
2

"History is indeed little more than the register of the crimes, follies
and misfortunes of mankind."
Edward Gibbon, English historian (1737-1794)
From: "The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire"
3

About the author
M. S. King is a private investigative journalist and researcher based in the
New York City area. A 1987 graduate of Rutgers University, King's
subsequent 30 year career in Marketing & Advertising has equipped him
with a unique perspective when it comes to understanding how "public
opinion" is indeed scientifically manufactured.
Madison Ave marketing acumen combines with 'City Boy' instincts to
make M.S. King one of the most tenacious detectors of "things that don’t
add up" in the world today. Says King of his admitted quirks, irreverent
disdain for "conventional wisdom", and uncanny ability to ferret out and
weave together important data points that others miss: "Had Sherlock
Holmes been an actual historical personage, I would have been his
reincarnation."
King is also the author of The War Against Putin: What the Government-
Media Complex Isn’t Telling You About Russia. King’s other interests
include: the animal kingdom, philosophy, chess, cooking, literature and
history (with emphasis on events of the late 19th through the 20th
centuries).
4

FOREWORD
By Jeff Rense
For over the past 30 years, I've worked in many key positions in broadcast journalism; TV
news reporter, news director, anchorman, and, for the past 20 years, the producer and host
of my own talk radio program. It has been quite a journey and all during that times I really
never stopped wanting to know the realities of news stories, large and small. Who? What?
Where? How? When? And most importantly; why?
When applying those timeless questions towards the crucial subject of History, I have
seldom been satisﬁed with the 'oﬃcial explanations' for my inquiries and questions. The
'truth' is just not 'out there' nor is it accessible. There is too much sleight-of-hand and
structural criminality.
That's one reason I am so gratiﬁed that one of the most remarkable, insightful, truthful
historians of today, M.S. King has tackled the murky, imponderable subject of revisionist
history, (realistic history that is) with his sweeping epic, The Bad War; The REAL Story o
World War II That You Were Never Taught”.
Though I am generally cautious in bestowing blessings upon the work of others, The Bad
War caught my attention for a number of reasons. Through his essays submitted to
Rense.com, and also from his 'tour d' force' guest appearance on my show, Mike King's
mastery of the subject, formidable writing talent, and unique ability to break down the
complex into simple bites, were already known to me. I was therefore pleased and excited to
learn of his project to bring the truth of World War II to the “average Joe” and beyond.
As my regular listeners and readers are by now well aware, the world situation becomes
gloomier by the day. It is only through a clear understanding of the past, that we can truly
understand the present, and the dark future that is being planned for us. By distilling real,
5

repeat, real history into easy-to-understand, illustrated mini essays, The Bad War serves as
the perfect reference guide to help you navigate through the sea of lies which have been fed
to us since childhood, and continue to be fed to us each day. King’s epic makes an utterly
unique and important contribution to understanding the world - a contribution which we
can all appreciate, and all understand.
6

TABLE OF CONTENTS
THE BAD WAR
INTRODUCTION
SECTION 1: Seeds of Future World Wars / 1848 – 1913
SECTION 2: World War I & Fall of Russia / 1914 – 1918
SECTION 3: Nationalism vs Globalism / 1919 – 1933
SECTION 4: The Plot to Destroy Germany / 1933 -1939
SECTION 5: World War II - Part 1 / 08/1939 – 12/1941
SECTION 6: World War II - Part 2 / 12/1941 - 08/1945
SECTION 7: The Aftermath of World War II / 1945 - 1950
CLOSING STATEMENT:
FOOTNOTES
7

Introduction
Aesop’s Fable of the Man and the Lion
A man and a Lion
traveled 
together
through the forest. They
began to boast of their
respective superiority to
each other in strength
and prowess.
As they were disputing,
they passed a statue
carved in stone, which
depicted 
a 
Lion
strangled by a Man.
The man pointed to it
and 
said: "See there!
How strong we are, and
how we prevail over the
king of beasts."
The Lion replied: "This statue was made by one of you men. If we Lions erected statues, you
would see the Man placed under the paw of the Lion."
The Lesson: One story is good, till another is told.
*
8

During the 75 years which have now passed since the end of the grand history-altering event
known as World War II (aka “The Good War”), only a single narrative of the great conﬂict
has been heard. It is a story which, as is always the case, has been scripted by the victors and
implanted, no, pounded, into the minds of all subsequent generations. Every medium of
mass indoctrination has been harnessed to the task of training the obedient masses as to
what the proper view of this event should be.
Academia, news media, public education, book publishing, TV documentaries, Hollywood
ﬁlms, clergymen and politicians of every stripe all sing the same dreadful anthem. You know
the familiar lyrics: “Germany, Italy and Japan tried to enslave the planet. The “good guys” of
the “world community” banded together and stopped them; but not before millions were killed
in Hitler’s gas chambers.”
Literally, not a day seems to pass without some sort of media reference to this simplistic
gooƟall narrative; a silly children’s fable which oh-so-conveniently ignores the previous
decades of critical history leading up to World War II, omits vital information from the
actual war years, and outright fabricates lie after lie after lie. Indeed, the “oﬃcial story”
amounts to a manufactured mendacity of such mountainous dimensions that the human
mind will have a hard time processing the actual truth of the grand event, no matter how
compelling the case may be.
Because the moronic mantra is never questioned, the public mind quite naturally assumes it
to be an indisputable truth, on par with the belief in 2 + 2 = 4. That is what diﬀerentiates
mythology from an ordinary lie. Whereas a lie can be dispelled in a matter of minutes, or
days at the most; myths can take 100 years, or more, to kill.
Author Dresden James describes the group psychology at play:
"A truth’s initial commotion is directly proportional to how deeply the lie was believed. It
wasn’t the world being round that agitated people, but that the world wasn’t ﬂat. When a
well-packaged web of lies has been sold gradually to the masses over generations, the
9

truth will seem utterly preposterous and its speaker a raving lunatic."
A fair warning; if you can’t handle the emotional discomfort and intellectual humbling of
having your fossilized worldview turned upside-down and inside-out by the pent-up truth
volcano that is The Bad War, you may want to put this book down now and just walk away.
Because once you start to dig into the critical data points of World War II, be assured that
you’ll not be able to refute the self-evident conclusions which logically ﬂow from those facts
– unless, of course, if you’re insane.
Myths die hard; as does the human ego.
10

SECTION 1
1848 - 1913
PLANTING THE SEEDS OF EUROPE’S FUTURE
‘WORLD WARS’
11

1848
’SPRING TIME OF THE PEOPLES’; PRE-PLANNED REVOLUTIONS
AFFECT 50 COUNTRIES
Pre-planned uprisings - similar to today’s “color revolutions” - begin in Sicily in January of
1848. Soon after, revolts “spontaneously” break out in 50 states throughout Europe and
South America. The rebel Reds and other groups demand “democracy” (mob rule
manipulated by the Banking Dynasties / Globalists).
Although there are legitimate grievances in any nation, and many of the 1848 reformers are
sincere people with noble visions, the higher purpose of the revolts is not to improve the
lives of the people. The true goal is to subvert the authority of existing governments and
install "democratic" governments that can be easily controlled by agents working for The
New World Order.
The New World Order refers to a movement among banking, media and academic
elites - the legendary Rothschild Family foremost among them - with philosophical
roots dating back to the days of the French Revolution.
The N. W.O. envisions the future establishment of an integrated system of “Global
Governance” to be erected upon the ruins of the “Old World Order” - a world based on
sovereign and independent nations.
The controlled revolutions wreak havoc, causing thousands of deaths and leading to
political changes in some states. Within a year, the revolutions will have been put down, but
the political structure of Europe has now been weakened by the slow poison of "liberalism".
Tsarist Russia, the hated enemy of the legendary Globalist Rothschild Family, is unaﬀected
by the Red tumult of 1848, but not for long.
12

1848 was a big year for the Globalists and their controlled ‘pro-democracy’ mobs of
Communists, Republicans and assorted dupes of varying stripes.
1848
KARL MARX PUBLISHES THE ‘COMMUNIST MANIFESTO’
As well-funded and well-organized revolutionary movements spread across Europe,
German-Jewish “philosopher” Karl Marx sets forth the goals of the Communists. For all his
lofty talk and empty promises of a “workers’ paradise” and “social justice”, the Communist
Manifesto is just an intellectual mask for the Rothschild Family’s Globalist plan to enslave
humanity under a New World Order. Marx’s grandparents were actually related to the
Rothschild Family, through marriage. (1)
The Communists call for heavy income taxes, a Central Bank with monopoly on credit
abolition of private land ownership and inheritance, state control over communication,
education, manufacturing, agriculture, and medicine. Marx refers to this totalitarian scheme
as ‘dictatorship of the proletariat (downtrodden masses).
13

Marx’s cult followers promote violence, class envy, and hostility towards free markets,
family, business, tradition, and Christianity. In addition to the angry misﬁts and
maladjusted criminals who worship Marx, there are many well-meaning idealists who fall for
Marx’s poisonous promises of a better world with security and prosperity for all. These
“useful idiots” are known, to this day, as “liberals” or “progressives”. Their
thoughtless idealism will unwittingly help the Reds and Globalists greatly.
1 & 2 - The revolutionary philosophy and false promises of Marx & Engels will
destabilize Europe for many years to come. 3- George Orwell’s classic, ‘Animal Farm’
is an allegorical expose of what idealistic Communism is really all about.
1865
JEWISH MOGUL ESTABLISHES REUTERS NEWS AGENCY
The Reuters Telegram Company is the world's ﬁrst major news organization. Established by
Paul Reuter (born Israel Bere Josafat), Reuter's builds a reputation in Europe for being the
14

ﬁrst to report news ‘scoops’ from abroad, such as Abraham Lincoln's assassination. Almost
every major news outlet in the world today subscribes to Reuters' services, which operates in
over 200 cities in 94 countries in about 20 languages. The creation of the Reuters media
empire marks the critical point in history when Jewish moguls begin to dominate
the press of Europe and the US.
Though the Reuters family founders and heirs have since passed away, the public company
today continues to vomit out pro-Globalist and pro-Zionist propaganda.
Jewish domination of the press, and thus, the public mind, began with Reuters
1870-71
FRANCE STARTS – AND LOSES – A WAR WITH THE GERMAN
STATE OF PRUSSIA
The Franco-Prussian War is a conﬂict between the French Empire of Napoleon III (a
15

nephew of Napoleon Bonaparte), and the Germanic Kingdom of Prussia. Prussia is aided by
a confederation of many smaller German states. The swift Prussian / German victory thwarts
French ambitions in central Europe, and brings about the end of Napoleon III’s rule.
After the war, the French branch of the Rothschild Family steps up with a massive bail out of
the nearly bankrupt French government. The new government (The 3rd Republic) is again a
“democracy”, bought and paid for by the Rothschilds, and under their inﬂuence more so
than before.
Imperial France started the Franco-Prussian War, not the Germans. Right: Prussian
leader Bismarck (right) meets with the defeated Napoleon III.
JANUARY, 1871
GERMAN STATES DECLARE UNITY / GLOBALISTS SEEK TO
CONTROL NEW GERMAN EMPIRE
16

The Prussian / German victory over France brings about the uniﬁcation of the German
states under Kaiser (King) Wilhelm I of Prussia. United Germany will soon become the
main economic power of continental Europe with one of the most powerful and professional
armies in the world.
Meanwhile, back in England, the Globalists plot to control the new German nation
Although Jewish bankers thrive in Germany, Germany (like Tsar Alexander's Russia), has the
capacity to shape its own destiny and thwart the ambitions of the "City of London". Not only
is German politics outside of Rothschild's total control, but the fact that several German
Royals are intermarried with British nobility complicates ‘the City’s” ability to menace
Germany with British power.
It will be 48 years before the new German nation can be brought under the thumb
of The New World Order. But the long-range plan goes into eﬀect immediately. Rothschild
agent and future (as well as ex) "British" Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli plots against both
Germany and Russia.
The voluntary unification of the German states gives rise to a great German Reich.
17

1871
THE NEW GERMAN REICH GRANTS CITIZENSHIP RIGHTS TO
JEWS / THE JEWS OF GERMANY PROSPER
Otto Von Bismarck is the Chancellor of the new German Reich under Kaiser Wilhelm I
Through his skilled and energetic diplomacy, he will keep Germany out of war, and the rest
of Europe at peace.
Soon after united Germany is established, Bismarck's government becomes the ﬁrst
European nation to grant citizenship privileges to its Jewish population. (2) Even
Rothschild's England has yet to do this. The UK's Jewish Prime Minister (Disraeli) holds
office because he had "converted" to Christianity.
By the end of the 1800's, this remarkable people will have obtained a great degree of
influence over German commerce, universities, press, politics, arts, and Central
Banking.
18

Bismarck, the political father of the German Reich, treated the Jews very well. They
prospered in tolerant Germany.
1874
REDS ATTEMPT TO KILL CHANCELLOR BISMARCK
A Jewish Red named Frederick Cohen had previously shot Bismarck when he was Prime
Minister of Prussia in 1866. Now, in 1874, terrorist Eduard Kullman attempts to assassinate
Chancellor Bismarck. Kullman's gunshot strikes Bismarck's hand.
Kaiser Wilhelm I and Chancellor Von Bismarck are the peacemakers of Europe, but the New
World Order crime gang would like these leaders dead so that mighty Germany can be
subdued under their thumb.
Kullmann (on right) nearly killed Bismarck.
19

OCTOBER, 1873
GERMANY, AUSTRIA-HUNGARY, & RUSSIA FORM ‘THE LEAGUE
OF THE THREE EMPERORS
Chancellor Bismarck negotiates an agreement between the monarchs of Austria-Hungary
(Emperor Franz Joseph), Russia (Czar Alexander II), and Germany (Kaiser Wilhelm I). The
alliance, known as The League of the Three Emperors, has three purposes:
1. The League serves as a mutual defense against the growing Red movements, which have
menaced Europe with violence since 1848.
2. The League will avoid war amongst each other when diplomacy can resolve differences.
3. The League opposes the expansion of French and British power, as well as plots to
threaten the internal order of their countries.
The military and ﬁnancial power of these three Empires forms a Central-Southern-Eastern
European power base that the Rothschilds and their British & French “hit men” cannot
control. There can be no New World Order until this mighty defensive coalition of
Empires is somehow broken up and individually smashed.
20

British cartoon on left mocks The Three Emperors League. Bismarck is depicted as
puppet master of the Emperors.
1877-78
RUSSIA DEFEATS THE OTTOMAN EMPIRE (TURKEY) IN THE
RUSSO-TURKISH WAR
There are two main causes of the Russo-Turkish War. First, Russia desires to reclaim vital
Black Sea territory lost in the Rothschild-ﬁnanced Crimean War of 20 years earlier. The
other objective, or at least, the other stated objective, is to liberate the Orthodox Christian
Slavic populations of the Balkan states. Russia’s Orthodox Christian and Slavic allies, Serbia
Montenegro, Romania, and Bulgaria, all rebel against Turkey and ﬁght with Russia. Claims
of Turkish mistreatment of Bulgarian Christians further upset the Russians.
21

Russia dominates the ﬁghting, and begins advancing towards Istanbul (Constantinople).
Dismayed that Russia may capture Constantinople and even Palestine from the beaten
Turkish Empire, Britain’s Jewish Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli pressures Russia to
accept a truce oﬀered by Turkey. Britain sends ships to the area to intimidate Russia and
force a peace conference in Berlin, Germany.
Russia wins the Russo-Turkish War.
MAY 11 & JUNE 2, 1878
REDS MAKE TWO ASSASSINATION ATTEMPTS AGAINST KAISER
WILHELM I
Just days before the important international conference is due to take place in Berlin, two
22

assassination attempts are made against Kaiser Wilhelm I. On May 11, ’78, a Red named
Emil Max Hodel ﬁres shots at the Emperor and his daughter as they travel in their carriage
Hodel is captured and then executed in August.
Three weeks later, another Red named Karl Nobiling ﬁres a gun at the Emperor. The 82
year old Kaiser is wounded, but he survives. Nobiling then shoots himself, and dies 3
months later. The New World Order's secret war against The Three Emperors League, and
all of Europe’s Christian Monarchs, is really starting to heat up.
The War on the Three Emperors Leagues heats up with two assassination attempts
against German Kaiser Wilhelm
JUNE, 1878
BENJAMIN DISRAELI PLAYS DIRTY TRICKS IN BERLIN
Rothschild-owned British Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli dominates the conference which
23

was called into session to settle the Russo-Turkish war. Britain, Germany, Austria-Hungary,
Russia, France, Italy, and Turkey attend the Congress of Berlin. The Ottoman Turks still
control the "The Holy Land", but Britain and the Rothschilds wish to ultimately take over
Palestine. Russia is committed to the protection of Orthodox Christians throughout
southern Europe and Turkey.
Before the Congress opens, Disraeli concludes a secret deal with Turkey against Russia, in
which Britain will keep the strategic island of Cyprus. (3) This gives Disraeli an advantage,
leading him to issue threats of war if Russia doesn’t comply with the demands of the Turks,
who had lost the war!
Another dirty pre-Congress deal is struck between Disraeli and Russia's soon-to-be ex-ally,
Austria-Hungary. (4) Slavic Orthodox Christians, including the Serbs of Bosnia, are to be
put under Austria-Hungary's rule. Russia and its Slavic allies had won the war against
Turkey, but now many of the Slavs are to be transferred from Turkish rule to Austro-
Hungarian rule. This breeds resentment among the Slavic subjects of Austria-Hungary,
especially the Serbs of Bosnia who are forbidden from uniting with the independent nation
of Serbia. Court Intriguers on all sides have put a permanent wedge between Russia
and Austria-Hungary.
24

Devious Disraeli (right) dominated the Berlin Congress and undermined its host,
Bismarck (left). The “victorious” Russians weren’t happy about the deal, nor were
their Bulgarian allies, and nor were the Serbs living in Austro-Hungarian Bosnia.
JUNE, 1878
DISRAELI’S DIRTY TRICKS CAUSE THE BREAKUP OF THE THREE
EMPERORS LEAGUE
Chancellor Bismarck tries to keep the Disraeli-engineered controversies from breaking up
the Three Emperors League, but the humiliation of Russia at the hands of Britain, Turkey
and Austria-Hungary is too much to bear. Russia pulls out of the League. Instead of being
allied with Germany (whom Disraeli also wants to isolate), Russia is now cut oﬀ from her,
and placed in a position where it can be played oﬀ against Germany’s ally, Austria-Hungary -
a classic divide & conquer scheme.
The foundation of the Great War of 1914-1918 (World War I) was laid at the Congress
of Berlin, thanks to the dirty work of the Globalist-Zionist Benjamin Disraeli. Upon
returning to England, Disraeli boasts to Queen Victoria of how he killed the Three
Emperor’s League. (5)
25

By causing the Three Emperors League to split, dirty Disraeli laid the foundation for
the Global bloodbaths of the coming century.
1882
THE ANGLO - EGYPTIAN WAR / ROTHSCHILD’S BRITAIN
ADVANCES TOWARDS PALESTINE
The Zionists dream of one day capturing the Holy Land (currently under Ottoman Turkish
control). Recall how years earlier, with Ottoman Turkey on the brink of total defeat,
Benjamin Disraeli intervened to keep the Russians away from Palestine. Now, the Zionists
are positioning their "chess pieces" towards the next step.
When the British-French Suez Canal opens in 1869, it is Benjamin Disraeli's Britain; with
Rothschild financing that purchases enough shares to make Britain the main shareholder of
the waterway linking the Mediterranean to the Red Sea.
26

By 1882, the Canal's host nation, Egypt, is being treated like a colonial subject of Britain
Always waging war under false pretenses, Rothschild's UK attack-dog picks a ﬁght with
Egypt, under the pretext of "protecting the Suez Canal." During the Anglo-Egyptian War,
the British bomb Alexandria and invade Cairo. Rothschild's Britain becomes master of Egypt
During World War I, Egypt (which borders Palestine) will be a useful staging post to launch
attacks on Turkey. Palestine (Israel) is now within the Zionist Rothschild Family's
reach.
Egypt's strategic location and proximity to Palestine are coveted by the Rothschilds.
JUNE, 1887
‘THE REINSURANCE TREATY’ / GERMANY AND RUSSIA FORM A
SECRET ALLIANCE
Although the British-Rothschild agent Disraeli had destroyed The Three Emperors Leagu
27

(Russia /Germany/Austria-Hungary), German Chancellor Bismarck continues to work for
peace. To "reinsure" the peace of Eastern Europe, and to prevent British or French intrigue
from starting more wars, Bismarck’s Germany and Tsarist Romanov Russia agree to a secret
treaty known as "The Reinsurance Treaty".
Under the terms of the agreement, Germany and Russia agree to remain neutral should
either become involved in war with a third nation. However, neutrality would not apply if
Russia attacks Germany's ally, Austria-Hungary.
The two powers remain vulnerable to the Balkan controversy in Austria-Hungary (Russia is
the protector of the minority Slavic/Orthodox community under Austrian rule, and also of
small Slavic states like Serbia) Nonetheless, the Reinsurance Treaty is a very good sign that
Russia and Germany will be able to work out any future differences diplomatically.
Bismarck worked to keep France & Britain from getting Germany and Russia to fight.
Right: Bismarck with Russian Prince Andrey Lieven
28

APRIL 20, 1889
ADOLF HITLER IS BORN
At a time when the dark forces of the New World Order were already setting the chess
pieces for the future war to enslave Germany, Adolf Hitler, the man who would become
their greatest nemesis, is born into a very simple Austrian family.
Klara Hitler, Alois Hitler and baby Hitler
1890
NEW GERMAN KAISER DISMISSES BISMARCK / TURNS DOWN
RUSSIAN OFFER TO RENEW THE REINSURANCE TREATY
Kaiser Wilhelm I passes away in March of 1888 at the age of 91. He is succeeded by his son
29

Frederick I, who dies of throat cancer after a reign of just 3 months. Frederick's 29 year old
son Wilhelm II then becomes Kaiser in June of 1888.
Like many young, "educated" Europeans, Wilhelm II is partially infected with the poison o
"liberalism". Whereas 'Iron Chancellor"’ Bismarck wants to smash the Reds of Germany
young Wilhelm is hesitant to crush the Communists. He believes that if Germany becomes
more "democratic", it will pacify the Red agitators. Wilhelm II also wants better relations
with the UK, the enemy of Russia. To that end, Wilhelm, (possibly under the inﬂuence of
NWO court intriguers) turns his back on Russia, refusing repeated Russian requests
to renew Bismarck's Reinsurance Treaty.
These irreconcilable diﬀerences lead Wilhelm to dismiss the legendary Bismarck in 1890. As
the grandson of Britain's Queen Victoria, Wilhelm evidently believes that he can trust and
befriend Britain (which really belongs to the Rothschilds, not Victoria). He also believes that
he can solve problems with Russia by negotiation.
Russia now feels isolated and mistrusts Germany's ally, Austria-Hungary. This leaves Russia
very vulnerable to French and British intrigue. History will prove that wise old Bismarck
was right, and naive young Wilhelm was wrong.
30

"Dropping the Pilot" - British cartoon mocks the dismissal of the great statesman and
peacemaker. Bad move Kaiser Wilhelm!
JANUARY, 1894
RUSSIA ENTANGLED INTO A ‘FRANCO-RUSSIAN ALLIANCE
Isolated from Germany and suspicious of Austria-Hungary, Russia (which wants another
crack at Turkey), falls into a clever trap set by France (which wants another crack at
Prussia/Germany) and Rothschild NWO agents (who have a much bigger picture in mind).
The Franco-Russian Alliance creates an entangling military alliance between the two
nations. The Russian giant can now be used to create a deadly 2nd front in any future war
with Germany. This is what German Chancellor Bismarck had worked so hard to
avoid!
The great Russian novelist Leo Tolstoy (War and Peace) passionately condemns the
31

Franco-Russian Alliance as a French trick to entangle Russia in a future war against France'
enemy (Germany). Tolstoy sarcastically describes the suddenly friendly French as "people
who, without reason, suddenly professed such spontaneous and exceptional love for
Russia". (6)
1- Bismarck's nightmare; French magazine glorifies the Franco-Russian Alliance. 2 & 3:
Tolstoy warned of the danger: “The Franco-Russian alliance cannot now present itself
as anything else than what it is: a league of war.” (7)
1896
GLOBALIST - ZIONIST PURCHASES THE NEW YORK TIMES
Since its founding in 1851 by Republican Henry Jarvis Raymond, The NY Times has been a
big player in shaping public opinion. In 1896, the Times takes a turn to the internationalist
left when it is purchased by a German-Jew named Adolph Ochs. In 1897, Ochs himself
32

coins the paper's self-serving slogan: "All the News That’s Fit to Print”
Ochs’ daughter marries Arthur Hays Sulzberger, who becomes publisher when Adolph
dies. Ochs’ great grandson Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, Jr. is the publisher of the NY Times
today. For 117 years, America’s most inﬂuential rag has been in the hands of the same
Zionist-Marxist family. Count on The Times to promote big government, Globalism, phony
environmentalism, Israel, the Fed, and endless wars.
Above: Adolph Ochs / The awesome power and influence of the New York Times Jewish
Ochs & Sulzberger dynasty cannot be denied.
AUGUST, 1897
THE 1ST ZIONIST CONGRESS MEETS IN BASEL SWITZERLAND /
THE PLOT TO STEAL PALESTINE IS HATCHED
33

The First Zionist Congress is held in Basel, Switzerland and is chaired by Theodore
Herzl. Jewish delegates from across Europe agree that Palestine should be given to them
The idea of a Jewish takeover of Palestine had been ﬂoating around for decades. Whenever
Russia advanced its interests in the area, Rothschild's Britain would keep Russia out.
The problem is, Palestine is 90-95% Arab, and falls under the sovereignty of the Ottoman
Turks. Unless the Turks agree to give Palestine to the Jews, the Zionist dream cannot be
realized.
In 1901, the Zionists will oﬀer to arrange a reduction of Turkey's foreign debt (owed to
Zionist bankers) in exchange for Palestine. The Sultan of Turkey bluntly refuses. Giving
away the Holy Land to the Zionists would be a betrayal of Turkey's, and Palestine's, Muslim
population.
Herzl refuses to give up. The British oﬀer to give the Jews part of the African colony of
Uganda. The Zionists refuse, insisting upon Palestine. Prior to his death in 1904, Herz
predicts that a world body will one day give Palestine to the Jews, and that he will go down
in history as father of the Jewish State. For Herzl's dream to come true, a European
military power will have to be manipulated into taking Palestine away from the
Ottomans by force.
34

Palestine lies deep within Ottoman territory. But Herzl has a long range plan. He
speaks of a “future world body” that will give the Jews a homeland in Palestine.
DECEMBER 8, 1897
THE DYING BISMARCK’S FINAL WARNING AND PREDICTION
Former German Chancellor Bismarck is now 83 years old and in poor health. Kaiser Wilhelm
II visits Bismarck for the last time in December of 1897. Again, the wise old man warns the
Kaiser to beware of the intrigues of courtiers around him, and of a European disaster that
may yet still come.
Bismarck warns Wilhelm not to trust court advisors: "Your Majesty, so long as you have
this present oﬃcer corps, you can do as you please. But when this is no longer the
case, it will be very different for you." (8)
35

Subsequently, Bismarck makes these accurate predictions:"... the crash will come twenty
years after my departure if things go on like this." ....."One day, the great European
War will come out of some damned foolish thing in the Balkans." (9)
This prophecy will be fulﬁlled almost to the year! Bismarck knew that a Balkan crisis
could result in a 2-front war against Britain & France in the west, Russia in the east, plush an
internal Red uprising on the home front.
Bismarck foresaw the evil plot against Germany.
1898
U.S. STARTS A WAR WITH SPAIN TO GAIN A GLOBALIST
FOOTHOLD IN ASIAN PACIFIC
Using the ridiculous pretext of “liberating Cuba” and a false accusation against Spain for the
36

sinking of the USS Maine, a warmongering
faction of the American Congress and
“Yellow Press” are able to impose the
phony Spanish-American War upon a very
reluctant President William McKinley.
The true purpose of the war is to take
Spain’s Paciﬁc Ocean naval bases in the
Philippines and Guam. The “crisis” of the
war is also used to pass a Congressional
decree to annex Hawaii as a U.S. territory,
against the wishes of the native Hawaiians.
The Spanish-American War, and the U.S. -
Philippines War which grows out of it, are
major turning points in the Globalist drive
to dominate East Asia. These events
mark the true origin of the war with
Japan which is to come 43 years later.
37

Within 24 hours of the start of the war to “free Cuba”, acting Naval Secretary Theodore
Roosevelt ordered Commodore Dewey to destroy the Spanish fleet in the Philippines.
The true, long range purpose was to achieve dominance over Asia.
APRIL, 1904
THE ‘ENTENTE CORDIAL’ / UK & FRANCE FORM AN ALLIANCE /
GERMANY IS SUSPICIOUS
The Entente Cordiale is a series of agreements signed between France and Great Britain
The agreements settle issues regarding colonial expansion and mark the end of a centuries
old era of on and off conflict between France and Britain.
Germany views the new alliance with great suspicion, especially because France had already
allied itself with Russia in 1892. The "chess pieces" of Europe are clearly being set in
preparation of the Big Game to come. The Anglo-French alliance will one day entangle
38

the U.S. as well. These nations will serve as the military "hit men" of the New World Order.
German cartoon: John Bull (UK) walks by with his French whore as an armed Germany
looks on with suspicion. The forerunner of modern day NATO is born.
1905
ZIONIST BANKERS & REDS ATTEMPT REVOLUTION IN RUSSIA
The attempted Russian Revolution of 1905 is a wave of political uprisings, massive labor
strikes, and terrorist acts against the government of Russia. The Reds (under orders from
their Rothschild / Schiﬀ masters) use the discontent surrounding the lost war with Japan
(financed by Schiff) to foment the revolution. From 1905 to 1909, Red terrorists will kill 7,300
people and wound about 8,000.
Though the Jewish-inspired Red Revolution is suppressed, Tsar Nicholas II is forced to mak
"democratic" concessions which weaken his power and set him up for a future attempt.
Nicholas makes a critical mistake by showing mercy to Red leaders such as Lenin and
39

Trotsky. Instead of executing the Marxist leaders, the Russians merely arrest or deport them.
Lenin ﬁnds his way to Switzerland, and Trotsky ends up in New York after escaping from
prison. The exiled Communists will one day return, with more money from the Zionist
bankers, to terrorize Christian Russia once again.
1- Trotsky (center) and his Jewish-Marxist gang hung out in New York. 2- Jewish Wall
Street banker Jacob Schiff weakened Russia by financing Japan’s victorious war effort
FORBIDDEN HISTORY: QUOTE TO REMEMBER
40

"The Jews have undoubtedly to a large extent furnished the brains and energy in the
revolution throughout Russia." (10)
George von Longerke / US Ambassador to Russia
1905
THE MYSTERIOUS PROTOCOLS OF THE LEARNED ELDERS OF
ZION IS PUBLISHED IN RUSSIA
Russian Professor Sergei Nilus publishes a full version of The Protocols of the Learned
Elders of Zion, a controversial document discovered a few years earlier. The Protocols are
alleged to be the minutes of a secret meeting of Jewish elites in which a master plan for
world domination, to be completed over the next 100 years, is laid out in chilling detail.
The Protocols tell of Jewish control of world banking, world media, Communism, liberalism,
and political parties of every type. The master plot includes plans to:
•
Destroy the Catholic Church and all Christianity
41

•
Promote Atheism
•
Wage class warfare / labor against management
•
Overthrow Tsarist Russia
•
Corrupt the morals of the people
•
Promote senseless “modern art” and dirty literature
•
Use anti-Semitism to keep "lesser Jews" cohesive
•
Manipulate women with ideas of "liberation"
•
Create economic depressions and inflations
•
Create "controlled opposition" to themselves
•
Use state debt as a weapon to enslave countries
•
Subvert and control all existing governments
•
Install tainted politicians that can be blackmailed
•
Manipulate college students with phony idealism
•
Assassinate world leaders
•
Spread deadly diseases
•
Use balance of power politics to control nations
•
Commit acts of terrorism
•
Promote sports and games to divert people
•
Start a World War which will include the USA
•
Set up world government after an economic crash
Some allege that the Protocols were forged by Russian security agents in order to convince
the Tsar Nicholas II of the New World Order's existence. Although the authenticity of the
document remains in question, world events of the coming decades will match the Protocols
so closely that the document becomes a worldwide sensation during the 1920's and '30's.
Forgery or not, whoever wrote it had an unusual knowledge and spooky prescience.
42

Professor Nilus translated the Protocols; since re-translated widely.
MARCH 25, 1906
ZIONIST-OWNED NEW YORK TIMES PUBLISHES FALSE CLAIM
THAT 6 MILLION JEWS FACE EXTERMINATION IN RUSSIA
43

*Smaller newspapers later picked up the claim too.
1907
TRIPLE ENTENTE BRINGS EUROPE CLOSER TO WAR!
The Triple Entente (from French entente, "agreement") is a military alliance between the
UK, France, and Russia, concluded after the signing of the British-Russian Entente in 1907
Of course, Rothschild Britain is not allying with Russia out of any friendship. The Globalis
goal is to draw Russia into ﬁghting Germany & Austria-Hungary from the east. After Russia
Germany, and Austria-Hungary exhaust themselves, all three former allies can then be
subverted from within by Communists and/or liberals, controlled by the Globalists.
44

The Triple Entente is the counterweight to the 1882 Triple Alliance (or Central Powers) of
Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Italy. Rothschild & Warburg agents are also at work within
The Triple Alliance. Italy later switches sides and is replaced by the Ottoman Empire
(Russia’s nemesis). The two alliances have been cleverly set up as mechanisms for the
purpose of triggering the coming world war to rearrange Europe, and the world. One little
incident in the Balkan region of southern Austria-Hungary is all that it will take to ignite the
two alliance powder kegs, and drag the powers of Europe (and America) into a massive war.
The New World Order and its agents will skillfully manipulate the patriotic passion
of the various nations so as to bring about a disaster that will beneﬁt Zionism,
Communism, and Globalism.
Germany & Austria-Hungary are boxed-in by The Triple Entente. The three ladies in
the Russian propaganda poster represent France, Russia and Britain.
NOVEMBER, 1912
45

NEW WORLD ORDER GANG CAPTURES THE U.S. PRESIDENCY /
TEDDY ROOSEVELT RUNS INTERFERENCE FOR WILSON
After decades of strategic political preparation, the New World Order now has 7 major
goals its wants to achieve in the coming decade:
1. Establish a Central Bank in the U.S.
2. Impose an Income Tax on America so that State debt to the Central Bank can be
collateralized with human labor
3. Trigger the long planned Triple Entente-Triple Alliance war to reshape Europe
4. Entangle the U.S. in the coming war and World Organization
5. Finish off Russia and convert the Eurasian giant into a Red tyranny
6. Establish a World Political Body under the pretext of "world peace"
7. Carry out Herzl's plan to steal Palestine from the Turks and Arabs.
Popular U.S. President William Howard Taft will never involve America in such treasonous
schemes. So the Globalists recruit Woodrow Wilson, a Princeton professor who is rocketed
to Governor of New Jersey, then to Democrat nominee for President. To steal Republican
votes from Taft, ex-President Roosevelt runs as the Progressive Party candidate (aka Bull-
Moose). The divide & conquer trick works. Due to TR's meddling; Wilson wins with just
41% of the vote.
46

TR’s interference undermined Taft (center) and enabled Puppet Wilson (right) to
become President and make a HUGE mess of the world.
1910-1920
NEW AMERICAN ZIONIST KINGPINS EMERGE
The Rothschild orbit includes other Zionist bankers who emerge as giants in their own right.
These “American” moguls will dominate the 8-year Presidency of their pathetic puppet,
Woody Wilson.
•
JACOB SCHIFF: The Schiﬀ Family shared a home with the Rothschilds in the
1700’s. Schiﬀ helped Japan defeat Russia in 1905. He also funds the NAACP and
the ADL.
•
BERNARD BARUCH:
 Baruch ﬁrst introduced Woodrow Wilson to the wealthy
Jewish community of New York City. According to one account, “Baruch led
Wilson as one would a poodle on a string". (11) During World War I, Baruch
47

will head up Wilson’s War Industries Board, making him the most powerful
figure in U.S. industry.
•
THE WARBURG BROTHERS:
 ‘German.banker.Paul Warburg will soon become
the "Father of the U.S. Federal Reserve" – a private banking and stock
manipulation syndicate which collects interest for the privilege of printing the
nation’s currency. His son James will set up the United World Federalists in
1947 to openly promote world government. (12) His brother, Max is a very
powerful banker in Germany, and his other brother, Felix, a ‘philanthropist’, uses
his fortune to promote Globo-Zionist causes.
Jacob Schiff
Paul Warburg
48

Felix Warburg
Bernard Baruch
Other Zionist power players of that era
49

Louis Brandeis
Samuel Untermyer
50

Chaim Weizmann
Rabbi Stephen Wise
51

“Against Our Better Judgment” by British novelist and historian Alison Weir reveals how early
Zionists manipulated Wilson, and others.
52

SECTION 2
1914 - 1918
A SUMMARY OF WORLD WAR I & THE RUSSIAN
REVOLUTION
53

JUNE 28, 1914
A DOUBLE MURDER LIGHTS THE BALKAN FUSE
To kick oﬀ their long-awaited, pre-planned World War, the New World Order uses
"Serbian Nationalists.” A secret society known as Young Bosnia, possibly working with The
Young Turks, plots the murder of an Austrian Royal.
Serbia is an Orthodox Christian nation under the protection of Russia. Due to Disraeli's
past schemes, many Serbs also live under Austro-Hungarian rule (in Bosnia) instead
of under Serbian sovereignty. This situation has always caused friction, both within
Austria-Hungary, and also between Russia and Austria-Hungary.
Archduke Franz Ferdinand is heir to the Habsburg Family throne of Austria-Hungary.
While traveling through the Bosnian city of Sarajevo with his wife, Sophie, a bomb is thrown
at the Archduke's open car. He deﬂects the bomb with his arm and it explodes behind him.
The royal couple insists on seeing all those injured at the hospital. After traveling there, they
decide to go to the palace, but their driver takes a wrong turn onto a side street, where
another assassin named Gavrilo Princip spots them. He shoots Sophie in the stomach and
Franz in the neck. Franz is still alive when witnesses arrive to give aid. His dying words to
Sophie are, "Don't die darling. Live for our children." (1)
54

The world is shocked. The fateful prophecies of Tolstoy and Bismarck are about to
come to pass.
SUMMER 1914
POST ASSASSINATION CHAIN-
REACTION SETS EUROPE ON FIRE
JUNE 29
Anti-Serbian riots erupt in the Austro-
Hungarian city of Sarajevo.
JULY 7
Austria-Hungary convenes a Council of
Ministers to discuss the situation.
JULY
The Zionist Austro-Hungarian press of
Vienna fans the flames of anti-Serbian
sentiment. False reports of a Serbian
conspiracy are circulated.
JULY
Kaiser Wilhelm II of Germany, at the request
of Russian Tsar Nicholas (his cousin),
attempts to restrain his Austro-Hungarian ally
by encouraging Austria-Hungary to talk with
55

Serbia. (2)
JULY 28
Austria-Hungary gives in to war hysteria and
declares war on Serbia.
JULY 29
To defend its Serbian ally, Russia mobilizes it
armies against its former ‘Three Emperors
League’ ally Austria-Hungary.
AUGUST 1
Beyond both the Tsar and the Kaiser’s
control, the Triple Alliance / Triple Entente
time bomb is triggered. Germany declares war
on Russia for its mobilization against its ally
Austria-Hungary.
AUGUST 1
Ignoring German pleas to not enter the
conflict, France begins advancing towards
Austria-Hungary in support of its Entente
ally, Russia.
AUGUST 3
Facing the dangerous 2-front war that France
& England had engineered, (and that
Bismarck had feared) Germany quickly
advances towards France, through Belgium,
while at the same time confronting Russia in
the east.
AUGUST 4
Great Britain enters the war on the side of its
allies, France and Russia.
SEPTEMBER 5
London Agreement: Triple Entente allies
France, Russia, & UK agree that no
member shall make separate peace with
Germany or Austria-Hungary.
OCTOBER 28
Russia’s southern rival, the Ottoman Turkish
Empire, enters the war on the side of Austria-
Hungary and Germany.
In just a few weeks’ time, Europe is now
aflame in war as the Globalist-Zionist
press in France, England, Austria, and
Germany whip up a mutually destructive
56

nationalist fervor among the European
nations.
1 & 2: Surrounded by the Great Powers of the Triple Entente, peaceful Germany was
forced to quickly advance in two directions. 3: The ‘Willy-Nicky” Telegrams clearly
reveal how the Russian and German Emperors both tried to avoid war, but were
powerless to stop the dark forces controlling events.
1914-18
EARLY GERMAN VICTORIES / FOLLOWED BY STALEMATE
After Germany's westward march towards Paris stalls, the Western Front bogs down into a
bloody stalemate with trench lines that change little until 1918. In the East, the Russian army
successfully ﬁghts against the Austro-Hungarian forces but is then forced back by the
German army. Additional fronts open after the Ottoman Empire (Turkey) joins the war (on
Germany's side) in 1914. Italy switches sides and joins the Entente powers in 1915.
57

At sea, the British Navy blockades Germany. German U-boats will counter the blockade, and
sink many British merchant ships carrying arms and supplies.
Not one inch of German territory was ever lost during the Great War.
1914
THE MANIFESTO OF THE 93 / GERMANY’S LEADING
INTELLECTUALS AND ARTISTS CONDEMN THE WEST’S ANTI-
GERMAN PROPAGANDA
To counter the lies of the Allied propagandists, 93 of Germany's leading scientists, scholars
and artists sign their name to "The Manifesto of the 93". The document denounces the lies
aimed at Germany, and declares unequivocal support of German military actions. Perhaps
the most notable of the accomplished signatories is Wilhelm Roentgen, the Nobel Prize
58

winning physicist who discovered “X-rays”.
The Manifesto reads:
“As representatives of German Science and Art, we hereby protest to the civilized world
against the lies and calumnies with which our enemies are endeavoring to stain the honor of
Germany in her hard struggle for existence—in a struggle that has been forced on her.
The iron mouth of events has proved the untruth of the ﬁctitious German defeats;
consequently misrepresentation and calumny are all the more eagerly at work. As heralds of
truth we raise our voices against these.
It is not true that Germany is guilty of having caused this war. Neither the people, nor
the Government, nor the Kaiser wanted war.
It is not true that we trespassed in neutral Belgium. It has been proven that France
and England had resolved on such a trespass, and it has likewise been proved that
Belgium had agreed to their doing so. It would have been suicide on our part not to have
preempted this.
It is not true that the life and property of even a single Belgian citizen was injured by our
soldiers without the bitterest defense having made it necessary.
It is not true that our troops treated Louvain brutally. Furious inhabitants having
treacherously fallen upon them in their quarters, our troops with aching hearts were obliged
to fire a part of the town, as punishment. The greatest part of Louvain has been preserved..
It is not true that our warfare pays no respects to international laws. It knows no undisciplined
cruelty. But in the east, the earth is saturated with the blood of women and children
59

unmercifully butchered by the wild Russian troops, and in the west, dumdum bullets mutilate
the breasts of our soldiers.
It is not true that the combat against our so-called militarism is not a combat against our
civilization, as our enemies hypocritically pretend it is. Were it not for German militarism,
German civilization would long since have been extirpated..
We cannot wrest the poisonous weapon—the lie—out of the hands of our enemies. All we can
do is to proclaim to the entire world, that our enemies are giving false witness against us.
Have faith in us! Believe that we shall carry on this war to the end as a civilized nation, to
whom the legacy of a Goethe, a Beethoven, and a Kant, is just as sacred as its own hearths
and homes.” (3)
As the discoverer of ‘X-rays’, Wilhelm Roentgen was able to ‘see through’ the Allies’
anti-German atrocity propaganda.
60

DECEMBER 2, 1914
JEWISH-OWNED NEW YORK TIMES REPORTS ON THE PLIGHT
OF 6 MILLION JEWS
Again with the 6 million?
MAY 7, 1915
UK LORD OF THE ADMIRALTY WINSTON CHURCHILL SETS UP
THE LUSITANIA TO BE SUNK / 1200 CIVILAINS KILLED
61

The UK wants to draw America into the war. Lord of the Admiralty Winston Churchill and
Wilson's Marxist advisor, Edward Mandell House, believe that if Germany can be baited
into sinking a British ship with Americans on board, the U.S. will be forced into the war. (4)
Unbeknownst to its passengers, the luxury liner Lusitania is carrying arms and explosives
destined for Britain. (5)
Sailing from New York, Lusitania is loaded with 600 tons of explosives, 6 million rounds of
ammunition, 1200 cases of shrapnel shells, and some American passengers. The German
embassy in Washington is aware of this and tries to warn American travelers by placing ads
in U.S. newspapers, which are refused in most cases. (6)
As Lusitania approaches the Irish coast, it is ordered to reduce speed, and its military escort
ship, Juno, is withdrawn. (7) Churchill knows that German U-Boats are in the area. He
purposely slows down the Lusitania and calls oﬀ Juno, leaving the Lusitania as a
sitting duck. A German torpedo hit ignites the munitions, causing a secondary explosion
which sinks the massive liner in just 18 minutes! Nearly 1200 of its 1959 passengers are
killed, including128 Americans. The American press viliﬁes Germany, but makes no
mention of the smuggled munitions (or perhaps a pre-planted bomb?) which really sank the
Lusitania.
During the 1950's, the British Navy attempts to destroy the historical evidence of the
Lusitania explosion by dropping depth charges onto the sunken liner.
62

1- British Mad Dog Churchill 3-Globalist NY Times, claimed TWO torpedoes hit.
1915-16
IN SPITE OF THE LUSITANIA SINKING, WILSON DELAYS U.S
ENTRY INTO THE WAR
The Lusitania incident plays a role in turning American sentiment against Germany, but it is
not yet time for America to make its entry. The Zionists are waiting to achieve
maximum leverage before ordering Wilson to ﬁnally pull the trigger. For the time
being, Wilson will just verbally condemn the Lusitania attack, while keeping America out of
the war and cruising towards re-election in November, 1916.
The British are disappointed. UK politicians, journalists, and the certiﬁably insane Teddy
Roosevelt all mock Wilson as being timid. In an eﬀort to keep America inﬂamed, the British
fabricate a story about German school children being given a holiday to celebrate the sinking
of the Lusitania. Other false tales tell of German soldiers nailing babies to church doors in
Belgium!
63

The British know that they will eventually need American help if they are to gain the
advantage over The Triple Alliance / Central Powers. The Zionists know this too, but
they are biding their time, setting up the UK and the US for the right moment, and
the right deal.
Wilson intends to drag America into the war, but his 1916 re-election campaign
promises say otherwise.
DECEMBER, 1916
GERMAN KAISER TRIES TO STOP THE WAR
The Battle of Verdun rages for 10 months, resulting in 306,000 battleﬁeld deaths (163,000
French and 143,000 German) and 500,000 wounded. That’s an average of 30,000 deaths for
each of the 10 months of the battle!
64

Taking place in north eastern France, Verdun is the longest and most devastating battle of
The Great War. By the end of Verdun, the war has broken down into a stalemate, but
Germany still holds an advantage. In December of 1916, Kaiser Wilhelm oﬀers to negotiate
peace with The Entente Powers. But Britain and France deliberately make impossible
demands upon Germany as a condition for even negotiating.
In spite of Germany’s sincere eﬀorts to stop the madness, somebody wants this senseless
bloodbath to continue. But who? ..... And why?
Battle of Verdun / Kaiser Wilhelm wanted peace all along.
DECEMBER, 1916
DIRTY BACK-ROOM DEAL KEEPS WAR GOING / ZIONISTS TO
BRITAIN: “WE CAN BRING THE U.S. INTO THE WAR!”
65

By December 1916, the Central Powers have a clear advantage. France has suﬀered horrible
losses. Russia is facing internal Red revolutionary chaos. Britain is under U-Boat blockade
and not one square inch of Germany has been occupied. Germany oﬀers generous peace
terms. Basically, Kaiser Wilhelm is willing to just call oﬀ the war and return to how things
were.
That’s when the Zionists make their move to fulﬁll Herzl's plan! Chaim Weizman and
Nathan Sokolow approach the British with a dirty deal. The Zionists oﬀer to use their
international inﬂuence to bring the U.S. into the war on Britain's side, while undermining
Germany from within. The price that Britain must pay for U.S. entry is to steal
Palestine from Ottoman Turkey (Germany’s ally) and allow the Jews to settle there.
(8)
Though the oﬃcial declaration of British support for a Jewish homeland is not be made
public until 1917 (Balfour Declaration), the agreement was, in fact, reached in December of
1916. Soon after that, Zionist agitated anti-German propaganda was unleashed in the U.S
while the Zionists and Marxists of Germany begin to undermine Germany's war eﬀort from
within.
66

Chaim Weizman made the British an offer they couldn't refuse. In return, the Zionists
want to see the Turkish Empire busted up and Palestine given to the Jews.
FEBRUARY, 1917
THE ‘FEBRUARY REVOLUTION’ TOPPLES RUSSIA’S ROYAL
ROMANOV FAMILY
As the Russian economy deteriorates and the war becomes unpopular, the ‘February
Revolution’ begins. Communists, Progressive Socialists, and disaffected soldiers combine to
destabilize the already weakened reign of Czar Nicholas. The Tsar is forced to abdicate his
thrown and put under house arrest pending exile. Jews worldwide celebrate the abdication
of the Russian Tsar.
A "center-left" coalition government consisting mainly of Socialists and Communists is
established. A power struggle between the Democratic Socialists and the hard-core
Communist (Soviet-Bolshevik) faction follows.
67

The Romanov Dynasty is over.
APRIL, 1917
WILSON BREAKS HIS PROMISE AND BRINGS THE U.S. INTO THE
WAR!
During the weeks following the Zionist-UK dirty deal to steal Palestine, the Zionists delive
on their end of the bargain. An intense propaganda campaign is suddenly unleashed
in America. The 1915 Lusitania incident is resurrected, along with hype over German U-boat
warfare. A German contingency plan to ally with Mexico if the U.S. enters the war
(Zimmerman Note) is falsely portrayed as a plot to attack America.
Citing various phony pretexts, on April 2nd, 1917, Wilson, who, according to Benjamin
Freedman, was under blackmail over an aﬀair he had when he was a Princeton professor,
asks Congress for a Declaration of War. Congress complies. Regular forces of the small US
military begin arriving in Europe, but it will be months before the full force of drafted men
68

can be deployed.
U.S. Zionist Fred Rothman's iconic poster portrays Germans as monstrous "Huns"
APRIL, 1917
EXILED REDS BEGIN RETURNING TO RUSSIA
The terrorist Red leaders that Czar Nicholas had only exiled in 1905 now begin returning to
Russia. Vladimir Lenin arrives from Switzerland, via Germany, with a stash of Zionist
banker gold. Leon Trotsky arrives from New York with more money and a gang of Marxist-
Jewish thugs. (9)
69

The Zionist-funded Communists immediately undermine the new provisional government
A violent coup is attempted in July, but the Bolshevik Reds are held back. Democratic
Socialist Alexander Kerensky becomes Prime Minister as Bolshevik leaders go
underground.
Back from Brooklyn, the killer Leon Trotsky (left) will join Lenin (center) in seeking
to oust Kerensky (right)
APRIL, 1917
EDWARD BERNAYS FORMS PROPAGANDA COMMITTEE
Wilson establishes the Committee on Public Information (CPI) for the purpose of
manipulating public opinion in support of the war. Edward Bernays, "the father of
American propaganda" is a CPI member. A nephew of the psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud
Zionist Bernays boasts of his ability to control the public mind. He calls his scientiﬁc
70

methods for controlling public opinion, "the engineering of consent." In his 1928 book,
Propaganda, Bernays explains:
"The conscious and intelligent manipulation of the habits and opinions of the masses
is an important element in democratic society. Those who manipulate this unseen
mechanism of society constitute an invisible government which is the true ruling
power of our country. - We are governed, our minds are molded, our tastes formed,
our ideas suggested, largely by men we have never heard of. It is they who pull the
wires that control the public mind." (10)
Bernays and his CPI co-conspirators portray the American war eﬀort as a holy crusade "to
make the world safe for democracy", while at the same time spreading vile hate-ﬁlled
propaganda directed towards Germany and its Emperor, Wilhelm II.
"Babies & Bayonets."
In Europe and America, Germany was now the target of hateful and ridiculous war
propaganda.
71

Bernays wrote the book on propaganda and manipulation; literally.
JUNE, 1917
WILSON SIGNS MILITARY DRAFT INTO LAW / VICIOUS HATE
PROPAGANDA USED TO ATTRACT VOLUNTEERS
America's military is very small, but its capacity to ﬁeld and equip an army is great. The
unpopular draft is instituted in 1917. By the war's end, under the idiotic pretext of "making
the world safe for democracy" (Bernays’ slogan), more than 2 million unsuspecting
American men will have been sent to fight for Globalism and Zionism.
72

U.S. propaganda posters encouraged men to enlist by accusing the German “mad
brutes” of crucifying women and children.
NOVEMBER, 1917
BRITAIN ISSUES ‘THE BALFOUR DECLARATION’ TO BARON
WALTER ROTHSCHILD
The Zionists have delivered on their end of the dirty deal made with the British in 1916
American entry into the war was delivered as promised. By formally, and publicly, issuing
“The Balfour Declaration”, Lord Balfour is assuring the Zionists that Britain will fulﬁll its
end of the deal after the war– the theft of Palestine!
The Declaration is delivered to the ‘Baron’ Walter Rothschild. It reads, in part:
73

“His Majesty's government views with favor the establishment in Palestine of a
national home for the Jewish people, and will use their best endeavors to facilitate the
achievement of this object.” (11)
The extraction of this promise from the British is one of the main reasons why the senseless
war was kept going, and why America was ﬁnally dragged in. In Israel today, Balfour Day
(November 2nd) is widely celebrated. The Palestinian Arabs observe it as a day of mourning.
“Dear Lord Rothschild” - Baron Walter Rothschild (left) received the Balfour
Declaration from Lord Balfour.
OCTOBER 25, 1917*
‘RED OCTOBER’ / COMMUNISTS SEIZE CONTROL OF ST.
74

PETERSBURG! *NEW STYLE GREGORIAN CALENDER: NOV 7, 1917
Socialist Prime Minister Kerensky struggles to keep a bad economy aﬂoat, an unstable
coalition government together, and a tired Russian nation in the war. The time is ripe for the
Reds to stage another violent attempt at power. This time, Trotsky, Lenin and their evil gang
will succeed. With backing from some Red troops - many of whom had been brainwashed in
1905 Japanese POW camps by communist reading materials paid for by Jacob Schiﬀ (12) -
the Capital City of Petrograd (St. Petersburg) is seized during the October Revolution,
(aka "Red October").
Kerensky ﬂees for his life and the new Soviet regime immediately moves to pull Russia out of
the war (before Germany can beat them). Outside of Petrograd, the predominantly Jewish
Red government is not recognized as legitimate. A bloody civil war between the Jewish-led
Reds and the Christian “Whites" is now in the making.
Red rabble-rouser Vladimir Lenin incites the hungry mobs.
FORBIDDEN HISTORY: QUOTE TO REMEMBER:
75

"The Bolshevik leaders here (Russia), most of whom are Jews and 90 percent of whom
are returned exiles, care little for Russia or any other country but are
internationalists and they are trying to start a world-wide social revolution." (13)
David R. Francis, U.S. Ambassador to Russia, January 1918
1918-1921
‘REDS’ vs ‘WHITES’ / CIVIL WAR IN RUSSIA
After the fall of St. Petersburg to the Reds, a counter-revolutionary civil war will tear Russia
apart for three more years. The various opponents of the ‘Reds’ are collectively referred to as
‘The Whites’, led mainly by Admiral Kolchak.
When it becomes apparent that a Red revolutionary army composed solely of workers and
some ex-Tsarist troops is far too small to put down the counter-Revolution, Trotsky institutes
mandatory conscription of the peasantry into the Red Army. Opposition to Red Army
conscription is overcome by terror tactics. Hostages and their families are tortured and
killed when necessary to force compliance.
76

Admiral Kolchak’s Whites vs Trotsky’s Reds
JANUARY, 1918
WILSON LAYS OUT A 14 POINT PEACE PROGRAM / GERMANY
AND AUSTRIA-HUNGARY RESPOND POSITIVELY
Had it not been for America's 1917 entry into the war, the stalemated parties would have
ceased ﬁghting on their own and millions of lives would have been saved. But it would not
be until 1918 that suﬃcient numbers of trained American recruits would be ready to deploy
in combat operations.
Before fresh new rivers of American blood would be shed (117,000 Americans would die of
combat or disease-related causes between April and November of 1918), both Germany and
Austria-Hungary again communicate their desire for a peaceful resolution; just as they had
previously been proposing to make a mutually acceptable peace with Britain and France all
along.
77

In an address before the U.S. Congress, the puppet warmonger Wilson is forced to admit
that, in response to his recent "14 Points" Statement, Germany and Austria-Hungary have
indeed expressed general agreement with Wilson's high-sounding proposals. (15)
But in the very next breath, Wilson casually dismisses these promising peace overtures
(referring to them as 'peace utterances') as unacceptable. Wilsons’ New York handlers
(Baruch, Schiﬀ, Warburg, Morgenthau, Brandeis etc) want their long-awaited war for
Globalism (the pre-planned 'League of Nations') and Zionism (the British theft of Palestine);
and they certainly are not about to allow Germanic peace proposals to derail the NWO
Express.
The most astonishing of Wilson's lies is his rosy description of what the eventual post-war
peace is to be like. The fact that so many naive and war-weary Germans will later buy into
Wilson's empty promises, will contribute to Germany's bizarre unconditional surrender and
disarmament in November of that same year, 1918.
78

1- “Tells Germany She May Be Equal” 2- Wilson’s phony peace talk carried the poison
pill of the Globalists’ ‘ League of Nations’.
SPRING, 1918
AFTER SUCCESFUL SPRING OFFENSIVE, GERMAN TROOPS
‘STABBED IN THE BACK’ BY HOMEFRONT JEWS
The Reds of Russia can’t ﬁght a civil war at home and an external war at the same time
Lenin and Trotsky have no choice but to take Russia out of the war. Before the American
troops can be deployed in large numbers, Germany diverts its troops from the paciﬁed
eastern front and stages a major western offensive.
The operation begins in March with an attack on British forces in France. The German
advance 40 miles and Paris is just 75 miles away! The Spring Offensive is so successful that
Wilhelm declares March 24 a National Holiday.
At this exact critical point, Marxists & Zionists in Germany stab their countrymen in
the back. Marxist Trade Union leaders order factory strikes which deprive German troops of
critical supplies. (15) The Jewish owned press, which had fanned war passions in 1914,
suddenly turns sour on the war and begins ripping on the German military. German morale
begins to fall quickly, as does industrial output. Recent recruits arrive at the frontline with a
defeatist attitude as anti-war protests and general discontent spread throughout Germany.
The Great Oﬀensive comes to a halt just as the Americans begin to arrive. German Zionists
are betraying Germany so that Palestine can be taken from Germany's Turkish ally and given
to the Jews (Balfour Declaration). German Jewish Marxists and "Democratic Socialists" also
see a German defeat as a means to destabilize the nation and stage a revolution.
79

After the war, the treasonous betrayal of 1918 becomes known as "The Stab-in-the-Back."
Modern liberal "historians" dismiss this allegation as a "legend", but there is nothing
mythical about it. On the brink of ﬁnal victory, Germany was betrayed from within -
plain & simple.
Post war cartoons depict Zionist-Marxists stabbing German soldiers in the back.
SUMMER, 1918
‘THE YANKS ARE COMING!
It had taken about a full year for America to get its military drafted, trained, and deployed
under American command. By the summer of 1918, 10,000 fresh troops arrive daily at the
front. About 120,000 of them will die in the Great War, 90,000 in combat, 30,000 from
disease. In addition to the badly needed fresh blood, the French and British war machines
are now being re-supplied by the industrial output of mighty America.
80

With the breakdown of the Spring Oﬀensive, the tide turns against Germany and its allies
The Allied counter attack, (100 Days Oﬀensive) begins in August. At the Battle of Amiens,
the Allies advance 7 miles into German-held territory in just 7 hours. Back in Germany, the
Jewish Press ignores the devastating eﬀects of the Jewish-led factory strikes and Jewish-
inspired defeatism. Instead, the newspapers blame General Erich Ludendorﬀ for the recent
German setbacks!
Fresh American boys arrived to kill German boys as the Jewish press of Germany
shamelessly shifted the blame onto General Ludendorff.
81

1- Come on man! Join me in dying for Wilson's lies! 2- Dead American entangled in
barbed wire. If only his mother, father, wife, kids, friends could have watched him die.
What would they say to Professor Wilson?
JULY 16, 1918
TSAR NICHOLAS AND HIS ENTIRE FAMILY ARE BRUTALLY
MURDERED
Tsar Nicholas II had hoped to be exiled to the UK while Kerensky was in power, but his
British "ally" had refused to take him in. The Bolsheviks (Communists) now hold
Nicholas, his wife Alexandra, his four daughters and young son under house arrest. Their
Red captors force them to live on rations.
As a boy, Nicholas had witnessed the bombing murder of his grandfather, Alexander II, in
1881. Nicholas's tragic error was in failing to execute the Red scum, such as Lenin and
Trotsky, after their failed 1905 revolution. Now, his misguided mercy returns to haunt him,
82

and his family.
On the evening of July 16/17, 1918, the royal Romanov Family is awakened at 2AM, told to
dress, and then herded into the cellar of the house in which they are being held. Moments
later, Jewish Reds storm in and gun down the entire family, their doctor, and three servants
in cold blood. Some of the Romanov daughters are stabbed and clubbed to death when
initial gunﬁre fails to kill them. News of the brutal murder of the Romanovs will send shock
waves throughout Russia, and all of Christian Europe.
A beautiful family - shot and stabbed to death like animals! As the shooting began,
the Tsar tried to shield his young son.
1918
BRITISH DIVERT MANPOWER SO AS TO FINISH OFF THE
OTTOMAN EMPIRE AND STEAL PALESTINE
83

Britain's previous campaign against the Turks had ended in failure (Gallipoli). Now, with
fresh and strong Americans arriving to ﬁght the Germans in Western Europe, British troops
are freed-up to concentrate on the Ottoman Empire. Britain covets the oil ﬁelds of the
Middle East, but the UK also has a debt to repay to the Zionist bosses who dragged the
U.S. into the war.
Assisting the Brits in the eﬀort to steal Palestine are 10,000 American Jews who enlist to ﬁght
not alongside their fellow Americans in Europe, but with the British, who intend to seize
their future home, Palestine. (16) See: The Jewish Legion
During this time, British airplanes drop leaﬂets over Germany. Printed in Yiddish, the
Balfour leaﬂets seek to win Jewish support in Germany by promising the Jews a
‘homeland’ in Palestine after they have won the war. (17)
84

"All Power to the Workers" really means all
power to the New World Order!
1- Vladimir Jabotinsky (left) led Jewish units in the fight against Turkey. 2- Leaving the
Americans to do the heavy lifting against Germany, the British head south to
dismantle the Ottoman Empire.
1918
LENIN & TROTSKY ESTABLISH THE ‘COMMUNIST
INTERNATIONAL’ / VIOLENT RED PLAGUE GOES GLOBAL
With the Russian Civil War raging, the Communist
International, known as “The Comintern”, is
established in Moscow, Russia. The Comintern
states openly that its intention is to ﬁght "by all
available means, including armed force, for the
overthrow of the international "bourgeoisie"
(the entrepreneurial class) and for the creation
of an international Soviet republic (world
government)." (18)
From 1918-1922, Comintern-aﬃliated Parties form in
France, Italy, China, Germany, Spain, Belgium, the
U.S. and other nations. All Communists operate
under the direction of the Moscow Reds, who are
themselves ﬁnanced by the same Globalist-Zionist
international bankers that created the Federal
Reserve and brought about the Great War.
SEPTEMBER 2, 1918
85

THE ‘RED TERROR’ IS ANNOUNCED IN RUSSIA
The Russian Communists plan to strategically use terror to intimidate their White
adversaries into submission. On orders from Lenin and Trotsky, the "Red Terror" is
announced by the Jewish Red Yakov Sverdlov. The Red Terror is marked by mass arrests in
the middle of the night, executions, and hideously creative tactics of torture. As many as
100,000 Russians are murdered in the Red Terror, carried out by Jewish-run Cheka (secret
police).
Among the atrocities committed, often in view of victim’s family members, are:
•
40,000 White prisoners publicly hanged in the Ukraine
•
Burning coals inserted into women's vaginas
•
Crucifixions
•
Rapes of women of all ages
•
Victims submerged in boiling oil or tar
•
Victims doused with petrol and burned alive
•
Victims placed in coffins filled with hungry rats
•
Victims soaked with water, and turned into human ice-cubes in winter weather.
•
Priests, monks, and nuns have molten lead poured down their throats
(19)
The demoralizing terror takes a heavy psychological toll on the frightened Russian
people. By 1922, many are broken into submission to the Red monsters of the Cheka.
86

1 & 2 - The horror of the Jewish Red Terror frightened Europe. Not since the days of
Genghis Khan have so many Europeans been so brutally murdered. 3- Yakov Sverdlov
was a mass murdering beast.
NOVEMBER 11, 1918
THE GREAT WAR ENDS / ‘THE NOVEMBER CRIMINALS’ BETRAY
GERMANY TO THE GLOBALISTS
By the fall of 1918, it is clear that Germany can no longer win the War. Its policy now is “to
not lose it either." As he had in 1916, the Kaiser oﬀers to negotiate peace on terms favorable
to all. Though Germany cannot win, the Allies are not able to win either. Germany's Eastern
front with Russia is closed. There are no Allied troops on German soil, the Capital, Berlin i
900 miles safely away from the front, and the German military is very capable of defending
the homeland from any invasion.
But the home front is collapsing. Treasonous politicians, Marxist labor union leaders, and
87

Zionist media moguls, combine to demoralize the people and destabilize Germany. The
Kaiser is forced to step down, exiling to Holland. On November 11, ‘18, Marxists and liberals
of the newly formed "Weimer Republic" (formed in the city of Weimar) lie down and roll
over for the Allies!
Incredibly, at a time when the Allies do not have a single soldier on German soil, the
Weimar traitors order the military to lay down their arms and withdraw from the
front. Based on Wilson's empty promises of "peace without victory", the ‘November
Criminals’ place Germany at the total mercy of the New World Order.
1- The armistice trap was signed in a railway car in Compiegne, France. 2- Patriotic
German cartoon depicts politicians stabbing German troops in the back. 3- Jewish
Reds seize Berlin that very day
NOVEMBER 11, 1918
AS JEWISH COMMUNISTS CAPTURE BERLIN / KAISER FLEES TO
HOLLAND
88

In 1915, Jewish Reds Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Liebknecht founded the "Spartacus
League" (named after NWO / Illuminati founder Adam Weishaupt's code name of
"Spartacus"). In 1919, the group becomes the Communist Party of Germany. That same
month, the Spartacists, aided by Jewish-Hungarian Red Bela Kun, take advantage of the
post-war chaos, and stage a coup in Berlin. Kaiser Wilhelm, fearing the same fate as Tsar
Nicholas, ﬂees to Holland. He now regrets his past liberalism and denounces the “Jewish
influence" that ruined Germany.
The Communist takeover of Berlin is short lived as veterans known as the ‘Freikorps’
reclaim control from the Jewish Reds and their followers. Luxemburg and Liebknecht are
captured and executed. The "Freikorps" has saved Germany from the same deadly fate that
has befallen Russia, but the new "democratic socialist" Germany will soon face other serious
problems. Just like the hard core Reds of Russia pushed aside the socialist Kerensky, the
Reds of Germany will keep trying to grab absolute power from the "democratic socialists" of
Weimar.
The German Freikorps saved Germany from the Soviet-style Communist bloodbath
that Jewish Reds Luxemburg and Liebknecht were planning.
89

NOVEMBER, 1918
INJURED GERMAN ARMY CORPORAL REACTS BITTERLY TO
NEWS OF THE SURRENDER
As a 25-year-old ‘starving artist’, Adolph Hitler had volunteered to ﬁght for Austria in 1914.
By that time, both of his parents had passed away. Aﬄicted with tuberculosis during youth,
Hitler was rejected for military service. Hitler then pleaded with Bavarian authorities to allow
him to ﬁght for Germany. He served with great distinction, and was promoted to Lance
Corporal after being awarded the German Iron Cross 2nd Class for bravery. In October ‘16,
he was badly wounded and spends two months in a military hospital. He could have stayed
home but chose to return to the frontlines.
In August of ‘18, Hitler is awarded the prestigious Iron Cross 1st Class. In October 1918, he
is blinded by a British poison gas attack. While recovering his eyesight, Hitler hears of
Germany's shameful capitulation. He is confused and outraged. The sacriﬁce and suﬀering
of the German soldiers had been for nothing. The brave unknown painter from Vienna
wants answers, and he won’t rest until the ‘November Criminals’ (his term) are exposed and
Germany's honor restored.
90

Hitler, seated left, was a heroic and highly decorated soldier.
JANUARY, 1919
THE PARIS PEACE CONFERENCE
The Paris Peace Conference is the meeting of the Allied victors to ﬁnancially crush
Germany and determine the new borders of the defeated nations. The Globalists devise a
series of treaties (Paris Peace Treaties) that reshape Europe and the world. At its center are
the leaders of the three ‘Great Powers’: Woodrow Wilson (U.S.), Prime Ministers David
Lloyd George (U.K.) and Georges Clemenceau (France). Germany is not invited and
will have no say in the final decisions.
The Globalists will dismantle existing nations and create new ones. Austria-Hungary and
Turkey are carved up; their disparate peoples re-assigned to new states. The Conference also
creates the framework for a future World Government, The League of Nations.
91

A Zionist delegation is also present. They had brought America into the war, and now it is
time to collect payment for services rendered (Balfour Declaration). Former Arab territories
of the Ottoman Empire are separated from Turkish rule and broken up into small states.
Palestine is to become a British protectorate. See: British Mandate
The Zionist statement establishes the Jew’s claim to a piece of Palestine, guaranteed by The
League of Nations and exactly as Herzl had predicted in 1897! Jews from all over the world
may now immigrate to British Palestine, but in controlled numbers. The Arabs of
Palestine (a 95% majority) were not consulted about this deal, and they are angry.
Clemenceau, Wilson, & George front for the Globalist gangsters in Paris.
JUNE, 1919
GERMANY IS GANG-RAPED BY THE ‘TREATY OF VERSAILLES’
92

Out of the Paris Peace Conference comes the barbaric and infamous “Treaty of
Versailles". The cruelty of the Treaty is today recognized even by liberal historians. With
Germany disarmed by its new government, the Globalists & Zionists proceed to rape the
German nation; a nation that did not want war, had tried to avert the war, and had
offered to make peace on numerous occasions after the war had begun.
The Treaty contains 440 clauses, 414 of which are dedicated towards punishing
Germany for a war that it was imposed upon her!
Among the key provisions that a disarmed Germany and Austria (Treaty of St. Germaine)
are forced to accept at gunpoint and while under a hunger blockade are:
1. Germany must accept 100% responsibility for the war.
2. German armed forces restricted to 100,000 men.
3. The industrial German Rhineland will be occupied by French troops for 15 years.
4. Kaiser Wilhelm II (safe in Holland) should be tried for "oﬀenses against international
morality".
5. The German region of West Prussia is given to the new nation of Poland.
Two million West Prussians are forcefully expelled from their homes, and East
Prussia is left isolated from the rest of Germany!
6. The German Sudetenland region is put under the rule of the new nation of
‘Czechoslovakia’.
7. The new state of Austria is forbidden from uniting with their brothers in Germany.
8. Germany is stripped of African colonies. Britain, France, & Belgium take them.
9. The coal-rich Saar region of Germany is placed under League of Nations control for 15
years. During this time, its coal is to be shipped to France.
10. The Baltic Sea port city of Danzig is separated from Germany and declared a "free city."
11. Germany is forced to pay massive war reparations in the form of money and natural
resources. The crushing debt payments (equal to 1 Trillion dollars in modern currency) will
93

devastate the German economy and soon cause a hyperinflationary monetary collapse.
(20)
Defenseless Germany is kept under the hunger blockade until she agrees to the
harsh terms. About 100,000 Germans die as a result of the post-armistice food
blockade. (21) The unjust and inhumane Treaty of Versailles will breed resentment
and anger for year to come.
1- West Prussia is given to the new state of Poland. East Prussia is cut off from the rest
of Germany! 2- German Sudetenland is assigned to the new state of Czechoslovakia
94

SECTION 3
1919 - 1933
THE COMPETING FORCES OF NATIONALISM AND
GLOBALIST COMMUNISM
95

1919
UNKNOWN ADOLF HITLER SPARKS A MOVEMENT
When Adolf Hitler joins the German Workers Party (DAP) in 1919, he becomes only the
7th member of the nationalist group. The now 30-year old, self-educated artist from Austria
has little money and no political connections. But his oratorical, organizational, and
marketing talents propel him to leadership of the tiny band of brothers. Hitler’s mesmerizing
beer-hall speeches stop onlookers in their tracks. He denounces the Versailles Treaty, the
occupation, the ‘November Criminals’, the Marxists, the Press, and the international
bankers.
DAP membership then grows rapidly, recruiting unemployed young men and disgruntled
ex-soldiers betrayed during the war. Hitler appeals to veterans because he himself was a
frontline soldier, twice decorated for serious injuries sustained, and twice more for
conspicuous bravery on the battlefield.
To draw recruits away from both the rival “right” Nationalist and “left” Socialist Parties,
Hitler simply adds ‘National’ and ‘Socialist’ to the Party’s name, making it NSDAP. (They
never called themselves "Nazis"!). To draw people away from the Reds, Hitler also uses
red flags, with a symbol of the ancient Aryans of Asia.
96

Adolf Hitler: A talented painter with a dream to save Germany.
Hitler designed the NSDAP flag. The "swastika" was a symbol of the ancient Aryan
peoples who came from Asia and settled in Europe.
FEBRUARY 8, 1920
WINSTON CHURCHILL WARNS OF A WORLDWIDE JEWISH
COMMUNIST CONSPIRACY
Lord of the Admiralty and Lusitania war criminal Winston Churchill is a supporter of
Zionism (Jewish state in Palestine), but opposed to Jewish Communism. Although both
movements trace back to the same Rothschild Crime Family, they sometimes appear - to
this day- to operate at cross-purposes, and in conflict with each other.
In an editorial appearing in the Illustrated Sunday Herald entitled, ‘Zionism vs
Bolshevism’, Churchill argues that Jews should support Zionism as an alternative to
Communism; missing the fact that both movements emanate from the same source. The
future Prime Minister rails against "the schemes of the International Jews”:
"This movement among the Jews is not new. From the days of Weishaupt to those of
Karl Marx, and down to Trotsky (Russia), Bela Kun (Hungary), Rosa Luxembourg
(Germany), and Emma Goldman (United States), this worldwide conspiracy for the
overthrow of civilization and for the reconstitution of society on the basis of arrested
development, envious malevolence, and impossible equality, has been steadily
growing. It played, as a modern writer, Mrs. Webster, has so ably shown, a deﬁnitely
recognizable part in the tragedy of the French Revolution……It has been the
mainspring of every subversive movement during the Nineteenth Century; and now at
last this band of extraordinary personalities from the underworld of the great cities
of Europe and America have gripped the Russian people by the hair of their heads and
97

have become the undisputed masters of that enormous empire." (1)
Zionism vs Bolshevism is a precursor of today's Neo-cons vs. Globalists rivalry.
1921 - 22
‘WAR COMMUNISM’ STARVES 10 MILLION TO DEATH!
Lenin’s oppression of the Russian people breaks their strength and will to resist. The
Famine of 1921 is partly due to the folly of central economic planning, as well as to a
deliberate eﬀort to kill oﬀ any Russians still not willing to support the Red takeover. The
Communists ran the money-printing presses to ﬁnance their civil war and welfare schemes.
When inﬂation follows, they impose price controls, causing farmers to lose money by
farming. Compounding the shortage is the Red seizure of seeds.
The horriﬁc famine is then used to selectively feed those regions submissive to the
Reds, and starve out those loyal to the Whites.
98

Starving Russians and Ukrainians resort to eating grass, or even cannibalizing the dead. The
horror escalates when Lenin deliberately blocks foreign relief eﬀorts. When the death toll
reaches 10 million, Lenin ﬁnally allows relief. Were it not for the mostly American aid, the
death toll for Lenin’s cruelty would have doubled.
Starving children and corpses of the 1921 Soviet Famine
JULY, 1921
NEW YORK TIMES PUBLISHES SOVIET CLAIM THAT 6 MILLION
JEWS FACE EXTERMINATION BY ‘WHITE’ COUNTER-
REVOLUTIONARIES
99

Yet again!
1922
THE REDS WIN THE RUSSIAN CIVIL WAR / THE ‘SOVIET UNION’
(U.S.S.R.) IS FORMALLY ESTABLISHED
At the conclusion of the Red Terror, Red Famine, and Red-White Civil War in 1922, Lenin
and Trotsky formally establish the Soviet Union with its capital city in Moscow. The former
Russian Empire is now also known as the USSR (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).
The Communist giant spans Eurasia. Of its multi-ethnic "republics" the Russian republic is
by far the largest and most populated. The well-known criminal brutality of the Soviets
shocks the world, as do the Communist declarations to overthrow all other nations. For
these reasons, three consecutive Republican Presidents (Harding, Coolidge, Hoover), will
refuse to diplomatically recognize the Soviet Union.
100

Phony symbolism; The hammer & Sickle on Soviet flag symbolize Communist love for
"the workers." The enormous Russian Empire is now the evil Soviet Empire.
OCTOBER, 1922
‘THE MARCH ON ROME’ / BENITO MUSSOLINI’S FASCISTS SAVE
ITALY FROM THE COMMUNISTS & LIBERALS
The global economic Depression that follows World War I gives the Reds and socialists an
opportunity to agitate in post war Italy. Benito Mussolini and his Fascist Party decide to act
before the "democratic" Reds can get any stronger.
In October of '22, Mussolini declares before 60,000 people at the Fascist Congress in Naples
"Our program is simple: we want to rule Italy." Fascist "Black-shirts" capture the strategic
points of Italy. Mussolini then leads a March of 30,000 men on the Capital City of Rome. On
October 28, a sympathetic King Victor Emmanuel III - whose father had been murdered by 
Red in 1900 - grants political power to Mussolini. Mussolini is supported by veterans and the
business class.
101

The corrupt left-wing political parties are eventually shut down. Under "Il Duce's" rule, the
pro-business Fascist Party takes control and restores order to Italy. Fascism combines an
honest and sound monetary system with a mix of free enterprise and state regulated
corporatism.
Mussolini’s ‘March on Rome’: "Communism is a fraud, a comedy, a phantom, a
blackmail." (2)
JANUARY 11, 1923
FRANCE INVADES GERMANY’S RUHR REGION AFTER GERMANY
IS LATE ON EXTORTION PAYMENTS
More than four years have passed since Germany's complete and total surrender at the end
102

of The Great War. The poor & hunger-stricken German nation is now having diﬃculty in
making the massive reparations extortion payments imposed by The Treaty of Versailles.
Having already destroyed the value of Germany’s currency, the Allies now demand to be
paid in timber and coal. Extortionist allied troops move in for a “shakedown.”
In a further humiliation of an already occupied Germany (Rhineland), 60,000 troops from
Belgium, France, and the French African colonies expand the occupation into the
defenseless Ruhr (an industrial region of Germany). While German children go hungry, the
Allies collect their stolen loot of physical German commodities. Machine gun posts are set
up in the streets as Allied troops take food and supplies from German shopkeepers. Other
than stage passive demonstrations, there is nothing the disarmed, humiliated, and hungry
German people can do about the French abuse.
Shaking down Germany! France and Belgium expanded the occupation of industrial
parts of Germany. The invaders killed 132 disobedient Germans.
103

1923
GERMAN SUPER-INFLATION WIPES OUT THE MIDDLE CLASS
With Allied troops occupying the Ruhr, and the German Mark losing its value to inﬂation
Germany in '22-23 goes through a horriﬁc hyperinflation. The socialist Weimer Government
and the Warburg/Rothschild Central Bank resort to massively expanding the money supply,
mostly to cover the crushing debt imposed by the Versailles Treaty, but also to keep the
Weimar Republic's welfare state afloat.
The life savings of the German people is wiped out as prices double every 2 days for 20
straight months! Workers are paid daily, so that they may go food shopping before prices
double again. Many Germans refer to their devalued money as “Judefetzen”, (Jewish
confetti). (3)
This leads to more chaos and another attempt by the Communists to stage a revolution. As
they had during the war, the Marxist Trade Unions call for strikes at a time when Germany
is most vulnerable. To pacify the striking workers, the Weimar / Reichsbank complex pumps
even more paper debt money into the economy.
104

1- Germans needed wheelbarrows full of paper money to go shopping. 2- 20 BILLION
Marks for a postage stamp! 3- Mark wallpaper.
NOVEMBER 8, 1923
‘THE BEER HALL PUTSCH’ / HITLER ATTEMPTS A COUP IN
BAVARIAN CITY OF MUNICH
Righteous anger is boiling over the hyper-inﬂation and the new French-Belgian occupation
Hitler decides that the time is right to seize power from the local government in Munich.
Hoping that war veterans will join the revolt and move against the national government in
Berlin, Hitler uses a rally in a Munich ‘Beer Hall’ to launch a coup.
The local uprising, or “putsch”, is ignited by Hitler’s moving speech, but fails to sustain itself
as troops open ﬁre on the nationalist rebels, killing 16 of them. Hitler and others are arrested
and tried for treason. At his trial, Hitler uses the occasion to spread his ideas, which are then
published in the newspapers. The judge is impressed, and issues a lenient sentence for the
rebels. Though the Munich coup has failed, the legend of the great orator grows, attracting
105

new followers by the day. Membership in Hitler’s NSDAP tops 20,000 by year's end.
A crowd turned out to support Hitler. Hitler and Ludendorff were arrested.
JANUARY 21, 1924
LENIN DIES / PSYCHO JOSEPH STALIN TAKES OVER THE USSR
When Lenin dies in 1924, Joseph Stalin, Secretary of the Communist Party Centra
Committee, skillfully outmaneuvers Red Army leader Lev Trotsky to take leadership of the
USSR. Stalin will eventually expel Trotsky from the Party, then from the USSR itself. Finally
he will have his Marxist rival axed through his brain by a Soviet agent in Mexico.
Stalin’s brutality instills fear not only in the enslaved people of the Soviet Union, but also in
the hearts of fellow Communists that the paranoid Stalin believes may challenge his
leadership. The egomaniac renames a city after himself (Stalingrad), and erects statues of his
likeness in town squares. From time to time, Stalin will “purge” many of his own Red
106

comrades, as well as wives. He dumps his ﬁrst wife, and drives his second, (as well as one of
his sons) to suicide.
In years to come, Stalin’s chilling crimes against humanity will make Lenin’s Red Terror and
Red Famine seem like minor infractions by comparison.
Lenin (l) was a pussycat compared to the genocidal Stalin and his Jewish ‘right hand
man’ Lazar Kaganovich. It was Kaganovich who ordered the demolition of Russia’s
grand and historic Christ the Savior Cathedral (right).
FORBIDDEN HISTORY: QUOTE TO REMEMBER:
107

"You must understand, the leading Bolsheviks who took over Russia were not
Russians. They (Bolshevik Jews) hated Russians. They hated Christians. Driven by
ethnic hatred they tortured and slaughtered millions of Russians without a shred of
human remorse. It cannot be overstated. Bolshevism committed the greatest human
slaughter of all time. The fact that most of the world is ignorant and uncaring about
this enormous crime is proof that the global media is in the hands of the
perpetrators."
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, Russian historian and literary figure (4)
AUGUST, 1924
THE DAWES PLAN / ZIONIST BANKERS REFINANCE GERMANY’S
DEBT
In 1924, a reﬁnancing of Germany’s reparations debt, as well as Allied debt to the US
Treasury (which in turn is indebted to the Fed) is worked out. The terms are still harsh, but
the German economy and currency are temporarily stabilized. In 5 years the Dawes plan will
also fail, and be replaced by the Young Plan. The reality of the Dawes Plan, named after US
Vice President Charles Dawes, is that Dawes himself has little to do with it. It was the
Zionist-Globalist bankers imposing the new plan. Former UK Prime Minister David Lloyd
108

George reveals:
“The international bankers dictated the Dawes reparations settlement. The protocol,
which was signed between the allies and Germany, is the triumph of the international
ﬁnancier. Agreement would never have been reached without the brutal intervention
of the international bankers. They swept statesman, politicians, and journalists
aside, and issued their orders with the imperiousness of absolute Monarchs, who
knew there was no appeal from their ruthless decrees. The Dawes report was
fashioned by the Money Kings.” (5)
The circular Dawes Scam reworked Germany's debt. David Lloyd George confirmed
that it was the International Bankers, not the politicians, who dictated the terms.
1925
HITLER PUBLISHES ‘MEIN KAMPF’
109

During his imprisonment of 1924, Hitler had dictated ‘Mein Kampf’ (My Struggle). His
close associate Rudolf Hess, imprisoned with Hitler, typed out the dictation for the book,
which was published in 1925. In it, Hitler places the blame for Germany’s sorry condition
upon a Global conspiracy of Marxists and Finance Capitalists.
According to Hitler, this global conspiracy for world government, directed by Jewish
bankers, engineered Germany's loss of The Great War, the Russian Revolution, the Versailles
Treaty, and the resulting hyperinﬂation that devastated Germany. He accuses the elite
Marxist Jews of Germany of controlling newspapers and banking, fomenting wars, and
corrupting the art, culture and morality of Europe.
Mein Kampf combines elements of a political manifesto and an autobiography along with
discussions of history, philosophy, and economics. Originally written for the followers of
National Socialism, Mein Kampf quickly grows in popularity, making Hitler a wealthy man.
Mein Kampf was first written in prison. Hitler spoke while Hess (4th from left) typed.
The book is still banned in U.S. occupied Germany today.
110

1926
ZIONIST DAVID SARNOFF ESTABLISHES NBC RADIO
David Sarnoﬀ was born in a small Jewish village in Tsarist Russia and immigrated to New
York in 1900. At the age of 15, he joined the Marconi Wireless Telegraph Company of
America, starting a 60-year career in electronic communications.
By 1919, Sarnoﬀ is General Manager of RCA radio. In 1926, Sarnoﬀ’s RCA forms NBC, th
ﬁrst major broadcast network in the U. S. Sarnoﬀ is instrumental in building the AM
broadcasting radio business which became the preeminent public radio standard for the
majority of the 20th century. During World War II, he will serve under General Eisenhower
as a “Communications Consultant” (psychological warfare). (6) Sarnoﬀ, who had no military
experience, would be awarded the rank of Brigadier General.
When television in America is born under the name of the National Broadcast Corporation
the ﬁrst TV show aired at the New York World's Fair and was introduced by Sarnoﬀ himself
Leadership of RCA-NBC eventually passes down to Sarnoff's eldest son, Robert Sarnoff, one
of the husbands of Felicia Schiﬀ-Warburg of the two famous banking families. Franklin
Roosevelt Jr. (son of FDR) was also an ex-husband of Felicia Schiff-Warburg.
The Sarnoff Family will control RCA-NBC TV for more than 60 years.
111

Sarnoff was an immensely powerful media giant of the 20th century. He would later
serve as a Psychological Warfare specialist during World War II.
APRIL, 1927
CIVIL WAR IN CHINA / MAO’s REDS vs CHIANG’s NATIONALISTS
A major civil war breaks out in China between the governing Kuomintang (KMT or Chines
nationalist Party) and the Communist Party of China (CPC). The anti-Communist Chiang
Kai Shek leads the KMT. The Red guerillas are led by Mao Tse Tung, who himself is
supported by Comintern boss Joe Stalin. This bloody civil war will eventually blend into the
Asian theater of World War II vs Japan, and finally end with Communist victory in 1949.
112

Mao was Stalin's agent in China. Combined, the 2 monsters murdered as many as 100
million people. Left: Chiang Kai Shek
1928
ZIONIST WILLIAM PALEY TAKES OVER CBS RADIO
William S. Paley (Paloff) is the son of Jewish immigrants who came from the Ukraine
region of the Czarist Russian Empire. In 1928, the 27-year old businessman secures majority
ownership of the CBS radio network (of which his father Samuel Paloﬀ had been part
owner). Within the next decade, Paley expands CBS into a national powerhouse with 114
affiliate stations.
During World War II, Paley, like Sarnoﬀ of NBC, will also serve under General Eisenhowe
as a colonel in the Psychological Warfare branch of the Office of War Information. (7)
As the King of the CBS radio (and later TV), Paley is without question, one of the
113

most powerful ﬁgures of the 20th Century. With David Sarnoﬀ already controlling RCA-
NBC, and Paley now in control of CBS, the important pre-TV medium of radio is now mainly
under Zionist control..
Like Sarnoff's NBC, Paley's CBS will shape what Americans believe for many years to
come. Paley lived until 1990.
1928
STALIN SEIZES THE LAST OF RUSSIA’S FARMS / RESISTERS ARE
KILLED
As part of Stalin’s ﬁrst “5 Year Plan”, the small farmers of the Soviet Union are forced into a
collectivization scheme. The government, not the market, now controls output and sets
prices. Land, livestock, and equipment become property of “the people” (the State). Reluctant
farmers (kulaks) are smeared in the Soviet press as “greedy” “capitalists.” Those who
continue to resist the state’s directives are murdered or imprisoned.
114

Thousands of private farmers are killed, but the really massive death tolls will occur during
the famine of the early 1930’s. Like all centrally planned economic schemes, in which
“intellectuals” think they know better than the actual farmer, Stalin’s collectivization, and
other “5-Year Plans”, yield only low living standards for the Soviet people.
The bestial Stalin cruelly dispossessed the Kulak farmers. Quote attributed to Stalin:
"One death is a tragedy. One million deaths is a statistic." (8)
OCTOBER, 1929
THE FEDERAL RESERVE CRASHES THE STOCK MARKET /
ENGINEERS ‘THE GREAT DEPRESSION’
In the late 1920’s, the privately owned U.S. Federal Reserve’s policy of “easy money” had
made it proﬁtable for investors to borrow money at artiﬁcially low interest rates, and then
115

purchase stocks with the money. Like two con men working a ‘mark’, the Zionist Fed
pumps out credit while the Zionist press hypes the Stock Market “rally”. As surely as
night follows day, a massive bubble is inflated.
In 1929, the Fed suddenly hits the brakes on the money supply with a “tight money” policy.
When the adjustment to the Fed’s bubble occurs, the Stock Market collapses. Investors big
and small are ruined. Instead of loosening up the money supply to enable debtors to pay
down old debt, the Fed tightens even more. The sudden shortage of currency creates a tidal
wave of bankruptcies across the U.S., as debtors cannot get their hands on enough money to
pay off old loans. The well connected then swoop in to buy up assets at bargain prices.
The press, the Reds, and the idiot liberals will blame “capitalism” and Republican policies for
the coming worldwide Great Depression, while deceitfully ignoring the deliberate role of
Warburg/Rothschild Federal Reserve.
1- Every newspaper in America led with the story of the horrifying October crash. 2- In
later years, future Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan admitted that the Fed actually
116

caused the Great Depression. (9) (“inadvertently” according to him)
SEPTEMBER, 1930
HITLER’S NSDAP BECOMES 2ND LARGEST PARTY IN GERMANY
The worldwide Great Depression hits debt-heavy Germany especially hard as loans from U.S
banks dry up. The people had already been worn out by the Versailles reparations, the unjust
war guilt, the 1920’s inﬂation, and chronic unemployment. There is a real fear among many
that a hungry Germany may yet fall to Communism.
As a result, the NSDAP makes its ﬁrst major electoral breakthrough. Hitler’s party wins 6
million votes (18% of vote), increasing its number of seats in the Reichstag (German
parliament) from 12, to 107. NSDAP is now second only to the 143 seats held by Germany’s
socialist party, the Social Democrats. The Communist Party also gains 23 seats, raising its
Reichstag representation to 77 Reds in the Reichstag, plus any secret members posing as
Social Democrats.
117

Belgian SS volunteer General Leon Degrelle
with Hitler
On his way up; supporters salute Hitler after the NSDAP's success in the elections. His
message is spreading fast, but the so are the empty promises of the Communists.
General Leon Degrelle on the education of Adolf Hilter
“Hitler was self-taught and he made no attempt
to hide the fact. The smug conceit of
intellectuals, their shiny ideas packaged like so
many ﬂashlight batteries, irritated him at times.
His own knowledge he had acquired through
selective and unremitting study, and he knew far
more than thousands of diploma-decorated
academics.
I don't think anyone ever read as much as he
did. He normally read one book every day,
always first reading the conclusion and the index
in order to gauge the work's interest for him. He had the power to extract the essence of each
book and then store it in his computer-like mind. I have heard him talk about complicated
scientific books with faultless precision, even at the height of the war.
His intellectual curiosity was limitless. He was readily familiar with the writings of the most
diverse authors, and nothing was too complex for his comprehension. He had a deep
knowledge and understanding of Buddha, Confucius and Jesus Christ, as well as Luther,
Calvin, and Savonarola; of literary giants such as Dante, Schiller, Shakespeare and Goethe;
and analytical writers such as Renan and Gobineau, Chamberlain and Sorel.
He trained himself in philosophy by studying Aristotle and Plato. He could quote entire
paragraphs of Schopenhauer from memory, and for a long time carried a pocket edition of
Schopenhauer with him. Nietzsche taught him much about willpower.
118

His thirst for knowledge was unquenchable. He spent hundreds of hours studying the works of
Tacitus and Mommsen, military strategists such as Clausewitz, and empire builders such as
Bismarck. Nothing escaped him: world history or the history of civilizations, the study of the
Bible and the Talmud, Thomistic philosophy and all the masterpieces of Homer, Sophocles,
Horace, Ovid, Titus Livius and Cicero. He knew Julian the Apostate as if he had been hi
contemporary.
His knowledge also extended to mechanics. He knew how engines worked; he understood the
ballistics of various weapons; and he astonished the best medical scientists with his knowledge
of medicine and biology.
The universality of Hitler's knowledge may surprise or displease those unaware of it,
but it is nonetheless a historical fact: Hitler was one of the most cultivated men of this
century. Many times more so than Churchill, an intellectual mediocrity; or than Pierre Laval,
who had a merely cursory knowledge of history; or than Roosevelt; or Eisenhower, who never
got beyond detective novels.” (10) - Leon Degrelle (1993)
DECEMBER, 1931
SHOCK CLAIM OF 6 MILLION JEWS FACING STARVATION IN
SOUTH-EASTERN EUROPE
Yet again, another baseless newspaper claim of 6 million Jews facing death:
119

1932
STALIN & KAGANOVICH
ENGINEER ANOTHER FAMINE
The Holodomor (Ukrainian translation: Killing
by hunger) was a man-made famine occurring
mainly, but not exclusively, in the Ukrainian
Republic of the Soviet Union during 1932-33. The
famine was caused partly by the folly of Stalin's
latest economic scheme, and partly due to a
deliberate, strategic terror plan engineered by
Stalin's powerful Jewish brother-in-law, Lazar Kaganovich.
Encyclopedia Britannica estimates 8 million people, 5 million of them Ukrainian, were
starved to death by the Stalin-Kaganovich famine. Some estimates run as high as 10 million
The famine-genocide is aimed at stamping out anti-communist resistance as well as starving
anti-Red peasants in Belarus, Kazakhstan and Russia.
Despite Soviet denials of the famine and a news blackout in most of the US Zionist/Globalis
press, the truth of the Holodomor was indeed known to the West. Unlike Lenin's terror
famine of 1921, this time no outside assistance is permitted into the Soviet Union.
Millions die a slow death and people resort to cannibalism. With this famine, Stalin and his
henchmen destroy any remaining resistance to the Red Revolution.
120

Lazar Kaganovich: "The Butcher of Ukraine" had also blown up the Cathedral of
Christ the Savior.
JULY & NOVEMBER, 1932
NSDAP SCORES BIG IN TWO ELECTIONS / BECOMES LARGEST
PARTY IN REICHSTAG
German elections in 1932 are held under violent conditions. NSDAP “brown shirts” clash in
the streets with Red paramilitary. Hitler’s party scores major gains, winning 230 Reichstag
seats. It is now the largest political body, but it is still not a majority in the 608 member
body.
Political deadlocks trigger another election in November: NSDAP: 196, Social Democrats: 121
Communists: 100, Center Party: 70, and 9 minor parties split 100 seats. Germany’s chaotic
politics are paralyzed and divided.
121

The brutal "austerity" policies of Chancellor Heinrich Brüning had shrunk the economy by
about 25%, but still did not prevent the German budget deﬁcit from growing.
Unemployment tops 30% as desperate Germans commit suicide by the 10’s of 1000’s.
In addition to a Parliamentary Reichstag and a Chancellor, Germany has a President with
unique powers. President Paul von Hindenburg was a World War I Field Marshall and is a
national hero. Politically, he is a non-Party Independent. On the basis of the NSDAP’s 196
seats, and in order to end the gridlock, Hitler asks Hindenburg to appoint him as
Chancellor. Hindenburg refuses Hitler’s request.
1932 Parade: As economic conditions in Germany worsen, NSDAP becomes the largest
political party. Hitler now has a platform for addressing the nation.
1866 - 1933
AN EPIDEMIC OF RED MURDER & TERROR
122

To better understand and appreciate the legitimate fear of Communist & Anarchist
revolutionaries (Reds) that aﬀected many Germans and Europeans prior to World War II, it
is important to review the shocking record of high proﬁle murders and acts of terror that
occurred in Europe and America during the preceding decades. It is equally important to
understand that the fanatical Anarchist & Communist street radicals (“Reds”), who carry out
these bold attacks, are only the blind tools of the NWO Globalists who fund and control
their organizations.
1866: Unsuccessful assassination attempt made on German Chancellor Bismarck.
1874: A 2nd unsuccessful assassination attempt is made on Bismarck.
1878: (May) Unsuccessful assassination attempt is made on German Kaiser Wilhelm.
1878: (June) A 2nd unsuccessful assassination attempt is made on Kaiser Wilhelm.
1881: Tsar of Russia is assassinated after four previous attempts had failed.
1893: Mayor of Moscow is assassinated.
1884: Reds kill 8 policemen in Chicago.
1894: Prime Minister of France is assassinated.
1897: Prime Minister of Spain is assassinated.
1900: King of Italy is assassinated.
1901: U. S. President William McKinley is assassinated.
1905: Unsuccessful assassination attempt made on King and Queen Consort of Spain.
1905: Grand Duke of Russia is assassinated.
1908: King and Crown Prince of Portugal are assassinated.
1911: Prime Minister of Russia is assassinated.
1918: Tsar of Russia and his entire family are murdered.
1919: Reds bomb Wall Street in New York; 38 people killed.
1919: Private home of U.S. Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer is bombed.
1922: Unsuccessful assassination attempt is made on the President of France.
1932: Package bomb destroys home of U.S. Judge Webster Thayer, injuring his wife
1933: The Mayor of Chicago is assassinated.
1918-1933: The Soviet Union headed by former street-radicals Lenin, Trotsky, Stalin et al,
murders, tortures and imprisons scores of millions of innocent people. That’s what
happens when Red revolutionaries actually take over a government!
123

Murder – Murder – Murder
Reds kill Tsar Alexander (Russia), King Umberto (Italy), President McKinley (US)
124

SECTION 4
1933 - 1939
THE RISE OF HITLER AND THE PLOT TO TAKE
HIM DOWN
125

1933
PRESIDENT HINDENBURG NAMES HITLER AS CHANCELLOR /
REDS CALL FOR LABOR STRIKES
After two parliamentary elections in 1933, Germany remains ungovernable as the Socialist
and Communist Parties continue to oppose the NSDAP. President Hindenburg is concerned
that the Reds will exploit the chaos and attempt another revolution in Germany. Hitler’s
NSDAP is the only group that can prevent this.
To protect Germany from Communism, Hindenburg relents and allows Hitler to become
Chancellor of Germany. Hitler’s powers are limited, but the NSDAP now holds the upper
hand in what is still a very unstable government.
The Communist Trade Union leaders move quickly to destabilize Hitler, calling for massive
strikes. Meanwhile in the U.S., the Zionist Sulzberger-owned New York Times kicks oﬀ an
anti-Hitler campaign on its front page of January 31, 1933. Zionist Sarnoﬀ's NBC and Zionis
Paley's CBS soon follow.
126

1- Chancellor Hitler shows his respect for Marshal Hindenburg 2- A Communist
propaganda poster threatens violence against the Hitler-Hindenburg system.
FEBRUARY 27, 1933
RED TERRORISTS SET FIRE TO THE REICHSTAG / HITLER IS
GRANTED EMERGENCY POWERS
Four weeks after Hitler’s appointment as Chancellor, angry Reds set the Reichstag
(Parliament) on ﬁre. Local police catch a Dutch Communist named Marinus Vander
Lubbe on the premises. He had just arrived in Germany a few weeks ago. The ﬁre was to
have been the start of the Red-instigated civil war, aimed at toppling the crumbling Weimar
state before Hitler and the NSDAP could establish themselves.
Hindenburg and Hitler act fast. Emergency decrees are issued and Communist leaders are
127

rounded up. The Red Revolution backﬁres. Instead of plunging Germany into civil war, the
Reichstag Fire starts a chain of events that leads to the The Enabling Act and Hitler's
consolidation of power. NSDAP becomes Germany’s only Party as the Weimar Republic is
swept away by The Third Reich, led by “The Fuehrer” (leader).
Some modern historians promote the theory that Hitler staged the ﬁre himself and then
blamed the Reds for it. There is no evidence at all to support this theory. It is a baseless claim
that ignores both the violent history and the standard destabilization tactics that the
Communists are well known for.
The Reichstag fire backfired on the Communists! Above: Marinus Vander Lubbe
MARCH, 1933
FDR BECOMES PRESIDENT AND SERVES THE NEW WORLD
ORDER
128

New York Governor and Globalist puppet Franklin Delano Roosevelt, (FDR) defeats
President Hoover in a 1932 landslide. Upon taking oﬃce in 1933, FDR (a cousin of Teddy
Roosevelt) moves quickly to remake America into a welfare state. His expensive schemes,
known as "The New Deal" take shape in "the ﬁrst 100 days". FDR uses the economic crisis,
which was created by his handlers, as the pretext for this expansion of government power,
ignoring the fact that it was the Federal Reserve's artiﬁcial manipulation of currency and
stocks, not the free market that caused the crisis.
The New Deal will be a colossal failure. It's reckless spending, high taxes, and ballooning
deﬁcits will only prolong the Depression and lead to even more expensive schemes, exactly
what the Globalist Fed bankers want. The debt-driven economic calamity that the U.S. is
headed towards today has its roots in FDR's fundamental transformation of the American
Republic into a perpetual warfare and welfare state.
1- The grinning phony will surpass the warmongering evil of his late cousin Teddy. 2-
FDR with his billionaire supporter and unofficial “advisor”, Bernard Baruch. At that
129

time, Baruch was the most powerful of the New York Jewish financiers.
MARCH, 1933
HITLER BECOMES FUEHRER AND DEFIES THE NEW WORLD
ORDER
Like FDR, Hitler came into true authoritative power in March 1933. Like FDR, Hitler inherit
an economic disaster. Like FDR, Hitler's "ﬁrst 100 days" in oﬃce are marked by a ﬂurry of
determined activity. But the similarities end there.
Whereas FDR is implementing all of the Globalists' economic and foreign policy plans, Hitle
is openly defying the Globalists. He implements the following policies:
*
Pulls Germany out of the Globalist League of Nations
*
Bans the Communist Party and arrests its leaders
*
Replaces the national Marxist Trade Unions with company unions
*
Implements the “Strength Through Joy” affordable luxury vacation program
*
Establishes NSDAP as Germany's only political Party
*
Ends reparations payments from the Versailles Treaty/Dawes Plan
*
Takes control of Germany's Reichsbank and issues debt-free currency
*
Restricts Jewish ownership of radio and newspapers
*
Cuts taxes and provides incentives for mothers to stay home and raise their
children
*
Relaxes the strict “gun control” laws of the previous government
*
Rebuilds German infrastructure and initiates the Autobahn Highway system
The Globalists & Marxists have lost control of Germany!
130

Hitler becomes a living legend as his policies begin to put Germany back on its feet.
Meanwhile, a subtle propaganda campaign is launched against him in the West.
MARCH, 1933
INTERNATIONAL JEWRY DECLARES WAR ON GERMANY
Jewish leaders formally issue a "Declaration of War" against Germany. On March 23, 1933
20,000 Jews protest at New York's City Hall. Rallies and boycotts are directed against German
goods. The front page of the March 24, London Daily Express carries the headline: “Judea
Declares War on Germany”.
Jewish leaders are quoted as calling for “Holy War" against the German people:
"The Jewish wholesaler will quit his house, the banker his stock exchange, the
merchant his business and the beggar his humble hut, in order to join the holy war
131

against Hitler's people.....Germany is now confronted with an international boycott of
its trade, its finances, and its industry.” (1)
On March 27, '33, 40,000 Jews and other assorted Reds gather in Madison Square Garden to
protest the new Chancellor. The NY Daily News front page blares: "40,000 Roar Protest
Here Against Hitler."
Worldwide Jewish leadership is ﬁring the opening propaganda shots of what, in due time,
will escalate into World War II. Hitler responds to the false “atrocity” charges being made
against the new Germany, stating on March 28: "Lies and slander of positively hair-
raising perversity are being launched against Germany.” (2)
1- 1933 / Daily Express (London): "Judea Declares War on Germany." 2- 1933 / NY Daily
New: 40,000 Roar Protest Against Hitler
132

International Jewry openly declares a sanctions war on Germany!
JUNE, 1933
ZIONIST – GLOBALIST FEDERAL RESERVE CHAIRMAN BUYS THE
WASHINGTON POST
The Washington Post is one of many businesses to go bankrupt during the Great
Depression. Owner Ned McLean unloads The Post at a bankruptcy auction. The buyer i
Zionist Federal Reserve Chairman Eugene Meyer. Having just stepped down from the
Federal Reserve; Meyer immediately changes The Post’s editorial policy, transforming the
influential newspaper into a pro-FDR, anti-Germany, and soft-on-Stalin propaganda sheet. In
1940, Meyer will ﬁre the Post’s paciﬁst editor for refusing to endorse U.S. intervention in
World War II (3).
The Post will lose money for 20 more years, but Meyer doesn’t care. He bought the Post for
inﬂuence, not proﬁt. The Post will later be handed down to Meyer’s daughter, the late
Katherine Meyer-Graham. With tension between International Jewry and Germany
building, it is ESSENTIAL to note that the four most powerful media sources in
America are now ALL under Jewish ownership.
133

CBS: Paley, NBC: Sarnoff, NY Times: Ochs-Sulzberger, Washington Post: Meyer
A CLEAN SWEEP! When Fed Chairman Eugene Meyer (right) purchased the
Washington Post, it gave the Globalist-Zionist moguls a clean sweep of the Big 4
major media giants; and the ability to distort the truth about Hitler and Germany.
FORBIDDEN HISTORY: QUOTE TO REMEMBER
134

Count Potocki leaving the White House
"Above all, propaganda here (in the U.S.) is entirely in Jewish hands. When bearing
public ignorance in mind, their propaganda is so effective that people have no real
knowledge of the true state of affairs in Europe. President Roosevelt has been given
the power to create huge reserves in armaments for a future war which the Jews are
deliberately heading for." (1934) (4)
Count Jerzy Potocki / Polish Ambassador to the U.S.
NOVEMBER, 1933
FDR GRANTS DIPLOMATIC RECOGNITION TO THE SOVIET
UNION (USSR)
Ever since the Reds seized power in Russia, three consecutive U.S. Presidents have refused
to recognize the criminal regime. Apart from its genocidal actions towards its own captive
135

people, the Communist International (Comintern) openly states that its’ goal is to overthrow
all “bourgeois” governments, including America’s.
FDR ignores these realties and pleases his Globalist masters by reversing this policy. The
normalization of relations is a great beneﬁt to the USSR, and will help the Soviets, and
international communism, to grow stronger.
As Hitler's Germany continues to be vilified for imaginary offenses; the real crimes
of Stalin & Kaganovich are ignored by the media.
1930's cartoon notes the ideological similarities between FDR and Stalin. The two will
forge a close relationship during the coming war years.
JUNE 30, 1934
136

‘THE NIGHT OF THE LONG KNIVES’ / LEFT WING COUP
ATTEMPT IS SUPPRESSED
More than one year into Hitler’s rule, Nationalist Marxist and homosexual Ernst Roehm is
threatening a 2nd revolution to “redistribute wealth”. Roehm commands the massive
paramilitary organization known as the SA (Brownshirts), whose members have a reputation
for street violence. German military brass despises Roehm and fears his ambition to absorb
them into the SA under his own leadership.
Facing an imminent coup attempt from these former allies, Hitler’s government carries out
‘Operation Hummingbird’; the purge of Roehm’s out-of-control left-wing faction. Many of
the coup plotters are executed and hundreds are arrested. The SA now comes under Hitler’s
command and control as western Jewish newspapers squeal about what they refer to as “The
Night of the Long Knives”.
137

Coup-plotter Roehm and his ‘brownshirts’ had their own agenda for Germany.
MAY 12, 1935
THE SUDDEN DEATH OF POLISH MARSHAL PILSUDSKI IS BAD
NEWS FOR GERMANY
Polish leader Marshal Jozef Pilsudski had been on good terms with Hitler. Pilsudski had
actually congratulated Hitler on winning the 1933 elections, and the German-Polish Non-
Aggression Pact was signed just 10 months afterwards. Not surprisingly, the Polish
Communist Party denounced Pilsudski as a “fascist and a capitalist”.
According to the Non-Aggression Pact, both countries pledge to resolve their problems
through negotiations, not armed conﬂict. Just before his death, Pilsudski reemphasized that
Poland should maintain neutral relations with Germany.
The popular Marshal will eventually be succeeded by the pompous warmonger, Marshal
Edward Rydz-Smigly. Pilsudski’s death, and Smigly’s rise, will prove to be great setbacks
for Germany - facts which Hitler will reiterate during the closing weeks of World War II.
138

1- Hitler attends a Berlin Memorial Service held in honor of Pilsudski, whom he
respected greatly. 2- Pilsudski and his Foreign Minister Beck (left) make peace with
German Minister for Propaganda & Public Enlightenment, Joseph Goebbels, and
German Ambassador to Poland, von Moltke.
NOVEMBER, 1935
WINSTON CHURCHILL PRAISES HITLER, THEN DROPS A
‘POISON PILL’
By November of 1935, it has become clear to the world that the anti-German atrocity stories
were baseless. The Jewish boycott eﬀort has failed; Hitler has renounced any claims to the
disputed Alsace-Lorraine region (France); and the rapid economic and social recovery of
Germany is self-evident. There are Monarchs, Prime Ministers, politicians, clergymen, artists
and poets from across Europe who are publicly singing the praises of ‘The Fuehrer’. Even
some Americans have come to admire him from afar.
139

Therefore, in order for the Globalist warmongers to impose their second war against
Germany, they must reboot their hate campaign gradually. Toward that end, Zionist puppet
Winston Churchill pens an article for Strand Magazine, entitled, ‘The Truth About Hitler’.
So as not to sound like the raving, warmongering lunatic that he truly is, Churchill, in order
to appear “objective”, makes a remarkable concession:
“One may dislike Hitler’s system and yet admire his patriotic achievement. If our country
were defeated, I hope we should ﬁnd a champion as indomitable to restore our courage and
lead us back to our place among the nations.” (5)
But further down in the article, the “objective” Churchill drops the other shoe by suggesting
that Germany may, possibly, yet turn out to be a threat to world peace:
“We cannot tell whether Hitler will be the man who will once again let loose upon the world
another war in which civilization will irretrievably succumb, or whether he will go down in
history as the man who restored honour and peace of mind to the great Germanic nation and
brought them back serene, helpful and strong, to the European family circle.
It is on this mystery of the future that history will pronounce Hitler either as a
monster or a hero. It is this which will determine whether he will rank in Valhalla with
Pericles, with Augustus, and with Washington, or welter in the inferno of human scorn with
Attila and Tamerlain. It is enough to say that both possibilities arc open at the present
moment.” (6)
The German press and Foreign Ministry are quick to express displeasure with Churchill’s
under-handed and baseless speculative comparison of Hitler to genocidal Hun and Mongol
leaders from antiquity. But Churchill’s anti-German hate campaign is just getting started,
along with his rise to political influence.
140

Strand Magazine Nov 1935, Churchill: The Truth about Hitler Page 10-11
Slowly but surely, the ambitious killer of the Lusitania is coming back from the
political graveyard he had been banished to.
FEBRUARY 4, 1936
THE MURDER OF WILHELM GUSTLOFF
Wilhelm Gustloﬀ had founded the Swiss branch of the NSDAP in 1932. A Jewish studen
named David Frankfurter, heeding the worldwide call for Jewish "Holy War" against the
German people, visits Gustloﬀ's home. Hedwig Gustloﬀ shows the killer into the study,
asking him to wait since her husband was on the telephone. When Gustloﬀ comes to meet
his unexpected guest, Frankfurter draws his pistol and shoots him 5 times. Hedwig screams
and cries hysterically.
141

Germans and German Swiss are outraged at the murder. Hitler attends Gustloﬀ's funeral
and then names a luxury ship, christened by his widow, in Gustloﬀ’s honor. The Swiss
sentence Frankfurter to 18 years, but he will be pardoned after World War II, before moving
to Israel. In 1945, on what would have been Gustloﬀ's 50th birthday, the ship named after
him will make history as the greatest sea disaster ever.
Wilhelm Gustloff (left) was murdered by David Frankfurter as his wife watched in
horror. After the war, Frankfurter (center & right) was allowed to live out the rest of
his life in Israel.
1933-1936
THE MIRACLE OF THE GERMAN RECOVERY
It has been 3 years since Hitler began his program for economic recovery. It is now the
most stunning economic revival in world history. (7) While the world remains mired in
the Great Depression, Germany’s once dead economy booms.
Unemployment, which had been over 30% a few years ago, is now under 5%. Productivity is
142

way up, as are wages. By freeing Germany from the heavy taxation of the Weimar Republic
the cruel burden of the Versailles Treaty, and the perpetual interest costs of Weimar's debt-
based Central Bank currency, Hitler has unleashed the private economy while using public
spending very wisely.
Unlike FDR's wasteful public works programs, Hitler's public works are useful investments
such as the national highway system which Hitler began building in 1933 (The Autobahn).
Hitler, a great admirer of Henry Ford, sketched the original prototype for the Volkswagen
(The People's Wagon) and suggested to Ferdinand Porsche that, “It should have the shape of
a June bug”. Hitler wanted every German family to be able to buy a car and take a vacation.
Low taxes, responsible debt, intelligent planning, lean government, debt-free currency, and a
business friendly environment are the secrets of Hitler's economic miracle, and of his
extraordinary popularity among a grateful German people, including many former
liberals who were once Communist voters.
1- Hitler understood the basic principles of automotive engineering. He consulted
with Ferdinand Porsche on the manufacture of the Volkswagen; the prototype for
which Hitler drew himself (Image # 2) 3 -Henry Ford receives the Grand Cross of the
German Eagle from the German consul-general of Cleveland
143

Along with economic revival, the re-born Germany experiences a cultural and moral rebirth.
The NSDAP, whose membership is open to all Germans of sound character, cleans up the
pornography and debauchery that thrived under the Weimar State. Classic art makes a
comeback, as "modern art" is relegated to its proper status as an object of ridicule. The
future is looking bright for Germany. Before the German model can spread to other nations,
the dark forces of The New World Order must destroy it.
By 1936, support for Hitler in Germany is near universal. Even the formerly pro-Marxis
liberals have been won over by his achievements. Photos and ﬁlms of happy Germans and of
Hitler smiling are deliberately censored by the Zionist-Globalist media.
1- Hitler turns first shovel of dirt for the Autobahn project. 2- Overjoyed adoring
German crowds greeted Hitler everywhere. 3- Vacation-loving Germans were now the
happiest people in Europe.
144

BEFORE & AFTER
1- The 1970’s Broadway play and Hollywood film, ‘Cabaret’, depicts the depraved
“transgender” night life of pre-Hitler Berlin. 2- Hitler’s youth groups promoted virtue,
discipline and clean living.
145

Due to the war, Hitler’s grand vision (models above) to make Berlin the architectural
and cultural wonder of the world would never be realized.
FEBRUARY, 1936
IN AN INTERVIEW WITH LONDON’S ‘DAILY MIRROR’, HITLER
OFFERS FRIENDSHIP TO THE WORLD
“I appeal to reason in international
affairs. I want to show that the idea of
eternal enmity is wrong. We are not
hereditary enemies.” - Hitler
FORBIDDEN PHOTOS OF
ADOLF HITLER
The images of Hitler shown by the
western Yellow Press of his day, as well
as the modern day history books and TV
documentaries, are careful never to show a smiling Hitler with children, animals, women, or
adoring German crowds. This serves to conceal the fact that he had a soft heart and a warm
fondness for children and animals; so much so that he was a vegetarian.
146

147

148

FORBIDDEN HISTORY: QUOTE TO REMEMBER
149

"It is not the Germany of the decade that followed the war- broken, dejected and bowed down
with a sense of apprehension and impotence. It is now full of hope and confidence, and of a
renewed sense of determination to lead its own life without interference from any influence
outside its own frontiers. One man has accomplished this miracle. He is a born leader of
men. A magnetic and dynamic personality with a single-minded purpose, a resolute will and a
dauntless heart.
As to his popularity, there can be no manner of doubt. The old trust him; the young idolize
him. It is not the admiration accorded to a popular leader. It is the worship of a national
hero who has saved his country from utter despondence and degradation.....I have
never met a happier people than the Germans."
-David Lloyd George, Ex-Prime Minister, UK, 9-17-36 (8)
MAY, 1936
IN NEW YORK TIMES, GERMANY IS ACCUSED OF A
“HOLOCAUST” FIVE YEARS BEFORE THE JEWS WERE EVEN
150

INTERNED!
Europe is at peace and the Jews who have remained in
Germany are prospering in the revitalized economy; 75% of
them being middle class or higher. Even the legendary Max
Warburg, though stripped of his dominance over Germany's
Central Bank, chose to stay in Germany until 1938.
A group of "Christians" fronting for the Chicago and New
York Zionists now makes the ridiculous claim of a "European
Holocaust". This claim forms the basis of the case for the
establishment of a Jewish State in Palestine; which the British
had conquered as part of a World War I payoff to the Zionists
for their help in dragging the U.S. into the war on Britain's
side. Not content with mass immigration to Palestine (The
British Mandate), the Zionists, speaking through their "Christian" front men and dupes, now
want the British to crack down on the oppressed Arabs and give the Jews an actual nation of
their own. The New York Times reported on this bizarre allegation:
“WASHINGTON, May 30 - A petition addressed to Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin expressive
of the hope that Great Britain will steer a course favoring the establishment of a free Jewish
nation in Palestine such as would provide refuge for millions of persecuted Jews in Eastern
Europe and Germany was presented to Sir Ronald Lindsay, the British Ambassador, today
by a Christian delegation representing the Pro-Palestine Federation of America … The
petition, stressed the intolerable suﬀerings of the millions of Jews in "the European
holocaust". (9)
Oops! It appears as though some over-eager Zionist went oﬀ the script and let the fake
‘Holocaust” cat out of the bag a full 5 years too soon!
151

AUGUST, 1936
THE BERLIN OLYMPICS / HITLER AND JESSE OWENS
The 1936 Olympics had been awarded to Germany before Hitler became Chancellor. So
despite the protests of Jewish groups, it is too late to take the games away. The games
showcase the new Germany. Visitors are impressed at the spirit and positive outlook of the
German people. Germany wins more medals than any other nation, but black American
Jesse Owens is the biggest star of the games.
The German crowd cheers wildly for Owens as he wins 4 Gold Medals as both a sprinter
and long jumper. But the Zionist media uses Owens to vilify Hitler. It was reported then
and repeated endlessly ever since, that Hitler "snubbed" Owens because he was black,
storming out of the stadium in a ﬁt of rage when Owens won his ﬁrst race. This "snub"
makes Hitler seem petty and rude in the eyes of the world. But the story of the Owens'
“snub” is a big lie.
Owens himself conﬁrms that the “snub” story is a hoax, stating, “When I passed the
Chancellor, he arose, waved his hand at me, and I waved back. I think the writers
showed bad taste in criticizing the man of the hour (Hitler) in Germany. (10) Years
later, in his autobiography, Owens again clariﬁes, "Hitler didn’t snub me -it was FDR who
snubbed me. The president didn’t even send me a telegram." (11)
152

1- The “snub” of Jesse Owens was a false propaganda story. 2- Owens was befriended by
German long-jump competitor Luz Long. They became pen pals.
1936 – 1939
THE SPANISH CIVIL WAR / NATIONALISTS vs REDS
Nationalist General Francisco Franco leads a rebellion against a democratic socialist
government in Spain. The country is deeply divided, with Socialists, Communists, and
liberals ﬁghting for the government, and Nationalists, conservatives, and the Catholic
Church favoring Franco. The war becomes a proxy war between Nationalism and Globalism
Germany, Portugal and Italy provide military aid to Franco as Stalin sends arms to the
Spanish government.
The Comintern sends volunteers to ﬁght for the Spanish regime. American Communists o
the Abraham Lincoln Brigade arrive to ﬁght alongside the Reds. As usual, Red ﬁghters
commit atrocities against civilians, such as setting ﬁre to the wives and children of
Nationalist oﬃcers after dousing them with petrol. Determined to stamp out Christianity,
they rape nuns, torture priests, and set fire to churches with the worshippers locked inside.
153

The Spanish Civil War ﬁnally ends in victory for Franco, but the war between New World
Order Globalism and European Nationalism is only just beginning.
1- Hitler helped Franco to defeat Stalin's Communists in Spain 2- Intolerant Spanish
Reds “execute” a statue of Jesus.
DECEMBER 10, 1936
THE PRO-HITLER KING OF ENGLAND IS FORCED TO ABDICATE
HIS THRONE
England's King Edward VIII is an admirer of Adolf Hitler. This creates a dilemma for the
Globo-Zionists who wish to instigate a war with Germany. Six months into his reign, there is
an assassination attempt against him. Jerome Bannigan produces a loaded revolver near
the King. After being quickly pounced upon by police and arrested, he claims to have been
recruited by "a foreign power".
Weeks later, Eugene Myers' Washington Post reports that Edward plans to marry an
American woman who has still not divorced her husband. British politicians use the "crisis"
154

to squeeze Edward out, giving him a choice between Ms. Wallis Simpson, or abdicating his
thrown. As the story goes, it is for love of Ms. Simpson that Edward gives up the throne. The
real reason for the silent coup is concealed from the public.
Hitler will later state:” I am certain through him permanent friendly relations could
have been achieved. If he had stayed, everything would have been diﬀerent. His
abdication was a severe loss for us." (12) With Edward gone, the Globalists proceed with
plans to wage war on Germany. Edward is replaced by his stuttering, stammering idiot
brother -George VI - ("The King's Speech"), who will spend the coming war years making
‘patriotic’ radio speeches.
Many in England defended their King and opposed abdication. After stepping down
from the throne of England, Edward and his American bride visit Hitler in 1937.
MAY 6, 1937
THE HINDENBURG DISASTER
155

The Hindenburg Airship, named after the man who helped Hitler become Chancellor, is
the pride of Germany's ﬂeet. American crowds marvel as the air-ships passes over New York,
saluting them with the German "Sieg Heil". The airships are designed to ﬂoat using Helium
But after FDR's Jewish Interior Secretary, Harold Ickes, slaps a Helium embargo on
Germany; the Zeppelins are redesigned to use highly flammable Hydrogen instead.
The moment Hindenburg begins to dock in Lakehurst, NJ, it bursts into ﬂames and crashes
killing 35 of the 97 passengers. "Static electricity" is blamed, yet Hindenburg had
previously endured direct lightning hits! The cause of the explosion remains unknown
to this day. But the unusual amount of news reel cameras present that day, the Helium
embargo, the timing of the mysterious ignition just as the ship is mooring, the hyping of the
idiotic "static electricity" theory, and the anti-German hysteria being whipped up by the
press, suggest that the Hindenburg disaster was actually an act of sabotage. Theories range
from an onboard suicide-bomber to an incendiary riﬂe-bullet ﬁred from the nearby woods.
The incident shatters confidence in Germany's airships and marks the end of the airship era.
A suspicious blast at the exact moment of mooring destroys Germany's Airship
156

industry. It was Harold Ickes who cut off helium exports to Germany.
JULY, 1937
WAR BREAKS OUT BETWEEN CHINA & JAPAN
The Japan-China War starts when the Japanese claim to have been ﬁred on by Chinese
troops at the Marco Polo Bridge near modern day Beijing. Tensions escalate and Japan
launches an invasion of China, using Japanese bases in Manchuria, as a launching point.
Manchuria is rich in resources and has strategically vital ports on the Sea of Japan. It is
located in Northeastern Asia, bordering China, Korea, and also western Russia. Manchuria
was once Chinese controlled, then part of the Russian Empire. Japan won Manchuria from
Russia in the war of 1905, but Nationalist Chinese view Manchuria as historically Chinese
The Japan-China war blends into the ongoing Chinese Civil War raging between the Chinese
Communists and the Chinese Nationalist government. At the same time that Japan is
ﬁghting the Chinese nationalists (led by Chiang Kai Shek) the Japanese must also ﬁght the
guerilla Reds (led by Stalin's agent Mao Tse Tung). The US, though still oﬃcially neutral,
clearly favors Chiang Kai Shek over Japan. But Chiang is only a disposable tool for the
Globalist’s Asian ambitions; a fact that will serve to prolong the Japan-China War.
It's Japan vs. China Reds vs. China Nationalists in a 3-way Far Eastern Battle Royale
that will shape the course of Asian history.
157

1- Part of Manchuria (region on right) was won by Japan in the Russo-Japanese war of
1905. 2- FDR & Churchill will later play their boy Chiang (seated left) for a fool and sell
him out at the Yalta Conference.
NOVEMBER 25, 1937
GERMANY & JAPAN AGREE TO AN ANTI-COMMUNIST DEFENSE
PACT
Germany and Japan agree to the Anti-Comintern Pact, a mutual defense Treaty directed at
the Soviet controlled Communist International. Italy will join the following year. The pact
states:
"recognizing that the aim of the Communist International, known as the Comintern, is to
disintegrate and subdue existing States by all the means at its command; convinced that the
toleration of interference by the Communist International in the internal aﬀairs of the nations
not only endangers their internal peace and social well-being, but is also a menace to the
peace of the world desirous of co-operating in the defense against Communist subversive
158

activities." (13)
In case of an attack by the Soviet Union against Germany or Japan, the two countries agree
to take measures "to safeguard their common interests". Mussolini's Italy will soon join the
anti-Comintern and several other nations join later on. Germany also invites Britain and
Poland to join the Anti-Comintern Alliance. Both nations decline.
German and Japanese officials sign the Anti-Comintern pact.
DECEMBER, 1937
THE IMAGINARY “RAPE” OF NANKING
The alleged Rape of Nanking is said to have been committed by the Japanese military in the
city of Nanking, then capital of China. China has long claimed that the Japanese massacred
300,000 Chinese people in just six weeks.
159

But newspaper accounts, photos, documentary ﬁlms, records and testimonies in those days
all suggest that neither a large-scale massacre, nor even a small-scale massacre, ever took
place. During the battle for Nanking, every civilian remaining in the city is urged to take
refuge in the internationally monitored Safety Zone. This Safety Zone is managed by the
International Committee for the Nanking Safety Zone, which is a group of professors
doctors, missionaries and businessmen from Europe and the U. S.. They remain in the city
throughout the battle.
On the day that Japanese troops enter Nanking, more than 100 press reporters and
photographers enter with them. The press is not only from Japan, but also from Europe and
America, including Reuters and AP. However, none of the journalists report the occurrence
of a civilian massacre. If the Japanese military had wanted to massacre the citizens of
Nanking, it would have been very easily done by simply bombing the very narrow
and crowded Nanking Safety Zone.
The most telling indicator is the fact that most of the alleged details of the “massacre” will
only surface after the unconditional surrender of Japan in 1945. During the war itself,
Chinese leader Chiang Kai-Shek broadcasts 100’s of radio addresses to the Chinese people.
But he never mentions that 300,000 people had supposedly been killed! Furthermore, many
of the “massacre” photos which surface later on are clearly fakes. (14)
Many Chinese are however killed by Chinese Supervisory Units, whose job is to kill Chinese
soldiers trying to escape from the battleﬁeld. Many pro-Japanese Chinese (who saw Japan as
pro-Asian liberating force) are also killed by these units, not by the Japanese military.
160

1- Japanese soldiers distribute food and sweets. 2- After the battle, many Nanking
citizens, who abhorred the Chinese military, welcomed the Japanese. The citizens are
wearing armbands of the flag of Japan, which were given to all civilians of Nanking to
distinguish them from Chinese soldiers hiding in civilian clothing.
JANUARY 9, 1938
NEW YORK TIMES PUBLISHES ANOTHER FALSE CLAIM OF 6
MILLION JEWISH VICTIMS OF PERSECUTION
As the ‘Four Tops’ of Motown fame used to sing: “Now it’s the same, old song, with a
different ….
161

MARCH 12, 1938
THE ANSCHLUSS / AUSTRIA IS INCORPORATED INTO THE
GERMAN REICH
The Anschluss is the voluntary incorporation of Austria into the German Reich. The
merger with their Germanic brothers is supported by 99% of Austrians and Germans (15),
but opposed by the puppet Austrian government instituted by the Allies after World War I.
The Versailles Treaty broke up the Austro-Hungarian Empire and forbid the new nation of
Austria from uniting with Germany. But after seeing the great success of Germany, there is
no stopping the Austrians desire to unite with their happy brothers and sisters. Without a
shot being ﬁred, German forces move in unopposed and are greeted as liberators by the
162

joyous Austrians. As a brotherly gesture towards the Austrians, Hitler invites Austrian troops
to march inside of Germany as well.
When Hitler himself comes to visit the land of his youth, he is given a hero's welcome by the
frenzied Austrian crowds. Not surprisingly, the western Globo-Zionist media portray the
joyful unification as "Germany conquers Austria.”
Happy Austrians turn out to welcome Hitler, their hometown boy. Image #4, Hitler
lays a wreath at the gravesite of his parents.
MARCH, 1938
UK NEWSPAPER BOSS: “I AM SHAKEN. THE JEWS MAY DRIVE
BRITAIN INTO A WAR WITH GERMANY.”
Lord Beaverbrook is the top newspaper mogul in Great Britain. His Daily Express is the
most widely read newspaper in the world. During World War I, he served as UK's Minister
of Information.
163

In a private letter written in 1938, Lord Beaverbrook voices concern over Jewish inﬂuence
leading the UK towards war with Germany. He writes: “There are 20,000 German Jews in
England – in the professions, pursuing research. They all work against an
accommodation with Germany.” (16)
In a subsequent letter he adds: “The Jews have got a big position in the press here. ... At
last I am shaken. The Jews may drive us into war.” (17)
Lord Beaverbrook was a big name media player. In private letters, he wrote what he
would not dare say publicly.
MARCH, 1938
THE MILITARY DICTATORSHIP OF POLAND STRONG-ARMS
LITHUANIA AND INVADES CZECH TERRITORY
164

Poland’s Marshal Rydz-Smigly issues an ultimatum to the tiny Baltic State of Lithuania
Lithuania had refused to have diplomatic relations with Poland after 1920, protesting the
annexation of the Vilnius Region by the new Polish state. The ultimatum demands that
Lithuania unconditionally agree to establish diplomatic ties with Poland within 48 hours.
The establishment of diplomatic relations would mean a renunciation of Lithuanian claims
to the region containing its historic capital, Vilnius.
Tiny Lithuania, preferring peace to war, accepts bully-boy Smigly's ultimatum and
conditions. Had Lithuania stood ﬁrm, it's quite possible that Stalin would have used the
ensuing war as pretext to take the Baltic States (which he eventually will in 1940) and start the
2nd Polish-Soviet war. Such is the recklessness of Marshal Rydz-Smigly of Poland. Many in
the "democratic" West, including the New York Times, express dismay over Poland's
militaristic bullying of Lithuania; a development deemed so dangerous that it causes jitters
among Wall Street investors. (18)
1 & 2- The megalomaniac Smigly dreams of restoring the old Polish Empire from
centuries past. 3 – Tiny Lithuania is Poland’s first victim of bullying.
165

SEPTEMBER, 1938
THE MUNICH CONFERENCE / SUDETENLAND IS REUNITED
WITH GERMANY
When the Treaty of Versailles dismantled Austria-Hungary, it combined Czechs, Slovaks
Germans and Hungarians into an artiﬁcial state called "Czechoslovakia". The German region
(Sudetenland), lies south of Germany and has 3.5 million inhabitants. Like the Austrians,
The Sudetenlanders also wish to unite with the Reich; but Czechoslovakia’s pro-Communist
President, Edvard Benes, will not allow it. The Sudetenlanders are politically
disenfranchised and severely mistreated by the Globalist-owned state of Czechoslovakia. The
role assigned to Benes is to pick a ﬁght with Hitler; a ﬁght which will draw in the
UK, France and the USSR.
To resolve the matter peacefully, Hitler calls for an emergency conference in Munich with
England, France, and Italy. The parties agree that the German Sudetenland should rightfully
be a part of Germany, and that the Slovaks will have their own state (Slovak Republic 1939-
1945). As the artiﬁcial Czechoslovakian state is dissolved, Germany establishes autonomous
protectorates over what remains (Bohemia and Moravia). Again, without a shot being
ﬁred or a drop of blood being shed, Germans are welcomed into the Reich while other
ethnic groups are given their own states; a win-win-win for all parties!
As was the case in Austria, Hitler receives a hero's welcome upon visiting the Sudetenland
UK Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain applauds the deal as "peace in our time." But his
rival, the drunken cigar chomping Winston Churchill, and the Jewish Press denounce the
deal as "Hitler’s latest conquest". Simply for agreeing to what was fair and just, Neville
Chamberlain has since been unfairly branded by history as "an appeaser". In fact, a Google
search of just the term "appeasement" yields pages and pages of references and images to
poor Neville Chamberlain!
For his part, Benes relocates to Britain and becomes part of Churchill’s circle. After the war,
166

he will again serve as President of the Communist-dominated government of a reconstituted
Czechoslovakia; using his position to confiscate the property of three million Germans.
Very happy Sudetenland women salute Hitler. Women often wept at the sight of
Hitler. In western versions of this photo, the two women on the left are cut out so as to
make it seem that the woman on the right is crying tears of sadness.
The eternal stupidity of the “Neville Chamberlain appeased Hitler” lie has been
167

enshrined in false history.
Benes with Churchill / Benes with Stalin
OCTOBER, 1938
POLAND GRABS A PIECE OF CZECH TERRITORY
The Polish regime continues its aggressive foreign policy by taking advantage of the
Sudetenland Crisis and demanding a portion of Zaolzie and some other smaller Czech areas
The Czechs are powerless to stop the forced annexations.
The Polish Army annexes areas with a population of 227,399 people. Again, the "democratic"
West shakes its head in dismay, but has to hold its nose and bite its tongue because it was
understood that the fool Rydz-Smigly and his gang would be needed for bigger things;
namely, picking a fight with Hitler’s Germany.
168

Polish tanks roll into annexed Czech territory. The Czechs join the Lithuanians as the
latest victims of Polish bullying. 'Emperor' Smigly will soon set his sights on grabbing
territory from German Prussia.
NOVEMBER 9, 1938
KRISTALLNACHT / JEWISH KILLER MURDERS GERMAN
DIPLOMAT / ANTI-JEWISH RIOTS ERUPT
Ernst vom Rath is a 29 year old German diplomat stationed in Paris. In a repeat of the how
Swiss Jew David Frankfurter had asked to speak to Swiss NSDAP head Wilhelm Gustlo
before killing him in 1936, a Polish Jew named Hershel Grynspan arrives at the German
embassy, asking to speak to a member of the diplomatic staﬀ. When vom Rath comes to
greet the visitor, Grynspan draws his pistol and murders him in cold blood.
By now, the Germans have had enough of the Jewish inspired boycotts, slanders,
169

warmongering, and murders aimed at them. News of the murder triggers rioting, arson, and
vandalism directed at Jewish shops and businesses. It is an angry Hitler who orders the
violence to cease immediately and it stops after the first night.
The night of violence, referred to by Jews as "Kristallnacht" (Night of the Broken Glass), is
hyped by the western media. Kristallnacht is still whined about to this day. But the
repeated agitation, boycotts, and murders which provoked German resentment are
never mentioned.
A senseless murder; young Ernst (left) and his killer Hershel Grynspan
1939
H. G. WELLS PUBLISHES ‘THE NEW WORLD ORDER’
British writer H.G. Wells is best known for classic works like ‘The Invisible Man’, ‘Time
170

Machine’, and ‘War of the Worlds.’ In 1939, Wells, a member of the Globalist Fabian Society,
releases a non-fiction book, The New World Order; which compliments his earlier work on
the same subject, ‘The Open Conspiracy’ Unlike most Globalists, Wells speaks openly about
his utopian dream. Some excerpts:
"This new and complete Revolution we contemplate can be deﬁned in a very few words. It
is outright world-socialism; scientifically planned and directed.”…
Countless people will hate the new world order and will die protesting against it.
When we attempt to evaluate its promise, we have to bear in mind the distress of a
generation or so of malcontents. ….The term Internationalism has been popularized in
recent years to cover an interlocking ﬁnancial, political, and economic world force for the
purpose of establishing a World Government.” (19)
Fabian member Wells: “Countless people will die."
171

ALL OF 1939
HITLER ATTEMPTS TO PEACEFULLY RESOLVE DISPUTE OVER
THE ‘POLISH CORRIDOR’
The “free city” of Danzig is 95% German. Along with its surrounding German area of Eas
Prussia, Danzig was isolated from the German mainland by the Versailles Treaty. Formerly
German territory now belongs to Poland, cutting right through the Prussian/Pomeranian
region of Germany. As had been the case with Germans stranded in Czechoslovakia, the
Germans in Poland (those not brutally expelled in 1919) are a persecuted minority.
Throughout all of 1939, Hitler tries to solve the problem of the "Polish Corridor” peacefully.
He proposes that the people living in Danzig and the “corridor” be permitted to vote in a
referendum to decide their status. If the region returns to German sovereignty, Poland will
be given a 1 mile wide path, running through Germany to the Baltic Sea so that it would not
be landlocked.
The Polish military dictatorship of Edward Rydz-Smigly and friends is urged by
Britain and, from behind the scenes and across the ocean, Roosevelt, to not make
any deals with Germany. (20) When it becomes apparent to Hitler that Poland will not
allow a referendum, he then proposes another solution – international control of the
formerly German regions. This sensible oﬀer is also ignored. The Globalists intend to use
foolish Poland as the match which ignites World War II.
172

Map shows stolen German areas of W. Prussia, “free” Danzig, and E. Prussia isolated
from the rest of Germany. Polish Marshal Rydz-Smigly wants Danzig and all of
Prussia.
MAY, 1939
AS GERMANY TURNS TO THE VATICAN FOR PEACE, BRITAIN
APPEALS TO STALIN FOR A WAR ALLIANCE
The warmongering faction of Great Britain continues to press for war with Germany. The
hawks are openly threatening to dump Neville Chamberlain if he refuses to deliver.
(21) Having failed to ignite the war in Czechoslovakia, the warmonger’s “Plan B’ is to draw
Stalin into a war alliance with Britain and France; and to then use Poland to start a war with
Germany. After Poland picks the ﬁght, the western allies will attack Germany from the west
as the Soviets advance from the east; an exact replay of how they imposed a two-front war on
Germany 25 years ago.
173

Britain assures Stalin that in case of war, the USSR would not be expected to join until the
British and French are in it first. But Stalin is hesitant to join the alliance at this time because
he has plans of his own. Hitler is well aware of the plots being cooked up against Germany.
While the British openly court Stalin, Germany reaches out to Pope Pius XII – quite
a contrast! The Vatican oﬀers to mediate an international conference between Germany,
Poland and the western powers. Germany and Italy are all in, but Britain refuses the
Vatican’s offer. (22)
Excerpts from the May 11, 1939 issue of The New York Times:
British Assurance Given
By Robert P. Post
“The position as it stands now is ....that Russia has been assured that she is not being
maneuvered into a position to ﬁght alone and the British are awaiting her reply and any
demands she may make to assure that her conditions will be fulfilled.
The note of cautious optimism continued here about the Russian negotiations, the belief
being that the two countries are not so far apart as they ﬁrst appeared to be. The British
are now expected to make certain concessions to the Russian idea of an alliance.
The negotiations with Russia are having repercussions on the British reaction to the Pope's
conference proposal. At the present stage the British are reluctant to take part in any such
conference with Russia eliminated.”
Demand for Soviet Pact Rises
By Sir Arthur Willert
Noted British Journalist
“LONDON, May 10. - The general British reaction on the feasibility of an internationa
174

conference to smooth out the troubles of Europe is somewhat lukewarm. This applies to
reports that the Vatican has put out feelers regarding the possibility of international action
for the settlement of the German-Polish problems.
The predominant opinion here is that if a conference were held at this juncture, the
Rome-Berlin Axis powers would try to vitiate it by the same intolerable pressure of fear and
menace that Chancellor Adolf Hitler so successfully brought to bear on the Munich
meeting.
... This view accounts for the constant sniping at Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain,
from his own supporters in Parliament, as well as from the Opposition parties, on the
ground that he is not pushing ahead effectively with the Russian negotiations.”
When Hitler turned to the Pope for peace -
175

…John Bull turned to Stalin for war!
Contrary to historical distortion, ex-altar boy Hitler enjoyed excellent relations with
the Catholic Church, an institution which he viewed as vital to public virtue and world
stability.
176

AUGUST, 1939
JEWISH MAD SCIENTIST ALBERT EINSTEIN ASKS FDR TO BUILD
ATOMIC BOMBS!
Jewish scientist Albert Einstein had left Germany shortly after Hitler came to power.
Though dismissed by scientific great Nikola Tesla as a “long haired crank” (in private letters),
Einstein had achieved world fame in the press for his "Theory of Relativity", which some
researchers now claim was plagiarized from the work of an Italian physicist. (23) Einstein is
an outspoken advocate of world government and is linked to numerous Communist front
groups in Germany.
While Europe is still at peace, Einstein (at the urging of lesser known Jewish scientists) writes
a letter to FDR in which he describes the power of a potential atomic bomb. He falsely
insinuates that Germany is already working on such a weapon, and urges FDR to fund
research into building atomic bombs. Though not stated so directly in the letter, it is clear
that Mr. Einstein hopes to one day murder millions of Germans with this devilish
weapon. The ‘Manhattan Project’ will eventually grow out of this effort.
177

Time's "Person of the Century" and Leo Szilard issued a libelous letter to FDR.
The genocidal physicist will later write, in 1942:
“Due to their wretched traditions the Germans are such a badly messed-up people
that it will be very difficult to remedy the situation by sensible, not to speak of
humane, means. I keep hoping that at the end of the war, with God's benevolent help;
they will largely kill each other off.” (24)
AUGUST 23, 1939
THE MOLOTOV-RIBBENTROP PACT / GERMANY & RUSSIA
AGREE TO A NON-AGGRESSION PACT
Like Bismarck before him, Hitler understands how the dangers of British & French intrigue
can again entangle Germany into a dangerous two - front war. To alleviate the threat in the
178

east, German Foreign Minister Ribbentrop and Russian Foreign Minister Molotov sign the
Molotov-Ribbentrop Non-Aggression Pact.
Hitler understands very well what kind of monster Stalin is, but he hopes that if he can at
least keep the peace with the USSR, the scheming warmongers of Britain and France can be
prevented from drawing the Soviet Union into a war against Germany. Western Globalists
are annoyed with Stalin over this peace pact with Germany. But Stalin has his own plans,
and his own timetable. Rather than ﬁght Germany now, Stalin wants Germany and
the Anglo-French Alliance weaken each other ﬁrst, in preparation for the day when
his Red Army can then take all of Europe.
Molotov - Ribbentrop– Stalin; the agreement to not fight upsets the Globalists, who
mocked the deal in numerous cartoons.
179

180

SECTION 5
1939 - 1941
WORLD WAR II (From Poland to The Eve of Pearl
Harbor)
181

AUGUST 25, 1939
BRITAIN & POLAND AGREE TO A MILITARY ALLIANCE
The Polish-British Common Defense Pact contains promises of British military assistance
in the event that Poland is attacked by another European country. This builds upon a
previous agreement (March 1939) between the two countries, and also France, by speciﬁcally
committing to military action in the event of an attack.
With this agreement, Zionist-Globalist forces in the UK have trapped the reluctant Prime
Minister Neville Chamberlain, as well as France. All that is left to do now is for Polish-Jewish
border thugs, under the protection of Marshal Edward Rydz-Smigly, to deliberately provoke
Germany into action and get the war started. On the nights of August 25 to August 31
inclusive, there occur many violent attacks on German civilians as well as German oﬃcials
and property.
Under heavy pressure, Chamberlain was manipulated into a UK-Poland Defense pact.
The power to start World War II was thus placed in the hands of the mad Marshal,
Rydz-Smigly
182

FORBIDDEN HISTORY: QUOTE TO REMEMBER
"Chamberlain (speaking off the record to Ambassador Kennedy while golfing) stated
that the America and the world Jews had forced England into the war". (1)
AUGUST 28, 1939
HITLER ISSUES AN OPEN PEACE LETTER TO THE PRESIDENT OF
FRANCE
Now emboldened by Britain, France and, from ‘behind the scenes’, Roosevelt, Poland’s
relentless and murderous abuse of its captive German population reaches the breaking point.
Hitler is prepared for war with Poland but is still attempting to preserve peace, especially
with France and Britain. In an open letter to French President Daladier, Hitler makes ye
another impassioned plea for peace.
Some pertinent excerpts:
“My dear Minister President:
183

I understand the misgiving to
which you give expression. I, too,
have never overlooked the grave
responsibilities which are imposed
upon those who are in charge of
the fate of nations. As an old front
line ﬁghter, I, like you, know the
horrors of war. Guided by this
attitude and experience, I have
tried to remove all matters that
might cause conﬂict between our
two peoples.
As you could judge for yourself
during your last visit here, the
German people, in the knowledge of its own behavior held and holds no ill feelings, much less
hatred, for its one-time brave opponent. On the contrary, the paciﬁcation of our western
frontier led to an increasing sympathy.
I am deeply convinced that if, especially, England at that time had, instead of starting a wild
campaign against Germany in the press and instead of launching rumors of a German
mobilization, somehow talked the Poles into being reasonable, Europe today and for twenty-
five years could enjoy a condition of deepest peace.
As things were, Polish public opinion was excited by a lie about German aggression. The
Polish government declined the proposals. Polish public opinion, convinced that England and
France would now ﬁght for Poland, began to make demands one might possibly stigmatize as
laughable insanity were they not so tremendously dangerous. At that point an unbearable
terror, a physical and economic persecution of the Germans although they numbered
more than a million and a half began in the regions ceded by the Reich.
May I now take the liberty of putting a question to you, Herr Daladier: How would you act as
184

a Frenchman if, through some unhappy issue of a brave struggle, one of your provinces
severed by a corridor occupied by a foreign power? And if a big city - let us say Marseilles -
were hindered from belonging to France and if Frenchmen living in this area were persecuted,
beaten and maltreated, yes, murdered, in a bestial manner?
I see no way of persuading Poland, which feels herself as unassailable, now that she enjoys the
protection of her guarantees, to accept a peaceful solution. If our two countries on that
account should be destined to meet again on the ﬁeld of battle, there would
nevertheless be a diﬀerence in the motives. I, Herr Daladier, shall be leading my
people in a ﬁght to rectify a wrong, whereas the others would be ﬁghting to preserve
that wrong.” (2)
The headline of the New York Times confirmed that Hitler sought to avoid war with
Britain & France. The front page carried the full text of the thoughtful and logical
letter which Hitler wrote to French President Edouard Daladier (shown laughing with
Hitler in 1938) - a letter which The Times cannot now deny.
185

FORBIDDEN HISTORY: QUOTE TO REMEMBER
"German men and women were hunted like wild beasts through the streets of
Bromberg. When they were caught, they were mutilated and torn to pieces by the
Polish mob. . . . Every day the butchery increased. . . . Thousands of Germans fled from
their homes in Poland with nothing more than the clothes that they wore..
On the nights of August 25 to August 31 inclusive, there occurred, besides innumerable
attacks on civilians of German blood, 44 perfectly authenticated acts of armed
violence against German official persons and property." (3)
William Joyce, Irish defector to Germany
AUGUST 31, 1939
‘THE GLEIWITZ’ (& other) BORDER ATTACKS / JEWISH-POLISH
GUERILLAS ATTACK GERMAN RADIO STATION
186

Overestimating their strength, underestimating German strength, and believing that France
and the UK would now back him, Marshal Smigly allows Polish-Jewish partisan terrorists to
cross the border and attack a German radio station in Germany. It is actually the latest in
a string of deliberate border instigations against Germany.
The "Poles" then broadcast a message (in Polish) urging others to take up arms and start
killing Germans. German police quickly arrive and retake the station, killing one of the Red
terrorists. Jewish Red terrorists, their Polish government protectors, and their
Globalist-Zionist masters have picked a fight with Germany!
Modern fake historians claim that the Gleiwitz incident was staged by Germans dressed as
Polish terrorists. But as is the case with the Reichstag Fire conspiracy theory, they oﬀer no
evidence to support this oft-repeated lie, (beyond a forced “confession” obtained after the
war) to support this theory – a theory that ignores the outrageous and repeated pattern of
provocations directed at Hitler's Germany ever since 1933, the numerous border incidents,
and also Hitler’s sincere attempts to negotiate a fair resolution to the Corridor and Danzig
controversies.
187

The Gleiwitz radio station was attacked and calls to kill German residents of Poland
were broadcast. Jewish books and films claiming otherwise are false.
FORBIDDEN HISTORY - QUOTE TO REMEMBER
"I lived in Germany during the 1980's when many people who lived during the war were still
alive. I sought out anyone who lived near Poland in 1939 and was lucky enough to meet
several people. One was a customs oﬃcial who said it was so bad on the border they were
armed and also had grenades in their oﬃce ready for attacks. Another told me his farm
animals were often stolen by Polish (Jewish?) terrorists. Another told of his niece being raped
by a Pole (Jew?) who crossed the border. He told me in 1940 they caught the man and showed
me a copy of the death order signed by Heydrich, in which he ordered the man be put to
death.
This is just one of many stories told to me by German civilians who witnessed these border
incursions just like had happened in 1919-1928. One thing many people fail to see is that
188

Poland openly attacked Germany right after World War I, which led to many border battles.
Once Germany started pressing Poland to work out a solution to the corridor, the attacks
started again. And one thing that is clear to me is that Germany did not make up these
attacks." (4)
- George H. Ohio, USA
Hitler has had about all he could take from Poland.
189

Germans troops arrive to the rescue as the western press portrays Germany as the
aggressor.
190

1- Britain & France declare war 2- Bromberg: Polish Jews massacre Germans
FORBIDDEN HISTORY: QUOTE TO REMEMBER
"This (Declaration of War) is the fault of the anti-appeasers and the
fucking Jews." (5)
British Duke Arthur Wellesley (5th Duke of Wellington) was the great grandson of the
famous Duke of Wellington who defeated Napoleon.
SEPTEMBER 17, 1939
SOVIET UNION INVADES POLAND FROM THE EAST / ALLIES SAY
NOTHING!
With the Polish army being routed by the advancing Germans in the west, Stalin cleverly
decides to break the Soviet-Polish Non Aggression Pact of 1932. Poland is stabbed in the
back as Soviet forces pour in from the east. The advancing Reds carry out massacres, the
191

most infamous being the Katyn Forest Massacre in which 10,000 Polish Army oﬃcers are
shot in the head.
Other than the pre-Versailles German areas which Germany reclaims, the Soviets will
eventually take all of Poland. In a shocking double-standard, the anti-German, FDR
France & the UK remain oddly silent about this brutal Soviet aggression.
Poland appeals to Britain for help, citing the Poland-British Defense Pact just
signed a few weeks ago. The Polish ambassador in London contacts the British Foreign
Oﬃce pointing out that clause 1(b) of the agreement, which concerned an "aggression by a
European power" on Poland, should apply to the Soviet invasion. The UK Foreign Secretary
responds with hostility, stating that it was Britain's decision whether to declare war on the
Soviet Union.
The truth is, the Allies don't give a rat's ass about Poland. They only used its foolish ultra-
nationalist leader, who by now has shamelessly abandoned his troops and ﬂed to Romania,
to instigate Hitler so that they could have their war. The horror that Poland will suﬀer
under Soviet occupation is now Poland's problem, not Britain's.
192

Marshal Smigly’s egomania doomed Poland. The Soviets massacred 10,000 Polish
officers after the rat Smigly abandoned his armies.
SEPTEMBER 17, 1939
GERMANY DEFEATS POLAND / DANZIG AND ALL OF PRUSSIA
REUNITED WITH THE REST OF GERMANY
Within a few weeks, the German-Polish War is already over. Hitler receives a hero’s welcome
upon his arrival in liberated Danzig. Hitler addresses the Danzig crowd:
“No power on earth would have borne this condition as long as Germany. I do not know what
England would have said about a similar peace solution (Versailles) at its expense or how
America or France would have accepted it.
I attempted to ﬁnd a tolerable solution - even for this problem. I submitted this
193

attempt to the Polish rulers in the form of verbal proposals. You know these
proposals. They were more than moderate. I do not know what mental condition the
Polish Government was in when it refused these proposals. …….As an answer, Poland gave the
order for the ﬁrst mobilization. Thereupon wild terror was initiated, and my request to the
Polish Foreign Minister to visit me in Berlin once more to discuss these questions was refused.
Instead of going to Berlin, he went to London.” (6)
Hitler rightfully mocks Smigly as a coward:
"The Polish Marshal, who miserably deserted his armies, said that he would hack the
German Army to pieces." (7)
Liberated Germans welcomed Hitler to Danzig.
OCTOBER, 1939 – MAY, 1940
HITLER PLEADS FOR PEACE WITH BRITAIN & FRANCE
194

The German-Polish War has ended quickly. The Allies never had any intention of helping
Poland. The French actually invade Germany on September 7th, advancing 8 km
before stopping. The quiet period between the end of the Polish war until May 1940, is
dubbed by a U.S. Senator as "The Phony War."
During this time, Hitler pleads for the Allies to withdraw their war declarations. Towards
France he declares: .“I have always expressed to France my desire to bury forever our
ancient enmity and bring together these two nations, both of which have such
glorious pasts." (8)
To the British, Hitler says: “I have devoted no less eﬀort to the achievement of Anglo-
German friendship. At no time and in no place have I ever acted contrary to British
interests….Why should this war in the West be fought?” (9)
Hitler’s pleas for peace are ignored as the allies begin to mobilize more than 2,000,000
troops in Northern France. Plans are openly discussed to advance eastward upon
Germany, via “neutral” Belgium and Holland, as well as establishing operations in “neutral”
Norway and Denmark, with or without their consent.
195

During his speech of October 6, 1939, Hitler pleaded for peace. Meanwhile, the British
government shamelessly frightened its own people with idiotic tales of imminent
German gas attacks.
NOVEMBER 4, 1939
FDR REPEALS THE NUETRALITY ACTS
The Neutrality Acts prohibited the United States from selling arms to warring nations. The
purpose of these acts was to prevent the U.S. from again becoming involved in Europe's
wars.
Throughout the 1930's, FDR and his Zionist advisor Bernard Baruch (who had also been an
advisor to Woodrow Wilson), anticipating a new war against Germany, had unsuccessfully
tried to amend the previous Neutrality Acts. Soon after Germany and Poland began ﬁghting
196

FDR again urges Congress to repeal the Neutrality Acts.
In November of '39, a new Neutrality Act is passed. The sale of arms to the UK is now legal
The scheming FDR has taken a big step towards involving America in a war that his Zio
Globo handlers have long been agitating for.
With help from the Jewish Press and Jewish Hollywood newsreels, Jewish Money King
Bernard Baruch and his puppet FDR undid the previous Neutrality Acts.
NOVEMBER 30, 1939
SOVIET UNION INVADES FINLAND
Just two months after swallowing Poland, Stalin launches an invasion of Finland. As he had
with Poland, Stalin breaks another 1932 non-aggression pact he had agreed to; The Soviet-
Finnish Non Aggression Pact of 1932.
197

The invasion is massive, with 21 Soviet divisions consisting of 450,000 Red Army troops
Stalin expects to overwhelm Finland in a matter of weeks and install a government of
Finnish Communists currently waiting in Moscow, but the brave and outnumbered Finns
stage a heroic defense of their homeland. The "Winter War" is an embarrassment for Stalin
A treaty is signed the following March, but the Finns are forced to give up some territory.
Stalin has now broken two non-aggression treaties and annexed territory from both
betrayed parties (Poland & Finland). The "International Community" verbally condemns the
Soviet invasion and makes some symbolic economic gestures, but once again, there are no
calls for boycotts, nor any declaration of war against the USSR as there was against
Germany. Hitler is also forced to remain silent about Stalin’s actions because he does not
want a two-front war.
The brave Finns put up a fierce resistance against the Soviet aggressors.
APRIL 9, 1940
GERMANY IS FORCED INTO PRE-EMPTIVE, LIMITED
198

OCCUPATIONS OF NORWAY & DENMARK
The Allied plan of attack is to disrupt Germany’s iron ore imports from Sweden by illegally
mining Norwegian waters, and then occupying the important Norwegian port of Narvik
Plans are also made for imposing a base of operations in Denmark, Germany’s neutral
neighbor to its north. (10)
A Norwegian politician named Vidkun Quisling conﬁrms the existence of these Allied
plots. (Operation Wilfred and Plan R 4). Sympathetic to Germany, and not wanting his
country to become a battleﬁeld, Quisling informs Hitler of the Anglo-French plot to wage
war from the two Scandinavian countries.
Germany moves quickly to secure the Norwegian port of Narvik just before the British can
place their mines, and also to occupy Denmark. German diplomats assure the leaders of
both Scandinavian nations that Germany seeks neither conquest nor interference in internal
aﬀairs. (11) Life under limited German occupation goes on quietly for the Scandinavians
during the war. Quisling’s name is now a dictionary word in the English language,
synonymous with “traitor” – a totally unfair characterization.
199

1- Hitler prevented the UK from using Norway & Denmark as bases of operation
against German shipping. 2- Norway’s Vidkun Quisling was a patriot - not a traitor. 3-
The Germans dropped leaflets over Denmark which explained their actions,
condemned British warmongering, and reassured the Danes that Germany would
protect their country.
MAY 10, 1940
GREAT BRITAIN INVADES NEUTRAL ICELAND
The British invasion of tiny, neutral Iceland is code named "Operation Fork." It begins on
May 10, 1940 (the same day that Churchill comes to power) with British troops
disembarking in the Capital City of Reykjavik. The British quickly move inland, disabling
communications networks and securing landing locations. The government of Iceland
protests the violation of their neutrality, but to no avail.
200

This force is then subsequently augmented, to a ﬁnal strength of 25,000. The recently
thwarted British occupations of neutral Denmark and Norway, and the successful
occupation of neutral Iceland, show that Rothschild Britain is the true aggressor of the
coming war in Western Europe. Although FDR, up until December 1941, promises tha
America will remain non-belligerent, 30,000 US troops will relieve the British and occupy
Iceland in spring of 1941. (12)
1- Bully Britain and the U.S. intend to use neutral Iceland (top left) as a base of naval
operations in the North Atlantic. 2- Icelandic police officers training to stop the
British invasion. They later decided not to resist the superior British force.
MAY 10, 1940
WINSTON CHURCHILL BECOMES UK’s PRIME MINISTER
With the preparations for war in place, the reluctant warrior Neville Chamberlain is ﬁnally
pushed aside as the lunatic, drunken, cigar chomping Winston Churchill takes his place.
Churchill's record of treason already includes the World War I sinking of the Lusitania
(when he was Lord of the Admiralty).
201

Churchill, and his wealthy London (and New York) Zionist backers, have been advocating
for war with Germany for the past 6 years. His warmongering had made him an outcast in
British politics. But now, with the Zionist press of Britain misrepresenting the facts
surrounding the German-Polish War, Churchill is portrayed as some sort of wise prophet.
Hitler knows very well who Churchill is, and who he works for. He had even referred to
Churchill in past speeches as part of Britain's "government of tomorrow". With Chamberlain
gone and Churchill now in power, Hitler now knows for certain that "the Phony War" is
about to become very real.
Churchill and his criminal crew of Kingsley Wood & Anthony Eden are now out in the
open as UK’s ruling war party. The relationship between Bernard Baruch & Churchill
dates back to the early 1930's. (Above photo on right taken in 1961)
FORBIDDEN HISTORY - QUOTE TO REMEMBER
202

"I emphasized that the defeat of Germany and Japan and their elimination from world
trade would give Britain a tremendous opportunity to swell her foreign commerce in
both volume and profit." - Bernard M. Baruch (13)
MAY 10, 1940
GERMANY LAUNCHES PRE-EMPTIVE INVASION OF ‘LOW
COUNTRIES’
Hitler’s pleas for peace have been repeatedly ignored as 400,000 British and at least
2,000,000 French troops have massed in northern France. The massive invasion of
Germany’s industrial Ruhr region is to come through the ostensibly “neutral” League of
Nations member states of Belgium and The Netherlands (Holland), whose governments are
under intense Allied pressure to allow safe passage for the planned Allied attack on the
bordering Ruhr region of Germany. (14).
203

Again, Hitler's hand is forced. On the same day that Churchill comes to power, and that the
UK invades Iceland, as an act of national self-defense, Germany takes the ﬁght to the Allies
before they can bring it to German soil and reinstitute a 2nd Versailles Treaty. In a stunning
advance westward, the German Blitzkrieg quickly overtakes the smaller nations (known as
the Low Countries because of their geography) and pushes the Allied armies into a full
retreat towards the beaches of northern France.
The Globo-Zionist press, as well as today’s history books, portrays the Blitz as “the Nazi
conquest of Holland, Belgium, and France.” But the menacing presence of the massive
Allied force on Germany’s industrial frontier is conveniently ignored, as is the
undeniable and extensive collaboration between the “neutral” Low Countries and
the Allies.
After the invasion, the German government published ‘Allied Intrigue in the Low
Countries’, which is a 50-page English language paper detailing the full extent of
Belgian and Dutch cooperation with the Allies. The western press and modern court-
historians have buried these allegations.
204

MAY 10, 1940
ALLIES BOMB GERMAN TOWN OF FRIEBURG / 20 CHILDREN
KILLED IN A PLAYGROUND!
The medieval and non-strategic German town of Freiburg is located just 20 miles from the
French border. In the opening hours of the war in the west, new Prime Minister Churchil
and his French allies waste no time in murdering civilians. About 60 bombs are dropped on
or near Freiburg; killing 50 civilians including 20 children who were playing outside.
This was the first bombing of civilians in World War II.
In order to whitewash this horriﬁc deed from the pages of history; and to maintain the
historical myth that it was Germany that initiated the bombings of civilians; court historians
have long promoted the ridiculous lie that the Germans accidentally bombed their own
town and then blamed the event on the Allies in order to cover up the mistake. Subsequent
terror bombings of German civilians will dispel any doubt that Churchill was indeed capable
of deliberately exterminating civilians.
1- The Allies terror-bombed scenic Freiburg 2- Memorial stone at the Hilda
playground where 20 children were murdered 3- The New York Times falsely accuses
205

Germany (!) of “savage attacks”.
MAY, 1940
HITLER TRIES FOR PEACE THROUGH A SWEDISH CHANNEL
After having just defeated the French and British invaders, Hitler, via a Swedish third party,
proposes generous peace terms to Britain. The Germans contact the British ambassador in
Sweden, Victor Mallet, through Sweden´s Supreme Court Judge Ekeberg, who is known
to Hitler´s legal advisor, Ludwig Weissauer. (15)
Hitler´s peace proposal demands nothing of Great Britain and implies that the states
currently occupied by Germany would be de-occupied; as Germany´s occupation was only
due to the present war situation. But Winston Churchill is not interested in peace. The oﬀer
goes nowhere.
German peace efforts via Sweden failed. Ambassador Victor Mallet (left) walking with
206

Princess Elizabeth (now Queen Elizabeth) and Prince Phillip
MAY 25-28, 1940
“THE WAR CABINET CRISIS” / CHURCHILL AND LORD HALIFAX
DIVIDED OVER ITALIAN PEACE MEDIATION
Giuseppe Bastianini, the Italian ambassador in London, requests a meeting with British
Foreign Secretary Lord Halifax to discuss Italy's neutrality. Halifax meets Bastianini later
that afternoon. The discussion soon moves to that of Italian mediation between the Allies
and Germany.
Bastianini reveals that the goal of Italian leader Benito Mussolini (Hitler's close ally) is to
negotiate a settlement "that would not merely be an armistice, but would protect
European peace for the century." (16) Halifax responds very favorably to the idea and takes
it to the British War Cabinet.
The following morning Halifax reports to the War Cabinet, summarizing his meeting with
Bastianini and urging his colleagues to consider Italian mediation. Again, Churchill would
have none of it!
For several days, Halifax continues to press for the Mussolini mediation. In an apparent
attempt to placate Halifax, Churchill states that he doubts whether anything would come of
an approach to Italy, but that the matter was one which the War Cabinet should consider. But
Churchill is lying to Halifax. Never once did Churchill even consider Mussolini's oﬀer
to mediate peace between Britain and Germany. The matter eventually dies after
Churchill outmaneuvers the peace-seeking Halifax. The conﬂict is known as 'The War
Cabinet Crisis'.
207

1- Lord Halifax (walking with Churchill) tried to convince the War Cabinet to at least
hear Mussolini's proposal. 2- Mussolini, shaking hands with UK Prime Minister
Neville Chamberlain in 1938, had helped Britain and Germany to keep the peace of
Europe at the Munich Conference of 1938. 3- Instead of accepting peace offers,
Churchill's gang chose to frighten the British public with tales of imminent poison gas
attacks from Hitler.
MAY 27 – JUNE 4, 1940
AS A SIGN OF FRIENDSHIP, HITLER ALLOWS THE ALLIED
ARMIES TO ESCAPE AT DUNKIRK
After Germany’s stunning advance, the Allies are trapped on the beaches of Dunkirk,
France. The entire force can be easily captured, but Hitler issues a halt order. (17) As a
show of good faith towards his western tormentors, Hitler believes that the British will be
more likely to make peace if they can escape with their dignity intact.
A massive boat lift involving British ﬁshermen ferries the troops across the English Channe
back to England. The Globalist Press maliciously spins Hitler’s gracious act as a “miraculous
208

escape right under Hitler’s nose.”
The cigar-chomping, Zionist-owned, alcoholic Winston Churchill vows to keep ﬁghting as
he frightens the British people with tales of imminent German invasion.
Allies trapped on the beach! Hitler could easily have taken the entire Allied force
prisoner. His gracious act allows the soldiers to escape from Dunkirk.
FORBIDDEN HISTORY - QUOTE TO REMEMBER
209

"He (Hitler) then astonished us by speaking with admiration of the British Empire, of
the necessity for its existence, and of the civilization that Britain had brought into the
world. ....He compared the British Empire with the Catholic Church saying they were
both essential elements of stability in the world. He said that all he wanted from
Britain was that she should acknowledge Germany's position on the Continent. The
return of Germany's colonies would be desirable but not essential, and he would even
oﬀer to support Britain with troops if she should be involved in diﬃculties anywhere."
(18)
- German General von Blumentritt
JUNE, 1940
SOVIET UNION INVADES 4 COUNTRIES AT THE SAME TIME! /
LATVIA, LITHUANIA, ESTONIA, & EASTERN ROMANIA
With the eyes of the world focused on events in Western Europe, Stalin continues to expand
his Evil Empire. The Reds annex the tiny defenseless Baltic states of Latvia, Lithuania, and
Estonia. Stalin also annexes parts of eastern Romania.
210

The Soviet Union has now invaded 6 countries in just 9 months! Yet, the western
Globalists only remain obsessed with attacking Germany, whose leader, just like the Kaiser
had two decades earlier, continues to plead for peace.
Stalin swallowed up the tiny Baltic states of Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia (and took
a piece of Romania too!)
JUNE, 1940
AFTER GERMANY’S DEFEAT OF THE ALLIES, MUSSOLINI’s ITALY
JOINS THE WAR
Upon seeing Germany's stunning victory in 1940, Benito Mussolini, the opportunistic, ego-
driven Leader of Italy, ends Italy’s neutrality and allies himself with Germany. He declares
war upon France (which was already beaten and occupied) and also upon the UK, (which is
already being chased out of Europe at Dunkirk).
Unlike Hitler’s defensive war, Mussolini dreams of conquest, hoping to restore a new Roman
211

Empire in North Africa. But his reckless adventures will prove to be very costly to Hitler. In
August of '40, Italy occupies British Somaliland in East Africa. In September, Italy invade
Egypt, which has been occupied by the British since a 1936 Treaty to protect the Suez Canal.
In picking a ﬁght with Britain, Mussolini bites oﬀ far more than the unimpressive Italian
military can chew. The superior British land and naval forces dominate their Italian
adversaries, giving Churchill a potential continental opening to invade a now non-neutral
Italy from North Africa.
Colonial Italy clashed with colonial Britain over Africa. Though a solid anti-
Communist, Mussolini's imperialist ego will cost Germany & Italy dearly.
JUNE 22, 1940
NEW GOVERNMENT OF FRANCE MAKES PEACE WITH HITLER
212

As the ﬂeeing French government collapses, the Germans enter undefended Paris on June
14 ' 40. The new government is headed by the World War I hero Marshal Philippe Petain,
who agrees to make peace with Germany.
Unlike the brutality of the Versailles Treaty, the terms of this Armistice are very
light, requiring only that Germany continues to occupy northern France as a defensive
measure against a British invasion of the continent. The new French government has its
administrative oﬃces in the southern city of Vichy. Other than the strategic occupation in
the north, France remains a sovereign nation. Life in occupied France goes on quietly.
German soldiers establish an excellent reputation for good behavior, and charm with the
French ladies.
Meanwhile in the UK, Churchill and French General Charles De Gaulle fume over Marshal
Petain’s refusal to continue ﬁghting. Hitler wants Petain to ally his country with Germany,
but Mussolini’s war declaration upon France leaves such a bad taste in the mouths of
Frenchmen that they cannot possibly join a German-Italian alliance.
Hitler and Field Marshal Petain make peace. The armistice is signed in the same
railway car in which Germany surrendered after World War I.
213

JUNE 24, 1940
WORLD JEWISH CONGRESS CLAIMS THAT 6 MILLION JEWS ARE
DOOMED IF GERMANY WINS THE WAR
Sing it Four Tops! - “It’s the same, old song, with a different …..
“if the Nazis should achieve final victory 6,000,000 Jews in Europe
are doomed to destruction.”
Not a single Jew has even been interned and Hitler is still pleading for peace; yet
the “Holocaust” and the “6 million” have already been established!
214

JULY, 1940
CHURCHILL LAUNCHES AERIAL BOMBARDMENT CAMPAIGN
AGAINST GERMAN CIVILIANS
With British ground troops having been chased oﬀ of the European mainland, Churchill
and his London/New York Banking Bosses can only continue the ﬁght over air (and sea).
The British Royal Air Force is ordered to bomb civilian areas. Churchill hopes to
provoke a similar response from Hitler so that he and FDR can point to “German bombing o
civilians.”
In a July memo to the Minister of UK Air Craft production, Churchill writes:
"When I look around to see how we can win the war I see that there is only one sure path. We
have no Continental army which can defeat the German military power.. ...there is one thing
that will bring him (Hitler) down, and that is an absolutely devastating, exterminating
attack by very heavy bombers from this country upon the Nazi homeland. We must be
able to overwhelm them by this means, without which I do not see a way through." (19)
The notorious drunk will bomb German civilian areas seven times. But Hitler refuses to do
the 
same. German bombers are under strict orders to limit their attacks to
military/industrial targets only. Finally, in September; Hitler is forced to declare that any
more British bombings of civilian areas will be met with a similar response. When the
German Air Force drops its ﬁrst bombs on British civilian areas, the world press declares
“Germany Bombs Civilians.”
As he had done with the orchestrated sinking of the Lusitania in 1915, Winston Churchil
has again deliberately brought on the deaths of innocent men, women, and children in
order to achieve political goals.
215

Germans were killed and left homeless by Churchill's heavy terror bombers.
JULY 20, 1940
HITLER DROPS ‘PEACE LEAFLETS’ OVER LONDON!
With Germany in total control of the continent and the war situation, Hitler responds to
Churchill’s bombs by dropping mass quantities of leaﬂets over London. The 4-page
broadsheet contains an English language summary of Hitler’s recent speech before the
Reichstag. The speech is entitled, “A Last Appeal to Reason”, in which he closes with a
final appeal for peace:
"In this hour I feel it to be my duty before my own conscience to appeal once more to
reason and common sense in Great Britain as much as elsewhere. I consider myself in
a position to make this appeal, since I am not the vanquished, begging favors, but the
victor speaking in the name of reason. I can see no reason why this war must go on. I
am grieved to think of the sacrifices it will claim.
Possibly Mr. Churchill again will brush aside this statement of mine by saying that it
216

is merely born of fear and of doubt in our ﬁnal victory. In that case I shall have
relieved my conscience in regard to the things to come.” (20)
The British respond to Hitler’s sincere plea with mockery, threats, and more bombs.
Ignorant British soldier laughs as he reads Hitler’s air-dropped peace leaflet.
AUGUST, 1940
THE MADAGSCAR PLAN / HITLER PLANS TO ESTABLISH A
JEWISH HOMELAND ON MADAGASCAR
For centuries, Europeans and Jews have had problems living together. Hitler was content to
leave them alone and live as resident aliens of Germany. For those who wanted to live in
217

Palestine, the 1933 'Transfer Agreement' between the German government and the Zionists
facilitated that. From 1933-1940, about 40% of Germany's Jews immigrated to Palestine
with all of their wealth intact. When World War II prevents further cooperation between
the Germans and the Zionists, it becomes clear that a new “final solution” is needed.
The plan Hitler envisions is to create a homeland for the Jews on the beautiful island of
Madagascar, oﬀ the coast of southern Africa, and resettle one million Jews per year under
German protection and supervision. The idea of a Jewish homeland on Madagascar had
actually been circulating throughout Europe since the 1880’s.
The Madagascar Plan is scrapped when the British invade the island in 1942, taking control
away from Vichy France after the Battle of Madagascar. A Jewish Madagascar would have
been a win-win solution for Jews and Europeans and would have spared the poor
Palestinians, and other Arab nations, all of the horrors they would endure after the
illegitimate founding of Israel in 1948.
1- Jewish author Edwin Black’s ‘The Transfer Agreement” reveals the full extent of the
cooperation between the Germans and Zionist émigrés. 2 & 3: Hitler’s ‘Final Solution”
218

was to relocate the Jews to a homeland of their own, not kill them.
SEPTEMBER 16, 1940
FDR INSTITUTES FIRST EVER PEACETIME DRAFT IN AMERICA
While publicly insisting that American boys "will not being going to foreign wars", FDR
continues to secretly prepare for entry into the Globalists' World War. FDR institutes a
peacetime "Selective Service" Act which requires all males aged 26-35 to register for an
upcoming draft "just in case". The actual draft begins in October 1940. The unlucky draftees
are told that they will serve a 12 month term, based in either the Western Hemisphere, or a
US territory.
By the summer of 1941, the deceitful FDR (who is planning to trick America into the war by
way of a Japanese provocation) decrees that the terms be lengthened. Outraged draftees
protest FDR's broken promise and threaten to desert when their 12 months are up. But most
will obey the order and continue to serve past the promised October 1941 release date, and
right up until the "surprise attack" upon Pearl Harbor in December of 1941. This is the ﬁrst,
and only, peacetime draft in U.S. history.
219

1- “What’s the Joke?” - 1940 Postcard mocks FDR for laughing as he signs Draft Bill. The
peacetime draft was very unpopular. 2- Evaders were arrested!
SEPTEMBER, 1940
‘AXIS’ NATIONS OF GERMANY, ITALY, & JAPAN SIGN
‘TRIPARTITE PACT / HOPE TO KEEP THE U.S. OUT OF THE WAR
Germany and Japan are suspicious of FDR’s true intentions. To discourage American military
involvement in either Germany’s war with Britain, or Japan’s unrelated war with China, the
two nations and Italy sign the “Tripartite Pact”.
Japan, Germany, and Italy agree to assist one another with all political, economic and
military means if one of the contracting nations is attacked by a nation at present not
involved in the European War or in the Japanese-Chinese conﬂict. The hope is that this pact
will keep America out of the war. Ironically, the defense pact will end up actually
facilitating FDR’s scheme to draw America in.
220

The Axis nations had hoped to keep the U.S. out of the war.
OCTOBER, 1940
ROMANIA ACCEPTS GERMAN PROTECTION OF ITS OIL FIELDS
The Soviets have already annexed parts of anti-Communist Romania. The Red Army now sit
dangerously close to the Ploesti oil ﬁelds, upon which Germany depends. Stalin is up to
something in southeast Europe, and Hitler knows it. With the approval of Romania, German
troops arrive to protect the oil fields from the Soviet threat.
221

1- Map above shows how vulnerable Germany is from the southeast. (soft underbelly
of Europe). The oil fields of eastern Romania can be easily attacked from Greece,
Yugoslavia, or the USSR. It is from this area of Europe that Churchill and Stalin will
play their "chess games" against Germany. 2- Romanian leader Antonescu visits
Hitler
OCTOBER, 1940
UK PROMISES ‘NEW WORLD ORDER’ TO JEWS AFTER WAR
Germany is in total control of the European war situation. As they had during their losing
days of World War I, British politicians reach out to international Jewry for help. During
World War I, Britain's 'Balfour Declaration' promised Palestine to the Jews in exchange fo
bringing about U.S. entry. Now, Lord Arthur Greenwood's Declaration' oﬀers them a “New
World Order”. Greenwood makes an amazingly prophetic statement, 'When we have
achieved victory, and we assuredly shall..."
222

But there is no chance of British victory unless the U.S. can be dragged into the conﬂict
Therefore, Greenwood must already suspect that the U.S. will enter the war (which it does 14
months later). The promise of a 'New World Order' is clearly intended to further encourage
American Jewish support for entering the war.
Greenwood promises: "In the rebuilding of civilized society after the war, there should
and will be a real opportunity for Jews everywhere to make a distinctive and
constructive contribution." (21)
In other words, Lord Greenwood is saying: "Get America in and we'll give you a say in
Europe’s aﬀairs after the war!" Greenwood's imperialist 'dance with the Devil' will prove
fatal. After the war, Britain ends up broke and loses her Empire.
NY TIMES HEADLINE: OCTOBER 6, 1940 / ‘NEW WORLD ORDER PLEDGED TO JEWS'
"....Arthur Greenwood member without portfolio in the British War Cabinet assured
the Jews of the United States that when victory was achieved an effort would be made
223

to found a New World Order” (22)
OCTOBER 28, 1940
ITALY INVADES GREECE
Italy had occupied tiny Albania in the spring of 1939. Mussolini now turns his ambitions
towards Greece. Greece has good relations with Germany, but Mussolini wants to claim the
Ionian Islands. Italy’s invasion of Greece is completely unrelated to Germany’s war and
creates unexpected problems for Hitler.
The Greeks repel the invasion. The British then oﬀer to send troops to assist Greece
Churchill now has an opening on the European mainland from which he can move
north towards Germany and eastward towards Romania and the crucial oil ﬁelds
which supply Germany.
Italy's failed adventure in Greece gives Britain an opening in southeastern Europe.
224

NOVEMBER, 1940
AFTER LYING ABOUT HIS INTENTIONS, FDR WINS REELECTION
OVER GLOBALIST STRAW-MAN WENDELL WILKIE
Throughout the Election year of 1940, nationalist Republicans warn that FDR is plotting to
bring the US into war. Because the public is strongly opposed to entry in another war, FDR
reassures voters that the “isolationists” are misrepresenting his intentions. During the
campaign, FDR gives his famous “Again and again” speech:
“I say to you mothers and fathers and I shall say it again and again and again. Your
boys will not be sent into any foreign wars.” (23)
The Globalist wing of the GOP (Republican Party) hijacks the nominating process and put
up an unknown patsy, an “ex-Democrat” named Wendell Willkie to run against FDR. Many
Republicans are shocked when the GOP (supported by the media’s hype of Willkie) anoints a
New York lawyer who has never held any office.
Willkie runs a half-baked campaign and loses badly. FDR is elected to an unprecedented 3rd
(and later a 4th) term. Afterwards, FDR gives Willkie a job as an Ambassador. In 1943
Willkie publishes a book entitled: One World.
225

‘One-Worlder’ Wendell Willkie: The "instant Republican". He was recruited to "throw
the match" to FDR.
NOVEMBER, 1940
THE VATICAN PRESENTS HITLER’S PEACE PROPOSALS TO
BRITISH OFFICIALS
As far back May of 1939, as revealed by the front page of the New York Times, the Vatican
had been trying to mediate between Britain and Germany. Hitler was ready and willing to
talk peace at all the times. It was the British who said “no”.
The peace-seeking Vatican and peace-seeking Germany remained in contact as the war
raged. The following excerpt from Martin Allen’s 'Himmler's Secret War' describes a meeting
held in Spain between the Papal Nuncio and British oﬃcials Hoare and Hilgarth; and the
latest peace offer from Hitler:
226

"The nature of the concessions that the German Fuhrer was prepared to make in order to
obtain peace with Britain must have astounded the men at the head of SO1.
This was not even a deal worked out through a process of hard negotiation. It was Hitler's
opening gambit....an oﬀer so generous and pragmatic that it would be very tempting to
anyone who genuinely wanted peace.
His (Hitler's) oﬀer of such remarkable concessions was an extremely threatening
development. Should the terms become public, it had the potential to render British resolve to
stand firm against German aggression to a shuttering halt." (24)
1- Neither the Pope's prayers nor his emissaries could soften the black hearts of
Churchill and his gang of warmongers.
FEBRUARY, 1941
GERMANS ARRIVE IN AFRICA TO BAIL OUT THE ITALIANS
227

The ﬁrst units of the German 'AfrikaKorps' arrive to rescue the collapsing Italian war eﬀort
in February of 1941. General Erwin Rommel, known as the Desert Fox, commands the
German force in North Africa. Rommel will eventually establish the upper hand in Africa
but this diversion of manpower and resources to Africa proves to be a costly hindrance for
Germany.
The Desert Fox cleans up Mussolini's mess in North Africa.
MARCH, 1941
U.S. ZIONIST THEODORE KAUFMAN PUBLISHES ‘GERMANY
MUST PERISH!’ / CALLS FOR EXTINCTION OF GERMAN RACE!
‘’Germany Must Perish!’ is a 104 page booklet published by an American Zionist
businessman named Theodore Kaufman. Kaufman calls for the complete extermination
of the German people through forced sterilization and total dismemberment and
reapportionment of German territory. The murderous hate-fest starts out in the very
opening lines of Germany Must Perish as follows:
228

"This dynamic volume outlines a comprehensive plan for the extinction of the German
nation and the total eradication from the earth, of all her people. Also contained
herein is a map illustrating the possible territorial dissection of Germany and the
apportionment of her lands." (25)
Incredibly, at a time when America is supposedly "neutral", the hateful book is actually
reviewed by The New York Times, Time Magazine and the Washington Post. Though not
widely distributed in America, Germany Must Perish is read throughout Germany
Propaganda Minister Dr. Josef Goebbels states: “Thanks to the Jew Kaufmann, we
Germans know only too well what to expect in case of defeat."(26)
‘Germany Must Perish!’ will inspire the frightened German people to ﬁght harder.
Kaufman's work, along with the deadly Jewish Partisan guerilla warfare against German
troops, will contribute to Hitler's decision to intern the Jews of occupied Europe into
wartime work camps later in 1941.
Kaufman's evil work openly calls for the extinction of the German people and the
absorbing of all German territory.
229

1941
FDR SIGNS ‘LEND - LEASE’ INTO LAW / UK TO BE SUPPLIED WITH
U.S. MANUFACTURED ARMS
Britain is running short of arms and supplies as Germany continues to oﬀer peace on terms
favorable to Britain. Churchill will not listen to reason because, behind the scenes,
FDR is reassuring him that the U.S. will support the UK at all costs. With his
successful re-election campaign of 1940 out of the way, FDR now becomes even bolder in
confronting the anti-war “isolationists”.
The Lend-Lease program places the awesome industrial might of the US at the disposal of
the UK, China, and later on, the USSR. America is to be “the Arsenal of Democracy” say
FDR. Britain will eventually receive $31 Billion worth of war supplies (about $500 Billion at
2012 prices!)
230

FDR and cronies smile as they move America closer to war.
APRIL 6, 1941
GERMANY BLOCKS BRITISH & SOVIET SCHEMES IN SOUTHERN
EUROPE BY INVADING GREECE & YUGOSLAVIA
Though unrelated to Germany’s war, Mussolini’s foolish adventure in Greece has already
created a big problem for Hitler. As Italian forces meet stiﬀ Greek resistance, Churchill uses
the conﬂict as an opportunity to again establish armies on Europe’s mainland, in Europe’s
“soft underbelly”. British troops begin arriving in Greece to help the Greeks in their ﬁght
against the Italians. Hitler oﬀers to mediate peace between Italy and Greece, but the Greeks
(egged on by the British) won't come to the table as more British troops keep arriving.
In March, 1941, Yugoslavia joins Hitler’s defensive Tripartite Pact. In response, British
intelligence immediately triggers an orchestrated coup. (27) The new Yugoslavian
regime is now a British puppet state, which immediately signs a "Treaty of Friendship" with
the USSR. Stalin’s Yugoslavian Communists take to the streets in support of the new
government.
Again, Hitler’s hand is forced. If he does not act now, the “soft underbelly” of Europe will be
ﬂooded with British troops destined for southern Germany, as well as the Romanian oil
ﬁelds upon which Germany depends. On April 6, ’41, the Germans invade both Greece and
Yugoslavia. The still small numbers of British troops are forced to evacuate, spoiling
Churchill’s scheme to inﬂame southern Europe and invite the Soviets in to help. Naturally,
the Globalist media simplistically portrays these events as: “Germans Invade Yugoslavia &
Greece”.
231

1- British troops (Australian) based in Egypt embark for Greece in April of 1941. 2-
Germany secures southeast Europe. But valuable time has been lost.
MAY 10, 1941
RUDOLF HESS PARACHUTES INTO SCOTLAND WITH YET
ANOTHER OFFER OF PEACE!
Rudolf Hess is Germany’s Number 3 in command and a close friend of Hitler. Recall that it
was Hess who typed out the dictation for Hitler’s Mein Kampf. In May of 1941, Hess (who is
ﬂuent in English) ﬂies a solo mission over Scotland and parachutes in, carrying an oﬀer of
peace. He is hoping to link up with the Duke of Hamilton, who he had befriended at the
1936 Berlin Olympics, and convince his British acquaintance of Germany's sincere desire for
peace. But he is arrested instead.
On Churchill's orders, Hess is held in solitary conﬁnement for the duration of the
war. After the war, Hess is "tried" at Nuremberg and then sentenced to life in East Berlin’s
232

Spandau prison. With the liberalization of the USSR in the 1980’s, there is talk of ﬁnally
releasing him. But he is said to have committed suicide in his cell in 1987. His family believes
that the 93-year-old Hess was murdered so that the details of his peace mission would
remain buried forever. (28)
Hess's peace mission to Britain ended with Churchill imprisoning him for life.
MAY - JULY, 1941
FDR ESCALATES HIS PROVOKATION OF GERMANY & JAPAN
Long before the German-Polish conﬂict, FDR had waged a silent war against Germany. With
Germany now in control of the European situation, FDR is even more desperate to drag
America into Britain's war. He relentlessly baits Hitler.
To that end, the U.S. impounds German ships, sinks German subs, freezes German, Italian
and Japanese ﬁnancial assets, assists the British Navy in spotting and sinking The Bismarck
233

(killing 2200 German sailors), and ships large amounts of arms to Britain. Hitler bears the
humiliating provocations quietly; knowing that US entry into the war would be
disastrous for Germany.
Realizing that Hitler will not take his bait, FDR further instigates the Japanese. Recall that the
Axis Powers, (Germany, Japan, and Italy) are parties to a mutual defense pact (Tripartite
Pact). An attack on one means war with all. FDR will turn the Tripartite Pact to his
advantage.
Deadly “neutrality”: A U.S. ‘Catalina” surveillance plane enabled the British Navy to
sink The Bismarck, killing 2200 German sailors. (29)
JUNE 22, 1941
‘OPERATION BARBAROSSA’ / HITLER THWARTS STALIN’S PLAN
TO CONQUER ALL OF EUROPE
As Germany and Britain exhaust each other in the air, at sea, and now North Africa, Stalin
234

quietly gathers his massive Red Army along Germany’s eastern frontier, near the Romanian
oil ﬁelds that supply Germany. Hitler knows that Stalin cannot be trusted. He recalls how
Stalin broke a non-aggression pact and pounced on Poland while the Poles were pre-
occupied with Germany. Another non-aggression pact was broken when Stalin attacked
Finland. Soviet invasions of the Baltic States and eastern Romania, along with a recen
Communist-backed coup in Yugoslavia all combine to oﬀer still more proof that Stalin is up
to something.
Now, with Germany and Britain distracted, Stalin threatens all of Europe. Hitler had hoped
to remove the Soviet threat in April, but invasion plans were delayed by Mussolini’s
misadventures in Africa and Greece. When “Operation Barbarossa” is launched, the Red
Army is caught ﬂat-footed and bunched up in offensive positions. Millions of Soviet troops
are taken prisoner, and the devastating loss of weaponry and equipment leaves the Red
Army neutralized.
Up to 65% of all Soviet tanks, ﬁeld guns, machine guns, and anti-tank guns are either
destroyed or captured. The Germans rout the Reds all the way back to the gates of Moscow,
liberating many cheering Ukrainian, Baltic, and even Russian people along the way. It is only
the onset of the brutal Russian winter that forces the Germans to pause their stunning
oﬀensive. The 2 month delay due to Mussolini’s folly in Greece may have saved Stalin’s
regime from a total collapse in 1941.
235

Liberated from the Stalin & Kaganovich death cult, happy Ukrainians cheer the
invading German soldiers. When the German offensive almost reaches Moscow,
Stalin is forced to flee eastward.
1 & 2- Soviet Intelligence Officer and historian Viktor Suvorov defected to Britain and
published several books about Stalin’s plan to attack Germany and Europe. 3- Hitler
with his Generals; his quick thinking and bold action saved Germany and ALL of
Europe from a Soviet conquest.
"Already in 1940 it became increasingly clear from month to
month that the plans of the men in the Kremlin were aimed at
the domination, and thus the destruction, of all of Europe. I
have already told the nation of the build-up of Soviet military
power in the East during a period when Germany had only a
few divisions in the provinces bordering Soviet Russia. Only a
blind person could fail to see that a military build-up of world-
historical dimensions was being carried out. And this was not
in order to protect something that was being threatened, but
rather to attack that which seemed incapable of defense..... I
may say this today: .If the wave of more than 20,000 tanks,
hundreds of divisions, tens of thousands of artillery
236

pieces, along with more than 10,000 airplanes, had not been kept from being set into
motion against the Reich, all of Europe would have been lost.” (30)
- Adolf Hitler, 12-11-1941
JUNE, 1941
FDR RESCUES STALIN / EXTENDS MASSIVE MILITARY AID
With Stalin’s Evil Empire facing extinction at the hands of German forces, FDR move
quickly to rescue the murderous regime. He unfreezes Soviet assets that had been frozen
after Stalin’s attack on Finland in 1939, enabling the Soviets to immediately purchase 59
Fighter aircraft. The “Arsenal of Democracy” is now, “The Arsenal of Communism.”
By 1945, the staggering amount of Lend-Lease deliveries to Stalin include 11,000 aircraft
4,000 bombers, 400,000 trucks, 12,000 tanks and combat vehicles, 32,000 motorcycles, 13,000
locomotives and railway cars, 8,000 anti-aircraft cannons, 135.000 submachine guns, 300,000
tons of explosives, 40,000 ﬁeld radios, 400 radar systems, 400,000 metal cutting machine
tools, several million tons of food, steel, other metals, oil and gasoline, chemicals etc. (31)
Without this ENORMOUS INFUSION of American aid, the Germans would probab
have finished off Stalin after the spring thaw of 1942.
237

1- The headline from 1941 says it all. 2- Contrary to the claims of Red propaganda and
Western court-historians, U.S. industry resupplied much of the depleted Red Army. 3-
Alaskan monument shown above commemorates the massive aid which flowed from
Alaska through Siberia.
JUNE 29, 1941
STALIN ORDERS ‘PARTISAN’ GUERRILLA WAR UPON GERMAN
WEHRMARCHT (ARMY) / JEWISH PARTISANS ALSO FORM
Stalin calls upon Party, Soviet, & Trade Union organizations to form “partisan divisions
and diversion groups to pursue and destroy the invaders in a merciless struggle”. (32)
In violation of commonly accepted rules of warfare, many Partisans neither wear uniforms,
nor recognize international law. To grow the ranks of the Red Partisans, and prevent the
Germans from winning over the civilian population, Soviet commandoes dress up in German
uniforms and carry out “false-ﬂag” atrocities against their own people, inciting hatred against
the Germans.
238

Communist and Jewish Partisans, aided by the OSS (forerunner to CIA), also form in other
nations, using the same false-ﬂag tactics, and menacing the safety of German troops unable
to tell enemy from civilian.
Massive Jewish support for and participation in non- uniformed Partisan groups,
including women & children, is the main reason for Hitler’s decision to intern
Europe's Jews in work camps as a wartime security precaution.
Jewish Partisan teams included women & children. Their sneak attacks killed many
German soldiers.
These Finnish children were executed by Soviet Partisans
239

THE SAD FATE OF THE VOLGA GERMANS
The Volga Germans are ethnic Germans living along the River Volga in southeastern
Russia. Recruited as immigrants to Russia in the 18th century, they had always been allowed
to maintain their German culture, language, and traditions
After the German invasion in 1941, the Soviets consider the Volga Germans as potentia
collaborators. On August 28, 1941, Stalin dissolves the Volga-German Republic and orders
the immediate relocation of ethnic Germans. About 400,000 Volga Germans are stripped of
their land and houses; and transported eastward to Soviet Central Asia, and Siberia. By 1942
nearly all the able-bodied German population will have been conscripted to the NKVD slave
labor columns. At least one-third will not survive the camps.
Their only “crime” was being of German ancestry. The Volga Germans were forced
from their homes and herded onto cattle cars bound for slave camps
THE GERMAN SOLDIER’s 10 COMMANDMENTS
240

The German soldier is the best behaved and honorable soldier of Europe. Every soldier
receives a copy of ‘The German Soldier’s 10 Commandments and is expected to follow them
to the letter or face serious punishment.
1. While ﬁghting for victory the German soldier will observe the rules of chivalrous
warfare. Cruelties and senseless destruction are below his standard.
2. Combatants will be in uniform or will wear specially introduced and clearly
distinguishable badges. Fighting in plain clothes or without such badges is
prohibited.
3. No enemy who has surrendered will be killed, including partisans and spies. They
will be duly punished by courts.
4. P.O.W. will not be ill-treated or insulted. While arms, maps, and records are to be
taken away from them, their personal belongings will not be touched.
5. Dum-Dum bullets are prohibited; also no other bullets may be transformed into
Dum-Dum.
6. Red Cross Institutions are sacrosanct. Injured enemies are to be treated in a
humane way. Medical personnel and army chaplains may not be hindered in the
execution of their medical or clerical activities.
7. The civilian population is sacrosanct. Neither looting nor wanton destruction
is permitted to the soldier. Landmarks of historical value or buildings serving
religious purposes, art, science, or charity are to be especially respected.
8. Neutral territory will never be entered nor passed over by planes, nor shot at; it will
not be the object of warlike activities of any kind.
9. If a German soldier is made a prisoner of war he will tell his name and rank if
asked for it. Under no circumstances will he reveal to which unit he belongs, nor
will he give any information about German military, political, and economic
conditions.
10.Oﬀenses of duty will be punished. Enemy oﬀenses against the principles under 1 to
8 are to be reported. Reprisals are only permissible on order of higher commands.
(33)
The only exception to these rules of conduct was in dealing with the murderous Communist
Partisans who refuse to recognize rules of warfare. For this reason, non-uniformed Partisan
241

prisoners who refused to surrender were sometimes hanged or shot as war criminals, not as
legitimate POW’s.
1- American POWS’s in German captivity returned safe and sound after the war 2- But
merciless Communist Partisans often got what they deserved.
LIFE IN THE GERMAN INTERNMENT CAMPS
Contrary to the popular belief that life in the SS-run internment camps was a brutal
existence of slave labor followed by extermination, the German went to great lengths to keep
the Jewish inmates well-fed, well-housed and even entertained. Oﬃcials from the
International Red Cross visited the camps regularly and right up until the end of the war.
(34)
There were orchestras, soccer leagues and activities for children. There were weddings, Bar
Mitzvahs, and even maternity wards for pregnant women. The Auschwitz camp even had a
swimming pool and a general store!
242

It was only during the ﬁnal year of the war that conditions began to deteriorate as typhus
epidemics spread and supplies diminished. Because of the contagious nature of typhus, the
corpses were cremated, not buried near groundwater. The destruction of so much of
Germany’s critical infrastructure contributed to the deaths. Nonetheless, as the camps were
liberated, many healthy and seemingly well-fed ‘Holocaust survivors”, as well as some not so
healthy, were seen and photographed.
1- Healthy Jewish mothers with their new-born babies. This photo was taken shortly
after the Americans liberated Dachau – “The Factory of Horrors” 2- The Auschwitz
swimming pool
243

Jewish Concert and lively Jewish Soccer games with scorecards
1941
THE WAFFEN SS: VOLUNTEERS FROM ACROSS EUROPE JOIN
INTERNATIONAL FORCE UNDER GERMAN COMMAND
Brave men from every nation in Europe (and some from Asia) volunteer to ﬁght the Soviets.
They are welcomed into Germany's "Waﬀen SS" - an elite ﬁghting force. The anti-
Communist Waﬀen SS are motivated by a vision of a greater European family. For the
European SS, the Europe of jealousies, border disputes, and economic rivalries is petty. They
fight for ‘Europa’ itself.
The Waﬀen SS is a true international army of the European peoples. One million men ﬁght
in the SS, of which, 600,000 are non-German. Oﬃcers of the Waﬀen serve in the front
lines alongside their men. By war's end, half of the SS commanders will have been killed in
action. During and after the brutal winter of 41-42, it is the Waﬀen SS who will stand their
ground and delay the massive Soviet counter oﬀensive. By the end of the war, 40% of the
244

Waﬀen SS will have been killed or gone missing. Were it not for the tenacity and
sacriﬁce of the heroic Waﬀen volunteers, all of Europe would have been lost to the
Soviet hordes. It is not surprising that to this day, the "SS" is still viliﬁed in the Globalist
press.
Waffen SS banner includes emblems from every nation of Europe. The force was
headed by Heinrich Himmler (right).
HITLER’S JEWISH SOLDIERS AND HIS FAVORITE JEWISH
DOCTOR
Hitler was not fanatically anti-Jewish as much as he was anti-Marxist, although there was
large overlap between the two groups. As hard as it may be to believe, it is absolutely true
that about 60,000 half-Jewish, and 90,000 quarter-Jewish soldiers fought for Hitler’s
Germany. (35) Among these were decorated soldiers, oﬃcers, and even Generals and
Admirals.
245

As Fuehrer, Hitler personally intervened to assist Dr. Eduard Bloch, the noble Jewish doctor
who had treated his cancer stricken mother. Hitler had never forgotten Dr. Bloch's
kindness, and inquired about him when he returned to liberated Austria in 1938. On Hitler’s
orders, Bloch was given “special protection”. When interviewed by the OSS (CIA) towards
the end of the war, Bloch spoke very well of the young Hitler that he had known. (36)
1- Author Mark Rigg gathered interviews of many of "Hitler's Jewish Soldiers". 2- Right:
Hitler never forgot Eduard Bloch, the Jewish physician who had treated his dying
mother.
AUGUST, 1941
JAPAN APPEALS TO U.S. FOR PEACE TALKS TO END THE WAR
WITH CHINA
246

FDR could easily have mediated an end to the war in Asia; but chose to continue
arming the Chinese.
SEPTEMBER 11, 1941
CHARLES LINDBERGH JR.
ACCUSES FDR AND JEWS OF
PLOTTING TO DRAG THE U.S.
INTO THE WAR
American patriots such as famed aviator Charles Lindbergh Jr. clearly see that FDR i
plotting to involve America in the war. Lindbergh is a leading ﬁgure in the “America First”
movement, or what Globalist propaganda cleverly refers to as “isolationism.” Lindbergh’s
speech in Iowa accurately describes what is happening behind the scenes. He warns:
“The leaders of the British and the Jewish races, for reasons which are as
understandable from their viewpoint as they are inadvisable from ours, for reasons
which are not American, wish to involve us in this war.” (37)
Joseph Kennedy, the US Ambassador to England and Patriarch of the Kennedy Family
Dynasty, also expressed this opinion, though not publicly. (38)
247

1- Lindbergh's famous speech before the America First Committee blamed Jewish
influence for FDR’s drive to war. 2- Joseph Kennedy agreed with Lindbergh. 3- After his
re-election of 1940, FDR didn’t even try to hide his intentions, as the 1941 newspaper
headline above confirms.
OCTOBER – NOVEMBER, 1941
FDR REPEATEDLY AND DELIBERATELY BAITS JAPAN
In the closing months of 1941, FDR’s provocations of Japan escalate to the level of “acts of
war”. FDR imposes devastating oil and trade embargoes on Japan, denies her ships access to
the neutral Panama Canal, and orders U.S. battleships to undertake "pop up" cruises
through Japanese territorial waters.
Finally, on November 26th of '41, FDR sends an impossible ultimatum to Japan, implying a
military threat, and demanding that Japan withdraw all of its troops from China and
Indochina as a pre-condition for lifting the oil embargo.
248

The day before the hostile letter was sent, Secretary of War Henry Stimson recorded, in his
personal diary, the topic of a meeting with FDR as follows: "The question was how we
should maneuver them (Japan) into the position of firing the first shot." (39)
1- Years after his death, a review of Secretary of War Stimson's diary revealed FDR's
intention to provoke Japan. 2- Japan’s Ambassador to the U.S. was bullied and
threatened by Secretary of State Cordell Hull 3- After December talks with Japanese
diplomats broke down (as planned) The Honolulu Advertiser carried the banner:
“Japanese May Strike Over Weekend”.
249

SECTION 6
1941 - 1945
WORLD WAR II (From U.S Entry to the Surrender
of Japan)
250

DECEMBER 7, 1941
JAPAN TAKES FDR’s BAIT / ATTACK ON PEARL HARBOR BRINGS
THE U.S. INTO THE WAR
While issuing the ﬁnal provocations of Japan, FDR and his Military Chairman, George
Marshall, also set the actual bait for the Japanese ﬁsh to bite. The tasty bait that these two
traitors are dangling is the heart of America’s Paciﬁc ﬂeet, deliberately left vulnerable at the
naval base of Pearl Harbor, in the U.S. territory of Hawaii.
By now, Japan knows that war with America is coming. The Japanese high command, in the
hopes of gaining an early advantage, decides to strike as damaging a blow to the U.S. Navy
as possible. Because the U.S. and Britain have each cracked Japan’s naval communication
codes, FDR and Churchill both have advance knowledge of the impending “surprise
attack”; but no specific warning is sent to the Commanders at Pearl Harbor. (1)
The attack kills 2402 US sailors, and ignites press frenzy and a wave of patriotic fervor.
The "isolationists" are silenced for good and the America First Committee disbands. FDR and
the Jewish Mafia around him will finally have their 2nd world war.
251

The "Day of Infamy" was not a "surprise". FDR allowed 2,400 US sailors to die without
warning.
1- The Great Deceiver plays innocent while addressing the nation. 2- “Remember Pearl
Harbor” - Ignorant young men volunteer to die in the Globalists’ war.
DECEMBER 8-11, 1941
252

WAR DECLARATIONS EXCHANGED
The day after Pearl Harbor, Congress declares war on Japan. Even the “isolationists” cannot
resist the war fever caused by what FDR calls “an unprovoked attack”.
Japan also issues a declaration. Germany and Italy then fulﬁll their Tripartite Treaty
obligation to Japan, by announcing that a state of war now exists between the Axis nations
and the U.S. (though they have neither the intention nor the means to actually cross the
Atlantic and attack the U.S. mainland). Congress then follows with additional declarations
upon Germany and Italy.
Again, from the diary of FDR’s War (Defense) Secretary, Henry Stimson, we learn that
Stimson’s immediate and “dominant feeling” was not one of sorrow or outrage over the lost
lives at Pearl Harbor, but rather of relief:
"When the news first came that Japan had attacked us, my first
feeling was of relief that a crisis had come in a way which
would unite all our people. This continued to be my dominant
feeling in spite of the news of catastrophes which quickly
developed." (2)
253

1- While wearing a black armband of "mourning" for the very men that he himself
murdered, the wicked traitor FDR signs the Declaration of War. 2- Propaganda
posters blanketed America
EXCERPTS OF EMPEROR HIROHITO'S WAR DECLARATION
"….We hereby declare war upon the United States of
America and the British Empire.
To ensure the stability of East Asia, and to contribute
to world peace, is the farsighted policy which was
formulated 
by 
our 
great 
illustrious 
Imperial
Grandsire and Great Imperial Sire … To cultivate
friendship 
among 
nations 
and 
to 
enjoy
prosperity in common with all nations has
always been the guiding principle of our
Empire's foreign policy.
254

It has truly been unavoidable and far from our wishes that our Empire has been
brought to cross swords with America and Britain. More than four years have passed
since China, failing to comprehend the true intentions of our Empire, and recklessly courting
trouble, disturbed the peace of East Asia and compelled our Empire to take up arms.
Although there has been reestablished the National Government of China, with which Japan
had eﬀected neighborly intercourse and cooperation, the regime which has survived in
Chungking, relying upon American and British protection, still continues its fratricidal
opposition.
Eager for the realization of their ambition to dominate the Orient, both America and
Britain, giving support to the Chungking regime, have aggravated the disturbances
in East Asia. Moreover these two powers, inducing other countries to follow suit, increased
military preparations on all sides of our Empire to challenge us. They have obstructed by
every means our peaceful commerce and ﬁnally resorted to a direct severance of economic
relations, menacing greatly the existence of our Empire.
Patiently have we waited and long have we endured, in the hope that our Government
might retrieve the situation in peace. But our adversaries, showing not the least spirit
of conciliation, have unduly delayed a settlement; and in the meantime they have
intensified the economic and political pressure to compel our Empire to submission.
This trend of aﬀairs would, if left unchecked, not only nullify our Empire's eﬀorts of many
years for the sake of the stabilization of East Asia, but also endanger the very existence of our
nation. The situation being as it is, our Empire, for its existence and self-defense has no
other recourse but to appeal to arms, and to crush all obstacles in its path. (3)
- December 8, 1941
The text of Hirohito’s war declaration appeared once in the inner pages of The New York
Times before its allegations disappeared down the black memory hole of “official” history
.
255

EXCERPTS FROM HITLER’S
POST-PEARL HARBOR
SPEECH
“Starting in November 1938, he (Roosevelt) began systematically and consciously to sabotage
every possibility of a European peace policy. In public he hypocritically claimed to be
interested in peace while at the same time he threatened every country that was
ready to pursue a policy of peaceful understanding by blocking credits, economic
reprisals, calling in loans, and so forth. In this regard, the reports of the Polish
ambassadors in Washington, London, Paris and Brussels provide a shocking insight.
This man increased his campaign of incitement in January 1939. In a message to the U.S.
Congress he threatened to take every measure short of war against the authoritarian
countries.”
I will overlook as meaningless the insulting attacks and rude statements by this so-called
President against me personally. That he calls me a gangster is particularly meaningless,
since this term did not originate in Europe, where such characters are uncommon, but in
America. And aside from that, I simply cannot feel insulted by Mr. Roosevelt because I
regard him, like his predecessor Woodrow Wilson, as mentally unsound.
256

We know that this man, with his Jewish supporters, has operated against Japan in the same
way. I don't need to go into that here. The same methods were used in that case as well. This
man ﬁrst incites to war, and then he lies about its causes and makes baseless
allegations. He repugnantly wraps himself in a cloak of Christian hypocrisy, while at
the same time slowly but very steadily leading humanity into war. And finally, as an old
Freemason, he calls upon God to witness that his actions are honorable. His shameless
misrepresentations of truth and violations of law are unparalleled in history.
I am sure that all of you have regarded it as an act of deliverance that a country [Japan] has
ﬁnally acted to protest against all this in the very way that this man had actually hoped for,
and which should not surprise him now [the attack on Pearl Harbor]. After years of
negotiating with this deceiver, the Japanese government ﬁnally had its ﬁll of being
treated in such a humiliating way. All of us, the German people and, I believe, all other
decent people around the world as well, regard this with deep appreciation.
We know the power behind Roosevelt. It is the same eternal Jew that believes that his
hour has come to impose the same fate on us that we have all seen and experienced
with horror in Soviet Russia. We have gotten to know ﬁrsthand the Jewish paradise on
earth. Millions of German soldiers have personally seen the land where this international
Jewry has destroyed and annihilated people and property. Perhaps the President of the United
States does not understand this. If so, that only speaks for his intellectual narrow-mindedness.
And we know that his entire eﬀort is aimed at this goal: Even if we were not allied with Japan,
we would still realize that the Jews and their Franklin Roosevelt intend to destroy one state
after another. The German Reich of today has nothing in common with the Germany of the
past. For our part, we will now do what this provocateur has been trying to achieve for years.
And not just because we are allied with Japan, but rather because Germany and Italy with
their present leaderships have the insight and strength to realize that in this historic
period the existence or non-existence of nations is being determined, perhaps for all
time. What this other world has in store for us is clear. They were able to bring the
democratic Germany of the past to starvation, and they seek to destroy the National Socialist
Germany of today.
257

When Mr. Churchill and Mr. Roosevelt declare that they want to one day build a new
social order, that's about the same as a bald-headed barber recommending a tonic
guaranteed to make hair grow. Rather than incite war, these gentlemen, who live in the
most socially backward countries, should have concerned themselves with their own
unemployed people. They have enough misery and poverty in their own countries to keep
themselves busy insuring a just distribution of food there. As far as the German nation is
concerned, it doesn't need charity, either from Mr. Churchill or Mr. Roosevelt -- but it does
demand its rights. And it will do what it must to insure its right to life, even if a thousand
Churchills and Roosevelts conspire together to prevent it.” (4)
- December 11, 1941
DECEMBER, 1942 - 1945
SUPER SECRET MANHATTAN PROJECT INFESTED WITH
COMMUNIST SPIES
The Manhattan Project is an eﬀort, led by the U.S. with participation from Britain, which
will result in the ﬁrst atomic bomb. The project grew out of the Einstein-Szilard letter to
FDR in 1939. The eﬀort had started out on a small scale later that year, and by war's end will
eventually employ 130,000 people at 30 locations. Three ‘secret cities” will house 100,000
workers, all of them sworn to secrecy, and most of whom are ignorant of “the big picture”.
From the start, there are concerns about the Project's security. Physicist Gregory Breit, an
important researcher, quits in 1942 because of concerns over lax security procedures. The
Jewish Communist Physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer takes over Breit's research, and is
then appointed to head the secret weapons lab at Los Alamos, New Mexico. Under his
leadership, Soviet spies and Communist sympathizers infest the Project (Enrico Fermi, Klaus
Fuchs etc).
258

As Oppenheimer "looks the other way", Red spies pass America's secrets into Stalin's hands
(5) In 1954, Oppenheimer's security clearance will be revoked. But by that time, The Soviets
have already stolen much of the “formula” for the A-bomb.
1- Robert Oppenheimer: Mad Man, Communist, Soviet Agent 2- Many years later, the
declassified “Venona Intercepts” will confirm the full extent of the treason which took
place at Los Alamos.
FEBRUARY, 1942
FDR ORDERS LOYAL AMERICANS OF JAPANESE DESCENT TO BE
PLACED IN INTERNMENT CAMPS
FDR’s Executive Order 9066 condemns 110,000 Americans of Japanese ancestry to serve the
rest of the war years in prison camps. Of those interned, 62% are actual American citizens.
Shortly thereafter, Executive Order 9095 freezes their assets. German-American and
Italian-American families are also interned in camps, though in lesser numbers. Unlike
259

Germany’s wartime internment of Jews (who were generally hostile towards Germany),
terrorist Partisans, thieving gypsies, and other assorted Reds; FDR’s internments are of
law abiding, peaceful, and patriotic citizens loyal to America. The internments are as
unjustified as they are unnecessary.
1- Innocent AMERICANS rounded up and herded onto camp-bound trains. 2- Innocent
Japanese-American boys, trapped behind FDR's barbed wire fences.
1942 - 1945
“ROSIE THE RIVETER” IS WORKED AND RATIONED LIKE A DOG
TO SUPPORT THE WAR EFFORT
The commonly-held economic fallacies that war is good for the economy and that World
War II pulled America out of the Great Depression are based on ignorance; nothing more
War is waste; plain and simple. The increased productivity (Gross Domestic Product) and
decreased unemployment associated with a wartime slave economy beneﬁt only the industry
260

bosses who own the factories and the bankers ﬁnancing the new spending. The goods that
are churned out do not beneﬁt the working public because they have to be shipped to the
soldiers overseas; in many cases to be destroyed.
World War II was a time of great sacriﬁce for both the American men who were compelled
to ﬁght, bleed and die, as well as for “Rosie the Riveter” on the home front. As consumers,
the women who were herded into buzzing factories faced shortages of everything from
metals to quality food and clothes.
The U.S., British, and Soviet armies sucked up the manufactured “goods” while Americans
struggled. Car bumpers were actually made of wood during these years! Propaganda posters
everywhere told Americans it was their patriotic duty to work like animals and to go
without. The suckers of “the greatest generation” believed it and never complained.
To support FDR’s evil war that will kill her husband, “Rosie the Riveter” was worked
like a factory animal and then told to “do with less”.
261

1942 - 1945
AMERICA’S RIDICULOUS WAR PROPAGANDA
The hateful idiocy of American propaganda posters speaks for itself:
262

JUNE 4-7, 1942
U.S. VICTORIOUS OVER JAPAN IN THE ‘BATTLE OF MIDWAY’
263

The Battle of Midway is the most important naval battle of the Paciﬁc Ocean campaign.
The U.S. Navy, under the command of Admiral Chester W. Nimitz, decisively defeats the
Japanese, inflicting irreparable damage upon the Japanese fleet. After Midway, Japan’s Pacific
defense perimeter of islands steadily shrinks as Japan cannot replace its lost ships and
aircraft as fast as the U.S. can.
Though Midway marks a turning point, the U.S. will sustain much more casualties as the
Japanese tenaciously defend their Pacific perimeter for many months to come.
1- Chester W. Nimitz 2- The region From Manchuria to Midway was Japan's defense
perimeter
JULY, 1942 – FEBRUARY, 1943
THE BLOODY BATTLE OF STALINGRAD
The Battle of Stalingrad between the Germans and the Soviets was fought for control of
the strategically vital Russian city that Stalin named after himself (today known as
264

Volgograd). It will go down in history as the bloodiest battle ever, with combined deaths of
nearly 2 million. Stalin’s refusal to pull the Red Army out of the city leads to a long siege and
great suffering for the hungry residents.
After the German oﬀensive manages to capture most of the city, the U.S. Lend Lease-
equipped Red Army wears the Germans down with bloody house-to-house ﬁghting
Brainwashed and inﬂamed by the NKVD’s false atrocity propaganda, much of the city’s
civilian population ﬁercely resists the Germans as well. As intended, this “false ﬂag” terror
enﬂames the civilian population against the Germans. The losses suﬀered by the Germans
will make victory in Russia impossible.
1- Brutal house-to-house fighting at Stalingrad took a heavy toll on the Germans. 2-
Stalin’s gang used phony photos to incite the Russian people against the Germans.
Note how a hanging body was added to the original photo.
265

America’s Globo-Zionist propaganda machine portrays Hitler and Stalin (an enemy
of America!) as a “Hero”!
NOVEMBER, 1942
OPERATION TORCH / ALLIES BATTLE THE GERMANS IN NORTH
AFRICA
A full year after U.S. entry into the war, the Germans are ﬁnally confronted during
Operation Torch, the Allied invasion of French North Africa (Algeria, Tunisia, Morocco). It
is facilitated by French Generals who switched loyalty from the nationalist Marshal Petain’s
Vichy France to the Globalist/Communist side of General Charles de Gaulle (self-exiled in
England).
The politically appointed and grossly unqualiﬁed General Dwight D. Eisenhower ("Ike") is
given command of the Allied force which sails from England. But it is the military genius of
General George Patton that ultimately bails out the incompetent and envious Eisenhower.
(6) Patton's Army successfully overcomes the German forces, led by General Erwin
266

Rommel (The Desert Fox).
By May of 1943, the Germans will have evacuated Northern Africa as they prepare to defend
the "soft underbelly of Europe" in southern Italy.
Patton vs Rommel / Allies land in North Africa / Italy now vulnerable to invasion.
JANUARY, 1943
CASABLANCA CONFERENCE / ALLIES: WAR WILL CONTINUE
UNTIL UNCONDITIONAL SURRENDER!
FDR, Churchill, and the exiled "'Free French" Generals Henri Giraud and Charles de Gaul
meet together at the Casablanca Conference (Morocco/North Africa). FDR announces a
policy of “unconditional surrender” for Germany, Italy, and Japan. Churchill agrees to the
policy.
267

Unconditional surrender means the Allies expect the Axis nations to not only stop
ﬁghting, but to also hand over complete political, educational, military and media
control to the invading Allied armies. This brutal hard-line policy of complete
subjugation inspires the Japanese and Germans to fight harder and longer.
Giraud, FDR, de Gaulle, and Churchill demand "Unconditional Surrender"
JANUARY – MAY, 1943
THE TIDE TURNS AGAINST GERMANY
The opening months of 1943 mark the turning point in the war. The combination of
America’s awesome naval, air, and land power, a 3-front war, Jewish and Red Partisan
guerilla war, merciless air bombardment of German civilians, and a massive Red Army
armed to the teeth by American manufacturing power, all combine to take a heavy toll on
Germany.
268

General Friedrich Paulus requests that Hitler allow the 6th Army at Stalingrad to
surrender. Hitler, knowing what the stakes were for Germany and Europe, and knowing
that Stalin would kill any prisoners, orders Paulus to hold firm.
In February, the cowardly general ﬁnally surrenders his army to the tender mercy of the
Stalin-Kaganovich death cult. About 35,000 of the men under Paulus’s command had
already been evacuated from the front. The remaining 91,000 are marched oﬀ to Soviet slave
camps. Only 6,000 of them ever returned home.
Paulus eventually sells out to the Soviets altogether, joining the ‘National Committee for Free
Germany’ and urging German troops to defy orders and surrender. After testifying at the
post-war Nuremberg show-trials for the Soviets, he was released and spent the rest of his life
as a mouthpiece for Communist East Germany.
In May, the campaign in North Africa ends as German troops evacuate. That same month
Admiral Donitz removes all German U-boats from the Atlantic after 41 subs are sunk in jus
3 weeks! Germany is now limited to playing defense as the Allies slowly tighten the Globalist
noose around Hitler’s Reich.
269

Betrayed by their General, cold, tired and hungry Germans surrender at Stalingrad.
Many will die on the death march to Siberian labor camps.
JULY, 1943
‘OPERATION GOMORRAH’ / THE FIREBOMBING OF HAMBURG
BURNS OR SUFFOCATES 42,000 GERMAN CIVILIANS!
The Firebombing of Hamburg creates a tornado of ﬁre so intense; it actually lifts people
oﬀ of the streets and into the ﬁre. Those who are not burned to death suﬀocate in shelters
as the fire above sucks up all the oxygen.
Hundreds of US and UK aircraft feed the inferno with wave after wave of incendiary
bombings. As a sick joke, the demonic planners of the genocide of Hamburg actually code
named the arson attack “Operation Gomorrah”, after the Hebrew Bible story of the cities
which God destroyed by fire and brimstone.(Sodom & Gomorrah)
Operation Gomorrah deploys 3,000 aircraft and 9,000 tons of bombs. It kills 42,000 people,
with an equal number injured. Indeed, more Germans died on that fateful night in
Hamburg than the total number of British civilians killed during ﬁve years of war!
One million traumatized German refugees ﬂee the city in which 250,000 homes were
destroyed.
270

The women, children, and elderly of Hamburg were suffocated or charbroiled alive by
Churchill and Roosevelt.
1943
CHURCHILL’S BENGAL FAMINE KILLS 2,000,000 INDIANS
While famines were not uncommon in India, largely because of droughts or monsoons, the
1943 tragedy in Bengal has the unmistakable fingerprints of the mad dog Churchill on it. (7)
271

In the prior year, when Japan occupied Burma, an important rice exporter, the British
bought up massive amounts of rice and hoarded it. Churchill then orders the diversion of
food away from India and toward British troops around the world. Now a rare commodity,
the price of rice shoots up four-fold. Wheat from Australia (which could have been delivered
to starving Indians) is instead transported to British troops as well. Even worse, British
colonial authorities (again under Churchill’s leadership) actually turn down oﬀers of food
from the U. S.
Churchill hates Indians almost as much as he hates Germans; mainly because India wants its
independence from Britain. Later, at a War Cabinet meeting, Churchill blames the Indians
themselves for the famine, saying that they “breed like rabbits.”
Churchill’s Reign of Death spanned several continents.
SUMMER, 1943
ALLIES INVADE SICILY FROM NORTH AFRICA / ITALIAN
GOVERNMENT COLLAPSES / 60,000 ITALIAN CIVILIANS KILLED
272

The Allied invasion of the southern Italian island of Sicily is another huge success for
Generals Patton and Montgomery (UK). German and Italian resistance is overwhelmed
Within four weeks of the initial air and sea assault, Axis troops evacuate to the Italian
mainland.
Italian Leader Benito Mussolini is removed from power by his own Grand Council. The new
government arrests him, makes peace with the Allies, and switched sides. This leaves
Germany with the sole task of halting Patton’s push up the Italian peninsula. (In September,
Mussolini is rescued by German commandos and reinstalled to rule over Northern Italy).
With Italy coming quickly under Allied control, Hitler worries that the Allies will now invade
Yugoslavia and the Balkan nations, cut oﬀ Germany’s oil supply, and march north upon
Germany from the “soft underbelly of Europe”. In August of 1943, the British Royal Air Force
departing from bases in southern Italy, begins heavy bombing of the Ploesti oil ﬁelds of
German allied Romania. The German-occupied parts of Italy are also heavily bombed by the
Allies, resulting in the deaths of 60,000 Italian civilians.
1- From North Africa to the "soft underbelly" of Sicily and southern Italy. 2- Bombed-
out Italian refugees
273

1943-45
SPECIAL GERMAN UNITS PROTECT THE PRICELESS ARTWORKS
OF EUROPE
Under Kaiser Wilhelm II during World War I, the highly cultured Germans had gone to
great lengths to protect and preserve artworks located in near zones of combat. The German
word to describe this principal of saving Europe's cultural and artistic treasures during
wartime is "Kunstschutz" (art protection). (8)
A talented painter himself, Adolf Hitler has a great appreciation for art and culture. He sees
Churchill and FDR as uncultured barbarians with merciless disregard for innocent life
architecture, and works of art. As the Germans had done during World War I, Hitler too
orders the protection of artworks throughout the combat theatres of Europe. The task of
protecting the art is handed over to Air Force Marshal Hermann Goering. As Allied
terror bombing ravages Europe, thousands of paintings and sculptures from Italy, France,
Belgium, Russia, Romania, and Poland are gathered and meticulously inventoried by the
Germans.
After the war, the American Art Looting Investigation Unit (ALIU) of the Oﬃce of
Strategic Services (OSS) issues 13 reports on the German “looting” of artworks. By the way,
this is the same OSS (forerunner of the CIA) that also accused the Germans of using dead
Jews to make “shrunken heads”, “lamp shades” and “bars of soap” - allegations which are
today universally acknowledged as false.
274

“Nazi looted art” is a war propaganda lie, as is the Hollywood film “Monuments Men”
starring George Clooney and Matt Damon.
1943
GENERALS EISENHOWER & MARSHALL POSTPONE THE U.S.
ADVANCE / WAR IS PROLONGED TO HELP STALIN
With “the soft underbelly of Europe” now vulnerable, Churchill and British Genera
Montgomery argue for an immediate Allied advance upon Germany from the south of
Europe. This was Hitler’s greatest concern.
The oil ﬁelds of Romania fuel the German military. An Allied advance on the Balkans
through Yugoslavia and Greece would be disastrous for Germany. From Italy and the
Balkans, the Allies can then launch a ﬁnal push upon Germany itself from the south and
275

southeast.
Inexplicably, Allied Commander Dwight Eisenhower.(‘Ike’) and Army Chief of Staﬀ
George Marshall (who had promoted Eisenhower over scores of senior oﬃcers) insist upon
making preparations for an invasion of heavily fortified Northern France the following year.
This bizarre “blunder” prolongs the war, buys the Soviets much needed time to
march westward, and eventually enables Stalin to steal Eastern Europe.
There is a reason for this geo-political “blunder”. FDR and his Globalist gang envision a
post-war world in which the Soviets and the United States join forces to lay the
foundation for a ‘New World Order’ (World Government). However, after the war,
Stalin will break with the Globalists and move towards a form of Nationalistic Communism
instead; an extension of the ideological conﬂict that had bitterly divided Stalin and Trotsky
during the 1920’s. Stalin still supports world-wide Communist revolution, of course. But his
vision of a New World Order is one in which Moscow calls the shots, not London or New
York.
276

1- The traitor Marshall (r) advanced the career of the traitor Eisenhower (l). 2- With
most of Italy conquered, and the Soviets advancing from the east, why the plan to
storm fortified beaches in France?
1943-1945
VLASOV’S ARMY: SOVIET POW’S VOLUNTEER TO FIGHT FOR
GERMANY
Stalin’s tyranny was hated by so many Russians that as many as 300,000 Russian POW’s
volunteered to ﬁght for Germany! The anti-Communist soldiers of the Russian Liberation
Army wore German uniforms with a Russian patch. They were led by General Andrey
Vlasov, but under German high command.
The RLA fought valiantly, mainly in key rear guard support roles against Communist
partisans. After the war, the RLA will attempt to surrender to the western allies. Not wanting
277

to deny ‘Uncle Joe’ of his revenge, Eisenhower will turn down their oﬀers and forcibly
repatriate those who were already in U.S. custody.
Despite pleading with the Americans for political asylum, General Vlasov and his freedom
ﬁghters will then be handed over to the brutal Soviets. Vlasov and 11 of his senior oﬃcers are
hanged in Moscow in August, 1946.
General Vlasov and his men were true Russian patriots; not “traitors”.
MAY, 1944
4000 ITALIAN WOMEN ARE GANG RAPED BY FRENCH CONTROLLED NORTH
AFRICANS AT MONTE CASSINO
In May ’44, the Allies ﬁnally succeed in taking Monte Cassino.(in Central Italy) from
German control, after bombing the town’s 6th century abbey into ruins. The Allies have
278

French-Moroccan troops ﬁghting for them. The Moroccans are allowed to run wild; slitting
the throats of prisoners, looting homes, and raping every Italian woman they can get their
hands on. The Moroccans even rape local boys and a Catholic Priest!
Two Italian sisters, ages 16 and 18, are gang raped by more than 200 Moroccans. One dies
from the abuse, and the other will spend the rest of her life in a mental hospital. An
estimated 3000 women aged 11-86 are raped, some so violently that 100 of them die. About
800 village men who try to protect them are also killed. The Moroccans go unpunished by
their “Free French” Commanders and will later rape and kill again when they occupy
Germany.
Italian actress Sophia Loren starred in "Two Women", about a mother and daughter
savagely raped by France’s Moroccan conscripts.
JUNE 6, 1944
‘D-DAY’ - OVERLORD / ALLIED INVASION OF NORMANDY
279

LAUNCHED ON 6-6-6 ESTABLISHES A FOOTHOLD IN EUROPE
At the 6th hour, of the 6th day, of the 6th month of 1944, Allied armies based in England
launch ‘D-Day’ (Devil’s Day?), and successfully cross the English Channel. The cost of
Operation Overlord (the Devil?) is high as nearly 10,000 men are killed storming the
fortiﬁed beaches of Normandy. But Overlord establishes an initial beachhead of 100,000
troops. From this base in northern France, the Allies will be reinforced for the push towards
Germany.
At the same time, the Soviet Red Army, armed to the teeth with state-of-the-art
American weaponry, advances upon Germany from the east. With Italy also under Allied
occupation, Germany has three fronts to defend (West, South, and East) as its cities,
railways, dams, factories and civilian population endure relentless bombardment and
Partisan sabotage.
In order to give Stalin time to conquer Eastern Europe, Generals Eisenhower and
Marshall repeatedly delay the advance of General Patton’s unstoppable 3rd army,
going so far as to cut off shipments of gasoline to Patton's army!
Patton (August, 1944): "At the present time our chief difficulty is not the Germans, but
gasoline. If they would give me enough gas, I could go all the way to Berlin!"
(9)
280

1- Instead of exploiting the "soft underbelly" of Italy, Allies storm fortified French
beaches. 2- The dead at Normandy; what a tragic waste of life!
SUMMER, 1944
THE MURDEROUS ‘LIBERATION’ & RAPE OF FRANCE
Under what was intended to be only temporary, wartime German occupation (19401944), life
in Northern France goes by peacefully for French civilians. The conduct of the German
occupiers is impeccable. Many French women fall in love with German soldiers. But with the
Normandy invasion (June 6, 1944), the peace and security of France is shattered into a
million pieces. To support the cross-channel invasion, and to then push the Germans
eastward, the Allies unleash a ferocious aerial bombardment campaign. Entire towns are
mercilessly carpet bombed. Cultural icons and works of art are destroyed, 65,000 French
civilians are killed, 150,000 are injured, and at least 500,000 left homeless. Even Paris is
heavily bombed.
Incredibly, twice as many French civilians are bombed to death during only a few
months, as the total amount of British civilians killed during the entire war! (10) Of
course, these numbers pale in comparison to the 1,000,000 + German civilians who were
281

killed by Allied bombings. The horror doesn’t end with the bombardment either. The Allied
occupation and subsequent economic collapse bring new nightmares for the women of
France. Under Allied occupation, American troops rape 1000's of French women, and turn
many 1000's more hungry women into sex-for-food prostitutes. To appease the French
population, the U.S. Army will eventually hang 130 of its rapist soldiers, a majority of them
Black. (11)
It will take years for these areas of France to recover from the tragedy. Such is the glorious
"liberation" that Churchill, FDR, and the French traitor de Gaulle have imposed upon
France.
1- The Allied 'liberators' left death, trauma and homelessness in their wake. 2 & 3-
Heavy civilian deaths as the Allies bomb Paris factories – and then some!
JULY, 1944
RED ARMY ROLLS BACK INTO POLAND / GERMANS RETREAT
With their free arsenal supplemented by America’s ﬁnest tanks, Tommy-Guns, planes,
282

trucks, jeeps, and even food and blankets, the Red Army advances on Germany from the
east. Stalin’s plot to take all of Eastern Europe has been helped greatly by Ike's and Marshall’s
curious obsession with invading Europe from England, instead of simply advancing from
Europe’s “soft underbelly”.
Stalin wants to crush Berlin. By July ’44, the murdering and raping Reds have rolled into
Poland, threatening Germany’s eastern flank. Frightened German civilians begin fleeing
westward by land and also via the Baltic Sea.
Armed with America's best weaponry, the Red army rolls towards Germany.
JULY, 1944
BRETTON WOODS CONFERENCE ESTABLISHES THE WORLD
BANK AND THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
The chaos and crisis of World War II gives the Globalists an opportunity to reshape the
world’s monetary system into a “global economy”. At the Bretton Woods Conference in
283

New Hampshire, 730 delegates from 44 nations set up new rules for commercial and
ﬁnancial relations. Representing the US is Harry Dexter White. White (originally Weiss) is
the son of Jewish immigrants from the Russian Empire. Years after Bretton Woods, Dexter-
White is revealed to be a Soviet spy. (12)
The top British delegate is the legendary Fabian Socialist (possible secret Communist) and
homosexual pedophile (13), John Maynard Keynes. Keynes suggests the creation of a
World Currency, to be issued by a Global Central Bank. But the world is not ready for such a
radical step towards The New World Order. Instead of a global currency, each nation will
link the value of its currency to the U.S. Dollar, which will serve as the international medium
of exchange. Both the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank, are
conceived at Bretton Woods.
Soviet agent White (l) & Fabian Marxist pedophile Keynes crafted the world’s debt-
based monetary system and devised the World Bank and IMF schemes.
JULY 20, 1944
OPERATION VALKYRIE & THE ASSASSINATION ATTEMPT
AGAINST HITLER
284

In addition to a few ambitious traitors, there are still some naïve fools among the German
military establishment who believe that the western Allies can yet be reasoned with and
peace obtained in the western front. Unbeknownst to them, Churchill and FDR have already
pledged to Stalin that they will not seek a separate peace with Germany.
Partly out of a sincere though very misguided belief that Germany would be spared if Hitler
was assassinated; and partly out of a desire to save their own skin; a gang of plotters, led by
Colonel Claus von Stauﬀenberg, attempts to kill Adolf Hitler. The great General Erwin
Rommel is believed to have given his blessing to the plot (though some have disputed this).
Carrying a bomb in his briefcase, Stauﬀenberg attends a conference with Hitler. He then
positions the briefcase under the table near Hitler. After a few minutes, Stauﬀenberg
receives a planned telephone call and leaves the room. When the bomb detonates, it
demolishes the conference room, killing three oﬃcers and the stenographer. Hitler survives
with a perforated eardrum.
The conspiracy is unraveled and the conspirators are soon executed by ﬁring squad. General
Rommel is granted the privilege of taking poison.
285

1- A soldier holds lucky Hitler’s torn and singed trousers. 2- The bombed-out
conference room 3- Colonel Stauffenberg
Hitler often preferred the company of his adoring rank and file soldiers to that of
some of certain snobby Generals who later turned on the “corporal”.
286

British sign in Naples warns
troops of typhus
1944 - 1945
TYPHUS EPIDEMICS DEVASTATE THE GERMAN INTERNMENT
CAMPS
Typhus is spread by head lice, and has historically been linked to wars and crowded
conditions. Decomposing typhus corpses can also spread the disease into local groundwater.
During and after the World War I, as many as 5 million Poles and Russians had died
of the deadly disease. (14)
To stop the spread of typhus, the Germans shave the heads of
the prisoners and/or delouse them in “gas chambers”. With
the situation in Germany deteriorating fast, deadly typhus
epidemics break out in Germany’s internment camps,
especially in Poland. The Allied bombardment of railroads
and medicine factories contributes greatly to this medical
crisis.
In spite of Germany’s well-documented eﬀorts to stop
the typhus epidemic, (15) deaths in the concentration
camps continue to mount throughout ’44 & ’45. After the
war, Allied propaganda will falsely portray the typhus deaths
as evidence of a deliberate extermination program aimed at
the Jews.
287

1- American soldier "gasses" an unidentified woman in order to kill typhus-carrying
lice. 2- Germans used Zyklon B to kill lice, not people.
AUGUST, 1944
THE VICHY GOVERNMENT OF FRANCE IS TOPPLED BY THE ALLIES / VENGEFUL
GENERAL de GAULLE RETURNS AND MURDERS 40,000 OF HIS OWN PEOPLE
After the collapse of the Vichy French regime, General Charles de Gaulle returns from hi
English exile. The Globalist and Communist French then impose a new Reign of Terror
Cruel punishment is meted out against those labeled as “Nazi collaborators”, whose only
crime was in making peace with Germany, or to have fought against the Soviets on the
eastern front as members of the German SS units.
The de Gaullist ‘liberals’ will murder as many as 40,000, and imprison 100,000 of their
countrymen. French women who dated German soldiers during the occupation are
humiliated by having their heads shaved bald or stripped naked.
288

Marshal Petain escapes to Germany. After the war, he will be sentenced to death for
“treason”, but due to his age, 88, and hero status from WW I, de Gaulle has no choice but to
reduce Petain's sentence to life in prison.
French women who had fallen in love with German soldiers were shaved bald and
paraded by Red Frenchmen and other ‘patriotic” ignoramuses.
JANUARY 8, 1945
NEW YORK TIMES PUBLISHES A COMMUNIST’S CLAIM OF 6
MILLION JEWS DEAD
Sing it again Four Tops: “It’s the same, old song….
289

We have ﬁrmly established that, on numerous occasions dating back to 1900, the
propaganda claim of “6 million Jews" being in jeopardy of dying appeared in print. Towards
the end of World War II, the ﬁrst claim of 6 million Jews having actually died was published
in January, 1945, based upon the claim of a Communist correspondent for the New York
Jewish Daily Forward (an openly Marxist, Yiddish language publication).
As far back as 1933, Lestchinsky (above, right) had been accused by both Latvia and
Germany of spreading false atrocity propaganda. (16) Germany had actually expelled him for
telling atrocity lies.
With neither investigation nor conﬁrmation, Lestchinsky's claim of 6 million dead Jews was
immortalized with a headline in the Jewish owned New York Times. The most "prestigious"
newspaper in the world thus gave a HUGE boost to a big lie.
290

Aside from Lestchinsky being a known Communist liar, there is another problem with the
story. You see, none of the major concentration camps had even been liberated yet!
Following are the 1945 liberation dates for some of the most well known "Nazi death camps":
Auschwitz (January 27), Buchenwald (April 4), Bergen Belsen (April 11), Dachau (April
29), Mauthausen (May 5)
All of these camps were regularly visited by the Red Cross, which estimated the ﬁnal death
toll at 270,000 (mainly from typhus). (17) Though the number was based on German
records, the Red Cross at the time neither questioned the ﬁgure nor ever complained about
German cooperation with regard to camp inspection.
So, where did Comrade Lestchinsky get this “6 million” from? As it turns out, the “6 million”
number, which evidently has some symbolic significance, has been around for a long time.
291

1- The “6 Million Jews” mantra had appeared in print many times since 1900. 2- The
United Jewish Campaign of New York set a fundraising goal of $6,000,000 to help the
“dying” Jews of Europe…in 1926?
JANUARY 30, 1945
SOVIET SUB SINKS THE WILHELM GUSTLOFF / 10,000 GERMAN
292

REFUGEES KILLED AT SEA!
As the raping and murdering Soviets push eastward, millions of terriﬁed German refugees
ﬂee west by land and sea. The liner MV Wilhelm Gustloﬀ is packed shoulder-to-shoulder
with 10 -12,000 people - 10 times as many as the Titanic!
Soon after leaving port, the doomed ship is sighted by Soviet Submarine commander
Alexander Marinesko. Having stalked his human prey for several hours, the Soviet killer
then ﬁres three torpedoes into the ship’s port side. In the panic that follows, many
passengers are trampled to death as they flee to the decks.
The Wilhelm Gustloff sinks in just 45 minutes. German ships arrive quickly and pluck about
1,000 survivors from the frigid Baltic Sea.
1 & 2- Artistic rendition of the Wilhelm Gustloff sinking - 10,000 souls lost at sea! 2- In
recognition of his “heroic” act of genocide, the Soviets built a memorial to
Commander Marinesko
293

FEBRUARY, 1945
THE YALTA CONFERENCE / FDR ‘GIVES AWAY THE STORE’ TO
JOE STALIN
The most historic of the “Big Three” conferences is held in the Black Sea resort of Yalta
(Russian Crimea). At the Yalta Conference, FDR & Churchill (especially FDR) make easy
concessions to the mass-murdering Communist, “Uncle Joe”. With Red spies Alger Hiss and
Harry Hopkins inﬂuencing the dying Roosevelt (who dies in April), it is decided that after
Germany’s defeat:
•
The Soviets will occupy Eastern Europe until free elections can be held.
•
The Soviets will eventually join the war against Japan and be supplied with U.S
arms for the effort.
•
After Japan is defeated, the Soviets will occupy northern Korea (without Korea’s
approval!), and Manchuria in China (without China’s approval!)
•
Millions of Russian POWs captured by the Germans, as well as Russian refugee
fleeing Stalin, will be forcefully returned to Stalin.
•
Germany will be split in half as will the Capital of Berlin. (18)
294

The Big Three of Yalta - The murderous psychopaths plot the reshaping of the post-
war world. The biggest winner is Stalin.
FEBRUARY 13-15, 1945
THE ‘ASH WEDNESDAY’ HOLOCAUST OF DRESDEN 200,000 -
300,000 CIVILIANS KILLED!
By February of ‘45, the outcome of the war in Europe is already clear. Germany is ﬁnished
and will formally surrender in 3 months. The murderous ﬁrebombing of the beautiful city of
Dresden is therefore as cruel as it is unnecessary. In an apparent eﬀort to mock Catholic
Germans, the Zio-Globalists chose the day of "Ash Wednesday" to literally turn Dresden into
ashes.
295

For two straight days, wave upon wave of Allied air sorties drop phosphorus and incendiary
bombs upon a defenseless population. Thousands of ﬁres merge into one huge
ﬁrestorm, sucking oxygen to feed itself as countless numbers of German elderly,
women, and children suffocate or burn alive.
The ﬁre is so massive that pilots report that their cockpits are actually illuminated by the
great ﬂame. Because so many refugees ﬂeeing eastward have swelled Dresden’s population,
it is diﬃcult to say how many are killed by the Churchill/FDR “Holocaust”. Credible
estimates vary between 200 -300,000 dead, and possibly as many 400,000! (19) Survivors are
later strafed with machine gun fire from low flying American & British fighter planes. (20)
Burnt out beyond description! The dead of Dresden were stacked in huge piles and
cremated before mass disease could set in.
296

Before and after; they did not deserve this!
MARCH 10, 1945
FDR FIREBOMBS TOKYO / 100,000 CIVILIANS KILLED
Though it will later be overshadowed by the subsequent atomic bombs dropped on
Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the Firebombing of Tokyo is just as deadly in its initial death toll.
The genocidal terror bombing involves the same type of incendiary explosives dropped on
Dresden one month earlier, and yields similar horrific results.
The charred bodies of 100,000 dead civilians litter the streets and 250,000 buildings and
homes are destroyed. Millions more are injured or left homeless.
297

Though later overshadowed by the atomic bombings of Japan, the Tokyo firebombing
was just as deadly. The boys above are homeless orphans.
APRIL 12, 1945
FDR DIES OF A STROKE/ HARRY TRUMAN BECOMES PRESIDENT
The polio-stricken FDR will not live to see the end of the bloody war that he helped unleash
upon the world. FDR intends to take a few weeks rest before his anticipated appearance at
the founding conference of the United Nations in San Francisco.
On the afternoon of April 12, Roosevelt says out loud, "I have a terriﬁc pain in the back of my
head." He slumps forward in his chair, unconscious, and is carried into his bedroom. Like
Wilson in 1919, FDR suﬀers a massive stroke and dies soon afterwards. FDR's lasting legacy
for America is the class warfare induced welfare state and the brutal foreign warfare state;
both of which are bankrupting the United States and killing innocents abroad.
298

Naturally, after his death The New York Times declares, "Men will thank God on their
knees a hundred years from now that Franklin D. Roosevelt was in the White House".
(21)
Vice President Harry Truman becomes President. He is a corrupt, dim-witted political hack
and failed businessman. FDR's Jewish and Red inner circle will continue to run the show
while the ill-tempered little man from Missouri delivers the speeches. Nothing will change.
The New York Times turns the lying swine into a god, as brainwashed Americans weep
for the death of the deceitful monster who had betrayed them.
*Note the sub-headline: ‘9TH Crosses Elbe (River), Nears Berlin’
APRIL 15, 1945
EISENHOWER ORDERS PATTON’S ARMY TO HALT / BERLIN &
299

EASTERN EUROPE RESERVED FOR STALIN!
British General Bernard Montgomery argues that there is now nothing to stop the Allies
from sweeping into Berlin, thus taking the German Capital before the advancing Soviet army
can get there. Eisenhower, however, has other ideas. As FDR’s loyal lapdog had done time
and time again, "Ike" would ﬁnd a way to delay the Allied advance so as to buy time for
Stalin to advance from the east.
On March 28, '45, Ike sends a message to Stalin, assuring him that the Allied advance wil
focus on western Germany. On April 15, Ike issues a halt order forbidding Allied
commanders from crossing the Elbe River. (22) Generals Montgomery and Patton are
very upset over the sudden order to halt the advance, thus condemning Berlin, and all of
Eastern Europe, to Soviet barbarism.
1- Red-lover ‘Ike’ was Stalin's favorite General. 2- Montgomery & Patton couldn’t
understand why Berlin was being given to Stalin. 3- American & Soviet troops shake
hands over the ruined bridge across the Elbe River.
300

APRIL 16, 1945
SOVIET SUB SINKS THE GOYA / 7,000 MORE GERMAN REFUGEES
KILLED AT SEA!
T h e Goya is a German transport ship carrying 7,000 wounded soldiers and terriﬁed
refugees westward. The Red Terror will follow these poor souls to sea. Soviet Captain
Vladimir Konovalov spots the Goya and orders it to be blasted by torpedoes. The Goya
sinks very quickly, plunging its passengers into the icy Baltic Sea. Less than 200 will survive.
The final death toll is about the equivalent of 7 Titanics!
For this murderous war crime, Captain Konovalov is awarded the Soviet Union’s highest
military decoration, Hero of the Soviet Union.
Soviet subs turned the Baltic into a graveyard for 10’s of 1000’s of refugees.
301

APRIL 28, 1945
ITALIAN COMMUNIST PARTISANS KILL MUSSOLINI / HIS BODY
IS PUBLICLY HUNG UPSIDE DOWN
With total defeat looming in Europe, Mussolini attempts to escape to neutral Switzerland
He is captured and summarily executed near Lake Como by Italian Partisans (Communists).
Mussolini's body is then taken to Milan, where it is hung upside down for public viewing
and to also to provide confirmation of his death.
Mussolini's 1922 takeover of Italy (The March on Rome) saved Italy from Communism. There
were many positive economic and social developments during his rule. But in the end, "il
Duce" and his imperialistic ego put Italy and Germany in very diﬃcult situations. His
reckless adventures in Africa & Greece made Italy a huge burden for Germany to carry and
defend. Moreover, French & Arab disdain for Mussolini’s actions ruined Hitler’s chances to
bring France and the Arabs into an anti-British alliance.
Mussolini (2nd from left) and his mistress (3rd) are strung up in Milan. His ill-advised
antics cost his friend Hitler dearly.
302

APRIL 30, 1945
HITLER ISSUES HIS FINAL TESTAMENT / COMMITS SUICIDE IN
HIS BERLIN BUNKER
With the situation in Berlin hopeless, Hitler marries his longtime mistress, Eva Braun. The
two then commit suicide; Eva by poison, Hitler by gunshot. Hitler's dog Blondie is also
poisoned. The staﬀ is under orders to burn the bodies and to escape Berlin before the
Soviets can capture them.
One day before committing suicide, Hitler had dictated his ﬁnal Political Testament, a
suicide note, in essence, in which he denied any responsibility for starting the war. Some
critical excerpts that you’ll not find in your High School history book:
“More than thirty years have now passed since I in 1914 made my modest contribution as a
volunteer in the First World War that was forced upon the Reich. In these three decades I
have been actuated solely by love and loyalty to my people in all my thoughts, acts, and life.
They gave me the strength to make the most diﬃcult decisions which have ever confronted
mortal man. I have spent my time, my working strength, and my health in these three
decades.
“It is untrue that I or anyone else in Germany wanted war in 1939. It was wanted and
provoked solely by international statesmen either of Jewish origin or working for
Jewish interests.
I have made too many oﬀers for the control and limitation of armaments, which posterity will
not for all time be able to disregard for the responsibility for the outbreak of this war to be
laid on me. Nor have I ever wished that after the appalling First World War a second
against England, or even against America, should break out. Centuries will pass away,
but out of the ruins of our towns and monuments the hatred of those whom we have to thank
for all this will always grow anew: international Jewry and its henchmen.
303

Three days before the outbreak of the German-Polish war I again proposed to the
British ambassador in Berlin a solution to the German-Polish problem—similar to
that in the case of the Saar district, under international control
This oﬀer also cannot be denied. It was only rejected because the leading circles in
English politics wanted the war, partly on account of the business hoped for and
partly under influence of propaganda organized by International Jewry.
After six years of war, which in spite of all setbacks will go down one day in history as the
most glorious and valiant demonstration of a nation's life purpose, I cannot forsake the city
which is the capital of this Reich. As the forces are too small to make any further stand
against the enemy attack at this place, and our resistance is gradually being weakened by
men who are as deluded as they are lacking in initiative, I should like, by remaining in this
town, to share my fate with those, the millions of others, who have also taken upon
themselves to do so.
Moreover, I do not wish to fall into the hands of an enemy who requires a new spectacle
organized by the Jews for the amusement if their hysterical masses. I have decided therefore
to remain in Berlin and there of my own free will to choose death at the moment when I
believe the position of the Fuehrer and Chancellor itself can no longer be held.
I die with a happy heart, aware of the immeasurable deeds and achievements of our soldiers
at the front, our women at home, the achievements of our farmers and workers and the work,
unique in history, of our youth who bear my name”. (23)
304

Adolf & Eva loved each other, and died together. Hitler’s young secretary, Traudl
Junge, typed out the dictation for Hitler’s Final Testament. Junge lived until 2002,
describing Hitler as a loving father figure until the end.
Adolf and Eva
MAY 3, 1945
305

AMERICA’S PERSECUTION OF EZRA POUND
Just days after killing Mussolini, the American-controlled Partisans hunt down and capture
the famous American poet, Ezra Pound, and hand him over to the OSS (CIA) for
interrogation. Pound is an admirer of National Socialism, or "Fascism" as it is called in Italy.
While living in Italy during the war, Pound had condemned the unjust war and the Jewish
ﬁnanciers behind it. After his capture, he praises Adolf Hitler a "Saint". The great literary
genius and gentle peace lover is then sentenced him to an insane asylum for 12 years!
1- Condemned as a "traitor", Ezra Pound was once regarded as America's foremost
literary genius. 2- Pound as a free man in Venice, Italy (1964)
MAY 8, 1945
V–E DAY / VICTORY IN EUROPE PROCLAIMED AS GERMANY
SURRENDERS WITHOUT CONDITIONS
306

Upon hearing news that Germany has surrendered unconditionally, jubilant crowds
throughout Britain and the U.S. celebrate Victory in Europe Day. Admiral Karl Donitz,
named in Hitler’s ﬁnal testament as the new President of Germany, signs the surrender
agreement. He soberly remarks, “With this signature, the German people and armed
forces are for better or for worse, delivered into the victor’s hands.” (24)
But there is to be no mercy for the German people who had dared to defy the New World
Order, and, for a while, had actually defeated the Globalists! Germany’s real nightmares are
about to unfold as a vengeful Globalist-Communist Alliance-of-Evil imposes a collective
punishment upon Germany that will dwarf Versailles. Between 10 million and 15 million
Germans died during, and after World War II.
307

1- The Red Army raises the Communist flag over bombed-out Berlin 2- New Yorkers
celebrate V-E Day. If they only knew what they were celebrating! 3- A German boy
weeps in front of the ruins of his former home.
MAY 8, 1945
HOURS AFTER GERMAN SURRENDERS, SOVIETS PUBLISH
REPORT OF ‘GAS CHAMBERS’ USED TO KILL JEWS / NEW YORK
TIMES CARRIES THE CLAIM
The May 8 Zionist-Globalist New York Times, carries a story on p. 12 of the VE-Day edition,
an article by Zionist C.L. Sulzberger headlined: ‘Oswiecim (Auschwitz) Killings Placed at
4 Million; Soviet Commission Reports’.
The story tells of mass killing and “gassings” at the Auschwitz prison camp in Poland. The
timing of the report’s release –j u s t hours after of Germany’s surrender–makes it
impossible for the falsely accused Germans to refute Stalin’s claim. It is a little known
fact of history that the Auschwitz “gas chamber” story originated with a Soviet report
(authorized by the known liars and murderers Joe Stalin & Lazar Kaganovich) which is then
308

spread by the "prestigious" NY Times.
In 1988, and again in 1991, forensic tests on the remnants of the Auschwitz “gas
chamber” will come back negative for any traces of “gas” or “poison”. ( 25) Noted
American and European scholars who have since dared to explore the many inconsistencies
and contradictions of “The Holocaust” story have been subjected to harassment, career
destruction and (in Europe & Canada) imprisonment. The Holocaust is a story that the
Globalists & Zionists will NEVER allow to be debated..
Adolf Hitler nearly smashed the New World Order. It is for this reason that he must
forever be portrayed in the public mind as the most evil and wretched monster who
ever lived.
1- Page 12, May 8, '45 New York Times (above) carries SOVIET claim of "gas chambers"
and FOUR million dead at Auschwitz. 2- Fifty years later, due to awareness created by
honest researchers, the official Auschwitz death toll was reduced to ONE million
(which is still a lie!) 3- A 1979 document, issued by the International Tracing Service
which documents “Nazi Persecution”, shows that the International Red Cross, which
had access to the camps, believed the total dead from ALL the camps to be 271,000.
309

The original "gas chamber" lies in bombed out ruins. Forensic tests on the porous
stones proved negative for any trace of chemicals. The museum piece "gas chamber"
(right) is an admitted reconstruction shown to unquestioning suckers. It was built
under Stalin's rule after the war.
1- Jewish soccer league documentary 2- Auschwitz Soccer Field 3- Auschwitz inmate
Yakov Tzur describes a 1944 soccer game at Auschwitz!
310

THE FATE OF HITLER’S INNER CIRCLE
Goebbels – Himmler – Hess – Hitler
Ribbentrop & Goering
311

Bormann
Hermann Goering, Head of the Luftwaffe (German Air force):
Committed suicide in his cell (cyanide) just before the Allies could hang him (1946)
Josef Goebbels, Minister of Propaganda & Enlightenment:
Committed suicide by gunshot in Berlin; body later burned
Heinrich Himmler, Head of the Waffen SS:
Allegedly committed suicide by biting a hidden cyanide pill while in Allied captivity; but
according to noted British historian David Irving, Himmler was actually beaten to death by
British interrogators
Martin Bormann: Staff Chief
Believed to have been killed by Russian rocket fire while fleeing Berlin
Rudolf Hess: Deputy Fuhrer, flew peace mission to Scotland
Life in prison. Murdered by British agents in 1987 before release
Von Ribbentrop: Foreign Minister
312

Hanged at Nuremberg, 1946
Himmler – Goering – Hess
Goebbels – Ribbentrop
313

JUNE 26, 1945
THE FOUNDING CHARTER FOR THE UNITED NATIONS IS
SIGNED IN SAN FRANCISCO
At the founding San Francisco Conference that established the United Nations, the U.S.
oﬃcial serving as Secretary General is the Communist agent Alger Hiss. Hiss will later be
exposed as a Soviet spy in 1948. The U.N. replaces the League of Nations as the foundation of
The New World Order. All 51 nations signing the original charter agree to be bound by its
articles.
The all-out propaganda campaign surrounding the UN’s establishment is pervasive
and intense. It is argued that “isolationist” America’s refusal to join the League of Nations
after World War I was the tragic mistake that led to World War II. That mistake "must not
be repeated".
Within 30 days, the US Senate will approve the UN Treaty by a vote of 89-2! Even the
conservative legend, Senator Robert Taft (son of President William Howard Taft) votes in
favor of U.S. entry. The embryonic World Government will be headquartered in New York,
on 18 acres of prime real estate donated by the Rockefeller Family. Globalism has won World
War II!
314

Communist-Soviet spy Alger Hiss shaking hands with Truman at UN's founding
conference. Hiss was Chairman of the Conference.
AUGUST 6 & 10, 1945
HORROR IN JAPAN! / ATOMIC BOMBS DROPPED ON
HIROSHIMA & NAGASAKI
Like FDR before him, Harry Truman also has no regard for human life. By August ‘45, Japan
is trying hard, via “neutral” Soviet channels, to negotiate surrender, just not unconditionally
as Truman demands. Little do the Japanese know that the Soviets are already planning to
join the war in East Asia! Atomic bombs are then dropped on the women, elderly, and
children of Hiroshima (Aug 6) and Nagasaki (Aug 10).
Within the ﬁrst few months of the bombings, the eﬀects kill 100-150,000 people in
Hiroshima and 60–80,000 in Nagasaki. Half of the deaths occur on the ﬁrst day, mostly
from burns. Many more die of cancer later on.
315

1- An unnecessary war ended with the unnecessary atomic bombings of Japanese
civilians. 2- Bloody bastard Truman warns of a ‘Rain of Ruin’ if Japan doe not
surrender unconditionally.
More images of what is today known as “The Good War”. Abandonment,
homelessness, disfigurement! What was so ‘good’ about this?
316

AUGUST 9, 1945
SOVIET UNION DECLARES WAR UPON BEATEN JAPAN!
Just 3 days after the bombing of Hiroshima, and only hours before the 2nd bombing at
Nagasaki, the man whom Truman and the U.S. press aﬀectionately referred to as ‘Uncle Joe”
breaks the Soviet-Japanese Non Aggression Pact of 1941 and declares war upon an
already beaten Japan. Thanks Joe; we couldn’t have won it without you!
Stalin’s entry into the Asian theater, agreed to at the Yalta Conference, will enable him to
arm and materially assist Mao Tse Tung’s Communist takeover of China in 1949. Soviet
occupation of North Korea will also lead to the Korean divide which results in the North vs
South Korean War; and 50,000 more dead Americans.
Stalin stabbed Japan in the back and brought Communist power to Asia.
317

AUGUST 15, 1945
V- J DAY/ JAPAN SURRENDERS
Facing what Truman calls “a Rain of Ruin”, Japan, like Germany before her, has to make a
choice between unrestrained civilian genocide at American and now Soviet hands, or
unconditional surrender and occupation. Japan surrenders on August 15, ’45. (Victory in
Japan Day) It should be noted that General Macarthur felt that the atomic bombing was
unnecessary, Macarthur later states, "My staﬀ was unanimous in believing that Japan
was on the point of collapse and surrender." (26)
For the Globalists, the atomic bombings will later serve a strategic purpose. The threat of
“nuclear war” will, in the coming years, do much to frighten, and then consolidate, the
nations of the world into political, economic, and military alliances. The Global fear of “the
Bomb” will be very useful for The New World Order.
More fools celebrating! The iconic V-J Day kiss in Times Square, New York.
318

319

SECTION 7
1945 - 1950
THE HORRIBLE AFTERMATH OF WORLD WAR II
320

AUGUST, 1945
‘IKE’ PARTIES IN MOSCOW WITH ‘UNCLE JOE’ WHILE MILLIONS
ARE BEING RAPED AND MURDERED BY THE SOVIETS
"The striking aspect of the visit was the lavish reception the Russians gave the commander
of a foreign nation’s army. Georgi Zhukov, General Eisenhower’s Soviet counterpart in
Berlin, met us at Tempelhof Airport for the ﬂight to Moscow in Ike’s C-54 four-engine
aircraft. Zhukov, as the oﬃcial host, was the soul of hospitality and congeniality. By this time
the two commanders...had become friends, as close of friends as public life permits.
In Moscow the party ﬁrst attended a parade. Signiﬁcantly, my father was invited to undergo
a four-hour ordeal atop Vladimir Lenin’s tomb with Zhukov and Stalin. He was, I later
learned, the ﬁrst foreigner ever accorded that honor. One evening, the entire party was
entertained at dinner, with Stalin himself officiating." (1)
- John S. D. Eisenhower (son and aide of Ike)
1 & 2 - As German women are being raped on Stalin's orders, a smiling Eisenhower
parties with 'Uncle Joe' - atop Lenin's tomb!
321

3- Stalin’s favorite US General receives a medal and a warm smile from Red Army
Chief Zhukov. 4- Ike wasn't the only one who loved Zhukov. Time once ran a puff piece
on the bloody Red Army Chief.
FINAL DEATH COUNT OF WORLD WAR II AND AFTERMATH
TOTAL KILLED: 40,000,000 +
AMERICANS KILLED: 420,000 +
BRITISH KILLED: 400,000 +
GERMANS KILLED: 12 - 15,000,000 +
ITALIAN KILLED: 450,000 +
FRENCH KILLED: 500,000 +
JAPANESE KILLED: 3,000,000 +
RUSSIANS KILLED: 5,000,000 + during war; 7,000,000 + disappeared or killed afterwards
(The official Soviet figure of 20,000,000 total dead cannot be substantiated and does not
differentiate between war dead and Stalin’s victims)
U.S. POW's kidnapped by Stalin: *25,000 / 100’s executed (2)
*Liberated from German POW camps in the east, shipped to Siberian slave labor camps
(Gulags), and then abandoned by US Government.
322

1- The ‘Fighting Sullivans” - 5 Brothers of Iowa - all dead for NOTHING when the USS
Juneau was sunk in 1942. Survivors were eaten by sharks. 2 – As much as 20% of the
German population was wiped out.
AUGUST, 1945
EISENHOWER AND HOLLYWOOD PRODUCERS ISSUE A FAKE
HOLOCAUST ATROCITY FILM
American audiences are horriﬁed by newsreel footage of the ‘Nazi’ concentration camps.
One full-length ﬁlm, authorized by General Eisenhower, shows the homicidal “gas
chambers” of Dachau, shrunken heads of inmates, and lamp shades that were made from
human ﬂesh at the request of a camp commander’s wife. German civilians were rounded up
and forced to view these fake props. To add further credibility to such claims, the ﬁlm
includes images of the sworn affidavits of U.S. military officials.
323

As it turns out, and as even Jewish “scholars” of the “Holocaust” now openly admit, the
shrunken heads were fakes, the lamp shades were made of goat leather, and there were
never any homicidal “gassings” at the Dachau camp. (3) But by the time these were admitted
as hoaxes (40 years later) the damage to the German reputation had already been done.
1 & 2- The cruel Eisenhower rounded up German villagers and forced them to “see what
they had done”. 3- The shrunken heads hoax was the creation of Albert G. Rosenberg, a
Jewish officer serving in Eisenhower’s Psychological Warfare Unit. 4- Ilse Koch was
sentenced to life in prison, mainly for owning “human lamp shades” that were
actually made of goat leather! She committed suicide in 1967, just before a scheduled
visit from her son.
1945 – 1950
EUROPE BECOMES A ‘SAVAGE CONTINENT’
World War II in Europe may have officially ended in 1945, but the period of anarchy and
civil war that follows will last for 5 more years. Across Europe, landscapes are ravaged, entire
cities ruined, and millions of people are homeless. Institutions such as the police, the media,
transport, local and national government are either gone or badly weakened. Crime rates
soar; economies collapse; and hungry women and girls turn to prostitution as the European
324

population hovers on the brink of starvation.
Communists, liberals and Jews impose a cruel vengeance upon their helpless prey. German
civilians and their anti-Communist allies everywhere are rounded up, raped,
sodomized, drowned in cesspools, tortured, genitally mutilated, burned alive, and
executed.
Internment camps are reopened and ﬁlled with anti-Communists and Germans. After
being starved to death, photos of the prisoners are then passed oﬀ as victims of
Hitler's "Holocaust". Massacres and civil wars follow in Greece, Yugoslavia, Poland, and
parts of Italy and France. In the greatest acts of ethnic cleansing the world has ever seen,
tens of millions are expelled from their ancestral homelands as Allied occupiers look the
other way.
The 2012 book ’Savage Continent’, by Keith Lowe, describes the horror of the postwar
months and years in gruesome detail.
325

1944 – 1945
RED ARMY RAPES 2 MILLION GERMAN WOMEN!
As the Red Army rolls into Germany, Stalin’s Jewish chief propagandist, Ilya Ehrenberg,
encourages the soldiers to rape and kill German women. Ehrenberg’s leaflets declare:
“Kill! Kill! In the German race there is evil; not one
among the living, not one among the unborn is but evil!
Follow the precepts of Stalin. Stamp out the fascist beast
once and for all in its lair! Use force and break the racial
pride of the German women. Take them as your lawful
booty. Kill! As you storm onward, kill, you gallant
soldiers of the Red Army.” (4)
The orgy of violence and rape is one of the ghastliest episodes
in human history. Two million German females ranging
in age from 8-80 will be gang-raped, sodomized and
beaten badly, often in view of their children or family members. (5) Some are
penetrated with broken bottles and bayonets in wild orgies of drunken violence.
Even the terriﬁed women who ﬂee to churches and hospitals are hunted down and gang
raped. Nuns, little girls, and elderly women are infected with venereal diseases. There are
cases of breasts being cut oﬀ and victims set on ﬁre after being raped. The most notable
oﬀenders are the mainly Jewish NKVD rear guard troops and the Mongoloid troops from
the Asian Republics of the far eastern reaches of the USSR. Rather than submit to the horror,
thousands of German women commit suicide.
Eisenhower, Truman, and the Zionist Press are fully aware of the monstrous horror that the
man they all refer to as ‘Uncle Joe’ is inflicting upon these poor women.
326

UNCLE JOE’s HANDIWORK
Ignored by the sanctimonious hypocrites of ‘the world community”
German women were snatched from the streets and gang raped.
Many of these once happy and secure women and girls chose suicide instead.
327

“Berlin gave me the blues. We have destroyed what could have
been a good race, and we are about to replace them with
Mongolian savages. It’s said that for the first week after they
took Berlin, all women who ran were shot and those who did
not were raped. I could have taken it (instead of the
Soviets) had I been allowed.” (6)
- General George Patton
1945 – 46
‘IKE’ MURDERS 1.5 MILLION GERMAN PRISONERS OF WAR!
328

More than one year after the German surrender, General Eisenhower still holds millions of
German Prisoners-of-War. The men are inhumanely crowded into camps without latrines,
exposed to the elements and underfed. Germans dig holes for shelter and even take to
eating grass!
American guards who attempt to help the prisoners face disciplinary action. German
civilians try to bring food and blankets to the men but are shot at by guards. Unlike
Germany’s wartime internment camps which were open to international inspection,
Eisenhower issues an order stating that Red Cross oﬃcials are not to be given
access to the camps. (7) As disease, exposure, and hunger take their toll, the German
losses mount daily. By the end of their cruel incarceration, as many as 1.5 million German
prisoners will have died a slow and torturous death. (8)
‘Other Losses’ by James Bacque is very well-researched and supported by shocking
photos. Millions of exposed Germans were packed tightly in Ike's POST-WAR death
camps. Disease, exposure and hunger killed them slowly.
329

1945 – 50
STALIN MURDERS AS MANY AS 1 MILLION GERMAN PRISONERS
OF WAR!
Not to be outdone by Eisenhower, Stalin’s mistreatment of German POW’s (as well as his
own) is heartbreaking. Germans were often summarily executed, paraded like animals and,
up until the 1950’s and perhaps beyond, worked to death in Siberia.
German POWS’s were be taken to the Soviet Union and paraded through the streets.
Afterwards they were marched eastward toward the infamous Gulag camps. Many
died on the long march; many died in the slave camps; and a minority returned to
Germany years later. Estimates of POW’s killed or worked to death in captivity range
from 400,000 to 1,000,000. (9)
1945 – 1949
10 MILLION GERMANS EXPELLED FROM HOMES / 2 MILLION
330

DIE / MASSIVE BRAINWASH CAMPAIGN ENSUES
After the war, the area of Germany historically known as Prussia ceases to exist. It is mostly
transferred to Soviet occupied Poland and to the Soviet Union itself. Seven million
Germans are expelled from their homes and forced to migrate west. Still more
German territory is given to Soviet occupied Czechoslovakia, with 3 million more Germans
expelled.
The refugees are often attacked and raped by the Red Army as well as Jewish and
Communist gangs. Two million will die during the forced migrations, and about 500,000
more are interned in Soviet labor camps. Displaced Jews are given preference in seizing
and occupying the stolen homes of German refugees.
As part of a psychological re-programming eﬀort known as “De-Naziﬁcation”, the German
people are deliberately subjected to hunger, mental trauma, and homelessness. Starving
German women sell their bodies to American soldiers in exchange for a few cans of food.
To add ﬁnal insult to injury, the old debt payments originating from the post World War I
Treaty of Versailles will be reinstituted in 1948, and not paid off until 2010!
331

1- Ten million Germans were expelled from their homes. Many died on the long march
westward. 2- ‘Hellstorm’ by Thomas Goodrich tells the story of what was done to
“Nazi” Germans from 1944-1947. Warning: It is very hard to stomach!
Expelled from Prussia (7 million) / Expelled from Sudetenland (3 million)
332

DECEMBER 21, 1945
ANTI-RED, ANTI-ZIONIST GENERAL GEORGE PATTON IS
ASSASSINATED (‘Auto Accident’)
General Eisenhower needed General Patton in order to win the war. But the outspoken
Patton often bucked Ike, complaining openly about his halt orders (which stopped Patton
from liberating Eastern Europe before the Soviets could get there) and ignoring Ike’s orders
to continue holding German prisoners after the war.
Patton urges his superiors to allow his army to evict the weakened Soviets from Europe. In
letters to his wife, he expresses his disgust over the cruel extermination of the German
people, the Red Army rapes, and what he describes as Jewish Communist eﬀorts to advance
Soviet inﬂuence. (10) Patton’s “insubordination” causes Ike to remove him from command.
In one of those letters, Patton reveals that upon leaving the Army and resettling in America
he will openly fight against the treason.
He never gets the chance. Patton is hospitalized following a strange, low impact auto
accident near Mannheim, Germany. The American icon dies in the hospital two weeks later,
apparently the victim of an assassination order, issued by Ike or higher.
333

1 & 2 - Larger than Life" Patton received a hero's welcome in Los Angeles parade. His
persona posed a threat to the NWO. 3- Death by fender-bender
1945-1947
‘OPERATION KEELHAUL’ / IKE DELIVERS 5 MILLION RUSSIAN
POW’s, SS MEN & REFUGEES INTO STALIN’S ARMS
Stalin brands Russian POW’s captured by Germany, and Russian refugees who ﬂed west
with the retreating Germans, as traitors. At Yalta, FDR and Churchill had agreed tha
Russian “traitors” and SS men should be sent to Stalin in exchange for American & British
POW’s “liberated” by the Soviets. General Eisenhower eagerly carries out this atrocity; which
was mockingly code named: “Operation Keelhaul” (after an old naval punishment that
involved tying a rope around a sailor and then dragging him under the hull of a ship)!
334

Up to 3 million terriﬁed Russian POWs are forced at gunpoint onto trains and
trucks that bring them to their Soviet executioners. (11) Many commit suicide. U.S.
troops, upon returning from the drop-oﬀ points, later report seeing rows of bodies already
hanging from the trees.
In separate operations, anti-Communist refugee families, who actually followed their German
protectors as they retreated from Russia, are also shipped back to "Uncle Joe", and subjected
to special tortures, including rape of the women. As a ﬁnal insult from our “ally”, Stalin
holds on to 25,000 American POW’s and 30,000 British, sending them to his Siberian
Gulags, and even summarily executing some (12) Ike, Churchill, and Truman are aware
of the missing POW’s but say nothing!
1- Red Army Chief Zhukov to Ike: "Good job Comrade”. For delivering the nations of
Eastern Europe, and millions of terrified Russian refugees to their death, Ike earned a
Soviet Medal. 2- ‘The Betrayal of the Cossacks’
335

Operation Keelhaul by Julius Epstein is one of the most heart-breaking accounts that
you'll ever read. Terrified Russian POWs (declared to be traitors) and Waffen SS men
from many countries were shipped to the USSR to be murdered. Many commit suicide,
as had Stalin’s own POW son, Yakov, in 1943.
MARCH 5, 1946
CHURCHILL DECLARES THAT AN ‘IRON CURTAIN’ HAS FALLEN
OVER EUROPE
By 1946, it is clear that Stalin has no intention of allowing the occupied nations of Eastern
Europe to join the “European Family”. Nor is he interested in annexing the USSR to a
western-controlled New World Order. The Globalist love aﬀair with the Soviet Union ends
in disillusion. Thus was born “The Cold War”.
336

The now ex-Prime Minister of Great Britain, Winston Churchill, who helped engineer this
disaster, delivers his famous “Iron Curtain” speech in Fulton, Missouri:
“an iron curtain has descended across the Continent. Behind that line lie all the
capitals of the ancient states of Central and Eastern Europe. Warsaw, Berlin, Prague,
Vienna, Budapest, Belgrade, Bucharest and Soﬁa; all these famous cities and the
populations around them lie in what I must call the Soviet sphere.” (13)
Over the coming months and years, these nations, which had been given to Stalin at Yalta,
will fall, one-by-one, to Soviet backed Communist Parties in each nation. The usual Red
terror soon follows in each. General Patton had been right after all!
The drunken fool's "Iron Curtain" speech marks the start of the "Cold War" with the
USSR and the division of eastern and western Europe.
337

OCTOBER, 1946
NUREMBERG MILITARY TRIBUNALS SENTENCE GERMAN
LEADERS TO DEATH
During the 1943 Tehran Conference, Joe Stalin had proposed executing 50,000 German staﬀ
oﬃcers after the war. FDR joked that 49,000 would do! The murderous Allies were all in
agreement that "trials" of Germany’s top leaders would take place after the war.
When the show trials begin in 1945, an 8-panel tribunal (The Nuremberg Trials) is seated
(2 judges each from the US, UK, USSR, & France). The primary American judge is Francis
Biddle, of the Biddle Family that spawned the 19th century American Central Bank
Chairman, Nicholas Biddle.
Honorable German leaders are condemned as “war criminals” by governments that carried
out the Hamburg, Dresden and Tokyo ﬁre-bombings, the sinkings of the Wilhelm Gustloﬀ
& the Goya, the forced return of Russian refugees & POWs, the starvation murders of 1.5
million German POWs, the murders at Katyn Forest, the mass raping of German women
and the dropping of atom bombs! Several hundred prominent American and European
political ﬁgures, writers, artists and military men, including a young John F.
Kennedy, condemn the trials. (14)
Of the accused, 11 will hang, and 7 (including the peacemaking parachutist Rudolf Hess) will
receive long, or life prison terms. Herman Goering, Head of the Luftwaﬀe (German Air
Force) cheats his executioners by taking poison in his jail cell. It is likely that a sympathetic
American guard helped Goering by smuggling the poison into his cell.
But simple murder wasn’t enough. The Allied executioners used a “short drop” instead of a
neck-breaking “long drop”. The victims thus died a longer death due to strangulation.
Additionally, the trapdoor was too small, such that several of the men suﬀered bleeding
head injuries when they hit the sides of the trapdoor while falling. (15) Adding ﬁnal insult to
338

injury, the bodies were cremated and scattered over a river, denying the families the right of
burial.
1- Goering, Hess, and Ribbentrop: German political and military leaders were
subjected to a ridiculous show trial. 2 & 3- Foreign Minister Ribbentrop is hanged
1946-1948
ZIONIST TERROR SPREADS IN PALESTINE AS THE NEW ‘STATE
OF ISRAEL’ COMES INTO BEING
With Britain tired, weakened and in debt from the war, the opportunistic Zionists escalate
their attacks against the British protectors of Palestine. It was the Brits who had stolen
Palestine for the Zionists’ sake after World War I, but now Britain is to be betrayed and
chased out of Palestine. The deadly bombing of the King David Hotel (1946) in Jerusalem
targets the offices of the British Military, killing 91 people.
339

In 1948, after the three Allied powers of the War have recognized the new State of Israel, the
massacre at Deir Yassin targets innocent Palestinian villagers, scaring them to ﬂee from their
villages. The Irgun terror gang, headed by future Israeli Prime Minister & Nobel Peace
Prize winner Menachem Begin, is responsible for both.
Due to sympathy gained from the fictitious “6 million” dead of World War II, Israel’s
brutal dispossession and displacement of the Palestinians is tolerated.
1- King David Bombing: Irgun terrorized the British protectors of Palestine as well as
the local Arabs. 2- Massacre at Deir Yassin, carried out by Jewish partisans newly
arrived from Europe.
JUNE, 1947
GLOBALIST ‘MARSHALL PLAN’ IS PROPOSED
340

The Marshall Plan is a massive US Foreign Aid scheme for post-war Western Europe. The
Globalists use every propaganda trick in the book to cleverly sell the expensive scheme to the
anti-Communist US Senate, and to a gullible American public.
The Marshall Scam is hard-sold as an "economic recovery program" needed to prevent
nations from “falling to Communism”. The scheme is named after, and announced by,
recently named Secretary of State, General George Marshall - the “war hero.”
The "poison pill" of the Marshall Scam is the sub-group that it creates in order to administer
the aid package: The Organization for European Economic Co-operation.
The OEEC consists of 18 nations. It is the “embryo” of the coming European Common
Market as well as today’s socialist, single currency European Union.
1- The only way to sell the Globalist Marshall Scam was to use reverse psychology and
present it as an "anti-Communist" plan that Stalin opposed. 2- Many years before the
EU was finalized, Marshall Plan propaganda posters were already selling the idea of
341

a United Europe.
1945 - PRESENT
THE 70 YEAR OCCUPATION & BRAINWASHING OF GERMANY
From the days of the post war “de-Naziﬁcation” of Germany, throughout the 45 year
Communist rule over East Germany, as well as the 70 U.S. domination of a united Germany
that continues to this day, perhaps the greatest crime of all is the psychological rape of three
subsequent generations of Germans.
From an early age, German school children are taught to hate the great accomplishments of
previous generations and wallow in self-loathing. Most pathetic Germans today fervently
believe all the lies told about “Nazi” Germany as they continue to hunt down and imprison
“holocaust deniers” and innocent 90-year old SS men for “war crimes”.
Those Germans who are not full of self-loathing are too afraid to speak up, lest the
occupation governments of Germany or Austria throw them in jail. Many Germans today
actually enjoy self-ﬂagellation! It’s like a woman who has been raped and battered to near
death, blaming herself and apologetically groveling before the perpetrator.
342

PATHETIC! 1: German Chancellor Angela Merkel grovels before Israeli Minister
Shimon Peres. 2: German National soccer team is forced to visit the Soviet-built
fantasy land at Auschwitz and pay respects to victims of the fictitious "gas chambers".
But they can't commemorate their own dead, mutilated, displaced, and raped of
Germany!
In the inscription of this emotionally powerful memorial to the 40,000 victims of the
Hamburg firebombing, brainwashed Germans actually blame themselves!
343

Inscription reads: "On the night of the 29th of July 1943, 370 persons perished in the air-
raid shelter in a bombing raid. Remember these dead. Never again fascism. Never
again war".
WHY HAVE COUNTRIES BANNED “HOLOCAUST DENIAL”?
Truth is its own defense. It does not require laws to protect it. Only lies do. The fact that so
many countries now ban the practice of “Holocaust Denial”, is alone evidence that
something isn’t right about the “official story”.
LEARNED SCHOLARS NAMED AS THOUGHT CRIMINALS
1- Professor Robert Faurisson (France): Beaten by Jewish terrorists and arrested
2- Author David Irving (UK): Arrested in Austria
3-Author Ernst Zundel (Canada): Deported to Germany and arrested
344

Innocent SS men in their 90’s are still being hunted, arrested and deported to
Germany or Israel to face trial over imaginary crimes. Above: John Demjanjuk and
Johann Breyer, both deported from America and died in captivity!
“After 1945 Hitler was accused of every cruelty, but it was not
in his nature to be cruel. He loved children. It was an entirely
natural thing for him to stop his car and share his food with
young cyclists along the road. Once he gave his raincoat to a
derelict plodding in the rain. At midnight he would interrupt
his work and prepare the food for his dog Blondi.
He could not bear to eat meat, because it meant the death of
a living creature. He refused to have so much as a rabbit or a
trout sacriﬁced to provide his food. He would allow only eggs
on his table, because egg-laying meant that the hen had been
spared rather than killed.” (16)
Waffen SS General Leon Degrelle (Belgium)
345

1960
WINNER’S HISTORY!
THE ‘RISE AND FALL OF THE THIRD REICH’ IS PUBLISHED
After having received what he calls a “generous grant” from the New York-based Council on
Foreign Relations (CFR), American newspaper hack and former CBS mouthpiece William
Shirer publishes his “definitive” and “comprehensive” history of World War II, The Rise and
Fall of the Third Reich. In the book’s opening acknowledgement, Shirer thanks “the
Council” - whose Globalist members were the very ones that engineered the war in the ﬁrst
place!
Shirer’s Rise and Fall is heavy on the empty verbiage and page-count (1,245!), but extremely
light on essential facts. Weaving truths with half truths and outright lies, while sprinkling in
a few seemingly objective, even pro-German nuggets of truth; Shirer skillfully paints a
deceptive facade; one which any reader of The Bad War should now be able to easily crack
open.
The Jewish publishing giant Simon & Schuster publishes the book, and the Jewish press
hypes it to the stars. Shirer becomes wealthy beyond his wildest dreams. His putrid package
of propaganda remains, to this day, the “go to” book for those who think they know
anything about World War II. What a joke!
346

Shirer’s multi-million best-seller began with a “generous grant” from the CFR, a New
York City “think tank” which still selects U.S. Presidents and is currently agitating for
confrontation with independent-minded Russia and China.
347

CLOSING STATEMENT
World War II, or ‘The Good War’ as modern day court-historian refer to it - is the gift that
keeps on giving - giving us problems that is! This tragedy, and its aftermath, haunt humanity
to this day, and will continue to well into the foreseeable future.
Out of the aftermath of World War II comes the Cold War, the Korean War, the Viet Nam
War, the wars and ongoing problems in the Middle East, the ﬁnancial schemes and distress
caused by the IMF and the World Bank, the framework of the tyrannical and corrupt
European Union, and so many other problems of the modern day.
The Bad War was a complete disaster for the forces of civilization, stability, virtue, culture,
and independent nationalism of blood-related kinfolk. ..But it was a total triumph for the
overlapping dark forces of Globalism, debt-based “Crony Capitalism’, World Communism,
misguided liberalism and Zionism.
Behold what the victorious “good guys” have wrought in the days since that tragic war.
Europe, and by extension America, Canada and Australia, no longer exist as peoples with
common history, heritage or values. The Globalists have reduced the beloved “Europa” of
Hitler into a rootless, cultureless, godless, genderless, alienated, infertile, pornographic,
multi-cultural, homosexual mish-mash of mentally medicated tax and debt slaves.
The true European essence that was once rooted in places like ancient Athens, Rome
Florence, Paris, London, Madrid, Dresden; and grand historical personages such as Plato
Aristotle, Pericles, Jesus, Marcus Aurelius, Charlemagne, Mozart, Kant, Dante, Shakespeare
Jeﬀerson; and vital institutions such as family, farm, folk, community, church and civic
groups, is, if not totally “gone with the wind”, certainly in the process of coming oﬀ its
moorings.
348

Waddesdon Manor in England is just one of the many Rothschild
estates throughout Europe.
Inset: Awestruck groupies Warren Buffet and Arnold
Swarzenagger visit Lord Jacob Rothschild (right) at his
Waddesdon Palace.
Conchita Wurst: Austrian "transsexual" wins
European Song Contest in 2014
Collectively, the people of the West are no longer really even ‘peoples’ deﬁned by common
cultures, traditions, bloodlines
and sets of eternal values. We are
economies deﬁned solely by the
Gross Domestic Product.
As individuals, we are no longer
persons deﬁned by our virtues
and intellects. We are soulless
machines 
– 
disposable, 
pill-
popping, 
TV-addicted “human
resources” 
and 
“tax 
payers”
deﬁned solely by our “net worth”
and ability to “consume” - a
euphemism for going into debt to
buy crap that we don’t need.
In a broader philosophical sense,
that’s what World War II was all about. It
was a titanic struggle between the forces of
classical Europa (as well as historic Japan)
and those of the culturally degenerate and
predatory 
Capitalist-Communist 
hybrid
New World Order in which we live in, no,
exist in today. And the true “good guys”
lost!
There is nothing that can be done to undo
the evil folly of the past; but by correcting
the misinformation associated with it, we
can, 
perhaps, 
at 
least 
avoid 
more
bloodbaths in the future. 
Make no
mistake; this dirty game is still going on and may one day culminate in World War III
349

pitting the NWO against the “disobedient” sovereign powers of the new Russia and China
Only the players change; the great game does not.
- End
* Related Reading from M.S. King:
The War Against Putin: What the
Government-Media Complex Isn’t
Telling You About the New Russia
Available at Amazon.com and Kindle
350

FOOTNOTES
SECTION 1 / INTERNET SEARCH TERMS
1- karl marx hannah Rothschild
2- bismarck jews citizenship
3- cyrus convention
4- congress of berlin
5- disraeli destroy three emperors league / Disraeli hatred of Russia
6- franco russian alliance Tolstoy people sudden love
7- Tolstoy franco russian alliance cannot now present itself
8- bismarck’s final warning to Kaiser
9- ibid
10- von longerke jews furnished the brains
11- baruch wilson in tow leading him like one would poodle on string
12- james Warburg united world federalists
SECTION 2 / INTERNET SEARCH TERMS
1- archduke dont die darling live for children
2- willy-nicky telegrams
3- manifesto of the 93
4- edward mandell house flame of indignation sweep the United States
5- secrets of Lusitania arms find challenges allied claims
6- german Embassy publishes warning in newspapers
7- winston churchill juno lusitania
8- benjamin freedman speaks, balfour declaration
9- trotsky financed by Schiff wall street
10- bernays conscious and intelligent manipulation of the habits and opinions
11- balfour declaration
12- Schiff distribution of revolutionary propaganda among Russians prisoners-of-war
13- david r francis the Bolshevik leaders here are returned exiles
14- wilson speech analyzing german peace utterances
15- german factory strikes 1918
16- jewish legion world war 1
17- balfour british drop yiddish leaflets germany
18- comintern overthrow of the international "bourgeoisie"
19- red terror atrocities
20- treaty Versailles
21- german hunger blockade after world war 1
351

SECTION 3 / INTERNET SEARCH TERMS
1- Churchill Zionism vs bolshevism
2- mussolini fraud comedy blackmail
3- wiemar jew confetti
4- solzhenitsyn bolshevism committed greatest human slaughter
5- lloyd george imperiousness of absolute Monarchs
6- Sarnoff communications psychological warfare
7- william paley psychological warfare
8- stalin one death tragedy million statistic
9- greenspan fed caused great depression
10- degrell enigma hitler
SECTION 4 / INTERNET SEARCH TERMS
1- Judea declares war on germany
2- hitler lies slander hair raising perversity
3- Eugene myer fires quaker editor
4- potocki propaganda here entirely in Jewish hands
5- churchill strand magazine truth about hitler 1935
6- ibid
7- hitler tackled unemployment revived germany economy
8- Lloyd George I talked to hitler
9- new york times Americans appeal for jewish refuge
10- jesse owens hitler waved at me
11- jesse owens hitler didn’t snub me
12- hitler Edward abdication was a severe loss for us
13- anti comintern pact
14- rape nanking fake photos
15- 99% support anschluss
16- beaverbrook 20,000 german jews in england
17- beaverbrook I am shaken jews drive us into war
18- 1938 polish ultimatum to Lithuania
19- hg wells countless people hate new world order
20- roosevelt's campaign to incite war in Europe polish documents
21- new york times may 11 1939 arthur willet demand for soviet pact rises
22- ibid
23- einstein plagiarist italian de pretto
24- einstein at the end of the war they will largely kill each other off
SECTION 5 / INTERNET SEARCH TERMS
352

1- forrestal diaries america world jews forced england
2- 1939 hitler note paris communiqué
3- german men and women were hunted like wild beasts
4- As told to the author in private correspondence
5- wellington fault of anti-appeasers and the fucking Jews
6- hitler speech danzig 1939
7- ibid
8- hitler reichstag speech October 6, 1939
9- ibid
10- operation wilfred and plan R 4
11- oprop leaflets Denmark
12- operation fork Iceland invasion
13- baruch I emphasized the defeat of germany and japan
14- allied intrigue in low countries
15- ekeberg hitler sweden peace
16- Halifax war cabinet crisis bastianini
17- hitler halt order Dunkirk
18- blumentritt he astonished us by speaking with admiration
19- churchill absolutely devastating exterminating attack
20- hitler leaflets last appeal to reason
21- greenwood new world order promised to jews
22- ibid
23- say again and again and again your boys will not be sent into any foreign wars
24- allen nature of the concessions that German Fuhrer was prepared to make
25- kaufmann germany must perish
26- Goebbels thanks to the jew Kaufmann
27- Yugoslavia coup 1941 british
28- rudolf hess murdered
29- catalina bismarck sinking
30- hitler plans of men in the Kremlin were aimed at the domination
31- lend lease to soviets
32- stalin orders partisan warfare
33- german soldiers 10 commandements
34- red cross Auschwitz
35- hitler jewish soldiers
36- dr. eduard bloch on hitler
37- Lindbergh iowa speech America first
38- joe kennedy anti Semitism
39- stimson into the position of firing the first shot
SECTION 6 / INTERNET SEARCH TERMS
1- day of deceit robert stinnet / infamy john toland
353

2- relief that crisis had come stimson
3- text of war declaration by Hirohito
4- hitler December 11 1941 reichstag speech
5- venona intercepts oppenheimer
6- patton bailed out Eisenhower north Africa
7- churchill bengal famine
8- kunstschutz art protection world war 2
9- patton chief difficulty is not germans, but gasoline
10- french civilians killed by allies bonbs
11- rape during liberation of france
12- harry dexter white soviet communist spy
13- Keynes homosexual pedofile
14- typhus world war 1
15- germans deloused inmates typhus
16- lestchinsky expelled latvia
17- red cross german camps estimated 270,000 dead
18- terms of yalta agreement
19- dresden firebombing david irving
20- ibid
21- men thank God on their knees a hundred years from now that Franklin Roosevelt
22- april 1945 eisenhower elbe halt order
23- hitler suicide final political testament
24- Donitz With this signature, the German people
25- forensic tests at Auschwitz / leuchter report: critical edition / Germar Rudolf Report
26- macarthur my staff was unanimous japan collapse surrender
SECTION 7 / INTERNET SEARCH TERMS
1- john s d eisenhower lavish reception Russians gave commander of foreign army
2- soviet held us pows executed by stalin
3- no gassings at dachau / you tube realist report ‘I swear’
4- ehrenberg kill german race
5- world war 2 rape of german women
6- patton berlin gave me the blues
7- other losses Eisenhower death camps
8- ibid
9- german prisoners of war in soviet union
10- patton letter to wife
11- operation keelhaul
12- american pows in soviet union
13- churchill iron curtain speech
14- nuremberg strangulation short drop
14- doentitz at Nuremberg a re-appraisal
354

15- nuremberg strangulation short drop
16- degrelle enigma of hitler
355

