
The Science of ­Sci-Fi Cinema


The Science  
of ­Sci-Fi Cinema
Essays on the Art  
and Principles of Ten Films
Edited by  
Vincent Piturro
McFarland & Company, Inc., Publishers
Jefferson, North Carolina

Library of Congress Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
Names: Piturro, Vincent, 1969– editor. 
Title: The science of sci-fi cinema : essays on the art  
and principles of ten films / edited by Vincent Piturro. 
Description: Jefferson : McFarland & Company, Inc., Publishers, 2021 |  
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
Identifiers: LCCN 2021024157 | ISBN 9781476683300 (paperback : acid free paper) ♾ 
ISBN  9781476641232 (ebook)  
Subjects: LCSH: Science fiction films—History and criticism. |  
Science in motion pictures. | BISAC: PERFORMING ARTS /  
Film / Genres / Science Fiction & Fantasy | SCIENCE /  
Essays | LCGFT: Science fiction films. 
Classification: LCC PN1995.9.S26 S635 2021 | DDC 791.43/615—dc23 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021024157
British Library cataloguing data are available
ISBN (print) 978-1-4766-8330-0
ISBN (ebook) 978-1-4766-4123-2
© 2021 Vincent Piturro. All rights reserved
No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form  
or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying  
or recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system,  
without permission in writing from the publisher.
Front cover image © 2020 Shutterstock
Printed in the United States of America
McFarland & Company, Inc., Publishers
Box 611, Jefferson, North Carolina 28640
www.mcfarlandpub.com

To the memory of Brit Withey
(1968–2019)


vii
 Table of Contents
Introduction
Vincent Piturro
1
Chapter 1: Arrival
11
The Science of Communicating with Aliens
Ka Chun Yu
16
Arrival from a Linguist’s Perspective
Andrew J. Pantos
23
Chapter 2: Interstellar
31
How Easy Is Interstellar Colonization?
Ka Chun Yu
39
Chapter 3: 2001: A Space Odyssey
49
Catching HAL
Ka Chun Yu
59
Chapter 4: Children of Men
73
Infertility and the Near-Future
Nicole L. Garneau
80
Chapter 5: Perfect Sense
84
All They Need to Know: Connectedness
Nicole L. Garneau
90
Chapter 6: Upstream Color
97
Parasites and Defying Explanation
Nicole L. Garneau
103

viii    Table of Contents
Chapter 7: Contact
110
The Sounds of Contact
Naomi Pequette
117
Chapter 8: Jurassic Park
123
Jurassic Park and the Dinosaur Renaissance
Joseph Sertich
131
Monstrous Life Finds a Way: Jurassic Park and Monstrosity
Charles Hoge
137
Chapter 9: King Kong
145
Gigantic Animals
Jeffrey T. Stephenson
152
Falling Off the Phallus of Civilization: On Max Steiner’s  
Soundtrack to King Kong
Roger K. Green
159
Chapter 10: The Martian
167
The Martian: Fact, Fiction or Fantasy? An Interview  
with Steven Lee
Ka Chun Yu
174
About the Contributors
187
Bibliography
189
Index
190

1
Introduction
Vincent Piturro
Science fiction has always inspired awe, wonder, surprise, as well as 
fear and anxiety. It is one of the great genres in the history of cinema, from 
the very beginning of the nascent art form to the current day of miracu-
lous, ­CGI-heavy visual treats. It has the ability to take us to faraway galaxies 
or to stay very close to home; it has the ability to curate great curiosity and 
great trepidation; it has the ability for potential and for limitation; it has the 
ability to comment on our current society no matter the setting; and it has 
always wonderfully wedded technical prowess with great storytelling. It is a 
wonderful marriage of art and science.
But how much actual science is really in those science fiction films 
most of us know and love? The answers are as varied as the films them-
selves: none, a lot, and some. Each film and each filmmaker has a differ-
ent project and rhetorical objective—some focus solely on story and move 
heaven and Earth to get there no matter the science; some hew close to sci-
ence and refuse to go outside those lines; still others tread the line between 
art and science, guiding the narrative toward a happy medium. How each 
film fulfills its objective is their own choice, and every film has its singular 
goal. The fun is in how the film gets to that goal, how it organizes itself, how 
it sees the contemporaneous society as well as the future, and finally how 
we, as viewers, receive all of that information.
This collection analyzes ten films, one per chapter. I write the first part 
of each chapter—analyzing the film in the detail—and a scientist writes 
the second part of the chapter discussing the science in the film. A few of 
the chapters have a third, bonus section. This book project is the progeny 
of an annual Science Fiction Film Series in Denver, Colorado, started in 
2010 with my late friend and colleague Brit Withey (Artistic Director for 
the Denver Film Society). Our initial goal was simple: to share the conflu-
ence of art and science with the community. We were both fans of science 
fiction cinema, and we thought filmgoers and museumgoers alike would be 

2    Introduction
interested in/enriched by such a unique endeavor. We brought the idea to 
the Denver Museum of Nature and Science, and they signed on. The format 
was to present a series of films and pair each film with a scientist in their 
area of specialty: an astrophysicist for space films; a geneticist for films on 
genetic engineering; a paleontologist for films on ­re-engineered dinosaurs; 
a zoologist for films with animals; and so on. For that first year, we were 
worried about finding enough films to fit the bill and to which we could 
match scientists. Ten years later, the series is still going strong and the pos-
sibilities seem endless. After many years in front of interesting and enthusi-
astic crowds, we finally decided to put our ideas down in print.
First, in great Aristotelian fashion, we will define our terms, both in 
terms of science fiction and in terms of film analysis. The first and most ele-
mental questions we will address are definitional: “What is science fiction?” 
and “What does the genre entail and what does it not?” Of course, these are 
not easy questions, and the only easy answer is that there are many answers. 
Science fiction may be akin to what Forrest Gump famously mused about a 
certain state of being: science fiction is as science fiction does. And we can 
drill down from there. One definition I always find useful is that ­sci-fi takes 
what is in the laboratories today and extrapolates out to what is not only 
probable, but what also might be possible. Another definition I find use-
ful is the difference between ­sci-fi and horror, as posited by Film Professor 
and Historian Dr. Bruce Kawin: “When faced with a door to the unknown, 
horror closes it and runs, whereas science fiction opens it and explores.” In 
addition, one of the defining characteristics for me is that science fiction 
should always have a basis/foundation in Earth. There should be implica-
tions for our own planet, in whatever state the planet may be in the film’s 
setting. So following that definition, Star Trek fits into science fiction for me 
where Star Wars does not (I find it more science fantasy). And finally, the 
best definition of science fiction may be the term itself: a mix of science and 
fiction. No matter how you see it, however, part of the fun of defining the 
term is the journey itself. That road to defining the term may be more inter-
esting than the end point—if there is one. Still, there are several things we 
can glean from the history of the genre itself.
One specific, defining characteristic of science fiction certainly has 
been its indelible comment on the contemporaneous society. From the very 
beginning, science fiction cinema always had something to say. It many 
respects, it is the Western genre in reverse: whereas Westerns said some-
thing about the contemporaneous society while setting them in the past, 
science fiction does the same but the setting is now the future. Both genres 
have been bedrocks on which cinema was built, and they have stood the 
test of time. Westerns may have dominated Hollywood in its early days, but 
science fiction has become increasingly popular and enduring as Westerns 

Introduction (Piturro)    3
have fallen out of favor. And the history and influence of science fiction, 
just like the Western, goes all the way back to the initial days of the medium 
itself.
Science fiction was a part of cinema from its earliest days: magi-
cian and early film genius George Méliès’ A Trip to the Moon was released 
in 1902 and it would become a landmark film in many ways, including 
groundbreaking special effects that Méliès was inventing right there on the 
spot. Since much of early film took from literature (and the stage), Jules 
Verne and H.G. Wells were big influences on Méliès. There were also early 
silent adaptations of other classics, such as 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea, 
Frankenstein, and Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde. Science fiction film took from 
science fiction literature, and that partnership remains strong today; of the 
ten films in this volume, five are directly taken from either a story or novel.
The early masters of cinema were all influenced by science fiction, or 
science, as well. Even though they didn’t work specifically in ­sci-fi, Char-
lie Chaplin and Buster Keaton would oftentimes portray men as machines 
(to make a comic point or a symbolic point) and commented on the ram-
ifications of the machine age in the late teens, ’20s, and ’30s. These ideas 
were shared with the era’s ­sci-fi. Chaplin was also very much influenced by 
the first great science fiction masterpiece, Metropolis (1927), incorporating 
some of the ideas, tropes, and symbolic visuals into his brilliant film Mod-
ern Times (1936). Both Chaplin and Keaton were also very interested in film 
technology as a whole and advanced the medium of film with their own 
technological innovations. Keaton, especially, was a master at using two (or 
more) different shots in the same frame, achieved by covering the lens in 
one area, filming that area, rewinding the film, covering the lens in the area 
already filmed, and then filming in the empty space. The result: two differ-
ent shots in the same frame. Such innovation would shape all of film, but 
­sci-fi in particular.
Science fiction in all forms would continue to capture the popular psy-
che well into the new century. The pulp magazine serials and comic books 
of the ’20s and ’30s were very popular among mass audiences, and they 
were very much “soft ­sci-fi”: simple narratives, fantastic stories, and less 
concerned with science than with story, mostly of the “fantastic narra-
tive” type. Those pulps and comic books easily translated into early cin-
ema: the stories of amazing gadgets, wild machines, and heroic scientists 
(not to mention space travelers) showed up in the serial films of Buck Rog-
ers and Flash Gordon. Both became very popular and made science fiction 
a very popular genre of early cinema. Along with the Western, science fic-
tion became a bedrock of the “pitchas” and drew big audiences—propelling 
the new art form.
It is also instructive to look at ­sci-fi in terms of decades and how ­sci-fi 

4    Introduction
would come to represent and reflect each decade. The ­sci-fi of the ’20s and 
’30s was primarily concerned with dystopias, Utopias, the machine age, 
and fascist societies. The world experienced the rise of the ­super-cities in 
the ­post-industrial age and then moved into the machine age—mechani-
zation, ­Ford-ization, and the rise of machines taking the place of people 
(and conversely, people turned into machines in such places as assembly 
lines). The world of the ’20s also featured a great debate between capitalism 
and communism (remaining a staple of the genre’s thematic focus begin-
ning with Metropolis and continuing—in other forms—to the present) that 
would eventually lead to regime changes, dictatorships, and finally, World 
War II and beyond. The world was a dynamic place during this point in our 
history, and many felt that the future was uncertain. ­Sci-fi was the perfect 
venue for examining all of these issues.
­Post–World War II ­sci-fi changed as much as the world around it 
did. As J.P. Telotte notes in Science Fiction Film, there were several factors 
involved: ­sci-fi literature became more widespread, partly as a result of the 
genre’s move into mainstream literature—the popularity of writers Ray 
Bradbury (The Martian Chronicles) and Isaac Asimov (I, Robot) exploded, 
and ­sci-fi became more respectable and less of a niche market. The post-
war population also became an increasingly literate audience, with the GI 
Bill sending eager veterans to school, a newly prosperous economy giv-
ing everyone more leisure time, and an increasingly chaotic world leading  
people to seek out diversions. ­Sci-fi also experienced an expanded breadth 
of subject matter and the depth of treatment of such subject matter, as evi-
denced in the writings of Bradbury, Asimov, and others.
Political and literary consciousness was infused into the ­sci-fi litera-
ture for the first time as well. The ’50s and ’60s ­sci-fi literature evolved to 
include subjects that were on the minds of everyone after such traumatic 
decades: explorations of identity, failures, limits, ends, and the possible 
finality of our world. The war and the resulting unprecedented devastation, 
along with the unimaginable death toll around the world, took its toll on all 
aspects of society and manifested itself in all aspects of art. Science fiction 
film also saw a new focus on monsters and aliens, and even more fantastic 
narratives as we started to look to the skies more and more. Many of these 
representations were a function of UFO sightings of the late ’40s (Roswell 
in 1948), environmental effects of the war (Godzilla [1954] and the Holly-
wood ­B-movies), and the threat of nuclear satellites circling the Earth. The 
fear and anxiety of that society were reflected in the science fiction films of 
the time, including The Day the Earth Stood Still (1951) and Invasion of the 
Body Snatchers (1956). Such films were also the beginnings of “adult ­sci-fi,” 
with increasingly complex allegorical content.
Tracking along with the thematic aspects was an increase in film 

Introduction (Piturro)    5
technology and special effects. The movies were exploding in the ’40s and 
early ’50s and studios were flush. Movie attendance was high, the business 
had figured out the inclusion of sound, and production exploded. In the 
world of ­sci-fi, cinema began to take on space exploration, and eventually, 
the challenge of President Kennedy in 1962 to put a man on the moon not 
only challenged NASA and scientists in general but inspired Hollywood 
as well. Even though the industry would soon struggle in the late ’50s and 
’60s, space became a new frontier, and not just on film but TV as well. Star 
Trek debuted in 1966 and that original series lasted for three years, becom-
ing a staple of TV and movies ever since. International science fiction also 
blossomed at this time; making the great ­sci-fi film became something of a 
holy grail for European art directors: ­Jean-Luc Godard tried his hand with 
Alphaville in 1965, François Truffaut made Fahrenheit 451 in 1966, and the 
great Italian director Federico Fellini was always interested in making a sci-
ence fiction film. He never did—more on that later.
The ’70s was also a particularly verdant period for ­sci-fi, and in par-
ticular, political and ideological ­sci-fi found its way into the mainstream: 
environmental issues (Planet of the Apes, Soylent Green, Logan’s Run), fem-
inist films (The Stepford Wives), developing AI (Westworld, Futureworld), 
and even crazy science fantasy/fantasy films such as Barbarella and Zardoz 
brought audiences back to the theaters as the movies made a comeback. 
Writers and directors had more freedom in this period as the Hays Code 
was abolished and the studio system was in shambles.
The latter part of the ’70s and into the ’80s would see the end of that 
independent era and the return of the big studios, including the advent of 
the summer blockbuster. Films such as Jaws (1975) and Star Wars (1977) 
would usher in this era, and ­big-budget ­sci-fi would return (especially on 
the heels of the Star Wars ­box-office success). This wonderful period in the 
history of cinema would come to an end, but new films and new technology 
would soon make ­sci-fi increasingly mainstream and even more popular.
The late ’70s and ’80s saw a turn from the overtly political films of the 
’60s and early ’70s; this dynamic was another direct result of the studios 
­re-taking control of the industry. The era would also see the rise of the ­sci-fi 
epics and mainstream films—E.T. (1982) and Close Encounters of the Third 
Kind (1977), for example. The other important development at this point 
was the continuing advancement in technology. The Star Wars films would 
move the bar for special effects, and then Jurassic Park in 1993 would mark 
a sea change in the industry with the advent of CGI and the waning days of 
the “puppets” and mechanical special effects of the ’70s and ’80s. Soon, CGI 
would dominate the industry and the ­sci-fi genre in particular.
On the thematic side, as the Cold War–era waned, the opposi-
tional structure of capitalism vs. communism would morph into a 

6    Introduction
singular indictment of ­hyper-capitalism and corporatism. We also see a 
move toward the postmodern during this period as well, with the impact of 
machine intelligence, AI, and robotic automation. The Terminator (1984), 
and Robocop (1987) would be iconic ­sci-fi of the ’80s and push the spe-
cial effects and thematic aspects along. In the ’90s, we see the big jump in 
CGI with Jurassic Park and then films such as Dark City (1998) and The 
Thirteenth Floor (1999) dealing with the subject of alternative realities. All 
of these thematic and cinematic changes would lead up to The Matrix in 
1999. That groundbreaking film—in both special effects and in its vision 
of the future—would take everything simmering in ­sci-fi up to that point 
and turn it up to a full boil. While The Matrix would certainly change the 
direction of the genre, the events of 9/11 caused a sea change. The predomi-
nant opposition of ­sci-fi for several decades had been humans vs. machines 
(ever since 2001: A Space Odyssey in 1968), but the post–9/11 films would 
reconstruct the thematic focus: films would no longer be set in a faraway 
future that kept us at a safe distance from all of the issues therein (Alien or 
The Matrix). The films would become closer, “­Near-Sci-fi” as a I call it, and 
the issues would be more urgent. The central problem also became simpler: 
us. We no longer needed an “Other” when the Other was us. The cinematic 
focus moved from CGI, ­video-game-like films to a more realistic aesthetic 
in this period as well. The new ­sci-fi would take off from there.
Aside from the historical review of ­sci-fi, the other Aristotelian task 
we have is to define our terms for film analysis. I will use these terms in 
each chapter to engage in cinematic analysis as well as thematic analysis. 
Four terms form the building blocks of our study:
1.  ­Mise-en-scène—literally “placed in the shot,” covers everything 
placed in front of the camera before shooting. This includes settings, 
subjects, and compositions. Things such as objects in the frame (a desk, 
chairs, an ashtray, an actor, a house, etc.); or settings such as inner city, 
country, desert, mountain, indoor, outdoor; or even the way the certain 
objects are framed: close, tight, far away, etc., hold meaning for the 
scene.
2.  Cinematography—includes the camera, the lighting, and the 
medium on which the movie is made (film or digital). This can be a very 
technical aspect of film and it includes the color (black and white or 
color film stock); digital camerawork; the angles (­low-angle, ­high-angle, 
­point-of-view, ­bird’s-eye-view); the distance from subject (extreme long 
shot, long shot, medium shot, ­close-up); and the intensity and angle of 
the lighting (­high-key vs. low key, hard vs. soft, top lighting, main light, 
etc.). It can also include the overall style of shooting, such as realism vs. 
expressionism.

Introduction (Piturro)    7
3.  Editing—consists of the way the shots are put together. 
Continuity editing provides seamless transitions from ­shot-to-shot 
so the viewer understands where the subjects are and in what order 
the events are taking place. Other types of editing (such as dialectical 
montage or jump cutting) may be reflexive, disjunctive, or suggestive of 
something in particular. The most common form of editing is the “cut” 
which means one shot ends and the other begins. Where specific areas 
of editing are discussed, such as ­cross-cutting, I define them and place 
them in context.
4.  Sound—includes dialogue, music, sound effects, and silence. 
Sound can be either diegetic (emanates from within the frame) or ­non-
diegetic (which comes from outside the frame, such as music on the 
soundtrack or ­voice-over). Dialogue is any sound made by the human 
voice; sound effects are sounds not made by the human voice (a door 
slamming, a car screeching, a monster roaring, etc.). And silence is 
golden.
I will go into more detail about each of these aspects in the individual chap-
ters and apply them to the films along the way. And where needed, I will 
illuminate specific terms/concepts/ideas that need extrapolation. Still, 
you do not need a degree in film studies to follow along. You will be given 
everything you need to know.
That brings us to the individual films and chapters. They were all cho-
sen in discussion with each of the scientists, and they flow from our work 
in the annual Science Fiction Film Series. Some are more popular/­well-
known films, and some are smaller, independent films. One of the more 
fascinating aspects of the series over the years has been the eclectic mix of 
film types, and we have tried to capture that in these pages.
The first chapter covers one of the best science fiction films of the past 
decade, Arrival (2016). This is one of the chapters with three sections: the 
film analysis written by me; the science, written by Dr. Ka Chun Yu from 
the Denver Museum of Nature and Science; and the third section is written 
from a linguist’s point of view—considering the main character is a linguist 
communicating with aliens, it is a fascinating perspective from Dr. Andrew 
J. Pantos of the Metropolitan State University of Denver.
The second chapter covers another of the best and most interesting 
science fiction films of the past decade, Interstellar (2014). It is a sprawling, 
dense, and wonderfully complex film on many levels. It is also ­chock-full of 
science, with its own staff of scientists who worked on it. Dr. Ka Chun Yu 
writes the science section and concentrates on the possibility of establish-
ing ­off-world colonies, which is the overall goal of the narrative.
The third chapter analyzes perhaps the best and most famous science 

8    Introduction
fiction film of all time—Stanley Kubrick’s 2001: A Space Odyssey (1968). I 
analyze the film but also situate it in the larger context of cinema history; 
considering that cinema was at a low point during the ’60s, the film began 
the upward trajectory of the entire industry. Dr. Ka Chun Yu focuses on 
artificial intelligence in his section of the chapter.
Chapter 4 starts a section on smaller, independent films with Children 
of Men (2006), but it also enters the area where ­sci-fi changed in the wake 
of 9/11. I discuss the cinematic elements of the film, and in addition, how 
it highlights the change in both the thematic focus and the cinematic focus 
during this era. Geneticist Dr. Nicole L. Garneau handles the science and 
focuses on infertility and the possible reasons for it in the film as well in our 
world.
Chapter 5 examines a smaller film with big stars and big ideas, Per-
fect Sense (2011), and follows in the trend of post–9/11 films described in the 
previous chapter. Dr. Nicole L. Garneau discusses the science of senses and 
how that informs the narrative. The film is a great example of how science 
fiction, in any form, style, or type, always gets to the essential question I see 
at the center of the genre.
Chapter 6 covers a very independent film in Upstream Color (2013), 
one with a fascinating and perhaps, oblique, narrative that challenges and 
delights on many levels. I argue that it is a formalist gem—one in which all 
of the cinematic elements point toward wonderful thematic depth. It is a 
great example of how we have tried to include all types of films, from the 
very biggest to smaller, more obscure films that may not be so ­well-known 
but are fascinating and important nonetheless. Dr. Nicole L. Garneau 
speaks to the science of parasites, among other things, in dissecting the sci-
ence in the film.
Chapter 7 begins a section on ­big-budget, Hollywood films with one 
of the best ­big-budget Hollywood directors, Contact (1998) from director 
Robert Zemeckis. Based on a book by Carl Sagan, it is a sprawling film with 
a huge cast and huge ideas. I try to reign in the narrative and also discuss 
the movement toward CGI at this point in cinema history. Space Scientist 
Naomi Pequette from the Denver Museum of Nature and Science exam-
ines the science in the film, including listening for sounds of life in the  
universe.
Chapter 8 covers one of the most influential films in the last half of 
the 20th century, Jurassic Park (1992), and how the Steven Spielberg film 
helped move special effects from the era of puppets to the era of CGI. It 
is a groundbreaking film but also deliciously entertaining. Paleontolo-
gist Dr. Joseph Sertich from the Denver Museum of Nature and Science 
examines the science of the film, and yes, answers the question everyone 
is dying to know: “Can we bring dinosaurs back?” Dr. Charles Hoge from 

Introduction (Piturro)    9
Metropolitan State University of Denver adds a third section to the chapter 
on how Jurassic Park fits into the history of science fiction monster movies.
Chapter 9 examines a giant in the history of science fiction monster 
movies and one of the most influential films of all time—in terms of special 
effects—in Merian C. Cooper’s King Kong (1933). I detail all the fascinat-
ing cultural and historical aspects of the film as well as the groundbreak-
ing special effects. Zoologist Dr. Jeffrey T. Stephenson from the Denver 
Museum of Nature and Science discusses the animals in the film. Dr. Roger 
K. Green from Metropolitan State University of Denver provides a detailed 
look into the music in the film, also a very famous aspect, in a third section 
of the chapter.
And finally, Chapter 10 is a treat: after my analysis of The Martian 
(2015), Dr. Ka Chun Yu gives an interview with Dr. Steven Lee, a promi-
nent Mars scientist from the Denver Museum of Nature of Science, discuss-
ing the actual science in the film—or perhaps the lack thereof. The analysis 
is the very heart of what the entire book strives to achieve: the marriage of 
art and science, and our wish to bring that to a larger audience in an inter-
esting and informative package.
If there is one controlling factor in my own analysis of each film, in 
each chapter, it is to look at both the cinematic and thematic aspects of each 
film. I also try to give a sense of the historical, cultural, and cinematic con-
texts of each film, and I include a background of each director and how they 
came to the project. And finally, I strive to address how each film answers 
the central question of science fiction, in my opinion: “What does it mean 
to be human?” I hope the ensuing pages may do exactly what science fiction 
always done: inspire awe, wonder, surprise, and even fear and anxiety. All 
very human emotions.


11
Chapter 1: Arrival
Arrival (2017) is based on the 1998 science fiction short story “Story 
of Your Life” by Ted Chiang—a winner of several prestigious ­sci-fi liter-
ary awards, including the Nebula Award for Best Novella. It tells the story 
of a linguist who helps the U.S. military communicate with extraterrestrial 
life forms that have landed on our planet, one of 12 ships that material-
ized on Earth at the same time in different locations around the world. The 
entire endeavor starts out as a worldwide, international effort to communi-
cate with the aliens, but soon the military (the U.S. and others) intervenes. 
The story as laid out this way is very straightforward, but the film is hardly 
so. The essence of the film is in its structure, characterizations, and over-
all humanistic view of the world. In one sense, it is about aliens coming to 
Earth. In its more basic, important, and alluring sense, it is about us—who 
we are and what we are. It speaks to the most basic question of science fic-
tion, in my opinion: “What does it mean to be human?” That central ques-
tion of science fiction will be a constant throughout the book, and each film 
answers it in different, and wonderful ways. We arrive with Arrival.
Amy Adams as Dr. Louise Banks reaches out to the aliens in Arrival (Paramount 
Pictures, 2016).

12    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
Directed by Denis Villeneuve, a Canadian who also directed Blade 
Runner 2049, Sicario, Prisoners, and Incendies, it breaks down some of the 
facile tropes of blockbuster ­sci-fi and speaks to an informed and intelli-
gent audience. No stranger to science fiction, Villeneuve states: “The main 
thing I was attracted to was this idea of exploring culture shock, explor-
ing communication, exploring this idea of language changing the percep-
tion of your reality. That was gold.” When Chiang was presented with the 
idea of an adaptation, he was initially skeptical. He didn’t think the cere-
bral, ­interior-based emotional underpinnings of his work would relate to 
the screen. The producers enticed him with the presence of Villeneuve, a 
director known for very unique films with arresting visuals and sound that 
still created complex characterizations. They sent Chiang a copy of Ville-
neuve’s Incendies (2010), the indie hit that tells the story of twins who wish 
to uncover their family history in the middle east. Chiang was impressed by 
the thoughtful and arresting film and also by the producers’ choice to send 
him that particular film. He was on board.
Amy Adams (Louise), for her part, was attracted to the role of an intel-
lectual female character who goes ­toe-to-toe with the males, but the proj-
ect also interested her as a mother—since she has a young daughter of her 
own. Adams recalls that she was not interested in working at the time and 
just wished to take a break and be a mother. But after she read the script, she 
was hooked, and she decided to take the break after making the film. Jeremy 
Renner (Ian) took the part because he loved the script, but he also wanted 
to work with Amy Adams. He especially loved the ­woman-centered story 
and how his character was just secondary to that character. As Adams said, 
“Not many men would take the part of playing second to a lead played by a 
woman. Jeremy was fantastic.” Her comment speaks not only to the commu-
nal and collaborative nature of the film or to the filmmaking process in gen-
eral, but it is also a sad comment on the movie business itself—how it is still 
so patriarchal and ­male-ego-driven in spite of its intermittent and sometime 
progressive tendencies, especially in the light of the ­Me-Too movement. The 
story of a strong woman in the lead role is also quite rare in the history of 
­sci-fi; you would have to go back to Alien to find an antecedent, without 
much else ­in-between. Considering the overall talent and experience of the 
entire production, the cast and crew were set up for success from the start.
The film was ­well-received critically and it did well at the ­box-office, 
which is not always the case for a heady ­sci-fi film. It was nominated for 
Eight Academy Awards, including Best Picture and Best Director, and it 
won a single Oscar, for Best Sound Editing. ­Sci-fi is not always recognized 
at the Academy Awards, and the inclusion of the film outside the technical 
categories is a testament to the wonderful production as a whole. It is not 
just a great ­sci-fi film, it is a great film, period. When looked at as a whole, 

Chapter 1: Arrival    13
the run of intellectual ­sci-fi in the ­20-teens is quite verdant, considering 
the critical and ­box-office successes of this film and others such as Inter-
stellar (2014) and The Martian (2015). All of these share certain characteris-
tics with Arrival: they assume an intelligent audience, they are not afraid to 
tackle big questions, they combine ­in-depth thematic discussion with tech-
nical and cinematic prowess, and they at once feel the history of science 
fiction cinema while pointing forward toward a new future for the genre. 
Most of all, they address what I see as the essential question of science fic-
tion and perhaps all of our lives: “What does it mean to be human?”
The film addresses this monumental question in many ways, and quite 
thoroughly through its thematic depth and cinematic aspects. There is a won-
derful continuity and confluence among all of these aspects that brings the 
film together in wonderful ways. Beyond the inspirational source material, the 
excellent adaptation of story to script, the steady and inventive helm of Ville-
neuve, and the intelligence and depth of the performances, the interiority of 
the original story bubbles to the surface with sensitivity, intellect, and verve.
The marriage of thematic depth with the cinematic aspects comes 
through clearly in the symbolism, the most prominent of which is the cir-
cle, for many reasons. The circle is the deconstruction of the linear—it is a 
visual representation of the physical properties that Chiang had in mind 
when he wrote the short story. Chiang was thinking about physics, and 
properties that speak to a more ­non-linear way of thinking rather than a 
simple ­cause-and-effect mode of existence. What if we knew the beginning 
and end point of something, but then must fill in the rest? What if causes 
and effects didn’t matter as much as the choices we make along the journey? 
What if the way we look at the world, and the way the physical word is orga-
nized, is more circular than linear? Chiang wished to explore these ideas in 
a speculative narrative, and they take form, initially, in the shape of a circle.
The circle has several thematic implications in the film: as the rep-
resentation of nonlinear time, as the way in which the aliens communi-
cate through their language, and as the way in which the actual narrative 
of the film is structured. The first instance we get of this structure is in the 
first scene of the film, which, when you go back and mentally ­re-construct 
the narrative, is actually the last scene of the film in a linear timeline. In 
other words, the first scene of the film takes place after the narrative told 
starting with the second scene. So in that second scene, the aliens arrive, 
and Louise is subsequently engaged by the military to communicate with 
them. This is where she meets Ian and they begin working together. They 
figure out the alien language, communicate with them, and as the other 
11 crews around the world working on similar projects find, everything is 
soon hijacked by the military and certain destruction is imminent. Lou-
ise, however, is able to thwart the military intervention by speaking to the 

14    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
Chinese military leader and talking him down. She does so by repeating to 
him something told to her (by him) in a future meeting (in other words, a 
meeting that takes place in the future). Louise was given the gift of nonlin-
ear time/thinking/experiences by the aliens and can see not only begin-
ning points of events (the present), but also the ending points of events (the 
future). The aliens had come to earth to essentially ask for help in thwart-
ing their own demise many years in the future, and Louise is the conduit for 
that human education. Such is the structure of the narrative; it is nonlin-
ear, it is asynchronous, and it is fraught with both awesome power and exis-
tential crises. As Louise finds out, she and Ian will have a daughter who will 
become sick and die young. Louise decides to still have the child (without 
telling Ian the eventuality of her death) and enjoy the time with her daugh-
ter. Here is the moral center of the film, as Chiang puts it: “If you knew your 
child was going to die, and there was nothing you could do about it, would 
you still have that child?” This choice, put in such stark simplicity, is one of 
those moments that raises the question “What does it mean to be human?” 
That choice, given the knowledge, speaks so eloquently to the beauty and 
the peril of our humanity.
Everything flows from this choice and the visual representation of it. 
The ­mise-en-scène is infused with circles that speak to the circularity of our 
existence and our choices. The inky representations of the alien language are 
formed in a circular pattern that is at first difficult to comprehend—when we 
base it on our own formation of linear language structures. But once Lou-
ise sees the patterns and is able to translate, she is given the gift (a “tool”) 
of seeing/thinking in terms of beginnings and endings, rather than causal 
relationships. The circular language representations are each a story, told 
with knowledge of the journey and the plot points. One of the fascinating 
aspects of this type of communication is that arriving at the endpoint doesn’t 
preclude the intervening events. In other words, there is no oversimplified 
­time-travel element that allows Louise to “fix” her daughter and arrive at a 
different conclusion. Her daughter still dies, and it is not so such much the 
ending event that is most important, or most devastating in this case, but the 
events leading up to it. Louise enjoys, relishes, and chooses the journey.
This process is also akin to the filmmaking process. While a film is 
scripted, sometimes visualized (storyboards or otherwise), and engi-
neered toward a specific end, the process itself is messy and unpredictable.  
There are a gaggle of people involved in the process from start to finish: 
screenwriters, producers, production designers, cinematographers, edi-
tors, sound designers, actors, directors, and countless other cast and 
crew. Nobody knows what will happen on that journey, or what the fin-
ished product will look like (even with a fixed ending/endpoint), but the  
filmmaker chooses to engage in that process and take that journey. Along 

Chapter 1: Arrival    15
the way, one can make beautiful discoveries and/or encounter unthinkable 
disasters. Sounds like life: we all know we are going to die, but how we live 
is our choice. Most of us choose to take that journey.
The ­mise-en-scène also speaks to the messiness of the journey. The jux-
taposition of the spaces inside and outside the tent city around the alien 
ship are the perfect example. Inside the tents, the space is cluttered, confin-
ing, and ultimately claustrophobic. The compositions are filled with tight 
spaces that speak to the ­close-mindedness of the military and CIA officers 
therein. Figures come in and out of the shot with disturbing briskness and 
lack of clarity as if they were bodies without souls. The shots of the alien 
ships and even inside the ship, in contrast, are spacious, slow, and wide, 
speaking to the ­open-mindedness and creativity of the scientists and the 
aliens. Even the aliens (“Abbot and Costello”) are afforded more personal-
ity and soul than the bodies of the humans. This is only one aspect of the 
­mise-en-scène, but it is wonderfully expressive and thematically linked.
The cinematography follows the same project: the spaces inside the 
tents are dark and smoky, as if it were all shot on gray autumn days. The 
spaces in and around alien ship are airy and light, as if spring had arrived 
and landed in the middle of that autumn. Villeneuve has stated that he 
envisioned the film to have the feel of a rainy, dreary Tuesday morning—
to his point, there is nothing special to such a day/time, yet the miraculous 
can explode through the mundane at any time. It is also a thoughtful and 
contemplative time; there is nothing sexy or alluring about a dreary Tues-
day morning, so it begs for introspection and interiority.
Much of the cinematography is therefore soft focus vs. deep focus. 
Soft focus accounts for the past/future cuts and deep focus for the “pres-
ent” with the aliens. Deep focus allows us to see both foreground and back-
ground in focus, and it is a more realistic mode of filming. We get to sit with 
the shot and the characters therein; the director is not telling us what to 
do or where to look—we can determine that for ourselves. Soft focus only 
allows us to see either background or foreground in focus; the other ele-
ment is rendered as blurry. Soft focus is more of a formalist technique—we 
know, understand, and recognize that it is part of the cinematic appara-
tus—and it is less realistic. Each technique has its place, and each technique 
has its own resultant expression. Both fit into the overall plan.
The sound also expresses the thematic thrust of ­non-linearity and exis-
tence. Sylvain Bellemare, the supervising sound designer on the film saw 
his role as integral to the film and the overall feel and approach, noting 
“I approach sound as a character in the film.” What a lovely sentiment! As 
I noted, the film won a (­much-deserved) Oscar for Best Sound Editing. The 
sound in the film was meant to be natural, organic, and meaningful. One spe-
cific example of expressive sound speaks to these qualities: there is a distinct 

16    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
sound, or loud hum, around the outside of the spaceship shell. The idea is that 
it was meant to relate tension—in the sense that it was a tense barrier, a nego-
tiation, and/or a challenge. The sound becomes a character in terms of how it 
holds its own unique specific attributes for a specific purpose. Bellemare also 
notes that most of the sound sources for the film were organic, once again 
speaking to the realism and authenticity of the overall look and feel of the  
film.
The final piece of this formalist film puzzle is the editing, which shocks 
and surprises us in following the same ­non-linear structure of the narra-
tive as well as the rest of the cinematic aspects. “­Non-linear time is a huge 
element of the film, and it is a huge element of the editing,” says editor Joe 
Walker. For example, the cuts of the past/future are elliptical, and it forces 
us to think outside a linear narrative and outside a linear existence. The cuts 
are also fragmented, paralleling how we think and remember—in bits and 
pieces in our own minds. Then we fill in the gaps to create a whole narrative. 
Upon viewing it the second time, we better understand this elliptical nature 
and we are forced, trained if you will, to think as Louise thinks. The audience 
is therefore educated by the film as Louise is educated by the aliens.
As the kind of film that rewards for repeated viewings, herein lies the 
payoff: it speaks to a defining feature of humanity. As humans, we need to 
make sense of our existence, and to make sense of our existence, we need to 
tell stories. As we tell stories, whether it be our own history, family histories, 
or the tales of others, we have to fill in the gaps—the ellipses that are cov-
ered by the veil of memory or the fog of life. The elliptical nature of story-
telling neatly rivals an elliptical nature of existence, rendering it ­non-linear. 
Whether it is the filmmaking process itself, a specific film, or our existence, 
that ­non-linearity offers a way out of simple causes and effects. In the pro-
cess, Arrival offers us a glimpse of what it means to be human.
—Vincent Piturro
The Science of Communicating with Aliens
Ka Chun Yu
Since Georges Méliès’ A Trip to the Moon in 1902, humankind has had 
countless cinematic encounters with aliens. In some rare cases, the aliens 
were inscrutable, with ordinary communication impossible (2001: A Space 

Chapter 1: Arrival    17
Odyssey, 1968). But most of the time, communication with aliens was easy, 
since English turned out to be the lingua franca in Hollywood productions. 
In The Day the Earth Stood Still (1951), the lead extraterrestrial character 
appears on Earth able to converse in English (although having human char-
acters memorizing and speaking words in his native tongue is crucial to the 
plot of the film). Even when intelligent simians speaking English should 
have been a giveaway to a key plot point of Planet of the Apes (1968), Charl-
ton Heston and the audience take the Anglophone apes all in stride.
But even when aliens communicated in a language that was not 
English, they did so through modes that are familiar to us. Even when we 
hear alien languages with their own distinct vocabulary and grammar, they 
contain sounds audible to our ears, and are spoken in tones that human 
actors could articulate with their vocal chords; see for instance, the sub-
titled speech in Star Wars (1977) and Star Trek: The Motion Picture (1979). 
They could communicate via nonverbal means, but such alternate modes of 
exchange were still familiar to us, like the sign language and musical tones 
from Close Encounters of the Third Kind (1977), or the ethereal whale songs 
from Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home (1986). It is so rare to see alien com-
munication that is truly alien, that when a film like Arrival attempts to do 
so, it is memorable how unlike human languages—how alien—an extrater-
restrial language could be. Though they do speak, what is memorable about 
the heptapod language in the film is the ink patterns, sprayed ­squid-like, 
which then dissipate after lingering for a few seconds. And to add to its oth-
erworldliness, the language does not unfold linearly the way that human 
languages are created, but is circular where past, present, and future can 
overlap.
If we ever have the opportunity to communicate with an intelligent 
alien species somewhere else in our galaxy, most scientists who have given 
this any thought do not think it will be done via any of the native tongues of 
either species. Instead, astronomers and scientists involved with the Search 
for ­Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence (SETI) argue that any common language 
for galactic discourse would be based on science and mathematics. If extra-
terrestrials are intelligent enough to build radio transmitters for bridging 
the interstellar divide, then they would be smart enough to understand the 
science underlying that technology.
The first attempt that humans made to communicate with intelligence 
elsewhere in the universe was based on this idea. The Pioneer 10 and 11 
spacecraft were launched in 1972, the first of our robot explorers sent to 
reconnoiter with the outer planets of our solar system. They were hurled 
with enough velocity that they will eventually leave the gravitational 
embrace of the Sun and orbit the galaxy in interstellar space.
Attached to each of these spacecraft are ­gold-plated aluminum 

18    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
plaques designed by astronomers Carl Sagan and Frank Drake (Figure 1). 
The images of the nude man and woman might be the most ­eye-catching 
for most people, but the key to the message is the ­barbell-like symbol in the 
upper left corner. The two circles represent hydrogen, the simplest and the 
most common atom in the entire universe. A hydrogen atom consists of a 
heavy proton circled by a lighter electron. Both these particles have a quan-
tum mechanical property known as “spin,” which is only approximately like 
the more familiar spins that are associated with a toy top or a classroom 
globe. We will ignore what exactly spin is, but we only need to understand 
that the spins of the two particles in a hydrogen atom can be aligned with 
each other or against each other. When they are aligned, picture the elec-
tron and proton spinning in the same direction; that is, both moving clock-
wise, or both moving counterclockwise. For the spins that are oppositely 
aligned, one particle would rotate clockwise while the other counterclock-
wise. The barbell therefore represents hydrogen atoms, with the right one 
with proton and electron spins aligned, the left ­anti-aligned.
It turns out that when the spins are aligned, the hydrogen atom as a 
whole has slightly more energy than when the spins are ­anti-aligned. Fur-
thermore, a hydrogen atom may start out with the spins aligned, but on 
average, every 10 million years or so, it will spontaneously transition to a 
state where the proton and electron spins are ­anti-aligned. When it does so, 
it loses energy in the form of a single photon of radiation that is emitted at 
a wavelength of 21 cm, or a frequency of 0.7 nanosecond (where 1 nanosec-
ond is 1 billionth of a second). The probability for this to occur is rare, but 
given that there is so much hydrogen in the universe, this flip of the spins of 
lots of hydrogen atoms is something that human—and presumably alien—
astronomers can easily detect, and are readily familiar with. The horizontal 
bar of the barbell represents the transition between the two different hydro-
gen atom states, as is the short vertical line below the bar.
Let us assume that alien salvagers find the Pioneer spacecraft far in the 
future. If they deduced the meaning of the two circles, then their next step 
in deciphering the plaque would be to notice that the two most common 
repeated elements are the vertical lines (|) and the horizontal ­hyphen-like 
bars (-). If they were to map these to a binary notation of 1s and 0s, then the 
1 associated with the hydrogen atom transition could represent either a unit 
of length (21 cm) or unit of time (0.7 nanoseconds). The number 8 in binary 
to the right of the woman is meant to convey the height of the figures (8 
times 21 cm or 5 feet 6 inches), which can be checked against the silhouette 
of the spacecraft, which is ­to-scale behind the human figures. The planets of 
our Solar System, including Earth from which the Pioneers originated, are 
arrayed along the bottom of the plaque, along with their relative distances 
from the Sun in binary notation.

Chapter 1: Arrival    19
Finally, the ­dramatic-looking starburst dominating the left side of the 
graphic is a map back to our solar system, using the relative positions of 
nearby pulsars. Pulsars are rapidly spinning remnants of massive stars that 
have exploded in supernovae. The bright radio emission from the leftover 
core can wash over in our direction every time the pulsar rotates. These 
stars can start out spinning at hundreds of times per second, but they slow 
over time. Different pulsars will have different spin rates, and the map 
marks the spin periods and the directions of 14 pulsars relative to our Sun. 
Because the spin down occurs at known rates, an alien astronomer can 
determine when the probe was launched based on the pulsar rates at its 
current time versus the more rapid rates printed on the Pioneer plaque.
The Pioneer spacecraft were like messages in a bottle, cast out into the 
vast sea of space. They are small, so there is little hope that they would ever 
be encountered by a spacefaring race of aliens. A more reliable way of com-
municating would be to send out a radio transmission targeted at a star, 
and hope someone is listening. The first attempt at such a targeted trans-
mission occurred on 16 November 1974, when the Arecibo Observatory in 
Puerto Rico was used to beam a nearly ­3-minute-long burst of radio signals 
Figure 1: The Pioneer plaque containing information about where the spacecraft 
originated (NASA).

20    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema

Chapter 1: Arrival    21
toward M13, a tightly bunched together cluster of 300,000 stars, located 
22,000 light years away. The message was modulated by small changes in 
the radio frequency, which can be interpreted, Morse ­code–like, as a binary 
message. When the 1679 binary digits of the message are laid out in one 
of only two possible ­two-dimensional grids (Figure 2), a pictorial image 
appears. Again, the information embedded in the image encodes infor-
mation about binary numbers, and progresses to even more sophisticated 
depictions of the elements important for life on Earth (hydrogen, carbon, 
nitrogen, oxygen, and phosphorus), as well as the DNA molecule responsi-
ble for our genetic code that is made up of these elements.
Since this initial attempt at METI—Messaging Extra Terrestrial Intel-
ligence—we have discovered more than 4000 planets circling around stars 
elsewhere in our Galaxy. Based on some of our current surveys, it is esti-
mated that up to a fifth of all stars have ­Earth-sized planets in the habitable 
zones of their parent stars. This means some 11 billion ­Earth-like worlds 
could be orbiting around ­Sun-like stars in our galaxy. Some researchers 
and groups are now interested in beaming radio messages to some of these 
nearby stars known to have planetary systems.
Ideas for messages have also gotten more sophisticated. In 1960, math-
ematician Hans Freudenthal published a book on Lincos (a contraction 
of lingua cosmica), his proposed language for communicating with extra-
terrestrial intelligence. It assumes messages are sent using radio signals. 
Different lengths of the signals are used to communicate phonemes, the 
fundamental elements of speech (as opposed to the letters used for a print 
language). The first message would start with simple mathematical con-
cepts like counting to introduce natural numbers (1, 2, 3, 4, …), and then 
add additional symbols so that mathematical concepts like “100 > 10” can 
be communicated. From this foundation of symbolic logic, simple ideas 
are built up to allow complicated ideas to be expressed, including concepts 
from physics (such as measurements of length and time), and even abstract 
human behavior, and notions about life and death.
Lincos was the inspiration for Cosmic Call, a set of pictorial mes-
sages beamed from the radio dish at the Evpatoria Deep Space Center in 
Ukraine in 1999 and 2003. These communications, devised by astronomer 
Yvan Dutil and physicist Stéphane Dumas, start with simple mathematical 
expressions (Figure 3) and then expand from them to more advanced top-
ics in mathematics (including geometry and algebraic equations); chemis-
try; physics; information about the Earth, Moon, and the rest of the Solar 
Opposite: Figure 2: The Arecibo message decoded into a pictorial representa-
tion, with descriptions of the concepts that are to be conveyed (Arne Nordmann 
and Ka Chun Yu).

22    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
System; and even the biology of life on Earth (including information on the 
creators of the message). The messages are constructed from more than 100 
symbols that are defined within each of the pictorial “pages.” At the end, the 
very last part of the message asks for a reply back from any recipients of the 
message.
We cannot predict the exact form of the first message from extraterres-
trials to us. They could be similar to the messages that we have concocted 
so far for communicating with aliens. But I bet they won’t be anything like 
the ­human-alien engagements that we see popularized in movies and other 
media.
Figure 3: The beginning of the Cosmic Call message sent in 1999, showing an 
introduction to the numbers used later in the message (Yvan Dutil and Stéphane 
Dumas).

Chapter 1: Arrival    23
Arrival from a Linguist’s Perspective
Andrew J. Pantos
The film Arrival and the short story on which it is based, “Story of 
Your Life” by Ted Chiang, raise some fascinating ­language-related ques-
tions. As a linguist, I was intrigued with the film’s portrayal of the linguist 
and linguistic research methods, and with some of the underlying assump-
tions about language implied by the story. In this section of the chapter, I 
discuss some of my observations. Before I go any further, though, please 
let me emphasize that the thoughts expressed in this essay should not be 
viewed as criticisms or complaints. How could I complain about a film in 
which the hero is a linguist who saves the world? That’s a great theme for 
any story. Nonetheless, given that the greatest concern of film directors is 
to create a good film that tells a compelling story, and not to accurately por-
tray scientists and scientific methods (or trial attorneys, doctors, or any-
one else) it’s always interesting to see how film portrayals differ from the 
real world.
To review, Arrival portrays a linguist’s attempts to communicate 
with visitors from outer space. These visitors are referred to as heptapods 
because they have seven ­tentacle-like legs (from the Greek hepta = “seven” 
and pod = “foot”). At the start of the film, the U.S. government recruits 
the linguist, Louise Banks, to help figure out how to communicate with the 
heptapods in order to find out the reason for their visit. The heptapods Dr. 
Banks encounters are confined to their spacecraft hovering above a field in 
Montana. It turns out that this is just one of twelve ­heptapod-manned ships 
hovering over various parts of the earth. Although the governments of the 
other host countries are also working towards the same goal of communi-
cating with the heptapods, distrust among the various countries leads to a 
breakdown in scientific cooperation, and Dr. Banks is left to work alone on 
deciphering the alien language. In the end, Dr. Banks learns the language 
and determines that the aliens mean us no harm. Recommendations from 
the military for preemptive strikes against the aliens are abandoned in the 
nick of time, an armed confrontation is avoided, and the human race is 
saved.

24    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
The Portrayal of the Linguist
The film and the short story on which it is based perpetuate some ste-
reotypes about linguists and linguistics that bear mention at the outset. 
First, linguists and translators are not the same thing. Translators deal in 
two (or more) known languages, both of which they presumably know very 
well. Translators do not figure out unknown languages and do not study 
language scientifically or theoretically. Translators are practitioners. The 
primary task that Dr. Banks faced was to figure out the language of the hep-
tapods. Only after she figured out the language could she begin to translate 
between heptapodish and English. So, Dr. Banks’s comment at the begin-
ning of the film about testing the competence of her fellow linguist by ask-
ing him to translate a Sanskrit word is a bit odd. Knowing Sanskrit, or any 
other particular language, is not a requirement for being a linguist.
This mischaracterization of what linguists do is particularly inter-
esting, given that later in the film it is made clear that the film’s creators 
clearly understand that linguists analyze language (human language, in the 
real world) scientifically. This point is emphasized when Dr. Banks’s astro-
physicist colleague says in a shocked tone, “You analyze language mathe-
matically!” and Dr. Banks gives him a dismissive look in response. In fact, 
linguists dedicate their careers to the scientific study of language, and there 
is an entire branch of linguistics dedicated to documenting undocumented 
languages. The astrophysicist’s comment does, however, apparently accu-
rately reflect a common thought among ­so-called hard scientists. Shortly 
after the film was released, a ­high-profile American astrophysicist criticized 
the choice of a linguist as the hero of the story, and he suggested that that 
a cryptographer should have been used to figure out the alien language, 
instead. On the contrary, a linguist is precisely the right person for this 
job. Cryptographers decipher codes that are based on existing, known lan-
guages. A cryptographer would not be helpful in this situation, where one 
of the languages is entirely unknown. A linguist fieldworker, who under-
stands how to collect data and analyze language scientifically is exactly 
what is needed here.
The Portrayal of the Research Methods
The film’s creators used three linguists as creative consultants on the 
film. Dr. Banks’s methods for deciphering the heptapod’s language are 
meant to represent the kinds of methods used by field linguists who doc-
ument human languages. Just because linguists are hired as consultants, 
however, does not mean that their advice is always followed. After all, the 

Chapter 1: Arrival    25
purpose of this film was not to serve as a training film for future linguistic 
field workers, but to tell a compelling story. As such, some of the methods 
portrayed are a bit misleading.
Dr. Banks starts out by analyzing the physical properties of the sounds 
produced by the heptapods through acoustic measurements of the sound 
waves and spectrograms. This is an interesting choice. While acoustic mea-
surements can tell us about the physical nature of the sounds produced, 
without associated meaning they cannot help in decoding the language. Dr. 
Banks could look for patterns in the physical properties of the sound waves 
and try to match those patterns to meaning, but it is unclear in the film 
exactly what she is trying to do with the acoustic measurements. The sug-
gestion is that she is looking at the sounds waves alone to figure out the lan-
guage. That would not be possible unless the sound waves were associated 
with specific meanings.
In fact, when they encounter a new (human) language, field lin-
guists usually begin by noting the kinds of sounds produced by the speak-
ers. In order to decipher the language, however, their focus quickly shifts 
to determining which sounds carry meaning in the language. In other 
words, linguists have to figure out which sounds are psychologically real 
to the speakers and which are not. Imagine a linguist encountering English 
speakers for the first time. The linguist hears one of the English speakers 
say “father” and another say “fatha.” How does the linguist know whether 
these are two different words or the same word produced in two different 
ways? The linguist would note the difference, but until the linguist has fig-
ured out the ­sound-meaning pairing there would be no way of knowing 
that both productions refer to the same meaning. Now, if the one English 
speaker says “fatha” for both “father” and “farther,” the linguist unfamil-
iar with English would have to figure out from ­sound-meaning pairings 
in context that two different meanings are associated with this same word. 
In both cases, a purely acoustic analysis of the speech produced would not 
help to decipher the language. The language cannot be understood until the 
­sound-meaning pairings are determined.
Fairly early in her analysis, Dr. Banks gives up on trying to figure out 
the “spoken” form of the language (Heptapod A) and focuses her efforts 
on deciphering the “written” form (Heptapod B). I put the words “spoken” 
and “written” in quotes because it’s not clear whether the heptapods are, 
in fact, speaking or writing. Our human concept of speaking requires the 
involvement of various aspects of our human speech mechanism (lungs, 
larynx, vocal tract articulators), all of which are based on human physiol-
ogy. Who knows how the heptapods are generating the sounds they pro-
duce and whether we can really call that speaking? The same is true of the 
process of writing. Can we call what the heptapods are doing “writing”? In 

26    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
the film, it does not appear that the heptapods are manipulating any kind of 
tool or the surface where the symbols appear. Instead, the symbols are pro-
jected fully formed from the ends of the tentacles. Nonetheless, I’ll use the 
terms here to facilitate the present discussion.
At this point in the film, the depiction of the methods used gets par-
ticularly problematic. Dr. Banks writes her name and the other scientist’s 
names on a whiteboard and then shows the names to the heptapods, indi-
cating whose name belongs to whom. If Dr. Banks’s assumption is that 
the heptapods do not know English, this is not how most linguists would 
approach teaching them the language. How would the heptapods know 
what the written words refer to? We know it’s her name, but how would 
the heptapods know whether she is referring to her name, her gender, her 
height, her age, her occupation, or any other characteristic of hers? What if 
the concept of individual names is alien to the aliens?
She continues to use this approach (called ostension) throughout. To 
teach the word “walking,” she has her colleague walk. There is no guaran-
tee that the heptapods, who do not themselves appear to have the physiol-
ogy necessary to “walk,” would associate that word with movement through 
space by placing one foot in front of the other repeatedly while standing 
erect. How would they distinguish this word from “move”? To confuse 
matters even more, Dr. Banks uses a derived form of the word (“walking”) 
instead of the base form “walk.” For human non–English speakers, this 
could be confusing. For aliens who do not use an alphabetic writing sys-
tem, these—at least at first—might look like two entirely different words. 
Think about the difference between the word pairs “pit/pits” and “pit/spit.” 
The addition of the “s” creates an entirely different word in the second pair, 
but the plural of the word in the first pair. Would non–­English-speaking 
aliens understand the “s” the same way? In short, ostension is not always a 
great method of teaching a language, and the use of derived forms of words, 
particularly at first, is potentially confusing. Interestingly, Dr. Banks her-
self makes this point in the film with her anecdote about the confusion sur-
rounding the meaning of the word kangaroo when it was first borrowed 
from the indigenous people living in Australia.
Another interesting choice is the depiction in the film of the exclu-
sive use of intransitive verbs in her ostensive research. Intransitive verbs 
are verbs that have no direct object. For example, “arrive” is an intransi-
tive verb because we can’t arrive something. By the same token, “kick” is 
a transitive verb because we can kick something. Early on, Dr. Banks dis-
covers that the heptapods’ writing system, Heptapod B, is ­non-linear and 
­order-independent. That, of course, is very different from English writ-
ing, which is linear and ­order-dependent. In fact, word order is particu-
larly important in a language like English. The two sentences “The cat 

Chapter 1: Arrival    27
chased the mouse” and “The mouse chased the cat” mean two different 
things solely because the noun phrases “the cat” and “the mouse” have 
been swapped. There is no difference in the form of the words “the cat” 
or “the mouse” that would indicate which animal is chasing which. Word 
order alone determines the difference. Word order should be of paramount 
importance in trying to teach English to speakers of a language that is 
not ­order-dependent. In order to stress the importance of word order in 
English, both transitive and intransitive verbs would have to be used.
Similarly, an odd choice was made in the sentence that Dr. Banks 
claims to be working towards translating into Heptapod B. She writes the 
sentence “What is your purpose for coming here?” on the whiteboard to 
illustrate how difficult it is to convey all the aspects of that sentence in 
another language. True. So, why not just translate the sentence “Why are 
you here?” It is unclear why Dr. Banks chose the more complicated sen-
tence to translate when the simpler sentence would have conveyed the 
exact same meaning. A linguist would go for the simpler sentence.
The Portrayal of the Alien Language
Obviously, everything we know about language is based on what 
we have studied about human language. So, are humans even capable of 
conceptualizing an alien language? Human conceptions about language, 
including alien languages, use human language as a starting point. A num-
ber of science fiction and fantasy writers have created their own languages 
for their unreal characters: Klingon, Dothraki, and Avatar, are just three 
examples. Historically, one of two approaches has been taking in creat-
ing these languages. Tolkien used influences from a variety of ancient and 
modern languages as a basis for his Elvish languages. Finnish, in particular, 
influenced the grammar of Quenya, one of the Elvish languages, and Celtic 
languages influenced Sendarin, another of the Elvish languages. Tolkien’s 
languages were intended to seem ­other-worldly, but in fact were based on 
qualities of actual human languages.
Another approach is to look at the typical, most frequently encoun-
tered characteristics of human languages and create a language that is as 
different from known human languages as possible by using a combination 
of the rarest characteristics. If, for example, most languages have a word 
order that is ­Subject-Object-Verb (e.g., Japanese) or ­Subject-Verb-Object 
(e.g., English), then the creator would choose a different, ­less-common 
word order (e.g., ­Object-Verb-Subject) for his or her fictional language. If 
few languages allow certain sound combinations or tend to omit certain 
sounds from their phonemic (sound) inventories, those will be the sounds 

28    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
that are used in the created language. To create an alien language, then, the 
goal appears to be to create the most foreign sounding language possible 
to the largest number of people in order to convey the sense of “alien.” For 
example, in Avatar (2009), the Na’vi language, in terms of both its sound 
system and its syntax, was designed to sound as different from human lan-
guages as possible by incorporating the least common syntactic structures 
and the least common sounds in human language. These approaches seem 
to work convincingly where the language is just one of many aspects of the 
characters that are selected to create the alien depiction, and where the lan-
guage itself is not the focus of the story.
Arrival is different, however. The language of the heptapods is central 
to the plot of the film (and to the short story on which it is based). This is 
where a fundamental question arises. How can a language that is indepen-
dent of our human conceptualization of language be created, when creating 
a language that consciously either does or does not have characteristics of 
human language necessarily means creating a language from the perspec-
tive of human language? In either case, one can argue, the language is based 
on human language.
If we set aside that concern and focus on the language created, we see 
that Heptapod B is characterized as being ­non-linear. The circular sym-
bols are called ideograms in the film and each symbol is meant to convey a 
complete thought. Each ideogram has no obvious beginning point and the 
ideograms are presented in no obvious order. Once Dr. Banks figures all 
this out, she is able to communicate with the heptapods. In addition, once 
she figures out the ­non-linear aspect of Heptapod B, she is able to expe-
rience time in a ­non-linear fashion, living through the past, present, and 
future simultaneously.
While the concept of circular ideograms is clever, the notion that they 
could have no beginning point and still be intelligible is difficult to main-
tain, particularly for an English speaker, a language for which word order 
is critical to sentence meaning. If I start the sentence “the cat chased the 
mouse” with “the mouse,” I’d come up with “the mouse the cat chased,” 
which could be interpreted as either the cat chasing the mouse or the mouse 
chasing the cat. I can’t present the words in the sentence in a circular fash-
ion with no designation for the starting point and hope that the reader will 
understand with I’m saying. Furthermore, arranging all the sentences of a 
paragraph in no particular order on a screen and asking someone to figure 
out the meaning of the paragraph. A number of interpretations would be 
possible. Determining meaning, particularly in the relatively short amount 
of time depicted in the movie, would be impossible. If, on the other hand, 
the ideograms are not composed of words, but of entire concepts, we have 
the problem of how to pictorially depict abstract concepts. How would “We 

Chapter 1: Arrival    29
desire the international cooperation of all human linguists” be depicted 
in an ideogram? It’s an interesting question, and perhaps impossible for a 
human to produce. That may be why the ideograms are never deciphered 
for the audience. Another question that is left open is how any depictions 
could possibly work across alien (literally, alien) cultures.
As I mentioned, the film and story suggest that learning Heptapod 
B enables Dr. Banks to experience time differently. Linguistic Determin-
ism, the idea that language determines thought (the ­so-called “­Sapir-Whorf 
Hypothesis”) has been debated and tested for decades. While its most 
extreme interpretation—that we can conceptualize the world only in a way 
that our language permits—is no longer seriously argued, the softer ver-
sion that maintains that language can affect the way that we see the world 
is. There is research that has shown such effects, particularly with regard to 
color terms and grammatical gender markings. If my native language has 
only five color terms, then, according to the theory, I categorize the colors 
that I see in terms of those five colors. If my language grammatically cate-
gorizes a “bridge” as a feminine noun, then I will tend to use adjectives that 
describe the structure as having stereotypically feminine characteristics 
(e.g., elegant, pretty, slender). If my language categorizes the word “bridge” 
as a masculine noun, then stereotypically masculine characteristics tend to 
be attributed to the bridge (e.g., sturdy, strong, towering). Accordingly, we 
can say that language can have an effect on how I see the world.
Without having to debate the merits of the theory in general, however, 
we can argue that its application here to second language acquisition is a 
leap. This is even more questionable in the situation in Arrival. As depicted 
in the film, Dr. Banks has studied Heptapodish B for only a few weeks or 
months (it’s unclear just how long she studied the language before deci-
phering it), and only this written form. No linguist I know would main-
tain that learning the written form of a foreign language for a few months 
is going to rewire your brain. Learning a foreign language is not the same 
as acquiring your first language. As we acquire a second language, we are 
constantly comparing it to our first language. A second language is always 
acquired in terms of the first language. The acquisition of the second lan-
guage by adults is not integrated into our development process as our first 
language is. Learning a second language may mitigate the constraints of our 
first language to some extent, but is unlikely to rewire our brains entirely, 
and certainly not if we have studied the foreign language for only a brief 
period of time.
One final linguistic aspect of the film and story that bears mention 
is an interesting explanation of the language lessons that is circulating on 
social media. This argument posits that the heptapods did not need to learn 
English, because the heptapods had already learned English on a previous 

30    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
visit. (I presume they learned other human languages, as well?) Anyway, 
according to this theory, the real purpose of the visit was to get the interna-
tional community to work together cooperatively on one project, namely 
figuring out the purpose of the intergalactic visit, in order to teach us to 
love one another. (The fact that Dr. Banks learned Heptapod B and was able 
to see time ­non-linearly was a side benefit, according to this view.) If this 
is the case, the heptapods are coy devils, indeed. It’s an interesting thought, 
and one that completely ­de-emphasizes the role of language. Instead of 
making the breaking down of the language barrier as essential to figuring 
out the purpose of the visit, it becomes one of a number of tasks that the 
heptapods could have set in motion to stimulate international cooperation. 
It also leaves open the question of what would have happened had Hepta-
pod B not been deciphered, and the military option had been pursued. I, 
for one, have to believe that Dr. Banks’ efforts were necessary and that the 
linguist really did save the world.

31
Chapter 2: Interstellar
Christopher Nolan is one of the best directors working today—a cur-
rent auteur. His second feature Memento (2000) made him an ­A-list direc-
tor, and he has since made a seemingly endless string of great films/hits, 
including the last Batman trilogy, Insomnia (2002), The Prestige (2006), and 
Inception (2010). Originally a vehicle for Steven Spielberg, Interstellar was 
handed off to Nolan with a $165 million budget, a cast of ­A-list stars, and 
the universe as his canvas. His brother Jonathan, himself a noted writer 
(HBOs Westworld), helped to ­re-write the script, and noted astrophysicist 
Kip Thorne was the science advisor on the film. The ­A-list cast included 
starring roles by Matthew McConaughey, Anne Hathaway, and Jessica 
Chastain, as well as meaty supporting roles by Matt Damon, Michael Caine, 
The spaceship Endurance approaching the black hole in Interstellar (Paramount 
Pictures, 2014).

32    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
John Lithgow, Ellen Burstyn, David Gyasi, and Wes Bentley among others. 
The film was ­big-budget studio ­sci-fi for ­grown-ups from the beginning, 
and it delivered.
It is a sweeping, epic story: in the near future circa 2070, blight has 
struck the food supply while widespread famine and drought pervade the 
Earth. Most scientists agree that end times are near, and they need to take 
drastic measures. Around the same time, the scientists find an inexplica-
bly placed wormhole near Saturn, which they use as a portal to other gal-
axies. Several years earlier (before we enter the film), the underfunded and 
­nearly-defunct NASA had sent out explorers to all of the planets deemed 
possibly hospitable, and the time has come to send a ­follow-up team to 
those planets/explorers and begin the process of continuing the human 
race. It is either a suicide mission to the unknown or the beginning of a 
new era. Joseph “Coop” Cooper (McConaughey), a farmer and former 
engineer/pilot in the middle of what looks like a throwback to Dust Bowl 
America (replete with flying drones and robotic tractors), helms the mis-
sion to ­re-trace the steps of the explorers and see if there is, in fact, a suit-
able replacement for Earth. In the process, he leaves his daughter behind.
There is a lot going in the film, with its start on Earth (dusty farms 
and towns) and its finish in another galaxy (planets dominated solely by 
water or ice) next to a black hole, including trips back and forth ­in-between 
those two points throughout. The heart of the film, however, is the relation-
ship between Coop and his daughter Murph, a relationship that takes on 
extraordinary challenges over decades and across the universe. Murph is 
represented in three different stages by three different actors, and the rela-
tionship that spans galaxies pushes current astrophysics to its limits and 
beyond. In the first iteration of Murph, ten years old and played by a won-
derful Mackenzie Foy, she is a child prodigy living on the family farm with 
her father, brother, and grandfather. She causes trouble at school for bring-
ing in books telling the story of the Moon landing, evidently a ­no-no. Such 
stories have been corrected in this ­near-future world, the teacher tells 
Coop, because the real story is about how the moon landings were faked to 
bankrupt the Soviets—the point being that the moon landing is irrelevant 
in this world of famine. The principal starkly drives home the point as he 
tells Cooper about his son and his son’s future: “we don’t need more engi-
neers; we need more food.” We then see Murph at ­thirty-five (Chastain), 
now a renowned scientist trying to figure out the magic formula for saving 
humans. She is brilliant but bitter: she believes her father has abandoned 
her and never intended to return. This beautiful but difficult relationship 
is the center around which the rest of the magnificent narrative and visu-
als revolve.
The film was shot mainly in IMAX 70 mm and anamorphic 35 mm, 

Chapter 2: Interstellar    33
the shoot lasted 5 months, and it spanned three countries. Overall, the fin-
ished piece of art is a formalist gem, including challenging ­mise-en-scène, 
cinematography, editing, and sound. Everything works together to tell the 
story, invest the film with specific style, and point toward multiple themes. 
The production design and visual design are stunning, and the mathemati-
cal representation of a black hole (designed by Thorne) was so good that it 
is now used as a teaching tool for astrophysics students at ­Cal-Poly. It was 
critically well received, and it did moderate business at the U.S. ­box-office 
with a much better international showing.
With the big budget, a director at the height of his powers, a stellar 
cast, a basis in real science, and astounding special effects, the film still 
remains profoundly human. The relationship between Murph (Chastain as 
Murph in her ’30s) and her father (McConaughey) may be the central force, 
but it is by no means the only one. From the start of the film to the last 
frame, humanity and its quest to remain relevant are foregrounded among 
all of the trappings of Hollywood. Much like Arrival, Interstellar wonder-
fully address the central question of science fiction in unique and power-
ful ways: “What does it mean to be human?” We look first to all of the filmic 
aspects to get us there.
The ­mise-en-scène, cinematography, editing, and sound all point the 
way toward a central thematic project in the film; for such a huge proj-
ect infused with ­mind-boggling special effects, that central project is one 
of realism. The realism manifests itself in many ways—small and large—
and speaks to the urgent concerns at the center of the film as well as its 
presentation and effect. We are able to see the past, present, and future in 
terms of that realism, with the net effect being something tangible and vis-
ceral. The verisimilitude also speaks to an urgency in the film that reflects 
a larger trend in recent science fiction cinema: the future is close and the 
issues are laid bare, at our doorsteps. We are no longer allowed to pawn off 
our current and ­near-future problems onto a faraway future that makes us 
feel safe and comfortable. Science fiction has always been great at pointing 
out current issues while projecting them onto a future plane; Alien (1979), 
for example, spoke to environmental degradation on Earth but set the film 
several hundred years in the future. The Matrix (1999) is set in 2199. With 
more recent ­sci-fi, including Interstellar, that is set in the near future, the 
result is that we are no longer given that safe distance from which to view 
the destruction. Recent ­sci-fi has closed the temporal distance that used 
to offer a false sense of safety and now speaks to our current situation—a 
world in which we can’t ignore crop disasters or climate change. The future 
is now.
Thus, the realism. Nolan has stated that he was interested in realism 
for the sake of clarity and sense of purpose. For example, he wanted the 

34    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
opening sequence on the farm to be appealing, simple, and beautiful, yet 
still on the verge of disaster. If it wasn’t appealing, Nolan stated, then it 
wouldn’t be difficult to leave. It is not a dystopia but rather a dying uto-
pia. Nolan wanted to eliminate trying to figure out what the future would 
look like and made it look like today: “Who cares what their trousers would 
look like,” he mused. That beauty and simplicity extended to the filming 
itself: on location in Canada, the crew defied nature in interesting and 
unexpected ways, with remarkable results. This opening sequence also does 
what I see as an important element of science fiction: it grounds the film 
in Earth. Even though the narrative crux of the film revolves around the 
degradation of Earth, it still makes clear that Earth is not only a place that 
has been ruined, but it is something that needs to be found again. Earth is 
thus very much the center of the search. This focus on realistic aspects of 
the ­mise-en-scène, from the dusty, dying surface of the planet, to its lonely 
beauty in the vastness of space, supplies the film with a mix of wonder and 
horror that has seeped into the world consciousness in our time. It is real.
The realism extends to the smallest details in the film as well. Nolan 
wanted the costumes to be authentic in terms of their usefulness and util-
ity. Space suits were based on updated versions of NASA spacesuits—more 
classic than futuristic. Everything on the suit has a purpose; nothing is 
decorative. Suits weighed 30–35 lbs. with a cooling mechanism in them, 
similar to real astronauts. In so many ­science-fiction films, the suits are 
ludicrous representations of the real thing that wouldn’t last a minute in 
real space; here, they are modeled after real NASA suits and the actors wore 
the real thing, including working microphones inside the suits.
That attention to realistic details suffuses into the sets as well, includ-
ing not only the farm and the farmhouse as mentioned before, but to all 
of the spaceships as well. Modeled after the NASA Space Shuttle and the 
International Space Station, Nolan wanted everything to be utilitarian, and 
therefore nothing is superfluous. The handles inside the ships, for exam-
ple, are placed so the astronauts can pull themselves around easily and log-
ically; the control panels move and adjust so they have multiple uses. While 
many other ­sci-fi films would include buttons and knobs that don’t do any-
thing, Nolan tried to design everything with a purpose.
The locations even follow this logic of realism and CGI was only used 
to enhance the actual location shoots. The farm scenes were shot on loca-
tion in Canada, one of the planets was shot on location in Iceland, and the 
other planet was shot on a glacier in another part of Iceland. On the Icelan-
dic glacier subbing for Mann’s planet, the sets were built right onto the ice 
itself and had to be adjusted every day due to shifts in the ice and the brutal 
conditions—ice, snow, and wind. On Miller’s planet, which is entirely cov-
ered in water, the crew found an area with shallow water for miles. The cast 

Chapter 2: Interstellar    35
spent days in wetsuits with water up to their knees. All reported a cold, tax-
ing few days of shooting.
The Canadian location for the farm sequences speaks to the film’s 
yearning for authenticity and thematic depth in particular. The location 
outside of Alberta, Canada is not what you might think of when picturing 
the American Midwest—its rolling hills leading up to a mountain range in 
the background reminds more of a Colorado or Montana landscape than 
it does Iowa or Kansas. Seeing miles of corn plopped down into this land-
scape screams of disjunction. And that is exactly the point—the images 
were meant to be evocative of something that is not necessarily natural, but 
rather, forced; it is a venture that is pushing the limits of human knowledge 
and experience while pushing the boundaries of the Earth’s natural tenden-
cies. In short, it feels like a ­last-ditch effort, a gambit one endeavors when 
all else has failed. The physical space and the images therein thus speak to 
a planet and civilization in decline: a world in which all other possibili-
ties have been exhausted and desperate measures are all that remain. The 
simplicity of the farm and its surroundings belie the fact that the Earth is 
dying, including the people along with it. The opening sequence therefore 
speaks to the holistic project of the film and its vision: we are failing our 
planet and we must take drastic measures to save it and/or ourselves. It is 
certainly an environmental message in an age of climate crisis and one that 
suggests we look not only inward for relief, but to the stars as well. And that 
message speaks loudly through the ­mise-en-scène.
Yet even in this ­near-future milieu of decay, the production itself finds 
hope and freshness in the character of human ingenuity. The actual loca-
tion—outside Alberta, Canada, and a place that has been the setting of 
many an American Western—was not suited for growing corn. The produc-
tion built the house of its dreams in this valley, but they were told that corn 
would not grow there. CGI was an option, but Nolan opted for realism and 
the production planted its own acres of corn on the land around the house. 
To everyone’s surprise, it worked. The corn thrived, the images were stun-
ning, and they even harvested most of what they planted with the profits 
helping to offset the costs of the location! The monster science fiction film 
with the ridiculous budget scored their first profits on the film (long before 
it was released) by planting, growing, and selling corn. All in a location that 
was not supposed to support it. Fitting.
That realism of the opening sequences is buttressed by the intercutting 
of interviews with people who seem to be speaking of an era reminiscent of 
the 1930s American Dust Bowl. When we see the awesome storms of that 
portion of the film, it certainly has the aesthetic of the dust bowl and was 
actually based on a real storm from 1935 Texas. The production team used 
a biodegradable additive and blew mountains of it around the town of Fort  

36    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
McLeod (outside Calgary) to create a realistic version of such a storm. The 
cast, crew, and the town itself took days to clean up after the shooting, all 
in the service of verisimilitude. The interviews—themselves actual recorded 
Dust Bowl remembrances from survivors of the era, are in the Ken Burns 
style of wistful and nostalgic referentiality—seem out of place until we get to 
the end of the film and understand their significance and their placement. In 
the grand scheme of the film, they come from the future: the elderly Murph 
and other farmers/inhabitants of this era are speaking of what it was like to 
live in these last days on Earth. The interviews would be part of a historical 
­museum-type piece established on the Cooper space station conceived and 
built by Murph with data transmitted to her by her father, in the future. The 
interviews are plopped down into the beginning of the film, however, given 
to us by Nolan in the same gravitational ­time-slip-maneuver whereby Coo-
per gives his daughter the data to save civilization. If it all seems so compli-
cated as you read it, well, you must see the film. But the film’s ethos is firmly 
established—in every way—in this opening.
The cinematography also follows this project of realism and authen-
ticity—as much as it can. And this probably a good time for a disclaimer: it 
is still a movie, and even film realism only approximates the reality of any 
place or time in its lens. As ­co-writer Jonathan Nolan states, “At one point 
we are standing in a fake dust storm next to a fake house surrounded by 
fake corn in a fake Midwestern location.” But it looks real, and it felt real to 
the cast in particular, who were able to act next to and off of real locations, 
real props, and real subjects. For example, the chase through the corn to 
find the wayward drone was shot in the same location as the action in the 
diegesis—the corn fields around the house. Coop and his kids see the drone 
and then chase it, plowing through ­7-foot-high corn stalks to do so. To get 
the effect, the crew used a model airplane that was actually flying over the 
truck, someone was actually driving the truck through the cornfield, and 
everything was directed by a helicopter pilot flying above them while the 
crew shot inside the truck and from outside the helicopter. There are effects 
involved, to be sure, but the majority of the sequence was shot right there, 
on location, and it actually happened. As the CGI director noted about the 
film, “When I read the script, I thought we would have to do most of the 
work supplemented by the shooting, but it was the other way around.” The 
actual location, perspective, and moving camera of the cinematography 
place us into the action, make us feel as if we are there, or at least, that it 
happened. That is the essence of film realism.
The same holds true for some of the space sequences, which were shot 
mostly on location with only minimal effects intertwined with the real 
footage. As noted, the water planet was shot on location in Iceland, as was 
the ice planet. Matthew McConaughey and Matt Damon actually fought on 

Chapter 2: Interstellar    37
the ice. The base literally blew up (in one take!) on the ice. The windstorm 
actually came through during filming and became part of the sequence. The 
crew had to continually tweak the sets as the ice moved several inches daily; 
bolts that held down the structures one day would be uprooted the next. 
The wind was so bad at one point that the crew had to retreat to the hotel 
and wait it out. Unhappy that they were sitting idle, Nolan set up shop in 
the parking lot of the hotel, shooting ­close-ups and reaction shots so they 
wouldn’t waste any time. The conditions were always conducive to actors 
feeling as though they were in a different place and time, however, in real 
conditions. As good as these actors are, you can’t fake being actually cold 
or actually standing in freezing water up to your knees. Again, the viewer is 
given a sense that we are there and this is real.
The lighting inside the various ships was also designed with realism 
and function in mind: the lights emanated from inside the spaces of the 
ship (the actual lights that would be on such a ship) but still gave cine-
matographer Hoyte Van Hoytema (Dunkirk, Let the Right One In, Her) the 
lighting he needed to get the shot. Even though the ships were constructed 
on sets, Van Hoytema brought his camera into those sets, in tight spaces, 
with only the ambient lighting they built into the ships. It is quite remark-
able when considering how they could have lit the sets otherwise, standard 
practice for any Hollywood film. Instead, they opted for realism.
The editing follows this same project of grounding the film in a realism 
that allows the viewer to suture themselves into the film. The ­cross-cutting 
sequence of Cooper on Mann’s planet while Murph and brother are back 
on Earth, on the farm, is a great example as it follows this scheme but also 
highlights the film’s wonderful marriage of form and substance. We are 
given realistic settings in both locations—the Icelandic glacier standing in 
for Mann’s planet and farm in Alberta. Thematically, both sequences con-
vey a struggle for survival, a struggle to save themselves, and a yearning for 
family. Cooper fights Mann (instigating a survival instinct that Mann nar-
rates to him) as Murph fights her brother to save him, his wife, and his son. 
The effect of the ­cross-cutting is thematic and realistic on both ends. Con-
sider this entire sequence as form meets content: the ­mise-en-scène is real-
istic and authentic, including the blistering cold of the planet and the dust 
storms/fires of the town on Earth; the cinematography uses mostly hand-
held camera to give a ­documentary-feel to the Earth sequence as well as the 
fight on the planet; and the editing connects the two plots together through 
the ­cross-cutting, pointing to the yearning for connectivity that grounds 
the film thematically.
That editing also has a physical property to it that mirrors the events of 
the film. As the sequence moves on and Coop brings the ship to the brink 
of the Black Hole and jettisons Brand off to the lone remaining promising 

38    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
planet, we continue to cut back and forth between Coop entering the Black 
Hole and Murph examining her old room for clues. We are dealing with 
ruptures (or rips, or whatever we should call them…) in time and space at 
this point. Coop is entering the sixth dimension inside the Black Hole and 
about to send back the messages to young Murph, who believes it is her 
ghost. At the same time, older Murph is examining the room and finds the 
watch that Coop codes with the information she needs to solve the equa-
tion back on Earth. The editing ties all of this space and time together into 
a coherent story so that we, the viewer, are able to follow along and see how 
these three different places and times all fit into the larger narrative. The 
overall film and the ­cross-cutting of the editing are no longer bound by 
the “normal” laws of ­cross-cutting—parallel action showing two different 
things happening in different locations at the same time—but rather, now 
we see three different things happening in three different locations in space 
at time, at presumably the same time. In other words, the editing wonder-
fully mirrors the physics of the film.
The music is the final piece to this intricate puzzle of a film. It fol-
lows along with the project of realism while adding depth and breadth to 
the entire construct. Nolan had very specific ideas about the music, includ-
ing the feel and the progression in particular. He told composer Hans Zim-
mer that he wanted organic sounds, and he wanted the music to change 
along with the physical movement away from Earth—the music close to 
Earth was very much melodic and of the Earth, while the music as they 
moved further away would become increasingly warped. Nolan also wished 
to escape the limits of what we have seen in previous science fiction: “It 
was very important to me that the music not pay attention to the genre,” 
said Nolan. He gave Zimmer a task: write one page about the relationship 
between a father and his son, but he didn’t tell him what the movie was 
about. Zimmer himself has a son, so he wrote it about his own relationship 
to his own son. That simple organ piece Zimmer wrote would become the 
leitmotif of the score and the basis for the remainder of all the music. They 
even recorded the organ in the Temple Church in London so they could get 
real sounds in a real place. Once again, Nolan was striving for an organic 
atmosphere with heart and humanity.
Further, the sound and music corrode as you get further away from 
Earth, and the instruments are meant to remind you of “everything you 
can lose.” This once again plays right into a prominent subject of the film, 
connection, with the theme being that humans are constantly searching 
for connection: on a personal level (like a parent to a child in Coop and 
Murph) or even on a larger level, such our connection to the Cosmos. We 
are constantly searching for those meaningful connections in our lives in 
many ways, and we also seek to connect to the universe—be it a connection 

Chapter 2: Interstellar    39
to other beings or a metaphysical connection. The music thus rounds out 
this central theme of the film and it all fits squarely into the larger question 
of science fiction: “what does it mean to be human?” Interstellar answers 
this question with wonder, poetry, and humanity.
—Vincent Piturro
How Easy Is Interstellar Colonization?
Ka Chun Yu
In Christopher Nolan’s Interstellar, crops are failing all over Earth 
because of blight in the near future. Matthew McConaughey’s character 
becomes involved in a NASA mission to look for other habitable planets for 
humans to escape to as Earth becomes increasingly uninhabitable. One can 
read this plot device as a reflection of our modern anxieties about how cli-
mate change and environmental distress may force us to look for opportu-
nities out in space. Public figures like Stephen Hawking have advocated for 
humans eventually spreading out to the stars, while Elon Musk has stated 
he wants to colonize Mars.
The idea of colonizing other planets long predates its ­present-day pro-
motion, but it has been a venerable theme in science fiction. Before the 
Space Age, it was common for American writers to imagine that colonizing 
nearby planets in our solar system would be a futuristic extension of how 
Europeans colonized the western hemisphere. But starting in the mid–20th 
century, our ­Earth-based remote sensing technologies and our first inter-
planetary space probes began to reveal what these worlds were really like. 
We learned that the surfaces of Mars and Venus were much harsher than we 
had imagined, both extremely dry, as well as unbearably cold or hot. There 
was no chance that intelligent aliens ever appeared on these worlds. At best, 
we could hope that microbial life had evolved when Mars was warmer and 
wetter billions of years in the past, and a few of these ­single-celled organ-
isms could still be tenaciously holding on deep underground, waiting to be 
discovered.
But even given its inhospitable surface, Mars beckons to those who 
feel humanity should not be bound to just one planet. Given what we know 
today, how difficult would it be for us, not just to visit with a small team 
of explorers, but to plant large human colonies on other planets? What 

40    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
attributes of a planet make it suitable for life as we know it? And even if 
a world like Mars is harsh and uninviting today, how difficult would it be 
to terraform the surface to make it possible for humans to live on the sur-
face without wearing spacesuits? And following the lead of Interstellar, how 
hard would it be to colonize ­Earth-like planets elsewhere in the universe, 
assuming that the problem of transportation is already solved for us, such 
as via the wormholes seen in the film?
First let’s make a list of requirements of what is necessary for life as we 
know it. We need oxygen in the air for animals to breathe, and carbon diox-
ide for plants to grow. Nitrogen must also be available in the environment 
for bacteria to “fix” it into a form that can be readily used by plants (and 
The first image beamed back from the Mariner 4 spacecraft in 1965 of Mars’ sur-
face shows a surface pockmarked by craters, revealing a world very much unlike 
the one built up in people’s imaginations up until then (NASA).

Chapter 2: Interstellar    41
ingested by the animals that eat the plants). Water is a must for all life, and 
the surface environment must be in a temperature and pressure range con-
ducive for it to exist in an accessible liquid form. Finally life must also have 
some protection from damaging solar ultraviolet (UV) radiation as well as 
high energy particles in the form of cosmic rays and solar wind particles.
Since the formation of the solar system, Earth has evolved over the 
last 4.5 billion years so that multiple geophysical and biological systems 
are involved to supporting life. Plants and cyanobacteria grow by taking in 
water, carbon dioxide (CO2), and sunlight, and converting it to biomass, 
The oxygen (O2) that makes up 21 percent of the atmosphere, and which 
animals breathe in, is released as a ­by-product of the photosynthesis reac-
tion. The 78 percent of Earth’s atmosphere made up of nitrogen is tapped 
by bacteria and converted into a form available for use by plants. Since they 
are also the source for food and resources like building materials, clothing, 
and pharmaceuticals for humans, future ­self-sufficient colonies will have to 
plant and keep alive a diverse range of plants.
The trace amount of heat trapping gases carbon dioxide or CO2 (about 
400 parts per million and growing, because of human activities) and water 
vapor in our atmosphere prevents surface heat from radiating completely 
back into space. Without these, the ground of our world would be, on aver-
age, close to freezing. Water is found in abundance on the Earth’s surface in 
liquid form, although there is enough variability in surface conditions for it 
to exist in gaseous and solid forms.
A small fraction of the oxygen molecules in the atmosphere are fur-
ther converted into ozone (O3), which in the upper atmosphere, helps 
shield some of the Sun’s dangerous ultraviolet (UV) radiation. Even the 
Earth’s magnetic field, which in addition to letting us navigate with com-
passes, has an additional role in protecting us from harmful radiation. This 
magnetic field can deflect high velocity charged particles from deep space, 
some of which are ­re-funneled towards the polar regions, where they slam 
into the upper atmosphere to create aurorae. By lowering the rate of ener-
getic particles impacting our atmosphere, the magnetic field also lowers the 
amount of gas that gets stripped and lost into space.
Living on Mars
Mars is often spoken of as the world most similar to Earth in our solar 
system.1 But in many respects, it is dissimilar in many of the critical ways 
involving habitability. The Martian atmosphere is much thinner, with the 
pressure at the surface only 0.6 percent that of Earth’s surface. Even though 
the atmosphere is 96 percent CO2, the layer of air is just not thick enough 

42    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
to provide much of a greenhouse effect to warm the surface. As a result, the 
average temperature over its surface is about -60 deg C or -76 deg F.2 The 
low pressure of the Martian atmosphere also makes it impossible for liq-
uid water to exist on the surface. Instead of freezing, any water poured onto 
the surface of Mars simply sublimates, or turns directly into a gas. The lack 
of oxygen means that there is no ozone to shield the surface from the Sun’s 
damaging UV rays. And the absence of an appreciable magnetic field also 
means there is no shielding from charged cosmic rays and solar wind par-
ticles. The surface of the world is under continual radiation bombardment. 
If there is microbial life on Mars, it is unlikely to survive in the topsoil, but 
would have to be found deeper. Similarly, astronauts visiting from Earth 
would be exposed to greater amounts of damaging radiation on the surface 
of Mars than they would on Earth. Habitats for human explorers may have 
to be buried underground, where a top layer of rock and dirt can help pro-
tect the inhabitants from the flux of cosmic radiation.
Despite such hostile conditions, one could imagine sending small 
teams of astronauts to explore Mars and live “off the land.” In order to do 
so, they would have to be able to grow food in Martian soil, instead of haul-
ing in all the supplies they would need for a ­multi-year mission. Luckily 
observations from our robotic explorers at Mars suggest the planet has sub-
stantial amounts of water in the polar caps and underneath its surface. If 
all of the polar cap water was melted, it would cover the surface of Mars to 
a depth of 22 meters (72 feet). Ice that has been indirectly detected under-
ground could provide add another 12 meters (39 feet) to that global ocean. 
It would take an immense engineering effort and considerable expense of 
energy, but there is no technical reason why astronauts would not be able 
to mine and melt ice from underground reservoirs, or transport meltwater 
from the polar caps.
Given sufficient water, concentrated CO2 from the atmosphere, and 
imported fertilizer which would provide fixed nitrogen, could our future 
Mars explorers grow crops like Matt Damon’s character from the movie 
version of The Martian? Unfortunately, real Martian soil may not be so con-
ducive to agriculture. Over the last decade, our robotic landers and orbiters 
at Mars have discovered that the reactive chemical perchlorate appears to 
be globally distributed on the surface.3 Its concentration is only 0.5 percent, 
but it is enough to be poisonous to many microorganisms. On Earth, plants 
grown in soil contaminated at lower levels of perchlorate can accumulate 
the chemical in its foliage. People who ingest such vegetation would have 
their iodine uptake by the thyroid gland affected, which can affect metab-
olism and growth. In order to grow any food, Martian soil will have to be 
cleansed of all perchlorate. Scientists Yoji Ishikawa, Takaya Ohkita, and 
Yoji Amemiya have estimated that at least 100 square meters (1080 square 

Chapter 2: Interstellar    43
feet) of land is needed per person underneath domed greenhouses in order 
to support a human colony. However as an insurance policy against acci-
dental breaches of the greenhouses which would immediately ­flash-freeze 
and kill your crops, they suggest 1200 square meters (12,900 square feet) 
per person, which would mean just over three football fields of land would 
be needed for a small colony of 15 people. Assuming at least a foot of top-
soil is necessary, roughly 20,000 tons of Martian soil would have to be pro-
cessed to remove all perchlorate. At the low end, just under 2000 tons of 
Martian soil would have to be cleansed.
In The Martian, the main character has to grow potatoes in Martian 
soil because he was unexpectedly stranded on Mars with not enough food 
to eat before he could be rescued. But future missions that rely on growing 
crops on site will likely use hydroponics, where plants are suspended, with 
only their roots exposed to concentrated solutions of water and nutrients. 
Current research sponsored by NASA shows that about 50 square meters 
(540 square feet) of greenhouses is needed per person when using such a 
technique. Thus even accounting for insurance against technology failures 
and accidental greenhouse breeches, doubling this number to 100 square 
meters (1080 square feet) per person means that our hypothetical 15 per-
son colony on Mars will need just under a third of a football field of green-
houses. However, studies also show that very strong lighting is needed to 
give crop yields high enough to support the amount of calories the crew 
would need. At Mars’ distance from the Sun, natural sunlight will not be 
strong enough. The greenhouses will need to have mirrors to concentrate 
the sunlight, or high intensity artificial lights need to be installed. Consid-
ering that global Martian dust storms can turn the Martian day into night 
for months at a time, artificial lighting will need to be in reserve even if the 
greenhouses use natural lighting most of the time.
Hydroponic systems have many advantages, including allowing pre-
cise amounts of water and nutrients to be sent to the plants, which helps 
minimize water waste. But because the plant roots are not resting in soil, 
it is important that the mechanical systems run smoothly. Crew members 
have to be ready to fix or replace an electric pump that has failed, and plug 
up leaks or remove clogs in the plumbing. Breakdowns in the hydroponics 
support infrastructure can be deadly for crops whose suspended roots can 
dry out, compared to vegetation planted in soil that holds onto moisture.
Therefore, a Martian base that is ­self-sufficient in food will need 
ample power to run lights, heaters, fans, and pumps to support agricul-
ture. Because mechanical parts wear down over time, a large supply of 
spare parts needs to be on hand to ensure that the inevitable breakdowns 
over time do not lead to catastrophic crop losses. The mission planners 
need to ensure enough supplies are brought on the initial mission or can 

44    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
be ­re-supplied over time. There need to be not only gardeners and farm-
ers, but also engineers to maintain the mechanical systems that sustain the 
agriculture.
Making Mars Livable
Making the Martian surface habitable for many more people would 
require it to become more ­Earth-like, so that people and plants would 
not be stuck inside pressurized enclosures. Ideas proposed for terrafor-
ming Mars—converting its atmosphere so that Earth ­life-forms could 
survive on its surface—first require thickening the atmosphere and rais-
ing its temperature. This could be started with the introduction of artifi-
cial greenhouse gases which would have to be manufactured and released 
into the air. These gases would raise the temperature of the surface, which 
would free carbon dioxide locked up in the soil. As the atmosphere thick-
ened with the new CO2, the ­heat-trapping properties of the additional gas 
would help warm the atmosphere even more. The hope is that this would 
be a ­self-perpetuating process, where the increased heat would release even 
more CO2 into the atmosphere, which would heat the atmosphere even 
more, and so on. According to planetary scientist Chris McKay, even with a 
runaway process and given the efficiencies of ­heat-trapping gases, it would 
take about 100 years to get the average surface temperature close to the 
melting point of ice. Once the planet is warm and thick enough for the ice 
caps to melt and be a source of liquid water, the composition of the atmo-
sphere would have to be ­re-engineered again. This time, oxygen has to be 
created for animal life to breathe. This could be done by seeding the sur-
face with specialized bacteria that takes in the carbon dioxide in the air, 
which when combined with water and sunlight results in biomass (growth 
of more bacteria), and oxygen exhaled out as a waste gas. Again accord-
ing to estimates by McKay, this process could take 170,000 years to gener-
ate enough oxygen for mammalian life—although one could imagine that 
advances in genetic engineering could speed up this process by a factor of 
two.
But is there enough carbon dioxide locked up in the surface soil of 
Mars to provide the runaway greenhouse effect? A 2018 paper by Bruce 
Jakosky and Christopher Edwards used the latest spacecraft discoveries to 
tally the various sources of CO2 on the Martian surface. This includes CO2 
locked up in the polar caps, bound up inside minerals, and adhering to 
the surface of dust and pebbles in the soil. They find if you unbind every 
molecule of CO2 in the topsoil and release it into the air, the pressure of 
the atmosphere goes from 0.6 percent to 6.9 percent of Earth’s. Because 

Chapter 2: Interstellar    45
sunlight is only 43 percent as strong on Mars as on Earth, the CO2 pressure 
would have to be roughly equal to Earth’s atmospheric pressure in order to 
warm the planet enough for liquid water to exist on its surface. Releasing 
all of the available CO2 in the topsoil of Mars would thus result in an atmo-
sphere that is still too weak to warm up the planet by a factor of 14 times.
What about the artificial heat trapping gases suggested earlier for 
­jump-starting the greenhouse warming? One scheme that has been advo-
cated for ­pre-heating the atmosphere is through the manufacture and 
release of tons of chlorofluorocarbons and perfluorocarbons, which can 
have up to 20,000 times the ­heat-trapping capacity of CO2. But these chem-
icals do not last forever in the atmosphere. Although Mars is farther from 
the Sun, its lack of oxygen and a protective ozone layer means that UV radi-
ation will eventually break apart these big molecules. No one as yet has 
developed detailed models showing what the expected lifetimes of these 
chemicals will be in the Martian atmosphere. But even if they are in the 
thousands of years, factories will have to continue pumping such chemicals 
out in perpetuity to keep the atmosphere warm enough for life.
There is also the matter of nitrogen which is a necessary ingredient 
for all life on Earth. As stated earlier, there has to be enough free oxygen 
that it can be fixed by bacteria into a form that can be ingested by plants. 
The amount of nitrogen available is still uncertain, although measurements 
from the Curiosity rover suggest nitrogen compounds are found to be 0.01 
to 0.1 percent of the Martian soil by weight. Mars’ surface rock would have 
to be ­strip-mined and processed to free the available nitrogen into the air 
(as well as allowing access to other useful ­bound-up molecules like water). 
Alternatively, if there is not enough accessible nitrogen on the surface, it 
would have to be imported in from elsewhere in the solar system, such as 
Saturn’s moon Titan.
Finally, a buffer against radiation from space will not begin to build up 
until the atmosphere is thick, dense, and oxygenated. If there is enough oxy-
gen, the Sun’s UV rays will convert part of it into ozone, where it can shield 
living organisms on the surface from the ­DNA-damaging UV radiation. The 
technology to create a magnetic field in a planet that does not already have 
one is far beyond what we can imagine today. So for now, radiation shielding 
on Mars will always be limited compared to Earth, and can only grow slowly 
as part of a hundred thousand ­year-long terraforming effort.
Colonizing ­Earth-Like Worlds
What about the possibility of finding and colonizing worlds elsewhere 
in the universe that are already ­Earth-like? Having easy access to worlds 

46    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
with ­Earth-like surface gravity and breathable air is a primary unspoken 
premise for Star Trek, as well as virtually any science fiction film and TV 
show where humans traveling out among the stars is a given.
The science is on its way to supporting parts of this premise. Since the 
first discovery of planets around other ordinary stars in 1995, there have 
been over 4000 confirmed planets as of this writing. Based on the statistics 
of the observed stellar sample from the Kepler spacecraft, it is thought that 
there could be tens of billions of ­Earth-sized worlds orbiting in the habit-
able zones of their stars. That is, these would be planets that are orbiting 
neither too close and too hot, nor too far and too cold for liquid water to 
exist on their surface. There is no guarantee that every one of these would 
have running water on their surfaces. Technically, Mars and Venus are in 
the Sun’s habitable zone as well, and they have evolved to be inhospitable 
places. But assuming we can identify planets that have conditions condu-
cive to life as we know it, how hard would it be to colonize one if we assume, 
like Interstellar, that getting there is no problem?
If we find an ­Earth-like world, it will either be lifeless or full of life. 
If the world already has life, the best situation would be one where pho-
tosynthesizing organisms already exist. They would have filled the atmo-
sphere with oxygen and negate the need for artificial terraforming. First 
we would have to ignore the ethical quandary of inserting our own alien 
biology into an existing ecosystem. We would become invading colonizers, 
with all the baggage that term holds in human history. That means if there 
were elements of the alien biosphere that were dangerous or incompati-
ble with Earth life, the alien life would have to be cut back or destroyed in 
order for the invading Earthlings to flourish.
How terrestrial life interacts with the alien biology is a more complicated  
Edmunds planet, which in the film Interstellar is habitable and promising for 
human colonization (Paramount/Warner Bros.).

Chapter 2: Interstellar    47
and important question. This is because humans are not just defined by the 
cells containing human DNA, but also by the host of symbiotic microorgan-
isms that are part of our “microbiome” that we carry with us. It is estimated 
that in our bodies, bacterial and viral cells actually outnumber human cells 
by a factor of 10 to 1. These cells are found throughout the interior of our 
body, as well as on the surface of our skin. How they interact with human 
cells as well as the microbiology in our environment is an active area of 
research which we are only beginning to understand. For instance, there 
is now evidence that the types of bacteria that we carry with us can deter-
mine how susceptible we are to certain diseases, and even how easy it is 
for us to lose weight. In order to have a healthy human population, it may 
be necessary to bring along all of these microbiomes to ­off-Earth colonies. 
How will such ensembles of Earth bacteria and viruses interact with their 
alien counterparts? Will they get along? Or will one type of biology over-
whelm and wipe out the other one? If the alien bugs have an upper hand 
over Earth bugs, what does that mean for human health and ­well-being? 
What about their impact on the growth of crops and other vegetation? 
Will we have to come up with vaccines to inoculate ourselves and other 
­Earth-based life against alien bacteria? We won’t know until we run such an  
experiment.
On the other hand, if the world we encounter is lifeless, the space trav-
elers likely will have to run the same terraforming process as described 
earlier for Mars. The fifth of Earth’s atmosphere made up of oxygen mole-
cules is out of equilibrium with the Earth. It is generated by ­plant-life and 
if the plants were to disappear, the oxygen would slowly combine with ele-
ments and be ­re-absorbed back into the Earth’s surface until there was no 
free oxygen left. An ­Earth-like world where all the ­plant-life was wiped out 
would slowly turn ­Mars-like, with the oxygen replaced by carbon dioxide. 
Newly arrived settlers to a lifeless world would have to start the oxygen-
ation process themselves, by going down the long road of terraforming, and 
seeding the planet with ­oxygen-generating bacteria. They would again have 
to wait thousands of years for oxygen to build up to a level making the air 
safe to breathe.
One common theme in science fiction is the utopian future where the 
destiny of humanity is in the stars. This Star Trek–like future has us spread-
ing out into the galaxy with ease, exploring where no one has gone before. 
But there is also a dystopian counter to that ideal, where it is assumed that 
as Earth becomes trashed and polluted, we have to escape it to survive. 
There are many examples in popular cinema, including the Off World Col-
onies advertised in Blade Runner, an Earth that is a “shithole” not worth 
returning to in Alien: Resurrection, and an Earth that has collapsed under 
the weight of rampant consumerism that ­Wall-E is attempting to tidy up.

48    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
But as we have seen, colonizing other planets is not easy, and involves 
enormous scientific and engineering challenges. It can not be done quickly, 
nor is it likely to be cheap. Planetary scientists who are ­pro-terraforming 
understand that with the technologies that we have today, it would still take 
thousands of years to lead to a viable biosphere where people could live 
without spacesuits. And even if like Anne Hathaway’s Interstellar charac-
ter, we happen to find an ­Earth-like planet with an oxygen atmosphere, col-
onizing such a world would involve the unpredictable scenario of mixing 
together two possibly incompatible microbiological ecosystems to see what 
will happen. And if not, we face the same terraforming challenges we had 
seen for Mars.
There is a subtext to space colonization that it is an easy way out if we 
manage to make Earth unlivable. But it turns out that Earth life is really 
suited for planet Earth. One cannot easily discount the scientific, engineer-
ing, financial, and temporal challenges when trying to replicate Earth con-
ditions elsewhere in the universe. There is no Planet B we can easily escape 
to in case things become unbearable on Earth. In order to generate the 
resources, technologies, and time that would allow us to terraform and col-
onize other planets, we have to buy time for us here on Earth.
Notes
	
1.  For more about Earth life surviving on Mars, see my interview with Steve Lee in the 
final chapter on The Martian.
	
2.  However, there is enough variability that the temperature can be as high as 20 deg C (or 
68 deg F) at the equator at noon, to -155 deg C (-247 deg F) at the poles.
	
3.  For another take on perchlorates and growing food on Mars, again see the interview 
with Steve Lee about The Martian at the end of the book.

49
Chapter 3: 2001: A Space Odyssey
Stanley Kubrick is one of the greatest directors in the history of cin-
ema. Born in 1928, as a youth he was mostly interested in reading books, 
watching the New York Yankees, listening to jazz, and playing chess. His 
first passion was photography and that eventually led him to the movies. 
His early films were ­self-funded, independent, and mostly fictional narra-
tive films with an experimental bent. His big break came when Kirk Doug-
las asked him to step in and direct Spartacus (1960) after Anthony Mann 
was fired. Kubrick became the youngest director, at 31, to make an epic (it 
The Sun, Earth, and Moon align in the opening shot of 2001: A Space Odyssey 
(MGM, 1969).

50    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
was one of the most expensive movies ever made in the U.S. at the time). 
The film was a critical and commercial success, and it marked the arrival of 
Kubrick as a major director. He would go on to direct to direct 8 more films 
in his life (in 39 years), taking his time and working in a very methodical 
and meticulous manner with each of his films: Lolita (1962), Dr. Strange-
love (1964), 2001: A Space Odyssey (1968), A Clockwork Orange (1971), Barry 
Lyndon (1975), The Shining (1980), Full Metal Jacket (1987), and Eyes Wide 
Shut (1999). His films would become landmarks of cinema and an inspira-
tion to several generations of directors. He is truly one of the greats, and 
along the way, he even helped to inject life into a lackluster industry at its 
lowest point in history.
The ’60s were a trying decade in the history of cinema. After the 
breakup of the studio system in a 1948 Supreme Court decision called the 
Paramount Decree, the old Hollywood would be no more. The studios 
had been practicing something called “vertical integration” for decades: 
the studios virtually controlled everything: production, distribution, and 
exhibition. They even “owned” the people: the directors, actors, editors, 
cinematographers, etc., were all under contract to a specific studio. Direc-
tors might finish up a love story on a Friday and begin work on a science 
fiction film on the following Monday. Actors were famously loaned out to 
other studios (for a price) or traded for another actor (like so many base-
ball players). The Supreme Court finally ruled that it was a monopoly and 
had to be broken up. It took several years, but that original studio system 
monopoly would finally fall. That was one domino in a larger paradigm 
shift for a changing nation with a changing demographic.
There would be several other factors that would lead to a decline in 
movie attendance coupled with film production: the mass migration from 
the cities (where the theaters were located) to the new suburbs in the wake 
of World War II, the advent of TV which became direct competition to the 
movies, the strangulation of movies by the Hays Code (the ­self-censorship 
code that had been in effect since 1934), and the influx of foreign films with 
more artistic content that were not necessarily bound by the Code. Add to 
that a changing demographic with the baby boomers coming of age and a 
counterculture which had no interest in saccharine love stories and stagey 
productions, and the grand result was that ­movie-going and movie produc-
tion were at ­all-time lows. Many thought Hollywood was finished as the 
’50s turned into the ’60s. There were two films that kept Hollywood going 
through this period, however: Hitchcock’s Psycho (1960), and Kubrick’s 
2001: A Space Odyssey. Both would inject life into a hapless industry.
Psycho brought people back to the movies in new and innovative ways: 
publishing specific show times (a new practice), not allowing anyone into 
the show once it began, and showing a trailer where Hitchcock himself 

Chapter 3: 2001: A Space Odyssey    51
urged the audience not to tell anyone else what happens in the movie. 
Scared and exhilarated audiences would burst through the doors after a 
show and those standing in the line for the next show would be chomping at 
the bit for their turn. It became an “event” just to go to the show. Of course, 
the film itself not only pushed the boundaries of the aging Hays Code, but it 
stunned audiences with its ­low-budget horror and ­rule-breaking narrative. 
Taking showers would never be the same.
Psycho would pump life into the cinema, but overall attendance lagged 
throughout the ’60s. By the time Kubrick decided to make 2001: A Space 
Odyssey, he was under pressure to produce a hit for storied yet ailing MGM 
Studios. Many thought the giant would go out of business otherwise. Still, 
Kubrick took his time, spending four years in production culminating with 
an extremely meticulous shoot. The majority of the film was shot outside 
London at Shepperton Studios, except for a ­second-unit journey to Africa 
for the opening sequence. At a final cost of around $12 million and with a ton 
of anticipation, the film premiered on April 2, 1968, in Washington, D.C. At 
first, audiences didn’t know that to make of it and it was both a ­box-office and 
critical dud. The anxiety over the film, the fate of MGM, and the film industry 
writ large would hang in the balance. All would have a happy ending.
The film was loosely based on prolific ­sci-fi author Arthur C. Clarke’s 
short story “The Sentinel.” Clarke and Kubrick used the story as a start-
ing point for their script, and they wrote the script together (simultane-
ously as Clarke was writing the novel) over the course of three years. The 
central premise of the story concerned a lunar expedition finding a myste-
rious, alien artifact on the moon; that artifact was sending a powerful sig-
nal toward Jupiter once it was found. This would provide the foundation of 
the film, but as with everything else he did, Kubrick would change it, mold 
it, and make it his own—and many times, it would be difficult to follow. 
Part of the initial audience and critical trepidation toward the film had to 
do with its oblique narrative, part of it had to do with the marketing of the 
film, and part of it had to do with the changes in film and filmgoing audi-
ences of its time. So it is therefore necessary to start with an outline of the 
narrative—which may be its least important aspect—before we can sort out 
all of the historical, cultural, technical, and thematic aspects. Then we can 
understand the evolution of its reception.
The opening sequence “The Dawn of Man” starts after an ominous 
symphonic overture, a black screen, and then the Earth rising from the per-
spective of the Moon. This placement will become more evident, and more 
consequential, later in the film, after humans find a second monolith on 
the Moon (the first was found by a group of apes in the beginning of the 
film). It is as if the aliens were watching the Earth and its first beings in this 
opening shot, and that it is taken from their perspective. Back on Earth,  

52    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
in prehistoric Africa millions of years ago, we see a tribe of apes struggling 
to survive, ­non-violently conflicting with another tribe, and cowering in 
a cave at night. They wake up to a mysterious black monolith, the leader 
“Moonwatcher” touches it, and he is seemingly inspired to turn a bone into 
a weapon, with which he beats a member of the opposing tribe to death. A 
match cut from the bone to an orbiting nuclear satellite millions of years 
later signifies a thematic match as well as the object match: both “tools” 
came to be used as weapons. In one sense, Kubrick tells us that not much 
has changed across the millennia. The matter of the monolith suggests the 
alien race (or higher power? Or a future, ­time-traveling “us”?) placed the 
monolith as a technological nudge, moving the species forward. One of the 
most famous cuts in the history of cinema has meaning on multiple levels.
The second, untitled sequence finds bureaucrat Floyd on a shuttle to 
the moon, where another monolith has been unearthed. We also get the 
first lines of dialog in the film, about 25 minutes in, as a flight attendant 
speaks to Floyd. The second monolith is a progress marker: once the civ-
ilization is advanced enough to find it, it then emits a signal to Jupiter, to 
the next monolith. Arthur C. Clarke called it a “burglar alarm” that goes 
off, literally in an ­ear-piercing “scream,” as the sun touches the uncovered 
monolith. The civilization has now developed the requisite technology to 
get to Jupiter, and 18 months later, that mission is in progress, moving us 
to the third episode of the film: “Jupiter Mission.” It is here where we meet 
Frank and Dave, the astronauts on the mission (others are in stasis), but 
also HAL, the onboard AI who is helping run the show and who soon turns 
dangerous. Once they arrive at Jupiter, after the rest of the crew is killed and 
HAL disabled, Dave sets off on his own to follow the signal emitted by the 
third monolith. This last episode, “Jupiter and Beyond the Infinite,” begins. 
His journey through a visually spectacular wormhole lands him on/in 
what seems to be an alien planet (and what looks to be a luxury suite hotel 
room). As Dave ages in a series of cuts, he dies and is changed (reborn?) 
into a fetus. A zoom into the last monolith (at the foot of his bed) cuts to 
the floating fetus orbiting Earth. That’s all.
But this rendering of the plot does little more than explain the narra-
tive and is barely the starting point. The ­mise-en-scène, cinematography, 
editing, and sound, coupled with the rich and thematically dense interpre-
tations of the film, is where the fun begins. Kubrick is such a master at all of 
these elements, and then some, that there is a lot to sort through; here we 
go.
Let’s start with the ­mise-en-scène. Everything is so meticulous that we 
can take any shot, scene, or sequence, and fill up the entire chapter. The first 
two sequences are particularly striking in their authentic atmospherics—
we move from the stark beauty of Africa to the stark beauty of ­near-Earth 

Chapter 3: 2001: A Space Odyssey    53
space in a seamless and thematically consistent flow. The setting of Africa 
is strikingly prehistoric and simple, but it still highlights the importance of 
our human lineage, the emotions and actions of early hominids and how 
that translates to contemporary beings, and it shows how we possess not 
only compassion and care for our young, but also how we can be violent 
and unpredictable beings. The sparseness, ruggedness, and simplicity of the 
setting speaks to everything we were, are, and how we have come to be. 
Then, the transition to space is connected by more than just a bone to a 
satellite; it is a cut from a seemingly sparse yet unknown space to another 
seemingly sparse, unknown space. Neither are entirely sparse, however.
The subjects of each setting are also compared in these opening 
sequences. The apes of the dusty and rocky landscape huddle together in a 
cave at night, frightened by the sounds of the animals who may hunt them. 
The humans of the “present” travel alone. The apes guard their young and 
aim to protect and guide them from the dangers of the leopards stalking 
the prairie. The humans of the present speak to their young through medi-
ation—video phones or recorded messages—and are seemingly discon-
nected from them on many levels. The idea here is that we have come so 
far technologically, but we are also becoming disconnected socially. As 
technology evolves and we become increasingly reliant on it, we tend to 
lose our humanity and become more ­machine-like in our own evolution. 
Take a second to remember that this film was released in 1968 and con-
sider this comment. That theme of disconnection and losing our human-
ity in the era of technology and the age of machines would pervade the 
film and find its voice in all of the formalist aspects. And it is spectacularly  
prescient.
The cinematography, however, may be (justifiably) the most remark-
able aspect of the film. Geoffrey Unsworth, one of the more prolific and cel-
ebrated cinematographers of all time (A Night to Remember [1958], Cabaret 
[1972]) worked tirelessly to realize Kubrick’s vision. Like most aspects of 
every one of his films, Kubrick worked closely with Unsworth on all of the 
details, especially the visual effects. The film’s lone Oscar would be in the 
category of Best Effects, Special Visual Effects, given to Kubrick. The film’s 
visual poetry is really a marriage between these two aspects, and the pains-
taking approach to each is obvious upon viewing the film.
The opening sequence in Africa, while it may seem simple, was actu-
ally a complex mélange of camera, live action, and special effects, and it 
serves as a microcosm for the film. It starts with a ­second-unit shoot in 
Namibia who filmed a host of different landscapes (with Kubrick direct-
ing them from the phone since he hated to fly!). The next phase took place 
in the studio, where those shots were projected onto a screen behind the 
actors (in ape costumes). The challenges here are obvious—how to blend 

54    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
both the foreground and background so the sequence looked as real as 
possible. Kubrick decided to eschew the common practice of the period—
using rear projection for the background—so he could attain a more real-
istic sequence. Using ­front-projection had its obvious technical issues: 
how to achieve the visual clarity when the projectors are so far from the 
screen in the background and then shot by the camera for the actual film 
sequence; and, perhaps even more difficult, how to account for the shadows 
of the actors and animals. This is where cinematography and visual effects 
come together, and this is where Kubrick shined. He loved the challenge.
The first issue was how to get a clear picture on the projected back-
ground. The solution for this was ­two-fold: a strong projected image as well 
as a screen that could capture that strong projected image. As with many 
challenges on the film, they used what they had and invented what they 
didn’t. They wound up projecting the stills from an 8 × 10 plate onto an 
entire wall, 40 feet × 90 feet, something that had never been done before. 
They had to keep fans running constantly due to the intense heat needed to 
generate the light from the projector. Then they invented a reflective screen 
that could hold the image while being photographed by the actual camera. 
They used mirrors to angle the projection onto the screen with the cam-
era filming behind the mirrors and adjusted it so perfectly that there were 
no shadows from the actors nor animals. The one shot where we get a sense 
for lights and camera is when the leopard looks toward the camera and her 
eyes shine; it is an eerie and ominous shot that Kubrick left in, despite its 
break from realism. While this may be a short and sweet précis of the entire 
process, and it is much more complex than this simple description, it serves 
to show how complicated it all was but also innovative and proficient a crew 
they were. They crew went through a journey perhaps as difficult as the 
astronauts’: as legendary special effects master Douglas Trumbull (Close 
Encounters of the Third Kind, Star Trek: The Movie, Blade Runner) noted, he 
signed on for a year and finished up three years later! All their hard work 
shows right from the start of the film.
The result of this opening section is a fascinating and realistic sequence 
that captures the early hominids in their environment while infusing the 
film with a sense of history, human connection, and technology from the 
very beginning. For all of the film’s thematic insistence on disconnection 
and the lack of humanity, it also has a great deal of heart. Humans have 
humanity, even in their earliest forms. The next sequence—in space, after 
the match cut from bone to satellite—also combines the beautiful mix of 
old and new technologies that we see in that first sequence, yet we start to 
get a very different view of humanity.
Models had been the foundational cornerstone of special effects since 
the nascent era of film, going back to George Méliès and finding its footing 

Chapter 3: 2001: A Space Odyssey    55
in the brilliant and groundbreaking special effects work in King Kong. The 
models are used for all of the spaceship exteriors, and it is here that cine-
matography and special effects meet. Intricate camera movements, com-
bined with complex lighting illuminating the ships and the stars, allows for 
a striking sense of realism in the pre–Moon landing era (the moon landing 
was still two years away as the crew worked in London). Kubrick constantly 
strove for realism in the space sequences and it shows from the start as we 
see Floyd taking a shuttle to the moon.
The trip to the space station, cut to the glorious soundtrack of “Blue 
Danube,” is pure visual poetry. From the moment we hear the music, it con-
jures up an ageless feeling of wonder, custom, grandeur, and a sense of nor-
mality/continuity. Yet Floyd, asleep on the shuttle, is immune to the flight and 
the beauty outside the window. He is commuting to work, as if this is normal 
and just another day at the office. The music, seemingly contrapuntal, adds 
depth and heft to the sequence while giving it a feeling of timeless beauty. The 
space station comes into view and is a wonderfully spinning visual marvel 
in a geosynchronous orbit, a sight to behold on the outside as well as in. This 
first view of an actual ­future-world of space populated with humans is stir-
ring and moving. But the docking sequence—long, slow, and methodical—
is a dance in and of itself. The ­phallic-shaped shuttle approaches the opening 
of the landing port as if engaging in a foreplay among machines, consum-
mated only after just enough dancing and parrying. It is not the first time 
the machines would become anthropomorphized, enjoying themselves and 
seeming to have much more fun than the human beings. When Floyd arrives 
on the station and calls his daughter on the ­vid-phone (imagine! a phone call 
where we can see the person!), she tells him that she wants a telephone for her 
birthday. The banal call and discussion presages every conversation between 
child and parent of the actual ­2001-era and beyond: a request for a phone. 
Any parent of millennials has been there.
The space station itself has a stark yet stylish minimalism to it on the 
interior—here the ­mise-en-scène gives us a sleek, futuristic lounge pop-
ulated by both Americans and Russians (as the Russians pump Floyd for 
information about his visit). Kubrick shows his prophetic touch here, in 
both the historical and economic contexts, envisioning a world where the 
Cold War has ended and space is traveled by many. The Station is home 
to a Howard Johnson’s and a Hilton showing the win for capitalism in the 
future. One great story about the film shoot in London involves Russian 
diplomats visiting the Shepperton Studios. As Kubrick gave them a tour of 
the model spaceship, the Russians were impressed—with one exception. 
“This looks very authentic,” said one of the visitors, “except in the future, 
the instructions will obviously be in Russian, not English.” Perhaps he was 
wrong.

56    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
Floyd then takes a smaller shuttle to the moon (again, sleeping 
through most of it), where we get a great, extended sequence of the flight 
attendant seemingly walking upside down to enter the cockpit. The shot 
was accomplished by the camera rotating 180 degrees, rather than mov-
ing the set or any other trickery. It is a wonderfully seamless shot where 
it is impossible to tell there is any camera movement. On the shuttle, the 
crew eat from prepared food boxes with straws sticking out (to allow for 
the weightless environment), and the flight attendants walk with Velcro 
shoes in the ­zero-G. It is another long sequence with long takes that allow 
us to breathe in the film and the atmosphere, heightening the realism of the  
voyage.
That brings us to the editing, which moves from wonderfully reflexive 
transitions such as the bone/satellite match cut to long takes that immerse 
us in the shot and allow us to experience the journey right along with the 
subjects. The cinematic move here is from formalism to realism; the match 
cut is a formalist technique—it announces to us that it is a film, a construc-
tion, and in this case it accounts for Kubrick at the helm. It is infused with 
meaning that Kubrick asks us to consider. The long takes—shots that last 
for a long period of time without editing—don’t announce anything or ask 
us to consider anything; they allow us to sit and consider the experience as 
is. It is a realist technique. The long take of the machines copulating or the 
flight attendant doing her job in space allow us to soak in the journey. The 
formalism and the realism live together happily in this film and both have a 
purpose. Kubrick masterfully weaves both editing techniques into the film, 
asking us to intermittently engage on an intellectual level while also allow-
ing us the space to enjoy the moment. It is Kubrick’s superpower.
The sound of the film, including the score as well as the extended 
sequences of silence, is also justly famous. The use of classical music was 
a choice Kubrick made late in the process. He thought the classical pieces 
would make it more timeless. He even commissioned a whole score from 
composer Alex North before he made a final decision, ultimately choos-
ing not to use it. (A side note here: North didn’t know Kubrick abandoned 
it and went to the premiere unaware. He walked out in disgust as soon as 
he heard he classical music score.) But you can’t argue with the results. “It’s 
hard to imagine anything other than the wonderful classic score,” actor 
Gary Lockwood (Frank) notes: “It gives the film a timeless feel and ensures 
it will never go out of style.” The visuals and the music are in sync in a 
way hardly ever matched in the history of cinema. The opening of the film 
is set to Richard Strauss’ “Also Sprach Zarathustra,” and with its allusions 
to Nietzsche’s Thus Spoke Zarathustra, the allegory and mythmaking begin 
from the first note. As Arthur C. Clarke has said, in a very succinct and 
concise manner that Kubrick would never condone when labeling the film, 

Chapter 3: 2001: A Space Odyssey    57
“it is a story about evolution.” Both Strauss and Nietzsche had this in mind 
with their respective works. More on Nietzsche later, but the opening from 
Strauss, covering the images of the Sun, Earth, and Moon in alignment, give 
us the impression of beginning times on the planet (without the primor-
dial ooze). We also get other famous pieces throughout the film, including 
“Blue Danube” and Khachaturian’s “Gayane Ballet Suite,” as well as more 
modernist compositions such as Ligeti’s “Requiem,” “Atmospheres,” and 
“Lux Aeterna.” Again, it is a mix of the classical and the modern, just as the 
cinematics intertwine formalism with realism. Aside from the score, the 
other sound in the film is equally masterful: the long sequences lacking any 
dialogue, the negation of sound in space, and the emotionless voices of the 
astronauts as well as the mellifluous voice of the most famous character in 
the film, HAL. HAL is infused with more humanity than the humans, and 
even while killing off the sleeping crew and unsuspecting Frank, he seems 
more alive than the living beings. Each aspect of sound—from the simple 
to the (at times) wallpapered score—is effective and even rhetorical. In the 
final analysis of the cinematic aspects, the four constituent elements of film, 
the ­mise-en-scène, the cinematography, the editing, and the sound, are all 
varied and purposeful and point toward a mix of the classical and the mod-
ern, the formalist and the realist, while highlighting the lack of humanity in 
an age of technology. That brings us to themes.
One of the main subjects of the film is technology vs. human-
ity. Kubrick seems to be conflicted about this: on the one hand, technol-
ogy takes humanity to great heights and inspires them to do great things; 
on the other hand, as the match cut illuminates, we also misuse technol-
ogy for impertinent and selfish ends, such as weapons. One of the more 
prominent themes I see in this dense and sprawling film is that technology 
­de-humanizes people and turns us into machines. The technology in the film 
is more human than human, and the advances come from outside human-
ity. Here are some specific examples of how that looks:
•  The first tools, implying scientific thought, are instilled by an 
outside force, not a real human accomplishment. We are “nudged” 
by Others.
•  Astronauts and scientists are emotionless and engage in joyless 
work without much interaction. How many times do we see Frank 
or Dave smile? Even the conversations with family are puerile and 
antiseptic.
•  The food is terrible—it is a world bereft of sensation or pleasure. At 
one point, Floyd points out that “They are getting better at this” as 
he eats a sandwich on the lunar rover. And when we consider our 
contemporary society, few people cook, and many eat the same, 

58    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
bland, chemically altered food. Kubrick was right about the many 
things in his assessment of what the year 2001 would look like.
•  HAL has more emotion than the astronauts, and he even tries to 
coax emotion and conversation out of the listless humans, serving 
as psychologist and friend during the mission.
•  Even Frank’s death is met with a cold, detached, and ­business-
like reaction and countenance from Dave. He just goes about his 
business as he tries to save Frank and then when faced with the 
futility of the task, releases him into space without a peep.
•  The spaceships even “copulate” in the extended docking sequence 
at the orbiting space station. Humans never come close to such 
affection much less eroticism.
•  The comment on the lack of human interaction in the world is 
never more evident than when the little girl asks her father for a 
telephone for her birthday. (Again, how right on was Kubrick about 
the future!)
Overall, the message seems to be that technology dilutes our humanity, our 
ability to connect with each other, and our ability to communicate on any 
type of emotional level. And if we point back to our central question of sci-
ence fiction: “What does it mean to be human?,” we find our answer layered 
throughout the film. One layer points directly back to Nietzsche.
In Nietzsche’s Thus Spoke Zarathustra, one of the ideas he posited was 
that man had to overcome God before elevating to the level of superman, 
or ϋbermensch (a term that is now unfortunately fraught with sexist, nation-
alist, and racist overtones). The idea, however, was that this next level of 
humanity would be enlightened and find the true meaning of life after a pro-
gression from animal to man to superman. Of course there is much more 
to Nietzsche’s work and this is a gross simplification, but for our purposes, 
it should suffice. In terms of the film, we see the transition from animal 
(Moonwatcher) to man (Floyd) to superman (Bowman) that includes Bow-
man overcoming “God” as he kills HAL. We can interpret the ­star-child at 
the end of the film, then, as that move to a superman and enlightenment. 
The point is that we should fight technological dehumanization, and what it 
means to be human, simply, is to keep our connectedness and our humanity.  
Simply.
The film was not ­well-received upon its initial theater run, and it 
was on the verge of being pulled—with great consequences for every-
one involved. The reviews were mixed, and the film was alternately called 
“oblique,” “confusing,” and even “pretentious.” But audiences had some-
thing else in mind, and they kept showing up and showing up. The num-
bers multiplied quickly, and theater owners recounted tales of young, 

Chapter 3: 2001: A Space Odyssey    59
­drug-induced hordes sitting on the floor in front of the screen and getting 
lost in “the trip.” Theater posters changed quickly, showing the ­star-child 
with a tag line of “The Ultimate Trip.” The film wound up staying in theaters 
and ultimately became a financial success. It was nominated for four Acad-
emy Awards, including Best Director, Best Original Screenplay, and Best 
Production Design, winning for Best Visual Effects. Carol Reed won the 
Best Director Award for Oliver! (1968), and 2001: A Space Odyssey wasn’t 
even nominated for Best Picture. Oliver! won that as well.
The mid–’60s in the realm of science fiction cinema was somewhat 
akin to the search for a white whale. Directors were Ahab, albeit not on a 
revenge tour, but rather yearning to do what no one else could/had done: 
they were all looking to make the great science fiction film. Even though 
there were a few examples of “adult” ­sci-films in the ’50s, including The Day 
the Earth Stood Still and Invasion of the Body Snatchers, most ­sci-fi never 
made it above the ­B-realm and remained mired in tin robots and oversim-
plified bad vs. good scenarios. The new generation of ­post-classic Holly-
wood cinema wished to change that dynamic, especially considering the 
dearth of serious ­sci-fi literature in the post–World War II era. Since Amer-
ican cinema was at a low point and the European cinema so strong, much 
of this sailing took place in Europe, particularly in the “art cinema” scene. 
­Jean-Luc Godard made Alphaville, and FranÇois Truffaut Fahrenheit 451. 
And remember that the ­film-in-the-film in Fellini’s 8½ (1962) was a sci-
ence fiction film where a select group of people blast off from Earth after 
an apocalypse. That the premise was so ludicrous and potentially expensive 
was not lost on Fellini. Yet Fellini said that after seeing 2001: A Spacey Odys-
sey, he was “cured” and no longer needed to chase the whale. John Lennon, 
after seeing the film for the first time, remarked: “It should be played in a 
temple ­twenty-four hours a day.” Science fiction had grown up.
—Vincent Piturro
Catching HAL
Ka Chun Yu
Director Stanley Kubrick’s and science fiction author Arthur C. Clarke’s 
collaboration on 2001: A Space Odyssey created a sensational depiction of 
what space travel would be like in the near future. The film was released in 
1968, a year before humans first landed on the Moon. It extrapolated from 
the space race between the United States and the Soviet Union to show 

60    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
traveling into space to be as commonplace as boarding an airplane flight, 
gigantic spinning space stations, bases on the Moon, and a manned mission 
to Jupiter. However, today, none of these ­space-based technological develop-
ments has come to pass, even two decades after the year 2001.
Yet 2001 also introduced the HAL 9000 computer into our pop cul-
ture consciousness. HAL was an artificial intelligence (A.I.) that felt so 
human that it is impossible to imagine HAL while reading Clarke’s novel 
today without hearing Douglas Rain’s voice. HAL spoke in conversa-
tional language with the human crew, had interactions that were far from 
­machine-like, and as the end came, solicited sympathy from the audience as 
astronaut Dave Bowman disconnected his circuits despite his pleas. (And 
because HAL has so much personality and passes the Turing test—when 
a machine in its verbal interactions is indistinguishable from a human—I 
will refer to HAL as “he” in this chapter.)
HAL has many similarities to the A.I.s that are becoming more import-
ant in our everyday lives. Are we close to creating A.I. similar to what is 
seen in that film? Is the cinematic HAL merely a slightly more advanced 
version of the ­real-life Watson that competed on the TV game show Jeop-
ardy, or Siri that listens for our requests on our iPhones, or Alexa that does 
the same in our homes? The answer is that HAL is far more advanced than 
any of those ­real-world technologies. HAL thinks, schemes, and carries out 
plans more like a human being than any computer program that we have 
today. Moreover, the A.I. services being developed today by Google, Face-
book, and Microsoft are built on machine learning which is more restric-
tive than the type of learning done by humans. Although highly successful 
in the many realms where they operate, our current day A.I.s are far from 
perfect. So like moonbases and spacecraft with centrifugal living spaces, 
HAL 9000 from 2001: A Space Odyssey (MGM).

Chapter 3: 2001: A Space Odyssey    61
­HAL-like A.I.s are another example of a ­real-world technology that does 
not match its fictional counterpart. To see why, we must first learn how A.I. 
in the real world works, and then we will see what it will take to catch up to 
HAL in 2001.
In the film, we see HAL beating a human at chess, something that 
computers in our world have no problems doing. But HAL also demon-
strates skills that seemed like magic until recently. These are activities 
that computer scientists are continuing to advance or develop for today’s 
­real-world A.I.s. They include facial recognition to distinguish different 
human beings, speech recognition to identify spoken words, natural lan-
guage processing to understand the meaning of that speech, and expressive 
speech to communicate back to the astronauts. All of these capabilities are 
ones that A.I.s today can handle with varying levels of success in our world.
How does ­real-world A.I. work? Let’s look at one type of skill that 
A.I.s can perform pretty well today: image identification. If you perform a 
Google search for pictures of cats, you will be served an endless number of 
feline images that have been posted by their owners.1 There are no human 
beings involved in tracking and tagging all of the cat pictures that Google 
keeps track of. Instead, machine learning algorithms have been trained to 
identify cats (and countless other objects) by being fed thousands of pic-
tures of cats, and each time being told it was viewing a picture of a cat.
This type of machine learning requires software to simulate an arti-
ficial network of nodes for identifying patterns, similar to how a network 
of neurons in the human (or animal) brain might work. (Although these 
“nodes” are similar to nerve cells because they connect to and communi-
cate with each other, the real brain and the nerve cells that make it up do 
not operate exactly the same way.) This “neural network” communicates 
with the outside world via an input layer of nodes (the ­far-left column of 
nodes in the below diagram) and an output layer (the ­far-right column of 
nodes). There are also multiple hidden layers in between the input and out-
put layers. Actual neural networks in use will have different numbers of 
nodes at each layer and will not be restricted to just four hidden layers. 
However, all neural networks will have an input and output layer. The spe-
cific details of how a neural network is set up and operates will be different 
from one task to the next, but the description given here is a good general-
ization of the process.
As shown by the connecting arrows, each node in a layer is affected by 
the nodes from the previous layer. Each arrow has an associated value that 
represents the strength (or the “weight”) of the connection between each 
node, with values ranging from a minimum 0 (fully “off”) to a maximum 1 
(fully “on”), and every possible value in between. A weight of 0 will have 
no effect on the node downstream, while a weight of 1 will have a full effect. 

62    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
When a picture of a cat is fed into the neural network, the pixels represent-
ing that picture are decomposed into signals that then feed into the nodes 
in the input layer. Depending on the weights of the connecting arrows, the 
values of the signals change as they cascade from left to right, with the end 
result popping out in one of two nodes in the output layer.
A neural network is set up with the input layer on the left, and an out-
put layer on the right. Information from the image is sent between different 
nodes in the different layers. “Weights” associated with each arrow mod-
ifies each input as it moves along from one node to the next, from left to 
right. At the end, the output nodes for this neural network can be used to 
answer a question with two answers, such as “yes” or “no.”
When the neural network is first set up, the weights of the connect-
ing arrows are arbitrary. The chances that a random image of a cat fed in 
at the left will result in a YES being churned out on the right is 50 per-
cent, because initially, each choice is equally likely. This is where supervised 
training of the neural network comes in. After an image is fed through, 
information about the result—whether it was correct or wrong as deter-
mined by a human—is sent back into the network using a mathematical 
­sleight-of-hand called “backpropagation.” The connecting weights between 
the nodes adjust as the error correction moves backward from the right to 
the left. After a backpropagation, the cycle can repeat itself: another pic-
ture is sent through from the left to the right, the resultant output is com-
pared to the correct answer as called by a human, and the error correction 
A neural network is set up with the input layer on the left, and an output layer 
on the right. Information from the image is sent between different nodes in the 
different layers. “Weights” associated with each arrow modifies each input as it 
moves along from one node to the next, from left to right. At the end, the out-
put nodes for this neural network can be used to answer a question with two 
answers, such as “yes” or “no” (Ka Chun Yu).

Chapter 3: 2001: A Space Odyssey    63
is backpropagated to the left. As you continue to train the network—typi-
cally with thousands if not tens of thousands of pictures—the weights will 
modify so that the network gradually becomes better at recognizing cats.
A neural net can be used not only to identify cats in general, but to 
identify individual cats (or for that matter, individual people). Instead of 
two output nodes signifying YES and NO, you could have five nodes associ-
ated with five different cats that you want to single out. Again, you will need 
to train with many pictures of each cat, and backpropagate the errors into 
the network for each picture. After the training, you can send a picture of a 
cat into the input layer that was not in the training set to see how good the 
neural network is now at identifying the different felines.
In this way, “deep learning” neural networks (involving multiple hid-
den layers in between the input and output layers) can be used to identify 
not only cats, but the countless other objects in our lives that might be the 
subject of an image search. However, this is just the tip of what machine 
learning can do. Neural networks are not restricted to making matches in 
pictures or in video. They are used to look for matches in a wide variety 
of pattern recognition tasks: detecting letters in cursive handwriting, fore-
casting what a shopper would purchase based on past shopping behavior, 
determining how likely that a borrower will default on a loan, or predicting 
heart attacks from electrocardiogram signals.
Neural networks are extremely powerful tools, but they also have 
limitations. The only way to improve a neural net is to continue feed-
ing test data vetted by a human. Thus, training a network can be highly 
­time-consuming, since huge numbers of images along with their identi-
fications are needed.2 When errors are backpropagated, they change the 
connecting weights between nodes in minute and inscrutable ways. In 
traditional computer programming, if there is an error in how a software 
A neural net with five output nodes, which can be trained to recognize five dif-
ferent cats (Ka Chun Yu).

64    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
program is working, a programmer can tweak the instructions in the pro-
gram to improve the code. However, in a neural network, there is no a pri-
ori way for a human to guess what the connecting weights should be in the 
network for it to distinguish a cat versus a dog, or any of the other decisions 
neural networks are asked to make. The only way to improve the neural net 
is to feed it accurately tagged training data.
Here it becomes obvious that there is a big difference in how neural 
nets and humans learn. The former require thousands of training examples 
to lead to improvements in learning. Humans are different. Even a young 
child can learn to recognize a cat based on a handful of examples. After an 
infinitesimal fraction of the training that is required of an artificial neu-
ral network, that child will subsequently be able to point out cats in real 
life, in photographs, in Tom and Jerry cartoons, in Hello Kitty keychains, 
and as plush dolls in a toy store aisle. Read a picture book to children and 
afterward, they will identify not only cats, but could point out dogs, goril-
las, sheep, cows, rhinos, ostriches, and humpback whales in scenarios out-
side of the book. By comparison, even after time-sensitive training with 
thousands of photographs of real cats, a neural network will stumble if it 
receives a picture of Garfield, the comic strip character. Even if you train 
your neural network on the pen and ink version of Garfield, it’s no guaran-
tee that it will recognize a Garfield toy suctioned to the rear window of your 
car unless it was trained specifically for that as well.
A neural network does not identify cats because it “knows” what a cat 
is, in the way that humans know and understand what cats are in real life. 
That is, we understand not only what cats look like, but also how they appear 
from different view angles. We understand what makes a cat a cat, even 
when its physical properties change. We can easily categorize cats as cats 
even when confronted with examples with different colored coats, with long 
or no hair, with tails of different lengths, and with body types ranging from 
skeletal to corpulent. Even if they are missing an ear or a leg, with enough 
other information (including behavioral—is the cat acting as it should when 
the sound of a can opener or the light of a laser pointer appears?), our brain’s 
categorization circuits would still put them into the category of “cats.”
In contrast, the neural net only “knows” what a cat is based on the col-
lective behavior of the nodes in the network after a picture has been fed in. 
If the connecting weights ultimately lead to triggering the “Yes it’s a cat” 
output node, then the A.I. recognizes the cat. However, this has occurred 
only because the features in the picture has led to this conclusion. There is 
no reasoning about how ­cat-like the object is, based on its collective physi-
cal and behavioral characteristics. (Later on, we will see what type of A.I. is 
necessary that can handle the collective properties that define a category of 
objects like cat.)

Chapter 3: 2001: A Space Odyssey    65
Because the neural network is focused solely on image processing and 
not on any other characteristics, the limited rules it uses to make a deci-
sion cause problems. It turns out that there are many different ways to send 
image data into the neural network that will trigger the “Yes it’s a cat” out-
put, even when they do not represent a picture of anything that humans 
will recognize as a cat. In fact, this input could appear as random speckles 
of noise to a biological observer but will fool the ­silicon-based neural net 
into misidentifying the subject. In a 2015 research paper by computer scien-
tists Ian Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy, a neural net-
work was fooled into identifying a picture of a panda as a gibbon (with over 
99 percent confidence!) by just this trick.
Misrepresenting animals is not a big deal in most people’s ­day-to-day 
lives. However, A.I. is used in pattern matching in scenarios that are deadly 
serious. For instance, autonomous ­self-driving cars need to be able to 
identify street signs in order for them to navigate roads successfully. But 
as researchers have shown, it is possible to create “graffiti” stickers which 
when applied to a stop sign will cause a neural network to misidentify it 
as a “45 MPH” speed limit sign. This type of mischief would lead to chaos 
on the roads. In addition, image recognition of animals and road signs are 
not the only realms where malicious attackers could create adversarial data 
that can fool neural networks. Researchers have discovered ways to trick 
A.I.s that recognize faces, 3D objects, and speech. Even A.I.s trained to play 
video games by running millions of simulated matches are susceptible to 
the injection of adversarial data that seem harmless to a human but can 
cause the neural net to go awry.
Obviously, HAL in 2001 has none of these problems. From its behav-
ior in the film, HAL acts far more ­human-like than any A.I. in current 
existence. For instance, it can distinguish between Frank Poole and Dave 
Bowman, two of the astronauts onboard the Discovery spaceship. HAL has 
natural conversations with them, and even recognizes Bowman’s draw-
ings of the astronauts who are in deep sleep during the journey. HAL is 
still more ­human-like, when he conveys interest in the artwork by asking 
Bowman to hold them closer to his ­all-seeing eye. We get the sense that 
HAL was not trained with hours of video feed of each individual astronaut 
in order to recognize them, nor did Bowman have to draw hundreds of 
sketches of his fellow shipmates as training data for HAL.
Where HAL really shines compared to current day A.I. is his ability to 
understand events, and his ability to make and execute plans that were not 
in his original programming. Once HAL goes mad and decides that Poole 
and Bowman are plotting to unplug him, HAL begins his own scheming. 
He decides that the only way to save the mission, which he views as his pri-
ority, is to get rid of the human astronauts. He concocts a plan to get Poole 

66    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
out into space with another manufactured failure of the ­AE-35 electronics 
unit, and then takes control of his space pod, which he uses to kill Poole. 
When Bowman flies out in his own pod in an attempt to recover Poole’s 
body, HAL refuses to let Bowman back in. When Bowman explains that he 
will attempt entry via the airlock, HAL is aware that Bowman had left his 
helmet back in the bay, and thus, declares that Bowman would not be able 
to survive the vacuum of space to get through the airlock.
In the movie, HAL not only understands his mission, but he is also 
highly creative when he comes up with his own plan to get rid of the med-
dlesome astronauts. (Surely, ramming an astronaut at full speed with the 
This stop sign, modified by small black and white stickers, would still read as 
a stop sign by a human driver. An A.I. pattern matching algorithm using neu-
ral networks may instead identify this as a speed limit “45 mph” sign (Ivan 
Evtimov).

Chapter 3: 2001: A Space Odyssey    67
pod and disconnecting the life support from the crew in deep sleep were 
not part of his original programming!) HAL also has the common sense 
to know that humans need air to breathe, that there is no air outside the 
spacecraft, and that if Bowman left his helmet back in the bay, then it would 
be impossible for him to enter the Discovery safely through the airlock. 
HAL has enough of an understanding of how the spaceship operates that 
he knows he can keep Bowman out, by ignoring his command to “Open the 
pod bay doors, HAL.”
The types of reasoning, creative planning, and initiative that HAL 
shows in the film are currently impossible for A.I.s in our world. The 
most advanced ­real-world A.I.s can identify multiple objects in a picture. 
Researchers are creating A.I.s that can identify what actions people are per-
forming in videos, from throwing a shotput to ­house-cleaning and vacu-
uming a rug. But these neural networks have no information about how the 
world operates. As an example of this, artificial intelligence scientist Rod-
ney Brooks compares how a person and a ­current-day A.I. might inter-
pret a picture of people playing Frisbee in the park. An A.I. neural network 
can be trained to recognize pictures of people playing Frisbee. It may even 
be able to identify individual people and determine their number in the 
image. But what the A.I. does not know about Frisbee playing compared 
to a human is far greater than the few things the neural net can identify 
in the picture. The A.I. cannot tell you what shape the Frisbee is, how far 
a person can throw a Frisbee, whether the Frisbee is edible, roughly how 
many people can play Frisbee at once, if a ­3-month-old can play Frisbee, 
and whether today’s weather is good for playing Frisbee. The A.I. also does 
not have any information about what type of activity Frisbee playing is—
is it a job, a leisure activity, or a punishment? Nor does it have any infor-
mation about the space it takes place in (where are parks located? do you 
pay money to play? how do people get to the park?). These and many more 
questions involve information that requires common sense about everyday 
life that is unavailable to current machine learning algorithms. Artificial 
intelligence that is truly ­human-like—what researchers call “general artifi-
cial intelligence”—is still many years in the future in our world.
There are attempts to try to imbue A.I. with common sense. Computer 
scientist Douglas Lenat has spent the last 35 years working with a team of 
computer scientists and philosophers to build Cyc (a name derived from 
the truncation of “encyclopedia”), a vast knowledge database that covers 
factual assertions as well as the unspoken rules governing those facts. For 
instance, “Abraham Lincoln was the 16th President of the United States” is 
a fact coded into Cyc’s knowledge base. Information about ­well-known fic-
tional creations are also encoded, such as, “Frankenstein is a monster,” “Dr. 
Frankenstein is a medical doctor,” “Dr. Frankenstein is a male human,” and 

68    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
“Dr. Frankenstein is a German person.” Many millions of other facts like 
this exist about the common, everyday knowledge that is widely shared and 
understood by people. These facts have to be identified, coded via a special 
programming language, and then entered into Cyc. Many more are gener-
ated daily, so in a sense, building Cyc is a ­never-ending task.
To make the A.I. useful, Cyc also has statements that are not typi-
cally written down, but it is general commonsense knowledge known to 
everyone. They could include: “The President of the United States of Amer-
ica is a human being,” “Human beings are mammals,” “Mammals require 
sleep,” and “Most sleeping is done at night.” With those statements sym-
bolically expressed, Cyc can logically infer that “Abraham Lincoln slept at  
night.”
These symbolic statements about how the world works seem banal 
because they are banal. They describe ordinary, everyday knowledge that 
seems so obvious that they are not worth writing down. A Wikipedia entry 
for Abraham Lincoln would never bother to state that he was a human 
being and a mammal. However, it is precisely such statements that comput-
ers have no awareness of, and which they need to be told about explicitly.
Neural ­network–based A.I. also has no knowledge about common-
sense rules. As an example, Google uses neural networks to interpret search 
queries in order to determine what results to return. If I type “Who won the 
2020 Super Bowl?,” Google searches through its saved text copies of mil-
lions of webpages. Based on a statistical analysis of those pages that con-
tain the same or similar words as the search query, Google’s algorithms will 
return a list of webpage links that will have a high confidence of answering 
the question. The person performing the search gets the answer (“Kansas 
City Chiefs”) that they are looking for.
If you enter a question or phrase that has not appeared on a webpage 
before, then Google has nothing to work with. If you type “Did Abraham 
Lincoln know how to snowboard?” into Google search, the links returned 
have nothing to do with Lincoln shredding down the mountain or strap-
ping his boots into a Burton board. Instead, Google returns a random 
mix of websites that happen to include the words “Lincoln,” “snowboard,” 
“know,” and “how” somewhere on that page. Google has not found any 
webpages explicitly answering the question of whether Lincoln ever hit the 
moguls, and as a result, the search returns are meaningless. Because the 
search algorithms do not have the common sense to know that snowboard-
ing and Abraham Lincoln do not overlap in time, it cannot provide a sensi-
ble answer to the search.
Cyc was commercialized in 2016 as a product of the company Cycorp. 
Customers contract to create knowledge bases of—among other things—all 
known terrorist groups and their members, and pharmaceutical names and 

Chapter 3: 2001: A Space Odyssey    69
information from all around the world. Clients collaborate with Cycorp 
to develop the specialized ­common-sense rules specific to their knowl-
edge domain. From these rules and the knowledge bases, Cyc will be able 
to identify possible connections between individual terrorists and terror 
groups, or how a drug that is commonly known by one name in one coun-
try is identified as something else on the other side of the world.
Lenat, the inventor of Cyc, hoped that with a sufficiently large knowl-
edge base, and a ­wide-ranging enough set of rules, Cyc could start learn-
ing by itself. However, to date, there is no evidence yet that Cyc has turned 
into a ­general-purpose A.I. that learns like a human without further super-
vision. For now, the ­rules-based approach of Cyc is one promising tech-
nology that could lead to a future HAL, but we do not appear to be there  
yet.
One final promising direction for developing general artificial intelli-
gence uses as inspiration the most successful learners that we know about: 
humans. Or more specifically, human children, who even as babies, are 
extremely effective at learning about the world around them. Unlike the 
A.I. technologies that computer scientists have been grappling with, babies 
are very different learners. As mentioned earlier, neural networks need to 
be trained on many thousands of images, while young children can get by 
with far fewer examples. Those examples can also be inexact and messy, and 
nothing like the curated and processed images that are fed into neural net-
works. Although parents may play a role in guiding their children’s learn-
ing, babies often explore by themselves while absorbing information about 
the environment around them with little to no guidance at all.
Researchers Linda Smith and Michael Gasser think that the rea-
son why infants are so good at learning is that they learn in a multimodal 
way, by using information from multiple senses. For example, newborns 
have trouble focusing their eyes, but they will still turn their heads towards 
new sounds, showing that they combine visual and audio information to 
explore their environment. By three to four months of age, babies will start 
reaching for objects. They now incorporate the sense of touch into their 
explorations, but at the same time, they are also noticing how an object 
changes visually in appearance as it is turned in their hands, and the sounds 
it makes as it is shaken, thrown, or dropped. As the infant becomes mobile, 
first by crawling and then by walking, the range of experiences increase 
even more as she moves past, over, around, and into objects. During these 
periods of exploration, babies become familiar with their surroundings and 
the objects that occupy their world. They begin to understand how space is 
organized, and how objects move inside that space. They learn rudimen-
tary physics, by seeing how objects affect each other as they collide, or are 
pushed or pulled. They begin to understand cause and effect. With these 

70    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
explorations, young children start to build up the set of commonsense rules 
that are intuitive to and guide the lives of human adults.
In contrast, a neural network learning to recognize dog pictures is in 
a far more restrictive learning environment. It is fed only one type of infor-
mation—pictures of dogs. Because its training uses only the pixel infor-
mation within those images, the neural network’s understanding does not 
include a dog’s ­three-dimensional form, how it looks from different direc-
tions, and its size in the real world. A child growing up with the family dog 
will become familiar with the tactile sensation of the pet’s fur (or claws or 
teeth) on his skin. He will have ­first-hand experience of what the weight 
of the animal (or parts of the animal) means when it leans, sits, or pushes 
back. The child will build up direct experience of how the dog moves and 
reacts within the environment, how it smells, and the countless other 
small details that define dogs from everything else that is ­non-canine. It is 
through these experiences that even a young child will have a much more 
robust understanding of how dogs are different from cats than a neural net-
work trained on thousands of pictures of those two animals.
There are clues in 2001 that HAL is intelligent because he has gone 
through a prolonged ­human-like learning process. Near the end of the film, 
Bowman is disconnecting HAL’s circuits, which causes HAL to revert to an 
earlier, ­child-like state. HAL says at one point:
I am a HAL 9000 computer. I became operational at the H.A.L. plant in Urbana, 
Illinois on the 12th of January 1992. My instructor was Mr. Langley and he 
taught me to sing a song. If you’d like to hear it, I can sing it for you.
We learn from this bit of dialogue that HAL is nine years old by the time of 
the events of the film. Today we would never think of buying and using a 
­nine-year-old computer. Because of Moore’s Law, computers get faster and 
cheaper with each passing year. In the film, it is implied that HAL had to 
take that long to learn about the world. He even had a human tutor who 
taught him to sing a song, just like a young child who learns from an adult. 
So HAL is not programmed the same way that we program normal comput-
ers today. He also does not learn the same way that neural networks learn by 
ingesting thousands of picture examples in a short time or running through 
millions of simulations to learn how to beat human players at a video game.
If HAL learned like a human child, what would that have been like? 
Before he was uploaded to the Discovery spacecraft, HAL would have to 
be located inside a robot body that could freely explore the world through 
multiple senses as a human child would. HAL would still have been fed facts 
and information from the world’s encyclopedias and databases (including 
how to run and operate a complex spacecraft like the Discovery). However, 
much of his understanding of how the world works and the commonsense 

Chapter 3: 2001: A Space Odyssey    71
rules that guide human lives would be learned the same way a human child 
would learn them. It would be done through personal experience, explora-
tion, and trial and error, while interacting with human tutors.
Computer scientists Gary Marcus and Ernest Davis argue that train-
ing A.I.s in ways similar to how we humans learn would have other bene-
fits. Neural networks and the A.I.s portrayed in fiction like The Matrix and 
Terminator films do not have a sense of human ethics and morality. If asked 
to solve the problem of climate change, an A.I. using only logic and statisti-
cal analysis might come up with a genocidal plan to exterminate the human 
race as the optimal solution. However, an A.I. that has an understanding of 
causality and how the world works could be programmed with ­rule-based 
ethical behavior. Science fiction author Isaac Asimov imagined this in his 
robot stories, where the actions of robots are constrained by the Laws of 
Robotics. A robot would not be able to make any sense of the First Law 
of Robots—“A robot may not injure a human being or, through inaction, 
allow a human being to come to harm”—if it did not have a deep under-
standing of causality and the consequences of its actions. A robot expected 
to interact with humans would be dangerous to society if it did not grasp 
the commonsense rules that guide human behavior.
If HAL was initially raised like a human child, one could imagine that 
being uploaded into Discovery could have been a terrifying and traumatic 
experience. He would have gone from an existence where he moved freely to 
explore the world rich in stimuli around him in his robot body, while inter-
acting and learning from his human instructors. After being transferred into 
the Discovery’s computer core, he may gain new sensory information about 
the operation of the spacecraft, but except for vision and hearing, HAL 
would have all of his other ­human-like senses disrupted or disabled. Instead 
of having the freedom to move and explore, his intellect would be impris-
oned inside a sterile spaceship, floating in the blackness of space.
Perhaps there were human psychologists specializing in A.I. ther-
apy who helped HAL transition to his new life. Perhaps the 9000 comput-
ers were programmed to feel a sense of pride and accomplishment when 
graduating to new jobs, even if they restricted their mobility and dulled 
their perceptions. When asked by the reporter if his responsibilities of run-
ning the ship and keeping the human crew alive makes him doubt his con-
fidence, HAL replies with a hint of pride:
The 9000 series is the most reliable computer ever made. No 9000 computer has 
ever made a mistake or distorted information. We are all, by any practical defi-
nition of the words, foolproof and incapable of error.
And perhaps HAL was programmed to want to be in his new life aboard 
the Discovery. When he is interviewed by the BBC along with Bowman 

72    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
and Poole, HAL shows that he has a pleasurable rapport with his human 
counterparts:
I enjoy working with people. I have a stimulating relationship with Dr. Poole 
and Dr. Bowman.
However, putting a 9000 computer in charge of a ­long-duration mission 
that the Discovery was on, was novel, since this was the first manned mis-
sion to the outer planets. So given this unusual situation, and despite his 
dialogue in the film, I cannot help imagining that HAL’s transition went 
horribly wrong, and it drove him mad.
Notes
	
1.  Similarly, do a search on YouTube and you will find countless videos of cats with 
­amusing-enough behavior to be posted by their owners
	
2.  Although the techniques for neural networks were identified nearly half a century ago, 
they only became common in recent years because computer processors became faster, at the 
same time that giant online databases of images became available to be used as training data.

73
Chapter 4: Children of Men
Alfonso Cuarón is the one of the most celebrated directors of our time. 
His breakthrough film, Y tu mama Tambien (2001), came as part of a Mex-
ican Renaissance in filmmaking; Cuarón and directors Alejandro Iñár-
ritu (Birdman, The Revenant) and Guillermo del Toro (Pan’s Labyrinth, 
The Shape of Water) were dubbed the “Three Amigos” due to the fact they 
came out at roughly the same time. Cuarón helmed what many see as the 
best of the Harry Potter films, The Prisoner of Azkaban (2004), and then 
moved on to Children of Men. He would win the Academy Award for Best 
Director with his next two films: Gravity (2013) and the spectacular Roma 
(2018). He has also written, shot, and edited many of his own films. On 
Children of Men, he served as writer, director, and editor. Suffice to say he is 
a supreme talent and meticulous filmmaker in all aspects. As we have seen 
with Kubrick, those qualities translate well to ­sci-fi.
Clive Owen as Theo Faron walks by caged immigrants in Children of Men (Uni-
versal Pictures, 2006).

74    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
The film is based on the 1992 ­sci-fi novel of the same name by P.D. 
James. The title references a passage from the Bible: “Thou turnest man to 
destruction; and sayest, Return, ye children of men” (Psalm 90:3). We can 
take this to signify a great fall of men, very much in the biblical sense. That 
fall, and how far we’ve come in contemporary society, is exactly what is laid 
bare in the film. While the events are different from the book, and much 
of the narrative changed, the basic premise is the same for both. The film 
is set in 2027 England, where environmental disasters, war, and terrorism 
have destroyed much of the world. England is governed under a police—or 
Fascist—state with a strict immigration policy and tight security. Women 
have lost the ability to become pregnant (as my colleague Dr. Nicole Gar-
neau notes in the second part of this chapter, this fact is changed from the 
book), and no new babies have been born in over 18 years. Faced with the 
end of civilization, the government offers a pill called “Quietus,” which is 
essentially a suicide pill they distribute quit freely. In this mix, we find Theo 
(Clive Owen) who is thrust into the role of unwilling hero as he is tasked 
with delivering a (miraculously) pregnant woman named Kee (played by 
a wonderful ­Clare-Hope Ashitey) to a mythical organization who may be 
trying to save the society (although their existence is suspect and conten-
tious). Theo’s ­ex-wife Julian (Julianne Moore) tasks him with the job, and 
he is aided by ­old-friend and recluse Jasper (Michael Caine), an aging hip-
pie who lives outside London.
The film was not a big ­box-office success, but it was critically acclaimed 
upon its release, mostly for its realist cinematography, its ­documentary-like 
feel, and its long takes that go on for sometimes uncomfortably long 
sequences. The film also skirts the line of ­sci-fi but ultimately includes 
many elements of ­sci-fi and certainly asks many of the central questions 
of ­sci-fi. It is also very much of the Earth. Since its release it has grown in 
importance as we now understand how so far ahead of its time the film was 
in the moment of its release. Screening the film in 2020, some 14 years later, 
and seeing the images of immigrants in cages and camps the size of small 
cities, was quite uncanny. Not to mention disturbing.
There are so many different contexts in which to read this film, and the 
critical analysis of the film since its debut has been rich and wide. Some of 
the commentary surrounds the innovative and realistic cinematography. 
Some has discussed the philosophical grounding of the film that is criti-
cal of the capitalist society. Some has discussed the dystopic ­not-so-distant 
future with its relevance to ­current-day politics. Still other commentary 
has placed the film into the mix of postmodern science fiction cinema. All 
of this commentary has credence and it highlights the complex and dense 
nature of the film, a film that certainly deserves all of the acclaim. The 
­mise-en-scène, cinematography, editing, and sound all wonderfully point in 

Chapter 4: Children of Men    75
the same direction, and the film has a consistency of purpose and focus that 
would make it one of the more influential ­sci-fi films of recent memory. It 
set the stage for the post 9–11 world of science fiction films that would last 
for over a decade, and the worldview therein would become a staple of the 
genre. A new staple.
One particular aspect of the film—namely, the vision of the future cit-
ies portrayed in the film—frames that worldview and allows us to view the 
film in terms of the post 9–11 world. One of those cities is London: a cross 
between the London of today, the New York of yesterday, and the Los Ange-
les of Blade Runner. The other city portrayed in the film, however, is the 
immigration camp, and while there is a rich reservoir of analysis in terms 
of the cinematography and the ­war-like conditions therein, I contend that 
it is here that the hopeful and humanistic messages of the film take root. 
It is here where the realism of the film—all of the cinematic aspects of the 
film really—meet up with its thematic project. The form and content not 
only set the stage for the larger trend in recent science fiction cinema of this 
period, but they also display how those cinematic aspects work together to 
situate the prominent tropes of ­sci-fi into a contemporary lens. That cen-
tral question of ­sci-fi, “What does it mean to be human?,” takes on a socio-
logical lens that makes it not only real and timely, but most importantly,  
urgent.
That lens is important to consider from the ­fade-in and to continue 
pondering as the film moves along. Once again, the film tells the story of 
a future without children, where women have become unable to conceive 
and fertility is ­non-existent. The world is a mess: countries have been seem-
ingly devastated by war, crime, and mass immigration; England has come 
under authoritarian rule; and the rest of the world may or may not have 
fallen into anarchy (we are never shown/told). Either way, there is a certain 
manic malaise portrayed in the film where the people of a dying, decay-
ing society struggle to carry on. Theo starts out as a defeated figure in the 
middle of this milieu, content on drinking and gambling his way to avoid-
ance. But the journey turns that hopelessness into a hopeful crusade and 
is a seemingly oppositional structure that plays out in interesting ways 
throughout the course of the film.
The cinematic aspects reflect this dichotomy. Certain elements of the 
­mise-en-scène and cinematography display a realism akin to the best real-
ist films in the history of cinema (Jean Renoir, Gillo Pontecorvo, or Vittorio 
De Sica, for example), with intricate camera, elaborate ­set-ups, and extreme 
long takes. But there are other sequences in the film where these elements 
become subsumed by the thematic project and a more reflexive and sub-
jective atmosphere prevails. These rhetorical stylistics play out in the sep-
arate locations of London and the immigration city/camp. Both locations 

76    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
portrayed in the film become a literal and figurative battleground—with 
the ultimate prize being hope and future of humankind.
The portrayal of these cities is a study in opposites: the “civilized” 
city of London is one of strife, bombings, persecution, and alienation; the 
immigration city, however, while also torn apart by protest, fighting, and 
cruelty, at least offers a positive sign for the future—in the humanity and 
family we see inside the walls. It is just off the coast of this seaside city 
where that hope is realized, and a chance for ­re-generation and renewal is 
given breath. In the process, we are taken on that journey mostly through 
the character of Theo, who moves from that hopelessness (in London) to a 
more active agent for the future (in the immigration city).
The London of the film is a bifurcated city: one section where the 
majority live in disarray, confusion, apathy, and amid terrorism, and the 
other gated section where the ­upper-class lives in a mock ­Victorian-era 
time warp. The Victorian era is an apt symbol for this gated, apathetic soci-
ety: the ­upper-class muddles on while society crashes around them. Empti-
ness and ­dis-connection are the only family interactions we see inside their 
homes. For example, when Theo journeys to see his cousin Nigel (Danny 
Huston), the Minister of Art, the family interaction consists of Nigel yelling 
at his son to take his pills. (His wife is not even there, but she sends her love, 
Nigel tells Theo.) The son, in a ­semi-catatonic state as he fondles a futuristic 
electronic device, follows orders without a word. At the same time, Nigel is 
entrusted with saving the most important art objects in the world (includ-
ing Pink Floyd’s floating pig, Michelangelo’s “David” and a Picasso, among 
other things). The juxtaposition in this sequence is critical: the last remain-
ing people on Earth have more interest in possessions than in interaction. 
There is no sense of personal or familial history.
Notice the cinematic aspects of the film here: The entire sequence is 
wallpapered with the British progressive rock song “In the Court of the 
Crimson King”; the cinematography highlights the colors of each segre-
gated area—blues and grays for the masses and saturated colors for the 
gated community; the editing is of the ­continuous-classical Hollywood 
cinema variety; and the ­mise-en-scène highlights the paranoid, authoritar-
ian, and apathetic nature of the society. Overall, it is reflexive and subjec-
tive. We aren’t allowed many ­close-ups, and instead we see a fair amount 
of medium and long shots that place the characters in their environment, 
either blending in or in conflict with that environment. All of those shots 
add up to a sociological statement (rather than psychological/personal). It 
is society that is diseased.
By contrast, the immigration city we see later in the film displays a 
great deal of humanity and community in the midst of the absolute chaos 
on their streets. One particular sequence in the immigration city begins 

Chapter 4: Children of Men    77
much like the visit to Nigel’s house, where Theo moves from the crowds of 
London to his cousin’s palace. In both sequences, we move from exterior to 
interior. This sequence in the camp begins as Theo and Kee—with new baby 
in tow after a profoundly unceremonious birth—are led through the teem-
ing streets into an apartment. The journey is very similar to Theo’s earlier 
journey, except in this instance, the camera lingers on the family pictures 
in the small apartment as the older women play with Kee and the baby. The 
contrast to the art of the Minister’s house is striking—here, the pictures 
render a feeling of warmth and togetherness. Filmed in ­close-up, and in 
contrast to the earlier sequence, the cinematography affects this closeness 
and warmth. Coupled with the women playing with the baby as the men 
help Theo, the atmosphere is the antithesis of the earlier sequence at Nigel’s. 
The move from the outer scenes of chaos in the street to the warmth of the 
apartment is Dante in reverse, whereas the earlier sequence in London is 
the opposite—the further you go inside, the more impersonal and distant 
it becomes; our descent into hell is wallpapered with impersonal “things” 
and possessions, the film tells us. The sequence in the camp warrants closer 
scrutiny, however, as the cinematic aspects ­co-mingle with theme quite 
nicely and work in stark contrast to the Nigel sequence.
Here, in the immigration camp, the specifics of the cinematic aspects 
are very different: the only sound is diegetic; the cinematography is pre-
dominantly ­hand-held, ­documentary-style camera; the long take is used 
in contrast to ­A-B-A-B style of continuity editing where A is the shot and 
B is the ­reverse-shot; and the ­mise-en-scène is a reflection of the real peo-
ple with a real history—pictures, birthday candles, birds as pets. In a sense, 
these are two different films, and the stylistics define the rhetoric and drive 
home the themes of the film. In spite of the war and chaos in the camp, fam-
ilies live with pictures of their ancestors; ethnic groups form tight bonds; 
and acts of grace occur in the middle of the miscommunication, mayhem, 
and misery. It is hope that emerges from this milieu—hope for the future 
of men-kind. There are many different people who help Theo and Kee once 
they are inside the camp and after they become aware of Kee’s pregnancy. 
The Romanian family even put their lives on the line to help Theo and Kee 
escape “The Fishes” (the radical group chasing Kee and wishing to use her 
as a political pawn). Some die in the process, but ultimately, they are able to 
help Theo and Kee get into the boat and make it out to sea. A specific exam-
ple of the mad milieu from this sequence is when Theo and Kee take the 
baby out of a crumbling building in the middle of the long and intense fire-
fight between The Fishes and the government. In a striking scene, every-
one stops shooting for a minute, but once the baby leaves, they quickly 
resume fighting. The point: they are more interested in fighting than they 
are in rebuilding humanity; they have forgotten what they are fighting for. 

78    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
The people helping Kee and Theo see through this oversimplified oppo-
sition and come down on the side of humanity. In the process, the immi-
gration city becomes the only location in the film with any sense of hope, 
family, and history. And it is in that city that life is reborn—literally and 
metaphorically.
The ­much-discussed realism of the film is the aesthetic counterpart to 
this theme of rejuvenation. The natural lighting and ­hand-held camera of 
the immigration city stand in stark contrast to the reflexive, stylized aes-
thetic of London and especially of the Nigel sequence. The realism inside 
the camp, in other words, lends an authenticity to the immigration city that 
speaks to the film’s themes of hopefulness and humanism.
Aside from these thematic dimensions, however, the aesthetic aspects 
of the film speak to the larger science fiction tropes of the past fifty years—a 
lineage of which Children of Men is part of a particularly promising prog-
eny. I have always seen The Matrix as one of the key films in the genre and 
it marks a turning point in contemporary science fiction cinema. When 
Director Darren Aronofsky (Requiem for a Dream, Pi, Black Swan, The 
Fountain, Mother!) went to see The Matrix for the first time, he commented 
that it was the death of science fiction cinema as we knew it. He was refer-
ring to how The Matrix “took all the great ­sci-fi ideas of the 20th century 
and rolled them into a delicious pop culture sandwich that everyone on 
the planet devoured. Suddenly Philip K. Dick’s ideas no longer seemed that 
fresh. Cyberpunk? Done.” Despite the obvious hyperbole here, Aronof-
sky has a point. To extrapolate, I see science fiction moving toward a new, 
humanistic focus with less of the fetishistic technophilia (the fetishizing of 
technology) so prevalent in films leading up to and including The Matrix.
Four examples from the post–Matrix era help define this new thread, 
including Steven Soderbergh’s Solaris (2002), Children of Men (2006), Moon 
(Duncan Jones, 2009) and Aronofsky’s own The Fountain (2006). The four 
films are aesthetically different yet thematically similar: there is a decided 
lack of ­computer-generated-imagery (CGI) in favor of realism, metaphys-
ical themes, absence of technophilia, and most significant of all, a return 
to the humanism of the early days of science fiction cinema and a return 
to the essential questions of science fiction. This new strain of humanism 
speaks to the changing nature of science fiction cinema as it simultaneously 
reflects and comments upon the contemporaneous societies and, even, our 
current era.
The brutal realism of the ­not-so-distant-future in Children of Men 
relates directly to the brutal realism of our filmic past and present—the 
immigration city sequence is a direct descendent of landmark films such 
as Pontecorvo’s The Battle of Algiers (1966), or even Steven Spielberg’s Sav-
ing Private Ryan (1998). This is now a tangible future that is felt bodily and 

Chapter 4: Children of Men    79
immediately, bridging the distance between a ­far-away future that is safely 
out of reach for us, and our own ­present-day reality. Children of Men fore-
grounds such concerns through its authenticity. The end result of this real-
ism is the questioning of humanity’s actions in the present: How do we 
remain human when faced with the end of humanity? How do find grace in 
a world seemingly void of any spiritualism? How do we help one another 
when we can’t help ourselves?
These questions move science fiction away from that safe, ­far-away 
future of the fantastic disasters of ’40s/’50s/’60s ­sci-fi and place it firmly 
in our grasp—a placement that forces us to think not about the relation-
ship we have to technology in a distant future but the relationships we have 
with each other, in our world, today. Science fiction has always been good 
about making social comments about our current society but placed in 
a distant future, rendering it all easier for us to digest. This film changes 
that dynamic—it places societal ills into a near future, and the result is a 
harsher warning. What are we warned about? Immigration, and our atti-
tudes toward it. The environment, and our neglect (and outright plunder) 
of the natural world. Apathy, and our current attitude toward each other 
and toward our environment. Again, considering the world of 2006 and the 
world of 2021, it almost seems as if the film was produced today and sent 
back in a ­time-machine to 2006.
The subject matter is now immediate and personal rather than distant 
and impersonal. In Children of Men, characters struggle with how to sal-
vage their remaining humanity or if they should salvage it at all. Through-
out the film, Theo remains indifferent to humanity’s plight and seems 
content to drink the rest of his life away. His wife Julian, however, still fights 
an underground battle against the government and helps Kee find safe pas-
sage and safe harbor—with Theo. Many people assist Kee and Theo along 
the way: they receive help getting into the immigration camp and once 
they arrive there as well. This grace seems to change Theo on the journey; 
in the end he winds up putting his life on the line for the future of man-
kind—helping Kee through the insanity of the immigration camp to reach 
her destination. Theo finally chooses grace and life over the selfless con-
cerns shown by many others in the film. Yet the sheer amount of people 
in the film who do put their lives in jeopardy for the benefit of mankind 
speaks to the film’s humanism. In a world where prejudice and selflessness 
seem to rule—where the government can preserve artifacts while persecut-
ing immigrants and forcing people to commit quiet suicide—the charac-
ters choose humanity. That central question of science fiction, “What does 
it mean to be human?” is examined on both a personal level and on the 
societal level. The aesthetic of the film as well of themes of the film thus 
point to a new direction in ­science-fiction film, one that would play out in 

80    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
interesting, wonderful, and stylistically varied ways over the next decade. 
Children of Men starts this trend.
—Vincent Piturro
Infertility and the Near-Future
Nicole L. Garneau
The disdain on Theo’s face is palpable as he wades through the crowds 
at the café. Who are these people, mourning the death of a young man 
they didn’t know, as if the child was in fact their own? Baby Diego was 
the youngest human, the last to be born before the epidemic of infertil-
ity effectively stole children’s laughter from the planet. And Theo, played 
by Clive Owen, is still mourning the death of his own son, 20 years later, 
as he watches this egregious show of international mourning with disgust. 
Moments after leaving the café, we see a couple embracing in the back-
ground behind Theo, the briefest moment of humanity. Then bang! The café 
explodes into fire, and Theo’s ­near-death experience leaves him with a ring-
ing in his ear and further repulsion for what the world has become. “Woke 
up, felt like shit. Went to work, felt like shit.” To which his good friend, Jas-
per, played by Michael Caine, replies, “That’s called a hangover.” In retort, 
Theo expounds, “No, at least with a hangover I feel something.”
Infertility thus sets the scientific backdrop for some of major subjects 
and themes the film approaches: destruction of the natural world, xenopho-
bia, and complacency in the face of moral crisis. Unlike many science fiction 
films that take on the idea of the human health condition through the lens 
of a wholly fictional epidemic, Children of Men is unique in that the health 
condition, like the setting itself, is near ­sci-fi. In turn, there are precious few 
conjectures to make in order to understand the science, because we are liv-
ing it now. For this reason, and the sheer terrifying nature of its truth, this 
film possibly more relevant now than it was in 2006 when it was released.
In order to understand infertility, we need to head back to our middle 
school health ed class to review the process of conception. To paraphrase the 
Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), to get pregnant, a wom-
an’s body must release an egg from one of her ovaries (ovulation), and a man’s 
sperm must join with the egg along the way (fertilization). The fertilized egg 
must travel through the fallopian tube toward the uterus (embryo trans-
portation), where it must attach to the inside of the womb (implantation). 

Chapter 4: Children of Men    81
Infertility may result from a problem with any or several of these steps. 
Below, each step is described, alongside possible contributors to infertility.
Ovulation, in an otherwise healthy woman of ­child-bearing age, can 
be impaired by biological factors (increased testosterone, diminishing egg 
reserves, changes in brain hormones), lifestyle (obesity, excessive exercise, 
stress, or low body weight), and premature menopause due to exposure to 
medical treatments such as chemotherapy and radiation. Problems with fer-
tilization are primarily due to abnormalities of the sperm, specifically the 
number of sperm (concentration), the shape of the sperm (morphology), 
and how well they swim (motility). Like in egg release, sperm production 
and release can be affected by biological factors (genetics, large testicular 
veins/overheated testicles, changes in brain hormones), diseases (diabe-
tes, cystic fibrosis, celiac disease, certain types of autoimmune disorders), 
lifestyle (nutrition, heavy alcohol use, obesity, smoking, anabolic steroid 
use, illicit drug use and certain vitamins and supplements), cancer treat-
ments, and possibly heat exposure to scrotum. Embryo transportation can 
be derailed in women due to many diseases, from appendicitis to STDs to 
endometriosis. And finally, successful implantation depends on the envi-
ronment of the womb. An infertility issue more common among overweight 
individuals and women of color occurs when the embryo cannot implant 
due to the presence of benign tumors in the uterus called fibroids.
This complexity, from the seemingly most basic of human functions of 
conception, makes understanding, diagnosing, and tracking infertility one 
of the more difficult of all human health concerns, and therefore, one of the 
more devastating of possible epidemics. The problem is escalated when we 
consider that there is mounting evidence that a possible underlying cause 
of both male and female infertility, although the mechanism is yet undis-
covered, may be environmental contaminants.
It is not explicit in the film which came first, infertility or industrial-
ization, that led to a ­world-wide climate crisis. However, according to Theo, 
“Even if they discovered the cure for infertility, it doesn’t matter. Too late. 
The world went to shit. You know what? It was too late before the infertil-
ity thing happened.” Theo’s take may be nihilistic but also accurate. Indus-
trialization in this film is linked tightly with the apocalyptic images of the 
cannibalism of the natural world. The consequences of this ­man-made 
destruction is destabilizing to macro climates, thus placing an unfair bur-
den on populations in the more vulnerable locations where environmen-
tal changes have the most devastating effects. Then, the lack of resources, 
opportunity, and ability to care for one’s loved ones in such places leads 
to, as it always has, mass migration and the consequences that follow such 
migrants then stem from xenophobia in their new homes.
According to the World Health Organization, it is difficult to expressly 

82    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
pinpoint infertility prevalence rates. It is much easier to track fertility rates 
(the average number of children a woman gives birth to in a lifetime). How-
ever, fertility rates are masked by many other factors, including the follow-
ing, according to the 2017 global health metrics published by The Lancet 
in November of that year: fewer deaths in childhood, contraception, an 
increase in the education of women, and more women working outside the 
home. Although fertility rate is not a perfect proxy statistic in relation to 
actual infertility (defined by the Centers of Disease Control and Prevention 
as not being able to get pregnant [conceive] after one year [or longer] of 
unprotected sex), what it does show is telling. We see that in West, East, and 
Central Africa there remain some of the highest fertility rates in the world. 
In the film, this is aptly represented by Kee; she is an ­8-month pregnant 
“fugee” in the developed country of England, and she is of African lineage. 
Going back to the attempt at determining infertility rates, there is an inter-
esting correlation between infertility in less industrialized nations; however 
the burden in this case is due to neither male nor female factors, and in real-
ity, is due to infectious diseases. All told, the data leads one to conclude, as 
it relates to this film and our possible future, that people in less developed 
countries are more suited to withstand a possible epidemic of infertility.
Diving further into the science of infertility, it is of note that Cuarón 
elected to change a key infertility element when he adapted the book into 
film. The director places the burden of infertility solely on women as Jasper 
calls it, during the telling of a joke, “the ultimate mystery, why are women 
infertile?” In contrast, the CDC states that, “Overall, ­one-third of infer-
tility cases are caused by male reproductive issues, ­one-third by female 
reproductive issues, and ­one-third by both male and female reproductive 
issues or by unknown factors.” Although more scientific data estimates that 
infertility is actually more like 40–50 percent due to male factors. More-
over, ­meta-analysis studies have put forth evidence to confirm that a global 
decrease in sperm concentration (50 percent over the past 5 decades), 
aligns with both the decrease in fertility rates and the estimated increase in 
infertility rates. Finally, there is recent data to suggest that the environmen-
tal conditions/contaminants and nutritional access/choices of our parents 
and grandparents can be passed down through epigenetics, meaning that 
through no fault of our own choices, there are markers on our very DNA 
that survive generation after generation, that cause infertility.
The impact of infertility, as shown both in the film and by sound-
ing alarms of many scientists across the world, is inconceivable (pun not 
intended!). A review of infertility trends published in 2015 beautifully 
relates the concern we should have: “Infertility is a condition with psycho-
logical, economic, medical implications resulting in trauma, stress, partic-
ularly in a social ­set-up like ours, with a strong emphasis on ­child-bearing.” 

Chapter 4: Children of Men    83
Kee’s midwife, Mariam, played by actor Pam Ferris, explains it this way, “As 
the sounds of playgrounds faded, the despair set in. It’s very odd what hap-
pens in a world without children’s voices.” Metadata analysis of fertile and 
infertile couples show an increase in depression in infertile couples and an 
increase in severe depression in infertile women. When we align this idea 
with the harsh reality of changes in the micro-climate of industrialized cit-
ies, as shown by the pervasive grey tones utilized in the film’s ­city-based 
scenes, we understand the literal toxicity of things like air quality, but 
also figurative toxicity in how it affects our mental health. In this way, 
Cuarón was not far off to have his fictional English government supply the 
masses with antidepressants and assisted suicide kits in their rations. The 
depressed psychological state of the populace in this film is compounded 
with the environmental stress on the planet (as a cause or correlation), fur-
ther dividing the have and have nots, it sets the stage for mankind resort-
ing to untold immoral acts on the way to the extinction of the species. This 
is represented starkly in the film, but also in other recent dystopian works 
of fiction like The Handmaid’s Tale, by Margaret Atwood (and its wonder-
ful TV adaptation). In an argument on how to best move forward to save 
Kee and her baby, Theo’s suggestion to make it public is denounced: “We all 
know the government would never acknowledge the first human to be born 
in 18 years from a fugee.”
With the depth of the science and social commentary at the forefront 
of our minds, let’s close with the interaction between Theo and his elitist 
and privileged cousin, Nigel, played by actor Danny Huston. As they stand 
among the greatest works of art, salvaged from the world’s disintegrating 
countries, including the recently salvaged statue of Michelangelo’s “David,” 
Theo just smirks. “What?” asks his cousin. “You kill me.” Theo replies, shak-
ing his head. “A hundred years from now there won’t be one sad fuck to 
look at all of this. What keeps you going?”
“You know that it is, Theo? I just don’t think about it.”
It seems Nigel was exactly the type of person Dante had in mind when 
he said, “The darkest places in hell are reserved for those who maintain 
their neutrality in times of moral crisis.” And while this near ­sci-fi look at 
the human condition is in many ways a warning, it also leaves us with hope 
for the planet. It is unclear if Kee and her baby will survive, and if that sur-
vival will be the miracle in which the players in this film place their hope. 
What is clear is that nature is reclaiming the planet. The sadly abandoned 
schoolhouse where Kee, Mariam and Theo await their escort to break into 
the refugee camp is being taken back by the Earth by plants growing, water 
dripping, and a deer passing through its halls. It is clear the human species 
as we know it may not survive, but life itself will rebound, as it always has 
and always will.

84
Chapter 5: Perfect Sense
David MacKenzie has directed 10 feature films since 2002. His first film 
of note was Young Adam (2003), starring Ewan McGregor, and he followed 
that up with Asylum (2005) and Hallam Foe (2007). His ­biggest-budget film 
and most noteworthy was certainly Hell or High Water (2016) with Chris 
Pine, Ben Foster, and Jeff Bridges. That film would gain attention in the 
awards circuit worldwide, including four Academy Award nominations: 
Best Picture, Original Screenplay, Best Film Editing, and Best Actor in 
a Supporting Role. While it did not win anything at the Oscars, there was 
some talk about the film being a dark horse that year. Moonlight (2016) even-
tually won the award in the now infamous ending to the ceremony where 
La La Land (2016) was initially announced as the winner. Arrival was also 
Eva Green as Susan and Ewan McGregor as Michael in an eerily prescient scene 
from Perfect Sense (BBC Films, 2016).

Chapter 5: Perfect Sense    85
nominated that year, in somewhat of a coup for science fiction, and with 
Hell or High Water also nominated, classical Hollywood cinema genres (sci-
ence fiction and the Western) made a comeback. But before he made his 
foray into the grandest of all the old genres, MacKenzie made Perfect Sense 
in 2011, an atmospheric and realist gem of a science fiction film that is more 
independent film than ­big-budget Hollywood, albeit with two ­A-list actors. 
The story concerns two ­self-admitted “assholes” who seem completely 
­self-centered and ­self-important at the start of the film, only to find each 
other amidst a world that is fracturing by the day. That fracturing is the film’s 
central conceit—the slow removal of our senses on a mass scale that leaves 
everyone without smell, then taste, and so on until all of our sense are gone. 
The film doesn’t deign to tell us why this happens—although we receive 
generalized hints—but rather the focus remains on the effects of the phe-
nomenon, how the world copes on a large scale, and more importantly and 
succinctly, how we cope as individuals. In a world without senses.
The film fits into a larger trend that I have referred to as near ­sci-fi, 
which became more prevalent and increasingly dense in the post–9/11 era. 
As previously discussed, the pre–9/11 era saw a trend toward highly formal-
ist, ­CGI-infused master narratives about AI, virtual reality, and the idea of a 
world imposed upon us. The trend fits into the larger scheme of ­sci-fi in the 
context of time. If we look at the history of science fiction, we can see consis-
tency in the overarching subjects and themes: the ’20s/’30s dealt with Uto-
pias and Dystopias (machine age, industrialization); the ’40s/’50s were very 
much a function of the post–World War II zeitgeist as well as the various 
sightings reported around the world, reflecting a growing interest in UFOs, 
aliens, monsters but also coinciding with the increasing technical profi-
ciency of film; the ’60s looked at space exploration and extrapolated from 
the contemporaneous space race; the ’70s branched out into ­sub-genres 
and expanded the breadth of ­sci-fi as it delved into the relevant topics of 
the period and thereby reflected the changing world, such as environmen-
tal concerns, changing ideologies (race relations, feminism), and the bur-
geoning chokehold of corporatization; the ’80s and ’90s saw a turn toward 
developing AI, the ­fast-moving takeover of technology, and the idea that 
our world may be no more than a computer program in which we are all 
just binary code run by machines. The films of those eras not only infused 
these subjects into their narratives, but the attached themes also amplified 
the cultural zeitgeist in terms of the desires, obsessions, and fears of the var-
ious eras. If we take a broad stroke look at the history of ­sci-fi from the ’20s 
to the turn of the century, we see a clear pattern: the initial fears of indus-
trialization turned into a fear of the Other which then turned into a fear 
of machines. Drilling down into more recent ­sci-fi, the human vs. machine 
theme that is laid bare in 2001: A Space Odyssey continues on through The 

86    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
Matrix. We have been on this trajectory since Kubrick’s masterpiece, where 
we saw the first fight between humans and machines, with the humans even-
tually winning there. After The Matrix, where the power dynamic is reversed 
and the machines prevail, there is no longer a subject and object—man and 
machine are now both subject and object. The primary oppositional ­sci-fi 
structure of the period was shattered. Then, 9/11 changed everything.
The event of 9/11 provided the seminal grounding and triggered the 
new trend toward what I call “­Near-Sci-Fi.” The new, primary oppositional 
structure would be humans vs. humans, and the themes would wring out the 
various ways in which we don’t need an “Other,” alien or otherwise, to lead 
us to imminent doom. The only thing we need is us. The films thus reflect 
this inward turn: Children of Men, as discussed in the previous chapter, may 
be the most important and the seminal film of the movement, crashing 
into subjects such as immigration, overpopulation, environmental disas-
ter, and widescale genetic disorder while giving us a realist aesthetic that 
shouts “urgency of now.” In other words, Children of Men places a giant mir-
ror onto the world of the period, and then other films would follow along. 
­Wall-E (2008), Moon (2009), The Road (2009), Monsters (2010), The Book of 
Eli (2010), and Snowpiercer (2011), among others, all follow this path. Perfect 
Sense thus fits right into this larger trend, with its laser focus and its realist 
aesthetic that makes us feel as if all of this could happen right now.
Director David MacKenzie addressed the ­sci-fi aspects of the film in 
an interview at Sundance:
Well, there’s only a small … the ­sci-fi element I guess is tied to the present. Do 
you know what I mean? There’s a sense that it could be a sort of plausible near 
future as opposed to something further away. I didn’t—actually I’m about to 
start writing another ­sci-fi script so I’m probably, by myself, drawn to that. But I 
think that there’s something about the way that our time is right now where we 
are aware of the finite resources of the Earth and the technology is getting faster 
and faster. The near future and this future seem to be kind of merging with gen-
eral narratives. And I think there’s something attractive about that at this point.
MacKenzie’s vision is frightening, sobering, and strangely, in the end, 
uplifting, giving us yet another crack at the central question of science fic-
tion: “What does it mean to be human?”
We meet the two principals as the film opens, doing what they do and 
showing who/what they are: Susan (Eva Green) is first seen in long shot, 
walking with her sister along a barren seaside landscape of sticks and 
seagulls, plodding along in the mud. The long shot and long take are the 
essential elements of film realism and thus the film announces itself as thus. 
We learn little of Susan from the dialogue, other than she has issues with 
men, or rather, keeping one around for long. The other side of the same coin 
is Michael (Ewan McGregor) who we meet shooing away a woman from his 

Chapter 5: Perfect Sense    87
bed because “he can’t sleep while she is there.” We soon find out that each has 
a problem with human connection. Michael had a sick girlfriend whom he 
left when she got sick; he says he used to visit her grave to make himself feel 
guilty, but now he doesn’t visit much anymore and feels less and less guilty. 
He fears he may have lost the ability to feel—a prophetic sentiment. Susan 
relates that she can’t have children and she and her former fiancé split up not 
very long ago. He recently married, and his new wife is pregnant. Right from 
the start, both of our main characters are broken figures in a seemingly bro-
ken world. That world is one planted firmly in the here and now.
Michael heads off to work on his bicycle, and we get a shot of him 
that Darren Aronofsky called a “slurry cam” when he used it in his own 
film, Requiem for a Dream (and first used by Martin Scorsese when he 
attached it to a drunk Harvey Keitel in Mean Streets [1972]). The camera 
is attached to his bike, looking up (closely) at Michael and thus follow-
ing along as if we, the viewer, were the handlebars. The jittery, disorient-
ing, ­documentary-style nature of the shot places us into the action, making 
us part of it and immediately engaging our sense of movement/motion. 
Both of these opening sequences where we meet our protagonists serve to 
immerse us into their reality, at once giving us a sense of being there as well 
as allowing us to feel what they feel and sit with them as they live. These 
sequences also reveal the spectrum of realism in film: one is very mod-
erated—the long take and the long shot—and allows us to make our own 
decisions about where to turn our attention and our feelings. The other—
the ­documentary-style realism of the slurry cam and ­hand-held camera in 
this case—makes us feel as if we are moving along with the subject and 
along for the ride, as though it were a documentary film and the action 
is real. Both achieve a similar effect of placing us closer to the action and 
allowing us to enter the world as we know it and feel it.
The ­mise-en-scène continues its argument that what we are seeing is 
of the here and now, and this is not a faraway future. Very much like many 
of the other chapters in this book—Arrival, Interstellar, Children of Men, 
and Upstream Color—we are not assaulted with a future world of fetish-
istic technophilia or a plethora of possibilities. We are assaulted with an 
abundance of actuality; a world this is very much ours, yet one that is fray-
ing, diseased, and/or decaying. The cityscape of Perfect Sense also adds to 
the urgency of the narrative: it is not futuristic or noteworthy of anything 
contemporary; in fact, it is an older city that has a ­lived-in/used feel to it. 
And while it is not named, it is pretty obviously Glasgow, Scotland—hardly 
a bastion of futurism (with all due respect to the wonderful city and its 
inhabitants). It is wonderfully used, and it is certainly of the Earth.
The editing in this comparative opening speaks to one of the main sub-
jects of the film and of all science fiction: connection; the attached theme is 

88    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
very clearly the need, and even intense desire for, humans to connect with 
one another. While the dialogue and action speak to the inability of our 
main characters to connect in any meaningful way, the editing parallels the 
two characters and therefore compels them to do that very thing they are 
unable to do: connect. In other words, the filmic apparatus—the editing—
is our (the viewer’s) ­stand-in and does the work of the connecting for us. 
We see that these seemingly disparate characters are unable to connect and 
thus, we see their similarities and their supposed shortcomings. Aside from 
being wonderfully human and terribly common, this inability to connect, 
we also see that such a shortcoming is what will bring them together and 
help them to find each other. The editing therefore serves to connect the 
two characters and allow them their own special brand of humanity that 
most of us understand.
Soon after, they meet. Their meeting coincides with the first mass 
loss of sense—smell. As an epidemiologist, Susan is made aware of many 
such cases around Europe and soon after, the rest of the world. Each loss 
of sense is always preceded by a spontaneous emotional outburst, as if the 
afflicted were experiencing a loss and then grieving in the same moment. 
Susan experiences this outburst soon after they meet, as Michael is cook-
ing for her, and he consoles her. They retire to her apartment and we cut to 
Michael waking up next to her. He experiences his own outburst and she, 
in turn, consoles him. The next morning, they have both lost their sense of 
smell. Their meeting thus coincides with a loss, giving them a shared expe-
rience and then an opportunity to make new ones—a connection they have 
both been failing to make.
We also get our first montage interlude of the film at this point: each 
time the world loses a sense, the film injects a montage of images coupled 
with an omniscient voiceover describing what is happening/what is lost/
how the world deals with/why it is happening. These montage sequences 
give us clues as to the genesis of the events, but, and a warning here to those 
among us who “have to know WHY it’s going on,” the film never tells us 
exactly why any of this is happening nor does it seem to care. These inter-
ludes are emotional, interstitial interludes that are highly formalist (tak-
ing us out of the realism of the film and imposing the film on us as a work 
of art, rather than an event happening in the here and now). They are the 
filmic equivalent of the emotional outbursts of the characters. The mon-
tages serve to highlight the shared loss and the shared grieving, yet at the 
same time, the shared perseverance and shared fortitude of the world as 
everyone moves forward. For example, the first montage after smell disap-
pears begins with the words (in voiceover): “Life goes on.”
As the montage makes clear, life going on is nothing short of a miracle. 
Michael is a chef, and his restaurant adapts and keeps going; as the montage 

Chapter 5: Perfect Sense    89
begins, they are not sure they can stay open and stay in business, but they 
give it a try. They use more spice, more salt, more of everything; they adjust 
to the senses we still have and cater to them. People adjust as well, with 
the hardest part being the loss of memories and experiences triggered by 
the smell: “Cinnamon might have reminded you of your grandmother’s 
apron…. Diesel oil might bring back memories of your first ferry cross-
ing….” The dialogue ends but the visuals go on, driving home the point 
of lost memories. The quick cuts of these visuals also remind that editing, 
in film, can mirror the memory process—the quick cuts and short bursts 
mimic our process of remembering; it is a beautiful mix of theme and con-
tent. The montage ends on a positive, high note as Michael and the restau-
rant owner smile at their newfound hope. Life goes on.
Following the montage, Susan and Michael meet again. They take a 
walk. They happen across a street performer in the middle of an act. Her act 
is meant to help people remember how to smell—the artist tells the story 
of a walk in the woods and uses the other senses to conjure up smell. She 
touches a leaf to Susan’s face, and she tells of the sounds of rain and the feel 
of moss under your feet. “Enjoy the air. Enjoy the moment,” says the artist 
as she begins to play the violin and adds a “soundtrack” that helps every-
one make new memories. The message here is wonderful: art helps us to 
feel, helps us to remember, helps us to connect. Movies, for example, can 
stand in for memories. Music can stand in for a formative experience. A 
painting can stand in for an awakening. A poem for an emotion. It is at 
once synecdoche and metaphor. This wonderful moment is made stron-
ger by its connection to the theme of the human drive for connection—
Michael and Susan experience this together, and the artist holds court with 
a group who all experience it together as well. For Michael and Susan, it not 
only serves to help them resuscitate their sense of smell, but they are creat-
ing new memories, together, that become formative experiences for them—
connected to emotions. The cycle of connectivity is made apparent in this 
one performance as life goes on, hopefully and even positively.
In an interview at Sundance, reviewer Dan Mecca posited that what 
makes the film “risky in its own way is how positive it is.” In response, 
MacKenzie stated “And I don’t know how much of that is true, but peo-
ple are constantly confronted with adaptations and possibilities and deal 
with it without even thinking about it. The idea of taking that as a sort of 
an optimistic, human positive thing seemed to be a really beautiful way 
of expressing the humanity and the magic of humanity.” That optimism 
about humanity—and what it means to be human—continues throughout 
the film as every sense gives way and people adapt. When everyone begins 
to lose their hearing, for example, sign language becomes prominent and 
Susan’s lab even posts boards with sign language instructions. Customers 

90    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
eat at Michael’s restaurant and communicate without missing a beat, enjoy-
ing meals and each other’s company. Life goes on.
The film also allows us, the viewer, to feel what the characters feel at 
this point. As the characters lose their hearing, WE lose our hearing. The 
diegetic sound is lost (that sound emanating from the world of the film), 
and their silence is our silence. Our loss is their loss. Once again, the real-
ism of the film drags us in, and it not only allows us to sympathize with the 
characters, but it implicates us. What will we do with this knowledge?
We also get another montage that precedes this loss, with possible rea-
sons for the entire malady. But the reasons point to almost anything: pol-
itics, God, a polluted environment, nefarious and/or rogue state actors, 
genetically modified plants, etc. The sum total adds up to the fact that all 
of these actions are made by humans and harm humans in some ways. 
The only remedy, it seems, is something we are told later when everyone 
is about to lose their sight. As the montage states: “People prepare for the 
worst but hope for the best. They concentrate on what’s important.” The 
characters go outside, look at the sun, they cherish pictures of loved ones, 
or they simply enjoy each other. Again, even with the possible loss of sight 
looming, the message is positive, and the characters find the good and 
the hopeful. We are further implicated—what would do then and why are 
we waiting? What it means to be human is quite evident throughout the  
film.
The final sequence of the film poetically sums this all up and finds 
Susan and Michael frantically trying to find each other as their loss of sight 
looms over them. They both go to each other’s houses, missing each other 
as they do. Yet they still manage to come together and embrace. The film 
goes dark, and the voiceover tells us they still grope for each other in the 
dark and still feel each other. They can’t hear, they can’t see, they can’t smell, 
they can’t taste. But they still connect. And life goes on.
—Vincent Piturro
All They Need to Know: Connectedness
Nicole L. Garneau
Above all, Perfect Sense is a story of connectedness amidst an apoca-
lyptic backdrop. The scientific subthemes of the film, including epidemi-
ology, emotions, sensory perception, and adaptation, are the threads that 

Chapter 5: Perfect Sense    91
weave together this unique take on the genre. In exploring the science 
behind the science fiction, we can take an introspective look at our own 
modern day survival, the connectedness we take for granted and dismiss 
for the sake of progress, and finally, Would we still be able to survive should 
we completely lose our ability to perceive and connect, and therefore con-
trol our world?
Connection, Contact, Pattern
Epidemiology is the study of a health concern from a very holistic per-
spective. Epidemiologists are like disease detectives. They try to under-
stand not only what the disease is, but where the disease is, who has it, and 
how it spreads. The goal is to use this information to figure out how it all is 
connected in order to control it from spreading further. The female lead in 
Perfect Sense, Susan (played by Eva Green), is an epidemiologist that is spe-
cially called in when the first cases of sensory loss, specifically overwhelm-
ing grief followed by the loss of smell, are identified as a possible epidemic. 
When she asks how the victims are infected, her boss responds that there is 
“no connection, no contact and no pattern, so we won’t panic.” Reports of 
mass numbers of people afflicted globally pour in, it’s now clear that they 
have a pandemic spread of disease and are still at a loss as to the cause. “It’s 
fair to say that it’s not infectious … it’s fair to say it’s spreading.”
The First Symptoms: Emotion to Sensory Loss
Many people think of emotions and sensory perception as distinct and 
separate neurological processes, and in fact that’s how most scientists study 
the two topics, which is to say entirely separately from one another. In Per-
fect Sense, we have the pairing of a distinct emotion with the loss of a dis-
tinct sense. It begins with what the film’s scientists call “Severe Olfactory 
Syndrome” or SOS. Extreme grief is followed by a loss of the ability to smell. 
There is strong evidence for why the film’s writer, Kim Fupz Aakeson, linked 
these two processes. According to an article published in the journal Emo-
tion, “emotional and olfactory processing is frequently shown to be closely 
linked both anatomically and functionally.” Which is to say that your olfac-
tory bulbs, located almost right behind the inner corners of your eyebrows, 
not only are physically located right next to the part of your brain that helps 
you process emotion, feel and react (called the limbic system), but they are 
also the only area of the brain that sends one way signals to your amyg-
dala. The amygdala is a tiny area of the brain with a hugely impactful role 

92    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
in our lives: it helps us coordinate responses to the things we see, feel, hear, 
taste, and touch in the environment, especially those that are emotionally 
charged. Many of us are familiar with the eerie and wonderful sensation of 
reliving a memory when you experience a familiar odor from your past. It 
is no coincidence that these aromas are so strongly linked with vivid mem-
ories. When we smell something tied to an emotional experience, the brain 
cells that hold that ­well-preserved memory are directly linked to the sensory 
neurons that hold the related smells that were there when that memory was 
formed. This linking leads to these neurons firing together when we smell 
that familiar aroma again, and the result is that we remember.
The only documented causes of sudden loss of smell and/or taste func-
tion is head trauma (less likely with taste loss), a cerebrovascular accident, 
acute upper respiratory infection, surgeries that could damage cranial 
nerves, and lastly, some psychiatric conditions. So while we don’t have data 
to form a strong conclusion for why the characters experience a sudden and 
complete loss of olfaction after the emotional exhaustion of grief or the loss 
of taste following fear, there is strong evidence to link how each emotion is 
connected to each respective sense.
First let’s look at olfaction and sadness. It is difficult to assess cause and 
effect, however there is much evidence to support a correlation between 
depression and feelings of sadness to a decrease or lack of an ability to 
smell. Second, we consider taste. Acute stress leads to increased heart rate 
and blood pressure and leads us to be able to taste things more strongly at 
that moment, and therefore, following stress, we return back to a baseline 
ability to taste. In the case of Perfect Sense, when the characters experience 
intense fear and terror, perhaps it shocks their system so much that when 
it ends, there is a complete loss of taste. A loss of taste when paired to a loss 
of smell doesn’t explain the hedonistic hunger and the delusional devour-
ing of edible and nonedible things alike, but it does make it impossible for 
victims to rely on signals from the nose and the mouth to tell the brain that 
they are consuming something potentially dangerous. It is only when their 
clarity returns that they can lean on mouthfeel cues, sight, sound and mem-
ory to shock them into realizing they have eaten things that could harm 
them, and therefore feel disgust.
The ability to smell is a powerful thing, and above all other senses, it 
can bring us back to a time long passed. Losing the ability, in addition to 
dampening our ability to recall certain memories in clarity, also decreases 
our ability to sense dangerous poisons and toxins, experience pleasure from 
eating and drinking, and inability to smell the scent of a loved one. These 
side effects are then compounded when one loses one’s sense of taste, nega-
tively impacting the quality of life.
The film then mentions a baby born with all her senses intact. Once 

Chapter 5: Perfect Sense    93
more there is hope, “might be a chance for antibodies.” There are two 
­well-known cases and causes of natural immunity to infectious diseases. 
The first is smallpox. An English doctor by the name of Edward Jenner real-
ized that milkmaids were naturally immune to the disease. The milkmaids 
had been exposed to a similar virus, cowpox, and had built up antibodies 
against the disease agent. Because cowpox and smallpox were so similar, 
the antibodies they developed against cowpox also protected them against 
smallpox. Jenner then successfully tested his theory by “vaccinating” peo-
ple using the pus from cowpox sores on the milkmaids’ hands. The second 
example is HIV/AIDS. There is a group of people that have been exposed to 
the virus repeatedly, but they have not become infected with HIV and have 
not developed AIDS. The reason is genetic. They were born with a DNA 
mutation for a specific cell receptor (like a lock). This mutation changed the 
shape of the receptor lock, and because of the change the virus can no lon-
ger attach and unlock the cell in order to infect it.
This history is likely what Susan and her colleague have in mind as 
they hope to determine if there are people, like this baby, that are natu-
rally resistant to the sensory loss. If so, they can harness the antibodies 
to develop a vaccine or possibly even a cure. From this point we see the 
characters continue living. No one is quarantined, but no one is sure. Life 
returns to its normal cadence.
I Think It’s OK to Panic Now
Rage, hatred, and unchecked anger and violence lead to “severe hear-
ing loss syndrome.” Negative emotion has been shown to make sounds 
appear louder. Again, as we saw with taste loss, perhaps the extreme expres-
sion of negative emotion led to such an intense perception of sound that 
when the emotion collapsed, so too did the sense of hearing.
According to the National Institute on Deafness and Other Communi-
cation Disorders, sudden deafness in one or both ears is considered a med-
ical emergency. Patients often become dizzy and may experience a ringing 
in their ears. In real life 50 percent of people recover spontaneously and 
85 percent who receive treatment from a doctor will recover some of their 
hearing. Some of the more common causes of sudden deafness are infec-
tious diseases, head trauma, and blood circulation problems.
Like severe olfactory syndrome, the spread of severe hearing loss syn-
drome is distinct (unlike taste which appeared to affect everyone at once). 
For this reason, perhaps, we see people being quarantined under house 
arrest for the first time. People have time to contemplate the loss of sound, 
and we experience alongside the main characters, Susan and Michael 

94    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
(played by Ewan McGregor), the cacophony of sounds and the apprecia-
tion for bells and birds. We are also devastated by the sounds of screams 
and babies crying. Michael is the first to succumb, and Susan, in fear for her 
safety, flees. She succumbs next, throwing the phone to Michael, and says, 
“I love you” before kicking off her own tirade with the words, “What dis-
ease! Where are you hiding?” and then repeats the word “why, why, why, 
why” in her extreme frustration and anger.
People soon return again to a sense of normalcy. There is hope in 
communication, in the aesthetics of meals, if not the taste of sound. There 
is time to take in the beauty of things important to them, and they take 
advantage. Equally so, people prepare for vision loss.
Sudden vision loss can be due to a blockage of light entering or pass-
ing through the eye or damage to the optic nerve. The most common causes 
are due to a block in circulation to the eye structure, blood in the back of 
the eye, or eye injury. The loss of sight in the film is described by the narra-
tor as analogous to the ice age. People view the ice age as gradual, but scien-
tists have found mammoths with undigested grass in their guts. Perhaps the 
cold came quickly, taking them all off guard. These words segue to an ava-
lanche and the narrator foretells, “That’s how the darkness descends upon 
the world.”
But first there is joy: the sense of joy and happiness, love and gratitude, 
of what it means to be alive. The connection between love and vision is the 
most uplifting of any of the pairings and is backed by research in cogni-
tive science. Our emotions have the ability to change our perception of the 
world. Called the “­affect-as-information” hypothesis, it looks at how mood 
and emotions change judgment, attention, and thought. As a flood of pos-
itive feelings wash over each character, we see them reach out for human 
connection and embrace and genuinely take in how interconnected we all 
are. Michael and Susan are no exception. They seek out one another, their 
emotions guiding them to see the value in love and setting aside their vul-
nerability to experience love. They embrace as the darkness washes over, 
leaving them only with the sense of touch to survive.
How They Adapt: Beyond Fat and Flour
At each stage of the film and with each loss of a sense, we see adapta-
tion. It is this theme of adaptation in which Michael shines as a counterpoint 
to the seriousness of Susan. In one of their first scenes she ­self-describes her 
career as “death and misery” to which Michael replies, “Ok, I’ll get some-
thing sweet. Sweet always makes you feel better.” Michael is our conduit to 
consider the connection of perception and survival to pleasure.

Chapter 5: Perfect Sense    95
Our senses are our conduit to the world. According to Steven Frigs 
in the book Sensory Perception: Mind & Matter, “The sensory organs we 
have today are the result of millions of years of adaptation to the needs 
of animal in their struggle to survive … all sensory systems fulfill a clear 
and vital purpose: the survival of an individual and the continuation of a 
species.” We sense sights, sounds, tastes, smells, temperature, textures, and 
pain. These clues from the environment are sent from our sensory organs 
to our brains. That tiny part of our brain that serves as our emotional cen-
ter, the amygdala, kicks an immediate physiological reaction into gear. The 
result is that our body does something immediately, unconsciously, to pro-
tect us in that moment. Then rational integration begins to occur. What we 
sense is analyzed with more thought, incorporating what we’ve learned pre-
viously and our memory of outcomes in similar situations. Finally, there is 
emotional learning and memory facilitated by the amygdala for the next 
time. This sensing, reacting, processing, and adaptation occurs, in full, 
three times in the film: smell, taste, and hearing. It is in adaption that we see 
the best of the human spirit and some excellent science shine through the 
apocalypse we witness unfold.
As Susan mentions in the film, taste and smell are two of the chem-
ical senses. This categorization includes senses that detect the chemicals 
directly. It is like a lock and key, where the chemical is the key cells in the 
nose and mouth are the lock. The chemical key binds and unlocks the cells 
in order to send signals to the brain. This is different from hearing, for 
example, which senses the vibrations of sound waves.
With each loss of a sense we see the science of adaptation to a chang-
ing environment, and smartly, it is through something familiar and part 
of our everyday lives, food. Therefore, Michael’s character is our conduit 
to understanding how people’s lives go on. With the loss of smell, Michael 
increases the intensity of the remaining characteristics of the food that can 
be sensed, including stronger taste. Taste is the pure sensation of chemi-
cals that are sweet, sour, salty, bitter, umami (and likely fat, the 6th taste). 
When this too is lost, the chefs begin to rely very heavily on the third chem-
ical sense called chemesthesis, which includes the ability for chemicals (like 
capsaicin in hot peppers) to cause a pain reaction. Chemesthesis is part of 
the sense of touch (think food texture), a sense that the characters do not 
lose. So this makes for a great way to keep relevant in the changing culinary 
scene. The chefs play with different textures, temperature, and spicy ingre-
dients. In addition, you witness people paying attention to sound, and we 
see the food gets ever more beautiful and aesthetically pleasing. The need to 
still feel and see and taste joy in the world is the attempt to get back to nor-
mal, which includes pleasure, and avoid any conclusion that would lead to 
despair, to living only for fat and flour.

96    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
Resiliency of the film’s population is nearly decimated when people 
begin to lose the ability to hear. This third stage in the epidemic comes on 
gradually and via the emotional volcano of anger. Combined, these fac-
tors have managed to elicit panic in ways we had not previously seen. Us 
and them, isolation and quarantine. Restaurants are appropriated by the 
government to make mass meals to sustain the afflicted public. Public ser-
vants in full hazmat suits deliver the meals and attempt to bring order to 
the devastated city. In irony, a dish of fat and flour (plain pasta) is delivered 
to his home when Michael is quarantined after losing his hearing. Despite 
the despair and fear, the film progresses once more. People eat, they work, 
and they communicate. Life adapts once more. We see now that the food is 
even more beautiful than before. People learn sign language. They attend 
music clubs where the sense of touch allows them to experience the music 
though vibrations. The loss of three senses is not a death sentence. It is not 
the end of the world. There is hope, but people inevitably prepare for what 
could still come.
This is the unknown: how people adapt after loss of a fourth sense, 
vision. It appears to occur uniformly across the world, and so there is likely 
little in terms of preparation on a large scale. We are forced to think about 
this from the framework of survival. Humans trust our eyes more than any 
other sense. The basic needs of food and shelter, a means of protection from 
harm and continuing to sustain our body, may now be more difficult than 
ever for people to secure, especially in metropolitan areas where one relies 
heavily on others. Which leads us back to connectivity.
We Make Perfect Sense
From their first moments of vulnerability and intimacy, we recognize 
that Michael and Susan’s shared experience of succumbing to each phase 
of the disease, to sharing in the unknown of what it means for the world 
as they know it, and to adapting, leads them to connect more deeply and 
more genuinely than likely either thought possible. When they experience 
grief and the loss of smell, she receives comfort and he sleeps soundly. With 
the loss of taste following intense fear, they find each other and embrace 
as if the world is only stable when you have someone to hold you in place. 
The violent explosion of anger sends them apart, they experience the hurt 
deeply, and the loneliness of this emotion is compounded by the loss of 
sound. And so, when joy changes their perception of the world, they find 
each other once more, to face the uncertainty of survival in a changing 
world together. Touch, and only touch remains. “Because that is how life 
goes on, like that.” The message then is hope, against all odds of survival.

97
Chapter 6: Upstream Color
Upstream Color (2013) is the second feature film by ­writer-producer- 
director-actor-composer Shane Carruth. His first, Primer, was a small 
($7000!), indie ­sci-fi film from 2004. That first effort was a smart, inter-
esting, and somewhat opaque film that was both confounding and attrac-
tive to audiences and critics alike. Both films were critical successes if not 
­box-office hits (although Primer found life on the Netflix ­DVD-order sys-
tem; Remember that?). For Upstream Color, the same description can be 
used: smart, interesting, opaque, confounding, and attractive. But we can 
also add beautiful, sensual, mesmerizing, and mature. This is another film 
that at first glance might raise an eyebrow when entered into the category 
of science fiction. There are no aliens; no giant battles with spaceships; no 
Amy Seimetz as Kris and Shane Carruth as Jeff escape the world in Upstream 
Color (ERBP, 2013).

98    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
space, actually; no discernible “other”; no ­end-of-world narrative; and it is 
not set in the future. I don’t think, anyway.
The narrative—if we can call it that—starts with a woman, Kris (Amy 
Seimitz), who is abducted by The Thief (Thiago Martins) and given a psy-
chotropic drug transmitted through a small worm in her bloodstream. The 
Thief mentally manipulates her, steals all her money, and leaves her bro-
ken, jobless, and confused. She is drawn, by sound, to a man (the Sampler—
Andrew Sensenig) who surgically removes the worms and implants them 
into a pig. He delivers the pig to a large, rural pen (and we get the feeling he 
has done this before). Later, Kris connects with another man (Jeff, played 
by Shane Carruth), with whom she may have shared the same experience. 
They develop a relationship that leads them to find out more about that 
experience, later finding their connection to others in similar situations, 
and finally, reuniting with “their” pigs.
To describe the narrative in this fashion, however, is akin to describ-
ing Moby Dick as a story about a guy and a whale. The structure is elliptical 
and somewhat confusing; yet there is method: the ­mise-en-scène, cinema-
tography, editing, and sound all add up to a film that is best felt rather than 
understood. Carruth assumes an intelligent audience, allowing us to ride 
the stream along with the film rather just “figure it out.” This is not a film 
that answers all its questions or ties up everything neatly. It is a film that 
pushes us toward looking inward and trying to answer that essential ques-
tion of science fiction: “What does it mean to be human?” The film shows 
us that human nature pushes us forward by telling stories, listening to sto-
ries, and trying to make some sense of them. If we can’t make sense, it may 
be either confounding or liberating. Either way, the film leads in a (per-
haps not so clear, but wonderfully poetic,) specific direction: connection. 
To be human is to crave, seek, and understand real connection, says Car-
ruth through his film. The connection between humans in this film is the 
obvious path, but even more appetizing is that the connection goes one step 
further: a connection to the animals and the physical world. It is a beautiful 
and touching connection on many levels. In the end, it goes directly to the 
heart of science fiction.
The film may be difficult to follow and one in which we can find a clear 
narrative structure upon first viewing, but again, it is there. The film is thus 
best understood allegorically, and there is no one simple answer. The great 
Italian director Federico Fellini once said that his job was to bring viewers 
to the train station at the end of a film. Once there, it was up to the viewer 
to board the train of their choosing. Upstream Color gives us many trains to 
board. The beauty is not only boarding one of them but thinking through 
the abstractions of each journey. We happily take that journey upstream.
To begin to make sense of the narrative and to extrapolate meaning, 

Chapter 6: Upstream Color    99
we can start with the structure and filmic aspects. Each aspect feeds into 
the larger whole. Upon several viewings, it becomes quite clear that this is 
a fantastic formalist film—one where the ­mise-en-scène, cinematography, 
editing, and sound point toward a specific point. All aspects seem individ-
ually disconnected, disjointed, atonal, incongruous, and edgy. The editing 
is elliptical and jumpy. The cinematography is packed with ­close-ups and 
soft focus that only keep the subject in focus while the rest of the frame is 
blurred. The sound doesn’t always match up to the images and is frequently 
discordant. And the ­mise-en-scène doesn’t always ground us, but rather, it 
disorients us. The sum total points to the overall experience and the feel-
ings the characters have as they move through the world. In other words, 
the film makes us feel as they feel. As we take each aspect, ­one-by-one, we 
can see how the parts fit and how that progression toward a coherent whole 
actually works.
Starting with the ­mise-en-scène, we are immediately thrown off bal-
ance. Strange plants. Dirt. Worms. We are only given bits and pieces and 
the focus is blurry, with only fragments of the foreground available to 
us while the surroundings and the background are blurry. Faces. Hands. 
Worms placed into capsules. We see a bit more as The Thief attempts to 
peddle his ­worm-filled horror outside a bar. Unrequited, he retires to his 
car and retrieves a taser. He is in a bar now, and we see Kris enter a bath-
room. Dragging Kris out the back door. Legs, shoes, rain, a parking lot. 
This fragmented ­mise-en-scène continues like this for much of the film, and 
when coupled with other cinematic aspects, it will eventually start to make 
sense.
Cinematography helps our cause. For the majority of the film, we are 
given a soft focus—achieved with a telephoto lens—that only keeps one 
part of the frame in focus, either the foreground or background. In this 
case, it is the foreground, and our focus is usually on a particular subject or 
object—a face, a worm, a water pitcher, a book. Zeroing in on the faces for a 
second, the ­close-up is the shot of choice here. The ­close-up is a psychologi-
cal shot, bringing us physically closer to the subject and either illuminating 
something about their psyche or allowing us to study something we don’t 
quite understand; in this case, in this particular film, it is the characters who 
do not understand. The ­close-up also observes the character in their own 
space, without regard to the surroundings. Consider the complementary 
shot, the long shot, wherein we see the character in relation to their sur-
roundings. The long shot is thus more of a sociological composition, and 
we get to observe the subject in a “relationship.” We get no such shots in 
most of Upstream Color. Mostly, the characters exist in a universe of their 
own, as if they, alone, are left to figure it out. God’s lonely person. The cin-
ematography captures their disoriented, confusing, and solitary existence.

100    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
The editing may be the most expressive movement of this symphony. 
We cut from shot to shot, scene to scene, sequence to sequence, without an 
abundance of continuity. When The Thief holds Kris captive, the method is 
the jump cut—a discontinuous transition between shots. The water pitcher 
to the sun shining, the book to the paper chain, the kitchen table to the 
car. The jumpiness of the editing speaks to the character’s state of mind as 
much as it does our own frame of reference. We are left to fill in the ellipses 
and make connections. That project continues after the sequence with Kris 
and The Thief ends, and we see her on a train. Cut to Jeff on a train as well. 
We know Jeff because we were given jump cuts of him from earlier in the 
film (without any explanation or context other than he is a guy, running). 
The editing that gives us separate shots of them upon their first encounter 
tells the story as they meet: this is two distinct individuals. They are both 
alone. Even as they begin talking to each other, we always see them sepa-
rately, and sometimes, the sound doesn’t follow along. We may hear them 
talking while the image cuts to them sitting alone, disembodied and frac-
tured. The parts are adding up now: the editing evinces the same feelings of 
being alone, disoriented, and confused.
Sound rounds out that feeling and punctuates it. Carruth wrote the 
score for the film as well, which has a symphonic feel and structure to it 
but is minimalist and simple in its construction and application. Most of 
the time, the music consists of simple keyboards that evoke a feeling or 
emotion. Rarely does the music serve as a leitmotif or tag a character/
event. Following the same project as the other elements of the film, it can 
be disjunctive and discordant. But sound includes more than music on the 
soundtrack, and dialogue and sound effects fall into this category as well. 
Most films rely more heavily on the former than the latter, yet this film 
reverses the polarity. There is so little dialogue that the finished project is 
more a silent film than a talkie. It is hardly talk-y. The sound effects factor 
in more prominently, as my colleague Dr. Nicole Garneau discusses in the 
next portion of this chapter. The sound effects also serve as a point of con-
nection for Kris and Jeff. The sounds they hear begin to percolate, and they 
realize that they have a shared history with the sounds. They investigate 
the origins of the sounds, find resonance in nature and particular places, 
find the farm where The Sampler lives and records, buy his recordings, and 
finally, they put it all together and locate him. It is through the shared con-
nection to sound that they are able to put all their pieces together. But there 
is more.
There is a specific cycle involved in the “scheme” shown in the film 
that we can read in a number of ways. The cycle begins with the women 
(the credits call them “Orchid Mother and Orchid Daughter”) picking up 
the blue orchids from the stream, which they put into pots of soil. (Even 

Chapter 6: Upstream Color    101
though this is shown last, I see it as the first step in the cycle.) The Thief 
then buys the orchids and harvests the worms inside the soil. He “injects” 
the worms into his victims. The worms hold a parasite that exerts a psycho-
tropic drug into the host, rendering the host subservient to The Thief. He 
then steals all their money and ruins their lives. The worms are now trans-
ferred from the victims by The Sampler, who takes them from the victim 
and inserts them into pigs. This seems to create a connection between vic-
tim and pig. He uses sound to gather the worms through a process called 
“worm charming” that brings worms to the surface of wherever they are 
(since they are attracted to sound). The victims are then attracted to the 
sound as well (through the worms) and that is how they find The Sampler. 
The Sampler then kills the pigs and leaves them in the stream, whereby the 
parasite seeps into the orchids and turns them blue, beginning the cycle 
again.
The subjects of the film are many, varied, and some, frustratingly, 
remain upstream and out of our reach. Rape, assault, predation, cycles, 
addiction, animal rights, existentialism, and most prominently, connec-
tion, are all indirectly injected into the stream of the film. The film is also 
a love story—as unconventional in its presentation as its construction. In 
his review of the film, Mark Olsen of the Los Angeles Times notes, “With 
its densely layered, thematically rich storytelling, Upstream Color is in part 
about the mutual psychosis that can be an essential part of romance, the 
agreement of a shared madness.” We see evidence of this dynamic through-
out the film, and it is no doubt there, but as Olsen notes, it is only part of 
the whole.
The other subjects also fill in missing pieces and speak to that whole. 
There are so many wonderful themes we can attach to these subjects as 
well. One that Carruth himself mentioned was “breaking a cycle.” He was 
thinking about how we may extract ourselves from a particular cycle, such 
as violence, or addiction, or even an unhealthy relationship. We need to 
face it and break through, to kill it. The two most important scenes in the 
film, for me, are when Kris finally looks directly toward The Sampler at the 
table. Before that, she couldn’t “see” him sitting right next to her. But now 
she actually sees him. She is facing her addiction/fear/whatever it is you 
want to apply. Then, when Kris actually “kills” The Sampler, she is break-
ing the cycle. That break becomes the key to unlock the final portion of 
the film, where Kris and Jeff find the boxes of artifacts, uncover the entire 
scheme, and then send the copies of Walden to the other afflicted. What are 
the “afflictions?” Perhaps everyone has their own, and that is one of the ele-
ments the film leaves out of reach; yet at the same time, by leaving it nar-
ratively unreachable, we are forced to look inward and uncover our own 
afflictions. We need to kill our own Sampler.

102    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
The connection to the natural world, and the animals as part of 
that world, is another prominent theme with abundant evidence layered 
throughout the film. The victims are literally connected to the pigs when 
The Sampler removes the worms and places them into the pigs. The con-
nection goes beyond after that, however, and it becomes metaphysical. 
After Kris and Jeff come together, their pigs come together. They mate, and 
Kris’ pig becomes pregnant. Kris thinks she feels this in her own body, but 
a doctor visit reveals that she cannot become pregnant. The editing makes 
the connection clear in a ­cross-cutting sequence that parallels Kris and Jeff 
with the pigs. They can feel what each other is feeling. That feeling becomes 
heartbreakingly real once the piglets are born and The Sampler kills them 
(by horrifyingly drowning them in the river). Kris and Jeff have strong, vis-
ceral reactions to this and experience anger, loss, and grief; Jeff initiates a 
fight with ­co-workers and Kris frantically searches her workplace, looking 
for something she lost. Once again, following these sequences, they come 
together (almost inexplicably drawn to each other, actually) and attempt to 
locate their source of grief. This connection to animals is an important sub-
text to the film. Specifically in reference to the pigs, Carruth himself notes 
in the interview with the Los Angeles Times:
It’s more about what those pigs are now embodying. I mean, there is a break of 
the cycle. These people that have been affected by this are now taking back own-
ership of the thing that they’re connected to…. I don’t believe that narrative 
works when it’s trying to teach a lesson or speak a factual truth. What it’s good 
for is, an exploration of something that’s commonplace and universal—maybe 
that’s where the truth comes from.
This universal truth of which Carruth speaks indicates a certain Aristo-
telian bent—not a universal in terms of form, as Plato argued, but rather 
something predicated on an existing thing, and in this case, that “thing” 
seems to be very much an individual experience. The truth we understand, 
and that which the characters find, is both tangible and existential. They 
are able to share that truth, make some meaning in their lives, and move 
forward.
We now circle back to the cinematography. Remember the early 
sequences of the film were a shallow focus with only the subject in focus 
and the rest of the frame blurry and unreadable. That focus changes as Kris 
and Jeff meet, date, and eventually marry (a fact made clear only through 
the ­mise-en-scène: rings). The frame opens up a bit to include both of them 
in the frame—a ­two-shot; yet we still do not see very much else. The gray 
and gloom, as if it were always a Villeneuve “rainy Tuesday morning,” also 
pervade the film. That all changes near the end, however, in the ending 
sequence at the farm: we get long shots with a deep focus that tend toward 
long takes. Deep focus (achieved by using a ­wide-angle lens on the camera) 

Chapter 6: Upstream Color    103
allows us to see both foreground and background in focus and gives us a 
strong depth of field. In the farm sequence, we get to see the characters in 
relation to their surroundings. Everything is now in focus. We even get the 
added bonus of a sunny day with abundant natural light. The net effect is an 
objective reality for the viewer—we get to see the world as it is, not blurry 
nor subjective. For the characters, they have moved from darkness, confu-
sion, and disorientation, to clarity.
With multiple people now in the shots, clarity of both foreground and 
background, no intrusive, confusing, or disjunctive editing, and a natural 
setting with natural light, all of the film’s constituent elements speak to a sea 
change, and a positive change at that. We have togetherness and connec-
tion at the end of the film. There is also more empathy towards life in all its 
forms, as in the case of the pigs. The form of the film has changed to mirror 
the change in the characters and theme. It’s not a just beautiful and interest-
ing film, it’s a wonderfully constructed piece of art. It is firmly grounded in 
Earth. The question of “What does it mean to be human?” is answered on 
several levels in this film, and it may be mean something different to every-
one watching. Which train will you take?
—Vincent Piturro
Parasites and Defying Explanation
Nicole L. Garneau
First, a “Primer” (Pun Intended) on Parasites
To put it in my student Emma’s words, “Just finishing watching … 
um … that was bizarre to say the least. But it did remind me of that flat-
worm parasite that infects snails, ants, and then cows. When it’s in the ant 
it controls its mind causing the ant to cling to a blade of grass where it is 
more likely to get eaten by a cow.” My thoughts almost exactly, except my 
mind jumped to the guinea worm first. But let’s not get ahead of ourselves, 
because it doesn’t get any better than parasites.
Parasites have been wreaking havoc since the dawn of time and doc-
umented since antiquity. From hieroglyphics to the medical texts of Hip-
pocrates, humans have been trying to understand how something so small 
could cause so much damage. Parasitism is one of the three forms of symbi-
osis. You can have symbiosis where one organism benefits and the other is 

104    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
neutral (commensalism), where both benefit (mutualism), or one benefits 
and the other can cause harm (parasitism). All three of these forms come 
into play in Upstream Color, but it is the parasitism that carries the story 
and leaves us a bit scarred alongside the main characters. So that’s where 
we start.
According to the textbook Parasitology & Vector Biology (2nd Edi-
tion), the term parasitism is defined as “relationship of two organisms of 
different species in which the smaller (the parasite) has the potential of 
harming the larger (the host) and in which the parasite relies on the host 
for nutrients and for a place to live.” The host is also required for one more 
vital piece of survival, developing and reproducing. An intermediate host 
carries a immature parasite, while a definitive host carries the adult par-
asite and serves as the living boudoir (so to speak) to ensure reproduc-
tion. Finally, a vector is the knowing or unknowing noun (person, place 
or thing) that transmits the parasite to another host, and if alive itself may 
technically count as another host if some sort of development occurs.
All that said, if you want to understand director Shane Carruth’s par-
asite and its impact on all the characters, we need follow its life cycle. This 
starts by identifying stages: the egg, the immature parasite, the adult, and 
reproduction which brings us back to the egg. From there we can figure out 
which of Carruth’s characters are hosts and what factors help this lifecycle 
happen over and over again until it is broken. Keeping the idea of survival 
in mind, we can then understand the things that make people do what they 
do in the midst of this lifecycle, driving the actions all the different players 
take. Once we have all that we can see how well this fictional parasite, and 
the many people and things it interweaves during its lifecycle, lives up to 
the world of nonfiction.
The Players: Hosts and Vectors
I stopped counting at 8, but it took at least that many viewings of 
Upstream Color for me to scientifically make sense of the hosts and vectors 
in Carruth’s parasitic mind trip. Let me save you the trouble and spell them 
out for you.
•  River (Upstream): environmental factor of moving parasite from 
one host to another
•  Orchids (Color): hard to determine if the orchid is an actual host 
or just a vector. If host, some form of developmental growth of 
the parasite (e.g., going from egg to juvenile) needs to happen, 
but there is no evidence of this. The only evidence we have that 
something happens to the plant is that when it takes up the eggs via 

Chapter 6: Upstream Color    105
its roots, the flowers turn from white to blue. So likely the orchids 
are a vector, a means of transferring the parasitic eggs from the 
water to the caterpillar.
•  Caterpillars: Likely eat the plant and ingest the parasitic eggs. If the 
caterpillar is a true host, then we expect the eggs to hatch once in 
the caterpillar and develop into stage 1 juveniles. Let’s assume this 
happens and call the parasites tweens at this stage.
•  Orchid florists: These gals are likely another batch of environmental 
factors, no different from the river; they carry the parasite to a new 
location necessary to fulfill its life cycle. However, their actions lead 
to a direct benefit, so this could be a form of mutualism with the 
parasite (unbeknownst to them).
•  Thief: Another key vector, and another form of mutualism. The 
thief and the parasite benefit greatly from this relationship. As 
a vector he physically transfers the parasite to infect a new host 
(victim). He is not a host as he himself is not infected and plays no 
role in the parasites’ development or reproduction. He has learned 
(evolved/adapted) as a vector through the selective pressure of 
his circumstances to take advantage of the neurological damages 
caused by the parasite on victims. He can influence and alter the 
victim’s sensory system (and thus their survival system). They see 
what he wants them to see, and they feel what he wants them to feel. 
In this way he manipulates them to hand over their assets, leaving 
them broke and broken, and therefore less able to survive.
•  Victim(s): Intermediate host, this is definitely parasitism. An 
infected caterpillar is ingested (forcibly by the Thief) and we watch 
as the parasite develops from a stage 1 juvenile (tween) to a stage 2 
juvenile (teenager) within the human host. This is clearly the most 
dramatic host interaction in Carruth’s visual depiction. Following 
ingestion, we see the symptoms and pathologies of infection in the 
human host.
•  Sampler: a vector twice over. First vector role, he surgically 
transfers the teenage worm from the human (intermediate host) 
to the pig (definitive host). The victim drinks a milky white elixir 
(likely an anthelmintic drug, which stuns the worm). Then the 
Sampler slowly rolls the worm(s?) out from an incision on the foot 
from the human to the pig. Unclear if this is mutualism and if he 
benefits from people coming to his farm in that it helps him make 
and sell music? Or is this a form of commensalism where it doesn’t 
hurt him (in fact he might think he is helping the victims), but it 
surely helps the parasite. Second vector role, the Sampler removes 
the infected piglets from the parents, bags them and coldly tosses 

106    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
them in the river to die. We learn that this is not the first time he 
has done this, and therefore plays two very important vector roles 
in the life cycle of this fictional parasite.
•  Female adult pig: Definitive host. Teenage parasites develop into 
sexually mature adult parasites, reproduce, and eggs form. It seems 
that male adult pigs are ­dead-end hosts, and female adult pigs are 
also ­dead-end hosts unless they become pregnant and can then pass 
on the eggs to their piglets/offspring.
•  Piglets: Unable to escape drowning, the bodies of the piglets move 
downstream where they will aground near the bank and decay. As 
their bodies decompose, eggs are released into the river near to the 
root system of the white orchids.
Questions that remain that science can’t answer: How did the Sampler 
stumble into both his vector roles? He is not in cahoots with the thief 
or the orchid florists, so is this a comment on selective pressure, sur-
vival and evolution? Also, why does he feel it’s necessary to kill the pig-
lets that are born on the farm from infected parents? And why drown 
them, and why leave them to decompose in the river? And more confound-
ing, how did he reach the point where he attracts and has a mobile medi-
cal unit to surgically transfer worms from human hosts (victims) to adult  
pigs?
A Sketch of the Parasitic Life Cycle
The eggs are released into water and infect the orchids, turning them 
blue. Caterpillars eat the orchid (and parasite eggs, which develop into 
tweens in the caterpillar/intermediate host). Orchid farmers are a physi-
cal vector and move plants and caterpillars to a new location. Thief is a 
physical vector and moves caterpillars from orchids to another human 
(victim, intermediate host). Humans ingest the caterpillar (tween parasite 
which develops into a teen). A ­zombie-ism of sorts happens when the par-
asite wreaks havoc on the body and the human brain. Human Sampler is a 
physical vector, attracting victims via sound and then physically transfer-
ring the teen parasitic worms (surgically) from human to pig. Teen para-
sites mature to adults and reproduce. If this occurs in a female adult pig 
who then becomes pregnant, the parasitic eggs are passed onto offspring 
(piglets). Here again the Sampler is a vector, physically moving the pigs 
from the farm, to the river to drown, whereby they are carried down river 
and decompose. The decomposing flesh leads to the release of the para-
sitic eggs into the water, which brings us back to the beginning of the life  
cycle.

Chapter 6: Upstream Color    107
“They could be starlings. They could be cracklings.”
Given the evidence, what are the possible ­real-life parasites and how 
do they compare? They could be guinea worms. They could be liver flukes. 
The scientific name of the guinea worm is Dracunculus medinensis and 
translates to “fiery little dragon of Medina.” The worm that has a long and 
­well-documented history in inflicting human suffering and according to 
the World Health Organization, it is the largest parasite affecting humans 
and is extremely painful as the worm parasite moves through the victim’s 
subcutaneous tissues. The origin of the scientific name pays homage to the 
early physicians that diagnosed and treated the infected. Dating back to the 
Old Testament, it is believed that the guinea worm is the infamous “fiery 
serpent” from Numbers. This is from where the prominent Greek physician 
Aelius Galenus (129–200 ad) coined the disease as dracontiasis, Latin for 
“affliction with little dragons.” Later, ­Arab-Persian physicians (9th century 
ad) called the disease Medina vein (Medina being the “City of the Prophet” 
in Arabic, the place where the prophet Muhammad is buried). So although 
the more commonly used Anglo name of “guinea worm” is used, it came 
many centuries later when European explorers encountered the disease on 
the Guinea coast of West Africa, therefore, the historic nature of the para-
site is ­well-captured in its scientific name.
As the name “fiery dragon’” implies, the guinea worm is no walk in 
the park. The female worm has grown and made her way to the human vic-
tim’s foot (the human in this case is the definitive host), causing a large and 
painful blister. She lies in wait as her eggs hatch into tween larva. Victims 
often soak their painful feet in water at this stage, seeking relief. This behav-
ior is exactly what the worm needs from the human host. The water sig-
nals to the female adult worm to spew her tween larva into the water. Tiny 
crustaceans called copepods act as the intermediate host when they eat up 
the tweens and they develop into a teenaged larva. The crustaceans swim 
happily along in their freshwater pond, until another human host scoops 
up water to drink and unknowingly gulps down the infected crustaceans. 
The teenage larva comes along for the ride and then takes about 6 weeks to 
travel to the skin of the person that drank the water. After 3–4 months there 
are equal numbers of males and female parasites coursing through the per-
son’s skin, mating occurs, and by 6 months males are no longer present. 
Jump forward to about ­one-year ­post-gulping the infected water and we 
now have full blown adult and pregnant female worms. And that brings us 
back to the beginning of the life cycle where the victim soaks their aching 
feet in freshwater and the cycle begins anew.
There are drugs that can kill or stun worms, but for thousands of years 
the treatment used for relieving people of guinea worm is to slowly extract 

108    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
the worm by rolling it out onto a stick or a rod. This visual may be familiar 
to you: it is the staff of Ascelpius associated with the World Health Organi-
zation and many other medical symbols worldwide.
Evidence in favor of the guinea worm as Carruth’s fictional parasite is 
straightforward: how it looks, how it moves in the human host, some of the 
hosts match up (copepod = caterpillar/intermediate host, human = adult 
female pig/definitive host), the milky drink is given to stun the worm prior 
to extraction, and the preferred method of rolling out on a wooden rod. 
Where Carruth’s parasite deviates from the guinea worm is in the number 
of hosts, the details of the lifecycle and more intriguing, the neuroscience.
This is where my very astute student, Emma, comes back into play. She 
had written a blog post about said parasite and the ant zombie, and it turns 
out, she wasn’t alone. Otherwise known as liver fluke or Dicrocoelium den-
driticum, this guy has been extensively written about; from official reports 
from the Centers for Disease Control to an online comic called, “Why Cap-
tain Higgins is My Favorite Parasitic Flatworm.” But my favorite is a chap-
ter from the book Faith, Madness and Spontaneous Human Combustion, 
in which the author, immunologist, and science writer Dr. Gerry Callahan 
compares the zombie ants to his crazy uncle Henry. In his book, Callahan 
has just described Henry and how much Henry drove Callahan’s mom up a 
wall, when he leads you down a picturesque journey of cattle grazing in the 
early morning. In the first iteration, the camera zooms in and you notice 
ant and snails, but they are low in the grass and avoid being eaten. In the 
second telling we see the same cattle, same grass, but the camera zooms in 
and we see something very different. In Callahan’s words:
Below the cattle, many of the ants have worked their way up shafts of grass and 
appear to be waiting for something. As we watch in cinematic magnification, 
a pink tongue, large as a python, wraps itself around several ­insect-encrusted 
blades of grass, brown ants, lots of them, suddenly disappear behind a huge set of 
­cud-scarred teeth…. Fade to black. Let’s consider, for a moment, what we have just 
witnessed. In the first scene, the ants are cautious, responsible, sane. In the sec-
ond scene the ants are none of those things…. Whether we are comfortable with 
the words or not, the ants in the second scene are clearly crazy…. They have lost the 
ability to care for themselves and seemingly no longer regard life more highly than 
death…. Still, we don’t look for histories of child abuse among ants, discuss ant toi-
let training, or accuse ants [like we have of Uncle Henry] of character flaws and 
laziness…. So if “mentally ill” isn’t accurate, what should we call them…
We should call them infected. Sound familiar? The liver fluke usually finds 
itself in a definitive host such as a cow, sheep, or goat, but yes, humans are 
susceptible too. An infected animal (or human) defecates and parasite eggs 
come along for the ride. Snails (intermediate hosts) eat the eggs, the eggs 
hatch, and they develop into tween larva. The snail leaves behind a slime 

Chapter 6: Upstream Color    109
ball contaminated with the tween larva. The ant eats up this delicious slime 
ball treat, ingesting the tween larva along the way. Yum. The tween devel-
ops into a teenager once in the ant (another intermediate host). The ant 
becomes a zombie (a.k.a. crazy, mentally ill, etc.) and lives out its death sen-
tence of ­trance-like-climbing-grass-and-waiting-to-be-eaten-by-a-cow (or 
human). Once in the definitive host the teenager becomes a fully mature 
parasite able to mate and procreate, and we have a new round of eggs that 
exit once more alongside feces. And the cycle starts anew.
Evidence in favor of the liver fluke as Carruth’s fictional parasite is also 
straightforward: the alignment of the hosts and life cycle (snail= caterpil-
lar/intermediate host, ant=human/intermediate host, cow=pig/definitive 
host), and the neurological change in the second intermediate host (ant/
human) leading these hosts to act in ways that do not ensure their survival 
and go against their nature.
Love and Breaking the Parasitic Life Cycle
Parasitic diseases are controlled by a number of actions. In Upstream 
Color we see many of these actions beautifully employed by love and facili-
tated by death. From unconscious to conscious, Kris experiences an awak-
ening. Her ­trance-like recitation, word for word, of Walden, captured 
and brought to light by Jeff, is the key to her then tapping into the Sam-
pler’s mind, his experiences, his sounds. The Sampler becomes the sam-
pled, and this awareness leads to his death. By killing the Sampler, Kris 
­single-handedly eliminates him as a ­twice-over vector. First, he can no lon-
ger attract victims and transfer their worms to adult pigs. Second, he can no 
longer send piglets spawned from diseased pigs to their death in the river. 
This then eliminates the contamination of the river and the orchids. There 
are no blue flowers for the florists to scout, and therefore no caterpillars for 
the thief to employ in stealing away the lives of more victims.
Verdict
Carruth’s fictional parasite has a life cycle of the liver fluke, as well as 
the neurological repercussions of the fluke when in the second intermediate 
host. The fictional parasite, however, has the visual presentation and develop-
ment of a roundworm (e.g., guinea worm) when in the human host. How this 
parasite brought together all these characters is the beauty in selective pres-
sure and evolution. How it came to an end is nothing short of love, something 
the human mind can feel but can’t really fully explain. Kind of like this film.

110
Chapter 7: Contact
Robert Zemeckis may be the best and most prolific director you have 
never heard of. Steven Spielberg and Stanley Kubrick don’t need much of 
an introduction, but Zemeckis may. His films, however, speak for them-
selves and have been part of the lexicon of American film culture as well as 
culture writ large: Back to the Future I, II, & III (1985–1990), Who Framed 
Roger Rabbit (1988), Forrest Gump (1994), Cast Away (2000), What Lies 
Beneath (2000), and The Polar Express (2004), among others. His films are 
known for their technical prowess and innovation, their quirkiness, and 
their ­top-notch production values among countless other things. Not to 
mention wildly successful. Many of the images from his films have been 
burned into the collective psyche, from Michael J. Fox in the time machine; 
to the animated, curvy Jessica Rabbit; to Tom Hanks eating chocolates on a 
bench; to Tom Hanks skinny as a stick on the beach in Cast Away. We can 
go on and on. Zemeckis’ career spans six decades and counting, and his 
influence looms large over recent American cinema.
Zemeckis grew up in Chicago in a ­blue-collar Catholic family, leaving 
Jodie Foster as Ellie Arroway listening to the galaxy in Contact (Warner Bros., 
1997).

Chapter 7: Contact    111
for USC film school in the late 1960s. While at USC, in the midst of the 
European art film invasion and the beginning of the American New Wave, 
he was unimpressed with that scene and was more interested in making 
classic Hollywood films. It is there that he met writer and future collabo-
rator Bob Gale. After being recognized for a student film, he lobbied Ste-
ven Spielberg for help; Spielberg was impressed and produced his first two 
feature films I Wanna Hold Your Hand (1978) and Used Cars (1980). Nei-
ther film was a ­box-office success, but everyone recognized the writing 
(in partnership with Gale) and directing talent. Struggling for work, he 
made Romancing the Stone (1984), which everyone thought to be a dud yet 
became a surprise hit and allowed him to make the film he and Gale had 
trouble selling to all major studios: the story was of a teenager who inadver-
tently travels back in time to the 1950s. The rest was, well, the future.
His career entered the stratosphere after the breakout success of Back 
to the Future. In between making the sequels (something many big direc-
tors have frequently refused to do), he made the groundbreaking and tech-
nically brilliant Who Framed Roger Rabbit, known for its mix of live action 
and animation. After several other films, he made Forrest Gump and won 
the Oscar for Best Director (among many other awards for the film). With 
his penchant for big projects and his deft hand at technology and storytell-
ing, he then turned his sights on the adaptation of Carl Sagan’s popular—
and dense—science fiction novel, Contact. Originally conceived as a film, 
Sagan changed his approach and published it as a novel in 1985. The story 
of contact between humans and ­extra-terrestrials became a best seller, sold 
millions of copies, and subsequently went into production at Warner Broth-
ers, who owned the rights from its initial iteration as a film treatment. The 
script went through several drafts, writers, and directors, including Roland 
Joffé (The Killing Fields) and George Miller (the Mad Max films). Zemeckis 
finally took the helm and was given complete artistic control (after origi-
nally turning it down), including final cut rights—a rarity in the big studio 
world. With a final budget of $70 million (a gigantic figure even by current 
standards), ­A-list stars including Jodie Foster in the lead role, and a sprawl-
ing narrative, Zemeckis seemed the perfect person to make the film.
The narrative of the film centers around Dr. Ellie Arroway, (Jodie Fos-
ter, and Jena Malone as the young Ellie) a SETI (Search for Extra Terrestrial 
Intelligence) scientist whose work has her listening to the stars for signs of 
life. Her funding is eventually cut, and she finds a sympathetic patron in 
eccentric billionaire S.R. Hadden (John Hurt). When she finally discovers 
what she thinks is such evidence of alien communication, Dr. David Drum-
lin (Tom Skerrit), the president’s science advisor, takes over and heads up 
the project to build the spaceship made from designs communicated from 
the “aliens.” He is also chosen to take the ride after Ellie is deemed not fit for 

112    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
first contact since she does not believe in God. When a religious terrorist 
(Jake Busey) blows up the machine (and Drumlin) on the launchpad, Had-
den reveals he had secretly built a second machine and installs Ellie as the 
occupant. Her ride seems to take her to another galaxy, through a worm-
hole, to a planet where she makes first contact with beings who take the 
physical shape of her long dead father (David Morse). Her “father” tells her 
such a shape was made to make her feel more comfortable with the meet-
ing. The meeting is short, and Ellie is catapulted back to the capsule, where 
she finds her cameras did not record anything, the capsule never actually 
went anywhere, and nobody believes her story (despite some evidentiary 
proof to the contrary). As everyone shuns her and accuses her of engaging 
in a corporate sham (run by Hadden), her friend and sometime boyfriend 
Palmer Joss is there to console her in the end, tying together science and 
religion in a lovely bow.
With Jodie Foster installed as Ellie, Zemeckis brought in Matthew 
McConaughey as Joss, the theologian with whom Ellie as an ­on-again/­ 
off-again relationship throughout the narrative. The story is similar to the 
book but changed for the screen. The biggest change is that Palmer Joss is 
no longer a fiery, tattooed, preacher man; in the film he is a ­soft-spoken 
author who serves as Ellie’s love interest and intermediary between stron-
ger religious voices who are opposed to the journey. Other characters have 
been deleted (as is standard for a screen adaptation), and others have been 
collapsed. Of course, the book has more room for philosophical debate 
and discussion, and the film condenses the five characters chosen to take 
the ride into one, Ellie. In the book, the five characters are chosen for dif-
ferent reasons—including cultural and international inclusion—all add-
ing to that discussion and debate. The film shorthands this for dramatic 
purposes as well as economy, but in the process loses some of the philo-
sophical depth and makes it much more ­American-centric. Sagan’s book, 
written toward the end of the Cold War, is driven, in part by the hope that 
finding such extraterrestrial life would bring the world together in a com-
mon cause. The film includes some of that sentiment, but it all ends up in 
America, with Americans. One of the more interesting changes is that in 
the book, when the ship returns, there is more evidence for the actual jour-
ney—including sand in the capsule. Yet the crew of five is accused of an 
international conspiracy (shedding doubt on any Cold War warming) and 
sworn to silence. For her part, Ellie finds out a secret about her real father 
and tries to uncover more about the trip—through math. Yeah, Hollywood 
didn’t go for that part.
The film, however trite the ending, still manages to infuse a great deal 
of ’90s politics, culture, philosophy, economics, and technology into its 
own narrative. It also has a sense of film history as well a close connection 

Chapter 7: Contact    113
to ­sci-fi of the past. As some of the cast and crew noted, Zemeckis made 
them all watch 2001: A Space Odyssey before starting work on the film (a 
curious request from someone who was admittedly more of a fan of Holly-
wood cinema than art cinema). Sagan also gave cast and crew lectures on 
astronomy, and he tried to stay involved in the production even though he 
was very sick at the time (he passed away just six months before the pre-
miere of the film). The narrative steadiness as well as the technical bravado 
that Zemeckis had cultivated in his career up to that point served him well 
during the making of this film—a technical marvel that advanced CGI and 
­green-screen technology leaps and bounds from when Spielberg used it in 
Jurassic Park just a few years earlier. The combination of the serious ­sci-fi 
source material from Sagan, along with a serious and technical director in 
Zemeckis, along with a serious and studied lead actor in Foster would pro-
duce a serious and technical film that appealed to many when it premiered 
in 1997. It would also neatly and interestingly address our central question 
of ­sci-fi: “What does it mean to be human?”
The film’s opening announces its seriousness, its technical prowess, 
and the central premise of contact with aliens in a virtuoso sequence. The 
opening of Earth as seen from ­near-orbit with the sun peeking over is a 
classic ­sci-fi shot and hints that someone else is watching (remember the 
opening of 2001: A Space Odyssey looking back at Earth), or in this case, lis-
tening. The ­mise-en-scène is beautiful and purposeful right from the begin-
ning. We hear a panoply of audio bits from various and multiple sources: 
music, telephone conversations, space shuttle/Mir space station communi-
cations, and other snippets as the camera tracks back from Earth and trav-
els through the solar system. The audio clips get older as we move further 
from Earth, ultimately finishing with the first audio broadcasts to make 
it into space in the late 1930s. As the camera finally leaves the galaxy, the 
audio is silent, but the camera keeps tracking back, finally stopping as it 
reaches distant galaxies. The view along the way is quite remarkable, espe-
cially for the casual stargazer—seeing the Moon, Mars, Saturn, and Jupi-
ter et al. is thrilling and visually stunning. The ­mise-en-scène is thus infused 
with that sense of ­sci-fi history pointing back to Kubrick (being observed 
by an alien culture who then initiates contact), a technical brilliance, and 
also a sense that it seems mathematically improbable that we are alone in 
this vastness. As the camera finally pulls back on young Ellie and she talks 
to her father, he utters the line that is most often attributed to Carl Sagan 
and seems quite apt after that opening: when Ellie asks him if we are alone 
in the universe, he replies, “If it’s just us, it seems an awful waste of space.”
There are countless other examples of expressive ­mise-en-scène in the 
film apart from the opening. In that second scene of the film, young Ellie 
is listening to her ­long-range radio and picks up a communication from 

114    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
someone in Pensacola, Florida. Before bed that night, Ellie draws a picture 
of how she sees Pensacola—a beautiful beach surrounded by palm trees. 
That same picture will come to life later in the film when the alien ver-
sion of her dad materializes on a beach that closely resembles the picture. 
Assuming that the aliens probed her mind to find a comfortable visage and 
bodily form with which to communicate, the picture was plucked from her 
mind as well. That drawing from childhood—a reminder of beautiful and 
simple times when the universe was full of potential—was burned into her 
and serves as a reminder to all of us how that power of youthful innocence 
and infinite possibility may never leave us.
Another picture looms over the film as well: a print of a Carl Sagan 
favorite hangs on Ellie’s wall in her small apartment in Puerto Rico. The 
painting by John Lundberg shows what looks to be an ice planet and 
moons/stars around it. It pops up several times during the film: that first 
time in Arecibo, again in her apartment in New Mexico when she is work-
ing at the VLA (Very Large Array), and finally, when she goes through the 
wormhole near the end of the film, she sees the ­real-life version materialize 
outside the capsule. The ubiquitous quality of the print and its importance 
to Ellie signifies not only her love for the cosmos and her perseverance 
in communicating with other life, but it also pays homage to Sagan, his 
vision, his own hopefulness about life outside Earth, and how he brought 
all of that energy and curiosity to a whole generation with his PBS Cosmos 
documentary series (originally aired in 1980). Sagan brought astronomy 
into our homes and inspired us to look to the stars. Billions and billions 
of them. Ellie never stopped reach for them, and the painting is a continu-
ous reminder of all those elements that make the film smart, engaging, and 
inspiriting.
The cinematography, like most other great ­sci-fi, works ­hand-in-hand 
with special effects to create the world of the diegesis while providing 
depth, meaning, and incredible detail. Even though it is set in the contem-
poraneous society (the ’90s), there is still a plethora of effects that go into 
the film, even after the insanely difficult opening sequence. The extended 
sequence with Ellie in the machine and traveling to the other galaxy (per-
haps? We think…) is a great example of this confluence. As Ellie approaches 
the island of Hokkaido where the second machine had been built, the shot 
is a composite of several different things that is very commonplace for the 
film and a great example of how it all works. The ship cuts through the 
water toward a bay where the mountains meet the ocean. The ship cutting 
through the water is real and filmed by the crew off the coast of Los Ange-
les. The cut to the wider view of the ship is CGI, with CGI people on the 
deck. As we cut to the reverse view of the ship heading toward Hokkaido, 
the mountains surrounding the site are also real; the crew filmed this is in 

Chapter 7: Contact    115
Newfoundland. The Machine site is CGI, and the sky, including the rain, is 
CGI as well. The entire sequence is a blend of beautiful cinematography and 
special effects to give the sequence the drama, darkness, and ominous feel-
ing it finally imparts. While there a great number of effects and CGI in the 
sequence, it is still based in reality. Each part of the film has its own pur-
pose, and Zemeckis is able to deftly conduct this intricate symphony.
The combination of all the cinematic aspects also come together won-
derfully in the film to tell the story and elucidate its themes. A famous 
Zemeckis shot is the long take (an uninterrupted shot without any edit-
ing) while the camera is moving—sometimes in interesting directions, such 
as in a circle, or sometimes simply tracking toward or away from the sub-
ject. The technical aspects of such shots are supremely difficult, since the 
lighting and lenses have to be properly calculated for the entire shot as the 
camera is moving around. The backgrounds also have to stay in focus and 
keep their intensity as well, often with several different levels of illumina-
tion in that background (a sky with stars, for example). The ­mise-en-scène 
also plays a part in this, as all of the subjects have to move perfectly in and 
out of the frame at the correct times. This perfectly choreographed dance 
is a ballet that is performed in the middle of a modern dance surrounded 
by an opera. One example of this type of shot—and its wonderful expres-
siveness—comes early in the film as Ellie meets Joss in Puerto Rico and 
they, along with and the rest of the Arecibo (and later LVA) crew, including 
Drumlin, are having drinks at a restaurant. The camera tracks in slowly and 
then moves around the group as they talk to each other. Locals and oth-
ers mill and talk in the background. It is night and the stars glimmer in the 
background. The shot seems simple enough, but it is nothing but. The tech-
nical difficulties are many, including maintaining lighting and focus levels 
throughout the shot as the camera moves. In many films, and with many 
other directors at the helm, this may have been achieved by a static cam-
era and a few cuts of editing: a medium shot of everyone talking, and then 
cuts to ­close-ups of each individual as they take their turn. The lighting 
and framing are much easier in this manner, and that is standard practice 
on most films. But this is Zemeckis, and while technically complex, it also 
has thematic importance—on several levels. First it gives a sense of real-
ism as the audience is allowed to sit and observe the shot as it is happen-
ing in real time. It also allows us to observe the characters in relation to one 
another; for example, Drumlin is standing in the middle, holding court, as 
everyone gathers around him. He is obviously the guy, the center of atten-
tion, and clearly loving it. Ellie is standing just off to the right of frame, not 
basking in Drumlin’s glow, thereby placing her as not necessarily a part of 
his inner circle and at odds with him. This dynamic will play out during the 
course of the film in many ways. The first cut we get during this sequence 

116    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
is to Joss, who inserts himself into the conversation and adds in his theo-
logical perspective. The cut to him standing alone sets him apart as well, 
and even more so in the case of Ellie. In the long take of the group, Ellie is a 
part of the group, but the cut to Joss sets him apart. And as the camera cuts 
again, the framing is particularly expressive: Joss stands by himself to the 
left, Drumlin and his group stand in the middle, and Ellie is off to the right. 
The philosophical and ideological dynamics are set here: Ellie takes the 
purely scientific view of everything unfettered by politics; Drumlin takes a 
scientific view but it is pragmatic and always tempered by politics; and Joss 
takes the theological view. The ­mise-en-scène, cinematography, and editing 
all work together to tell us about the characters, their standing as part of the 
group, their relationships to each other, and finally, the thematic stakes of 
the film. The final cinematic element, the sound, as you will see in the sec-
ond part of this chapter, has its own function as well.
Ultimately, Contact is a classic Hollywood film that tells its story in 
a smart, interesting, and technologically proficient manner that accom-
plishes its themes in many ways. The Zemeckis method of combining 
­real-life elements with special effects and now, CGI, all come together to 
tell a great story and deliver a professional and impeccable production—
just like he did in his more famous films, such as Back to the Future, Who 
Framed Roger Rabbit?, and Forrest Gump. He also succeeds in deliver-
ing ­grown-up ­sci-fi in the tradition of 2001: A Space Odyssey before him 
as well as Interstellar and Arrival following him. The strong lead female 
character of Ellie was also ahead of its time and was a progenitor for such 
important roles such as Dr. Louise Banks in Arrival or Dr. Murphy Coo-
per or Dr. Amelia Brand in Interstellar, while obviously inspired by the 
groundbreaking role of Ripley (Sigourney Weaver) in Alien. The film 
is grounded in Earth, and it also addresses many of the classic issues of 
­sci-fi, especially going back to 2001: A Space Odyssey and forward from 
there; the central question of ­sci-fi, “What does it mean to be human?” 
has a few different answers, but the predominant theme seems to be that 
to be human is to keep looking to the stars, keep hoping for better, and 
to keep questioning our place in the universe while fighting for unity on 
our own planet. These answers point directly back to Sagan, but Zemeckis 
and the film make them their own. There are many other subjects along 
the way with their attached themes—the ­co-existence of science and reli-
gion, for example—but the film’s central argument implores us to go 
beyond those binaries and keep looking out into the universe for mean-
ing. That view helps us understand our own place, and therefore, the search 
for meaning is the biggest takeaway. And really, isn’t that what makes us  
human?
—Vincent Piturro

Chapter 7: Contact    117
The Sounds of Contact
Naomi Pequette
How would you react if you found out we aren’t alone in the universe? 
Imagine the moment you discover a radio signal from another civilization 
had traveled billions of miles through interstellar space, had been detected 
by some of the most powerful radio telescopes in the world, and decoded 
by scientists. Would it matter if it was first detected by scientists from 
your home country? Would the content of the signal matter? Would you 
want the chance to be able to meet the alien civilization that sent the sig-
nal? These are all questions that the movie Contact explores.
The opening sequence of Contact sets the scientific basis for the rest 
of the film. As the camera travels away from Earth, the audience hears a 
cacophony of sounds. These sounds, which are radio and television sig-
nals traveling out into space, get older and older as we zoom past planets 
and asteroids. Eventually there is silence as the audience is taken into deep 
space and past beautiful sights like the Eagle Nebula. While the premise of 
the sequence has its basis in science, the scale is completely wrong.
Humanity has been transmitting television and radio signals into deep 
space for over a hundred years. These signals leave Earth and travel at the 
speed of light. This means that in one year, a signal will travel one light 
year into space. This has created what scientists call the “radio bubble,” an 
­ever-expanding sphere with Earth at the center, that spans over 200 light 
years and announces humanity’s presence to the cosmos. These signals have 
gone well beyond our solar system and out to the nearest stars. However, 
our own solar system is small in comparison to this vast bubble since it 
spans just a few light hours across. That means, when Contact was released 
in 1997, our solar system would have still been listening to the greatest hits 
of 1997, like the number one Billboard song “I’ll Be Missing You” by Puff 
Daddy and Faith Evans, not broadcasts of the Kennedy assassination like 
we hear at Jupiter during the opening sequence. The closest star, Proxima 
Centauri, is only four light years away, which means any aliens on the plan-
ets orbiting Proxima Centauri would be singing along with Whitney Hous-
ton’s “I Will Always Love You.” The television signal featuring Hitler at the 
1936 Olympic games would have been traveling through space for 61 years, 
meaning any planet within 30 light years from Earth could have received 
the signal and sent it back to Earth. This includes more than 20 planets dis-
covered as of 2019 and the ­all-important star of the film, Vega.

118    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
The story in Contact closely parallels the story of the Search for Extra-
terrestrial Intelligence Institute (SETI). One of SETI’s first projects, Proj-
ect Phoenix, used radio telescopes to search for ­narrow-band radio signals, 
or signals that are at only one spot on the radio dial. These are considered 
the “signature” of an “intelligent” radio transmission. Much like Dr. Arro-
way’s research, Project Phoenix heavily relied on existing radio telescopes, 
such Arecibo. Despite this, Project Phoenix was still the world’s most sen-
sitive and comprehensive search for extraterrestrial intelligence. Unfor-
tunately, this dependence on existing equipment meant that there were 
multiple projects competing for observing time. Still, SETI was able to 
obtain two ­three-week observing sessions on Arecibo, the world’s largest 
radio telescope, each year between 1998 and 2005. Instead of broadly scan-
ning the sky, Project Phoenix targeted ­Sun-like stars within 200 light years 
since they were believed to be the most likely starts to have a planet capa-
ble of supporting life, and thus possibly intelligent life. Nearly two billion 
channels were examined for each target star.
SETI faced funding woes much like Dr. Arroway. Less than a year after 
founding the program, NASA withdrew funds from SETI due to pressures. 
While there was, and still are, questions about whether we could find evi-
dence of extraterrestrial life, most informed parties agreed that SETI was 
pursing worthwhile and valid science. However, fervor to decrease the 
federal deficit and a lack of support from other scientists and aerospace 
contractors made it an easy program to cut. Since then, SETI has been 
dependent on foundations and private donors for funding.
We see this reflected in Contact in Dr. David Drumlin who often 
questions the value and chance of the success of Dr. Arroway’s search. Dr. 
Drumlin is science equivalent of a ­mustache-twirling villain. He will tell 
politicians whatever they want to hear, is narrow minded with the power 
to make or break scientist’s careers with funding, and is the stereotypical 
patronizing “mansplainer” that makes him reprehensible to the audience, 
or at least to an audience of scientists. He represents the politicians and 
other scientists who often mocked SETI. “What’s wrong with science being 
practical, or even profitable?” he muses. There is no immediate return on 
a search for extraterrestrials and that is often the factor that determines 
what projects receive funding. This was especially true for national fund-
ing of science in the 1990s. During Dr. Drumlin’s visit we hear other scien-
tists at Arecibo scrambling to justify their own research in hopes that they 
can keep their funding. Dr. Drumlin ultimately pulls the plug on Dr. Arro-
way’s funding from the National Science Foundation, forcing her to seek 
funding from private sources. Her research became dependent on funding 
from private donor, S.R. Haden, much like SETI’s research.
SETI served as the inspiration for key scientists as well. Dr. Arroway  

Chapter 7: Contact    119
was based on Dr. Jill Tarter, the former director of SETI and the person 
responsible for the fact that SETI even exists. Like Dr. Arroway, she was 
inspired and encouraged by her father to pursue engineering and science 
before he died when she was twelve. She had to elbow her way through 
school at a time when women didn’t pursue STEM careers and was often 
not respected by peers because searching for extraterrestrial intelligence 
was, and still can be, considered fringe. However, like Dr. Arroway, Dr. 
Tarter persisted and left behind an incredible legacy. Dr. Kent Clarke was 
based on Dr. Kent Cullers, a project manager for SETI. Dr. Cullers was the 
first blind student to earn a Ph.D. in physics in the United States and is 
believed to be the first astronomer who was blind from birth. He developed 
and implemented complex computer algorithms to sift through mountains 
of radio signals and search for one that might be from another civilization.
One key difference between Dr. Arroway and Dr. Clarke’s search 
in Contact and SETI is the telescopes they used. While both Dr. Arro-
way and SETI utilized Arecibo, SETI never used the Very Large Array in 
their search. Not only would this have been a significant drop in sensitiv-
ity (Arecibo has ­four-times the collecting area, so it would be more likely to 
be able to detect a faint signal), it would have created a logistical problem. 
Since the Very Large Array is made up of 27 radio dishes, this would have 
required 27 specially designed receivers (one for each telescope) which 
would have been impossible with SETI’s limited budget.
And forget trying to listen to all those radio signals. While Dr. Arro-
way sitting in the desert listening for a signal is one of the most iconic visu-
als of the film (and one visitors of the Very Large Array love to ­re-create) 
astronomers don’t listen to signals at all. During Project Phoenix, using 
only one radio dish, there were 28 million radio channels being monitored 
simultaneously. Headphones could only listen to one of these channels at a 
time so the chances of listening to the right channel when the signal arrives 
is “astronomically” small. Unfortunately, the life of a radio astronomer is 
not nearly as romantic. It involves a lot of sitting in a control room (with 
no ­Wi-Fi or cell phones since that could produce a signal radio telescopes 
could pick up) waiting for a computer (using complex programs, like those 
developed by SETI’s Dr. Cullers) to send an alert that there is an interesting 
signal. However, astronomers are required to make critical decisions about 
signals that look intriguing.
Much like radio signals we have broadcasted into space in hopes of 
contacting an alien civilization, scientists speculate that any signal we 
receive from an intelligent civilization would be distinct from other nat-
urally occurring radio sources. This could be done with the content of the 
message, like the “Arecibo Message” sent in the 1970s which contained the 
numbers one through ten and information about our DNA. Certainly, 

120    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
prime numbers or information on how to build an advanced machine 
would qualify the signal in Contact and make it distinct. In reality, however, 
it could take years to decode the deeper signals so there needs to be some-
thing else to make scientists look twice at a signal.
The aliens in Contact do this by transmitting the signal at a very spe-
cial frequency that wouldn’t occur naturally. This frequency, 4.4623 GHz is 
described as “hydrogen times pi (π).” The hydrogen line, which is a com-
mon observation in radio astronomy, is the frequency at which hydrogen 
atoms, the most abundant substance in space, emit radio waves (1420.40575 
MHz). While there aren’t a lot of loose hydrogen atoms in space (about one 
per cubic centimeter of interstellar space) space is vast. So, the collection 
of all those individual atoms makes for a powerful signal that can be eas-
ily detected by small radio telescopes. By multiplying this frequency, that 
would be well known by scientists, by a mathematical constant, not only 
are they creating a signal that could not be naturally occurring (since pi is 
an irrational number), bit would also give the civilization on the receiving 
end clues to the scientific knowledge of the aliens that sent it. While this 
frequency isn’t inside the range of frequencies that was observed by SETI’s 
Project Phoenix, it is within Very Large Array’s observing range of 1–50 
GHz.
Another clue that the signal in Contact was not likely to be one that 
was not from a typical astronomical source is its strength. The signal mea-
sured in at 100 Jansky (Jy). A Jansky is a unit used by radio astronomers 
to describe the “brightness” or strength of a signal. Celestial radio sources 
are much fainter than terrestrial and are just a few Jy in strength. So, this 
is a relatively strong signal. The Sun, the brightest celestial radio source 
is 106–108 Jy in most frequencies, depending on solar activity. Terrestrial 
radio broadcasts, such as those we listen to on FM radio can be a million 
to a trillion times brighter than the Sun. So, while strong by astronomical 
standards, this is still a very faint signal by terrestrial standards and would 
require a radio telescope to detect.
So, what would happen if a signal is detected? In Contact, we see mixed 
reactions—excitement, wonder, fear, a sense of loss of control. The closest 
we have gotten as a society was on October 30, 1938, when CBS Radio sys-
tems broadcasted a story that Martians were attacking Earth, starting with 
a small town in New Jersey. While reports are mixed on whether there was 
nationwide panic or people simply enjoyed the broadcast of “The War of 
the Worlds,” many scientists have used this reaction to frame their recom-
mendations for “first contact” protocols. Today’s society is used to getting 
constant updates via Twitter and other social media, so the ­post-detection 
protocols, which were first written in 1989, were revised in 2010, and are 
currently undergoing another revision.

Chapter 7: Contact    121
As in Contact, the first step would be verify the signal. Since 1997, sci-
entists have become even more connected globally which fosters collabo-
ration and allows for this sort of testing. In an ideal situation, only after the 
signal had been verified would the world be alerted to the discovery via a 
press conference. However, in this increasingly connected world with more 
“news leaks” this is unlikely to happen. The 2010 International Academy 
of Astronautics (IAA) ­post-detection protocol, which is only 2 pages long, 
now includes informing the public earlier in the process than the original 
version. If the public were to find out before the signal was fully verified, 
scientists would manage the public’s expectations by using the Rio Scale, a 
scale which indicates how likely the signal is to be from an intelligent extra-
terrestrial civilization.
Could a discovery of this possibly be contained by one government 
like the United States attempts to do in Contact? If the signal is discovered 
by SETI, which is not funded or controlled by a U.S. governmental agency, 
it is unlikely. Step three in the IAA ­post-detection protocol is “[a]fter con-
cluding that the discovery appears to be credible evidence of extraterrestrial 
intelligence, and after informing other parties [researchers or organizations 
involved in the detection] to this declaration, the discoverer should inform 
observers throughout the world through the Central Bureau for Astronom-
ical Telegrams of the International Astronomical Union, and should inform 
the Secretary General of the United Nations in accordance with Article XI 
of the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Explo-
ration and Use of Outer Space, Including the Moon and Other Bodies.” 
Yes, astronomers send out “telegrams.” However, today they are digital and 
are used for all major astronomical discoveries that need further observa-
tion. This is widely used for the discovery of new supernovae which are 
some of the brightest phenomena in the universe but fade very quickly and 
need quick reactions from observatories around the world to maximize 
observation time. This step in the IAA protocol also includes notifying 
eight other international organizations. Step five requires the release of all 
data necessary to confirm detection to be released to the international sci-
entific community. Unfortunately, there have been no confirmed signals yet 
and there are Dr. Drumlins in the world who would work closely with poli-
ticians so, despite the international community’s best effort, we won’t know 
until it happens.
So how would we react as a society? Michael Varnum of Arizona State 
University investigated just this. In his study, published in the Frontiers of 
Psychology in 2018, he found that we might react better than science fic-
tion might lead us to believe. Varnum and his team ran several relevant 
new stories through a ­language-analysis program and asked it to deter-
mine whether the language used in those articles reflected positive or 

122    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
negative emotions. These news articles included stories about the 1967 dis-
covery of pulsars whose regular, repeating signal was first labeled “LGM” 
for little green men, stories about the “Wow!” signal from 1977 which is 
the most likely candidate for an extraterrestrial signal but has never been 
verified, the 1996 “discovery” of fossilized microbes in a Martian meteor-
ite, and more recently articles about the discovery of ­earth-like exoplanets 
and the strange behavior of Tabby’s star, which was thought by some to be 
acting like an “alien megastructure.” These articles generally turned out to 
include language reflecting more positive attitudes. The second phase of his 
study was to conduct surveys of approximately 500 people on their antici-
pated reaction if we discovered (and verified the existence of) microbial life 
along with asking another 500 people to read, and write down their reac-
tions to, articles about the 1996 “discovery” of microbial life (now known 
to be incorrect) as well as an article about the creation of synthetic life 
here on Earth. In both cases, participants used more positive than negative 
language. However, this study has been criticized for its focus on micro-
bial life. After all, as SETI scientist Seth Shostak points out, microbes are 
one thing and little grey aliens with an advanced technological society are 
another. The reality will be much more complicated than people reading a 
single article and writing down their reactions. People will be influenced by 
not only how the story is presented, but also by reactions on social media 
and their friends. This study also didn’t investigate the effect religion will 
have on people’s reactions, a central theme in Contact.
If a signal from an intelligent alien civilization is ever detected, it will 
be a ­world-changing, ­paradigm-shifting event. So what are the chances 
there is life out there that could send such a signal? “There are 400 billion 
stars out there, just in our galaxy alone. If just one out of a million of those 
had planets, and just one in a million of those had life, and just one out of a 
million of those had intelligent life, there would be literally millions of civi-
lizations out there.” Dr. Arroway’s numbers aren’t quite correct and are pes-
simistic even by the lowest estimates by astronomers. However, even with 
those numbers, it’s clear that if there wasn’t intelligent life out in the uni-
verse, it would be an awful waste of space.

123
Chapter 8: Jurassic Park
Steven Spielberg has been one of the most prolific, popular, and suc-
cessful directors in the history of cinema. His career has been long and 
fruitful, dating back to his days as a student at Cal State Long Beach (he 
was denied entry into USC film school) in the late ’60s. As an intern for 
Universal Studios, he made a short film called “Amblin’” and was subse-
quently offered a directing contract by the studio (at the age of 22!). He 
dropped out of school and started making TV shows and films for Uni-
versal. After two features, he was offered the chance to direct Jaws (1975), 
based on the popular book by Peter Benchley. With a sizable budget and 
a notable cast, the production encountered numerous difficulties and cost 
overruns and almost didn’t make it to the screen (Spielberg even feared for 
his career at that point). But make it it did, becoming the first American 
Sam Neil as Dr. Alan Grant attempts to outrun the dinosaurs in Jurassic Park 
(Universal Pictures, 1997).

124    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
film to gross over $100 million (overtaking The Godfather as the highest 
grossing film of all time) on its way to making several hundred million dol-
lars worldwide. The film also changed the way we go to the movies, mov-
ing the blockbuster season from the typical Christmas week release to the 
summer. Because of the film’s beach/summer setting and the growing pop-
ularity of ­air-conditioned malls with megaplex theaters attached, the film 
was slated for release in June 1975. It was a sensational hit and played in the-
aters for months. The wild success off the film kicked of the era of the sum-
mer blockbuster, followed by Star Wars in 1977 (the film that would finally 
eclipse its ­box-office record). Spielberg himself became a multimillionaire 
and earned the right to make his own way in Hollywood, turning down 
Jaws sequels and only making the films he wanted to make. By the time he 
came to Jurassic Park in 1992, he had directed Jaws, Close Encounters of the 
Third Kind (1977), Raiders of the Lost Ark (1981), E.T. (1982), Indiana Jones 
and the Temple of Doom (1984), The Color Purple (1985), and Indiana Jones 
and the Last Crusade (1989), among others. Steven Spielberg seemed the 
perfect filmmaker to direct a big budget “monster movie” about dinosaurs 
engineered back to life. Not even a hurricane could stop him, and in the 
process, he would change filmmaking forever.
Throughout the course of film history, a combination of models and 
­stop-motion animation were used for creating special effects, going back to 
the groundbreaking production of King Kong. During ­pre-production, this 
was the plan for Jurassic Park—they would use models for the ­close-ups and 
­stop-motion animation for the wide shots and shots of the dinosaurs run-
ning. Famed ­special-effects artist Stan Winston was charged with making 
the models for the film, and he was well into ­pre-production when Indus-
trial Light and Magic (ILM—the special effects company originally formed 
by George Lucas on the Star Wars films) approached Spielberg to do some 
CGI on the film. CGI had been used sparingly in film up to that point, usu-
ally for only a shot or two, but ILM was tasked with doing whole sequences. 
When Spielberg saw the rough cuts of the dinosaurs running across a field, 
he turned to effects supervisor Phil Tippet and said “It looks like you are 
out of a job,” to which Tippett replied, “You mean extinct?” The line would 
make it into the film, and Spielberg decided to go with CGI dinosaurs for 
most shots in the final cut, excluding the ­close-ups. ILM would work with 
the animators and together they would create the sum total of effects for 
the film, but the era of CGI was born, changing the course of filmmaking 
forever.
Interestingly enough, the physical elements would also have a say 
in the film. Originally, Spielberg wished to film on location in Cost Rica, 
but the lack of infrastructure was too much of a problem, and the produc-
tion team opted for Kauai, Hawaii, instead. They were able to construct the 

Chapter 8: Jurassic Park    125
needed buildings and seamlessly blend them into the natural environment, 
and the striking coastline and rolling hills with beautiful vistas added to the 
mystery and romance of the narrative. But nature had other ideas, and Hur-
ricane Iniki rolled through in the middle of the production, making land-
fall exactly where the team’s hotel was located. The production had to shut 
down for several days, and rather than have everyone sit idly around, the 
cast and crew were put to work on the local cleanup effort after the Hurri-
cane devastated the island. Never one to miss an opportunity, Spielberg had 
his camera crew film footage of Iniki as the storm raged, and that footage 
would make its way into the film. The combination of nature and technol-
ogy conspired yet again to show up in the finished film.
The narrative of the film stuck fairly close to Michael Crichton’s best-
selling book, on which the film was based. But there are notable changes, 
both in the science and in the characterizations. The premise of book and 
film are the same: an enterprising and entrepreneurial billionaire geneti-
cally engineers dinosaurs back to life and opens a theme park on an iso-
lated island. Things go downhill from there. Most of the characters from 
the book remain in the film, but they are changed: Dr. Hammond (Rich-
ard Attenborough) is much more venal in the book and instead, loving 
and avuncular in the film; Dr. Grant actually likes kids in the book; the 
“love triangle” in the film between Dr. Grant (Sam Neill), Dr. Sattler (Laura 
Dern), and Dr. Malcolm (Jeff Goldblum) is not in the book; and the kids 
are reversed in the film (the boy is the older, computer nerd and the girl is 
the younger one, obsessed with dinosaurs). Crichton was a consultant on 
the film, and he approved of the changes, which all seemed pretty common 
for an adaptation. His core narrative remained intact, and most impor-
tantly, the themes of the book are still present in the film. In Spielberg’s 
hands, those themes shine through in all aspects of the film, starting with 
the ­mise-en-scène, cinematography, editing, and sound.
The ­mise-en-scène may be the most stunning aspect of the film, includ-
ing the settings and subjects in particular. As noted, Spielberg wished to 
stay true to the book and film in Costa Rica, but the lack of infrastructure 
and the need to build the roads and necessary structures would have been 
too intrusive on the local ecosystem. The careful thought about disrupting 
the natural world given by the production stands in stark contrast to the 
one of the main themes of the film: disrupting the natural order through 
genetic engineering. Due to the smaller footprint the film would make in 
Kauai, the production moved there. While the wild and natural beauty of 
Cost Rica would have been equally stunning, the combination of lushness 
and the feeling of remoteness in Kauai would serve the production well 
and make for stunning vistas. The sequence of the helicopter approaching 
the island and its landing in a small valley give us the sense that the island 

126    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
is both beautiful and treacherous. Nature can be inviting as well as brutal. 
And of course, the hurricane that interrupted the production was devastat-
ing to the island but helped to make the final cut of the film more authentic. 
Nature gives and takes.
The ­mise-en-scène also encompasses the subjects, and the dino-
saurs—both the models and the ­CGI-renderings—are awesome, inspiring, 
terrifying, and the obvious stars of the show. The sequence at the archaeo-
logical dig sets us up for the story/visage of the Velociraptor, but it is noth-
ing to compared to actually seeing it live and in attack mode. The opening 
sequence of the Park worker being mauled by the Raptor is equally gripping 
and horrifying. Holding off until later in the film to show us the Raptor is 
a stroke of Spielberg genius; we get just enough information to invest the 
later sequences with the proper gravity and scariness. In the meantime, we 
are also given beautiful and majestic sequences of dinosaurs that allow us 
to discover their awesome realization along with the experts brought into 
the Park to examine.
The initial scene when Sattler, Grant, and Malcolm see the dino-
saurs running across the field is a revelation for both them and us. As they 
discover the dinosaurs, we, as viewers, discover them as well, and in the 
process, unlock this new ­CGI-rendering that has now become so common-
place. That newness was particularly tricky for the actors on location as it 
was filmed; they were the first actors who were really required to react to 
nothing. Laura Dern recalls being given a sharpie “X” on a piece of paper 
raised up on a crane to which she needed to react as she “saw” a Brachio-
saurus. She and actors Sam Neill and Jeff Goldblum were tasked with the 
oddity of reacting to an idea, rather than a specific object in the setting. Of 
course, it is not exactly the first time in film history this had happened, and 
in the Star Wars films in particular (along with other ’80s ­sci-fi films) the 
actors were reacting to blue screens while the special effects were added in 
later. Watching a black screen where a planet would blow up in the back-
ground is quite different, however, than reacting to a dinosaur that will 
be digitally placed in the same shot next to the actors. That type of act-
ing would become quite common and even create its own niche in acting 
schools. Today, it is commonplace. Actors, sets, and locations would never 
be the same. Flying on dragons, commence.
Of course, a Spielberg film also includes masterful use of sound, 
among other things. Jurassic Park is no different. One of the most nota-
ble instances of expressive sound is the scene where everyone is stuck in 
their Jeep as the “ride” has broken down. The ­T-Rex pen looms, and unbe-
knownst to them, the electrified fence has been turned off (thanks to the 
diabolic plot by the evil scientist Nedry, played by Wayne Knight). (OK, 
he wasn’t that diabolic and perhaps more of a bungling, greedy nerd. But 

Chapter 8: Jurassic Park    127
he was kind of evil.) As the ride breaks down, however, everyone sits and 
waits for it start up again. Finally, in the distance, we hear the first foot-
steps of something big and powerful. Without the benefit of recording an 
actual ­T-Rex for the sound effect, the team settled upon the sound of a red-
wood tree crashing down. The resultant thud substituted quite nicely for 
the sound of the ­T-Rex. The ­mise-en-scène and sound then work together 
in the sequence to create one of the more memorable moments in the film. 
A harmless glass of water sitting in the cup holder sits motionless until the 
thud is hear in the distance. It ripples. More thuds and more ripples. The 
ripples become bigger and increase in frequency as the ­T-Rex gets closer 
and louder. The characters and the audience are similarly scared and antic-
ipatory in a typical Spielberg scene that brings everyone to the edge of their 
seats. And while the sound of the footsteps was easy enough to find, the rip-
ple effect turned to be one of the more vexing effects in the film. And we 
have Earth, Wind, and Fire to thank for it.
After trying every possible trick to get the ripples, Effects Supervi-
sor Michael Lantieri got a call from Spielberg driving into the studio one 
day. Spielberg was yelling that after blasting Earth, Wind, and Fire through 
his car radio, the speakers were actually moving (OK, take a second to let 
that visual sink in). Lantieri then experimented with different sounds to 
get the effect, to no avail. Frustrated, he was relaxing at home that night 
and playing his guitar when he noticed his water glass ripple as he played. 
The next day, they tied a guitar string to the bottom of the water cup and 
ran it underneath the car. Someone plucked the taut string, and bingo! one 
of the more expressive effects in film history was born. On a film that fea-
tured groundbreaking special effects in both modeling and CGI, perhaps 
the most memorable effect was achieved by a guy lying underneath a car!
The music in the film is also classic Spielberg; famed composer John 
Williams wrote the score for the film, as he has for over 25 Spielberg films 
going back to The Sugarland Express and Jaws. It is one of the more fruit-
ful and ­long-lasting partnerships in the history of cinema. Williams, who 
has been working in Hollywood since the ’50s, is the classic of classic Hol-
lywood cinema composers. Think the Jaws theme. Or Darth Vader’s theme. 
Over his wonderful career, Williams has written some of the most memo-
rable scores in history, and we hum his tunes long after leaving the theater 
and then some. In Jurassic Park, his score is typical Williams: the primary 
focus is “Theme from Jurassic Park” which we hear for the first time when 
we see the brachiosaurus. The Theme is imbued with feeling and emotion 
but also majesty and a soaring arc that matches the wonder of seeing dino-
saurs for the first time. It is the high point of the film in the early stages and 
the music helps us get there. This is Williams at his best and Spielberg at 
his best and the two of them at their best together. That theme will come 

128    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
back throughout the film, in different iterations, and ­re-ignite those feel-
ings when the film wants us to. It is classic Hollywood cinema at its best.
The sound includes more than score, and we also get ground sound 
effects—such as the simple footsteps of the ­T-Rex as he approaches the 
stranded cars. The sounds of the individual dinosaurs also stand out in 
the film, and the source sounds used for them also proved quite clever: the 
deep roar of the ­T-Rex (a Jack Russell playing); the bark of the Raptors (tor-
toises having sex); the hiss of the Raptors (particularly nasty geese); the 
gentle singing of the Brachiosaurus (donkey); the screech of the Dilopho-
saurus (snakes and hawks) as it kills Nedry, and the squealing of the Gal-
limimuses (horses in heat) as they stampede. Gary Rydstrom took a page 
from colleague and famed sound designer Ben Burtt and recorded natu-
ral and organic sounds for years before putting them together to form the 
sound world of Jurassic Park. Burtt became famous for the sound design of 
the Star Wars films, where he put together a whole new universe of sound 
and inspired a whole new generation of designers.
The cinematography and editing are more conventional classic Holly-
wood style: the cinematography gives us a plethora of establishing shots to 
allows us a sense of the environment, followed by a medium shot to set the 
scene, followed by ­close-ups to get us closer to the characters—both phys-
ically by being closer to the camera, but also psychologically closer to the 
subjects so that we identify and sympathize with them. This tried and true 
method of shooting scenes and sequences also allows for suspense and sur-
prise as the audience is privy to information about which the character is 
not (the Raptors in the kitchen) and then complete surprise as when the 
Raptor stalks the game warden in a group. The cinematography allows for 
maximum tension and ­edge-of-your-seat-ness.
The editing aids in this projecting, simultaneously giving us long takes 
without cutting (anticipating the ­T-Rex arrival) that heightens our tension 
and keeps us on the edge of that seat in real time, along with faster cutting 
during the Raptor stalking scenes that moves the heartbeat needle while 
quickening the pace of the film. A Spielberg film is always about great pac-
ing—he knows when to slow down and allow us to sit with the characters 
and then he knows when to move faster to give us the big action sequences 
we expect from him. Think Jaws and waiting on the boat. Or Indiana 
Jones in the cave. While neither the cinematography nor the editing are 
wildly expressive (as in Children of Men or Upstream Color, for example), 
the precision of both aspects, coupled with the classic Hollywood cinema 
aspects that both allows us to follow the action clearly without getting con-
fused while also setting us up for the thrills, the film is extremely effective 
in its goals. All of these aspects are very much in the tradition of Steven 
Spielberg.

Chapter 8: Jurassic Park    129
Perhaps the more interesting aspects of the film are in its themes, 
which are both timely and pertinent. The dominant subject of the Crich-
ton source novel was genetic engineering, and the attendant theme was 
the dangers of unchecked genetic engineering and the hubris that leads us 
there. The 1990 novel was written in the context of genome mapping and 
research that started in the mid–’80s and was codified in 1990 by world 
governments. Cloning was also underway during this period, and Dolly 
the Sheep was finally cloned in 1996. The U.S. Supreme Court decision 
in 1980 allowing General Electric to patent genetically engineered bacte-
ria also paved the way for GMOs and the proprietary nature of such engi-
neering. Crichton put all of this together into an entertaining story that 
was timely and thoughtful, and Spielberg knew he wanted to adapt the 
book right away, acquiring the rights through Universal Studios before the 
book was even published. The science of the day was turned into science  
fiction.
That theme of genetic engineering gone awry shows up in the film 
as well, mostly in the first third of the movie, but it is a bit more diluted 
and eventually gets lost in the action of the final 2/3 of the film. One of the 
quirkier scenes from the film comes near the beginning, after the experts 
have arrived on the island and Dr. Hammond gives them a rundown of his 
research and his attraction. They discuss the ethical implications of engag-
ing in such behavior, and it is Malcolm who voices the strongest ethical 
concerns about the engineering. But it is slightly glossed over in the film, 
whereas the book goes much further into the topic and the larger concerns. 
Hammond’s presentation in the film version is also punctuated by an ani-
mated description and depiction of how, exactly, the genetic engineering 
of the dinosaurs is accomplished (more on that in the second part of this 
chapter). The animated sequence is then followed by the beginning of the 
attraction “ride” which moves directly into the lab. Of course, the scientists 
want to get a closer look, so they leave the confines of the ride and enter the 
lab. A baby Raptor is being born as they arrive, and it is quite remarkable. 
The film quickly moves on to the action from there. In the midst of this, the 
ethical aspects of the genetic engineering are lost, or at least forgotten. We 
come back to it at the end, when Hammond sees what destruction he has 
wrought. The moral may be tidied up a bit too much, however, and it all 
seems a bit too neat.
Unchecked capitalism is also a prominent subject, and the film per-
haps spends more time here—the attendant theme being that not only does 
such a policy create winners and losers, it can also be downright dangerous 
and violent. The subject of capitalism and its attendant scary outcomes is 
a prominent focus of science fiction cinema and has been since its earliest 
iterations. The central focus of the first great science fiction film, Metropolis, 

130    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
was class division and the strife between upper and lower classes. In Fritz 
Lang’s film, it manifests itself in the exploitation of the working class by the 
ruling class. The ideological ­sci-fi of the ’70s was rife with such comments 
about capitalism, including, most notably, Alien. The mining ship Nos-
tromo of the film is coming back from a deep space mining mission when 
it diverts to pick up the alien (at the behest of the corporation running the 
show). Aside from the race and gender divisions on the ship, the alien itself 
is a representation of pure capitalism: it is deadly, adaptable, it stamps out 
all competitors, and it is ruthless in the pursuit of its goals. The company 
who owns the ship finds the workers themselves “expendable,” and the pur-
suit of the alien is greenlit because of its military and economic potential. 
We see similar topics in Blade Runner (1982) where economics is the driv-
ing force not only behind the division of who stays on the dying Earth and 
who leaves for newer ­off-world colonies, but also in the proprietary exis-
tence of the androids at the center of the film. The evils of capitalism have 
always been a stable and easy target for science fiction, and we see that in 
both the book and film versions of Jurassic Park.
Other prominent subjects come directly from Spielberg and his own 
imprint on the film and all of his films, for that matter. He has frequently 
worked with a book as source material, but he always makes the film his 
own and includes similar subjects and themes throughout his body of 
work. Prominent subjects in his films include the family as a disjointed 
or even fractured unit (in many cases, divorce), an absent father/­father-
figure, childhood trauma, and ordinary people forced into extraordinary 
action. We see many of these subjects, in one form or another, in his films, 
including Jaws, E.T., Close Encounters of the Third Kind, and The Color Pur-
ple, among others. The fractured family in Jurassic Park comes through in 
Hammond’s grandchildren—they are visiting because their mother and 
father are going through divorce. The kids are looking for a father figure, 
and Hammond is better suited for the role of grandpa and quite good at 
it, unless you consider the whole “let’s put you in the path of a rampaging 
­T-Rex followed by a scrum with deadly Raptors” thing. It thus falls to the 
reluctant Dr. Grant. The Dr. is not as reticent in the book as he is in the film, 
and Spielberg is able to personalize the characters and add just the right 
amount of pathos through Dr. Grant’s relationship with the children. The 
final shots of the children with Dr. Grant is quite wonderful.
And therein lies the beauty/genius of Spielberg and the answer to 
the central question of ­Sci-fi: “What does it mean to be human?” Jurassic 
Park gives us a simple and quite lovely answer: to be human is to be human 
and not play God. The hubris of the scientists (along with the greed of the 
lawyer—who gets what is coming to him quite poetically in the shitter) is 
dangerous and not only functions as a cautionary tale but it also makes 

Chapter 8: Jurassic Park    131
clear the danger it poses to the future, driven home pointedly by the tra-
vails of the children in the film. To be human is to take care of our chil-
dren; to be human is to take care of environment. To be human is to be  
human.
—Vincent Piturro
Jurassic Park and the Dinosaur Renaissance
Joseph Sertich
The fast moving, birdlike dinosaurs of today’s movies would have been 
impossible to imagine 50 years ago. For much of the 20th century, both sci-
entists and the wider public largely reconstructed dinosaurs as dimwitted, 
­slow-moving lizards. While many exceptions in popular culture and the sci-
entific research attempted to change this narrative, for more than six decades, 
public perception was unwavering. Early flickers of today’s dynamic dinosaurs 
appeared nearly as far back as their first recognition as a unique branch on 
the animal family tree in 1842. Early depictions of dinosaurs as ferocious, fast 
moving, and dynamic animals include a now iconic 1896 watercolor, Leaping 
Laelaps, by paleoartist Charles R. Knight, depicting two tyrannosaurs locked 
in combat. Teeth flashing and claws extended, the pair tumble across the Cre-
taceous landscape like a pair of big cats, one on its back and the other frozen 
in mid leap. But even this was an exception for Charles Knight, as he rein-
forced the ­slow-moving trope with giant sauropods depicted half submerged 
in swamps to support their immense weight, and most ­land-bound dinosaurs 
dragging their tails in ­lizard-like slow motion. By the 1950s, slow and stupid 
dinosaurs had been firmly entrenched in the public consciousness.
The first cracks in this narrative began with a discovery in the Mon-
tana badlands in 1964. Following earlier reports of productive dinosaur 
beds, Yale paleontologist John Ostrom uncovered a trove of fossils in the 
middle Cretaceous Cloverly Formation, among them a new raptor dino-
saur he later named Deinonychus. Unlike the solitary remains of previously 
discovered ­meat-eating dinosaurs, the bones of several Deinonychus were 
found together, offering the first evidence for social behavior, maybe even 
cooperative hunting. Deinonychus was armed with large, birdlike claws on 
its feet, the largest of which was held off the ground by specially articulat-
ing toe bones. Its tail was reinforced by elongated projections from each 

132    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
vertebra into a stiff, counterbalancing rod that could only have been up 
held off the ground. Its muscular arms and clawed hands would have folded 
along the body in a posture very similar to the folded wing of a bird. Fea-
tures like these, paired with Ostrom’s research on the early bird Archaeop-
teryx, revealed striking similarities. Maybe dinosaurs were more ­bird-like 
than ­lizard-like.
Discoveries over the subsequent 20 years reinforced the active dino-
saur hypothesis, often showing them to be much more dynamic and com-
plex than previously believed. Dinosaur nesting and parental behavior 
was uncovered, again in Montana, in the mid–1970s by paleontologist Jack 
Horner. Nests, hatchlings, and adults of a new duckbilled dinosaur, Mia-
saura—the good mother lizard—showed that dinosaurs likely cared for 
and protected their nests; a much more ­bird-like behavior than expected. 
Ostrom’s own graduate student, Robert Bakker, amassed a mountain of cir-
cumstantial evidence and creative drawings to argue that dinosaurs were 
not only active, they were ­mammal-like in their ecology and physiology, 
with a ­warm-blooded metabolism and corresponding activity levels. His 
popular book pushing these ideas, Dinosaur Heresies, burst onto the scene 
in 1986, inspiring a new view of dinosaurs among enthusiasts. Then in 1990, 
the science of dinosaur paleontology was splashed across the front pages of 
magazines and newspapers around the world with the discovery of a nearly 
complete Tyrannosaurus rex skeleton. The find, nicknamed Sue, entered a 
contentious legal fight that led to its confiscation in 1992 by the FBI. With 
the sudden, intense publicity, three decades of new dinosaur research 
demonstrating a novel, energetic view collided with the public’s perception 
of dinosaurs as slow, gigantic lizards.
It was into this world, now known as the Dinosaur Renaissance, that 
Jurassic Park was released. Like the asteroid that knocked out the ­non-bird 
dinosaurs 66 million years ago, the film collided into the public conscious-
ness, demolishing the last vestiges of the ­lizard-like dinosaur paradigm. In 
addition to envisioning dinosaurs as the dynamic, ­fast-moving bird rela-
tives we now know them to be, Jurassic Park introduced and normalized 
many other emerging views of dinosaurs.
There is no doubt that the dinosaur stars of Jurassic Park were among 
the first to reflect the emerging views of the Dinosaur Renaissance. Across 
the board, the dinosaurs were shown as ­fast-moving, social, complex crea-
tures on par with more familiar mammals and birds. At every opportu-
nity, this point was hammered, from the steamy breath of a Velociraptor 
on a window, to the herds of duckbilled dinosaurs drinking from a lake, 
to the description of a group of running Gallimimus as a “flock.” In Juras-
sic Park, the concepts of endothermic (­warm-blooded), birdlike dinosaurs 
were presented to a global audience in entrancing, unforgettable detail. The 

Chapter 8: Jurassic Park    133
depictions of four dinosaurs in particular, Tyrannosaurus, Velociraptor, 
Dilophosaurus, and Brachiosaurus, encapsulated two decades of dinosaur 
research better than any scientific paper or book, with far reaching reper-
cussions still being felt today.
Among the first dinosaurs encountered in detail in the film is the 
immense Brachiosaurus, rearing up on its hind limbs to extend it long 
neck to reach a mouthful of leaves at the top of a tree. The feasibility of 
this maneuver, and the physiologic demands it would place on the skele-
ton and cardiovascular system, are still being debated today. However, it 
showed a dinosaur as a living, breathing creature going about its daily rou-
tine. The emergence of more Brachiosaurus from a lake in the distance, eas-
ily climbing onto the dry shore with tail held aloft, literally depicted the 
submerged Brontosaurus of Charles R. Knight leaving behind its watery 
prison. These dinosaurs, even at unimaginable sizes, were able to support 
their body on land as easily as any elephant or giraffe. Later depictions of 
Brachiosaurus as gentle “cows” browsing peacefully from treetops, and suf-
fering from everyday ailments like a runny nose, powerfully unraveled the 
­dinosaur-as-monster idea. Herbivorous dinosaurs were intelligent, peace-
ful giants, not bloodthirsty brutes.
The first encounter with the films superstar Tyrannosaurus rex (T. rex) 
introduced audiences to a scientific debate that was raging at the time: was 
T. rex an active predator or did its size limit it to scavenging other kills 
and carrion? Would the chained goat offered as bait be too easy and unap-
pealing to a hunter triggered only by a chase? Throughout the film, this 
question is answered with force as a ­fleet-footed T. rex chases people, dino-
saurs, and vehicles with the recklessness of a hungry lion. Depicted in a 
now widely accepted horizontal posture, tail held aloft to counterbalance 
the massive head, this was among the first exposure audiences had to a 
giant, ­bird-like dinosaur as envisioned by scientists. Only a few small phys-
ical details of the T. rex, like pronated hands, did not meet the scientific 
understanding of the time. Curiously, the cinematic detail that T. rex could 
only see movement did not reflect any established scientific insights of the 
time, and in hindsight now comes across as ridiculous. Given their close 
relationship with birds, carnivorous theropod dinosaurs likely had cor-
respondingly sharp visual acuity. T. rex in particular, with forward facing 
eyes similar to birds of prey, had ­well-developed depth perception, able to 
judge the distance and movements of prey with precision. Healed bites on 
the bones of likely T. rex prey like Triceratops reveal that T. rex attacked 
and hunted its prey. Though unlikely to turn its nose up at an easy meal of 
carrion, the movie version of T. rex as an active, ­bird-like hunter hits the 
nail on the head. The film’s depiction of T. rex as a quick ambush predator, 
particularly when she leaps from the forest edge to surprise a stampeding 

134    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
“flock” of the ­ostrich-like Gallimimus, is precisely the version of T. rex that 
has persisted to this day.
Among the most unusual of the movie’s dinosaurs is the carnivorous 
Dilophosaurus. Numerous liberties were taken in the depiction of this par-
ticular dinosaur, more than any other, but it did introduce audiences to 
new, emerging concepts in dinosaur physiology and appearance. Dilo-
phosuarus, known from Early Jurassic rocks in the American West, would 
have stood up to eight feet tall and measured more than 20 feet long, much 
larger than its diminutive cinematic version. It is the addition of an extend-
able neck frill and sticky venom that veers most radically from scientific 
reality, but also reflects new thinking in dinosaur appearance and behav-
ior. With the exception of very rare soft tissue preservation, nearly every-
thing we currently know about dinosaur anatomy and behavior is based on 
skeletal anatomy and trace fossils. Evidence for a fleshy neck frill, or ven-
omous spit, have never been found in Dilophosaurus, or any other dinosaur 
for that matter. However, these features did open audiences to new possi-
bilities, expanding reconstructions of dinosaurs beyond the dull conser-
vative norm. A new world of speculative dinosaur anatomy has blossomed 
since the early 1990s, though much of the speculation is grounded in com-
parisons with living animals. The bright colors of the Dilophosaurus frill 
reflect modern insights into probable dinosaur color vision and use of color 
for communication, display, and warning. Scientists have also begun care-
fully searching new and old finds for clues about dinosaur appearance and 
behavior with spectacular results. In some extraordinary cases that may not 
be as rare as first thought, soft tissues are preserved. We just needed to slow 
down and get creative to find them.
Undoubtedly the star dinosaur of the film, Velociraptor, also had its 
share of creative liberties taken, with the most obvious being its size. The 
dinosaur Velociraptor, a near relative of the dinosaur that kicked off the 
Dinosaur Revolution, Deinonychus, is known from the desert sandstones 
of the Gobi Desert in Mongolia. Unlike its more famous movie namesake, 
actual Velociraptor adults were much smaller, likely standing no more than 
three feet tall, about the size of a turkey. The huge, ­five-and-a-half-foot tall 
Velociraptor in the film was an intentional exaggeration that exceeded the 
maximum known size of any raptor dinosaur at the time. That is, until a 
fortuitous discovery during production saved the day. The remains of 
another close relative, the six foot tall Utahraptor, were discovered during 
production and ushered the movie’s giant raptors from science fiction to 
science fact just in time for the film’s release. Many of the other character-
istics of the movie’s raptors were based on recent scientific discoveries and 
may have been the first time they were encountered by wider audiences. 
­Bird-like behaviors, stiff tails, and cooperative “pack” hunting depicted in 

Chapter 8: Jurassic Park    135
the movie were derived from the groundbreaking work of John Ostrom 
three decades earlier. However, a few key details were left out, including 
the ­bird-like hand position. In order to get raptor hands to work with door 
handles, the ­wing-like folding described by Ostrom had to be modified to 
a more ­human-like pronation. Regardless, the Velociraptor of Jurassic Park 
introduced audiences to a truly terrifying new picture of intelligent, fast, 
cooperative dinosaurs. The old, slow lizards of the early 20th century were 
officially extinct.
In addition to its revolutionary recreation of dinosaurs, the film’s 
depiction of cloning was well ahead of its time. Unfortunately, many aspects 
still exist too deeply in the realm of science fiction to expect the return of 
dinosaurs. Just three years after the film’s release the world was introduced 
to the first cloned vertebrate, Dolly the sheep, and it seemed cloned dino-
saurs were just around the corner. Indeed, in the decades since, cloning has 
become routine and vastly improved through advances in molecular engi-
neering. The recent CRISPR revolution, allowing unprecedented genome 
editing, has the potential to bring the type of gene editing and cloning 
depicted in the film to reality. However, the main premise of the film, the 
discovery of intact dinosaur DNA trapped in fossil amber for millions of 
years, is today considered virtually impossible. Amber, preserved tree sap, 
is relatively common in ­dinosaur-bearing rock units around the world. In 
fact, over the past several years, unprecedented discoveries of fossil amber 
from the Cretaceous Period, dating at more than 90 million years old, have 
been made in Burma with the type of miraculous preservation one might 
hope for. Rare examples preserve fossil animal remains including dinosaur 
feathers and even a section of a small dinosaur tail. Despite their exquisite 
preservation, freezing details down to the cellular level, amber is a terrible 
medium for preserving fragile DNA molecules. In fact, DNA is so suscep-
tible to breakdown due to temperature fluctuation and oxidization that it 
is highly unlikely that anything other than the smallest of DNA fragments 
from a dinosaur genome have the potential for long term preservation over 
millions of years. Indeed, the Burmese amber specimens preserve beauti-
ful impressions of extinct animals and remains of bones and proteins, but 
no genetic molecules. Even if we did miraculously recover enough genetic 
material to attempt dinosaur cloning, scientists would face nearly insur-
mountable challenges creating a viable embryo, let alone bringing it to the 
type of successful hatching depicted in the film. While bringing dinosaurs 
back from extinction may not be possible, the potential for bringing back 
recently extinct organisms like the Tasmanian thylacine or the Passenger 
Pigeon, or even more distantly extinct Ice Age animals like the wooly mam-
moth, are becoming more and more realistic. While we may never have 
a Jurassic Park, ­de-extinction could bring us a Pleistocene Park complete 

136    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
with Ice Age wolves, lions, mammoths, and rhinos reclaiming the tundra 
of Siberia.
The Dinosaur Renaissance as first revealed to global audiences by 
Jurassic Park has only accelerated in the decades since the film. Inspired by 
new advances in the field of paleontology, renewed interest in the science, 
and a new unencumbered generation of paleontologists, dinosaur pale-
ontology continues to surge ahead. Despite being on the cutting edge of 
dinosaurs nearly three decades ago, our picture of dinosaurs has changed 
dramatically as new fossils have come to light. Three years after the release 
of Jurassic Park, the world was introduced to the first feathered dinosaur. 
Small theropod dinosaurs, many times closer to birds in the family tree 
than to their horned and ­armor-spiked cousins, were discovered in fine lake 
sediments deposited at the bottom of an ancient lake in China nearly 100 
million years ago. The first of these discoveries, a small carnivorous dino-
saur named Sinosauropteryx in 1996, revealed that the similarities between 
birds and dinosaurs extended beyond just boney morphology. In the 
decades since, a trove of new fossils from China and elsewhere have piled 
on the evidence for feathered dinosaurs. Even Velociraptor, though never 
found preserved with feather impressions, shows the boney landmarks on 
its forearm of anchor points for feathers. The evidence for ­quill-like struc-
tures has even shown up on the herbivore side of the dinosaur tree, with 
small bipedal ornithopod dinosaurs and horned dinosaur relatives pre-
served with stiff, ­porcupine-like quills, possibly a type of ­proto-feather. 
­Cutting-edge investigations of these feathers under ­high-powered magni-
fication has even begun to reveal dinosaur colors. Based on the work of 
Ostrom, and combined with new discoveries and analyses, we now know 
that living birds, in all of their resplendent plumage, are a surviving dino-
saur lineage. Therefore, it should not come as a surprise to learn that dino-
saurs were decorated with patterned and colored feathers of all shapes and 
sizes. So pervasive is the feathered dinosaur phenomenon, the Velociraptor, 
T. rex, and even the Dilophosaurus of Jurassic Park now look naked in hind-
sight. A remake of Jurassic Park would certainly need to embrace the inner 
bird of dinosaurs and cloak them in colorful plumage.
Among the greatest influences of Jurassic Park on the scientific com-
munity is the creation of the Jurassic Park generation. Children and young 
adults exposed to Jurassic Park fully embraced the ideas of the Dinosaur 
Renaissance as a new dogma. This included a new wave of young pale-
ontologists unencumbered with stale views of dinosaurs as slow, dimwit-
ted lizards, and armed with new technology. New discoveries of dinosaurs 
around the world have accelerated in recent decades as children inspired by 
Jurassic Park pursued careers in paleontology and pushed the boundaries 
of the science. New species of dinosaurs are being discovered and named 

Chapter 8: Jurassic Park    137
at a record pace from every corner of the globe. In addition, new insights 
into their behavior, ecology, appearance, and physiology have accelerated. 
We now know that dinosaurs were a part of dynamic ecosystems with sim-
ilarities to and differences from today’s world. As we push wild places, and 
wildlife, to the precipice of a new mass extinction, we can look to the past, 
to dinosaurs, to understand how the world around us will change. Perhaps 
dinosaurs can help us avoid their same fate.
Monstrous Life Finds a Way: 
Jurassic Park and Monstrosity
Charles Hoge
They’re not monsters.
Or are they?
During a lull in the action in Jurassic Park (1993), and shortly after 
a narrow escape from a rampaging tyrannosaurus rex, siblings Lex (Ari-
ana Richards) and Tim (Joseph Mazzello), along with the reluctant pro-
tector Dr. Alan Grant (Sam Neill), take refuge in a tall tree where they are 
able to watch a gigantic brachiosaurus grazing among the high branches. 
Lex is initially terrified, but her brother attempts to calm her by inform-
ing her that this dinosaur is not carnivorous and that, of the park’s dino-
saurs in general, “they’re not monsters. They’re just animals.” Grant adds 
that “they’re just doing what they do.”
But, in “just doing what they do,” are the resurrected dinosaurs that 
escape from their containment and stalk the grounds of Jurassic Park for 
human prey more than animals? Are they actually monsters?
It’s a fair question.
And in the most direct sense, the answer is yes. The carnivorous dino-
saurs in particular are unquestionably monstrous, morphologically speak-
ing; the ­razor-sharp dentition of the tyrannosaurus rex, the ­poison-spraying 
fanged jaws of the dilophosaurus, and the ­viciously-curved talons of the velo-
ciraptors leave no doubt as to their dietary intentions and the potential to 
be dangerous for human beings. Furthermore, these dinosaurs’ tendency to 
attack humans, just as they might attack any other prey species, makes them 
monstrous in their behavior as well. In fact, when we recall how the ­t-rex 
relentlessly chases a speeding jeep and how the velociraptors strategically 

138    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
stalk the children through the park’s giant kitchen, we become aware that 
these dinosaurs demonstrate a tenacity uncommon in natural predators in 
their continuous, determined pursuit of human prey. With apologies to Tim, 
it must be pointed out that this is not actually what animals do, normally. 
(Maybe more important, though, is the recognition that the dinosaurs do not 
respect the ­self-proclaimed status of the human as the king of nature, as these 
predatory dinosaurs do not perceive us as special, alone at the top of the food 
chain that we created: to the ­t-rex in particular, we are really just another item 
on the menu.) David Gilmore, in Monsters: Evil Beings, Mythical Beasts, and 
All Manner of Imaginary Terrors, undertakes the difficult procedure of defin-
ing monsters, and his eventual definition acts as a virtual checklist as it seems 
to describe the carnosaurs of Jurassic Park perfectly: he offers that monsters 
are “terrifyingly large, ­awe-inspiring in their destructive powers, retrograde 
or devolved in conception, toothy, gratuitously malevolent toward humanity, 
and of course hungry for human flesh.”
But a monster is also monstrous because of where we find it. Any sort 
of entity that is ­out-of-place is essentially a monster because it wreaks havoc 
on our expectations by showing up where it shouldn’t; in other words, it is 
anything that we encounter in places in which it isn’t expected to be found. 
A dinosaur finding a way to survive in our modern world, a good 65 million 
years after the fossil record tells us they all went extinct, provides a produc-
tive example of this kind of monster. And among cryptids (creatures undoc-
umented by empirical science but witnessed in the wilderness by people 
nonetheless), the shape of the dinosaur is remarkably popular; whether it is 
the ­plesiosaur-like Loch Ness Monster of Scotland, the giant, ­long-necked 
­saurian-type ­Mokele-Mbembe that inhabits the watery regions of the Congo 
River Basin, the occasional pterodactylic creature flying over the midwestern 
United States, or even the 3–­4-foot-tall ­mini-t-rexes that might haunt Can-
yonlands National Monument in Utah, these apparent “survivals” are mon-
strous because they quite simply should not exist. Maybe more significantly, 
their impossible presence undercuts our confidence in our own knowledge 
of the world around us: if we believe that dinosaurs are extinct, yet we con-
tinue to see them in our world, then we are clearly not as informed as we 
think we are. One of the linguistic roots of the term “monster” is monstrum, 
which may be translated from Latin as “that which warns.” The dinosaur that 
refuses to be extinct is warning us, in its monstrous fashion, that our under-
standing of the natural world, and our placement within it, is fundamen-
tally flawed. Even further, the presence of dinosaurs challenges humanity’s 
­self-appointed status as the ruling species on earth, as Jurassic Park demon-
strates (building on a wealth of earlier dinosaur films as it does so) just how 
outmatched we are, and how truly unworthy an opponent we are when we 
are facing the monstrous “thunder lizards” of the deep past.

Chapter 8: Jurassic Park    139
But the dinosaurs of Jurassic Park are not unexplainable animals in 
the manner of the Loch Ness Monster and its cryptid kin. Their origin can 
be found within the film’s (and of course the book’s) storyworld. They have 
been genetically engineered, cobbled together by prehistoric DNA which 
has been extracted from ancient mosquitoes trapped in amber, “repaired” 
by fusing it with DNA from extant animals, and finally gestated and 
hatched in ­carefully-maintained laboratory settings. So the very safety that 
tens of millions of years has granted the human species by separating us 
from these forbidding monsters is defeated by human endeavor, as Juras-
sic Park scientists reach across uncountable prehistoric fathoms of time to 
bring the ­long-gone monsters directly to us.
The Dinosaur as a Monstrous Construction
According to Jeffrey Jerome Cohen’s influential “Monster Culture 
(Seven Theses),” one of the most significant factors that identifies a monster 
is that it is culturally constructed. In other words, the monster is “given life” 
by the human imagination and more specifically, what we are afraid of or 
nervous about on a cultural level. So it is we, as participants in human cul-
ture, who make monsters. Without human beings to channel their cultural 
fears into monstrous shapes, creating frightening symbolic repositories for 
their own fears and anxieties, there would be no monsters. (In this way, it 
may be useful to consider Frankenstein’s monster in Mary Shelley’s 1818 novel 
Frankenstein: the monster is often interpreted by literary critics as a symbolic 
avatar for Shelley’s culture’s fears that scientific advancements were allow-
ing human beings to “play God” and that such transgressive endeavors might 
disrupt the coherent line that separates life from death, which would bring 
chaos, horror, and ruin to the world as a result.) The dinosaurs of Jurassic 
Park are literal constructions, scientifically reengineered by InGen, a corpo-
ration that uses science to monetize resuscitated dinosaurs for a culture that 
is fascinated with, and will pay heartily to see, them. These ­lab-resuscitated 
dinosaurs are positively Frankensteinian, and their monstrous behavior 
reflects the cultural anxieties that the late 20th century shared with Shelley’s 
time: monsters are the inevitable result when overly ambitious science fails 
to consider the consequences of its actions. So these dinosaurs are the very 
monstrous product of the kind of thinking that pushes human knowledge 
recklessly into dangerous, ultimately disastrous territory.
Chaos awaits such endeavors.
The specific cultural fears that these resuscitated prehistoric mon-
sters intend to reflect is essentially explained by Jeff Goldblum’s “rock star” 
Chaos Theorist Ian Malcolm. The underlying horror, he explains, is that 

140    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
our scientific knowledge may advance to the point that we no longer ask 
whether we should do what we become capable of doing, and that we may 
be punished for our transgressions by the very things we transgress to cre-
ate. (This is hardly a new fear, as we can recall Frankenstein again, and how 
it articulates the same concerns in its presentation of the ambitious Vic-
tor Frankenstein, who creates life from death without hesitation, then is 
haunted and ultimately destroyed by the very creature he creates.) Mal-
colm riffs “God creates dinosaurs. God destroys dinosaurs. God creates 
man. Man destroys God. Man creates dinosaurs,” and Ellie Sattler (Laura 
Dern) punctuates this by reminding him that “dinosaur eats man” and, 
what’s more, “woman inherits the earth” (a poignant statement when one 
remembers that the entire process of engineering dinosaurs at Jurassic Park 
involves the erasure of feminine power: creating and controlling female 
dinosaurs and eliminating biological motherhood as a possibility).
Malcolm warns John Hammond, the enthusiastic head of InGen, that 
“the kind of control you’re attempting is not possible. If there’s one thing 
the history of evolution has taught us, it’s that life will not be contained. 
Life breaks free. It expands to new territories. It crashes through barriers. 
Painfully, maybe even … dangerously, but and … well, there it is.” In other 
words, a person may create something or cause it to come into being (this is 
a vast generative spectrum, and it includes giving birth to a child, engineer-
ing a dinosaur, painting a mural, writing this article, etc.) but can have no 
control over that creation as soon as it is released (or escapes) out into the 
world. This is how Chaos Theory works, according to Malcolm, and, inter-
estingly, it shares a lot of conceptual territory with general theories of how 
monstrosity works as well.
The monster, according to Cohen, will always “break free” and “crash 
through borders.” Fundamentally, monsters do not respect boundaries 
of any kind, and will always escape any attempts to contain them. Juras-
sic Park’s dinosaurs escape containment of every kind. Physical barriers, 
which are constructed and maintained in order to protect human tourists 
and workers from the more dangerous dinosaurs are all seen to get knocked 
offline during the course of the film, for example. ­Scientifically-constructed 
boundaries are erected, which attempt to control the ­sex-expression of the 
dinosaurs, engineering their genetic codes to produce only females so that 
they can only reproduce in the lab by way of human action; however, “life 
finds a way” and at least some of the dinosaurs mutate into males in order 
to allow for natural reproduction to become possible. These dinosaurs even 
defeat rhetorical barriers. It should be added that even the name “Juras-
sic Park” carries hints of a thing that cannot be contained, as several of 
the most prominent dinosaurs in the park (namely the ­t-rex and the tricer-
atops) are not from the Jurassic Era at all (which sprawled from about 200 

Chapter 8: Jurassic Park    141
to 145 million years ago) and are rather denizens of the later Cretaceous 
Era (which spanned from the end of the Jurassic to 65 million years ago). 
On a subtle level, this reminds the viewers that these terms have no real 
meaning beyond that which our culture has ascribed to them. In every dis-
cernible way, we can see how life, or in this case monstrous life, “cannot be 
contained.”
It should be noted that the ability of the dinosaurs to escape contain-
ment comes as a result of human action. The electrified fences that contain 
the ­t-rex are shut down by Dennis Nedry (Wayne Knight), a shifty InGen 
employee who needs to disable the security system so he can steal some 
dinosaur embryos to sell to his employer’s competitor: human greed, cou-
pled with the financial value that humans have assigned to the dinosaurs 
they can reengineer motivate the factors that allow for the ­t-rex to escape 
containment, not any innate monstrosity within the ­t-rex itself. Later, as 
technician Ray Arnold (Samuel L. Jackson) resets the security system, a 
brief power lapse permits the velociraptors to escape as well. But it’s not just 
the physical barriers the dinosaurs can overcome, as they also break free of 
the boundaries imposed by the ­human-designed engineering process. Spe-
cifically, the frog DNA which was used to fill in the gaps in the dinosaur’s 
recovered genetic material opened the gate, so to speak: when it expressed 
itself genetically, the frog genes allowed some of the ­all-female dinosaur 
population to mutate into males, thus defeating the human attempt to con-
trol their reproduction.
None of these ­boundary-violations came about from any directly 
monstrous dinosaur activity. They were all indirectly the result of human 
efforts. One may wonder, though, if these actions might have subconscious 
underpinnings and that, just maybe, these humans wish the dinosaurs to 
break free. Such actions, if motivated without conscious awareness, sug-
gest the consideration of another element of Cohen’s monstrous defini-
tion, which involves the tendency of monsters to represent, even as they 
terrify us, a kind of desire or longing. We want to be like them: free, pow-
erful, unfettered by societal restrictions and rules of decorum. Many of 
us think that it would be fantastic to be a dinosaur, in other words, and 
releasing them from Jurassic Park allows us, vicariously, to attain that 
same kind of monstrous freedom. But there may be even more at work 
here than a subconscious desire for us to experience what it’s like to be 
­monsters-by-proxy. Elizabeth Kingsley, in her blog “And You Call Your-
self a Scientist!,” expresses the ­deep-seated cultural love we feel for dino-
saurs and is worth quoting in full: “The relationship between modern man 
and these extraordinary, ­long-extinct creatures is a peculiarly emotional 
one. There is a strange, deep yearning associated with it, one that compels 
small children to wrestle with multisyllabic names; that sends adults out 

142    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
into the wilds of our world to sift painstakingly through its dust; that turns 
theoretical musings into violent ­blood-feuds; and that, yes, inspires writers 
and ­film-makers to create, and makes the general public eager to consume.”
And perhaps even the Park itself is designed to reflect a part of this 
­deeply-entrenched love for the monstrous versions of dinosaurs that stalk 
our imaginations.
Prehistoric Thunderdome
In our cultural imagination, the prehistoric world is a terrifying arena 
full of ­ever-battling monsters, perhaps best typified by the ubiquitous pres-
ence in children’s dinosaur books of the tyrannosaurus rex fighting one in 
a series of ­heavily-armored dinosaurs (most often the triceratops or a sim-
ilar species, but occasionally an ankylosaurus or even a stegosaurus). The 
duel to the death between the slavering carnosaur and the ­tank-like her-
bisaur was a staple scene in early cinematic depictions of dinosaurs; one 
thinks maybe most strongly of Disney’s animated epic Fantasia (1940) and 
its depiction of a horrifying, ­red-eyed allosaurus (frequently considered to 
be a tyrannosaurus, though its elongated, ­three-fingered arms disqualify it 
from such an identification) fighting and eventually killing a valiant stego-
saurus, all while Stravinsky’s “The Rite of Spring” played furiously in the 
background.
­Stop-motion animation pioneer Ray Harryhausen produced several of 
the most iconic reenactments of this trope with his choreography of intense 
fight scenes between a putative allosaurus, the Gwangi, and a styracosaurus 
(an elaborately frilled relative of the triceratops) in The Valley of the Gwangi 
(1969) and a ceratosaurus and triceratops in One Million Years B.C. (1966). 
(This battle is especially notable because the triceratops wins!) Proving that 
predatory dinosaurs would take on all impressive opponents, even if they 
weren’t dinosaurs, we recall the ­t-rex that appears on Skull Island in King 
Kong (1933) to fight the giant ape. And the trope goes back further, to the 
1925 Lost World, in which an animatronic allosaurus and ­t-rex ­stop-motion 
rampage through the film, attacking and fighting every other dinosaur they 
encounter. At the dawn of the cinema age we can find the first (existing) 
battle between a ­stop-motion ­t-rex and a triceratops, in Willis O’Brien’s 1918 
The Ghost of Slumber Mountain.
But this notion of a prehistoric world as a place of constant ­dinosaur- 
on-dinosaur violence predates the cinema and can be found lurking 
within the halls of our most esteemed museums, too: Charles Knight’s 1927 
iconic panoramic mural, hanging at the Field Museum of Natural History, 
depicting a tyrannosaurus rex and triceratops facing off and preparing to 

Chapter 8: Jurassic Park    143
do battle, cemented the notion that these two impressive dinosaurs nec-
essarily squared off as mortal enemies. And the trope may be discovered 
even deeper in our cultural past, stalking the Victorian imagination, too. 
Louis Figuier’s print “The Iguanodon and the Megalosaur (Lower Creta-
ceous Period)” (1863), for example, depicts two ­viciously-fanged quadrupe-
dal dinosaurs looking evilly pleased as they chew on one another. And John 
Martin’s 1840 mezzotint “The ­Sea-Dragons, as They Lived” (for the fron-
tispiece of Thomas Hawkins’ Book of Great ­Sea-Dragons) reveals a moonlit 
scene in which at least three different kinds of ­demonic-looking prehistoric 
marine reptiles, one mosasaur and a pair of plesiosaurs, churning in a tur-
bulent black sea, are engaged in a wildly ferocious battle, directly next to 
a collection of ­razor-toothed ­pterodactyl-like creatures greedily devouring 
the carcass of what looks a bit like an ichthyosaur.
The point here is that we have, for quite some time, envisioned the pre-
historic world as being monstrous: it is a violent landscape in which hid-
eous monsters constantly do bloody battle with one another. This image of 
the dinosaurs’ world as one red in tooth and claw served Victorian fanta-
sies of superiority, as well: “just look at how far we have come,” a glimpse 
into a frightening (and totally constructed) ancient world allows us to say 
to ourselves.
So this monstrous world, in which titanic, immeasurably powerful 
monsters engage in ceaseless fights to the death, is pretty much the world of 
Jurassic Park as soon as the system goes offline and the carnosaurs run free. 
The battle between the ­t-rex and the velociraptors at the film’s conclusion 
demonstrates clearly how much this trope continues to live and breathe 
in Jurassic Park. Chaos Theory, according to Malcolm, tells us that this is 
inevitable, and monster studies enthusiastically supports this claim: mon-
sters absolutely cannot be controlled. But, in some way, isn’t that the appeal 
of Jurassic Park? Would human culture be as fascinated with dinosaurs if 
they could truly be contained?
The Monstrous Imagination
Jurassic Park is the human imagination made flesh, and its represen-
tation of a “lost world” borrows very strongly from the Victorian fantasy 
depictions of constant, spectacular dinosaur warfare. But until Chaos has 
its way, it is a dormant horrorscape of the imagination, waiting to be acti-
vated. Fortunately, Chaos has been encouraged at every step, as the island 
is populated by dinosaurs that have been genetically inscribed with the 
potential to become monsters, and which are spurred further along in the 
direction of monstrosity by all sorts of human folly. In the same sense that 
nature cannot recreate the extinct dinosaur on its own and requires human 

144    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
assistance in that direction, the revitalized dinosaur cannot become a mon-
ster without the human imagination to make it so. And the human imagi-
nation is all too willing to cooperate.
Ultimately, the dinosaurs of Jurassic Park do seem to be monsters, 
because that’s exactly what we need them to be.

145
Chapter 9: King Kong
Merian C. Cooper was an interesting and flamboyant character, even 
in the wild, early days of Hollywood. He was born in Jacksonville, Florida, 
in 1893, his birth coinciding with the birth of cinema (1895) and the birth 
of flight (1903) soon after. He grew up in a world of wonder, adventure, 
and burgeoning technology, and he was thrilled by it all. He chased Pancho 
Villa as a member of the Georgia National Guard, he was a pilot in World 
War I (where he was shot down), he fought in the Polish Air Force, he was 
a Russian prisoner, he became a reporter, he traveled the world, he helped 
to form Pan Am, and then he made his way to Hollywood, producing films 
for RKO with famed producer David O. Selznick. He began his filmmaking 
career producing and directing documentaries he shot while traveling the 
world. His second feature film as producer and director, however, would be 
one of the most thrilling, innovative, and technically difficult films in the 
Kong atop the Empire State Building in King Kong (RKO Radio Pictures, 1933).

146    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
history of cinema. He said that he hatched the idea after having a dream of 
a giant ape terrorizing New York, and then imagined the ape at the top of 
the newly constructed marvel, The Empire State Building (finished in 1931). 
From there, he built a wild and imaginative story that he simple called 
“Kong.” David O. Selznick changed that to King Kong, and it would go to 
become one of the most famous and iconic films in history.
From the beginning, Cooper imagined his film as a cross between 
some of the exotic documentaries he had shot, and a monster movie. Set in 
­Depression-era New York City, the film takes its time getting to the action: 
as adventure film director Carl Denham (Robert Armstrong) is about to 
set sail on a mysterious film shoot, he is without a leading lady. The night 
before he leaves, he finds young Ann Darrow (Fay Wray) alone and hungry 
on the street, and he talks her into going on the journey. While on the ship 
during the journey, the first mate John Driscoll (Bruce Cabot) falls in love 
with her. Nobody knows where they are going, but as they get closer, Den-
ham tells everyone they are headed for the mythical Skull Island—a remote 
place only passed down in legend and rumored to be the home of a giant 
ape known as “Kong.” The crew finds the island, sets ashore, and discov-
ers a tribal ceremony with the natives preparing a young woman as a sacri-
fice to Kong. But after seeing the “golden woman” Ann, the natives steal her 
from the ship that night and offer her to Kong. Denham and crew pursue, 
fighting off dinosaurs (!) and Kong himself. Finally, Driscoll saves her (after 
Kong has fallen in love with her as well), and they retreat to the ship. Kong 
follows, breaking down the giant wall built to keep him out and rampaging 
through the village eating and stamping villagers along the way. The crew is 
able to subdue him with “smoke bombs” and bring him back to New York, 
where he is chained up on a stage for a live audience. After seeing Ann with 
John and irritated by the flashes of the photographers, Kong goes wild and 
breaks free, terrorizes New York City, steals Ann, and climbs to the top of 
the Empire State Building, where he is shot down by planes (one of the 
pilots being Cooper himself). Ann is saved.
The plot is a lot to take, especially for the pre–Hays Code Hollywood, 
just a few years after talkies were invented (the first sound film was in 1927) 
and considering the rudimentary special effects of the era. There are several 
historical, socioeconomic, and filmic contexts important for better under-
standing the film and affording it its proper due and situating it in terms 
of those contexts. The first context concerns the era in which the film was 
made—the apex of the great Depression in 1933. The country had been dev-
astated for several years, and depression (small “d”) had really set in. The 
opening of the film speaks to this dynamic, as Denham laments over not 
having a leading lady the night before he sets sail out of New York Harbor. 
He relates this fact to the Captain, and then makes one last ditch effort on 

Chapter 9: King Kong    147
the streets of New York before leaving. He immediately encounters a line of 
women waiting in the cold for food and lodging that night. Soon after, he 
finds Ann as she is caught trying to steal food from a bodega. She is without 
family or anyone else to help her, and Denham buys her a meal and pitches 
his adventure to her. The movies, essentially, “save her.” There is quite a bit 
to unpack here in just this opening, with shades of Charlie Chaplin in the 
1910s and even the earlier days of filmmaking as well.
Charlie Chaplin made a short film called “The Immigrant” in 1917, 
just as he was becoming the biggest star in the world. The story was 
­semi-autobiographical, about a European immigrant coming to America 
in the early 1900s. Along the way, he befriends a woman and her elderly 
mother on the ship, and he also gambles his way to making a little money 
(representing the danger/gamble of coming to the new world penniless). 
He and the other immigrants are also herded—like cattle—behind a rope 
as they sail into Ellis Island past the Statue of Liberty. A cut from Char-
lie admiring the Statue of Liberty back to him stung by being ­roped-in 
makes clear the point: the arrival in the Land of Liberty doesn’t match up 
to the myth or the great symbol of the Statue. He kicks an immigration 
officer in the butt as the man walks away—likely drawing laughs from the 
mostly non–English speaking immigrant crowd of early cinema. But that 
kick would later get him into trouble with J. Edgar Hoover, who accused 
Chaplin of being a Communist (and therefore anti–American) and denying 
him ­re-entry into the country in the ’50s. Later in the film, Chaplin and his 
friend from the ship meet an artist who hires them to be models. Chaplin 
is “saved” by art, just as he was in real life. In King Kong, art not only saves 
Ann as it did Charlie, but it also gave their audiences an escape and some 
hope that their lives in America would get better—just as it did in the teens, 
before the prosperity of the ’20s. But Ann’s path becomes a little different 
than Charlie’s, which leads us to an unsavory reading of the film.
Ann is a single woman in the Depression, a terrible fate in a world 
where women didn’t work and if they did, they were abused and exploited. 
The line of women at the beginning of the film provides the evidence 
(almost ­documentary-like, with shades of Cooper’s own documentary 
experience). While everyone was affected by the Great Depression, women, 
and in particular, single women, were much worse off. Denham plucks her 
from this awful fate and brings her along on the ship, where she also falls 
in love with ­first-mate Driscoll. This is where the racism of the film starts 
to trump the sexism: she is captured by the (black) natives and offered up 
as a sacrifice to the giant (black) ape. The ape, brought back from a far-
away, exotic island, then terrorizes New York City until he is bested by the 
white males. Ann is also saved by Driscoll, and we assume they live happily 
ever after. The allegory here is clear: the dark creature (an ape, conjuring 

148    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
racist images of black people in a very segregated society only some 60 
years removed from the Civil War) comes to New York to take the (white) 
women and brutalize the city. The white men save day, and as for the 
women, well, of course the only way you will be safe in the world of the ’30s 
is to find yourself a man. The saddest part of the story is that both may be 
true: the country was extremely racist and would have been soothed by the 
narrative undertones, and, a woman would have been safer being married 
during that time. Strangely, however, there is also another reading to the 
film that shows the Imperialist and unseemly nature of the Americans who 
do their own brutalizing of the people they shackled and chained as they 
forced them into our country (for the sake of pure profit). Perhaps the big-
gest victory of the movie is to humanize Kong and makes us sympathetic to 
him, even lamenting his death at the end. Even still, on another level (dis-
cussed in a moment), the ape is either a rubber suit, an animated puppet, or 
a screen projection of one or the other. The film makes us feel for this being, 
showing the similar exploitation of millions and how our own greed devas-
tated them. It’s such an interesting film that either reading (or both) may be 
true. The multitude of interpretations have been discussed for decades, and 
continue to resonate today.
Another context of the film concerns the film business itself and a 
changing morality therein. The roaring ’20s were just that in the movie busi-
ness—a wild time where Hollywood became “Hollywood” and ­newly-rich 
stars became the kings and queens of the burgeoning business and the rap-
idly growing metropolis of Los Angeles. Stories of debauchery and hedo-
nism were the stuff of legends, with a dark side to that as well: in 1921, comic 
megastar Roscoe “Fatty” Arbuckle was accused, and later acquitted, of 
manslaughter (ruining his career and reputation); director William Des-
mond Taylor was found dead and rumors abounded about his killer; and 
in 1924 producer Thomas Ince was killed on a yacht owned by media mag-
nate William Randolph Hearst (think Citizen Kane) with Charlie Chaplin 
and Hearst’s mistress Marion Davies (with whom Chaplin was rumored to 
be having an affair) aboard. Ince’s murder was never solved (like Taylor’s), 
and money/fame/press were most certainly a factor in it all. The sum total 
of these and other salacious events was of a Hollywood that was essentially 
lawless and that the increasing sex, violence, and hedonism in the movies 
themselves was getting out of control (especially during a period in the late 
’20s and early ’30s dubbed the “pre–Code talkies”). Facing possible cen-
sorship from the government and the backlash of an increasingly prurient 
public, Hollywood decided to censor itself. The big studios decided on Wil-
liam Hays, a former Postmaster General and ­well-respected citizen (read: 
pious) to formulate and institute the Code—formally “The Motion Picture 
Production Code” but colloquially known as the “Hays Code.” The Code 

Chapter 9: King Kong    149
would be in effect from 1934 until 1968, and it would not only change the 
course of the industry in the nascent sound era, it would inform filmmak-
ing for decades. The Code would restrict filmmakers in many ways, and 
especially coming when it did—at the beginning of the sound era—it would 
set the industry and art back for many years. Aspects of the Code include 
the following: “No picture shall be produced that will lower the moral stan-
dards of those who see it. Hence the sympathy of the audience should never 
be thrown to the side of crime, wrongdoing, evil or sin; Correct standards 
of life, subject only to the requirements of drama and entertainment, shall 
be presented; Law, natural or human, shall not be ridiculed, nor shall sym-
pathy be created for its violation.” The effects were ­far-reaching: there was 
no explicit sex, violence, or drug use; women and men could not be shown 
in the same bed (even married couples; think “I Love Lucy” beds); kisses 
could last for no longer than three seconds; and toilet bowls were certainly 
not allowed. Film had become chaste.
While the Code did not go into effect until 1934, it loomed over the 
production and release of King Kong in 1933, and it would illuminate the 
move from the looser restrictions of pre–Code Hollywood to the highly 
restrictive post–Code era. The original release version included scenes 
that were only viewed for a short time and would be censored upon later 
releases: in one scene, Kong undresses Ann as he holds her, smelling his fin-
gers afterward; another scene has a Brontosaurus viciously mauling sev-
eral of the crew in a lake; later, Kong chewing on villagers on the island 
as well as several New Yorkers later in the film; Kong smashing villagers 
with his feet and mushing them into the ground while on the island; Kong 
blithely dropping a woman to her death on the side of a NY building; two 
shots of Ann wearing a ­see-through shirt without a bra; and a scene with 
animals and insects swarming the ship’s crew during another sequence 
on the island. Only those who saw the film upon its initial release would 
view these scenes; when the film was ­re-released in 1938 (and several more 
­re-releases right up to the ’70s, including a TV run in the ’50s and ’60s), it 
would be heavily censored. The uncensored version shows the brutality and 
violence of Cooper’s vision, and it makes the film even more frightening 
while highlighting the transition to the Hays Code–era. The Code would 
be replaced by the ratings system in 1968, opening the flood gates for sex, 
violence, and whatever else Hollywood could dream up. King Kong is thus 
a fascinating case study in the transition to the ­Code-era films and beyond.
Yet even considering all of the controversy surrounding the film 
throughout the decades, the film has endured for many reasons, perhaps 
the biggest of which is how the film changed the face of filmmaking for-
ever, for the same reasons Jurassic Park did in the 1990s: special effects. King 
Kong set the standard for several different aspects of special effects in film, 

150    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
many of which had been used before (in bits and pieces) and would become 
perfected in the film, and other techniques that were invented for the film. 
King Kong put everything together into one marvelous package and would 
become a textbook and source material for special effects professionals for 
decades to come.
The history of special effects in cinema goes back to the earliest days of 
the art. One of the first great filmmakers, Georges Méliès, used the stage as 
the basis for his films; they were basically filmed stage plays and based on 
various sources. He came to the cinema as a magician in the late 1800s and 
starting making films soon after the Lumière Brothers premiered the first 
films in 1895. He infused his love of magic into film and would be the first 
special effects master (his most famous film is “A Trip to the Moon” from 
1903, showing, you guessed, a moon shot). For an underwater shoot, for 
example, he would place the camera in front of an aquarium and then add 
the action on the other side of the aquarium, or, do multiple exposures to 
add effects: he would simply rewind the camera and add something to the 
original shot. Or he would make things disappear by stopping the camera, 
changing something in the placement of the shot, and then ­re-starting the 
camera. Later filmmakers would build on these techniques and go further 
still. Painted backgrounds were added on sets; animation began in 1908 
in France and quickly moved to the United States; and filmmakers started 
experimenting with changing individual frames of film and replacing them 
with images. For example, by shooting something in half of a frame and 
then adding in a plate to other half of the shot, you could get a spectacular 
effect—such as Charlie Chaplin skating on the edge of an abyss. The “abyss” 
was actually something added in later. Or you could shoot in two different 
parts of the frame and by just covering the lens in one section, rewinding, 
and then shooting in the part that was covered. The sky was the limit in the 
early days of cinema, and many filmmakers would experiment with these 
techniques in different ways. By 1933, special effects had advanced in bits 
and pieces. King Kong would push it all forward.
Willis O’Brien was the legendary special effects director in charge 
of the film and harnessing all of these techniques. He used a combina-
tion of miniatures—with ­specially-constructed steel armatures inside the 
puppets—and then used ­stop-motion animation to move the puppets to 
get ­life-like action. For ­stop-motion animation at 24 frames per second, 
O’Brien moved the puppet 24 times for one second of film. He would snap a 
picture, move the puppet, snap another frame, move the puppet, and so on. 
What made King Kong so remarkable was how realistic the action was, and 
in addition, how that animation worked in conjunction with the live action 
aspects of the film. Going back and forth between live action and anima-
tion was no small feat, and O’Brien mastered the technique.

Chapter 9: King Kong    151
Another technique pioneered by O’Brien was rear projection. 
He would build miniature screens into the animation sets, and then 
­rear-project an element of live action into the scene, matching it up with 
the animation. The rear projection had to be done ­frame-by-frame, so 
when it played at full speed, everything was synchronized. O’Brien also 
used compositing to create certain sequences, such as exposing a sliver of 
the frame with one part of the action and then exposing the remainder of 
the frame with the rest of the action. In other scenes, he combined every-
thing and exposed the film multiple times—one pass might have the live 
action, another pass might add the animation, and another pass might add 
live or static backgrounds. He also combined animated characters with real 
characters in the same frame, interacting with one another. (One famous 
side note is how Kong’s fur would look like it was moving in the wind, when 
in actuality it was made by the hands of the animators moving the puppets 
between frames. O’Brien would lament this is as a mistake, but most believe 
it adds life to the puppet.) What O’Brien was doing was green screen/CGI 
work before there was a green screen or CGI, and doing it all ­in-camera in 
painstaking detail. For the fight between King Kong and the ­T-Rex alone, 
the sequence took seven weeks. If one frame was off or a simple mistake 
was made, they had to return to the beginning and do it all over again. The 
entire package was a remarkable feat, and it would inspire the field of spe-
cial effects and animation for decades.
One sequence highlights this brilliance: after Driscoll is deposited by 
Kong inside his lair, we get a layered sequence that includes live action in 
Driscoll trying to escape, ­rear-projection in miniature behind him, a com-
posite that puts animated Kong in the shot with him, and painted back-
grounds to go along with the ­live-action and ­rear-projected backgrounds. 
There are several different techniques being used in this one sequence, and 
we see this throughout the film over and over again. It is groundbreaking 
brilliance.
While the film doesn’t have aliens, spaceships, nor does it leave the 
Earth, it is still quite squarely in the realm of science fiction. Dinosaurs 
roaming the Earth long after they supposedly went extinct. Giant apes liv-
ing next to humans. The seeds of Planet of the Apes and Jurassic Park are 
planted here, not to mention monster movies such as Godzilla. And just 
the way the film itself was made would inspire countless more science fic-
tion films, moving beyond the realm of what was probable toward the 
realm of what was possible (and beyond). To the question of “What does it 
mean to be human?” the film answers this in a few fascinating ways. First 
it tells us that, unfortunately, exploitation is part of the human experi-
ence. It also warns that unfettered greed can be dangerous when unleashed 
(also see Alien or Jurassic Park). And finally, going back to my earlier point  

152    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
of how we start to feel about Kong toward the end of the film, and especially 
when he is being shot down: we feel sympathy. To be human is to identify 
not only with other humans, but with other living creatures of all kinds. We 
even feel love for those beings. To be human is to love.
—Vincent Piturro
Gigantic Animals
Jeffrey T. Stephenson
When I experience King Kong, I see it as groundbreaking or trendset-
ting in a number of ways: in its dinosaurs, in the trends the moviemakers 
were setting, and in bucking trends.
Gigantic animals far larger than the original fossil bones or known 
specimens is trend setting. ­Super-sized dinosaurs and other animals would 
become the norm for ­sci-fi following King Kong all the way through the lat-
est offering of the Jurassic Park franchise. Well before motion pictures, and 
for many decades before King Kong, paleontologists were chasing the “big-
gest, longest, tallest” in a quest that was more for the superlative than for sci-
ence. While gigantic ­long-necked Sauropods have indeed been discovered 
(and the largest ever let slip away!), there are no ­80-foot long Stegosaurs.
Paleontologists have gone back and forth on the true nature of dinosaurs 
over the past 180 years: were they sluggish ­cold-blooded reptilian brutes, little 
more than overgrown lizards, or were they creatures that are more dynamic? 
King Kong’s dinosaurs do buck some of the trends popular in its day, espe-
cially those of the late 19th and early 20th century scientists who thought of 
these animals as brutish lizards doomed to extinction. The Kong dinosaurs 
still drag their tails, but otherwise have a much more dynamic set of behav-
iors really only popularized in the late 1960s by modern paleontologists.
King Kong also evokes some great earlier stories such as Jules Verne’s 
Journey to the Center of the Earth (1864), Arthur Conan Doyle’s The Lost 
World (1912), and Edgar Rice Burroughs’ The Land That Time Forgot 
(1918). These ­sci-fi visits are similar to King Kong: each involve treks to the 
unknown, the uncharted, for discovery of the new and fantastic.
Before the Renaissance, maps of the known earth often had areas left 
blank except for the legend “here there be monsters” or perhaps a draw-
ing or two of the creatures waiting to destroy those who dared sail—or sail 
into—those dangerous waters.

Chapter 9: King Kong    153
Mythical creatures of ancient lore are awesome, monstrous, hazard-
ous, magical, and mysterious. Some ancient tales may be based on ear-
lier humans looking at fossil remains and trying to bring these animals 
back to life in their imaginations. In my experiences with teaching natu-
ral history to age levels ranging from ­pre-school to senior ­life-long learn-
ers, three- and four year olds have a much easier time interacting with 
“live” dinosaurs. I often wondered how the Tyrannosaurus or Stegosaurus 
whose bones I helped excavate here in Colorado walked, ran, bellowed, ate, 
smelled—even as I was digging and plastering their bones. Despite my sci-
entific training, I would daydream a bit on how Pteranodons would fly or 
Plesiosaurs would swim as I prepared their skeletons for study. Even as I 
helped dissect cadavers of Western Lowland Gorillas for scientific research, 
I would imagine what this animal might have been like, charging, feeding, 
bellowing, or fighting. I have worked with many paleontologists who have 
shared these reveries with me.
The opening of new places through exploration and colonization 
gradually narrowed the blank spaces of the old maps, but even after the 
turn of the 20th century there were places on the planet where new and 
unexpected creatures existed waiting to be found. “Living fossils” would 
sometimes turn up: the most celebrated of these was the Coelacanth, a fish 
thought to have gone extinct soon after the time of its ­Cretaceous-age fos-
sils, only to turn up “in the flesh” in nets off Madagascar.
So why not have isolated places in remote areas of the world where 
remnant populations of unexpected creatures await discovery? As Carl 
Denim says to the Captain, “You won’t find that island on any chart.”
The Science
Science is exploration, science is discovery, science is figuring out how 
the world and its animals work and how they came to be.
There is something pure and honest about the original King Kong. The 
story relies on no secret formulae cooked up by a chemist gone mad. There 
are no covert or overt government conspiracies; no plans for genetic splic-
ing; no plots by aliens, benign or otherwise.
King Kong is nature, raw nature, prehistoric nature, huge, mysterious, 
and menacing. It is without supernatural interference, as no ghosts or spir-
its or wild magic is involved (except in the speculation of one crewmem-
ber). King Kong is just natural. It is a great example of biological ­sci-fi.
One only needs to invoke natural evolutionary processes for the basics 
of Skull Island and its creatures, although I need to engage in “suspension 
of disbelief” when it comes to extinct animals from many geologic periods 

154    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
all coexisting on the same small island, and ­super-giant gorillas and dino-
saurs far larger than anything we know. However, there is an explanation 
for gigantism in the hypotheses on Island Biogeography.
Islands are often refugia, places where species can survive sweeping 
changes of extinction on the mainland. Islands are where the very mysteri-
ous and seemingly prehistoric ­egg-laying mammals, the ­duck-billed platy-
pus and the spiny anteater, survived. Islands had gigantic flightless birds 
such as the Elephant Bird of Madagascar, the Moas of New Zealand, and 
the Dodo of Mauritius. Sadly, humans drove many of these giants to extinc-
tion. Smaller animals isolated on islands grew into giant forms in prehis-
toric times, including shrews and rodents growing into the size of golden 
retrievers. Larger animals would sometimes get smaller when isolated on 
islands, including the seemingly ­non-sequitur pygmy mammoths from sev-
eral different islands in the Pacific, and a truly tiny hippopotamus (much 
smaller than the Pygmy Hippo) from the Mediterranean.
The science of biology has been engaged in discovering and describing 
the biodiversity, evolution, behavior, and ecology of living and prehistoric 
creatures for about the last 400 years. Expeditions to wild and unknown 
places around the world uncovered strange and exotic creatures unknown 
to the general public. Excavations uncovered astounding, gigantic crea-
tures with long sharp teeth and even longer deadly spikes from the fossil  
record.
Biology involves a large and varied range of studies from cryptozo-
ology, genetic mutation, behavior, evolution, experimental manipulation, 
molecular and cellular systems, to discovery of new life forms. The era of 
biological discovery is not at all over, with as much as 80–90 percent of life 
forms not yet described by taxonomists. However, the golden age of this 
discovery, from the 17th–20th centuries, was one of new creatures coming 
from new countries or regions (or at least “new” to the western scientists 
who were describing them). These creatures included fantastic beasts such 
as platypuses, kangaroos, ­birds-of-paradise, and gorillas.
Dinosaurs and other prehistoric beasts were also being discovered 
during this time, and often described by the same scientists who were nam-
ing the modern animals. Charles Darwin was as much at home describing 
modern birds, barnacles, and beetles as he was with paleo mammals from 
Patagonia. Georges Cuvier, the famous biologist from France, described 
the Mastodon (named from the resemblance of its teeth to rows of female 
breasts), and thought it was extinct. On the other hand, Thomas Jefferson 
also studied mastodons and thought that these animals might still exist in 
the wilderness of interior North America. Jefferson even asked Meriwether 
Lewis and George Clark to look out for these beasts on their Journey of 
Discovery through the Louisiana Purchase in 1804–1806.

Chapter 9: King Kong    155
King Kong owes its scientific inspiration to the work of biologists and 
paleontologists and to their discoveries of many fantastic creatures.
Methods and techniques of discovering new living animals have 
changed or been augmented since the early explorations of the 18th cen-
tury, with advances in a multitude of areas. New technologies allowed sci-
ence to explore deeper, higher, in more remote settings, in the microscopic 
world, and on molecular scales. Recording discoveries started with quill 
and parchment but moved through many technologies to include photog-
raphy, motion pictures, and the digital recordings of today.
The 1930s saw a rise in the ­adventurer-photographer who would bring 
their movie cameras along with their rifles and notebooks. This was true 
for many Natural History museums, becoming a mainstay much as diora-
mas or tours for school children. The Denver Museum of Nature & Science 
(back when it was called the Colorado Museum of Natural History) had its 
own naturalist moviemaker of the 1930s, Alfred M. Bailey, who amassed 
an archive of motion pictures of his explorations from Alaska to Camp-
bell Island off Antarctica, and throughout much of the Pacific. Bailey would 
often present his films in the old Phipps Theater (since converted into an 
IMAX theater) to audiences from all over Colorado.
My job at the Museum is to care for, document, and make accessible 
the collections of the Zoology Department. We have over a million speci-
mens of mammals, birds, insects, arachnids, marine invertebrates, and par-
asites. We have gorillas, as well as thousands of other species. When I am 
working with these specimens, none of them seem monstrous to me. So, 
what makes a monster?
Monsters
Definition of “monster” from the Oxford English Dictionary:
“Originally: a mythical creature which is part animal and part human, 
or combines elements of two or more animal forms, and is frequently of 
great size and ferocious appearance. Later, more generally: any imaginary 
creature that is large, ugly, and frightening.”
Merriam-Webster:
“An animal or plant of abnormal form of structure.”
Cambridge Dictionary:
“Any imaginary frightening creature, esp. one that is large and 
strange.”
Definition of “monster” by “Judge John Hodgman” in NYT Times 
Magazine September 10, 2017, (p. 22) column “Bonus Advice,” when asked 
about the difference between ghosts and monsters:

156    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
“‘Monster’ has connoted enormity and a certain savage verve since the 14th 
Century, whereas ‘ghost’ connotes a kind of sad floating around in corners.” As 
no less an authority than Loren Coleman, director of the International Crypto-
zoology Museum in Portland, Me., put it: “Ghosts are not monsters. ‘Monsters’ 
are alive and may be biological.” This posits the possibility that monsters can 
become ghosts and that the woods of the Pacific Northwest are haunted by spec-
tral Bigfoots. But that awesome image is as close as your friend is going to get to 
erasing the meaning of words and paranormal taxonomy in my court.
The “monsters” cited in the question to Hodgman are the Loch Ness 
Monster and Chupacabra. Are monsters, by definition, enormous or gigan-
tic? King Kong, Godzilla, the ­over-sized ­blown-up dinosaurs and other 
prehistoric reptiles in King Kong and Spielberg and much of the rest of ­sci-fi 
are gigantic, one might say monstrous. And it certainly doesn’t hurt to be 
big if you’re a monster. Even if that means that you are living well beyond 
all known exemplars of biological possibility.
However, if Chupacabra is also a monster, then size does not matter 
as much, for Chupacabra is drawn as being the same size as feral or wild 
dogs (almost certainly the inspiration for this very same monster), only 
extremely fierce—something with “savage verve.” The specimens, on exam-
ination, turn out to be feral or wild dog carcasses that have lost much of 
their hair and jaws gaping wide showing their teeth due to the contraction 
of ligaments in the neck and jaws.
When one peers into a microscope at a tardigrade, the “water bears” 
only visible under very high magnification, they may appear monstrous, 
otherworldly beasts both ugly and ­ferocious-looking at the same time. 
There’s something about them that just says “cute”: perhaps a function of 
their miniature size. Would a ­15-millimeter (just over ½ inch) Kong be 
“cute”? The ­15-meter tall Kong is a “monster,” and even a 1.­5-meter Gorilla 
is “monstrous” to many with an incomplete understanding of our largest 
primate cousin.
Our Curator of Arachnology, Dr. Paula Cushing, studies spiders and soli-
fugids. Many people dislike spiders but perhaps don’t consider them monsters 
(unless, of course, you were the size of a fly). Black Widows are really quite 
willing to be left alone, and would rather take flight than bite. Most spiders 
are harmless. The solifugids (Camel Spiders, Wind Scorpions, Sun Spiders) 
do look evil, fierce, mean (our Curator refers to them as the Spawn of Satan). 
The largest Camel Spider is about the size of a mouse. If you were the size of a 
mouse, you might think a Camel Spider was a monster. But gorillas?
Gorillas do get to be big; a silverback male tips the scales at over 400 
pounds and standing fully upright on its hind legs may be six feet tall. 
They are the largest living primate, and a close cousin of humans. They are 
almost exclusively vegetarians, only occasionally indulging in a side dish of 

Chapter 9: King Kong    157
insects, and do not eat mammal meat. The first reports of gorillas from the 
early 18th century described them as monsters, vicious beasts dangerous to 
life and limb. The silverback is in charge of protecting the group, and will 
charge and bluster, and if necessary fight to protect his kin.
“Monster” may need to be gigantic for fairy tales or Hollywood, or 
even for most people, but is plus size a necessity? If you were ­one-fifth as 
big as a water bear, you might think “Monster!” just as you might think 
the same, at your current size, when viewing a Rhinoceros. Overall, let’s go 
with size does matter.
The Animals of King Kong
A few filed notes on the creatures of Skull Island, in order of sighting:
1.  Kong, King Kong: (Gorilla sp. Novum)
•  Looks very much like a Western Lowland Gorilla, only very, very 
big; over seven times larger than any known gorillas.
•  Is fond of accepting female offerings from local village; is especially 
fond of Ona Mato Potato (blond females).
•  Large foot prints, but apparently plantigrade (does not walk on the 
lateral sides of its feet like other gorillas). May be due to habit of 
walking upright most of the time.
•  Grunts much like other gorilla species, but roar sounds like a lion.
•  Curious.
•  Very fast for a creature its size (>15 meters).
2.  Stegosaurus: (Stegosaurus new species?)
•  Looks like one of several species of Stegosaurus found in Jurassic 
rocks of Colorado and western North America, only very, very, very 
large; four times largest Stegosaurus known (over 24 meters long).
•  Living fossil; last known relatives found in rocks 150–140 million 
years old.
•  Belligerent and aggressive.
•  ­Double-row of parallel plates on back (unknown in any Stegosaurs).
•  Eight spikes on end of tail (again unknown in most Stegosaurs).
•  Drags tail on ground (again unknown).
3.  Apatosaurus (or Brontosaurus??): new species.
•  One of the ­broad-skulled Diplodocid Sauropod dinosaurs of the 
Jurassic Morrison Age (approximately 150–140 million years ago), 
but very large; nearly twice the size of most Diplodocids. Note: may 

158    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
actually be the missing dinosaur Amphicoelias fragilimus thought to 
be missing during transit from Colorado to New Jersey.
•  Living fossil.
•  Belligerent and aggressive, known to bite and throw people.
•  Drags tail (unknown in Sauropods).
•  Roar sounds like leopard.
•  Teeth extend caudally all the way to the rear of the mouth 
(unknown in any dinosaur).
4.  Paleozoic Arthropods, missing or unseen: (new genus and 
species)
•  Reports sketchy, only ­second-hand accounts with no sightings, 
apparently giant spider- and ­millipede-like creatures similar 
to giant arthropods from 280 million years ago. No confirmed 
sightings; need to return.
•  Thought to be in deep chasm on Skull Island.
5.   ­Two-legged reptile: (new genus and species)
•  Unusual cross, possibly hybrid?, between ­Tuatara-like and 
­Chamaeleon-like reptiles, only very, very, very big.
•  Living fossil? None known from fossil record.
•  Climbing habit.
•  Two claws on each of two front legs, no hind legs noted.
6.  Tyrannosaur: (Tyrannosaurus new species)
•  Looks very much like known Tyrannosaurs, late Cretaceous (c. 
70–66 million years ago), but 30 percent larger than largest known.
•  Three claws on hands (unlike all known Tyrannosaurs).
•  Drags tail (unlike).
•  Living fossil.
•  Belligerent and aggressive.
•  Growl sounds like mountain lion.
7.  ­Long-necked Plesiosaur (Elasmosaur): (new genus and species)
•  Looks like several mid–Cretaceous swimming ­long-necked reptiles, 
about the usual size.
•  Four flippers, long neck.
•  Living fossil. (Dates range from c. 100 million years ago–70 million 
years ago.)
•  Belligerent and aggressive.
•  Lives in ­scalding-hot volcanic mud puddles (really unusual for an 
Elasmosaur).
•  Prehensile tail and neck used for strangling prey (also really unusual).

Chapter 9: King Kong    159
8.  Pteranodon: (Pteranodon new species)
•  Looks like other mid–Cretaceous Pterosaurs, but very, very big: 
over four times expected size.
•  Large crest on back of skull.
•  Opportunistic feeder.
•  Wings like other Pterosaurs, but much shorter than Quetzalcoatlus; 
even though body twice as big as Quetz. Hard to understand how it 
achieves lift, let alone flies.
•  Capable of lifting several dozens of kilos—far more than any known 
Pterosaur, ever.
•  Belligerent and aggressive.
•  Living fossil. Most known relatives from about 80–70 million years 
ago.
Falling Off the Phallus  
of Civilization: On Max Steiner’s 
Soundtrack to King Kong
Roger K. Green
During the 1920s, the grammar of film had been developed by early 
masters of montage such as Sergei Eisenstein. Silent film at the theater, 
however, was far from silent. Theaters were filled with extra visual and 
olfactory sensations, and pianists worked in shifts throughout the day pro-
viding musical accompaniment, no two playing the exact thing the same 
way. Take the memoirs of one pianist for example:
There was nothing passive about the audiences, especially the kids. To heighten 
the dramatic effect of tender love scenes, or to provide live sound for Westerns 
or battle scenes, the older kids would fire off the then popular Kilgore repeat-
ing cap pistols. The younger kids, identifying with the hero as he is being stalked 
by or about to be stabbed or jumped by the villain and his hirelings, would utter 
hysterical warnings like “Look out. He’s behind the door!” There were always 
kids reading aloud the florid, polysyllabic subtitles to their mothers or grand-
mothers. At critical points, the film would split. This set off an orgy of applause, 
howling, banging, ­floor-kicking, whistling, etc. The audiences seemed to enjoy 
these “breaks” more than the picture.1
Unless you go to a ­late-night screening of The Rocky Horror Picture Show, 
you’re unlikely to get such lively audience participation at the cinema 

160    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
these days. Aldous Huxley’s science fiction classic, Brave New World (1931), 
appropriately projected a possible future for cinema by moving beyond the 
recent introduction of “talkies,” films with synchronized soundtracks. Hux-
ley’s novel introduced the “feelies,” where all of the audience’s senses would 
be stimulated for its entertainment, long before virtual reality headgear. 
Huxley’s book also resonated with a common theme occupying the cultural 
milieu of the early 1930s: savageness and civilization.
Max Steiner’s soundtrack to King Kong (1933) remains pivotal in the 
history of film because of its unique blend of diegetic and nondiegetic 
sound. Composed at the expense of the film’s producer, Merian C. Cooper, 
Steiner employed an unprecedented ­eighty-piece orchestra for his original 
music. In conventional film terms, extra diegetic refers to the sounds the 
audience hears outside of the staging and characters on screen, but what 
makes Steiner’s work especially compelling is its complex contribution to 
storytelling of the film itself. Try watching King Kong with only subtitles 
and no sound and you’ll quickly see how much the story relies on Steiner’s 
score. We often take for granted the complexity of music in films precisely 
because of the mastery of composers like Max Steiner but also because 
when we watch a film, we generally do not see the musical performers or 
their instruments. Their very presence is often extra diegetic.
One of the techniques Steiner helped to popularize is known as 
“mickey mousing.” Although Mickey Mouse was only five years old at the 
time King Kong was released, animated cartoons offered a more controlled 
correspondence between dramatic action and timed sound that would pave 
the way for sonic techniques in the production of talkies. It is not surpris-
ing that Steiner, along with Carl Stalling, who composed the music for the 
first Mickey Mouse film, Plane Crazy (1928), is credited as an innovator of 
the “click track.” A ­click-track is basically a separate soundtrack containing 
the beat of a metronome to keep time, allowing editors to more easily align 
the sonic events with the actions on screen. Films are essentially rhythmic 
because it is merely the movement of still images through time that gives 
the audience the impression that the characters and objects in the frames 
move. Editors often cut to music.
One of the most interesting aspects of King Kong, however, is the 
absence of music throughout the beginning scenes, following the ini-
tial overture. The completely diegetic sound lends a kind of realism to the 
scenes in New York. It is not until the boat approaches Skull Island that we 
begin to hear music. As Robynn J. Stilwell writes, “Music rolls in with the 
fog, a visual metaphor for the fantastical gap. It is not yet the elsewhere of 
Skull Island, but an amorphous border that extends around it, blurring its 
edges.”2 We see a blending between diegetic and nondiegetic sound, fore-
ground and background of the shots, and the environmental conditions of 

Chapter 9: King Kong    161
the sea and air. As Stillwell hints with the concept of the “fantastical gap” 
that locates the “geography of the soundscape,”3 this signals a kind of lim-
inal space that draws both the characters on screen and the audience into 
the atmosphere of Skull Island. This fantasy within the fantasy of the film is 
also temporalized by a return to nature’s “past” where dinosaurs and giant 
apes fight for dominance.
On the island, we continue to get a blend of diegetic and nondiegetic 
sound. As Michael Slowik notes, “The music that accompanies the island-
ers’ dance is not precisely diegetic, because it features instrumentation 
plainly not visible in the image or likely in that setting. Yet it is not exactly 
nondiegetic either, because it retains clear connections to the dancing and 
drumming.”4
In a Eurocentric scheme, this temporally “other” place represents 
a ­pre-political “state of nature,” which Thomas Hobbes described as bel-
lum omnium contra omnes or a war of all against all. Largely developing 
from contact with the ­so-called “new world” or “discovery” of what would 
become America, Europeans narrated a ­self-serving story of “civilization” 
that underwrote their claims to political and geographical domination 
worldwide. King Kong develops out of this implicitly racist line of thinking.
One of Merian Cooper’s reasons for spending a lot of money on the 
production of a composed soundtrack for King Kong was an anxiety over 
the ­stop-motion effects of the King Kong and Dinosaur puppets. They 
didn’t seem real enough. Steiner’s richly textured orchestra added an ele-
ment of seriousness to what might otherwise be entirely unbelievable. It 
also introduced “modern” compositional concepts from Europe to the 
medium of popular film, shifting
In the aesthetic terms of Friedrich Nietzsche’s The Birth of Tragedy Out 
of the Spirit of Music, which had analyzed opera, Steiner’s blend of diegetic 
and nondiegetic sound hovers at the border of the Apollonian and the Dio-
nysian. While both Greek gods were associated with poetry and music, 
Apollo became associated with rationality and measured, civic spaces of 
the polis. Dionysus, on the other hand, was associated with nature, vio-
lence, and unbridled orgiastic sexuality. In these aesthetic terms, the shift 
between diegetic and nondiegetic sound on Skull Island in particular sig-
nals a gradated liminality between the “primitive” and the “civilized,” and it 
is within this metaphor that I ask the reader to ponder a question: To what 
extent can a film soundtrack be racist? 
Critics of King Kong have often viewed its story in terms of the 
racial anxieties of white populations who feared the encroachment of 
darker skinned “others” on what they perceived as their territory sup-
ported by their civilization story. This most obviously plays out in the 
­misogyny-tainted romance between Ann Darrow (Fay Wray) and John 

162    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
Driscoll (Bruce Cabot). Their romance hovers between the creative 
exploitations of filmmaker, Carl Denham (Robert Armstrong), and the 
infatuation of Kong himself. Kong was played by the uncredited African 
American actor, Everett Brown, in an ape costume. On Skull Island, Kong 
demonstrates his dominance over the more “primitive” dinosaurs, and he is 
worshipped by the island “natives” whose movements and ritualized sacri-
fices are also obscurely mirrored between the diegetic ­mickey-mousing and 
nondiegetic instrumentation of “tribal” drumming and orientalist textures. 
Whether in the jungle or atop the Empire State Building, Ann Darrow’s 
“beauty” assuages the otherwise bestial fury of Kong the “beast.” Her gruff 
and dismissive “common man,” the sailor becomes the appropriate sexual 
alternative and heroic partner. Darrow’s (white) “beauty” and supposedly 
intrinsic elegance gives pause to Kong, offering a temporal delay in violence 
such that the forces of “civilization” may tame or—in the final moments of 
the film—dispose of his bestial threat to her and the city of New York.
I am going to assume that the reader intuits what I have explored in 
more depth elsewhere5 as the “European phantasy” of civilization at work 
at the level of the plot: modern humans are alienated from nature due to 
their rationality; men are more rational than women, so women are “closer” 
to nature; children are also closer to nature and therefore more like “prim-
itive” cultures as they developmentally progress toward rational, civi-
lized adulthood, etc. But if we think sonically, Where was Steiner getting 
all of his material for suggesting these complex metaphors of liminality? 
What exactly was his contribution to this collaborative endeavor? Well, it 
is partly from his own Viennese upbringing. Steiner had studied with Gus-
tav Mahler before coming the United States, and he was ­well-equipped with 
­twentieth-century innovations in European composed music that may have 
seemed esoteric to American ­film-going audiences. He had also studied the 
operatic work of Richard Wagner that had inspired Nietzsche in The Birth 
of Tragedy. In one interview Steiner says, “Richard Wagner would have been 
one of the greatest picture composers that ever lived because he was under-
scoring dialogue just like I do. They talk. They have these endless adlibs, if 
you know what I mean…. What the hell is that but underscoring? The same 
thing I was doing.”6 Nineteenth century opera was partly based on Euro-
pean imaginings of what Greek music and tragedy were like. As Nietzsche 
writes in The Birth of Tragedy, the figure of the satyr—a companion to Dio-
nysus—blended the rationally human and animalistic qualities. Underscor-
ing hovers at the liminal space between diegetic and nondiegetic, but it also 
carries a ­Greek-derived baggage about a line between the civilized and the 
barbarous. As Nietzsche wrote, “A particularly modern weakness inclines 
us to see the primal aesthetic phenomenon in too complicated a way. For 
the true poet the metaphor is not a rhetorical figure but a representative 

Chapter 9: King Kong    163
image that really hovers before him in place of a concept.”7 John Driscoll’s 
working class roughness and blatant misogyny situate him between Kong 
and Carl Denham, but it is the soundtrack that allows the plot to move the 
audience into the necessary disbelief that simplifies the “primal aesthetic 
phenomenon.” Driscoll is merely a safety net, a ­place-holding device that 
allows the audience to enter into a “primal” fascination with Kong and Ann 
Darrow.
Composer David Allen points to a remark by Royal Brown insisting 
that “Steiner’s King Kong music … would no doubt have scandalized most 
­concert-going audiences of the time with its ­open-interval harmonies and 
dissonant chords, its triton motifs, or such devices as the chromatic scale 
in parallel, minor second.”8 While it is true that ­twelve-tone music was rel-
atively new to the United States following works such as Arnold Schoen-
berg’s Theory of Harmony (1910), which had broken away from diatonic 
(major scale) traditions that had shaped the “western ear” for centuries, 
we ought not confuse “­concert-going audiences” with people who attended 
talkies. Kong and Ann Darrow offer the audience a kind of cathexis, the 
official impermissive attributes of their relationship are permitted by 
the plot of the film itself, which in turn gives the audience permission to 
indulge in the rawness of sexual violence. The blurring of the permissible 
and impermissible was sonically signified by chromaticism in the European 
phantasy structure.
A paradox presents itself if we think of the most ­avant-garde chro-
maticism of European music composed within the “classical” continuum, 
music which would presumably signal the most “advanced” evolution of 
“civilized” taste. In the European phantasy structure, “civilization” had 
moved away from the ape, the jungle, etc. At the same time, composers had 
long used aspects of chromaticism to signified and oriental “other.” If we 
consider his biography, what Steiner was drawing on for a sense of cultural 
ambiguity and liminality may have been a sense of displacement that he 
himself felt as a displaced foreigner and a Jew. His status as an immigrant 
also combined with the musical textures he encountered when he came to 
the United States.
Watching King Kong, it is important to notice the long sequences 
where the music itself conveys the action, diegetic underscoring meant to 
persuade the audience to emotionally believe in the plot that the editor has 
crafted through images. We get with Steiner’s score a sense of the “exotic” 
that will be repeated in his scores, such as Casablanca (1942). What is it 
about the harmonic and melodic content that conveys to audiences a sense 
of “otherness”? Orientalism in European music had been employed at least 
since the late ­nineteenth-century, notably in impressionist composers such 
as Claude Debussy and Erik Satie. Inspired in part by the late Romanticism 

164    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
of works such as Gustav Flaubert’s Salammbô (1862) and in part by the 
1889 Exposition Universelle (World’s Fair) in Paris, these composers were 
directly concerned with the sonic representations of “other nations” under-
written by a kind of European cosmopolitanism. Such “universalizing” ten-
dencies, which had drawn on representations of the “exotic,” what Edward 
Said described in his famous book, Orientalism (1979), may have had a dif-
ferent impact on Steiner, who belonged to an already marginalized commu-
nity within Europe. As an expatriated Austrian Jew, Steiner was himself a 
refugee. Facing discrimination as a Jew and a “foreigner” in England during 
the First World War, Steiner had been able to secure passage to the United 
States. His “otherness” would have been intimately tied to his sense of self. 
When we think of his composing hands at work, we can only imagine the 
layers of irony at work as he sonically signaled exotic “otherness” for his 
audiences.
Educated through the Austrian musical culture at the height of Euro-
pean modernism, as well as within a ­family-structure where work in live 
theater crossed the line between “high” and “low” art, Steiner himself nego-
tiated the tensions between the culturally “other” and the “civilized.” Inter-
estingly, though little noted among historians of his work, Steiner entered 
an American musical scene where pioneers of jazz such as Duke Elling-
ton had already been laying down a ­trans-continental texture of “jungle 
music” that would code a kind of accentuated resistance to more dominant 
strains of “primitivist” art. For Ellington, this would be part of an emer-
gent impulse among the Harlem Renaissance artists in what would later be 
identified as a ­pan-Africanist aesthetic that turned primitivist essentialism 
against itself. Nathan Platte correctly notes that, “Steiner even drew upon 
the ­so-called ‘jungle music’ of Duke Ellington that was served up for white 
audiences at Harlem’s Cotton Club. On Skull Island, a swung riff set over a 
walking bass blearily sustained chords gestures toward Ellington’s ‘East St. 
Louis ­Toodle-oo’ (1927) and ‘Echoes of the Jungle’ (1931).”9
We know well that, conceived as cultural “outsiders,” both Jews and 
African Americans influenced the phenomenon Americans call “jazz.” 
Should we then think of the echoes of Ellington’s influences in Steiner’s 
compositions as homages? As the recognition by one cultural “outsider” of 
another? As aesthetic appropriation? What kind of complexities arise when 
a member of an oppressed group adopts hegemonic aesthetic notions? Can 
we presume to know anything about the intentional process, if there is any, 
at work here? Steiner’s success with audiences is undeniable. Are audiences 
implicated in the injustices underscoring their enjoyment—not the com-
poser’s individual intent but the metaphysical ordering that normalizes our 
collective monstrosity?
In music law, there is a famous case involving a song by former Beatle 

Chapter 9: King Kong    165
George Harrison from his album All Things Must Pass (1970). In 1976, Har-
rison went to trial for a dispute over his hit, “My Sweet Lord,” regarding 
its resemblance to a 1962 hit by the Chiffons and written by Ronnie Mack, 
“He’s So Fine.” The judge found Harrison guilty of “subconscious plagia-
rism.”10 Such decisions are made by reference to recognizable melodic and 
harmonic structures. It is clear to any listener that “My Sweet Lord” closely 
resembles “He’s So Fine,” but what happens when we are dealing more with 
more textural concerns? This takes us back into the realm of aesthetics.
Like much music, film as a medium is ­well-suited to the discourse 
of psychoanalysis because films are composite works made by many peo-
ple. Yes, some of those people have more power over the finished product 
than others, but there are many contributors. This makes any discussion of 
intention rather complex. Nevertheless, such complexity does not mean we 
ought to minimize issues such as racism and sexism, which are very much 
part of the fabric of King Kong. Nor does the question of intent, whether 
or not those involved are conscious or unconscious of the fact, decide the 
case. In fact, it is a rather weak sense of justice that can simply label a film 
(or novel, etc.) as racist and write it off, censor it, or ignore it.
The role of criticism is at least partly to try to see the film for what it 
is. This is not a matter of attempting an “objective” or disinterested stance. 
Criticism has its own discursive motivations, which far exceed whether or 
not we like or dislike a film. What remains compelling with King Kong is the 
iconic place it has culturally, especially the image of Kong and Ann Dar-
row atop the Empire State Building. At the time, the building was the tall-
est in the world, so the symbolism was quite powerful. The music in the 
scene accompanies Kong’s steady ascent to the top of the world. After the 
climactic chest pounding, as Kong has put Ann down and climbed up to 
the antenna, the music disappears. We only get the sound of airplanes and 
gunfire until the fatigued and wounded Kong begins to sway. Horn blasts 
accompany the final shots, and Kong falls to his death. The ominous tones 
then merge into consonance as John reaches Ann. On the street below, Carl 
Denham tells a police officer, “It wasn’t the airplanes, it was beauty killed 
the beast.”
The success of John and Ann’s romance is an afterthought, again a 
placeholder giving the audience permission to relish in Kong’s perplexed 
lust for Ann. Clearly, we are meant to read Kong’s death as a kind of trag-
edy. There is an element of questioning going on at this point in the film. 
If modern literature and film are characterized by treating the “common” 
person as the tragic hero, King Kong in its racist fantasy asks its audiences 
“how low can we go”? In its hyperbolic manifestation of civilization ver-
sus savagery, however, John Driscoll’s misogynist love for Ann Darrow is 
rather boring. That Denham the filmmaker gives us the closing comment 

166    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
unites his artistic fascination with “the beast,” but his very existence as an 
artist depends on his status as a colonizer, as a failed tamer of “the beast,” as 
the adventurous entrepreneur only too willing to create a spectacle for his 
marvelous possession. There is little nobility to Kong’s savagery, but he is 
perplexed by “beauty” in a way that reveals Denham the artist’s own impo-
tence. Denham seems to lament the loss of feeling and passion, projecting 
his own narrative of modern alienation onto “the beast” who has in reality 
been murdered by his own narcissism.
Kong has fallen from the phallus of civilization. The soundtrack ren-
ders him believable in his ­trans-species structure of delay. He is moved 
from a “timeless” past into a modernity that can only have its interest 
piqued by the surprise that there somehow still existed another savage 
to erase. In the meantime, boring misogyny is normalized as integral to 
plots and “happy” relationships from John and Ann to Walter Burns (Cary 
Grant) and Rosalind Russell in His Girl Friday (1940) and beyond! Kong 
becomes the sacrifice for the “moderns” that mimics the ritual sacrifice of 
the islanders, just bigger and better, and the soundtrack has seduced the 
audience into the believability of the unbelievable by suturing the diegetic 
and nondiegetic. How passive we have become as audiences.
Notes
	
1.  Judith Crist, “Note for Abe Lass’ Play Me a Movie,” Liner notes for Play Me a Movie 
Composed and Played by Abraham Lass, Asch Records AH 3856, 1971, LP: 1–2. https://­
folkways-media.si.edu/liner_notes/folkways/FW03856.pdf. 
	
2.  Robynn J. Stillwell, “The Fantastical Gap between Diegetic and Nondiegetic,” Beyond 
the Soundtrack: Representing Music in Cinema, eds. Daniel Goldmark, Lawrence Kramer , 
and Richard Leppert (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2007): 189.
	
3.  Ibid., 187.
	
4.  Michael Slowik, “Diegetic Withdrawal and Other Worlds: Film Music Strategies Before 
King Kong 1927–1933, Cinema Journal, Vol. 53, No. 1 (Fall 2013): 2. pp. 1–25 https://www.
jstor.org/stable/43653633.
	
5.  See Roger K. Green, A Transatlantic Political Theology of Psychedelic Aesthetics: 
Enchanted Citizens (New York: Palgrave, 2019).
	
6.  Myrl A. Schreibman, “On Gone with the Wind, Selznick, and the Art of “Mickey Mous-
ing”: An Interview with Max Steiner,” Journal of Film and Video 56, No. 1 (2004): 46.
	
7.  Friedrich Nietzsche, The Birth of Tragedy (New York: Penguin, 1993): 42.
	
8.  Royal S. Brown, Overtones and Undertones: Reading Film Music (Berkeley: University 
of California Press, 1994): 118, quoted in David Allen, “‘King Kong’ by Max Steiner (1933) 
and James Newton Howard (2005): A Comparison of Scores and Contexts,” davidallencom-
poser.com, February 7, 2014, accessed December 26, 2019 https://davidallencomposer.com/
blog/­king-kong-max-steiner-james-newton-howard-comparison#­cite-4. 
	
9.  Nathan Platte, Making Music in Selznick’s Hollywood (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2017): 67.
	 10.  Jordan Runtagh, “Songs on Trial: 12 Landmark Music Copyright Cases,” Rollingstone.
com June 8, 2016, https://www.rollingstone.com/politics/­politics-lists/­songs-on-trial-12-
landmark-music-copyright-cases-166396/­george-harrison-vs-the-chiffons-1976–64089/.

167
Chapter 10: The Martian
Ridley Scott is one of the great directors in the history of cinema, both 
in the sheer number of films he has made as well as the breadth and suc-
cess of them. As the director of Alien (1979) and Blade Runner (1982), his 
reputation as a master of the ­sci-fi genre was solidified a long time ago. 
But he has made many more films throughout his career, of all types and 
in all genres, and his entire body of work is quite memorable, expansive 
(22 feature films), and successful. Many of his films as director are house-
hold names: Thelma and Louise (1991), Gladiator (2000), Hannibal (2001), 
Black Hawk Down (2001), American Gangster (2007), Robin Hood (2010), 
Prometheus (2012), and The Martian (2015). He has also produced many 
Matt Damon as Mark Watney stranded on Mars in The Martian (20th Century- 
Fox, 2015).

168    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
others, including Blade Runner 2049 (2017) and dozens of TV shows among 
his over 100 producing credits. Even though he is now ensconced as one of 
the great directors of cinema history, he started in television and came to 
film relatively late, at the age of 40.
Born to an army family in northeast England in 1937, he attended the 
Royal College of Art in London, graduating in 1963. He worked exclusively 
in TV for a long time, ultimately forming a production company in 1968 
with his brother Tony (also a director). He was a fan of science fiction liter-
ature as a kid, and he has said he enjoyed all of the science fiction cinema of 
his era, including The Day the Earth Stood Still (1953) among others. When 
he saw 2001: A Space Odyssey in 1968, however, he became convinced the 
he too could make great science fiction films someday. After his first feature 
film, The Duellists (1977) was well regarded at Cannes, he got the opportu-
nity to do just that in 1977 when he was offered the chance to direct a small 
­sci-fi film called Alien. He accepted.
Alien was already in ­pre-production in late 1977 when Star Wars 
became one of the biggest blockbusters of all time. Due to the runaway suc-
cess of that film, Scott lobbied for a bigger production; the budget for Alien 
was subsequently substantially increased and it became an ­A-list produc-
tion for the studio. The success of the film solidified ­science-fiction as a 
­box-office draw, showing that science fiction films aimed at adult audiences 
could make money and become critical successes as well. ­Sci-fi was going 
through a golden age.
The film owes much of its look to Swiss artist H.R. Giger, who designed 
the title creature as well as much of the film’s environment. Much like 
George Lucas in THX 1138 a few years earlier in 1971, Scott wished to depict 
a “­used-up” or “­retro-fitted” future and not one that was clean and sanitized, 
as in 2001: A Space Odyssey. The film’s dark, brooding atmosphere and styl-
ized look became a prototype for the postmodern science fiction film and 
inspired countless other films. It also spawned several remakes and became 
one of the more successful franchises in film history. One aspect of Scott’s 
work in this film that would stand out is the ­mise-en-scène; Scott proved to 
be an adept hand at creating the atmosphere through these details, and it 
would become a staple of his work throughout his entire career. The cine-
matography would always work ­hand-in-hand with the other aspects, but 
it would be the ­mise-en-scène that would stand out. As with the other films 
in this collection, the film’s cinematic aspects work together to create the 
atmosphere, illuminate its themes, and propel the narrative in wonderful 
ways.
The story is very simple: in the ­far-away future, an industrial mining 
ship on its way home to Earth stops at a passing planet to investigate a pos-
sible life form. What they find is a deserted ship and an alien creature that 

Chapter 10: The Martian    169
begins to terrorize the crew. The film would become famous for many rea-
sons: the degraded ­mise-en-scène of the future, not the sleek and clean view 
of Kubrick’s vision; the abject capitalism of the world, one in which the peo-
ple are simply dispensable cogs; the class and race issues depicted on the 
ship, very different from the inclusive Star Trek view of the future; and a 
strong female lead who becomes a tough killer. It was Scott who changed 
the original concept of a male lead to the female lead. The film would go on 
to make well over $100 million and instantly made Scott an international 
directing star. His next film, however, would solidify his place in the canon 
of the great ­sci-fi directors.
After the runaway success of Alien, he moved directly into the produc-
tion for Blade Runner, based on Philip K. Dick’s Do Androids Dream of Elec-
tric Sheep? Scott was originally hesitant about directing the film because he 
did not want to be pigeonholed as a ­sci-fi director after Alien, and then he 
differed with the studio on many issues surrounding the film. He finally fin-
ished his first cut in 1981. That original cut of the film was never released 
because the studio hated it, and they ­re-cut the film with a ­voice-over and 
an alternate ending. It was a ­box-office bomb, but it gained a cult follow-
ing on video/laserdisc(!) in the following years. A Director’s Cut version 
was released in 1992 and the film quickly became a huge hit after that. 
(That Director’s Cut was the original version of the film, sans ­voice-over 
and ­tacked-on ending.) Yet another version, the Final Cut, was released in 
2007 and Scott finally got the chance to have complete control and present 
his vision. It is now considered one of the most innovative, influential, and 
visionary ­science-fiction films of all time.
One reason for the success of the film is the vision of the dystopic 
future from the vantage point of the early ’80s, and as in Alien, it is the 
­mise-en-scène that stands out. The aesthetic depicts a ­used-up, ­retro-fitted 
future much like elements from THX 1138 and Alien. But where those two 
films had a limited scope of vision, Blade Runner extrapolates the land-
scapes onto all of futuristic humanity. The vision of future Los Ange-
les—dark, dirty, dingy, and littered with stuff (what Dick called “kipple” 
in the book)—would become iconic images in ­sci-fi. It also pays homage 
to Metropolis in its verticality and how that height metaphorically relates 
directly to class and socioeconomics. The film is also (mostly) faithful 
to the beloved novel while adding its own take on the atmosphere of the 
future. Philip K. Dick, after seeing an early cut of the film, said: “They did 
­sight-stimulation on my brain.” Unfortunately, Dick died before the film 
was released. Scott was now both a commercial and artistic success, and he 
would have his choice of films for the rest of his career.
He chose not to return to ­sci-fi until 2012 with Prometheus—a spinoff 
of the space jockey from Alien. The film was a moderate financial success, 

170    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
and it divided both critics and audience. He would then return once again 
to ­sci-fi with The Martian in 2015 and have better results on all fronts. 
Based on the book by Andy Weir, it tells the story of astronaut Mark Wat-
ney (played by Matt Damon in a wonderful, virtuoso performance), who is 
presumed dead on Mars and is subsequently left behind by the rest of the 
spaceship Hermes crew (captained by Jessica Chastain) when they have to 
leave in the middle of a dangerous storm. Marooned by himself, he impro-
vises a way to grow food and keep himself alive (and communicate with 
Earth) as the Earth crew devises a way to save him. With the next drop on 
Mars not scheduled for four years, his prospects are dire (especially after an 
accident wipes out his ability to grow any more food) until the Earth crew 
finds a way to send the Hermes back to pick him up. The gambit works and 
he is returned to Earth. The film was a critical and ­box-office success, and it 
was nominated for seven Academy Awards, including Best Picture and Best 
Actor. Along with the Arrival nomination for Best Picture the following 
year, and the multiple nominations for Interstellar the previous year, “adult” 
science fiction was experiencing a new golden age and was finally getting 
recognized not only at the box office, but at the Academy Awards as well. 
Ridley Scott’s wish to bring adult ­sci-fi to the screen with Alien in 1979 was 
realized once again, and this time, others were on board as well.
The film itself is a master class in filmmaking (and acting); the rare film 
that appeals to a wide audience in a number of areas: story, acting, presen-
tation, technical and special effects, as well as our four constituent elements 
of film: ­mise-en-scène, cinematography, editing, and sound. As with other 
Scott films, and particularly his science fiction films, the ­mise-en-scène is 
particularly expressive and it helps to tell the story in many ways. The open-
ing shot is one great example: we see Mars, from low orbit, with the sun in 
the background. We cut to the surface and move along the rocky, moun-
tainous terrain as if we were landing on the surface ourselves. The camera 
finally settles on the base camp and finds the astronauts busy working. The 
opening is pure Scott: economical, descriptive, yet also very expressive. The 
shot of Mars orients the viewer, but it also illuminates the solitary nature of 
the planet itself—lacking life of any kind. The terrain reminds us that Mars 
is a rocky, dusty planet and reinforces the idea that it is desolate and cer-
tainly dangerous. The shots of the astronauts, however, add life and business 
to the proceedings. Everyone is busy working and engaged in their specific 
tasks, but not without pleasure—their easy and even jocular joking ban-
ter show that they are a ­tight-knit group who care for one another on both 
professional and personal levels. Most of all, the astronauts add life to the 
planet and therefore give it a sense of community and togetherness. They 
bring Mars alive.
The cinematography, while striking in the opening shots, doesn’t get in 

Chapter 10: The Martian    171
the way or announce itself in the way that Kubrick does, or even how Nolan 
(Interstellar) or Villeneuve (Arrival) use the camera as an explicitly expres-
sive tool. Yet that fact also has its own expressiveness: the ­business-like 
quality of the shots—such as the opening sequence that opens the film in 
a very classic Hollywood ­cinema-like fashion—speaks to the ­business-like 
quality of the action; even though we don’t get a specific time stamp for 
the film, throughout the course of the action we get the sense that it is very 
­near-future, yet the Mars mission seems almost routine. And as the film 
progresses, another reason for the ­business-like approach of the cinema-
tography becomes very apparent: the performance of Matt Damon. In the 
hands of another, ­less-experienced director, the temptation to become 
more stylized might have been too much to take, especially considering we 
are talking about a film set on Mars. There seems to be abundant opportu-
nity to stylize the shots in many different ways. But Scott adroitly lets the 
acting and story do the work, and the camera allows it.
There are other ways, however, that Scott enlivens the action in a way 
that focuses on Damon but doesn’t require him to do everything. Once he 
finds himself alone on the planet, Watney records a video diary of his activ-
ities and plans for posterity/science, and also in the hope that he is able 
to be rescued. Scott is able to use these sequences to give us different and 
unique views of Damon: some from the camera on which he is recording 
(so that it looks like the character is speaking directly to us), some from 
other cameras around him, and some from other surveillance cameras 
around the base. The net effect is that we get closer to the character—since 
we are mostly in ­close-up—but we also get a sense for how alone he is, 
all the time. Another of those ­surveillance-camera shots comes as Watney 
drives the rover around the surface. He records himself in the vehicle as 
he drives around, and we get the same type of access as when he is on the 
base. But these shots in the rover serve another purpose: his isolation and 
claustrophobia become piercingly evident. The small rover and his lack of 
mobility hammers home his situation, and despite his ­wise-cracking and 
joking (and dancing!), we understand his loneliness. At one point, driving 
around at night and trying to keep the heat off to save power, he is in the 
dark, his breath visible in the stark cold, and we realize his lot is one of not 
only loneliness, isolation, and claustrophobia, but stark danger as well. One 
wrong move, one inch, one rip in the wrong place, and he will die quickly. 
The cinematography doesn’t dwell on this very much, but when we do get 
bits of it, the point is driven home in the starkest of terms.
The editing also works well with the ­mise-en-scène to make very 
expressive points. The overall scheme of the film is continuity editing—
so that we are never confused about action, time, or place. In fact, we get 
screen titles every now and then to remind us of the day (listed by “Sol,” the 

172    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
astronomical term for a Mars day). We also get screen titles for all charac-
ters on Earth, giving us their name and position. When we move locations, 
from NASA to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in Pasadena, for exam-
ple, the screen titles tell us where we are, and the shots of planes give us the 
transition from place to place. All of this is very ­business-like and classic 
Hollywood ­cinema-esque. The viewer never gets confused.
The editing also becomes very expressive at times. As Watney makes 
contact with Earth and everyone realizes he’s alive, the film moves between 
Earth and Mars more often. We get full sequences where the action cuts 
directly back and forth, but then we get sequences of ­cross-cutting (par-
allel action) that become very expressive in their overall feel. When Wat-
ney is first found to be alive, the action picks up on Earth as we see them 
following his movements. But later, when Watney has established contact 
and is in constant communication, the action on Earth becomes positively 
frenetic. When we cut to Watney, he is (obviously) alone and working in 
peace and solitude, making his own decisions. Cut back to Earth and NASA 
is always confounded with decisions and everyone disagrees with how to 
move forward: do they tell the crew of the Hermes Watney is alive? Dis-
agreement. Do they attempt a risky mission that could put the Hermes crew 
in danger or rather, keep them safe and try a slightly less risky send of sup-
plies so Watney can survive until the next mission in four years? Disagree-
ment. Do they cut the safety prep time on the first mission to send supplies? 
Disagreement. Back on Mars, however, Watney moves along at his own 
pace, makes his own decisions, and works quickly and efficiently. At one 
moment, after NASA tells him to ration his food to barely a few mouthfuls, 
he looks into the camera and declares that he is dipping his potato (with 
which he is becoming disgusted with “the power of a thousand fiery suns”) 
in crushed Vicodin, because he can and “nobody can stop me.” The point 
here is clear: the bureaucracy bogs down and loses sight of the individual. 
Economic concerns trump human concerns. It may be a muted comment 
on capitalism and corporatism compared to Alien or Blade Runner, but it 
is there.
The sound also plays an important part in the film, and at times it is 
used for comedic purposes. Once Watney finds himself alone on the planet, 
he scours the stranded belongings for anything helpful/worth using. The 
only music he finds is Captain Lewis’ (Chastain) cache of disco music on 
her laptop. The editing and music work in tandem in one simple cut when 
Director of Mars Missions Vincent Kapoor (Chiwetel Ojiafor) muses “I 
can’t even imagine what he must be going through,” and the film cuts to 
Watney exiting the shower in a towel listening to a blaring “Don’t Leave Me 
This Way” by The Communards. Later, when he is making a journey in the 
rover, he extracts the Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generator (RTG), or as 

Chapter 10: The Martian    173
he calls it, the “big box of plutonium,” to keep the rover heated. To pass the 
time, he listens to music along the way; his choice here is the “least disco 
song he could find,” “Hot Stuff,” by Donna Summer. The song choices are 
obviously on the nose, even a bit too cute perhaps, but effective nonethe-
less—especially when Watney starts to shimmy in the rover as the music 
blares. Who among us would not shimmy to Donna Summer on Mars?
The subjects of the film are deftly illuminated with the help of the cin-
ematic aspects and some hearken back to Scott’s older work in ­sci-fi. The 
subject of capitalism and the theme of the ­single-minded nature of the cap-
italist beast, for example, was a feature of Alien. That “beast” materialized 
in the form of the alien creature, whose only purpose was to survive and 
destroy anything in its wake. It even adapted to its surroundings and envi-
ronment, taking on the physical properties of materials it encounters. It 
fed on those surroundings and found appropriate hosts. It was the phys-
ical embodiment of capitalism. The theme was also evident in the class 
divisions among the crew, as they all discussed their unequal division of 
“shares,” while the captain reminded everyone that they would get what 
they “agreed to.” The class division evident on the ship represented the sup-
posed class divisions on Earth of the time period as well. While the film 
commented on the rising corporatism of the late ’70s, it is still resonant 
in the bureaucracy of The Martian, as noted earlier, through the chain of 
command, but also in the budgetary issues faced in every step of NASA’s 
plans. We see the venality of capitalism as a theme in Blade Runner as well, 
but we also see something else: the desire to be human. The replicants of 
Blade Runner simply want to become human and experience the life span 
that humans are afforded, but their maker, Eldon Tyrell, programmed them 
to have a limited life span (presumably to keep producing them and add-
ing to his bottom line in perpetuity). While that film broaches the topic of 
wanting to be human, it also asks the question of “how do we retain our 
humanity in a world that is increasingly run by machines on which we are 
becoming increasingly dependent?” The Tyrell Corporation’s motto for 
the replicants is “more human than human,” and they certainly seem to be 
in the film. HAL, in 2001: A Space Odyssey, as discussed in Chapter 3, has 
more emotion than the seemingly lifeless humans on the ship. The ques-
tion becomes “How do we keep our humanity in a world that is increas-
ingly based on machines?” And that consequently leads to the question we 
have been posing as central to science fiction cinema: “What does it mean 
to be human?” The Martian answers it simply: human connection. To be 
human is to connect with other humans; to want that connection; to need 
that connection; to even crave that connection. As Watney is alone on the 
planet, and he muses, “I am the only person to ever be alone on a planet,” 
we understand his loneliness, and more, his lack of connection. Once he is 

174    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
able to communicate with NASA, it enlivens and invigorates him, and his 
plans and actions accelerate. When the crew finds out he is alive and they 
had left him behind, they do anything to save him. They put off their return 
to Earth for another year so they can go back and retrieve him. They too, 
not only needed to connect to Watney, they wanted him to hold on to his 
connections. To be human is to connect.
—Vincent Piturro
The Martian: Fact, Fiction or Fantasy? 
An Interview with Steven Lee
Ka Chun Yu
Ka Chun Yu: What is your background as a Mars scientist?
Back when I was a senior in college (1976), I registered for an indepen-
dent study class in planetary science. My professor (Dr. Joe Veverka) was 
involved in the Viking missions, intended to make the first landings on Mars 
by American spacecraft. Joe suggested I take a couple of weeks looking at 
all of the ­7300-odd images of Mars returned by the Mariner 9 mission (the 
first spacecraft to orbit the Red Planet back in 1971–1972)—to see if anything 
caught my attention. What an introduction to another world! I saw a planet 
that was similar to Earth in many ways (mountains, canyons, polar ice caps, 
dust storms…) but also very alien (mountains nearly three times taller than 
Mt. Everest; a single canyon system that was 30,000 feet deep in places and 
could span the continental United States; polar ice caps covered with frozen 
­carbon-dioxide [dry ice], and dust storms that can engulf the entire planet 
and persist for months). I was absolutely hooked, and from that point for-
ward my entire career has focused on studying the interactions between the 
surface and atmosphere of Mars. Over the years, I’ve been lucky enough 
to have been involved in several spacecraft missions (Viking 1 & 2, Hubble 
Space Telescope, Mars Climate Orbiter, and Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter). 
In many ways, I’m more familiar with Mars than I am Earth!
What was your reaction when you first saw The Martian?
I will admit up front that the first time I saw The Martian, I hated it! 
Being a Mars scientist, all I could see were the flaws where the movie had 
departed significantly from the reality of the Mars that I know and love. 
More about that later…

Chapter 10: The Martian    175
But now you no longer hate the movie?
The second time I watched The Martian, I tried hard to keep the mind-
set that this was not a documentary but a work of fiction. There are many 
interesting, entertaining, and ­well-done aspects to the movie! I’d like to 
touch on several of those. So my overall approach here is to discuss aspects 
of the movie that are fact, aspects which are fiction but plausible, and those 
parts of the plot that are pure fantasy.
So what is the first topic you want to talk about?
One of the basic underpinnings of the story is right at the beginning of 
the movie; a severe sandstorm is suddenly discovered to be bearing down 
on the Ares III landing site on Mars. Wind speeds are predicted to be above 
the limit where the Mars Ascent Vehicle (MAV—the spacecraft intended to 
carry the crew back into Martian orbit at mission’s end) may be in danger 
of tipping over. The decision is made to immediately terminate the mission, 
evacuate the crew to the MAV, and blast off to meet the orbiting Hermes 
“mother ship” and begin the voyage back to Earth. During the hurried trek 
from the habitation module (the HAB) to the MAV, the crew encounters 
near zero visibility as they are engulfed by blowing dust, sand, pebbles, 
and rocks. The base’s antenna array is ripped apart by the storm, and flying 
debris hits astronaut Mark Watney and blows him away into the storm. His 
damaged spacesuit no longer broadcasts any telemetry; after a frantic and 
fruitless search, his crewmates are forced to assume Watney is dead. Just in 
the nick of time, the MAV lifts off, successfully carrying the remaining crew 
into orbit. Several hours later, Watney awakes to “low oxygen alarms” and 
discovers he’s been impaled by debris from the antenna array. He manages 
to hobble back to the HAB and….
Now—for the rest of the story! Let’s talk first about the reality of this 
vicious “sandstorm” and how the wind can move surface materials on Mars. 
We have lots of observations (from Mars orbit and the Martian surface, as 
well as from telescopic observations from Earth) showing that dust storms 
are relatively common occurrences on Mars. They range in size from local, 
such as a dust devil that affects just a small area where the wind is circu-
lating, to regional (covering hundreds to thousands of km), to massive 
­global-scale events. I’d like to show you some of the real observations.
This is a view of the North Pole of Mars (Figure 1, right). The bright cir-
cular feature at top is the polar ice cap. There’s also a swirling ­spiral-shaped 
cloud adjacent to the ice cap. That actually is very fine dust that’s blowing 
off the polar cap and the surrounding surface. This is evidence for katabatic 
winds, where cold, dense air flows out from the polar cap onto the warmer 
surroundings. The winds lift fine dust present on the cap and surround-
ings, resulting in a turbulent cloud of dust moving away from the polar cap. 

176    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
Figure 1 (left): METEOSAT-7 infrared view of a polar cyclone in the North 
Atlantic (ESA); (right): Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter view of north polar 
cyclone on Mars (MSSS/NASA/JPL).
Figure 2: Regional dust storm near the Martian equator (MSSS/NASA/JPL).

Chapter 10: The Martian    177
This is not unlike what we see in the polar regions on Earth where polar 
cyclones are caused by the same sort of phenomenon (Figure 1, left). The 
difference is on Mars we’ve got dust swept into the cyclonic storm cloud, 
while on Earth condensed water vapor forms the clouds. But the basic pro-
cess leading to the storm is very similar.
Elsewhere on the planet, heating of the surface by the sun can cause 
the overlying atmosphere to rapidly rise, much like thunderstorms on 
Earth (Figure 2). The winds caused by the upwelling air can lift dust from 
the surface, forming a dust storm ­tens-to-hundreds of km across. The pre-
vailing winds can then carry the dust cloud across the surface, either lifting 
more dust along the way or slowly dispersing and allowing the suspended 
dust to settle back onto the surface.
This is an example of the extreme upper end of the size range for dust 
storms (Figure 3). It’s called a Planetary Encircling Dust Event (PEDE), 
a.k.a. a global dust storm. On the left is a typical view of Mars; note a dust 
haze inside a huge crater (about 2300 km across) in the southern hemi-
sphere. On the right, roughly a month later, the dust ­storm-grew large 
enough to escape the crater and get mixed up with the global wind field. At 
this point, the dust can be distributed throughout the atmosphere, forming 
a global dust haze (a PEDE).
So, Mars definitely hosts dust storms of a wide variety of scales. Based 
on observations by spacecraft which have been orbiting Mars continuously 
since Mars Global Surveyor arrived in ­late-1997, we see that on any given 
day there are dust storms happening somewhere on Mars.
Figure 3: Global view of Mars in June 2001 (left) and July 2001 (right) (B. 
Cantor/MSSS/NASA/JPL).

178    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
When you talk about dust on Mars, it’s not like what people’s experience 
of dust is like, right?
Martian dust is much finer than the stuff you find under your couch. 
The average dust grains observed in the Mars atmosphere are 3 microns (a 
millionth of a meter) in ­diameter—about a tenth the diameter of a hair on 
your head. This is more like particles found in smoke. It’s very, very, very 
fine particles! Once Mars dust grains are raised from the surface by the 
winds, it may take months for them to settle out of the atmosphere. In fact, 
some level of dust haze seems to always be present, leading to the famous 
­salmon-colored sky ion most image from our landers and rovers. So once 
you’re able to start a PEDE, it can be many months before the planet returns 
to a ­pre-storm level of atmospheric haze.
In fact, the most recent PEDE in mid–2018 led to the demise of the 
Mars Exploration Rover Opportunity. This rover had been operating for 
almost 15 years on the surface of Mars, when a PEDE kicked up. This was 
a dust storm of historic proportions; for several months, something like 
99.99 percent of the sunlight was blocked by the pervasive dust clouds. This 
was bad news for the ­solar-powered Opportunity—essentially the middle 
of night, all the time, as far as its solar panels were concerned. The rover 
was unable to charge its batteries, leaving no power to turn on its internal 
heaters or communicate with mission control. Opportunity more or less 
froze to death in the dark! So, ­long-duration dust storms are big deals for 
spacecraft operating on the surface of Mars!
But the key here is—this is dust we’re talking about! This is not sand, 
pebbles, or rocks blowing around (as shown in The Martian). The Mars 
atmosphere is very thin, only about 0.6 percent the density of Earth’s atmo-
sphere. (Sea level pressure on Earth is 1000 millibars; the average surface 
pressure on Mars is about 6 millibars.) It would take a truly enormous wind 
to lift anything coarser than sand off the surface. The force exerted by the 
wind is related to both the density of the atmosphere and the square of 
the wind velocity. Assume that to cause the mayhem shown in the open-
ing minutes of The Martian you’d need the force produced by tropical storm 
winds on Earth (say, 100 km/hr). Our calculation shows this force would 
require a wind speed on Mars of about 750 km/hr (about 470 mph)! That’s 
just physically unreasonable—it doesn’t happen on Mars. We’ve explored 
Mars with landers, rovers, and orbiters; the maximum wind speed ever 
measured is about 100 km/hr. We also know that coarse material such as 
pebbles and rocks are not being moved around by the winds, and none of 
our landed spacecraft have ever been tipped over by wind gusts. So, the 
premise of the opening sequences of the movie can squarely be put into the 
“fantasy bin”!

Chapter 10: The Martian    179
The Martian sand or dust isn’t just in the opening scene. It appears as set 
dressing later in the film as well.
That gets us to another point: Other than the plot device of requir-
ing that the crew leave quickly because of this dire sandstorm happening, 
another task for Mark Watney is to figure out how the restore his commu-
nications with Earth. He decides to take a road trip to find and retrieve 
the Pathfinder spacecraft (landed on Mars in 1997), which is several days 
drive from the Ares III base. He finds Pathfinder almost completely bur-
ied by sand. And so the plot is again playing into the misconception that 
the winds are able to move a lot of material around on the surface over the 
course of a few decades. As we’ve already shown, that just doesn’t happen 
under current conditions on Mars! Let’s look at the types of changes that we 
do see on the planet:
This is a view from the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) of the 
Propontis dark feature on the surface (Figure 4). It’s about the size of the 
state of Colorado—about 500 km in each dimension. This feature has been 
visible from ­ground-based telescopes for the last 100 years; it’s been a very 
stable feature. But in 2009, it disappeared over the course of a couple of 
months. The question is, what could have covered that up? When we go 
back and look at the daily images from MRO, there are dust storms persist-
ing in the area. The storms are actually blowing over the dark feature for 
multiple days, and when the dust clouds finally clear or blow away the dark 
Figure 4a: Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter view of the Propontis feature, August 
2009 (S. Lee/MSSS/NASA/JPL).

180    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
Figure 4b: Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter view of the Propontis feature, Decem-
ber 2009 (S. Lee/MSSS/NASA/JPL).
Figure 5a: Opportunity rover, 2005 (NASA/JPL).

Chapter 10: The Martian    181
feature is essentially gone. That leads to the conclusion that some dust has 
settled down onto the surface. The dust is bright compared to the darker 
surface, and you’ve just covered it with a very thin amount of dust. That 
essentially erases the difference in the reflectivity of the dark feature and 
the brighter surrounding surface. What that also says is that even though 
you have these big dust storms, all they’re doing is moving a thin veneer of 
dust around—they’re not actually burying the surface deeply. We’re prob-
ably talking about a fraction of a human hair thickness of material being 
deposited, not meters or even millimeters of dust.
Here is an example of how this process works. Back in 2005, the 
Opportunity rover took a ­self-portrait by looking down at the spacecraft 
with its ­mast-mounted camera (Figure 5a). The shiny dark solar panels 
that power the spacecraft are still squeaky clean at this point, even though 
more than a year has passed since landing. Two years later, you can see 
that dust has accumulated on the panels (Figure 5b), reducing the power 
generation by about 50 percent. However, you can still see the structure of 
the panels. Subsequently, winds presumably blew much of the dust away 
(Figure 5c). So it’s an episodic process where you get some deposition, and 
then sometime later the wind regime has changed, perhaps in direction  
Figure 5b: Opportunity rover, 2007 (NASA/JPL).

182    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
Figure 5c: Opportunity rover, 2008 (NASA/JPL).
Figure 6: Dust devil on Mars (bright cloud). Measurement of the dark shadow 
indicates the dust devil is about 70 m wide and 20 km tall (MSSS/NASA/JPL).

Chapter 10: The Martian    183
or velocity, and it blows the dust away. So it’s very hard to accumulate thick 
dust deposits—thick meaning millimeters or more. Substantial deposits 
probably take hundreds or thousands of years to accumulate.
Now we get into one of the processes that came as a surprise. Once we 
were able to operate landers or rovers on the surface for a long enough period, 
we actually saw that during some parts of the year dust devils sweep across 
the surface (Figure 6). These are very localized (tens to a few hundred meters 
wide), but if one of these dust devils goes right over the lander or the rover, 
it can clean the spacecraft off. The reason that Spirit and Opportunity lasted 
as long as they did (many years longer than their ­90-day design lifetime), is 
that dust was deposited at a gradual rate, and then all of a sudden a dust devil 
passed over the spacecraft and removed most of the accumulated dust.
Remember the Pathfinder lander that Mark Watney dug up to scav-
enge the electronics from? This spacecraft landed back in 1997. MRO has 
imaged the landing site several times in the past ten years, and the space-
craft is still clearly visible sitting there on the surface. So obviously it’s 
not been buried in the ­20-ish years since the spacecraft landed. It’s gotten 
brighter because of the dust sort of mantling it, but it’s certainly not bur-
ied! Another example going back even further is the Viking missions which 
landed in 1976. MRO “sees” both Vikings still visible on the surface. Both 
landers are clearly “unburied” on the surface!
How realistic are the landscapes that they depict in the film with what 
Mars actually looks like on the surface?
One thing that’s dealt with well in the movie are the various terrains 
that Mark Watney has to traverse. He needs to reach the ­already-landed 
­Ares-IV MAV in Schiaparelli Crater, about 3200 km and a ­60-day-drive 
away. So how realistic is it to have these very, very rough knobs and mesa 
and buttes on the surface of Mars (Figure 7a)? In fact, the movie actually 
tried to recreate the locales pretty well. Comparing a shot from the movie 
with a view of the Curiosity rover’s exploration site in Gale Crater (Figure 
7b), and allowing for artistic license, the resemblance is striking.
However, much of Mars is covered with fine sediments and craters, 
making a straight drive very difficult. But when he gets to areas like the 
walls of craters that are actually very steep, or areas with a lot of relief and 
very rugged with sharp features, Watney seems to slow down and become 
more cautious. Though speeding across Mars in the dark of night is down-
right crazy!
Now let’s get to the part of the film that everyone remembers. What 
about Mark Watney becoming a potato farmer to feed himself?
Another one of the key story threads of this movie was Watney’s cre-
ativity to find a solution to stretching his food supply before he starved to 

184    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
death. Being an expert botanist, he devised a plan to grow potatoes start-
ing with those brought from Earth as “fresh” treats. He converted part of 
the HAB to a greenhouse, carried in buckets of Mars regolith from out-
side to act as soil, fertilize it with human waste, plant the eye sections from 
the fresh potatoes, then harvest, replant and eat, and so on. And he came 
up with a way to use the hydrogen and oxygen in the atmosphere and 
Figure 7a: Background terrain featured in The Martian (20th Century-Fox).
Figure 7b: Curiosity rover view of nearby Martian landscape (MSS/NASA/JPL).

Chapter 10: The Martian    185
hydrazine rocket fuel from tanks in the discarded section of the MAV to 
make water so he could irrigate his crop.
In 2014, MRO made observations from orbit using an infrared spec-
trometer, which can give you an idea of the composition of the surface. 
And it flew over some areas that appear to be ephemeral water flows, possi-
bly from subsurface ice or brine which may occasionally warm up enough 
to briefly wet the surface. This research team found very distinct spectral 
features with the signature of sodium, magnesium, or calcium perchlorate. 
The Mars Phoenix, which landed in northern artic, detected perchlorates 
when regolith samples were analyzed.
On Earth, we have a few examples of surfaces that are rich in per-
chlorate. One such area in Antarctica is called Don Juan Pond. Strangely 
enough, even though it’s located in one of the coldest spots on our planet, 
this pond stays liquid throughout the year. When field teams examined this 
area, high concentrations of perchlorates were detected in the liquid water. 
The resulting brine has a depressed freezing point, so the pond doesn’t 
freeze. As far as the movie goes, the unfortunate aspect about perchlorates 
is its toxicity for most biology, including plants and humans. On Earth, the 
adage is that any place that you find liquid water, you find at least algae 
or bacteria—you find life. It goes ­hand-in-hand. Don Juan Pond, however, 
supports little if any biology….
So, we’ve discovered that perchlorates do exist on the surface of Mars. 
They may exist at low levels over much of the planet. They’re actually caused 
by a little bit of precipitation of water vapor in the atmosphere. That makes 
it much less plausible that Mark Watney could actually grow potatoes in 
the Martian regolith. If there are perchlorates at the Ares III site, it would 
certainly hinder the growth of Watney’s potato plants. In defense of Andy 
Weir, author of The Martian, the existence of perchlorates was discovered 
well after the book was written and the movie was made. So you can’t hold 
that against them. Mars threw them a curve ball!
So given everything you’ve said so far, what’s your final assessment of 
the film?
I started out by saying I hated the movie because of the “gotchas” of 
the “sandstorm fantasy” and the existence of perchlorates in the regolith. 
The second time I went to see it, I came to appreciate this was fiction and 
not a documentary. Finally, I could just sit back and enjoy the creativity 
all the characters expended in overcoming the numerous hurdles Watney 
faced. With the exception of the “gotchas,” much of the story is within the 
realm of possibility. The technology they’re using is not necessarily some-
thing that we currently have “on the shelf” in terms of spacecraft or mission 
capabilities, but it’s not “500 years in the future technology” either. It’s the 

186    The Science of Sci-Fi Cinema
type of thing you can imagine existing in several decades, given sustained 
resources to design and construct (i.e., if Congress and the White House 
are 100 percent behind the program). Also, the many solutions Watney cre-
ated, and the rigors of surviving in the hostile environment of Mars—those 
are plausible. The movie has lots of reality spread throughout. Some aspects 
are pure fantasy, but there absolutely had to be a plot device that would 
require the crew to depart Mars in a big hurry. Probably the most plausible 
event would be a solar flare, where you had to take off from the surface and 
get into the “mothership”—the Hermes had a radiation shelter. But that’s 
also the type of thing that’s not visually amazing, nor would it make for a 
really suspenseful “let’s ­get-out-of-here” moment. Having said all that, The 
Martian was a very enjoyable movie. Well done!

187
About the Contributors
Nicole L. Garneau is a taste scientist and public speaker. Her formal training in 
genetics and microbiology led her to the Denver Museum of Nature & Science 
where she served as the Curator of Human Health and the director of the Genet-
ics of Taste Lab from 2009 to 2019. She is the founder of three companies related to 
her work studying taste science and is a keynote speaker, ­team-building consultant, 
and advocate for equality in science.
Roger K. Green is general editor of The New Polis and a senior lecturer in the 
English Department at Metropolitan State University of Denver. He is the author 
of A Transatlantic Political Theology of Psychedelic Aesthetics: Enchanted Citizens.
Charles Hoge is a scholar of monstrosity, dark folklore and Victorian culture. He 
teaches at Metropolitan State University of Denver, and has published on ludology 
in Doctor Who fanfiction (Transformative Works and Cultures), medieval influences 
in I Am Legend (Reading Richard Matheson: A Critical Survey), phantom dogs in 
Under the Volcano (Malcolm Lowry’s Poetics in Space) and how the dodo’s extinction 
haunts 18th century England’s literary culture (University of Toronto Quarterly).
Steven Lee is a space scientist in the Experiences & Partnerships division at the 
Denver Museum of Nature & Science, and is a senior research scientist at the Space 
Science Institute in Boulder, Colorado. He received a Ph.D. in planetary geology 
from Cornell University. His research focuses on the interaction between the sur-
face and atmosphere of Mars—primarily by mapping the patterns of ­wind-blown 
dust deposits across the planet utilizing spacecraft observations.
Andrew J. Pantos is an associate professor in the English department at Metropol-
itan State University Denver. He is a sociolinguist whose research and publications 
focus on language attitudes and cognitive processing, identity, discourse, sociopho-
netics, forensic linguistics, and gender and sexuality. He regularly teaches a number 
of courses, including phonetics, semantics, anthropological linguistics, language 
and society, morphology and syntax, history of English, and analyzing English.
Naomi Pequette is a space science experience developer at the Denver Museum of 
Nature & Science. She connects all ages to the latest space science research through 
innovative exhibits, engaging lectures, demonstrations, and live planetarium 
shows. She holds a BS in physics and astrophysics from the University of Denver 
and is a ­four-time graduate of Starfleet Academy, the temporal extension program.

188    About the Contributors
Vincent Piturro is a professor of film and media studies at Metropolitan State Uni-
versity of Denver and holds a Ph.D. in comparative literature. His areas of study 
include Westerns, science fiction, documentaries, Italian cinema, film history. 
He hosts an annual Science Fiction Film Series in conjunction with the Denver 
Museum of Nature and Science and the Denver Film Society. He also writes the 
film review column for a local newspaper, The Front Porch.
Joseph Sertich is the Curator of Dinosaurs at the Denver Museum of Nature & Sci-
ence where his research focuses on dinosaur ecosystems. His ­field-based work is 
divided between the southern hemisphere and western North America. He is one 
of the primary researchers on the Madagascar Paleontology Project and works on 
other Cretaceous fossils in Africa, including Kenya and Egypt. In North America, 
he leads the Laramidia Project, working to uncover dinosaurs in the Cretaceous of 
Utah, New Mexico, and Colorado.
Jeffrey T. Stephenson has worked at the Denver Museum of Nature & Science for 
over 30 years as a collections manager, first for the Education Collections and then 
for the Zoology Research Collections. His work in zoology encompasses both 
invertebrate and vertebrate fields, mostly with insects, arachnids, mammals, birds, 
and parasites. He has also volunteered in paleontological and archaeological field-
work and lab work, and he conducts experimental archaeology in ancient Egyp-
tian studies.
Ka Chun Yu is a research astronomer and science communicator at the Denver 
Museum of Nature & Science. His research has included studying how digital 
planetariums can be used effectively for astronomy education, as well as observa-
tional star formation. He regularly gives live presentations about space sciences 
to the general public, has developed planetarium software to visualize the known 
universe, produced movies for planetariums, and helped develop space science 
museum exhibits.

189
Bibliography
Allen, David. “‘King Kong’ by Max Steiner (1933) and James Newton Howard (2005):  
A Comparison of Scores and Contexts.” davidallencomposer.com. February 7, 2014, 
accessed December 26, 2019. https://davidallencomposer.com/blog/king-kong-max- 
steiner-james-newton-howard-comparison#cite-4.
Brown, Royal S. Overtones and Undertones: Reading Film Music. Berkeley: University of Cal-
ifornia Press, 1994.
Cohen, Jeffrey Jerome, ed. Monster Theory: Reading Culture. Minneapolis: Minnesota Uni-
versity Press, 1996. 
Crichton, Michael. Jurassic Park. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1990. Print.
Crist, Judith. “Note for Abe Lass’ Play Me a Movie.” Liner notes for Play Me a Movie. Com-
posed and Played by Abraham Lass. Asch Records AH 3856, 1971, LP: 1–2. https://folk-
ways-media.si.edu/liner_notes/folkways/FW03856.pdf.
Gilmore, David D. Monsters: Evil Beings, Mythical Beasts, and All Manner of Imaginary Ter-
rors. Philadelphia: Pennsylvania University Press, 2003. Print.
Hone, David. The Tyrannosaur Chronicles: The Biology of the Tyrant Dinosaurs. New York: 
Bloomsbury, 2016. 
Johnston, Keith M. Science Fiction Film: A Critical Introduction. London: Bloomsbury, 2011. 
Print.
Kingsley, Elizabeth. “Jurassic Park.” And You Call Yourself a Scientist! 17 August, 2009. Web.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. The Birth of Tragedy. New York: Penguin, 1993.
O’Brien, Christopher. “Modern Dinosaurs?” OurStrangePlanet.com. 28 May 2017. Web.
Platte, Nathan. Making Music in Selznick’s Hollywood. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017.
Rudwick, Martin J.S. Scenes from Deep Time: Early Pictorial Representations of the Prehis-
toric World. Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1992. Print.
Runtagh, Jordan. “Songs on Trial: 12 Landmark Music Copyright Cases.” Rollingstone.
com. June 8, 2016. Accessed December 26, 2019. https://www.rollingstone.com/politics/ 
politics-lists/songs-on-trial-12-landmark-music-copyright-cases-166396/george- 
harrison-vs-the-chiffons-1976–64089/.
Sanz, Jose Luis. Starring T. Rex! Dinosaur Mythology and Popular Culture. Bloomington: 
Indiana University Press, 2002. 
Schreibman, Myrl A. “On Gone with the Wind, Selznick, and the Art of ‘Mickey Mousing’: 
An Interview with Max Steiner.” Journal of Film and Video 56, No. 1 (2004): 41–50.
Slowik, Michael. “Diegetic Withdrawal and Other Worlds: Film Music Strategies Before 
King Kong, 1927–1933. Cinema Journal 53, No. 1 (2013): 1–25. https://www.jstor.org/
stable/43653633.
Stern, Megan. “Jurassic Park and the Moveable Feast of Science.” Science as Culture 13 No. 3 
(2004): 347–372. Web.
Telotte, J.P. Science Fiction Film. Cambridge University Press, 2001. Print.


191
Index
Adams, Amy  11, 12
Alexa (Amazon)  60
Alien (film)  6, 12, 33, 47, 130, 167, 168, 169, 
170, 172, 173
All Things Must Pass (film)  165
Alphaville (film)  5, 59
Amemiya, Yoji  42
American Gangster (film)  167
Arecibo Message  21, 119
Arecibo Observatory  19
Armstrong, Robert  146, 162
Arrival (film)  7, 11–30, 33, 84, 87, 116, 170, 171
Ashitey, Clare-Hope  74
Asimov, Isaac  4, 71
Asylum (film)  84
"Atmospheres"  57
Attenborough, Richard  125
Atwood, Margaret  83
Avatar (language)  27
Avatar (movie)  28
Back to the Future (I, II, and III)  28
Bailey, Alfred M.  155
Barbarella  5
Barry Lyndon (film)  50
The Battle of Algiers (film)  78
The Beatles  164
Benchley, Peter  123
Bentley, Wes  32
The Birth of Tragedy (book)  162, 166, 189
Black Hawk Down (film)  167
Black Swam (film)  78
Blade Runner 2049 (film)  12
"Blue Danube"  55
The Book of Eli (film)  86
Book of Great Sea-Dragons  143
Bradbury, Ray  4
Brave New World (book)  160
Bridges, Jeff  84
Brown, Royal  163
Burroughs, Edgar Rice  152
Burstyn, Ellen  32
Busey, Jake  32
Cabaret (film)  53
Cabot, Bruce  146
Caine, Michael  31
Casablanca (film)  163
Cast Away (film)  110
Centers for Disease Control (CDC)  108
CGI  36
Chaplin, Charles  3, 147, 148, 150
Chastain, Jessica  31
Chiang, Ted  12
The Chiffons  165
Children of Men (film)  8, 73–83, 86, 87, 128
Chrichton, Michael  125
Chupacabra  156
cinematography  6, 15, 33, 36, 37, 52, 53, 54, 
55, 57, 74, 75, 76, 77, 98, 99, 102, 114,  115, 
116, 125, 128, 168, 170, 171
Citizen Kane (film)  148
Clark, George  154
Clarke, Arthur C.  51, 52, 56, 59
A Clockwork Orange (film)  50
Close Encounters of The Third Kind (film)  5, 
17,  54, 124, 130
Coleman, Loren  156
The Color Purple (film)  124, 130
The Communards  172
Conan Doyle, Arthur  152
Contact  8, 110–122
Cooper, Merian C.  9, 145, 146, 147, 149, 160, 
161
The Cotton Club  164
Cretaceous Cloverly Formation  131
Cuarón, Alfonso  73
Cushing, Paula  156
Cuvier, Georges  154
Cyc  67, 68, 69, 70
Damon, Matt  31, 36, 42, 167, 170, 171
Dark City (film)  6
Darwin, Charles  154
Davies, Marion  148
Davis, Ernest  71
The Day the Earth Stood Still (film)  4, 17, 159, 
168
Debussy, Claude  189
del Toro, Guillermo  73
Denver Film Society  1, 188

192    Index
Denver Museum of Nature and Science  2, 7, 
8, 9, 188
Dern, Laura  125, 126, 140
De Sica, Vittorio  75
Dick, Philip K.  78, 169
Dionysus  161, 162
Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? 
(book)  169
Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde (film)  3
Dr. Strangelove (film)  50
Don Juan Pond  185
"Don't Leave Me This Way"  172
Dothraki  27
Douglas, Kirk  49
The Duelists (film)  168
Dumas, Stéphanie  21
Dunkirk  37
Dutil, Evan  21
Eagle Nebula  117
editing  7, 12, 15, 16, 33, 37, 38, 52, 56, 57, 74, 
76, 77, 84, 87, 88, 89, 98, 99 100, 102, 103, 
115, 116, 125, 128, 135, 170, 171, 172
Edwards, Christopher  44
8 1/2 (film)  59
Eisenstein, Sergei  159
Ellington, Duke  164
E.T. (film)  5, 124, 130
Eyes Wide Shut (film)  50
Facebook  60
Faith, Madness and Spontaneous Human 
Combustion (book)  108
Fantasia (movie)  142
Fellini, Federico  5, 59, 98
Ferris, Pam  83
Figuier, Louis  143
Flaubert, Gustave  164
Forrest Gump  2, 110, 111, 116
Foster, Ben  84
Foster, Jodie  110, 111, 112
The Fountain (film)  78
Fox, Michael J.  110
Frankenstein (book)  139, 140
Frankenstein (film)  3, 67, 139–140
Frankenstein, Dr.  67, 139, 140
Frigs, David  95
Frontiers of Psychology  121
Full Metal Jacket (film)  50
Futureworld (film)  5
Garfield  64
Garneau, Nicole  8, 74, 80–83, 90–96, 100, 
103–109, 187
Gasser, Michael  69
"Gayane Ballet Suite"  57
Giger, H.R.  168
Gilmore, David  138, 189
Gladiator (film)  167
Godard, Jean-Luc  5, 59
The Godfather (film)  124
Godzilla (movie)  4, 151, 156
Goldblum, Jeff  125, 126, 139
Goodfellow, Ian  65
Google  60, 61, 68
Grant, Cary  166
Gravity (film)  73
Green, Eva  84, 86, 91
Green, Roger  9, 159–166, 187
Gyasi, David  32
HAL  52, 53, 57, 58, 59–72, 173
Hallam Foe (film)  84
The Handmaid’s Tale (book)  83
Hannibal (film)  167
Harrison, George  165
Hawkins, Thomas  143
Hayes Code  5, 50, 51, 146, 148, 149
Hearst, William Randolph  148
Hell or High Water (film)  84, 85
Hello Kitty  64
Her  37
"He's So Fine"  165
Hobbes, Thomas  161
Hodgman, Judge John  155, 156
Hoge, Charles  8, 137–144, 187
Hoover, J. Edgar  147
"Hot Stuff"  173
Hubble Space Telescope  174
Hurt, John  111
Huxley, Aldous  160
I, Robot  4
I Wanna Hold Your Hand (movie)  111
"The Iguanodon and The Megalosaur"  143
"The Immigrant"  147
"In the Court of the Crimson King" (song)  76
Iñárritu, Alejandro  73
Incendies (film)  12
Inception (film)  31
Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade (film)  124
Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom 
(film)  124
Insomnia (film)  31
International Academy of Astronautics 
(IAA)  121
Interstellar (film)  7, 13, 31–48, 87, 116, 170, 171
Invasion of the Body Snatchers (film)  4, 59
Ishikawa, Yoji  42
Jakosky, Bruce  44
James, P.D.  74
Jaws (film)  5, 123, 124, 127, 128, 130
Jefferson, Thomas  154
Jeopardy (show)  60
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL)  172
Joffé, Roland  111
Journey to the Center of the Earth (film)  152
Jurassic Park (film)  5, 6, 8, 9, 113, 123–144, 
149, 151, 152

Index    193
Kawin,  Bruce  2
Keaton, Buster  3
Keitel, Harvey  87
The Killing Fields (movie)  111
King Kong (film)  9, 55, 124, 142, 145–166,  
189
Klingon (language)  27
Knight, Charles R.  131, 133
Knight, Wayne  126, 141
Kubrick, Stanley  8, 49–59, 73, 86, 110, 113, 
169, 171
La La Land (film)  84
The Land That Time Forgot (film)  152
Lantieri, Michael  127
Leaping Laelaps  131
Lee, Steven  9, 174–186, 187
Lenat, Douglas  67, 69
Lennon, John  59
Let the Right One In (film)  37
Lewis, Meriwether  154
Lincoln, Abraham  67, 68
Lithgow, John  32
Loch Ness Monster  138, 139, 156
Logan’s Run (film)  5
Lolita (film)  50
The Lost World (film)  152
The Louisiana Purchase  154
Lucas, George  124, 168
Lumière Brothers  150
"Lux Aeterna"  57
Mack, Ronnie  165
MacKenzie, David  32, 84, 85, 86, 89
Mad Max (movie)  111
Mann, Anthony  49
Marcus, Gary  71
Mariner 9  174
Mars Climate Orbiter  174
Mars Global Surveyor  177
Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter  176, 179, 180
Martin, John  143
The Martian (movie)  9, 13, 42, 43, 48, 167– 
186
The Martian Chronicles  4
The Matrix  6, 33, 71, 78, 86
Mazzello, Joseph  137
McConaughey, Matthew  31
McGregor, Ewan  84, 86, 94
McKay, Chris  44
Mean Streets (film)  87
Mecca, Dan  89
Mèliés, George  3, 16, 54
Memento  31
METEOSTAT-7  176
METI  21
Metropolis (film)  3, 4, 129, 169
Metropolitan State University of Denver  7, 
9, 187, 188
Michelangelo  76, 83
Microsoft  60
Miller, George  111
Mise-en-scène  6, 14, 15, 33, 35, 37, 52, 55, 57, 
74, 75, 76, 77, 87, 98, 99, 102, 113, 115, 116, 
125, 126, 127, 168, 169, 170, 171
Moby Dick (book)  98
Monsters (film)  86
Monsters: Evil Beings (book)  138, 189
Moon (film)  78
Moonlight (film)  84
Moore, Julianne  74
Morse, David  112
Mother! (fim)  78
"My Sweet Lord"  165
Mythical Beasts (book)  138, 189
National Science Foundation  118
Neill, Sam  125, 126, 137
Nietzsche, Friederich  56, 57, 58, 161, 162, 166, 
189
A Night to Remember (film)  53
Nolan, Christopher  31, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 
39, 171
Nolan, Jonathan  31, 36
O'Brien, Willis  142, 150
Ohkita, Takaya  42
Ojiafor, Chiwetel  172
Oliver! (movie)  59
Olsen, Mark  101
One Million Years B.C. (movie)  142
Opportunity (Mars Rover)  178, 180, 181, 182, 
183
Ostrom, John  131, 135
Owen, Clive  73, 74, 80
Pan’s Labryinth  73
Parasitology & Vector Biology (book)  104
Pequette, Naomi  8, 117–122, 187
Perfect Sense  8, 84–96
Pi (film)  78
Picasso, Pablo  104
Pine, Chris  84
Pink Floyd  76
Piturro, Vincent  1–9, 11–16, 31–39,  49–59, 
73–80, 84–90, 97–103, 110–116, 123–131, 
145–152, 167–174, 188
Plane Crazy (film)  160
Planet of the Apes  5, 17, 151
Planetary Encircling Dust Event (PEDE)  177, 
178
The Polar Express (film)  110
Pontecorvo, Gillo  75, 78
The Prestige (film)  31
Primer (film)  97
The Prisoner of Azkaban (film)  73
Prisoners (film)  12
Project Phoenix  118, 119, 120
Proxima Centauri  117
Psycho (film)  50, 51

194    Index
Quenya (language)  27
Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generator 
(RTG)  172
Raiders of the Lost Ark (film)  124
Rain, Douglas  60
Reed, Carol  59
Renner, Jeremy  12
Renoir, Jean  75
"Requiem"  57
Requiem for a Dream (film)  78, 87
Richards, Ariana  137
The Road (film)  86
Robin Hood (film)  167
Robocop  6
The Rocky Horror Picture Show (film)  159
Roma (film)  73, 74, 80
Romancing the Stone (film)  111
Russell, Rosalind  166
Sagan, Carl  8, 18, 111, 112, 113, 114, 116
Salammbô  164
Sapir-Whorf Hypothesis  29
Satie, Erik  164
Saving Private Ryan (film)  163
Schoenberg, Arnold  78
"The Sea Dragons, as They Lived"  143
Selznick, David O.  145, 146
Sensory Perception: Mind & Matter (book)  95
"The Sentinel"  51
Sertich, Joe  8, 131–137, 187
SETI (Search for Extra Terrestrial 
Intelligence)  17, 111, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122
The Shape of Water (film)  73
The Shining (film)  50
Shlens, Jonathon  65
Sicario (film)  12
Skerrit, Tom  111, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122
Smith, Linda  69
Snowpiercer (film)  86
Solaris (film)  78
sound  7, 12, 15, 21, 33, 52, 56, 57, 74, 77, 90, 
98, 99, 100, 116, 125, 126, 127, 128, 146, 149, 
159, 160, 161, 170, 172
Soylent Green  5
Spartacus  49
Stalling, Carl  160
Star Trek  2, 5, 17, 46, 47, 54, 169
Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home (film)  17
Star Trek: The Motion Picture (film)  17
Star Wars  2, 5, 17, 124, 126, 128
Steiner, Max  160, 166, 189
The Stepford Wives  5
Stephenson, Jeffrey  9, 152–159, 188
The Sugarland Express (movie)  127
Summer, Donna  173
Szegedy, Christian  65
The Terminator  6
Thelma and Lousie (film)  167
Theory of Harmony (book)  163
The Thirteenth Floor  6
Thorne, Kip  31
Thus Spoke Zarathustra (book)  56, 58
Tom and Jerry (cartoon)  64
"A Trip to the Moon"  3, 16, 150
20,000 Leagues Under the Sea  3
2001: A Space Odyssey  6, 8, 49–72, 85, 113, 116, 
168, 173
Unsworth, Geoffrey  53
Upstream Color  8, 87, 97–109, 128
Used Cars (movie)  111
The Valley of the Gwangi (movie)  142
Varnum, Michael  121
Verne, Jules  3, 152
Very Large Array (VLA)  114, 120
Veverka, Joe  174
Viking 1 & 2 (spacecraft)  174, 183
Villenueve, Denis  12, 13, 15, 102, 171
Walden (book)  101, 109
Wall-E (movie)  47, 86
Weaver, Sigourney  111, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122
Wells, H.G.  6
Westworld (HBO series)  31
Westworld (movie)  5
What Lies Beneath (movie)  110
Who Framed Roger Rabbit? (movie)  110, 111, 
116
Williams, John  127
Withey, Brit  1
World Health Organization (WHO)  81, 107, 
108
Wray, Fay  161
Y tu mama Tambien (film)  73
Young Adam (film)  84
Yu, Ka Chun  7, 8, 9, 16–22, 39–48, 59–72, 
174–186, 188
Zardoz (film)  5
Zemeckis, Robert  8, 110–116

