
T
 ip, Book 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

om mers 
001( 
Building the E- 
Second Edition 
Empire 
Steffano Korper 
Co-founder of the E-Commerce Program 
Dallas, Texas 
Juanita Ellis 
Co-founder of the E-Commerce Program 
Los Angeles, California 
ACADEMIC 
PRESS 
A HARCOURT SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COMPANY 
San Diego San Francisco New York Boston London Sydney Tokyo 

This book is printed on acid-flee paper. Q 
Copyright 9 2001 by Academic Press 
All rights reserved. 
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or 
by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or 
any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing 
from the publisher. 
Requests for permission to make copies of any part of the work should be 
mailed to: Permissions Department, Harcourt, Inc., 6277 Sea Harbor Drive, 
Orlando, Florida, 32887-6777. 
All brand names and product names are trademarks or registered trademarks 
of their respective companies. 
ACADEMIC PRESS 
A Harcourt Science and Technology Company 
525 B Street, Suite 1900, San Diego, CA 92101-4495, USA 
http://www.academicpress.com 
Academic Press 
Harcourt Place, 32 Jamestown Road, London NW1 7BY, UK 
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 00-108252 
International Standard Book Number: 0-12-421161-5 
Printed in the United States of America 
00 01 02 03 04 CO 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 

Contents 
9 
11 
Preface 
Setting the Vision 
Market Predictions 
Defining Vision 
Traditional Business Vision vs. E-Vision 
Rethink Your Revenue 
Reengineer Your Business 
Empower Your Customers 
Capture Customer Service 
Go Global 
Business Model Basics 
Consumer-to-Consumer 
Business-to-Consumer 
Business-to-Business 
Know Your Customers 
Know Where to Start 
Who Is on the Web? 
The Crayon Crawlers 
The Transient Teens 
Baby Boomers Are Booming 
xiii 
1 
1 
3 
5 
6 
8 
8 
10 
10 
10 
11 
12 
14 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
27 

vi 
Contents 
m 
m 
Income, Race, and the Digital Divide 
Gender Online 
Geography Online 
Speaking the Global Language 
Web Gurus Are Already Global 
Access Issues 
Targeting the Best Shoppers 
Give Them What They Want 
Marketing and Branding 
Know What You're Up Against 
Plan for Acquisition Costs 
Search Engines and Directories 
Search Engines 
Directories 
Advertising Banners 
Online Classified Advertisements 
Message Boards 
E-Mail Newsletters 
Links on Other Web Sites 
Newsgroups 
Discussion Lists 
Traditional Media 
Press Releases 
Just Give It Away! 
Branding for Success 
Marketing and Advertising Agencies 
First Impressions May Be Everlasting 
Focus on Essentials 
Easy Is Everything: Use Wide, Consistent Site Design 
Present Interior and Exterior Links Well 
Reliability Counts 
Tackle Your Overall Look 
27 
28 
29 
30 
32 
35 
36 
37 
41 
42 
44 
45 
47 
49 
51 
54 
54 
55 
57 
58 
58 
59 
60 
61 
62 
63 
67 
69 
70 
72 
72 
73 

Contents 
vii 
5~ 
Use Graphics and Layouts Well 
Keep Text Readable 
Make Fonts Enhance a Site, Not Detract from It 
Make Your Pages Easy to Skim and Revisit 
Make Your Visitors Feel Confident 
Use Your Resources: Professional Design Agencies 
Revisit Your Vision Statement and Goals 
Keep Your Customers 
Service with a Smile 
Quality, Service, Cleanliness 
The Customer Is Always Right 
Thank You, Please Come Again 
An Ounce of Prevention 
Be Neighborly: Chat and Discuss with Your Customers 
Would You Like Fries with That? 
Keep Your Hands above the Table 
Personalize for Better Service 
Customers Now Control the Relationship 
6. Fulfillment Channels That Work 
Why Does Fulfillment Seem So Difficult Today? 
Know Your Customers' Expectations 
Know Your Shipping Options 
Shipping and Your Bottom Line 
Can Not Shipping Be an Option? 
What Are My Other Business-to-Business Shipping Options? 
Tackle Other E-Fulfillment Issues 
Escrows 
Credit Rating Companies 
Engage New Technology 
Find E-Fulfillment Solutions 
E-Fulfillment Supply-Chain Management 
Plan for Spikes 
76 
77 
78 
78 
79 
80 
82 
83 
84 
88 
91 
92 
95 
96 
97 
98 
101 
102 
103 
104 
].06 
]O8 
11o 
111 
112 
]]4 
114 
115 
]]6 
]]6 
]]8 
].2] 

viii 
m 
Contents 
Choose Your Payment Systems 
Payment System Categories 
Micropayments 
Smart Cards 
Electronic Billing 
Credit Cards: Web Leaders in Payment Systems 
Enable Electronic Payments 
Electronic Wallet 
Merchant Register 
Internet Payment Service 
Financial Institutions 
Implementing Credit Card Verification 
Ensure Online Transaction Security 
Additional Security: The Secure Sockets Layer 
Help Customers Trust You 
125 
126 
128 
131 
133 
134 
136 
136 
137 
137 
138 
140 
140 
142 
143 
8. Know Your Infrastructure 
Overview of Components 
Web Clients 
Web Server Software 
Commerce Server Software 
Selling Products 
Selling Digital Content 
Order Tracking 
Customer Registration 
Content Management 
Connectivity Tools 
Back-End Systems 
Tuning and Load Balancing 
Clustering 
Replication 
Routers 
Network Architecture 
147 
]47 
150 
150 
151 
152 
152 
155 
156 
158 
159 
159 
161 
162 
163 
163 
164 

Contents 
Internet 
Intranet 
Extranet 
Architecture Security 
11 Selecting the Right Commerce Package 
Determining Your Needs 
What Products and Services Are You Providing 
on the Internet? 
What Are Your Requirements? 
What Does Your Current Technology Landscape Look Like? 
When Do You Need Your Site Up and Running? 
Who Are Your Competitors? 
Evaluate Vendor Solutions 
BroadVision 
OpenMarket 
Ariba and CommerceOne 
ICat 
MerchandiZer 
IBM HomePage Creator 
Platforms Supported and Integration Tools 
Ease of Modifications and Extensions 
Scalability 
Partners 
Customer Base 
A Final Reminder before You Buy 
10. Secure Your Investment: Security 
Threats and Solutions 
Network Threats 
Port Entrance 
Password Cracking 
E-Mail Spoofing 
165 
166 
166 
167 
169 
170 
170 
172 
172 
173 
173 
174 
174 
176 
178 
180 
181 
182 
184 
185 
186 
186 
187 
188 
189 
19] 
191 
]91 
192 

x 
Contents 
Virus Intrusion 
192 
Other Hacker Attacks 
193 
Security Policies and Procedures 
194 
User-Based Security 
194 
Administrator-Based Security 
195 
Physical Server Security 
196 
Basic Operating System Security 
196 
Internet and Port Security 
197 
Security for Servers with Dial-In Access 
198 
Virus Protection Software Security 
198 
Commerce Application Security 
198 
Separating Your Net from the Net: Firewalls and Proxy Servers 199 
Firewalls 
199 
Proxy Servers 
201 
Encryption 
203 
Symmetric Key Encryption 
204 
Asymmetric Key Encryption 
204 
Encryption and Decryption Algorithms 
204 
Pretty Good Privacy 
205 
Authentication and Access Control 
206 
Digital Signatures for Authentication 
206 
Viruses 
207 
Warning Signs 
207 
How a Virus Works 
207 
Keeping Them Out 
208 
Auditing an Attack 
209 
CERT 
210 
11. Get Ready for Wireless! 
From E-Commerce to M-Commerce 
How Many Customers? How Soon Will This Happen? 
The Devices... Now, Then, and in the Future 
Mobile Phones and PDAs 
211 
212 
213 
213 
215 

Contents 
xi 
What's Available Now in E-Commerce? 
What Will Be on the Screen? 
Wireless Portals 
Who Are the Players? Carriers vs. Internet Service Providers 
What Will Happen? 
International Perspective 
Customer Satisfaction 
Wireless Internet Convergence: Merging Technologies 
Advancing M-Commerce Applications 
Case Study: Year 2005 
Make Your Plans 
Note to Readers 
216 
216 
217 
219 
220 
221 
223 
224 
226 
228 
228 
228 
12. Commit to Never-Ending Improvement 
The Dell Story 
The eBay Story 
The Amazon Story 
The ]CPenney Story 
The Bid.com Story 
Think! Think! Think! What's Next 
Read 
Research the Trends 
Invest in Change That Improves Access to 
Your Goods and Services 
Invest in Change That Adds Value to Your Goods and Services 
Create Barriers to Entry for Subsequent Competitors 
Network! 
231 
231 
232 
233 
233 
234 
234 
235 
236 
238 
238 
238 
238 
Index 
241 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Preface 
The past two years has seen dramatic movement in e-commerce. We 
saw the stock market going up and crashing down. We saw thousands of 
companies being funded by venture capitalists and going public only to 
discover "it just did not work." We saw companies spend vast amounts 
of money to get e-commerce sites up and running only to not realize a 
profit or even expect profits in the near future. With all of these scenar- 
ios, e-commerce may seem like a short-lived trend. Think again! The 
numbers for goods and services selling online are increasing every day. 
E-commerce is here to stay and will continue to change the way we do 
business. 
We are now in the second wave, where it is even more critical to 
understand e-commerce and the business aspects and technology 
required to implement a successful e-commerce solution. The first edi- 
tion focused on the main requirements needed to build a Web presence: 
marketing and sales, vendor selection, and security. What makes the sec- 
ond edition so valuable is that we keep that focus, but now have data to 
back it up. When we first started working with companies to get online, 
it was all new. The main goal was to get up and running before the com- 
petition did. Now, through experience, we know what worked and did 
not work in this industry. The idea "if you build it, they will come;' for 
example, has not worked. We saw companies that were successful in the 
first wave go downhill because they neglected standard business prac- 
tices such as great customer service, strong fulfillment channels, and tar- 
get marketing to the right customers. In this edition we have expanded 
on these areas. Currently only a handful of successful companies have 
flourished in doing business on the Web, including large corporations 
xiii 

xiv 
Preface 
such as Dell Computer and Cisco, and Web-based companies such as 
e-Bay and Amazon. What made these companies leaders, and what 
drove their success? In this book, we tell you. 
The book will be filled with stories and case studies of successful 
e-commerce start-ups and individuals that have conquered this indus- 
try. Having worked with top executives from companies such as Xerox, 
SW Bell, Alcatel, and Fujitsu, we have direct insights to how these large 
corporations have moved forward. In addition, we have provided guid- 
ance to vast audiences as guests on both local and nationwide radio 
shows, including CNN, DayBreak USA, Computer Daze, and Business 
Day, as well as interviews in magazines such Entrepreneur Magazine. 
In this book, we will guide you through the key elements of being 
successful online. Think of this book as The E-Commerce Cookbook. 
First, you find out what the right ingredients are. Then you combine the 
right amounts of each ingredient. Once the entr6e is complete, you 
improve the appearance with garnish. While e-commerce might not be 
as straightforward as a four-star dinner, there are key ingredients that 
will start you well on your way. Other companies have been successful in 
e-commerce, why can't you? 

Setting the Vision 
We have seen e-commerce go through the first wave, with thousands 
of new start-ups and companies going online. The first wave was the 
business to consumer market. The second wave was the business to busi- 
ness market. Venture capitalists invested heavily in everything with an E. 
People started investing based on speculation. Companies went public 
without a solid management team and products that were based partially 
on hype. We had not seen such a movement. It was like the gold rush. 
You may think e-commerce was just a phase with all of the changes 
we have seen in the last two years. There were ups and downs in the mar- 
ket, companies filed bankruptcy and venture capitalists pulled back 
from investments. If you think about it, over 90 percent of new non 
e-businesses fail in the first year. We knew this would happen; it was just 
of question of when this shakeout would occur. 
E-commerce will remain as a medium to sell products, services, and 
content over the Internet. Both small and large corporations will extend 
their enterprises using this Internet medium. The key to the jackpot: Do 
it right, right now. Companies that have done it right have a vision of 
where to begin, but no vision that would cap their end potential. Like 
the market, their sight is infinite. They already are ahead. 
Market Predictions 
Two years ago, Forrester Research, the leading independent Inter- 
net firm, released a report containing its first financial estimate for 

2 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
e-commerce. "Internet commerce is transforming the way enterprises 
do business .... By 2002, the value of goods and services traded between 
companies over the Internet will represent 1 percent of the global econ- 
omy (approximately $317 billion)?' 
In 1999, the same research firm increased its earlier estimate for 
Internet trade fourfold to $1.3 trillion. 
Enter the year 2000, and generally accepted estimates top $2.2 tril- 
lion by 2003. 
This year, International Data Corp. predicts the U.S. online popula- 
tion will reach 137 million~still less than 50 percent of the nation's 
population. 
U.S. online retail revenues will hit $38.8 billion, up from $20.3 bil- 
lion in 1999, Forrester predicts. About 11 million U.S. households will 
make their first online purchase this year, bringing this country's total 
online shopping population to 28.4 million households. 
But the online growth isn't just in our own backyard. Forrester pre- 
dicts that Latin America will see the world's largest percentage growth in 
annual Internet advertising spending~increasing 137 percent to $121 
million. Worldwide Internet advertising, which hit $3.3 billion in 1999, 
will almost double to $6.5 billion in 2000. 
Considering such statistics, it's clear why respected research and 
development firms now support predictions of a radical new market- 
place without physical or fiscal limits. 
Travel Planning 
Even in existing e-commerce markets, the biggest players and ideas 
may yet be under the surface. Four years ago, showing up at the airport 
without the old book of check-sized coupons meant serious hassles. 
Then the e-ticket was born. Show up with your driver's license or pass- 
port, and the airline remembers your ticket for you. 
The advent of the e-ticket made online ticketing a snap. Suddenly, 
every airline had seek-and-find Web sites where consumers could 
browse the weekly specials, peek through travel news and destinations, 
and then shop for the best fares or itineraries, often comparing several 

Setting the Vision 
3 
airlines and departure and destination points before arriving at their 
best possible choice. 
Internet travel provides a prime example of the exponential rate at 
which business can move from bricks-and-mortar to online, adding 
value to the transaction with the kind of speed, service, and 24-hour 
convenience available only online. 
News released by Forrester Research in April proved how, even after 
a good percentage of a market's Internet potential has been tapped, 
room for considerable growth remains. On April 17, Forrester 
announced that companies eager to save travel and processing costs 
would start requiring their employees to make travel purchases via Web- 
based corporate booking engines. 
"In 2000, managed travel will already account for 57 percent of the 
$4.9 billion businesses spend on travel online,' said Henry H. 
Harteveldt, senior analyst at Forrester. "By 2004, however, corporate 
policy will dictate the spending of 77 percent of the $20.3 billion of 
business travel booked online." 
Forrester further predicted that companies with the largest travel 
budgets would be the first to shift their travel buying online through the 
installation of a booking engine, with 70 percent of Fortune 1,000 com- 
panies making the migration by 2002. Smaller firms will move their 
business travel online as well, as secondary companies began to buy 
seats on high-volume routes in bulk then to resell those seats at a 
markup to small businesses. 
In the end, the online ticketing concept will have exploded into a 
tremendous marketplace servicing both consumers and businesses, 
where many airlines and agencies compete for market share. 
Defining Vision 
It's 11 P.M., and in thousands of dimly lit bars spread throughout 
hundreds of cities, great ideas for the world's best companies are making 
their debuts on cocktail napkins. The idea makers get excited~worked 
up, even~as the profound natures of their napkins grow in the neon 
glow. They share their napkins with Joe the bartender and call over their 
billiard-playing friends before folding the napkin carefully and tucking 
it in their pockets. 

4 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
The fated napkin may even make it to the office the next day, and 
the idea could spark similar genius around the water cooler. It gets 
minds churning. It rallies people to listen, to think, and to evaluate their 
own ideas. Soon, everyone is offering input on how the idea on that 
napkin could found the next eBay or Amazon.com. If the creator does 
nothing, then the idea is worth nothing more than the thin, easily dis- 
solved tissue it's printed on. But, if the creator of that napkin takes 
action, then that napkin could become a vision. 
A vision should establish an excitement and tone for an entire 
e-venture. The vision must be flexible~good e-commerce companies 
are in a state of constant flux, always wary of competition and worried 
about growing stale in a nebulous marketplace. 
A vision should establish 
an excitement and tone for an 
entire e-venture. 
So what happens if you don't have a collection of ideas on crumpled 
napkins? Do you have the will for an idea, but nothing seems to materi- 
alize? If so, then allow us to suggest the following simple prescription for 
ingenuity: 
1. Take a piece ofpaper. Fold it in half, four ways, six ways~it doesn't 
matter. Put this paper in your wallet, and always carry a pen. 
2. Write down every concept or idea that someone tells you is not pos- 
sible. If it simply cannot be done according to one person, then 
it's another person's e-commerce solution. 
3. Constantly suggest small changes. If you suggest a change, and the 
feedback to that change is reluctant~"But we've always done it 
this way"~then write your suggestion down. You have an 
e-commerce solution. 
4. Write down everything that frustrates you~everything that takes a 
little bit more of your time than it should. Americans are moti- 
vated by convenience. They have more money than time and will 
gladly spend the former to obtain more of the latter. For instance, 
had you thought, "I hate stopping for directions,' you might have 

Setting the Vision 
5 
been the first to suggest putting Global Positioning System navi- 
gational tools in your everyday Mercedes. 
Traditional Business Vision vs. E-Vision 
In the end, the opportunity for e-commerce lies in the seemingly 
impossible. In that regard, developing an ingenious e-commerce idea is 
not unlike developing an ingenious idea for a neighborhood bricks- 
and-mortar business. 
In the end, the opportunity 
for e-commerce lies in the 
seemingly impossible. 
In fact, you're making a mistake if you define e-commerce as a dif- 
ferent type of business. Instead, it's the same business that's simply 
based on different tools. Instead of paper and personal time, you use 
electronics and connectivity. In fact, when people ask us, "What is 
e-commerce?" we like to say: "E-commerce is lying on the beach, having 
a cocktail and making boatloads of money." 
(This is figurative, of course. Like any business, successful 
e-commerce ventures are built, figuratively, from the ground up. They 
aren't get-rich-quick schemes, they're get-rich-slowly schemes.) 
Back to our happy e-vacationer: 
The beach you're lying on represents how e-commerce operates 
independent of geography and can serve customers anywhere in 
the world from anywhere in the world. 
The cocktail in your hand represents a dynamic switch in man- 
power. The goal is total automation~you don't do the work, 
computer systems do it. Or, at least, they do as much as possible. 
The boatload of money, well, that's the reason you're reading, isn't 
it? If your process is optimized, then you will make money. You 
will add value to transactions by your fully automated informa- 
tion, product, delivery, and service systems. 

6 
THE E-COMMERs 
BOOK 
Selling on the Internet is not just creating a Web site and thinking, 
"If I build it, they will come." Companies jumping on the next wave of 
marketing and sales via e-commerce think outside the box. If they have 
a current business model, they throw it out and invent a new one. If they 
lack a business model, they focus entirely on a unique selling point~a 
single strategy unique only to them that gets the attention of a very spe- 
cific client pool and can capitalize heavily on the needs of that pool. 
Those companies that have been most successful and realized the 
highest return on investment have approached e-commerce with a spe- 
cific strategy for building clients, inventory, and revenue. They reengineer 
their business goals to reflect new revenue streams, they empower cus- 
tomers and provide exceptional customer service, and they consider the 
implications of joining the first truly global marketplace and economy. 
At the same time, these companies don't see e-commerce as an over- 
whelmingly magical, mystical entity. They just see it as a different way of 
doing business or as a different business tool. 
Remember, as you mull over your vision, using e-commerce as a tool 
can be very simple. It can be a small way of using e-mail to reach potential 
customers and clients, or it can be a huge sophisticated payment system. 
Regardless of how prepared you are to use e-commerce as a tool, 
concentrating on five strategies to selling online can help unfold your 
napkin~and your vision~into a company that can truly take advan- 
tage of new methods of doing business. 
Rethink Your Revenue 
Companies approach e-commerce from every angle, and a variety 
of methods of selling are being used in the Internet arena. Some compa- 
nies generate revenue from direct sales, online advertising, subscrip- 
tions, and credit card processing. Other e-businesses receive percentages 
of every online Internet transaction they host. Many businesses earn 
commissions for matching buyers to sellers. When goods and services 
are auctioned online, auction hosts may take a flat fee or, like Trade- 
Out.com, the largest online surplus exchange marketplace, they might 
take a percentage of every sale. 
Companies that generate revenue from direct sales include Charles 
Schwab and Dell. Companies that generate revenue from online adver- 
tising include Onsale.com and Yahoo! The Wall Street lournal and 

Setting the Vision 
7 
UNFOLDING 
YOUR 
VISION 
aOtuoJ, sn3 ~an~6~'3 
Figure 1.1 Unfolding your vision 
TheStreet.com use a subscription-based model. VeriFone and Cyber- 
Cash, both credit card verification vendors, use transaction fees as 
a foundation for their businesses. Digital River and Beyond.com use 
electronic product delivery. Realtor.Com takes a percentage of all real 
estate agents' commissions whose clients are referred to them via the 
Web site. Vendors whose sites feature clickthroughs to online stores, 
including Amazon.com, also get compensation related to the number of 
clicks they route to other businesses through ad banners and other links. 
To start on the journey toward Vision, think about new streams of 
revenue. As you continue through the book, the vision you have today 
will be honed by a whole new vision of doing business and increasing 
your market potential. 

8 
THE E--s163 
BOOK 
Reengineer Your Business 
The Internet promises to change your whole manufacturing 
process, allowing you to communicate instantly with suppliers, part- 
ners, and customers on a worldwide scale, yet it requires that old stan- 
dards of customer service, such as toll-free numbers for instant airing of 
complaints or questions, be maintained. It is not enough simply to set 
up Web sites for customers and partners. To take full advantage of the 
Internet, companies reinvent the way they do business by changing how 
they produce, market, and distribute goods and how they collaborate 
within the company and with suppliers. 
Reengineering projects may be daunting and complicated. Because 
e-commerce is not merely a technology-based effort, it requires simulta- 
neously redefining marketing, sales, services, and products. In addition, 
it requires interactions between suppliers, shipping companies, legal 
departments, governments, and banks. It requires integration with exist- 
ing systems either within the organization or between two companies. 
Successful companies have included marketing, sales, ordering, distribu- 
tion, procurement, customer support, and trading partners in reengineer- 
ing efforts. In addition, they have developed solutions that provide 
complete and timely reference data to company decision makers for mar- 
keting, product planning, production, and the logistics planning process. 
Empower Your Customers 
Unlike a traditional store, the Internet allows customers to take con- 
trol of any transaction. In the past, the retailer had control. The retailer 
established what times customers could come to the store, what prod- 
ucts customers could choose from after arriving, and what salespeople 
would be available to answer questions about product features, price, 
and quality. 
Online customers have absolute choice over when and where they 
want to shop and who they want to contact for information or buying 
advice. The Web also provides a venue for buyers to have the most 
choices and find the best prices for any products, be they dust-covered 
rare books, heavy industrial machines, delicate art prints, or razor-sharp 
hockey blades. Even in business-to-business commerce, online catalogs, 
exchanges, and auctions allow companies to purchase goods and ser- 
vices at the best prices. 

Setting the Vision 
9 
In other words, where customers traditionally were limited by time, 
information, and physical distance to find goods at the best prices and 
quality, today they have absolute control and freedom in tossing out the 
old models of consumerism. Today, with a click of a mouse, customers 
can gather information about features and pricing, comparison shop 
with little effort, seek advice from online news sources or discussion 
groups, purchase their products, and arrange for direct shipping. They 
can expect their products delivered to their doorsteps as early as the next 
morning, and consumers get to slip their shoes on and walk down the 
hall from their desk chairs. The result is the absolute empowerment of 
the consumer~the driving force in the sales process. 
The Automobile Purchase 
Consider the traditional automobile purchase, which involves driv- 
ing from lot to lot; pushy salesmen; right price, wrong color; then right 
color, wrong price. What if you could pick the perfect automobile from 
home? This was the vision of Autoweb.com, a company based in Santa 
Clara, California that went public on March 23, 1999, at an initial offer- 
ing price of $14.00. 
Autoweb.com is now a leading consumer automotive Internet ser- 
vice. With an extensive collection of automotive-related community, 
content, and commerce offerings, Autoweb.com guides consumers 
through every stage of the vehicle ownership process, including brows- 
ing, buying, enjoying, maintaining, or selling a vehicle. The company's 
goal is to connect "mass market consumers to real-world buying alterna- 
tives through the most extensive network of Member Dealers and other 
commerce partners, and ensures the consumer experience is faster, bet- 
ter, and easier." As a result, Autoweb.com offers a virtual one-stop shop 
for automotive enthusiasts, as well as reluctant car buyers. Its site pro- 
vides links to consumer information, manufacturers' sites, parts suppli- 
ers, financing and insurance services, and automotive accessories. 
This year, automotive industry consulting firm ]. D. Power and 
Associates reported that consumers saved $490 on average when buying 
a new vehicle using an Internet online buying service compared to 
showroom shopping. 

10 
THE E-£OMMER£E 
BOOK 
Over half the auto-buying public shopped online, and about 5 per- 
cent of all shoppers were expected to make an online auto purchase this 
year. 
:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:::::~:::~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~*~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:::~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~:~: 
Capture Customer Service 
Customer service plays a critical role in e-commerce, and we'll com- 
mit an entire chapter to this later. For now, as you develop your vision, you 
must remember the following simple fact: Because e-commerce is not a 
market that geographically captures a customer, merchants must be even 
more creative in providing value-added services, such as online support, 
FAQ listings, and follow-up communications and product support. 
Your goal will be to automate as many customer service processes as 
possible by leveraging Web technologies. If this is done correctly, your 
company will generate not only cost savings but also customer loyalty. 
Go Global 
Your site should address the global economy. As evident in the sta- 
tistics mentioned before, the Web is not just for the technology savvy. 
Women, men, and children of different countries, religions, and nation- 
alities now are lining up to participate in this new market. 
But you can't make money from their participation until your com- 
pany is prepared to go global. Consider the possibility of conducting busi- 
ness online in foreign languages. How easy will your company be to use 
and interface with? Do you offer a product that will require international 
shipping and customer service channels? Can you use different interfaces 
to target members of outlying countries? 
The advent of the global economy provides even more opportuni- 
ties for those of you who can think globally to expand exponentially, 
because the foreign markets will be the last to be fully tapped. 
Business Model Basics 
Now that you're thinking globally about using new technology tools 
to capture revenue, capture and empower customers, and provide cus- 
tomer service, you should consider what format or model your business 
could fit into. 

Setting the Vision 
11 
Of course, models should be and are constantly tweaked~and 
some company has already reinvented each one--but these basic four 
form the foundation of all types of commerce now online. 
Business Model Basics 
1. Consumer-to-consumer: Think eBay, online newspaper 
classifieds. 
2. Business-to-consumer: Think TheGap.com, CrateandBarrel.com. 
3. Business-to-business: Think OfficeDepot.com, TradeOut.com. 
Consumer-to-Consumer 
This type of model facilitates commerce between consumers, plain 
and simple. Revenue streams are typically fees for matching buyers with 
sellers and vice versa. Flat fees and commissions may apply. The most 
famous C2C company is eBay, the world's largest personal online trad- 
ing community, which~for a tiny fee~allows consumers to offer their 
goods directly to other consumers in auction format. 
eBay contends that its cocktail napkin moment was a conversation 
between Pierre Omidyar and his wife, who collects Pez TM dispensers. She 
wanted to use the Internet as a tool to expand her collection, and Pierre 
expanded that idea to include a central location for the trade of all col- 
lectibles and launched eBay on Labor Day in 1995. 
Today, the secret to eBay's profitability is volume~insane volume. 
Individual consumers use eBay to buy and sell items in more than 4,320 
categories, including automobiles, collectibles, antiques, sports memo- 
rabilia, computers, toys, books, magazines, music, pottery and glass, 
photography, electronics, and jewelry and gemstones. Buyers are com- 
pelled to trade on eBay due to the large number of items available. Simi- 
larly, sellers flock to eBay because that's where the most buyers are. As a 
result, more than 450,000 items are posted for sale on any given day, and 
eBay collects a fee on each transaction. 

12 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
Figure 1.2 Consumer-to-consumer model. 
Business-to-Consumer 
Think of the business-to-consumer e-commerce as the new QVC of 
selling your goods to consumers. Traditionally, companies and small 
businesses employ catalogs, door-to-door sales, print and broadcast 
advertising, telephone mail order, direct mail, product placement and 
design, and brick-and-mortar storefronts to sell products. E-commerce 
is just another tool~a way to sell goods using Web-based technologies. 
Of course, it's a very powerful tool that transcends traditional bound- 
aries to commerce, allowing customers to hail from any spot on the 
globe at any second of any day. 
Unfortunately, it's also a powerful tool that's enabled almost any 
business to jump onboard~many that weren't sustainable. This year, 
Forrester Research released a dramatic report predicting that weak 
financials, increasing competitive pressures, and investor flight would 
drive most dot-com retailers out of business by 2001. 
To survive in the online retail battleground, Forrester reported, 
firms would need to redirect extravagant branding investments (which 
we'll discuss in depth in Chapter 3~Marketing and Branding) into 
three categories of hard assets: scale, service, and speed. Otherwise, con- 
solidation would steamroll the weak dot-coms, leaving only dot-giants 
to suck up the majority of an ever-expanding online consumer base. 

Setting the Vision 
13 
Credit Card 
Processing 
/~ 
Company 
Warehouse 
/ 
Catalogs 
I 
Third Party 
I 
/ 
I E-Fulfillment 
Company 
Customer Pays Electronically 
I 
via Credit Card 
/ 
Goods Distributed from Company Warehouse, 
Manufacturer Warehouse, or 
Third Party E-Fulfillment Company 
Figure 1.3 Business-to-consumer model. 
Forrester even predicted the order of consolidation and demise. First, 
firms selling products such as books, software, and flowers would consoli- 
date by fall 2000. Second, merchants selling common products at thin 
margins~drugstores, pet supplies, toys~would fold before Christmas. 
Finally, they gave e-commerce ventures with significant strongholds in 
branding longer lifetimes~two years. They'd be gone by 2002. (No one 
has ever accused Forrester researchers of wearing rose-tinted glasses.) 
Whether these dire Forrester predictions hit their mark or not~and 
we think it's likely~hundreds of e-commerce sites exist, and many cur- 
rently are highly successful in the business-to-consumer market. These 
companies search for innovative ways to sell products and services on the 
Internet. For example, Infoseek allows its visitors to search phone books, 
yellow pages, and e-mail addresses online. Once you have found the per- 
son you are looking for, you can send a card, flowers, or call directly using 
a specific carrier. All of these transactions happen online. 
Markets where convenience, pricing, and selection are major buy- 
ing influences have done extremely well in business-to-consumer 
e-commerce. Computer software and hardware retailers have per- 
formed extremely well in the e-commerce market. Through electronic 

14 
THE E-s163 
BOOK 
commerce, customers have a greater choice of products at lower prices 
than what they typically would experience while shopping at major 
retail outlets. Companies such as Compaq and Dell have added millions 
of dollars in sales per day. 
CrateandBarrel.com has taken its brick-and-mortar home goods 
stores online with great success, as has TheGap.com, which now offers 
international sales, shipping, and service. Other businesses that have 
flourished include book and magazine retailers, music and video vendors, 
and retail florists. 
The common market share prediction is for total business-to- 
consumer e-commerce trade to compose roughly one-quarter of all 
trade online within three years. The rest of the money will be in busi- 
ness-to-business and digital marketplace models. 
Business- to-Business 
If, indeed, 75 percent of future Net revenue is in business-to-busi- 
ness channels, then herein lies the greatest opportunity for e-commerce 
hopefuls. The B2Bs now publicly traded swim daily amid accusations of 
inflated value and short revenues. Investors jump onboard and offboard 
faster than passengers on a Carnival Cruise ship docking in St. Thomas 
for the day. 
Regardless, B2B e-commerce ventures will form the backbone of the 
new economy, which, like the Industrial Revolution, isn't going away. If 
the publicly traded B2Bs are failing now, it's only because the real gems 
have yet to be mined and brought to their initial public offering. The 
biggest opportunities are still in the napkin stage. 
Because it offers such tremendous opportunity for specialization and 
capitalization, business-to-business models can be broken into several 
distinct forms. First, B2Bs~often called "market makers" by investors~ 
serve either vertical or horizontal markets. 
Vertical markets are industry-specific. E-commerce solutions in this 
category most frequently address the inefficiencies within a given 
industry, and hundreds of vertical market makers have already 
emerged in highly scattered, highly populated industries such as 
steel, chemicals, plastics, and paper. 
Horizontal markets span across multiple industries by offering com- 
mon information, goods and services. They provide a venue for 

Setting the Vision 
15 
the transfer of goods, and services, including the outsourcing of 
basic services: data collection and analysis, human resources, and 
general office operating supplies, to name a few. 
Each of the four additional types of B2Bs~online catalogs, auc- 
tions, community markets, and exchanges~can fall within either the 
vertical or horizontal marketplaces. 
ONLINE CATALOGS Perhaps the most basic and well-understood 
form of B2Bs are the online catalogs, whose main function is to compile 
inventory from as many suppliers as possible and spur demand for 
inventory from as many buyers as possible. In the end, the efficiency 
provided when a hefty volume of suppliers meet a hefty volume of buy- 
ers will determine a good deal of their success. 
SciQuest, Chemdex, Ariba, and Commerce One are well-known 
examples. 
SciQuest started in November 1995 and sought to use Internet tech- 
nologies as tools to streamline the purchasing of scientific prod- 
ucts, such as chemicals and lab equipment. Today, it is a leading 
Credit Card 
Processing 
Businesses 
Company 
Electronic 
Catalogs 
Businesses Pay Electronically 
via Credit Card or PO 
Distribution is via UPS/FedEx/USPS 
Trucking or Ship 
Company 
Warehouse 
Business 
Manufacturer 
~ 
Warehouse 
I 
~
[
 
Third Party 
/ 
[ E-Fulfillment 
Company 
Figure 1.4 Business-to-business model. 

16 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
business-to-business marketplace for scientific products used by 
pharmaceutical, chemical, biotechnological, industrial, and 
educational organizations worldwide. With more than 270 sup- 
pliers offering almost a million products, they can easily attract 
buyers seeking to streamline procurement of scientific industry 
products. 
Chemdex, now owned by Ventro TM Corporation life sciences 
company, offers e-commerce solutions to researchers and 
enterprises including an extensive online marketplace with 
detailed product information on hundreds of thousands of 
scientific products, electronic procurement to support busi- 
ness workflow and controls, systems integration to interface 
with third-party and back-office applications (see Chapter 
8--Know and Maintain Your Infrastructure). 
Ariba developed one of the first true B2B e-commerce applications 
to fully leverage the Internet. Ariba's first application, Operating 
Resource Management System (ORMS), automates the procure- 
ment of operating resources, which consume about one-third of 
the typical company's revenue base. In other words, Ariba found 
and developed the resources to eliminate the largest bastion of 
company inefficiency. They produce automated work flow at its 
best. 
Commerce One, founded in 1994 as DistriVision and reborn as 
Commerce One in 1997, developed an application to automates 
the typically inefficient procurement of indirect goods and ser- 
vices such as information technology, travel, entertainment, pro- 
fessional services, and office equipment and supplies. Its Global 
Trading Web enables buyers and sellers worldwide to trade in a 
barrier-free environment, creating new Web portholes and busi- 
ness opportunities for those on board. 
AUCTIONS Auctions provide a venue for the purchase and sale of 
unique items, such as surplus inventory, used capital equipment, dis- 
continued goods, and perishable or refurbished items. Best examples 
include FreeMarkets, a reverse auction for manufacturers, and Trade- 
Out, an auction for surplus inventory. 
FreeMarkets creates business-to-business online auctions for buyers 
of industrial parts, raw materials, commodities and services. Since 1995, 

Setting the Vision 
17 
Businesses 
Businesses 
Bid 
P"I 
BtoB 
Internet 
Auction Site 
ie: Trade Out 
Companies 
place items out 
to auction / 
Businesses 
Businesses 
Businesses 
Businesses 
Highest Bidder at Closing Pays 
via Credit Card or PO. 
Distribution is via UPS/FedEx/USPS 
Trucking or Ship 
Figure 1.5 Auction model. 
they have created auctions for goods and services in more than seventy 
product categories, including injection-molded plastic parts, commer- 
cial machinings, metal fabrications, chemicals, printed circuit boards, 
corrugated packaging, and coal. In 1999, FreeMarkets claims to have 
auctioned more than $2.7 billion worth of purchase orders while saving 
buyers between 2 and 25 percent. 
TradeOut leads the industry as an online auction for businesses buy- 
ing and selling excess inventory and idle assets. The company, formed in 
October 1998, brings together thousands of companies to buy and sell 
surplus assets in over one hundred product categories. TradeOut esti- 
mates the surplus asset market at $350 billion and seeks to eliminate its 
rampant inefficiencies through Web-based marketplace centralization. 
COMMUNITY MARKET MAKERS 
Community market makers bring 
together professionals with like interests in industry-specific online 
communities. Information often includes industry-related news, edito- 
rials, job postings, and discussion boards. Their goal is to attract a target 
audience of potential buyers for industry sellers. VerticalNet is perhaps 
the best example of such community Web sites today. 
VerticalNet began as one online business community, Water Online, 
in 1995. Since then, the company has grown rapidly in size and scope, 
building ten dynamic, industry-focused Internet communities and envi- 
ronments where business efficiency can be increased as professionals 

18 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
Suppliers 
Suppliers J 
BtoB 
Marketplace 
Businesses place 
products and services 
in marketplace 
Figure 1.6 Community market maker model. 
Business A 
Business B 
Business look at marketplace 
to find products 
and services in a 
virtual industry 
keep abreast of breaking news and trade ideas as well as goods and ser- 
vices. They have partnered with Internet industry leaders, including 
Microsoft, IBM, British Telecom, and Internet Capital Group. Advertis- 
ing is VerticalNet's principal revenue stream. 
EXCHANGES, OR DIGITAL MARKETPLACES Perhaps the most hyped 
new B2B business models are the exchanges, or digital marketplaces. 
Exchanges provide a market for commodities, often with high price 
volatility. Natural gas, telecommunications, or electricity may be bought 
or sold here. These markets are bid/ask and provide real-time pricing. 
Exchanges find their revenues in membership and transaction fees. A 
good example is paperExchange, which used such a business model to 
bring never-before-heard-of efficiency to the $300 billion global pulp 
and paper industry. 
PaperExchange is completely free for buyers and makes its money 
by charging sellers a commission for transactions completed on its site, 
much as a real estate broker might charge commission for transactions 
completed via his or her office. Trades are private, secure, and anony- 
mous. The site also offers community market-maker elements, such as 
job postings, industry news, and value-added resources, such as credit 
and fulfillment systems or logistics. 
In the end, your vision will do much to determine which business 
model best suits your needs, but the decision will not be yours alone. 
Your customers also will help dictate the model that can best facilitate 
the fulfillment of their needs. You must choose correctly, or you will not 

Setting the Vision 
19 
Suppliers 
Suppliers J 
Exchange 
Business A 
Business B 
Suppliers receive 
Places RFP in 
request and bid 
the exchange requesting 
for RFP 
product pricing 
Figure 1.7 Exchange model. 
attract the proper audience or be prepared to offer your goods in the 
best possible environment. You have to know your customers before you 
can plan the best possible e-commerce site to serve them and success- 
fully vend your solution. 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Know Your Customers 
In 1938, twenty-three friends each contributed $1 to form the 
Recreational Equipment, Inc., cooperative and to acquire high-quality 
climbing and camping gear at reasonable prices. In 2000, REI 
announced that its 1.5 million members contributed to $41 million in 
global sales online. (Anyone can shop at REI, but its members share in 
an annual patronage refund.) 
Few can dispute the scale has changed in REI's sixty-two years of 
operation. The company now operates out of fifty-four bricks-and- 
mortar stores in twenty-two states. Its online store has no borders. In 
1999, REI Online had the highest online sales in the outdoor industry, 
and its customers who shopped online spent 22 percent more in REI 
stores in 1999 than they had the year before. REI calls its strategy"clicks- 
and-bricks"~bringing its in-store customers online and vice versa. We 
call it "knowing your customer." 
Before going online, REI strived to ensure that members and cus- 
tomers have access to products and services combining performance, 
durability, quality, and value. Its sales associates consistently were 
trained to be goldmines of sporting tips and advice. It backed all of its 
products with 100 percent guarantees. REI knew this practice worked, 
and its customers returned because they could depend on an extraordi- 
nary quality of products, knowledge, and service. 
When REI started its REI Online venture, it took its entire time- 
tested corporate policy there, too. While online, the customer can access 
any of the same products, advice, and services. A customer can become a 
21 

22 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
member, read quick primers on equipment, and interact with gear 
experts. Those new to outdoor sports can access REI.com's educational 
clinics and learn basic skills, while longtime REI members can check on 
their patronage refunds or change their mailing address. Because 
REI.com is accessible worldwide, it also ships worldwide. And its 100 
percent guarantee is still firmly in place online. 
Knowing its customers liked instant access to any and all outdoor- 
related news, information, and resources, REI also brought its online 
product back into its brick and mortar stores via kiosks. While in an REI 
store, a customer can walk up to a kiosk, access the Internet, instantly 
learn more about any of REI's products, and order any product that REI 
carries. 
REI didn't attempt to redefine itself or its customer base when it 
went online; it only sought to expand access to its products. It attracted 
the same type of buyers, but it attracted them from a worldwide base, 
not just its stores in twenty-two states. Its sales figures and preeminence 
in outdoor retailing prove its online success. 
Know Where to Start 
With sixty-two years of retail experience, REI knew its marketplace 
and its customers before it struck out into a new wilderness online. For 
younger retailers and e-commerce ventures, comparable knowledge is 
equally essential for success. 
Because customer acquisition costs are intense online~about $250 
on average~e-commerce companies must tailor their entire image and 
process to attract the consumers who want what they are offering. In fact, 
the entire content, feel, and look of your Web site should depend entirely 
on what customers who are interested in your goods and services want 
online. If you meet or surpass their wants and needs, they will leave your 
site having had a positive and memorable online experience. 
Research and target the 
right customers. 
Of course, companies like your own must research and target the 
right customers first. To begin the process, you must understand the 

Know Your Customers 
23 
demographics and geographies of all Internet users. When you know 
the base from which you will draw your customers, you then will know 
what types of customers are available and willing to buy online, and you 
can identify your best prospects. Then you must learn how these best 
prospects are accessing your site, how they shop, and what they want 
online. Only then can you develop marketing and branding strategies 
and begin to build your site appropriately. 
It's a long and tedious process that demands proper commitment. 
In order to begin successfully, follow these twelve steps: 
1. Know who comprises the bulk of Web users. 
2. Learn how children will figure into the Web's future. 
3. Track how teens spend disposable income online. 
4. Watch the heavy hitters~baby boomers and senior users. 
5. Know what income brackets dominate the Web. 
6. Know what races and nationalities are Web users and in what 
proportions. 
7. Note how gender contributes to online use and sale patterns. 
8. Know how much customers in different income brackets are 
willing to spend online. 
9. Know what nationalities and countries are doing business 
globally online. 
10. Research the computer and Web access technology most of 
your customers will use to access your site. 
11. Know what types of shoppers will access your site and how to 
attract them. 
12. Know what these shoppers are looking for online, and give it to 
them. 
Who Is on the Web? 
The answer, quite simply, is everyone, regardless of race, gender, age, 
or nationality, although they are not online in proportionate numbers. 
The Computer Industry Almanac (www.c-i-a.com) has reported that 
327 million people were online this year, and within two years, 490 mil- 
lion people worldwide will have Internet access~about 80 per 1,000 

24 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
people worldwide. The top fifteen Internet countries will account for 
about 82 percent of all users. 
The Computer Industry Almanac 
(www.c-i-a.com) has reported that 327 
million people were online this year, and 
within two years, 490 million people 
worldwide will have Intcrnet access- 
about 80 per 1,000 people worldwide. 
At year-end 1999, the United States led the international brigade with 
about 110 million Internet users and about five times as many as Japan, 
the number two-ranked country. Within four years, Internet Data Corp. 
expects the number of U.S. Internet users to reach about 180 million. A 
more conservative Net research group, Cyber Dialogue, calls these figures 
too aggressive and states that about 75 million adult Net users went online 
in 1999, and that figure will grow to about 109 million in 2003. The real 
answer may lie somewhere between these two firms' estimates, but both 
firms agree that the number of U.S. users is, indeed, increasing. 
Although the U.S. Internet market is strong, the bulk of Internet 
access already comes from outside the United States. You will need to 
think about your business and how it addresses the world markets if you 
seek large-scale success. Again, the idea is to move ahead of your com- 
petitors and to increase your market share. By globalizing your site, you 
have the opportunity~like REI~to draw greater numbers of unique 
consumers from a larger consumer base. 
For now, adults ages 25 to 44 comprise the bulk of that base and are 
most likely to access the Internet and buy online. Specialized markets, 
including children, teens, young adults, baby boomers, and seniors are 
rising fast. 
The Crayon Crawlers 
Compared with 2.7 million in 1997, almost 21 million children ages 
2 to 12 years will have their eyes peeping upon the Internet in the year 
2002. The U.S. government has allocated funds to wire schools, and 
families are realizing the benefits of computers and the Internet in the 
learning and research process. 

Know Your Customers 
25 
Why do children go online? It's fun. And even though Web sites 
must now request that children get their parents' permission before giv- 
ing out information online, the opportunity to build online brand loy- 
alty and familiarity with consumers from their youth should excite 
online retailers. 
An MTV Networks Leisure Time Study showed that children aged 4 
to 11 were more likely than the population as a whole to say they enjoyed 
using computers and the Web. The same study reported that 83 percent 
of kids use their computers as much or more than they did a year ago. 
That old family room television only scored 75 percent in that poll. 
Clearly, children are and will become more of an online force. The 
online interests and buying habits they develop while young should 
carry into their teens and young adulthood. 
The 1998 Nickelodeon Online Attitude and Usage Study showed 
girls aged 7 to 14 flocked to online chat and message boards rather than 
Internet downloads. Boys the same age did exactly the opposite, while 
both genders enjoyed playing games and gathering information online. 
While the online market for children may have as far to grow as its 
customers, joining in early may have its advantages. 
The Transient Teens 
Forget the mall, today the Internet serves as teens' all-purpose hang- 
out~and the Internet mall never closes. To the woe of some parents, 
teens see the Internet as more than a tool for homework. Online, they 
talk to friends; explore new communities, fashions, and attitudes; and 
spend their after-school-job cash. 
The half of U.S. teens with Web access surfed the Web about an hour 
each day in 1999, the Nickelodeon/Yankelovich Youth Monitor reported. 
Figure 2.1 Activity on the Web. 

26 
THE E-s163 
BOOK 
Almost one-third spend less time watching television in order to spend 
time online. 
Top TEN REASONS TEENS Go ONLINE* 
1. E-mail: 67% 
2. Just surfing: 63% 
3. Play games: 58% 
4. Homework: 50% 
5. Get to the World Wide Web: 50% 
6. Easier than the library: 50% 
7. Chat rooms: 48% 
8. Learn new things" 45% 
9. Instant messaging: 43% 
10. Online encyclopedia: 37% 
Although they've yet to pack the punch online that they do in the retail 
market, teens have begun to pick up substantial online buying power. 
Teenage Research Unlimited, a Chicago-based firm, reports that about 31 
million teenagers spent $141 billion in 1998. They spent $58 million of 
that total online. By 2002, teens will spend $1.2 billion online, and their 
online population will nearly double, from 8.4 million to 16.6 million. 
Most teens buying online buy music, books, and electronic equip- 
ment, and they favor the same sites as adults of their same gender. For- 
rester Research, Inc., reports that the correlation between brand 
preference and site traffic is lower among teen consumers. For instance, 
teens who prefer to drink Coca-Cola don't go to the Coca-Cola Web site 
while they're online. 
While they might shun some big-name product sites, most teens 
probably aren't surfing extremely little-known sites and unadvertised 
targets. Alexa Internet reports that 70 percent of global Web traffic goes 
to fewer than 4,500 sites. NEC Research Institute reports that the best 
search engine can find only 16 percent of about 800 million pages on the 
World Wide Web. As a result, sites with no branding at all would be dif- 
ficult to find, let alone remember, even for these transient teens. 
*Source: Nickelodeon/Yankelovich Youth Monitor 

Know Your Customers 
27 
Baby Boomers Are Booming 
Their buying power makes boomers middle-aged goldmines in the 
retail industry. Now, they're starting to exercise their financial clout 
online. 
Adults aged 45 to 64 surf the Internet more frequently and stay 
online longer than their younger counterparts, and their heavy spend- 
ing habits make them one of the most desired markets on the Internet, 
according to Media Matrix. In 1999, baby boomers made up one-fifth of 
all online users. The long-considered Internet-savvy 18- to 24-year-old 
crowd trailed at 17.5 percent of users. 
So intense are baby boomers' commitments to Web usage that they 
access the Web for an additional six days and a total of almost two hours 
longer on average than the younger crowd. The Web sites that pique 
their interest include health, fitness, and personal business sites, and 
they have the income to support investments in their interests. 
Income, Race, and the Digital Divide 
We've already mentioned that adults aged 25 to 44 make up the bulk 
of those accessing the Internet and buying online. Among them, tremen- 
dous discrepancies exist in Web user demographics. The National 
Telecommunications and Information Administration reported in a 
1999 government study that the most affluent and well-educated Ameri- 
cans dominated the e-commerce scene and that this domination would 
continue. This administration termed this discrepancy between rich and 
poor the "digital divide." 
Although Web use is increasing among all income brackets, Ameri- 
cans in the top bracket are ten times as likely to be online as those in the 
bottom, according to the study. Almost 61 percent of households mak- 
ing more than $75,000 per year were online. In contrast, just 30 percent 
of households making between $25,000 and $35,000 per year were 
online. Among households making between $10,000 and $15,000 per 
year, less than 8 percent were online. 
Similarly, in 1998, almost half of all college graduates were online, 
30 percent of those who had attended some college were, and just 16.3 
percent of high school graduates were online. Mediamark Research 
(www.mediamark.com) reported that 40 percent of all Internet surfers 

28 
THE E-s163 
BOOK 
are college graduates, 40 percent have household incomes of more than 
$75,000, and 63 percent hold white-collar jobs. 
As a result, the statistically more educated and affluent households 
of Asian/Pacific and of white descent have a clear lead in computer pen- 
etration and in Internet access rates. However, the discrepancy extends 
beyond income. When holding income constant, black and Hispanic 
households remain far less likely to have Internet access. According to 
the government study, many who aren't online say the cost of comput- 
ing and Internet service is just too high. Others say they aren't interested 
in being online. A Cyber Dialogue survey showed that, among the U.S. 
adult population, those who weren't online saw"no need to go online?' 
As a result, the government study reported that the digital divide 
was increasing. It stated that black, Hispanic, and Native American 
households were more likely to access the Internet from public or 
shared computers, such as a library, rather than from a computer at 
home. Black and Hispanic users are 40 percent as likely as whites to have 
a computer with Internet access at home. 
The report did show some hope, however, for a decrease in the digi- 
tal divide. It stated that, at the highest incomes (more than $75,000 
annually), the discrepancy in computer ownership between white and 
black households decreased by more than 76 percent between 1994 and 
1998. Mediamark also noted this decrease by presenting statistics that 
online usage has grown among lower-income and less-educated groups. 
Much as we expect in the bricks-and-mortar retail marketplace, 
income correlated with the amount spent online, according to an Ernst 
& Young study. The study found that online purchases rose as income 
rose. Among people making $100,000 or more, 80 percent spent more 
than $500 online the year before. Only 29 percent of those making less 
than $30,000 spent as much online. 
Gender Online 
Men, long stereotyped the electronics- and technology-loving gen- 
der, don't have a huge leg up online. Mediamark Research reports the 
gap between the number of men and women online has narrowed to 4 
percent or less. Once online, men and women both list three favorite 
sites: Amazon.com, BarnesandNoble.com, and CDNow, according to an 
Ernst & Young online survey of 1,200 U.S. Internet users. However, after 
the three top-ranking shared favorites, men's and women's online tastes 

Know Your Customers 
29 
diverge. Men prefer to seek out electronics, entertainment, and office 
supplies online. Women click through sites with health and beauty 
products, apparel, and online greetings. 
Even among experiences shared jointly by men and women, such as 
travel and child rearing, women were much more likely to be found 
clicking around eToys.com and children's apparel Web sites. Men were 
more commonly making travel arrangements. 
These patterns hold true when men and women stop clicking to 
open their online wallets and purses. Both men and women buy mostly 
books, music, and computers online. After the top trio, men buy more 
electronics, videos, and travel arrangements. Women buy more beauty 
supplies, toys, and clothing. Men and women also differ in how they 
spend money online. Men were more likely to buy online via auction 
sites and were more likely to have spent more than $500 online in the 
previous year. 
Geography Online 
When comparing one U.S. state with another, Californians led 
online spending in 1999, racking up almost $6 billion in Internet bills, 
according to an International Data Corporation study. Texans followed 
with more than $3.2 billion. The lowest online spenders were relatively 
rural, less populated states. Wyoming ranked last, with $41.5 million in 
1999. The discrepancy was credited to differing population densities, 
not the percentage of households online, however. 
When comparing one international country with another, the den- 
sity of populations does not correlate with their tendency to go online. 
The United States continues to lead, and International Data Corp. 
reports that Americans are 44 percent of the Web population. However, 
Europe's share of Web commerce is predicted to increase to one-third 
by 2003. 
In fact, the Computer Industry Almanac reports that the popularity 
of using the Internet is now spreading more rapidly outside the United 
States, although the United States accounted for 85 percent of all online 
advertising revenue last year. Mthough this country is expected to keep 
about two-thirds of these advertising revenues through the year 2003, 
by 2005, U.S. Web users will account for less than one-third of all users 
worldwide. This could result in significant changes is both global adver- 
tising and in the language in which content is presented. 

30 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
Speaking the Global Language 
If you conduct business in the United States, conducting business 
worldwide via the Web has been easy so far. In 2000, more than half of 
all online business is being conducted in English. 
However, as the number of Web users continues to expand overseas, 
so will the prevalence of conducting e-commerce in different languages. 
In 1999, about 43 percent of Web users worldwide were non-English 
speakers~155 million English versus 147 million non-English, according 
to Global Reach (www.glreach.com). About 96 million Web users spoke 
in non-English European languages, but the biggest contenders to English 
were Japanese, German, Spanish, Chinese, French, Korean, and Italian. 
By 2005, Global Reach expects Chinese to dominate the Web with 
300 million online speakers, compared with English's projected 256 mil- 
lion and Spanish's projected 100 million. Other, smaller players include 
Dutch, Russian, Portuguese, Scandinavian languages, Polish, Arabic, and 
Hebrew, with Hebrew being spoken by just 1 percent of 288 users online 
in the year 2000. Other languages have smaller shares. (See Table 2.1.) 
Language considerations in e-commerce are those considerations 
that address the languages people speak instead of any geographic con- 
cerns, such as the specific countries that customers inhabit. It is impor- 
tant todistinguish between the two when considering the additional 
Table 2.1 
Online Populations (in Millions) 
Language 
1998 
2000 
English 
107.2 
155 
Japanese 
14.4 
21.5 
German 
13.9 
19.9 
Spanish 
14.2 
19.5 
Chinese 
6.4 
15.5 
French 
8.3 
13.2 
Korean 
n/a 
10.4 
Italian 
n/a 
10 

Know Your Customers 
31 
Figure 2.2 Online population growth. 
capabilities you might add to your e-commerce site, such as multilingual 
support or localization. Some countries that your site targets may only 
require a single language (with English as an alternative). Businesses in 
most countries outside of the United States provide sites that contain 
both their native language and English. Other multilingual countries, 
such as the United States or Switzerland, may require support for several 
major languages. 

32 
THE E-s163 
BOOK 
Global Reach states that people speaking the same language "form 
their own online community, no matter what country they happen to 
live in." For this reason, language and global Internet usage must come 
into play when learning about and projecting your customer base. Sim- 
ply saying, "We're a global company,' will not be enough. To be a global 
company, you must both communicate and interact without barriers 
worldwide. Remember at least to consider conducting business in the 
native language of your audience, whether you target a single region or a 
single population. 
Web Gurus Are Already Global 
The sheer size of the international market could mean tremendous 
payoffs for ventures that succeed in truly barrier-free worldwide com- 
merce. 
ToP 15 NATIONS IN INTERNET USE, 1999" 
TOTAL ONLINE POPULATION 
1. United States: 110,825,000 
2. Japan: 18,156,000 
3. United Kingdom: 13,975,000 
4. Canada: 13,277,000 
5. Germany: 12,285,000 
6. Australia: 6,837,000 
7. Brazil: 6,790,000 
8. China: 6,308,000 
9. France: 5,696,000 
10. South Korea: 5,688,000 
11. Taiwan: 4,790,000 
12. Italy: 4,745,000 
13. Sweden: 3,950,000 
14. Netherlands: 2,933,000 
15. Spain: 2,905,000 
*Source: Computer Industry Almanac 

Know Your Customers 
33 
Figure 2.3 Top 15 nations in Internet use, 1999. 
*Source: Computer Industry Almanac 
By region, a shift in the dominant percentage will continue. In the 
year 2000, more than 43 percent of all Internet users hailed from North 
America, according to the Computer Industry Almanac. Another 25 per- 
cent accessed the Web from Western Europe, and another 20 percent 
accessed it from Eastern Asia. By 2005, just 30 percent of Internet users 
will hail from North America. Western Europe will increase to almost 28 
percent, and Asia will rise to almost 25 percent. The remainder will be 
shared by Eastern Europe, Latin America, the Middle East, and Africa. 
The percentage of users hailing from Africa and the Middle East in 2005 
isn't predicted to break 4 percent. 
In business-to-business e-commerce, it's not the number of people 
online, but the value of their online commerce that will determine the via- 
bility and profitability of global trade. In 1998, the United States led 
e-commerce with $37.4 billion in commerce. Japan followed most closely 
with $2 billion, making other countries competitors, but hardly serious 
ones. In the year 2002, the United States is predicted to top $409 billion, with 
Germany and the United Kingdom following with more than $100 billion 
combined. By then, the top eight e-commerce countries will have totals in 
the high twenties and teens, as reported by International Data Corp. 

34 
THE E-s163 
BOOK 
Although the market outside the United States is clearly set to 
explode, if you conduct the core of your business in English or any other 
one particular language, you must weigh comprehensively the costs and 
benefits of going global. Localizing a site could be more practical and 
productive in targeting your consumer than providing additional lan- 
guage options. In business-to-consumer, conducting business in only 
one language limits your consumer base. In business-to-business sys- 
tems, your trading partners also will be limited without multiple lan- 
guage capabilities. A cost-benefits analysis will prove essential to your 
decision, but, in the end, you must make the call. 
Companies who chose to include multilingual support and have 
thrived include Land's End and Dell Computer Corporation. 
Lands' End, a catalog-driven global organization, uses its own over- 
seas operations to set up online overseas. The company has separate 
Web sites for Germany, Japan, and the United Kingdom, each with its 
own localized address. The German and U.K. sites provide company 
information, allow consumers to request catalogs, and offer e-mail cus- 
tomer service. The U.K. site also gives information about physical stores 
in that country. To date, neither site allows online transactions, instead 
referring customers to the U.S. site. The Japanese site is transactional, 
allowing consumers to order catalog items and overstocked items. It also 
offers some features specific to the Japanese market, such as a dictionary 
of specialized words and phrases used in the clothing industry and links 
to entertainment articles. 
Dell has been doing business internationally and online for years, so 
it's not surprising that the company has launched specialized sites for 
dozens of countries. Unlike books or clothes, its products must meet dif- 
ferent technical specifications depending on the country. Power supplies 
and encryption software are just a few of the components that vary by 
country, as do tariffs. International customers are unable to buy from the 
main American site, and the order page requires consumers to state that 
they will not export the systems. But Dell's main home page includes 
options that take a user to a specialized section of the site with local con- 
tent, currency, and language tailored to the customer's geography. 
It is possible to grow an international customer base without offer- 
ing multiple languages, especially if your Web site is in English and En- 
glish is understood by a large percentage of your customer base. In that 
case, advertising your English-only Web site in your customers' native 

Know Your Customers 
35 
tongue may be a good idea, even if English is understood by a large per- 
centage of that population. 
For the latest information on online demographics, try the follow- 
ing sites: 
Name 
URL 
Description 
AIINetResearch 
CyberAtlas 
Forrester Research, Inc. 
www.a I I netresea rch.co m 
www.cyberatlas.com 
www.forrester.com 
A superstore for 
Internet research 
A reference desk 
for Web statistics 
Leading 
independent Net 
research firm 
Access Issues 
Once you know what types of people may be accessing your Web 
site online, it's important you recognize how they will be accessing it. 
You already know that Hispanic and black families in mid- to low- 
income brackets are more likely to access the Web via libraries or other 
shared sites, while their white counterparts are more likely to have Web 
access at home. The type of equipment they find to access the Web at 
any location and the privacy they have while accessing the Web could 
have a tremendous impact on their ability and desire to conduct trans- 
actions and to interact online. 
More than nine times out of ten, the connection a customer uses to 
access a Web site is slower than the connection of the company gurus 
who originally navigated and approved the Web site design. Nielsen 
NetRatings announced in March 2000 that 47 percent of Web users have 
modems with speeds of 33.6 Kbps or slower, and 93 percent connect at 
no more than 56 Kbps. The 56K modem is about 25 times slower than a 
high-speed T1 line, which users are more likely to find at work than at 
home. 
As a result, the average Web user's online experience can be classified 
as moderately to severely inhibited. He or she may be less likely to inter- 
act online where multiple graphics increase download times that lag on 

36 
THE E--s163 
BOOK 
lethargic, aging modems. A site that requires a plug-in for viewing~even 
if that plug-in is offered as a free download elsewhere on the Web--may 
require its customers to spend many minutes downloading prior to 
viewing the intended site. Unless they're intensely dedicated to viewing 
that particular site, many customers will just give up rather than devote 
their evening to downloading. As a frame of reference: Only 12 percent of 
those online have downloaded the free version of RealPlayer, the most 
popular plug-in enabling common media streaming. 
In the end, a site that boasts the best and most creative designs, 
replete with multimedia displays and attention-catching visual energy, 
might in fact be alienating the bulk of its clients if the majority of them 
hail from the customer base at large. Variances in equipment are 
expected online, but they can be inconvenient for Web businesses. 
Research into your customer base can improve this, but in the end, 
the most accessible sites are those that can be quickly navigated by cus- 
tomers with the lowest common denominator of computer and Internet 
access capabilities. 
Targeting the Best Shoppers 
E-commerce ventures, just like retail stores, will sell their merchan- 
dise to three types of customers: the customers who know what they 
want and go get it, the customers who want to buy something but are 
undecided, and the potential customers who merely browse the Web. 
The more directed the shopper, the easier the sale~as long as that shop- 
per can quickly and easily find the product online, get all information 
on the product, and then complete the purchase. Therefore, Web sites 
should concentrate on the shopper who came for a product and wants 
to quickly and easily purchase that product. 
The well-known Amazon.com has a small search box that allows its 
customers to search for any product by title, author, artist, or other 
applicable data, then quickly lists all available versions, prices, and the 
average shipping time of that product on the screen. One-click shop- 
ping allows past customers to purchase the book or books without reen- 
tering credit card information. The directed shopper can access, buy, 
and leave the site with minimum effort. 
However, sites that ignore the less directed, undecided buyers will 
miss a good deal of clientele. If your site and products attract these types 

Know Your Customers 
37 
of buyers, you must prepare to develop a storefront that help them easily 
and quickly browse products by brand, age, manufacturer, category, 
price, and any other appropriate criteria. These shoppers will buy when 
they find a product they like, so they should be exposed to as many 
products as possible. 
At the online clothing outlet Bluefly.com, customers can enter their 
email address and then enter a size or a range of sizes for many different 
types of clothing, shoes, and accessories. Customers can chose what 
types of merchandise interest them and what designers and styles they 
prefer. From then on, they will be presented with their own personalized 
catalog of merchandise every time they log on. By personalizing the site, 
Bluefly.com can present its browsing customers screens of images of the 
merchandise most likely to fit them and to appeal to their tastes, dra- 
matically improving the chances of them finding the products that 
entice them to buy. 
The least directed, browsing shoppers are the most difficult to con- 
vert into buyers. Personalized searches, specialty shops, hot-product 
lists, and online promotions help attract these shoppers, who often will 
be drawn to a Web site's "glitter,' or its look and feel, rather than its con- 
tent, service, or products. Sophisticated marketing campaigns and 
online tools such as generalized, all-product queries; chat room and dis- 
cussion groups; and other promotions can help turn these browsers into 
buyers, but a Web site should not count on these shoppers to succeed. 
Targeting a strong and directed base of customers is essential. 
Give Them What They Want 
As in retail shopping, quality, service, and value are the backbone of 
e-commerce. A business without those key qualities doesn't make either 
sense or profits, not in a bricks-and-mortar shop and certainly not 
online, where a customer can leave a bad experience at one shop and 
enter another in two clicks. 
In addition to quality, service, and value, online consumers demand 
ease of use, privacy, and responsiveness. 
1. EASE OF USE 
Ease of use is the single most important need to 
fulfill for your potential customers. Online customers are lazy; many are 
not technically savvy; and they will go elsewhere rather than tolerate dif- 
ficulties. Ease of use involves simplicity in access and in navigation 

38 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
Figure 2.4 What consumers want when shopping online. 
online. They don't want to wait more than ten seconds for a site to 
download. They don't want to scroll horizontally because a Web page 
doesn't fit in their browser window, although vertical scrolling is OK. 
They don't want to wade through dozens of features and links that don't 
interest them. They don't want to try to understand unfamiliar jargon 
or to read long paragraphs of text. They don't want error messages or 
too many distractions on the screen. 
Instead, online customers want a professional, clear, and concise 
site. They want to be able to search and get accurate search results. They 
want the technolingo replaced by easy-to-understand wording. They 
want to be able to find the right product and conduct the transaction 
quickly. After the transaction, they want fast shipping and an easy return 
process, if returns are necessary. 
If you are trying to attract customers who are not technically savvy, 
it is important that the site includes easy-to-access information and 
simple navigational elements. Plug-ins, elaborate frames, and conflict- 
ing color schemes should be avoided. The worst offenders tend to be 
sites that require multiple downloads of plug-ins prior to offering com- 
plete functionality. Keep the interface simple. This includes clear catego- 
rization and appropriate color schemes. Focus on the specific demands 
of your audience. 
2. PRIVACY The anonymity of the Internet is important to most 
users, and they want to feel secure and confident about entering into a 

Know Your Customers 
39 
transaction with you before they will become your customers. They fear 
receiving a hundred junk emails the week after they do business with 
you. They fear credit card fraud, identity theft, and other abuses of their 
personal information. Privacy policies should exist and assure your cus- 
tomer that your site systematically protects any personal information 
given during a transaction. 
An important way to support the sale of products or services at your 
Web site is to include a toll-free phone number. Mlow those people that 
are concerned about Internet security to place their orders (and use 
their credit cards) with a toll-free phone call. You are more likely to 
become a victim of fraud by handing a waiter your credit card after din- 
ner than by charging a product online, but Web site visitors remain 
skeptical. Many sites specify that a third-party certificate authority such 
as Verisign verifies them. Some sites post the Better Business Bureau 
logo to show that they belong to the organization. As more people expe- 
rience online shopping, security fears will subside. For now, do not miss 
a sale just because your customer is tentative about divulging personal 
information online. 
3. RESPONSIVENESS Customers don't want to feel isolated during 
or after the transaction. They want to know that real people exist behind 
the electronic storefront. For instance, if they send an email asking ques- 
tions or lodging complaints, they want an answer now, not in two days. 
They want a toll-free phone number at which they can reach real human 
beings with questions or complaints, should an urgent problem arise. In 
other words, they want more than service; they want responsiveness as 
instant as the Internet. 
Following these steps toward understanding your customer base 
will help you to target your customers and to develop appropriate 
branding and targeted marketing campaigns, as well to build a Web site 
that can most efficiently and successfully give your customers what they 
want in a positive online experience. A well-targeted consumer base also 
will keep customer acquisition costs down and help your company 
more quickly accumulate the mass of customers critical to your Web 
site's success. 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Marketing and Branding 
After e-commerce companies complete a challenging and tedious 
process of clarifying their goals and identifying their customers, they 
must decide how they will define themselves within the new global mar- 
ketplace. Each must decide what will make them unique and decide how 
they will use this unique selling point to attract the customers they have 
already identified. 
The process is called marketing and branding. Good marketing dic- 
tates how many customers will arrive at and view your Web site, and 
good branding dictates how they will remember your site and whether 
they will return. 
The principles of online marketing vary little from the principles of 
marketing bricks-and-mortar businesses. Like the most successful tra- 
ditional retailers, the most successful e-commerce companies place a 
major emphasis on marketing their sites. These sites take advantage of 
traditional advertising channels through traditional media, such as 
magazines, newspapers, and radio and TV commercials, as well as the 
new channels available via electronic media, such as banner ads, search 
engines, and e-mail distributions lists. 
In marketing, the goal for any brick-and-mortar or online business 
is similar: to entice customers to try your product or service, with the 
hope that their first experience will be a positive one and that they will 
return as customers again and again while referring new customers. In 
branding, the goals are brand recognition, customer loyalty, and better 
word-of-mouth advertising. 
41 

42 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
Branding online is more than simply moving a print identity to the 
Web, however. Instead of a good graphic design, your brand in 
e-commerce is much more influenced by customers' experience on your 
Web site. Online branding is wholly interactive. Every element of a Web 
site~its entire look, feel, content, and service~contributes to its brand- 
ing online. An e-commerce company will have one shot at getting the 
branding right, or its visitors either will forget about the site or will 
choose never to return. 
Good online branding should result in customers having a positive, 
unique, and memorable experience on your site. Online branding is 
wholly interactive. Dissatisfied visitors and customers won't complain; 
they will leave and go elsewhere. 
Depending on your budget, some forms of marketing and branding 
may be too expensive to deploy immediately. On the other hand, some 
may prove less expensive than current methods of selling your products 
and service in the traditional retail marketplace. 
Whether you will apply online marketing and branding techniques 
to your current business or will develop a unique approach for a Web- 
only venture, think through these steps toward success: 
1. Research other companies' Internet marketing campaigns. 
2. Know and plan for the acquisition costs. 
3. Develop a plan of action. 
4. Know what online marketing mediums give the most 
"bang for your buck." 
5. Learn how to best use search engines. 
6. Continue to exploit print media advertising channels. 
7. Think beyond slogans and logos. 
8. Make your online brand usable. 
9. Deploy technology that creates a unique definition. 
10. Know and use your resources. 
Know What You're Up Against 
Before you develop your own unique marketing campaign, spend 
many hours researching those of other companies. Remember what you 
like and what you don't like. Your potential customers are apt to have the 

Marketing and Branding 
43 
same reaction. Afterwards, dig into these three Internet sites that spe- 
cialize in Internet marketing: www.adresource.com, www.internet.com, 
and www.net2b.com. 
It's important to acknowledge up front that a few online banners and 
targeted e-mails will not produce an automatic response. Almost 800 mil- 
lion Web sites now exist worldwide, competing for attention. Companies 
succeeding online are succeeding after allocating substantial resources to 
online marketing and branding. They will be your competitors. Therefore, 
do not commit capital and time to building a Web site if you aren't willing 
to spend considerable capital and time promoting it after its launch. 
A report by Simba Information estimates that online ad spending 
will reach $7.1 billion by 2002. According to the report, the biggest chal- 
lenge for Web publishers is to hold the audience captive long enough for 
potential customers to absorb an advertiser's message. To increase the 
chance of a message getting through in a medium with more than 800 
million Web sites, they must bombard the audience from many angles. 
Companies use a combination of traditional marketing methods, such 
as magazine ads and press releases, as well as online advertising at major 
portals such as Yahoo!, Lycos, and Excite. 
For example, sales for Camera World with a site at www. 
cameraworld.com grew from $1 million in 1997 to over $16 million in 
1998. The company sells analog and digital cameras, high-end and stan- 
dard camcorders, digital camcorders, VCRs, and DVD players to both 
customers and other businesses. For advertising, they experimented 
with some banner advertising and search engine listings. However, their 
most effective advertisements were print ads in Popular Photography, 
Petersen's Photographic, Shutter Bug, PC Photo, and various other cam- 
era or electronics-related magazines. They could best target their cus- 
tomers via these popular print publications, which also were industry 
standards. Camera World also forged partnerships with other online 
retailers in order to direct the most traffic to their site. 
Some companies' most effective advertising is word of mouth. Good 
word-of-mouth advertising can stem from a relatively small expenditure, 
as long the resulting marketing is well developed, well placed, and well 
received. For instance, K&L Wine Merchants at www.klwines.com sells 
wines and liquor. The company placed ads on Yahoo!, Lycos, and Side- 
walk for maximum visibility. But not until September of 1997 did they 
see sales jump. That month, the company was named as the "Internet's 
Top Wine Site" by Money Magazine. The resulting publicity led to a 

44 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
boom in business, which led to other spectacular word-of-mouth adver- 
tising. Time Magazine wrote that the site is best for rare and hard-to-find 
wines, and Smart Money magazine recommended the site to its cost- 
conscious readers as "the cellar to search first." 
Larger companies such as Amazon.com Inc., E~Trade Group, and 
eBay have focused on becoming brand names via the Internet. They 
have placed emphasis on marketing their site through trade magazines, 
press releases, banner ads, TV commercials, and other forms of market- 
ing. As a result, they flourish among the other similar e-commerce sites 
on the Internet. Most of these household names in e-commerce sites 
were unknown four years ago. 
Because they were early movers, their tremendous expenditures in 
marketing paid off. Other companies undoubtedly made the same 
expenditures with less effective campaigns, and they struggled to com- 
pete with names that were already well known. 
Plan for Acquisition Costs 
For any new or immature business, the price tag for attracting cus- 
tomers can be staggering. Online, the low percentage of customers who 
buy, the percent of repeat customers, and overall operating costs can make 
customer acquisition costs even more breathtaking for start-up compa- 
nies with small preexisting customer bases. McKinsey & Co. recently com- 
pleted a study of e-commerce companies and found these companies 
spend on average $250 to acquire each customer. Unfortunately, only 5 
percent of all site visitors will buy something at any one particular site. As 
a result, companies are spending more on acquisition costs than they are 
likely to make in profits from an average customer. 
Companies spend on average $250 
to aquire each customer. 
Companies dumping such massive chunks of capital into marketing 
understand that customer retention will ultimately drive their profit- 
making capabilities. But customer retention isn't cheap, either. McKin- 
sey & Co. reported that sites spend about $1,931 on site operations for 
every one repeat customer. 

Marketing and Branding 
45 
Overall, new customer acquisition costs ranged between $1.92 and 
$980. The cost of maintaining a repeat customer was between 27 cents 
and $16,000. The range was attributed to e-commerce businesses' vary- 
ing maturities and start-up costs, but McKinsey & Co. noted that costs 
were running, on average, 170 percent of revenues for e-commerce 
companies more than two years old. 
In planning your marketing and branding campaigns, you must 
prepare for extraordinary expenditures in attracting new customers. If 
cash doesn't permit, you must prepare to be extremely creative and 
resourceful and doggedly persistent in your pursuit. 
Search Engines and Directories 
Georgia Tech University conducted a survey in order to determine 
how a variety of people discovered specific Web sites. The results 
showed that the majority of the respondents discovered specific Web 
sites by search engine listings, by links from other sites or by advertise- 
ments in printed media. 
NEC Research Institute estimates that about 800 million pages exist 
on the Web, and a mere 16 percent have been indexed by the best search 
engines. AltaVista, the largest search engine, has indexed about 150 mil- 
lion pages, according to Forrester Research. HotBot has indexed about 
110 million, Infoseek about 75 million, and Excite and Lycos have 
indexed about 50 million each. Yahoo! is the most popular Web direc- 
tory, but only about 10 percent of all submitted Web sites ever get listed, 
and those lucky 10 percent still wait between a month and fifteen weeks 
for their listing to appear! 
Search engines and online directories, both extremely cost effective, 
are by far the most popular marketing opportunities. They catalog and 
list your Web site information so that when someone using the Internet 
searches for information pertaining to products or services that you sell, 
your potential customer locates your site. Search engines and directories 
function as listings of your site's theme and content, similar in function 
to a phone directory advertisement. 
As soon as your Web site is up and running, you should list its con- 
tents with several of the major search engines and directories or with 
those that are specific to your industry. Hundreds of lists are available to 
display the particulars of your company. Some of the major search 

46 
THE E-s163 
BOOK 
engines include AltaVista, Lycos, Excite, Infoseek, Northern Light, and 
HotBot. AltaVista provides 10 percent of all search engine referrals, 
according to Web Side Story. Yahoo!, a Web directory, provides 44 per- 
cent of all referrals. 
Although the distinction between the two is often confused or 
ignored, search engines and directories are the products of two entirely 
different processes. The processes, described below, also affect your Web 
site listing when you alter your site. If you, the Web site designer, edit 
your Web pages, the search engine technology reflects the changes fol- 
lowing the next search request. However, editing your Web pages does 
not automatically update your site listing in directories. 
The most efficient means of exploiting these search engines and 
directories is to list with sites that generate the most traffic. Research 
indicates that almost half of all Internet traffic generated by search 
engines and directories is a byproduct of Yahoo! Excite accounts for 
about 22 percent of the traffic generation, and AltaVista accounts for 
another 10 percent of the traffic. Because these three venues comprise 
three-quarters of the Web's traffic generated by search engines and 
directories, you should begin your marketing work with these three 
sites. Do not, however, ignore the more difficult to find specialty and 
industry-specific search engines and directories. 
The following seven marketing Web sites can help you better regis- 
ter your own: 
1. DirectoryGuide (www.directoryguide.com) features over 350 
search engines and directories, each organized into distinct cate- 
gories. 
2. MMG's WebStep Top 100 (www.mmgco.com/topl00.html) 
allows you to list your Web site on the top 100 search engines. 
3. The Submit Site (www.thesubmitsite.com) allows you to register 
your site. 
4. WebCom (www.Webcom.com/html/publicize.html) also allows 
you to register your site. 
5. Submit-It (www.submit-it.com) allows you to post your Web site 
details to more than twenty listings from a central location. 
6. SelfPromotion.com (www.selfpromotion.com) also submits sites 
to search engines and award sites free of charge. 

Marketing and Branding 
47 
7. If you need further information on search engines, WDVL's 
"How in the Web Will They Find Me?" (www.stars.com/Search/ 
Promotion) offers instruction for designing a site, generating 
publicity, and using search engines. 
A majority of the search engines and directories are easy, inexpen- 
sive, and effective to use, and it's easy to register your site without pro- 
fessional help. 
Search Engines 
Search engines create their listings with minimal human interven- 
tion. They crawl across the Web to gather information from existing 
Web pages. Page titles, body copy, and other elements each play a role in 
the resulting collection of data. 
Whenever you use a search engine to search the Internet, you enter a 
query, then receive a list of sites ranked according to relevance, or how 
closely content displayed on the site appears to match your query. 
Search engines follow rules that describe relevance according to the 
location of words and their frequency. Search engines check to see if the 
keywords appear near the top of a Web page, such as in the headline, 
subtitle, or in the first few paragraphs of text. Web pages with keywords 
appearing in the title are considered more relevant than others to the 
selected topic. In addition, search engines analyze how often keywords 
appear in relation to other words in a Web page. Those with a higher fre- 
quency are often deemed more relevant than other Web pages. 
Every search engine available on the Internet supports both the 
location and frequency method for listing and ranking sites. Some sites 
have added other criteria in order to rank pages, just as link popularity 
and potential "spamming" of the search engine with repeated keywords 
intended to increase a site's possible ranking among other search results. 
In order to have your site ranked effectively, follow six steps: 
1. Make all pages on your Web site accessible within three clicks of your 
home page. Most search engines will crawl only three pages deep 
on your site when searching for content to index your site. 
2. Submit your home page and one other important page, then let 
search engines begin crawling your site. Infoseek is the only search 

48 
THE E.-s163 
BOOK 
engine that requires you submit every page manually for index- 
ing. Other sites begin with your home page and then use criteria 
to determine how far they will crawl within your site. Submit 
your pages to several of the search engines listed below, because 
ranking criteria differ between each search engine. In this stage, 
do not expend too much energy learning the distinctions 
between search engine ranking methods~the most important 
goal is to get your site indexed. Just remember that legitimate rea- 
sons exist as to why searches on different search engines generate 
different results. After your site is indexed, continue on to step 
three, and begin tweaking its rankability. 
3. Make sure all your pages have the best possible TITLE and META 
description and keyword tags. HotBot, Infoseek, and other search 
engines give a slightly higher ranking to pages with keywords in 
their title and metatags. When writing these tags, keep the most 
important information up front. The first word should be the 
most important keyword. For instance, if you sell sportswear and 
running shoes to marathon enthusiasts, the first word of your 
title should be "marathon" following closely by "clothing,' 
apparel, "sportswear" and" " 
""Run" 
" 
"" 
snoes, 
and "athletic" could 
be other important keywords. The goal is to most closely match 
the queries of your targeted potential customers, so put yourself 
in their places. What are they most likely to type into a query? 
Brainstorm as many possibilities as possible, and put the most 
likely candidates at the top of the tags. Find more information on 
revamping your meta tags at www.siteowner.com. 
4. Monitor your submissions, and resubmit often. Every two weeks is 
a good goal. An engine that takes your submission one week 
might drop it a week later. Submitting too often could result in 
your site being classified as a spammer, but submitting less than 
once every two or three weeks could keep your site from getting 
in and staying in the search engine's index. 
Some search engines reduce the ranking of pages, or do not 
list them at all, if they detect search engine spamming. This type 
of spamming involves repeating a word multiple times in a title 
or metatag in an attempt to generate a higher ranking for a page. 
5. Get as many other sites linking to your site as possible. More and 
more, search engines are using link popularity as part of their 

Marketing and Branding 
49 
ranking criteria. Excite, HotBot, and Lycos rely on this in rank- 
ings and also use link popularity to determine how deeply they 
will crawl within your site when indexing. In order to gauge link 
popularity, these search engines determine which Web site pages 
in their indexes have a multitude of links pointing at them. 
6. Avoid the most common pitfalls. As we mentioned before, each 
search engine uses different criteria to determine rank. They also 
use different criteria when determining which Web sites to 
exclude. The following Web site schemes might sound like inven- 
tive ways to increase your site's ranking, but many search engines 
will throw your site out if they detect them: 
9 Repeatedly using a word on a page or in META tags. Search 
engines analyze pages to determine whether a word is used too 
frequently to occur in natural language. A keyword should not 
be repeated in META tags more than three times. 
9 Typing text that is the same color as the page background or 
very tiny. Mthough visitors to your Web site cannot see it, 
search engines will detect it. 
9 Using page redirects. Some search engines, including Infoseek, 
reject pages that take users to another page instantly and with- 
out their intervention. If you must use a page redirect, the delay 
should last about seven seconds. 
9 Submitting identical or duplicate pages to a search engine 
under different file names or submitting them more than once 
on the same day. 
Directories 
Directories require that the Web designer or a company representa- 
tive submit a form containing keywords that describe his or her Web 
site. Then, when a user enters a keyword for a search, a directory lists 
those sites whose authors have submitted that keyword as part of the 
search criteria. The most popular search engine, Yahoo!, uses directories 
as a method for categorizing information on their site. It's important to 
understand the process, because Yahoo! generates about 44 percent of 
all search engine referrals to Web sites. 
In order to register your site within the Yahoo! directory, you must 
search Yahoo! for your Web site and determine whether your site already 

50 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
is registered. If your site is already listed in Yahoo! but you want to 
change its comments, title, and/or placement, you can fill out and sub- 
mit a change form. 
If you are not already listed, then you must search Yahoo! to deter- 
mine which category or categories you wish to be listed under. Take your 
time. Specifying the appropriate category for the listing of your Web site 
is essential but far from easy, due to the extreme range and number of 
categories and tiers of information within them. 
Click the hyperlink provided byYahoo! to display a list of important 
pointers explaining how the directory is organized. Finding an appro- 
priate category for your site is at the heart of this process. Remember 
that Yahoo! surfers visit each site suggested, and proper categorization 
on your part helps Yahoo! process suggestions quickly. 
If you want to suggest a scheduled chat, live broadcast, or chat area, 
you should submit it directly to Yahoo! Net Events. If your site is in a 
language other than English, please check the list of non-English direc- 
tories to see if there is an appropriate International Yahoo! for your sub- 
mission. Sites that are in a foreign language represented by international 
directories are not added to www.yahoo.com. 
When you are content you have found an appropriate category, sug- 
gest your site from the category you think most appropriate by clicking 
on the "Suggest a Site" link at the bottom of that category page. An 
online form will display and request information about your Web site. 
Provide, among other information, your site's title, URL, and a brief 
description. Remember that suggesting a site is free, and the ultimate 
placement or nonplacement of your site within a category will be deter- 
mined by official Yahoo! Internet surfers. Unfortunately, they are so 
bombarded by submissions that they often do not have time to look at 
each one. Yahoo! has begun to offer a $199 express listing service that 
greatly improves the chances of a business being listed, and the service 
includes a seven-day decision guarantee. 
Otherwise, as we previously mentioned, getting listed by Yahoo! is 
an extremely lengthy and difficult process, although extremely worth- 
while. Yahoo! brings some sites up to half of their online customers. See 
searchenginewatch.com/sereport/9903-yahoo.html for more tips and 
advice on how to get listed on Yahoo!. 
If you do not wish to spend time researching the search engines and 
directories listed in Table 3.1 (as well as others) and registering your 
site, then seek one of many commercial services that will do the work 

Marketing and Branding 
51 
Table 3.1 
Search Engines and Directories 
Name 
Profile 
AltaVista 
Direct Hit 
Excite 
GoTo 
HotBot 
Infoseek 
Lycos 
MSN 
Netscape 
Search.corn 
WebCrawler 
Yahoo] 
One of the largest search engines on the Web, a favorite 
among researchers 
Ranks sites based on the number of hits received 
Offers a medium-sized index and integrates non-Web 
material, such as company information and sports scores 
Companies pay to be placed higher in GoTo's listings 
Favorite among researchers due to its large index and 
many search features 
Offers small to medium-sized index, but includes person 
listings and company pages 
A directory model 
Features directory listings and search engine results 
Offers a branded version of the Excite search engine 
A branded version of the Infoseek search engine, offering 
specialty searches 
Offers the smallest index of any major search engine 
Largest human-compiled guide to the Web with over one 
million sites listed 
for you. Both Yahoo! and Express Press can point you in the right direc- 
tion. Yahoo!'s announcement services provide links to guides and to orga- 
nizations that you can hire to help publicize your site. User information 
also is available within Yahoo's Web site. An alternative to Yahoo!, Express 
Press (www.xpresspress.com), distributes e-mail news releases to hun- 
dreds of media editors throughout the world, targeted by subject area. 
Advertising Banners 
You jump to a new Web site. Not much of interest on this page. As 
you prepare to jump somewhere else, you notice a small, flashing two- 
inch by one-inch advertising banner offering a product or service similar 

52 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
to those you were seeking. You click the banner and instantly jump to an 
entirely new site. The banner has done its job. Banner ads display on a 
Web page when a potential customer accesses the site. Clicking the ban- 
ner links visitors to your e-commerce site. 
Banner ads are one of the most blatant methods of marketing goods 
and services over the Internet. Research suggests that online banner 
advertisements perform as effectively as television advertisements in 
their ability to increase consumer awareness of brands. In addition, the 
recall level of a banner ad is equal to that of a television ad. So even if the 
banner ad cannot coax you to click through it, you still may take its mes- 
sage with you. 
The placement of banner advertisements is essential but wholly 
flexible. Banner ads can be placed on any site your targeted customers 
are most likely to frequent. For example, if you sell car insurance, you 
know that when customers buy a car, they immediately must purchase 
automobile insurance. You should want to place an ad banner on 
www.automall.com or a similar online car information site, such as 
www.kbb.com, the official Kelley Blue Book site, which values new and 
used cars for free. On the other hand, you may decide to place a banner 
at a bank's Web site, so that when car buyers apply for their car loans 
they can also apply for insurance. To determine where to employ your 
banner advertisements, consider site content, placement, and cost. 
In order to determine where your banner ads would be most effec- 
tive, answer the following questions: 
1. What are the demographics of my audience? 
2. What Internet sites cater to this market? 
3. If a visitor searched under the key word "insurance,' what sites 
would he or she reach? Can I place banner ads on those sites to 
redirect potential customers to my own? 
4. What traditional media can I employ to display my banner? 
5. Would a banner help my business if I placed it on the Web site of 
a national or regional magazine? 
After brainstorming, choose Web sites with the greatest number of 
potential clickers and that attract the same types of customers that you are 
targeting. Or try another good technique: Put yourself in your customers' 
shoes, and try to surf the Internet as they would. Go to www.yahoo.com, 

Marketing and Branding 
53 
and type in the name of your product, such as "car insurance?' Review the 
resulting list of sites. Visit the ones that seem relevant, and determine 
whether they offer banner placement. Typically, each site lists a contact 
number for banner placement opportunities. Some sites allow you to sub- 
mit banner ads directly from a Web page. 
After picking the best sites for placing your banner ads, consider 
where on their Web sites they will let you place your ads. Mthough ads 
can be placed anywhere on a page, they prove more successful when they 
are appear near the top of the page. The page-leading ad delivers a higher 
click-through rate than the same ad placed at the bottom of a page. 
Once you have considered your options for placing banner ads, take 
a look at your advertising budget. Some of the major sites charge a sub- 
stantial fee to place your banner ad on their site, while other may charge 
only a small fee. 
Web advertising is typically sold on a cost per thousand impres- 
sions, or CPM, basis. An impression occurs when a visitor to a Web site 
views a page where an ad is displayed. Banner ads are typically sold in 
quantities of 100,000 impressions. The cost may vary from $20 to $100 
per thousand impressions. Popular sites average $25 to $70 CPM and 
may offer ad agency discounts and volume or frequency discounts that 
hover around 15 percent below the gross rate. Because most sites have 
repeat visitors, 20,000 to 50,000 unique visitors may generate your 
100,000 impressions. Most software packages allow you to specify not to 
display a banner more than once during a single user session. 
In addition, some Web sites also sell advertising on cost per click or 
click through. This type of advertising provides a direct measure of 
response and ad performance, as you are billed according to the number 
of times a user clicks on the banner ad. In addition, this information can 
be easily tracked for analysis purposes. You can determine which sites 
performed best, and for which categories, search words, and Web pages. 
Although these advertising arrangements are available, most sites avoid 
selling this way. Poorly designed ads do not attract clickers, so ad rev- 
enue is reduced. 
Some Web sites generate substantial revenue from advertising fees. 
Sites such as Onsale.com rely on banner ads and other ads for a majority 
of their revenue. You may want to consider using your site as a host for 
other companies' advertisements. However, in some cases, banner ads for 
other sites prove problematic. For instance, you may notice that most 
major department stores, hardware vendors, and other large companies 

54 
THE E-s163 
BOOK 
do not place advertising from other sites on their site. These companies 
want customers to focus on buying their products instead of being dis- 
tracted by other companies' banner ads. 
Depending on your budget, banner ads can be a great way to market 
your products or services. When assessing their value, consider the sites 
that act as hosts, the placement of the banner ads on a site, and the 
expense associated with each. 
Online Classified Advertisements 
Several sites allow you to place classified ads for free or for a mini- 
mal fee. For example, Yahoo! has a classified section to place items you 
want to sell for free. Other major search engines also provide this ser- 
vice. Classified ads can be placed in several sites. For example, there are 
thousands of real estate sites that allow you to place ads to buy or sell 
homes or investment properties for free or at a minimal cost. These sites 
make their revenue from advertising. Their goal is to get as many cus- 
tomers as possible so they can charge other companies such as real 
estate, insurance, and mortgage companies higher fees for advertising 
on their sites. Also, most local newspapers and magazines are online. 
You can place your ads on these sites at a minimal cost. For example, 
The Baltimore Sun allows customers to place ads in all print editions 
of The Sun and in its searchable online version accessible via www. 
baltimoresun.com for as little as $19.99 per week. Customers there 
can search for items and have e-mails automatically sent to them when 
that item is advertised, which helps you, the seller, further target your 
customers. 
Message Boards 
Special-interest boards often serve as listing areas for product or 
service providers. These message boards tend to address special-interest 
groups, such as photographers, pet lovers, cooks, or specific industries 
or businesses, such as biotechnology fields, pulp and paper, or chemi- 
cals. Sometimes the special-interest groups are as simple and wide- 
reaching as parents or college students. One unique board has an 
ongoing and massive discussion about how aliens are avoiding human 

Marketing and Branding 
55 
contact, although they frequently visit earth. The lesson: Any type of 
customer you want to target is online and reading a message board. 
Boards can be a good supplement to your more visible and costly 
marketing plans. Yahoo! and Lycos both offer expansive listings of mes- 
sage boards via messages.yahoo.com and boards.lycos.com, respectively. 
To locate the boards that exist on many commercial sites, especially spe- 
cial-interest sites and the sites of news venues and magazines, search on 
any of the main search engines for keywords related to your products or 
services. 
E-Mail Newsletters 
In order to e-mail newsletters to a well-targeted group of con- 
sumers, you must choose registering users as part of your marketing 
plan and must design your Web site accordingly. If done well, registering 
users can be a valuable resource for gaining new customers, as well as for 
ensuring customer loyalty. When users register, you may ask them 
whether they want to be notified of future developments and special 
Web events and offers. If your content and products are good, there's a 
good chance your users will say"Yes" 
Once e-mail addresses are acquired, you can send e-mail messages 
to announce sales on products, to announce new products or events, or 
simply to promote select products or features. You even can design 
forms on your site that allow site visitors or customers to select the 
information they want to receive by category. For example, if you are 
selling clothing, you could set up your site so that visitors can choose to 
receive information about specific designers. If the designer announces 
a new clothing line or if you have a sale on a designer's line, you can send 
your potential or repeat customer an e-mail message alerting them to 
the special event. 
Ideally, user registration and e-mail technology should be com- 
bined for proactive selling. For example, if you are selling gifts, you 
could set up an online form to allow customers to enter information 
such as the birthdays of their family members or friends. After process- 
ing this information, you could send your customers reminders to pur- 
chase gifts before those dates. By capturing the date and providing a 
service for your customers, you add value to your products and generate 
more sales. 

56 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
E-mail messages are a great medium for marketing specifically to 
repeat clients. Consider an online pool supply store whose best-selling 
product is chlorine for swimming pools. Customers must replenish 
their chlorine supplies regularly. The Web site calculates how much 
chlorine is needed for a swimming pool and how long the chlorine will 
last and then generates an e-mail message to the customer. That e-mail 
is an automatic request form for reordering the right type and amount 
of needed chlorine. The customer can respond by clicking an element, 
usually a button, embedded in the e-mail message to place the order. 
Without this functionality, this same customer would have to remember 
that he or she needed to reorder chlorine and would have to then locate 
the site on the Web, remember how much chlorine was necessary, and 
then input the order information and payment method. The improved 
process ensures convenience for both the consumer and the business~a 
definite win-win situation. 
When e-mail is used as a medium for advertising, targeted e-mail 
messages are much more effective than scatter shooting. If your cus- 
tomer receives e-mail from your company that is of interest or some- 
how adds value, you have created a positive experience. On the other 
hand, if your messages are too frequent or impart little value, you create 
a negative experience. At best, your message is deleted. At worst, your 
potential customer feels irritated and denigrates your products or ser- 
vices. When advertising via e-mail messages, consider the guidelines 
that follow: 
1. Do not reward your customers for registering at your site by spam- 
ming them. Spamming means sending them incessant e-mail 
messages whether requested or not. To avoid sending e-mail to 
people who are not interested, ask them on your Web site if they 
want to receive e-mail from you. 
2. Treat the information a visitor leaves at your Web site as confiden- 
tial. Typically, sites inform users that they collect data for internal 
purposes only, such as analyzing sales trends. Respect the privacy 
of your visitors. They may become your customers. 
3. If you plan on selling the information that you gather, secure the vis- 
itor's permission. Have you ever received faxes in the middle of the 
night or useless mail from marketing companies? Companies also 
employ e-mail messages as a means of selling products and ser- 
vices. Mailing lists are being purchased and sold across the Inter- 

Marketing and Branding 
57 
net. If you sell visitor information, and it results in annoying or 
incessant e-mail to your customers, you have violated their trust. 
Do not trade long-term trust for short-term revenue. 
4. Use e-mail messages to follow up on the sale of a product or service. 
Often the only time that you become aware that a customer had a 
bad experience is after that customer vanishes. Remember that 
angry or dissatisfied customers do not complain; they disappear. 
Give all of your customers the opportunity to rate their buying 
experiences. You can include a questionnaire with a few ques- 
tions asking about their shopping experience. The information 
gathered can then be used to improve your site for future cus- 
tomers. Remember that customer service is more critical on the 
Internet than it is in brick-and-mortar stores. On the Internet, 
your competitor is just a click away. 
Most importantly, remember to include your URL several times in 
each newsletter you send. Make it easy for potential customers to click to 
your site and skim its contents. Also, include language on your newslet- 
ter inviting recipients to share its content with their friends and col- 
leagues. Don't assume they will share it; plant the idea in their head. 
Links on Other Web Sites 
Where do your targeted customers go when they surf the Web? Why 
aren't they at your site? Did they find another related site first? Then use 
those sites to help them find you! 
Search the Web for sites similar to your own, and then negotiate a 
cross-link with their owners. It may be much more difficult negotiating 
a cross-link with a site that has a greater traffic level than yours, but you 
should make an effort to persuade the owners. 
If simple negotiations fail, try compensating certain Web site own- 
ers for placing your link on their site. Some companies offer a referral 
fee~a percentage of the sale if a customer purchases a product via the 
link. For example, Amazon.corn offers Web sites 15 percent of a book 
sale when a customer purchases a book through a link to Amazon.com. 
The Yahoo! Store includes built-in tools to help you create and manage 
revenue-sharing links. Use the same strategies as those for banner place- 
ment, as discussed earlier in the chapter. 

58 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
Newsgroups 
Newsgroups gained their infamy about five years ago, when the 
Internet first became popular. At that time, two attorneys advertised 
their services by posting to every last one of thousands of special interest 
newsgroups on the Internet. The furor from their postings resulted in 
angry newsgroup users sending several thousand e-mail messages to 
these attorneys in complaint. The attorneys had violated the noncom- 
mercial nature of these newsgroups. As a result of their scatter shooting, 
the Internet service provider (ISP) unceremoniously dropped the attor- 
neys as customers. 
Newsgroup topics exist to suit every taste and interest, from tech- 
nology forums to gourmet food to aliens attacking the planet. Posting to 
these newsgroups is free, but posting randomly can have dire conse- 
quences. Use newsgroups responsibly. 
First determine which newsgroups might have participants whom 
you've already targeted as potential customers. Then post information 
that is informative to these groups. Do not advertise directly on any 
newsgroups, but concentrate instead on adding value to their discus- 
sions. Use information as power, and divulge tips, hints, or other tidbits 
that create interest among the participants. Pique their interest, and 
then direct them to your Web site for more detailed information. In 
order to use newsgroups as an advertising medium, include a signature 
file listing your uniform resource locator (URL) address. 
Discussion Lists 
Use discussion lists much like newsgroups to build online relation- 
ships with users who share the characteristics of customers you are tar- 
geting. Users subscribe and post to discussion lists in order to exchange 
information about particular interests. Instead of sending e-mails as 
they are received throughout the day, hosts of these lists compile the 
e-mails in digest form and e-mail them infrequently. 
These discussion lists represent a compelling medium for market- 
ing to potential customers, but, as with newsgroups, we advise that you 
use discretion. If you choose to participate, then create value for your 
fellow participants. Ensure that your exchanges are win-win, and your 
results will be more significant and long lasting. 

Marketing and Branding 
59 
Table 3.2 lists a few sites that contain bountiful information for 
both finding appropriate discussion lists and then effectively. Review 
each of these resources before developing a strategy to target discussion 
lists and their audience members. 
Table 3.2 
Discussion List Resources 
Name 
Profile 
Advertising 
Discussion List 
E-mail 
Discussion 
Group Resources 
Internet Marketing 
List Archives 
L-Soft Catalist 
List Exchange 
A nonprofit, sponsor-supported discussion group 
A directory of dicussion lists and resources 
No longer active, but archives are available 
The official catalog of discussion lists 
A list of discussion lists and resources 
Traditional Media 
Both small and large companies use traditional forms of marketing 
to publicize their businesses and to attract people to their site. 
Onsale.com launched a major television advertising campaign in order 
to publicize its Web site. Automall.com also uses television advertising 
to entice visitors to its Web site. 
As a starting point for your advertising efforts, place your URL on 
business cards, customer mailings, company letterhead, e-mail messages, 
yellow page ads, and any other spot that you currently use to market your 
company. You may also want to advertise your products and services in 
the newspaper, in local and trade magazines, in radio and television 
commercials, in infomercials, or on billboards. As more and more people 
make purchases via the Internet, online-only advertising will become a 
more viable method of mass marketing. For now, most successful Web 
sites advertise via a combination of traditional and online media. 
For example, we suggested that a major department store should 
consider auctioning their products online. We recommended that they 

60 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
place an ad in the newspaper, just as they would for a big sale. This 
advertisement would attract potential customers to the site because of 
the curiosity created and for the potential deals available. Once these 
customers became familiar with the process of the online auction and 
the resulting auction prices, they were hooked. 
As you survey traditional media, consider how businesses support 
their online efforts and how you can incorporate your online message. 
In a recent study conducted by the Response Marketing group, Web 
addresses, used as direct response mechanisms, appeared as frequently 
as toll-free phone numbers. Among the study's sample group, 58 per- 
cent used both Web addresses and toll-free numbers. Street addresses 
( 17 percent), "bingo" cards (4 percent), e-mail (4 percent), and coupons 
( 1 percent) were also used as direct-response mechanisms in the sample. 
The industries most likely to use a URL in their ads were real estate, 
water, and delivery services, followed closely by computer businesses, 
telecom organizations, and office equipment companies. The study also 
found that URLs are most often used as response mechanisms in the 
media whose clients were most likely to fit the description of well- 
educated, well-off Internet users. URLs were used most in computer 
magazine ads (93 percent), news magazine ads (88 percent), and finan- 
cial magazine ads (79 percent). The additional cost of adding a URL to 
your traditional advertising is minimal, but the benefits are invaluable. 
Press Releases 
Do you offer a product that is unique to your market? Does your 
product or service add value to the current marketplace? Is it part of a 
trend, or will it create a trend? The media spotlights products or compa- 
nies it feels are newsworthy, and the most newsworthy companies are 
unique or unusual and are spearheading a trend or are part of a larger 
trend that will affect its audience. Develop a news angle that positions 
your company within these newsworthy categories. 
For instance, are you the first company to offer a particular service 
online? Put it in the press release. Are you the first in the area? That's 
good, too. Are you changing the way a certain industry traditionally 
operates by going online? Now we're talking trends, and trend stories 
have weight. What will the media's readers, listeners, and viewers gain by 

Marketing and Branding 
61 
learning about your site? If your site could have a wider impact, then it's 
more important. 
To get your name swimming in media circles, develop a compelling 
reason that your site stands out from its competition, and then send 
press releases to your trade magazines, local newspapers, online maga- 
zines and business magazines. Call ahead to get the name, fax number, 
or e-mail address of the editor or reporter you will fax. The media are 
bombarded with thousands of story pitches and press releases each day. 
Getting it to the right person is half the battle. 
In addition to sending press releases to editors and reporters, some 
Internet sites allow you to submit and post stories directly that might 
be of interest to their readers. As with any marketing products, make 
sure the quality of your press releases matches the quality of the image 
you wish to project. Because you are sending the releases to writers 
and editors, spelling and grammatical errors are as deadly as factual 
errors. If you are not up to the task of writing a perfect news release, 
hire a marketing company to help. It's worth the investment; if a news- 
paper or magazine editor finds your site compelling, so will his or her 
readers. 
Just Give It Away! 
Glittery giveaway promotions work and are a popular way to entice 
new Web site traffic. TheKnot.com and other sites targeting brides-to- 
be commonly feature banner advertisements for giveaway promotions 
that include free honeymoons, wedding-day jewelry~even free bridal 
gowns for the big day. Women.com has an entire page of links to "flee 
stuff" including coupons and sweepstakes. The page gains credibility by 
showcasing sweepstakes winners. Sports Illustrated's online site featured 
a banner ad to offer $20 off a $50 purchase in a Dick's Sporting Goods 
online sports merchandise store at dsports.com. 
Advertise your promotion in traditional media as well. No matter 
what the medium, request that online users register in order to be 
entered in the giveaway, or require them to register in order to claim 
their prize. It's another way to gather precious e-mail addresses from 
visitors that will help you send targeted e-mails to a good potential cus- 
tomer base later. 

62 
THE E-COMMERs 
BOOK 
Branding for Success 
Is Kleenex the only form of tissue? Is Band-Aid the only form of 
adhesive strip? Is Coke the only form of cola? Branding is a powerful 
tool. Trademarking is something you do to the public, but branding is 
something the public does to you. 
Trademarking is something you do to 
the public, but branding is something 
the public does to you. 
Branding is the culmination of customers' experience with your 
Web site. It's a relationship that must be built and maintained with the 
goal that people will think of your brand first when they think of pur- 
chasing a particular product type. Online, this experience is much more 
than a logo, name, or a trademark, although these elements of advertis- 
ing should capture the unique ideas that allow your company to add 
value. 
Online, a brand must be multidimensional and must encompass site 
design, overall look and feel and an effective logo, as well as a positive cus- 
tomer experience. A recent industry study states that the top one hundred 
e-commerce sites spent an average $8.6 million each in 1998 to build their 
online brands and attract customers to their Web sites. Even the smallest 
companies in this group, those with one hundred or fewer employees, 
spent an average $2.2 million each on marketing, while the largest compa- 
nies in the group averaged $21.4 million. The top five marketing budgets 
in 1998, according to the report, belonged to Amazon.com ($133.0 mil- 
lion), E'Trade Group ($71.3 million), BarnesandNoble.com ($70.4 mil- 
lion), CDnow ($44.6 million), and Ameritrade Holding Corporation 
($43.6 million). 
These companies are willing to spend tens of millions on branding 
in order to be the frontrunners and the Internet's brand names. Books 
online? Amazon.com. Trading online? E'Trade. Compact disks online? 
CDnow. The principals know that if they brand early in the e-commerce 
wave, they will capture future markets. Remember the statistics; revenue 
will reach $2.2 trillion or more in the next four years. Capturing and 

Marketing and Branding 
63 
maintaining a small percentage could prove lucrative long after the ini- 
tial marketing investments have been paid off. 
Establishing a strong brand involves the following three steps: 
1. Know your customers. This is step number one in most areas of 
business. Remember, you may develop your product, your Web 
site, your marketing scheme, and your system of customer ser- 
vice, but only your customers can give you your brand. Remem- 
ber also that your best bricks-and-mortar customers may not be 
your best online customers. Therefore, the same branding tech- 
niques may not apply to both the traditional and online aspects 
of your business. 
2. Keep your brand convenient. Use Internet surfers' laziness to your 
advantage, and appeal to them through a simply designed site 
that allows for easy, near-thoughtless site navigation. A customer 
who does not want to browse~just get what he or she came for 
and leave--should be able to do so. Poll your customers to deter- 
mine the usability of your site. If it's not good, improve it in order 
to improve your branding. 
3. Use technology to add functionality. Use new technology inter- 
faces to add value to your site. Integrate your Web site with back- 
end databases, and add customer services, such as real-time stock 
quotes or stock portfolio tracking. Another technology-enabled 
service includes personalizing Web sites, shopping catalogs, and 
news pages so that users do not have to remember passwords or 
search for the information or products they deem most impor- 
tant or desirable. Make your site a convenient tool that adds value 
to users' day-to-day tasks, and they will return. 
Marketing and Advertising Agencies 
Considering the breadth of research and resources required to market 
and brand online, as well as the magnitude of related expenditures, you 
might want to turn to the professionals for help. Marketing companies can 
either support your marketing efforts or develop entirely new marketing 
concepts tailored to the new global economy. Before you employ a mar- 
keting agency, do some preliminary work yourself using the marketing 

64 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
strategies described in this book. This knowledge and background will 
help you to ask appropriate questions and get your best results. 
Most importantly, stay involved in the creative process of develop- 
ing your company's marketing and branding strategies. Beware of a 
marketing agency that hands you a template and then tells you "This is 
the way you must market." While some standard methods of marketing 
exist, each business is unique. The company you select to support your 
marketing and branding efforts should develop creative ways of convey- 
ing that idea to your customers. 
One 
marketing 
agency, Advanced 
Marketing 
Corporation 
(www.theultimatepromotion.com), serves as an example of the type of 
support you can expect. Their service, Ultimate Promotion, helps boost 
your Web site traffic. Their Traffic Building Package submits your Web 
site to more than 900 search engines and directories quarterly and sub- 
mits your Web site to over 500 popular links pages. In addition, Ulti- 
mate Promotion advertises your Web site with 5,000 displays of your 
banner ad. Each of these services generates visitors to your site~visitors 
you can then turn into customers. Additional information describing 
the company is available at their Web site. 
Table 3.3 lists companies that can assist with marketing and adver- 
tising efforts. See also www.adresource.com. 
Whether with a professional company or with your own 
e-commerce team, invest in marketing and branding. Combine tradi- 
tional selling methods with those offered online. The goals are to get as 
many people as possible to your site at least once. After they arrive, a 
good impression of your site, its content, and its design will help compel 
them to make a purchase. After this initial purchase, then you will focus 
on the customer service channels that will keep them coming back and 
buying again and again. 
Combine traditional selling methods 
with those offered online. 
In the end, a good overall customer experience can make your 
branding infallible, even when new competitors arise. When you reach 
your goal of creating and maintaining a popular site, the result is radi- 

Marketing and Branding 
65 
cally increased sales via word-of-mouth advertising and increased rev- 
enue generation by selling other sites' ads. 
Table 3.3 
Marketing and Advertising Agencies 
Company Name 
Profile 
THINK New Ideas 
Beyond Interactive 
Ad Up 
Online & Multimedia 
Marketing Group 
K2 Design 
Eyescream 
USWeb/CKS 
Deadlock Web Design 
A full-service marketing and communication 
company 
Features media planning, buying, and campaign 
management 
Offers site and banner design, as well as marketing 
consulting 
Offers e-mail marketing, Web development, and 
offline promotion 
A full-service interactive firm 
Provides online media planning, placement, and 
strategies, as well as creative development for 
banner and advertising campaigns 
Helps clients define strategies and build their 
businesses 
Web site promotion and design 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

First Impressions 
M ay Be Everla sti ng 
Click on the American Airlines site at www.aa.com. Look at the 
whistles and bells! Everything you could possibly want for travel, acces- 
sible from a host of tabs, pull-down menus, and links. It's all there, isn't 
it? Or is it? You'll spend a while familiarizing yourself with the site to see, 
and you'll have to log in to use all of the site's services. The links are 
effectively organized, and the site is entirely professional and attractive, 
but it will take a while to get what you want. 
Now go to Southwest Airlines' Web page, www.iflyswa.com. You'll 
find a much simpler home page that loads quickly and is easy to skim and 
to navigate. The logo is bright and obvious. Only a few internal links are 
listed, but they are clear and easy to navigate. A year ago, this page was one 
large graphic that looked and felt like a counter in an airport. All of the 
possible links and applications within the site weren't initially obvious, 
but physically, Internet users who had flown on an airplane before knew 
how to use the site. With both sites, Southwest Airlines had an effective 
Web presence that could be summed up with the following: Simple. Tac- 
tile. Easy to navigate. Efficient. Memorable. Good e-commerce. 
The overall design and mission of a Web site creates the first impres- 
sion for visitors. A well-designed Web page will balance unity and vari- 
ety and will support the business's message without overpowering it. 
Compare building a Web site to designing it: Building the site is the 
process of building the customer interface for an entire e-commerce 
67 

68 
THE E-s163 
BOOK 
Figure 4.1 How to create an efficient Web presence. 
system with architecture that provides automation for process effi- 
ciency. The goals are cost-effective sales and ease of use that increase 
customer satisfaction, retention, and loyalty. The more complete the 
automation, the more efficient the site in achieving these goals. 
Designing the Web site takes these principles and adds marketing 
and branding. Because the success of e-commerce so heavily depends on 
efficiency, it's no secret that the key to good Web site design isn't glitter, 
bells, and whistles; it's well-defined simplicity that provides an effective 
storefront. 
Follow twelve steps to a simple and efficient Web presence: 

First Impressions May Be Everlasting 
69 
1. Focus on the essential element: speed. 
2. Use wide, consistent site design to jump-start navigation. 
3. Enhance navigation with good link design. 
4. Make sure your site is reliable. 
5. Keep your overall look clean, professional, and consistent. 
6. Make graphics and layout reflect your business goals and image. 
7. Keep text readable, and make it enhance your image. 
8. Make fonts enhance a site~not detract from it. 
9. Make it easy for visitors to skim pages. 
10. Make your visitors feel confident. 
11. Use your resources: professional design agencies. 
12. Revisit your vision statement and goals. 
Focus on Essentials 
When users click onto a Web page, speed is the most significant 
factor determining whether they will stay or leave. In fact, online at 
www.cyberatlas.com, find the CyberAtlas/Watchfire Quality Test. Cyber- 
Atlas, the leader in compiling Internet research on the Web and Watch- 
fire, the leader in e-business quality analysis, have teamed up to track the 
performance of the Web's twenty-five most popular sites, and they give 
each a ranking based on criteria including the number of inoperable 
links and other Web page blunders. But the test's two top criteria are: 
1. No pages over 50 kilobytes in size, including graphics. 
2. No pages that take more than 20 seconds to download with a 28.8 K 
modem. 
Most Web surfers agree that speed is extremely important on the 
Internet, and most consider the biggest problem of the Internet to be 
Web sites that take too long to download. Graphics are the number one 
traffic-killer when it comes to Web site speed. The higher the byte size of 
your images, the slower your Web site will download. It doesn't matter 
how spectacular the graphics on your Web pages appear if Web users' 
patience expires before the images can load. Of course, it's important to 

70 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
use a few graphics to entice surfers, Web site viewers, and potential cus- 
tomers. However, it is possible to keep good images on your site that are 
no larger than 20 KB. In addition, images 3 to 5 KB in size will download 
almost as fast as text. Each additional 2 K adds about one second of 
download time on a 56K modem. 
The ability of graphics to load quickly depends on both color and 
size. The fewer colors, the faster the picture will load. When designing 
photos or other graphic images in the popular Adobe Photoshop, the 
default setting exports an image to .gif format, which defaults at 256 col- 
ors~a surely slow download! Use the "adaptive" setting and preview the 
image to export the .gif with as few colors as necessary. 
Other design programs will convert your images to .gifs differently. 
The key is to always be conscious of colors and to use as few as possible to 
still retain a good image. Also, make your images seem faster by saving 
them as interlaced images so the viewer will at least see something other 
than an empty box during download time. Speaking of empty boxes, 
always include alternative text for your images, too, so that the viewer will 
know what's coming and need not wait before moving on to different 
pages in your site. Loading a large image on to a Web site then scaling it 
down to the correct size for your page also is a mistake. The scaled-down 
image will maintain the byte size of the larger image and will take much 
longer to load. Determine the necessary dimensions for your Web page, 
and save your image as a .gif at those dimensions before you upload it to 
your site. If you want a large graphic on your Web page, try slicing it up 
into smaller images and putting it in a table in order for the image to 
download faster. Find the free program to dice images into more work- 
able piece at http://www.ziplink.net/Nshoestring/dicer01.htm. 
Easy Is Everything" Use Wide, Consistent Site Design 
If your Web site loads quickly, your next challenge is making it 
inherently easy to navigate. One of the first elements affecting a site's 
navigation is how the pages are laid out in relationship to one another. 
Another is consistency of design. 
Web sites can either be narrow or wide in design. A narrow site 
means that all information on the site is accessible from many clicks via 
a few initial links. As a result, your site is narrow and deep. Users access- 
ing a narrow site either have to click through many pages of information 

First Impressions May Be Everlasting 
71 
on your site in order to find what they are looking for, have to search the 
site to find what they are looking for, or have to find and view a site map 
of the site in order to find what they are looking for. 
If a site is narrow, having a search element accessible from the site's 
main page could be important. In any case, Web surfers are likely to give 
up and move on to another site rather than dig through a narrow site. 
Another solution is a wide site, where all of the information or cate- 
gories of information are accessible from the site's main page. This 
design allows Web users to access the information they seek without 
clicking through many pages. Research shows Web users prefer wide 
sites, which allow them to work faster and more accurately. 
Visitors work faster on wide sites because they have to make fewer 
decisions. From one page, they scan a list of choices. Even if the list is 
long, they only have to choose once. On a narrow site, they would 
choose from a sequence of short lists spread over several pages. They 
would have to make one choice after another. That takes time. 
Visitors work more accurately on a wide rather than a narrow site, 
because in a deep site they are more likely to get lost among the many 
layers of information. They may not remember where they saw some- 
thing that interested them as they wade through the site. They may not 
be able to find something they deemed important after the fact. Ever 
forget where you parked your car in a multistory parking garage? Or 
forget what level of a multilevel mall you entered on? The same princi- 
ple applies. 
Wide site design also can help a site's ranking on search engines. As 
we mentioned before, many search engines will crawl only three levels 
deep to find and index information on a site. 
Consistency of design will enhance a site's navigation. For instance, 
navigation bars are most commonly placed on the top and left-hand 
sides of a site, because Americans are accustomed to reading from left to 
right and from top to bottom. Americans expect to find navigation bars 
at the top and left-hand side of pages, so they will look in those locations 
first. On an extremely long page, a short navigation bar at the bottom of 
the page is helpful and common. Web users will know where to find and 
how to use navigation bars in these places. 
Consistency of width also is important. Web users are used to 
scrolling from top to bottom to find all the information on a page. They 
are not, however, accustomed to scrolling from left to right. Therefore, 
information on a Web site that is too wide for browser windows will not 

72 
THE E-COMMEP, CE BOOK 
be as widely noticed and accessed, and a too-wide Web page will damage 
the ease of navigation for the site. 
Once you develop a site design you are comfortable with, use cer- 
tain key elements such as navigation bars, content layout, and standard 
graphics or logos as templates for your site. If you place these elements 
in the same spot on every page, visitors will quickly absorb the layout 
and will know where to look for the information they seek. 
Present Interior and Exterior Links Well 
When deciding how to present internal and external links on your 
site, focus on removing the guesswork for visitors and on enhancing 
navigation. Think of the weather page in your local newspaper, where 
the column of forecasts is kept for major cities nationwide. Any major 
city will be there, and the cities will be listed in alphabetical order. The 
list is the same every day, although the weather information (highs, 
lows, and precipitation) will change. 
Web site navigation requires similar design. From a list of choices, 
visitors should know exactly what they would find from each keyword. 
The meanings of links should not overlap or be difficult to decipher 
because of poor or difficult language. In addition, all links should be in 
the same place on a page, prioritized from the visitor's perspective. If a 
site has many internal and external links, these links should be grouped 
into categories to help speed the visitor in finding the appropriate link. 
Links should not be embedded in text, scattered around the page or 
associated with graphics. Two links should not go to the same place, 
either. Redundancy adds confusion. 
Reliability Counts 
Another category that influences rankings on the CyberAtlas/ 
Watchfire quality test is reliability. Sites with links that have broken 
internal and external links get a ranking much worse than their com- 
petitors. Sites that are not always up and running will damage their con- 
sumers' confidence, as well as hinder Web users' abilities to access and 
conduct transactions via their site. 

First Impressions May Be Everlasting 
73 
Because reliability is facilitated greatly by your systems architecture, 
we will revisit this topic in our architecture chapter. For now, plan on 
designing your site so that, if a link is missing or the site does temporar- 
ily go down, visitors can easily find the means to access your company or 
a company help desk through another route, such as an e-mail address 
accompanied by a quick-response promise or a twenty-four-hour, toll- 
free customer service line. 
Tackle Your Overall Look 
Your Web page, especially its home page, is your online storefront. 
This one page will create an immediate impression on each of your visi- 
tors, and it will determine whether the majority of visitors stay or go. 
Overall, this first page should look clean, professional, and attractive, 
much like the lobby of an office building. 
A clean site has no broken links, no missing page title, and no miss- 
ing graphics. It is uncluttered and carefully uses banners and links. It's 
not swamped with advertisements. Banners work well if used sparingly 
and in appropriate places, but they can detract from a site if their place- 
ment is inconsistent or these banners are too heavily used. 
A professional site closely mirrors 
the image of the company it 
was designed to portray. 
A professional site closely mirrors the image of the company it was 
designed to portray. No one definition of"professional" exists. A profes- 
sional image for a Harley Davidson dealership will vary greatly from a 
professional image for an accounting firm. This is OK. However, the gen- 
eral rules of business apply. A site should not be flashy, gaudy, profane, or 
otherwise offensive. A professional site will be tailored to attract the trust 
of its clientele. 
An attractive site combines these elements, along with the elements 
of color. Colors should be subdued and attractive. Bright, neon-green 
headlines or navigation bars scream "Amateur!" Use colors that enhance 
your design but do not cause it to jump off a page. 

74 
THE E-s163 
BOOK 
Whether you're choosing colors for a graphic image, a background, 
or for colored text, give some thought to what types of colors are appro- 
priate for your site and the image you're trying to convey. Whole courses 
are taught on the proper uses of color and how to evoke various emo- 
tions with appropriate colors. 
Bright primary or secondary colors such as blue, red, yellow, 
orange, green, or purple are loud, happy colors. They are seldom, if ever, 
used by stodgy corporate sites, but kids will love and react to them. If 
your design is mostly black and white, then such a bright color could be 
used to call attention to certain elements, such as a short bit of text. 
Remember that these bright colors seldom look dignified. 
Darker shades that contain a large proportion of black are 
much more dignified. A dark blue, hunter green, or brick red can add 
life to a black-and-white page without overwhelming it. Try using col- 
ors like these for headings or for other small elements, such as naviga- 
tion bars. 
Other important shades include pastels and earth tones. Pastel 
shades are laid back and undemanding. A pastel shade is often a good 
choice for a background, if white or very light gray isn't appropriate. 
Earth tones such as light tan or brown are organic, unobtrusive, and 
popular. They can be used in either dark or light shades, and they tend 
to contrast well with primary colors. Regardless of what colors you pick, 
use them sparingly to create visual interest on your site. 
While you're thinking about which colors would best serve your 
interests, remember that working with colors on a computer screen is 
quite different from working with colors for print. While print applica- 
tions usually use a cyan, magenta, yellow, and black (CMYK) color 
model, the Web uses a red, green, and blue (RGB) color model. This 
model uses three numbers from 0 to 255 to represent each of three col- 
ors. However, Web browsers can display only a small subset of the 16 
million possible RGB color combinations, and the browsers' subsets are 
not consistent. Therefore, Web designers stick to a Web-safe color palate 
to ensure that visitors to their sites will view the site in the colors they 
designed their site with. If designers use a color that's not in the Web- 
safe palette, a user's browser may substitute another color. Netscape 
navigator and many other application programs have a predefined set of 
colors or a color table that they use to display images in HTML pages. If 
a color used in an image is not found in the color table, the browser will 

First Impressions May Be Everlasting 
75 
either substitute a color from the color table that is similar to the color 
specified in the image, or it will dither the colors to approximate the 
desired color. Find a good source of information on colors and color 
combinations at: wdvl.comlAuthoringIGraphics/Colour/. 
Use even more caution when considering colors for backgrounds. 
Busy backgrounds can make text impossibly hard to read and can 
detract significantly from other content on a Web site. Mthough a well- 
chosen solid color background can set the mood and give a site a unique 
identity, choose carefully. Color is powerful, and different colors will 
have different connotations for your visitors. For instance, a white back- 
ground implies a no-nonsense business attitude, while a black one 
evokes an air of creativity and mystery. Red and orange excite the senses 
and increase heartbeat. Blues and greens are more restful. Yellow 
reminds us of energy, sunshine, and flair. 
Compare www.washingtonpost.com with www.beyondideas.com. 
The Washington Post's online site uses white backgrounds and careful, 
subdued colors that reflect its staid corporate image. Beyondideas.com 
is a Web site creativity company. For those with flash technology, its site 
begins with bright colors, moving sights, and sounds. However, after the 
introduction, the Web site reverts to its nonflash version, where profes- 
sional layouts and no-nonsense white backgrounds are the rule. As a 
result, Beyondideas.com has presented itself as a creative company that's 
still a company. From its Web site, you walk away impressed by the com- 
paw's image: a group of creative professionals. This is the power of good 
Web site design. 
For each example of professional-looking Web design you find on 
the Web, you will find many more examples of amateurish design. 
Avoid the following pitfalls: 
1. Busy, bright backgrounds. 
2. Busy, complicated graphics. 
3. Bright, elementary-looking headlines and navigation bars. 
4. Carelessly or overly used frames that clutter a page. 
5. Extra long pages. 
6. Under construction signs. 
7. Visual clutter: too many banners, buttons, and pointless 
animation. 

76 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
Figure 4.2 No-no's in Web design. 
Use Graphics and Layouts Well 
We've already discussed that too-big graphics and too-intricate lay- 
outs are hallmarks of poorly designed, slow-to-load pages. However, 
well-designed and well-placed graphics can enhance good layout to 
relay an important corporate image in an instant. The graphics and lay- 
out of your home page contribute heavily to your first impression. 
Make sure your layout and design are symmetrical. Think about 
balance of graphics, images, and margins on a page. The page should be 
visually pleasing, not off-kilter. Have someone else edit your site for 
symmetry. 
Also concentrate on the quality and appropriateness of your 
images. If you have a serious site, you don't want cartoonlike images on 
your site. If your company image is more playful, you will want images 

First Impressions May Be Everlasting 
77 
that reflect this. When using graphics in layout, remember that any 
graphic that has a directional aspect should be placed on the page with 
the intent of drawing visitors' eyes in toward the page. For instance, if 
you have an airplane on the top right-hand corner of your site, make 
sure its nose is pointing downward and in toward the rest of the page. 
Keep Text Readable 
Your text should say the same thing to your visitors as your image. 
Eliminate discrepancies between what you say in print and what you say 
visually. If you are sending conflicting messages, neither will be received. 
Choose words that are as good for your company as your logo. A logo 
might communicate instantly, and text may take longer for visitors to 
consume and to digest. But do not assume that text is secondary. Choose 
your verbal elements carefully. 
Your words must stand out on your page. Surround them with 
plenty of white space. Words crowded by images will make your site 
visually difficult to digest and also will decrease the probability of visi- 
tors actually reading the words. If you have large blocks of text for read- 
ers, remember to control your line length. 
Long an important tool for print designers, controlling line length 
greatly increases text's readability. Imagine a newspaper page without 
columns. The slab of text that would cover the page, margin to margin, 
would seem overwhelming and imposing. You, as the reader, would be 
unlikely to begin reading, let alone finish an article. For this reason, 
newspapers and magazines divide their text into columns. Those 
columns break up text into digestible pieces. 
Keep this in mind when placing your text on the page. Control your 
margins. See www.omaha.com/OWH, the online site for the Omaha 
World-Herald newspaper, which uses blocks of black and muted colors to 
help draw readers' eyes onto text kept solidly within easy-to-read margins. 
As important or more important than the appearance of your 
words are the words themselves. Poor spelling, bad grammar, and care- 
less punctuation seriously detract from the appearance and readability 
of a site. They hinder a reader's ability to focus on content and destroy a 
reader's ability to respect the site as authoritative or professional. 
In addition, such mistakes reflect poorly on the Web site owner and 
the owner's product. If you are not a gifted writer, take steps to improve 

78 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
your skills. Have someone proofread and edit your work, or hire some- 
one to write your pages for you. Do not ruin a well-designed site with 
poor text. 
Make Fonts Enhance a Site-Not Detract from It 
Select one font for all of your headings and subheadings. Select the 
same font in a smaller size or a different font for your text. Use boldface, 
italics, or size to distinguish important elements, but keep your fonts 
consistent. Too many fonts on a page will make the page visually confus- 
ing and amateurish, just like using too many colors. 
The purpose of fonts is to convey information. Well-used font styles 
will allow your visitors to glance at your page and to take in all the key 
points. 
Remember that many users can or will specify via their own 
browser's preferences which font they will view your site in. Do not rely 
too heavily on a specialty font to convey meaning on your site. Instead, 
concentrate on using white space, different sizes, and different styles of 
the same font in order to draw attention to certain elements. Small bits 
of text can be presented in color, if you wish to draw attention to them. 
In general, the standby black text is best. 
Make Your Pages Easy to Skim and Revisit 
Dividing your pages into easy-to-digest bits is essential. Make sure 
headings, subheadings, groups of links, and text are all separated. Con- 
sistency of design within your site will help. Draw attention to impor- 
tant elements with bold text, but do not underline anything that is not a 
hyperlink. 
Most importantly, think from a visitor's perspective about how your 
site is laid out. If you were surfing the Web and came upon your site, 
would you find the most useful and dynamic elements first? Or would 
you have to wade through text and explanations in order to find the 
unique and useful elements of the site? 
Remember that many visitors will spend merely seconds on your 
site without clicking to an interior page. If your pages are easy to skim 

First Impressions May Be Everlasting 
79 
and digest, then more will leave with a distinct impression of your site, 
even if they leave quickly. 
Again, remember the importance of consistency, even if informa- 
tion on your site is updated or revamped often (as it should be.) If visi- 
tors to your site find information there that they want to see as it is 
updated, they are likely to bookmark the page. When they pull up the 
bookmark days, weeks, or months later, it's important that they find the 
page again. 
Make Your Visitors Feel Confident 
This is an essential element of good Web design. Because many visi- 
tors are not comfortable divulging personal information or conducting 
transactions via the Web, you must include elements that will put them 
at ease. As a Web-based business, you will have visitors and customers 
who are anonymous until they announce themselves. You want their 
e-mail addresses and other bits of personal information in order to bet- 
ter tailor your site to their tastes and in order to cultivate your client 
relationship. 
Therefore, tell your visitors outright what your plans are with the 
data they share with you. Include a statement about what you are doing 
to safeguard their information. If you are not going to share the e-mail 
address they provide you with other vendors, then tell them so. In addi- 
tion, give them the chance to say "no" to future marketing emails from 
your site~then respect their wishes. 
Think about providing an entire page of information~a privacy 
policy~that divulges exactly how you will and will not use their infor- 
mation. Tell them how you accept orders, and the steps you take to 
ensure the security of your transactions. Tell them how you gather infor- 
mation and who has access to it. Tell them how you use the information 
you gather. Being up-front about information gathering and transaction 
policies will help customers to trust you with their information. 
In addition to posting such a policy, consider posting customer tes- 
timonials on a page online. Ask satisfied customers to be your references 
and to provide you with such statements. In return, provide links to 
these customers' personal pages or make other concessions you feel are 
reasonable for their efforts. (Paying them for positive testimonials 
would immediately call into question the validity of those statements.) 

80 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
Use Your Resources" Professional Design Agencies 
Design agencies can add value to your site via its appearance alone. 
If you do not have a team of creative individuals who are savvy or who 
have the time to learn about Web design, consider seeking the help of a 
design agency. When choosing an agency, keep in mind pricing, experi- 
ence, and flexibility. 
If you sell a product in a retail shop or by catalog, you tell the cus- 
tomer the price up front. Perhaps you use a retail price and a sale price as 
important assets in your marketing scheme. Demand that the design 
agencies you consider give you the same up-front pricing. Ask whether 
they charge by the hour, by the job, for a full site of services, or by 
another formula. When you're starting a Web company, budgeting is 
essential, and Web design is seldom cheap. Companies charge anywhere 
between $500 and hundreds of thousands of dollars to build Web sites. 
Some services will be billed up-front, and some will not be included in 
your design quote. Make sure you know what services are and are not 
included. Hosting and secure servers, merchant accounts, software, and 
promotion services rarely are included in the up-front design charge. 
Once you have some ideas about your site, write a concise letter for 
potential Web site designers. They can't give you a price unless they have 
some idea about what you want. If you can only afford $500 to design 
your site, then keep your letter short and concise. Companies won't allo- 
cate the resources necessary to thoroughly review a twenty-page letter 
for a $500 job. On the other hand, if you plan to pay the design company 
thousands of dollars for their services, then you may want to make the 
letter more formal and call it a Request for Proposal (RFP). 
Whether formal or informal, the letter should describe your busi- 
ness, image, and target market; briefly list the important elements that 
you would like your site to include, and list URLs of sites you appreciate 
or that are similar to the design you want. 
After you have written the letter, keep the following steps in mind: 
1. Present your letter, paying special attention to defining the cus- 
tomers you want to target, to several Web site designers and ask 
for their feedback. See how their initial reaction and vision works 
with yours. 
2. Get bids from several Web site designers before committing to 
one. 

First Impressions May Be Everlasting 
81 
3. After you find the best candidate, put your design and payment 
agreement in writing. 
Never hesitate to ask for references and examples of a company's 
work. Look for the elements of good design we have listed above. Are 
their sites professional? Do they all look alike, or is the company flexible 
with their design and able to use a company's unique selling point in 
order to create an original and effective Web presence? Does the design 
agency have e-commerce capabilities beyond design, such as designing 
payment systems and database systems for collecting and analyzing cus- 
tomer information? If not, another vendor may be able to offer you a 
more complete and cost-effective solution. 
Finally, make sure that, after the Web site design is complete, you or 
someone on your team will be able to maintain and update the site. 
Know your ownership rights and what intellectual property is involved 
on your site. For instance, a Web site designer may use technology for 
your Web site that the design company uses for many Web sites. Other 
companies may own other programs used on your site, and some pro- 
grams may have been designed specifically for your site. Make sure you 
understand what you will own, if anything, and how you may use the 
underlying technology in the future. 
Your site may also include certain copyrighted and trademarked 
material, including original text, graphics and computer programs. If 
the designer is creating something for you to own, make sure he or she 
transfers ownership of this intellectual property in a written contract. 
Table 4.1 
Online Resources for Web Design 
Name 
URL 
Description 
Web Developers 
Virtual Library 
ZDNet 
Small Business 
h ttp ://w w w. w dvl .co m/ 
h ttp ://www.z d ne t.co m/ 
smallbusiness/ 
Complete library of resources 
for both beginning and 
advanced Web designers 
Library of articles and other 
tips and advice on starting and 
maintaining a small 
e-commerce venture 

82 
THE E-s163 
BOOK 
Revisit Your Vision Statement and Goals 
If you chose to enlist the assistance of a design agency, remember 
that you are asking for just that: assistance. You are responsible for mar- 
keting your services in a way that will turn visitors into customers. You 
must have a set plan and well-established vision for your company 
before you can fully utilize the services of a design company~or before 
you can fully utilize the services of your own partners in creating and 
effective Web design. After you have read about how you can best pre- 
sent yourself online, use your vision of an effective Web presence to 
reexamine your current business vision and goals. Hone or redefine this 
vision and these goals in light of your new knowledge. Remember that 
flexibility and innovation are a good portion of online success. 
Remember that flexibility 
and innovation are a good portion 
of online success. 

Keep Your Customers 
Good online businesses today rely on customer relationships built 
upon mutual advantage and trust, the way businesses always have. Only 
today, the challenge is heightened by the global competition provided by 
the World Wide Web. Many products or services are likely to be available 
elsewhere at a competitive price. Your customer relationships will help 
define your practice and make your product unique. 
Before you can sustain your success in e-commerce, you must ask 
yourselfi How can I use the efficient technology available via the Inter- 
net and still create personal relationships? How am I going to maintain 
customer relationships in the digital world? 
A warning: Don't make implementing good customer service and 
relationship building online overly complex. Although the technology 
to support some ideas for relationship building might be complex, the 
principles are simple. Your goal is to develop a great customer experi- 
ence by giving the customers what they want: simplicity, service, and the 
ability to accomplish their goals without hassle. 
In fact, although each of you reading will develop different answers 
to the previous questions, we guess that most answers will coincide 
somewhat with old business adages~those cornerstones of the mom- 
and-pop stores that still propel large chain stores today. Try "Service 
with a smile" or "Quality, Service, Cleanliness." Customers appreciate 
"The customer is always right." And never forget to say"Thank you" and 
"Please come again." 
83 

84 
THE E-s163 
BOOK 
The trick is to translate these adages to online relationships. It's not 
difficult; it just takes planning in order to develop the appropriate 
support systems for customer service as you develop your e-commerce 
venture. 
Follow these steps to keeping your customers: 
1. Adapt "Service with a smile" to influence your responsiveness. 
2. Redefine "Quality, Service, Cleanliness" for online content. 
3. Use follow-up e-mails to say "Thank you. Please come again?' 
4. Use technology to find an ounce of prevention. 
5. Be neighborly: Chat and discuss with your customers to 
cultivate your online relationship. 
6. Suggest complementary products and services to increase both 
customer satisfaction and sales. 
7. Keep your hands above the table. Let your customers know what 
to expect at all times. 
8. Personalize your Web site for better service. 
9. Let your customers control your relationships. 
Service with a Smile 
Adapting the principle of friendliness to service provided online 
might sound like an impossible task. After all, customers can't see you 
smile online. They can, however, judge from your eager reply that your 
company is glad to hear from them, appreciative of their presence, and 
open to additional comments. For example, at a party, the people who 
walk from group to group introducing themselves and talking to each 
group are considered friendly, polite, and outgoing. Those who keep to 
themselves are considered unfriendly and aloof. In this same manner, 
your quick attention to the customer and continuing online conversa- 
tion with them will make your company seem friendly and welcoming 
of them as recurring patrons. 
If you smile when you talk on the phone, customers can hear the 
difference in your voice. Without the audio cues of voice communica- 
tion, it's much easier for customers to misunderstand you and your 
interest in their situation. Therefore, speed of response becomes essen- 
tial in showing customers they are important. 

Keep Your Customers 
85 
When designing an e-commerce Web site, it should include some 
prominent means of contacting the company, such as a button for quick 
e-mails via the open Web browser. Customers may choose to contact the 
company with general product questions, or they may issue questions or 
complaints related to an online transaction. When the customer sends 
that e-mail, he or she will expect a quick reply. No more than twenty- 
four hours should pass between the e-mail and its response. A fast, 
friendly response will let your customers know that you value their 
opinions and online experience and that you are working diligently to 
keep them happy. As soon as the customer receives this response, a per- 
sonal relationship, facilitated by the Web, has been established. 
This very simple exercise in customer service makes a big impres- 
sion on the anonymous Internet. However, too many companies lose 
their chance to create a personal relationship by being slow or not 
responding to e-mail messages. Having the time to sort, evaluate, and 
respond to each customer e-mail may feel like an overwhelming task to 
the entrepreneur consumed by other duties of the e-commerce start-up, 
but this chore should not be allowed to slip through the cracks. 
When e-service vendor Brightware (www.brightware.com) tested 
the United States' 100 largest companies online, 15 percent answered the 
simple question, "What is your headquarters address?" within three 
hours. About 36 percent could not be e-mailed from their Web address. 
Another 10 percent never responded with the answer to the question, 
while some took up to twenty-three days to respond. Imagine that the 
question had been from a consumer who received a defective product 
and needed the address to return it. The customer, if he or she received a 
belated reply, would have felt undervalued in the transaction and would 
have been unlikely to return to that site. 
To avoid this pitfall from the beginning, create a twenty-four-hour 
e-mail response policy that is respected companywide. Try designating 
one person as a sort of e-mail receptionist~someone who can monitor 
the general e-mail account and respond to general questions immedi- 
ately, then sort and distribute e-mails to the individuals who can most 
quickly and effectively address the customers' more in-depth questions 
or concerns. Remember to designate a back-up receptionist for when 
the first person is away. Decide who will authorize replies and within 
what time frame, if authorization is necessary. 
If responding to e-mails immediately will not be possible for a few 
days, or if a more in-depth response will take more than twenty-four 

86 
THE E-COMMERCE BOOK 
Hello! Thank you for visiting us at www.website.com. 
Please take a moment to give us your honest feedback, 
and we'll happily answer any questions you may have. 
E-mail address: 
How did you hear about Website.com? 
I~ Online advertising 
I~ Word-of-mouth 
I~ Newspaper/magazine 
I~ RadiorFV 
t~l Other 
Have you ever bought from website.com before? 
IZI Yes 
No 
When is the next time you anticipate purchasing a 
website.com or similar product? 
I~l Never 
I~ < :3 months 
1~ 3-6 months 
[~1 6 years-1 year 
I~ > 1 year 
Additional comments, questions or concerns: 
Thank you for your time. We at website.com should respond to 
your questions or comments within one business day. 
Figure 5.1 Sample online survey. 

Keep Your Customers 
87 
hours to conjure up, consider using a free auto responder service avail- 
able online (see Table 5.1). Companies can consider having these auto 
responders acknowledge all queries and designate how long they can 
expect to wait for a reply. Smaller companies can improve efficiency by 
developing standard responses to frequently asked questions and work- 
flow processes that notify senior managers if a response has not been 
sent within the agreed-upon time flame. 
Larger companies should consider e-mail response software agents 
(see Table 5.1) that can significantly automate the e-mail response process. 
A more substantial online customer service department could be created 
to handle nothing but customer correspondence. Amazon.com is reported 
to have more than 200 customer service representatives who handle cus- 
tomer e-mails, and as customers' complaints pop up on representatives' 
screens, they quickly assemble responses from an electronic library of 
more than 1,400 routine remarks. Amazon offers special rewards to those 
customer service representatives who handle messy situations with finesse 
and ensure a repeat customer. Representatives have the authority to 
quickly waive small shipping charges and other inconsequential fees that 
do very little to improve Amazon.com's bottom line but can alter a cus- 
tomer's perception of the company permanently and for the better. 
Regardless of the size at which you start, remember that e-mail 
responsiveness is often your first and most efficient porthole for enter- 
ing into personal relationships with your customers. It's one key to pro- 
viding that one-to-one touch that will reward all of your online efforts 
with customer loyalty. 
Table 5.1 
Responding to E-Mails 
Programs that allow you to 
personalize email 
www.d igita l-impact.corn 
www.guesttrack.com 
Free auto responder services 
www.myreply.com 
www.freedback.com 
E-mail response software agents 
www.b rig h twa re.co m 
www.mustang.com 
www.delanotech.com 
www.mcsdallas.com (Calypso) 
www.aditi.com (Talisma) 

88 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
In addition to responding to e-mails, in order to deepen your com- 
pany's relationship with a customer, it is important to learn more about 
his or her wants and needs. You've already made your e-mail address 
prominent and easy to find, together with your toll-free number. Now 
consider the use of forms that can gather small bits of required infor- 
mation from your Web site visitors and potential customers. See 
www.freedback.com for free online feedback forms, such as those that 
ask for an e-mail address, the length of time before the customer next 
seeks to purchase your type of product, and a few lines for the cus- 
tomer's personal comments about your site, if they have any to add. An 
example of such a form is shown in Figure 5.1. Your response is likely 
to drop if you require more detailed personal information up front, be- 
fore potential customers submit a simple question, feedback form, or 
request. About 12 percent of U.S. companies in Brightware's survey 
required such personal information up front. 
If you do want to request information more personal than an e-mail 
address, or if you want to increase the likelihood that a correct or cur- 
rent e-mail address will be provided, post your company's customer pri- 
vacy statement in a prominent location. If the statement is long, include 
a prominent link to that privacy statement in the text below your feed- 
back forms or e-mail address. No one likes to discover unsolicited bulk 
mailings in the inbox of their favorite personal e-mail account. No com- 
pany wants the poor reputation of causing such inconvenience and 
annoyance, either! 
If your online business partners with other businesses and shares 
customer information for marketing purposes, then consider creating a 
box to check or uncheck on your response form that states, "Yes! I want 
to receive periodic newsletters about similar product information and 
services" or "Please send useful product updates and news to my e-mail 
account" 
Quality, Service, Cleanliness 
Traditionally, customers discern the quality of a product by word- 
of-mouth referrals from family and friends, from the look and feel of the 
selling establishment, and from physical contact with the product itself. 
Service and cleanliness help them determine the quality of a product 

Keep Your Customers 
89 
and of an overall shopping experience. Customers expect top-quality 
products to be sold by attentive, professional-looking merchants. They 
will pay more for a shirt at Nordstrom, a high-end department store 
famous for its attentive personnel, than they would pay for that same 
shirt at a store with shabbier surroundings and customer service pro- 
vided only at the cash registers or a customer service booth. The same 
holds true online. The professional look of a Web site, as well as the tone 
and choice of wording on that site, can contribute to the visually"clean" 
feeling that helps establish trust. Prompt replies to online customer ser- 
vice queries add with this "clean" feeling to promote a perception of 
quality online. 
Customer Service Q&A with Author Juanita Ellis 
E-commerce entrepreneur: 
I am currently in the process of setting up an online storefront to 
sell handmade jewelry. My product line is typically sold to department 
stores in the United States. I currently send a brochure of my products 
to several department stores, and the buyers order between five and 
twenty-five pieces of jewelry. Once I go online, I will be taking over the 
responsibility of selling and servicing my customers. What are some of 
the ways I can ensure that my customers receive the service they need 
without having to provide twenty-four-hour customer service phone 
support, which is not an economical choice for me at this time? 
Juanita: 
You are focusing on the right area! Customer service plays an even 
bigger role when introducing and selling products on the Web. The key 
is to understand how your customer buys products and the type of 
information they need to make a decision. Think about the department 
stores that are currently buying your products. What type of informa- 
tion have they requested? For example, what are some of the unique fea- 
tures of the products? What is the cost of the product if they buy more 

90 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
than a quantity of five? Is there an incentive to buy significantly more 
pieces? This type of information must be provided to help the customer 
make the purchasing decision. Most importantly, now that you are 
going online, customers will want to know information such as ship- 
ping costs, return policies, delivery dates, and special packaging. Easy 
access to this information can be critical in making the sale. 
So how do you provide all of this information? Let's start out with 
some basic techniques that have been used by both small and large com- 
panies: 
Product Information 
For each product, provide a short and a long description. The short 
description includes product name, description, cost, shipping charges, 
and delivery time. The long description should include special features 
of the product and other information in which you think the customer 
will be interested during the purchase. The more information you pro- 
vide, the more comfortable potential customers will feel in deciding to 
make the purchase. 
Develop a Question-and-Answer Section 
Initially, when you set up the site, think about the types of questions 
that your customers ask when purchasing your jewelry. You may even 
want to ask some of the salespeople currently selling your products in 
department stores. For example, customers may ask questions like, 
"What do I use to clean the product?" or "Is the jewelry water resistant?" 
Customers also will want to know about the return and/or exchange 
policy. In addition, include a section where customers can enter their 
own questions and you can provide responses via e-mail. These ques- 
tions may eventually be incorporated into your online question-and- 
answer section. 
E-mail Response 
One of the best methods to provide personalized customer service 
online is to include a confirmation of their purchase via e-mail. The 
e-mail should include the expected delivery date, total cost of the pur- 
chase, shipping charges, and a short "thank you" note. Take this a step 

Keep Your Customers 
91 
further by including a small survey on their shopping experience. Over 
time, the surveys will provide you with valuable information about your 
customers' experiences while shopping your site. In turn, this informa- 
tion will give you feedback on what is working well and not so well on 
your Web-based storefront. Your own customers will tell you what you 
need to do to beat the competition and to succeed. 
A 1-800 Number 
I know you do not want to provide a twenty-four-hour, seven-days-a- 
week customer service hotline. However, consumers in some situations 
want to speak to a sales representative and ask additional questions in per- 
son, and others refuse to make online payments but will call and make 
payments via the phone. At the minimum, allow your customers to leave a 
voice mail at any hour. You may also consider hiring an answering service 
that is responsible for taking phone calls when your office is closed. This 
will help ensure that you are not losing potential customers who want to 
purchase a product but do not have the answer they need immediately or 
do not want to put that credit card number online. 
............ in servicing your customer, 
put out the red carpet. 
No matter which of these ideas you choose to implement, keep in 
mind that the next online jewelry store is one click away for your poten- 
tial and returning customers. In servicing your customer, put out the 
red carpet. Good customer service will differentiate your Web site from 
the rest of the World Wide Web. 
The Customer Is Always Right 
Merchants who implement this saying may take a few losses with 
untruthful customers, but their reward from good customers is immea- 
surable loyalty and confidence that customers will enjoy~or at least 
approve of~every shopping experience they have with the merchant. 

92 
THE E-s163 
BOOK 
Ensuring that the customer feels "always right" begins with the 
before-mentioned prompt reply to e-mails, even if they are substantial 
complaints that must be evaluated within the company. Answer all com- 
plaints promptlymwithin twenty-four hours is, again, a good rule of 
thumb. Have someone designated to answer complaints or to route them 
to the appropriate person for maximum efficiency in replying. If the 
complaint is serious and a offer of resolution will take time to develop, 
then send an e-mail notifying the complainant that their complaint has 
been heard, a proposed resolution is forthcoming, and give them some 
timeline for receiving the expected reply. 
Along these lines, sometimes twenty-four hours will seem too long 
to wait for an answer to a complaint. List your company's customer ser- 
vice phone number on your Web site for those customers' complaints 
that feel more like crises. If no one will be available after hours to listen 
to a complaint, provide voice-mail access, and ensure a reply within one 
business day. Sometimes allowing customers or clients to vent their 
frustration when they need to is enough to win their trust and respect 
and to keep them coming back. 
Mistakes within your company inevitably will happen. Prepare to 
keep your customers despite the occasional blunder by offering incen- 
tives for your customers to try you again. In a restaurant, a maitre d's 
apology for poor food or poor service may include giving the dinner to 
the customer for free. Online, an incentive could be an electronic 
coupon to apply on a future purchase or a free gift or product sample. 
Choose to offer any incentive that shows a customer that the blunder 
was happenstance and uncommon and that your company is commit- 
ted to their satisfaction. Actively seeking their forgiveness and approval 
via prompt communication and an extra incentive to return will reward 
you in the long run with customers who feel valued, heard, and appreci- 
ated on the vast and lonely Internet. 
Thank You, Please Come Again 
Those words are still the golden phrase of customer appreciation, 
spilling from the lips of cashiers and clerks in small shops and large 
chains everywhere. They're the last thing a customer hears before leaving 
a store, and they remind a customer that his or her business was valued, 
that the transaction was pleasant, and that he or she is welcome to return. 

Keep Your Customers 
93 
Because of the extreme cost-effectiveness of e-mails, it makes sense 
to use that medium and follow up all of your transactions with similar 
"Thank you, please come again" e-mails that remind the customer that 
his or her business was appreciated. In a store, a clerk or cashier would 
be able to tell from a customer's tone and appearance whether or not he 
or she was satisfied with the transaction. Because the online experience 
takes away this personal responsiveness, these "thank you" e-mails 
should contain a means for the customer to submit feedback on the 
quality of his or her transaction with you. Send the e-mail from an 
address that allows the customer to respond by hitting the "Reply" key 
on their e-mail program. Ask them a short series of easy-to-answer 
questions about the quality of their transaction, and you're likely to 
receive a reply. The more lengthy the questionnaire, the fewer people 
will feel they have time to complete it. 
The Web site Bizrate.com uses promotional offers, raffles, and give- 
aways to convince customers to complete more significant, voluntary 
surveys about the transactions conducted with its member businesses. 
Complete one of their surveys to get an idea of good questions that, 
when answered, could benefit your future Web site development and 
transactions. Larger companies could consider evaluating Bizrate.com 
for a list of member businesses and information on how to use their 
product to evaluate their own Web transactions. 
If your online operation is still too small to make large-scale cus- 
tomer service evaluation cost-effective, develop your own "thank you" 
templates and online surveys. Don't feel there's any one wrong or right 
question to ask or that sending only one "thank you" e-mail is necessary. 
At several points in the transaction, even an extremely busy customer 
could appreciate follow up e-mails. Good times to send out "thank you" 
and follow-up e-mails include: 
1. As soon as the order is received. Use this e-mail to thank the cus- 
tomer heartily, verify online payment and approximate time 
before the order is shipped, and include a customer service 
phone number for any questions the customer may have. 
2. When the order is shipped. Use this e-mail to thank the customer 
again, provide a shipping date and package tracking number, 
estimate when the order should arrive, and include a customer 
service phone number. Most commercial shipping services have 

94 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
package tracking systems that will help your online company 
facilitate this service. 
3. A couple of days after the order should have arrived. At this time, 
the customer should have had a chance to evaluate the product, if 
it arrived as scheduled. At this point, you can offer incentives for 
referring other customers and discount coupons for returning 
for subsequent purchases. You can include e-mail addresses and 
phone numbers that will help track the package if it hasn't 
arrived on schedule. You can also include e-mail addresses and 
customer service numbers for product questions and com- 
plaints. Most importantly, this is a good time to send a brief 
questionnaire about the quality of the transaction, including sat- 
isfaction with the product and customer service. 
4. On a regular basis, via new product newsletters. Place your cus- 
tomers on a biweekly or monthly newsletter list that notifies them 
of product upgrades, product news, or new products. Continue to 
send electronic coupons and incentives for referrals and return 
business. Don't pester your customers by sending too-frequent 
reminders, and provide a means for them to request to be taken off 
the product newsletter list. Customers who feel pestered by your 
frequent e-mails after the sale are unlikely to return or to refer 
others. On the other hand, if you don't send newsletters, your cus- 
tomers are less likely to see your name and brand in the frequency 
required for easy recall and true brand recognition. Remember 
that every follow-up e-mail should reinforce the favorable feel of 
the prior transaction and should entice customers to return. This 
will help reinforce a positive customer relationship. 
Mso, make it easy for customers to complain. When someone com- 
plains, he or she is presenting you with an opportunity to collaborate in 
solving a problem. You can then build loyalty and referrals. Just make 
sure you have a good process for handling complaints with some agreed 
service levels so you can monitor your performance. If you find few cus- 
tomers are issuing complaints, don't assume no one is complaining. 
Assume that your system for hearing complaints is failing somehow. 
Retool your Web site so that customers can more easily access you with 
complaints and can feel confident that their complaints will be heard 
and responded to; and, if necessary, you could consider offering a prize 

Keep Your Customers 
95 
or some reward for the best feedback or improvement suggestion. Any 
criticism an e-commerce venture receives is constructive, not detrimen- 
tal, and can only increase that company's competitiveness, if the criti- 
cism is heeded, discussed, and acted upon. 
An Ounce of Prevention 
Mong the same lines, why wait for your customers to complain? 
Because of package and order-tracking software, the merchant should 
know before the consumer if a problem arises with the order. A forward- 
thinking merchant can make sure these checks on the purchase, process- 
ing, and shipping process are in place and can intercept problems before 
they reach the consumer. For instance, if the purchase did not go 
through, begin immediately remedying the problem with the hopes of 
saving the transaction. Customer service specialists should identify 
where the purchase went wrong, such as the wrong expiration date or 
misspelled name entered for a credit card purchase. The customer can 
be e-mailed quickly about this problem, with the hopes that he or she 
will choose to provide the correct information and allow the transaction 
to continue. The chance of the transaction never happening increases as 
the amount of time that lapses after the initial online purchase decision 
increases. 
In addition, although automated e-mails can be precious boons to 
efficiency and can help respond to customer concerns quickly for maxi- 
mum effectiveness, sometimes a truly personal response is needed to 
save the transaction or to ensure repeat business from the customer. If 
some element of the transaction has failed, and the result is significantly 
delayed shipping or an inability to provide the product at all, the mer- 
chant should work proactively and notify the consumer immediately. 
Otherwise, by the time the consumer realizes that the transaction has 
gone awry and takes the time to contact the merchant, he or she is 
already dissatisfied and frustrated with the transaction. The customer 
will appreciate the fact that the vendor cared enough to intercept and 
solve the problem rather than wait for the customer to navigate the cus- 
tomer complaint process. This "ounce of prevention" can not only cure 
whatever ill has occurred within that particular transaction, it can also 
solidify a trust-based customer relationship for life. 

96 
THE E-s163 
BOOK 
Be Neighborly: Chat and Discuss with 
Your Customers 
In a bricks-and-mortar shop, customer relationships are built 
through the customary,"Hi, how are you?" small talk. Mthough such idle 
chatter would look ridiculous in any online format, similar customer 
relationships can also be built and maintained by the use of chat rooms 
and discussion forums. A chat forum hosted by a well-known expert in a 
particular field can be a good way to drive new and repeat traffic to your 
Web site, provided it is properly marketed. For instance, advertising a 
local golf celebrity's live online chat session on perfecting putting in the 
newspaper's sports section could drive many new customers to your site. 
Advertising the chat solely on your Web site would only encourage 
returning customers and would not increase your new-customer traffic 
flow. Hosting virtual events and conferences also could prove useful 
for some online companies who wish to court a very specific type of 
business-to-business client. At www.webex.com, find a free service for 
the sharing of documents and presentations and a program that enables 
customers to jointly surf the World Wide Web. 
Discussion groups can not only create and maintain relationships 
between you and your customers but also can help customers get in touch 
with one another. These can be either unmoderated, in which case they 
may have more credibility, or moderated if you prefer more control. Mod- 
erating the discussions ensures that off-putting conversations are inter- 
cepted and your company image is maintained, even though the customers 
are doing all the work to lead, encourage, and develop the discussion sec- 
tions. Discussion groups can be self-hosted, or you can utilize the increas- 
ingly powerful services provided by the free communities at www.deja.com 
or clubs at www.yahoo.com. These latter services can be links from your 
home page and allow messages to be sent to members, new members to be 
personally invited, and a number of relevant forums created. 
Mthough online communities created via e-commerce sites seem 
plentiful these days, their popularity is driven by this simple truth: 
Online communities can be extremely powerful marketing tools. Arthur 
Armstrong and John Hagel in their book Net Gain divide these commu- 
nities into four categories: 
1. Fantasy: People assume new personalities or create new environ- 
ments, such as combining players from different sports teams to 

Keep Your Customers 
97 
Fantasy 
Interest 
Relationship 
Transaction 
Figure 5.2 Types of online committees. 
form custom "fantasy teams" that compete in online leagues 
against other such teams. 
2. Relationship: People who have shared life experiences, such as 
divorce, difficult children or life-transforming diseases, come 
together, mainly to support each other. Some fun-to-read exam- 
ples that promote a product or service include the communities 
on dating and relationships at www.therulesbook.com and 
www.whatmenwant.com. 
3. Interest: People with a common interest in a topic gather to learn 
and share about the topic. 
4. Transaction: Where people buy and sell products and services. 
If you are not going to create an online community because it is too 
expensive or inappropriate, then you may want to consider ferreting out 
existing communities that you can sponsor or where you can place 
advertisements or editorials in order to draw new customers to your site. 
Would You Like Fries with That? 
Another means of valuing your customer and adding value to his or 
her experience is to suggest products or services that complement prod- 
ucts or services that interest them. Businessmen and women with little 
free time will appreciate the convenience of one-stop shopping. Examine 
the products you are offering online, then ask yourself: "What can I do to 
add value? Will another product or service make this more useful or 

98 
THE E-s163 
BOOK 
manageable for my customers? Can I offer to send them news or product 
updates that will help them while furthering our relationship? Is there a 
product or service available for purchase that will help my customer 
accomplish his or her goals?" 
Add value to his or her experience. 
Amazon.com and CDNow, for instance, create relationships among 
the products they offer online and instantly suggest similar or compli- 
mentary products and information to customers accessing their infor- 
mation online. Search for a particular book on Amazon.corn, and you'll 
find a list of the books most commonly purchased by people who also 
bought the book you were seeking. CDNow will suggest music by artists 
and in genres favored by those who also sought your musician. 
When you can add value to your product with other products, not 
only are your chances of grossing more sales from each customer higher, 
the chance is higher that they will return to find new products or services 
that will fit their interest or meet their needs. The trick is to make sure 
this information is usable and accessible. Make sure the suggested prod- 
ucts are within eyesight of the products the customer already is seeking 
or is buying. If additional information can be provided on another Web 
site, make sure that information is only a click away and that customers 
do not leave your Web site in order to access this information. 
Keep Your Hands above the Table 
In some cultures, it is inappropriate at dinner to have one hand on 
your dinner fork and the other below the table. Why? Because it is 
unclear who else's hand you could be holding with that hand beneath 
the table. Online customers feel the same. They want to know exactly 
what both of your hands are doing before they're willing to put enough 
trust in you to complete a purchase. They want to know up front what 
products and shipping will cost, how long they can expect to wait for 
your product to arrive, and what they can expect from you if the trans- 
action somehow goes awry. Knowledge of what to expect takes the fear 
out of buying and thus encourages transactions. 

Keep Your Customers 
99 
For this reason, the following information should be evident on 
your Web site: 
1. In-depth product information. A short "teaser" description should 
be listed first, in order both to pique clients' interest in a new 
product and to help them find any specific product they seek. A 
link to more in-depth information should be easily accessible 
from this teaser description, perhaps by clicking on a thumbnail 
photo of the product or by clicking on the product name. 
2. Shipping charges. If shipping is flee, advertise it! Make this a sig- 
nificant selling point. According to a survey by Cyber Dialogue, 
www.cyberdialogue.com, free shipping was a major factor in the 
decision-making process for 90 percent of online adults who 
made holiday gift purchases in 1999. On the other hand, if you 
choose to have your customers pay for shipping, make sure these 
charges are evident up front. If these charges are not calculated 
and disclosed until the check out process, the chances are greater 
that a customer will feel shocked about the added charges and 
Figure 5.3 What customers need when online shopping. 

100 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
abandon the online shopping cart at the last minute. If you must 
charge for shipping, also consider offering shipping discounts 
for purchasing additional items. Disclose this freely as an adver- 
tising point, as well as an important notice to your potential 
customers. 
3. Shipping times. Let customers know how long it will take to 
process their order and get the package out the door. If the prod- 
uct usually ships within 24 hours, display that information 
directly under the product. If the product is temporarily out of 
stock, and shipping could take an indefinite amount of time, 
display that information instead. Even if the delay in shipping 
could dissuade some customers from placing an order on that 
product, they will trust your promises of service on other, similar 
products. 
4. Product return and~or exchange policies. Because these policies 
may be lengthy, provide a prominent link to the page with this 
information. Be warned that a short return period, an exchange 
or store-credit-only policy, and especially an "all sales are final" 
policy are serious obstacles to winning customer trust and gain- 
ing sales online. Because the customer cannot examine the prod- 
uct firsthand before making a purchase, he or she must have the 
perception that the online business stands wholeheartedly 
behind its products and believes just as strongly that the cus- 
tomer will either be satisfied or will have an easy channel for 
remedy. 
5. The shopping basket. The shopping basket should be displayed for 
one-click access on every page, and when clicked upon, it should 
quickly display all products currently earmarked for purchase. 
The customer should be able to easily add or delete items or to 
change quantity and quickly recalculate total product costs and 
shipping charges. If navigating around and altering the shopping 
cart is difficult, the chance of the shopper abandoning the cart 
before checkout is astronomical. As we mentioned earlier in the 
book, few customers who select items for purchase ever check 
out with those items. Most online transactions are abandoned 
before they can be completed. 

Keep Your Customers 
101 
Personalize for Better Service 
Relationships can also be built effectively and efficiently, simply by 
getting people to repeatedly return to your Web site. To get people to 
keep coming back to your site, you must provide them with a reason. 
This can be relevant, frequently changing information. Better yet, it can 
be a personalized page. For instance, personalized weather data available 
at www.weather.com (The Weather Channel) makes the Web site a 
quick source for one-click weather data among its customers. Cus- 
tomers can choose which cities or zip codes they would prefer as their 
primary weather information area, then they can choose a list of alter- 
nate cities whose weather data will be available for viewing via a quick 
pull-down menu. Customers can choose what weather maps they want 
displayed, as well as other personalized details. 
At www.bluefly.com, the online clothing outlet store, customers can 
customize their own catalogs and thus choose to view only those prod- 
ucts suitable for them. They begin by filling out a lengthy, specific ques- 
tionnaire that includes the customer's preferred clothing and accessory 
designers, as well as the customer's shoe size, hat size, and every size in 
between. They can change the catalog at any time, but only clothing and 
accessories in their particular size and preferred style will be displayed. 
Effective personalization does not have to include customer-specific 
content, however. Personalization can include maintaining password- 
protected private areas, using cookies that allow the site to remember the 
user on repeat visits, having personalized start pages (similar to many 
portals), building databases that produce personalized content, and cre- 
ating different entry pages for separate categories of users. Larger compa- 
nies may want to invest in personalization software, such as that offered 
at www.firefly.com, www.broadvision.com and www.guesttrack.com. 
Perhaps the most effective personalization is remembering clients' 
purchasing information, so that they can engage in "one-click shopping" 
Streamlining the checkout process encourages customers to come back 
to your site rather than to seek out a competitor. Web surfers are lazy 
online. They don't want to get out their credit cards and type in all six- 
teen little digits, their birth dates, their shipping and billing addresses, 
their work and home phone numbers, and their e-mail address. They 
want to click on a product, choose "purchase now" and have it arrive on 
their doorstep within a few days. Online is all about convenience. Other- 
wise, online shoppers would still be found in bricks-and-mortar stores. 

102 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
As an added bonus, not only does personalization of this nature encour- 
age return customers and more online purchases, tracking customers' 
purchasing information also helps you, as the merchant, to directly target 
product and service promotions likely to interest specific customers, 
based on their past buying habits. 
Customers Now Control the Relationship 
In the digital world, customers now exist who report they have 
developed a more significant relationship with an online company than 
they have with their neighborhood grocer, despite the fact that they have 
no human contact online. This is because they feel more in control of 
the relationship with the online company, where they can get the infor- 
mation they want when they want it, rather than relying on some under- 
trained, under-resourced human salesperson in an offline store. With 
new technology such as Web-based video phones spreading rapidly, 
soon even people who want human contact with an online organization 
will be able to achieve it. 
Therefore, while human relationships can be neglected on the Inter- 
net, this pitfall can be avoided with a little effort. In fact, a clever entre- 
preneur with the right customer service tools can provide more 
thorough, accessible, and personal service online than he or she could in 
a bricks-and-mortar shop. The challenge is to view the Internet as a tool 
with which to enhance our customer relationships, rather than an 
obstacle to creating them. 

Fulfillment s 
That Work 
It's no secret that the Internet has revolutionized the way goods are 
sold to consumers. Consumers have been empowered to select their 
purchases from a vast array of competitive services and to base their 
purchasing decisions upon boundless product information also avail- 
able online. E-tailers have gone far in presenting and selling goods 
online. It's the transition from online purchase to tactile delivery~the 
fulfillment process~that has many merchants stumped. 
Christmas 1999 brought the fulfillment crisis into the media lime- 
light. Customers moved online in droves, hoping to find the perfect gifts 
without the headache of notoriously imperfect holiday crowds at tradi- 
tional shopping malls. Although the World Wide Web could offer them 
the boundless product options and promises of prompt shipping that 
shoppers expected, shoppers found that many Web businesses could not 
fulfill their offers and promises. Web businesses' fulfillment channels 
were vastly under-resourced for the spike in online holiday shopping. 
E-tailers found themselves spending big bucks to save face with their 
customers. For instance, when a bug in the Toysrus.com distribution 
software caused the Web site to overestimate its ability to deliver Christ- 
mas gifts in time, the company issued $100 gift certificates to customers 
who demanded to cancel their orders. Customers whose canceled orders 
arrived anyway were allowed to keep them free of charge. Even Web 
retailers, including Amazon.corn, generally respected for its top-notch 
103 

104 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
customer service, found themselves crippled. Shoppers frustrated by 
high-traffic-induced Web-site slowdowns tried to call customer service 
for help and faced an average hold time of thirty minutes at the com- 
pany's call center. As a result, many shoppers' faith in online shopping 
was eroded, and their perception of the brands with which they experi- 
ence flawed transactions were permanently altered. Companies who 
failed during the holidays last year may not be easily forgiven this year. 
Clearly, neglecting fulfillment creates disastrous results. Fulfillment, 
representing the end of the site transaction, is a crucial part of the cus- 
tomer experience. You don't want to lose customers who have come 
this far. 
Neglecting fulfillment creates 
disastrous results. 
Begin to establish fail-proof fulfillment channels through the fol- 
lowing steps: 
1. Learn the obstacles to fulfillment today. 
2. Know your customers' expectations. 
3. Know your shipping options, including national and global 
fulfillment networks. 
4. Tackle other fulfillment areas. 
5. Engage new information technology that enables high-speed 
fulfillment. 
6. Discover e-fulfillment solutions. 
7. Evaluate whether supply-chain technology could benefit your 
enterprise. 
8. Plan for spikes by developing capacity flexibility. 
Why Does Fulfillment Seem So Difficult Today? 
As online shopping rose into the commerce limelight, the focus 
stayed tightly on marketing and product offerings online. The big ques- 
tions were who was going to shop online, when they were coming online, 

Fulfillment Channels That Work 
105 
9 7 
Do I P~/for s~iPPl~ Does my customer pay for shipping? 
How much should i Warehouse? 
Should I outsource fulfillment? 
Should I use an escrow com_an_ y.~ 
What carrier do I use? 
How do l handle returnS? 
Figure 6.1 Considerations for the e-commerce entrepreneur. 
and what they would be willing to purchase in a virtual store, without the 
tactile process of traditional product selection. Few questioned how they 
would get the products once they were purchased. After all, catalogs and 
mail-order businesses had been taking orders and filling them by mail 
for more than a century. How could filling an online order be any differ- 
ent? Why would fulfillment of online purchases require any special plan- 
ning or concern? 
The answer arrived loud and clear: Online transactions were differ- 
ent because they began in a virtual world. Few anticipated the challenges 
of moving from a virtual presentation and sale to the delivery of physi- 
cal products. While shopping online, customers can obtain their desired 
products on demand, purchase them almost instantly, and have them 
delivered to the intended point of use. They expect the same instant effi- 
ciency and control over the fulfillment end of the process. Online mer- 
chants also change their online product offerings more fluidly and 
frequently than traditional catalog or mail-order merchants. An entire 
product line can change in a matter of minutes. As a result, both cus- 
tomers and the merchants themselves place untraditional expectations 
on what today remains a vastly traditional fulfillment process. 
In addition, online fulfillment is still relatively new, and new tech- 
nologies arrive daily to help facilitate the types of internal/external 
information exchanges and supply chains necessary for the fail-proof 

106 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
fulfillment of customer orders online. More importantly, these tech- 
nologies help facilitate the exchange of information with the customer, 
in order to give the customer the same feeling of empowerment during 
the fulfillment process that he or she currently enjoys in the beginning 
of the transaction. 
Know Your Customers' Expectations 
Internet commerce has made it possible to buy and sell goods in 
near-real-time transactions. The customer is empowered to customize a 
good deal of the transaction process by choosing shopping, payment, 
and shipping options. However, customers do not expect the efficiency 
of the transaction to end with the sale. They expect the fulfillment 
process to proceed with the same visibility, efficiency, and dependability 
as their online purchasing experience. As a result, shoppers expect a 
greater level of efficiency from e-tailers than they do from traditional 
businesses. 
At the same time, customers do not trust that this efficiency will be 
delivered. According to an Andersen Consulting study, fewer than half 
of online shoppers make a purchase online more than once a month. 
Although online transactions take a quick eleven to fourteen minutes 
on average, these shoppers still conduct the majority of their transac- 
tions in brick-and-mortar shops. Although an argument could be made 
that these shoppers are simply slow to break old habits, it's more reason- 
able to believe that some obstacle is keeping them from fully trusting 
their transactions to the Internet. These shoppers are obviously aware of 
the value and speed available on the Internet, because they do complete 
a dozen or more transactions online. Chances are that they hesitate 
because they doubt the ability of online businesses to meet or succeed 
their expectations for trustworthy performance. 
The enormous amount of near-real-time information available 
online further heightens customers' expectations for online purchase 
fulfillment. When a customer has complete control over the shopping 
and purchasing process, he or she expects to be able to track the back 
end of the transaction with the same efficiency. A nervous customer 
who purchases a gift close to a deadline, such as a holiday or a family 
member's birthday, will want to know each step of the way how his or 
her order is being processed. Their inability to track this process physi- 

Fulfillment Channels That Work 
107 
cally may drive them to shop at a traditional store, where they know 
they will have a gift in hand as they exit the premises, even if the 
process takes substantially longer than an online gift selection and pur- 
chase. 
If the customer is able to track the fulfillment process online, the 
merchant will face additional challenges. Many merchants today have 
leeway in the traditional shipping process that e-commerce merchants 
will not enjoy. A customer who placed an order with the L. L. Bean 
catalog five years ago would have found the middle insert that gave ap- 
proximate shipping times and would have expected to wait. The process 
of getting that package to the customer's doorstep remained a mystery; 
all that mattered was that the product arrived within the promised 
time period. With the advent of online information systems and 
product tracking, online merchants will face tremendous pressure to per- 
form accurately and on time at each step of the fulfillment process. 
Customers may want to know exactly what warehouse their order 
originates from, when their order is packaged, when their preferred 
shipper takes the package, and, finally, when they should plan to be 
home to receive the expected package. If this information is made avail- 
able to placate eager online customers, then any misstep will be noted 
and will cause the customer to lose some faith in that merchant's 
capabilities. 
Keep in mind that, right now, consumers seem willing to accept the 
shipping speeds that are offered by e-commerce companies. What they 
do not accept is promises broken. Therefore, promise shipping times 
and to meet holiday deadlines only if you have absolute certainty in your 
ability to do so. More important than giving your customers access to 
online tracking of shipments is giving them reason to trust your 
promises. If they engage in a flawless transaction with you once, their 
confidence will be buoyed. If they engage in a transaction where 
promises were broken, their trust may be permanently lost, and step-by- 
step tracking may be a necessity in order to regain their business. 
Know Your Shipping Options 
When thinking about shipping, first decide where your products 
will come from, then examine what fulfillment channels have a good 
reputation for the all-important on-time product delivery. 

108 
THE E-s163 
BOOK 
According to The Standard Internet business magazine, 43 percent 
of e-tailers ship merchandise ordered online directly from their brick- 
and-mortar stores' distribution centers. Another 23 percent ship the 
merchandise directly from these physical stores. Only 7 percent use 
Web distribution centers, and 18 percent outsource their Web fulfill- 
ment entirely. If you are moving online from a brick-and-mortar 
identity, then consider whether a Web-only distribution center is appro- 
priate or whether your existing stores and distribution centers can 
handle the additional Web order traffic. If so, then using existing distri- 
bution centers could make economic sense, especially if your inventories 
are similar. 
The reputation of your shipping resource will determine your 
own reputation for fulfillment, to a great extent. Right now, people 
trust FedEx and UPS to conduct the vast majority of e-commerce 
product fulfillment. They may not offer the most cost-effective solution 
for your company, however, so carefully researching your options is 
important. 
Also remember: 
1. Shipping is a two-way process in online retailing. Just as good 
fulfillment channels should facilitate the prompt and accurate 
delivery to an at-home address, the fulfillment channels must 
also facilitate easy product returns if you intend to have a strong 
return policy. Consider that you may pay for shipping the same 
product several times if you offer free shipping and the product is 
returned or exchanged by a customer. 
2. Customers feel empowered when they can choose their preferred 
package carriers, delivery costs, and delivery times. They may 
trust the fulfillment process more if it is facilitated by a familiar 
shipping service, and they may be less likely to abandon their 
online shopping carts in favor of a brick-and-mortar store where 
they know they can receive the product that day. 
3. Most shipping services track package delivery internally, while 
some may offer electronic interfaces that allow your company to 
monitor package delivery with equal speed and access. 
4. Some shipping services offer interfaces that allow customers and 
merchants alike to evaluate shipping options easily and accurately. 
Popular sites include www.iship.com and www.smartship.com. 

Fulfillment Channels That Work 
109 
Shipping Q&A with Author Juanita Ellis 
E-commerce entrepreneur: 
What is the best method to ship products to customers buying from 
my Web site? Currently I am using FedEx as a primary method of ship- 
ment, but this seems to be quite expensive. My products range from cof- 
fee mugs to T-shirts. Any suggestions? 
Juanita's reply: 
Selecting the right carrier for the e-tailer has always been like navi- 
gating a maze. We are hit with so many options that the best choice is not 
always as clear as we would like it to be. The bottom line is that shipping 
rates are determined by three major factors: distance between origina- 
tion and delivery points, package weight, and required speed of delivery. 
Let's say you want to ship a 5-1b package from Los Angeles to Baltimore. 
Using FedEx Priority Overnight would run approximately $35, while 
UPS Next Day would run approximately $33 for the same package. Both 
packages will arrive by 10:30 A.M. the next business day. Other carriers, 
such as Airborne and USPS, offer noon-deadline deliveries. Airborne 
charges about $23 for the same 5 lb package, and USPS charges $24. 
There are several online sites that provide information on the best 
shipping options based on origin and destination of the package as well 
as the weight and dimensions. And guess what? It's freer. Let's cover some 
of these services from the online vendors. 
For example, www.iShip.com provides an excellent interface that 
gives you the best options for shipping a package based on delivery times, 
weight, and destination, iShip provides a comparison of UPS, FedEx, Mr- 
borne, U.S. Postal Service, and Yellow Freight. When going to the site, the 
customer is presented with an online form to complete with shipment 
dimensions, postal codes, and loss protection options. After the form is 
submitted, the Web site derives a matrix containing all of the shipping 
prices of UPS, FedEx, Airborne, U.S. Postal Service, and Yellow Freight. 
iShip also has a tool for merchants to integrate the shipping compari- 
son service directly into their Web site. With this tool, merchants can offer 
buyers the option to compare shipping methods online and then make 

110 
THE E-s163 
BOOK 
their own selection from your site. This will give them accurate shipping 
estimates. When you, as the merchant, provide such accurate informa- 
tion, you don't have to worry about losing money on shipping, either. 
Another company, www.SmartShip.com, provides very similar ser- 
vices, where you have the option of comparing shipping costs per carrier. 
Prior to shipping a package, you enter in the standard shipping informa- 
tion, and SmartShip will provide each carrier's pricing model based on 
destination, weight, and delivery dates. SmartShip also has a tool that may 
be integrated into your site so shipping prices are automatically updated 
and displayed based on the buyer's selected shipping method. 
So, to answer your question, "Is FedEx the best-priced method for 
shipping? Is there a cheaper option available?": The two most common 
carriers used for shipping by e-businesses are FedEx and UPS. However, 
you may want to offer several options to your consumer, so that they 
may choose the carrier of their choice. They will feel empowered by the 
choice in pricing and delivery times. 
Shipping and Your Bottom Line 
As you consider which shipping options will offer your e-business 
the right combination of trustworthy shipping and cost effectiveness, 
also consider the following: What order size will make shipping with 
different carriers benefit your bottom line? A top-notch direct fulfill- 
ment company may expect to spend $9 to $10 per order on processing 
costs, while average performers may spend about $15 per order. You, as 
the retailer, must either charge your customers these significant ship- 
ping costs to recover your losses or somehow increase your average 
order size to recover these shipping costs. Your average order size may 
have to hit $50 or more in order to turn a profit. One health products 
online retailer offered, as a promotion, free shipping to customers plac- 
ing online orders that totaled $40 or more. That merchant is offering an 
incentive for customers to help protect its gross margins. 
Offering free shipping on at least some orders is a powerful incen- 
tive to your customers. According to a survey by Cyber Dialogue 
(www.cyberdialogue.com), free shipping was a major factor in the deci- 
sion-making process for 90 percent of online adults who made holiday 
gift purchases in 1999. Forrester Research (www.forrester.com) con- 
firmed this data in a separate report. Many online retailers sensed this 
and picked up the delivery tab for customers during the holidays. They 

Fulfillment Channels That Work 
111 
tossed an appealing carrot in front of the 82 percent of consumers who 
say that the cost of shipping matters and would affect their decision to 
shop online. The result: New customers moved online in droves for the 
holiday season. If you are not offering and adamantly advertising free 
shipping as a service, you may want to think again. 
Nordstrom, the popular upscale department store well-known for 
its superior off-line customer service, transferred this strength to its 
Web site with a flexible and easy-to-find return policy that is one of the 
clearest and most comprehensive on the Web. From the home page, cus- 
tomers can find the return policy by clicking a link labeled "Easy 
Returns, Free Exchanges." This takes them to a page entitled "5 great rea- 
sons to shop at nordstrom.com." The page tells customers how to make 
a return, explains the return policy, and provides other information. 
Customers see that they have two options for returns. One is to place 
their purchase in a preaddressed envelope for the mail carrier to pick up. 
The other is to return items to a brick-and-mortar Nordstrom~an 
option that shoppers who live near a Nordstrom would appreciate. This 
hassle-free return policy is extremely popular and thus serves both 
Nordstrom and its customers well. 
Can Not Shipping Be an Option? 
It may make sense to restrict where you will ship your product if 
delivery to some foreign or domestic locations isn't enabled by either 
your budget or your current transaction and fulfillment systems. If you 
choose to ship only within certain areas or countries, remember that any 
Web presence is, by nature, global. Don't let your customers fill an entire 
shopping cart and attempt to check out before they receive notification 
of shipping restrictions online. Have your shipping destinations listed as 
prominently as your delivery methods and times to avoid customer frus- 
tration. 
Shipping also may not be the best choice even when it's entirely feasi- 
ble to ship your product. For instance, if you're expanding your brick- 
and-mortar retail practice to the Internet, consider that your best 
fulfillment option in rush situations may be to create an incentive for an 
online customer to come into the store. The customer who wants a dress 
or shirt for a party that night or a band's CD before an imminent concert 
may be willing to use your online store as an important existing distribu- 
tion channel. One solution may be to mesh the inventory tracking 

112 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
Table 6.1 
Common Carriers 
The following popular carriers are all included in www.iShip.com, which is now 
part of Stamps.corn, and www.SmartShip.com. Customers can easily weigh 
shipping costs and options via both Web sites. 
Federal Express 
United Parcel Service 
Airborne Express 
United States Postal Service 
www.fedex.com 
www.ups.com 
www.airborne.com 
www.usps.gov 
These smaller carriers also are included at www.SmartShip.com: 
UltraEX 
www.ultraex.com 
Offers national same-day 
delivery within a fixed 
number of miles from 
package origin and many 
overnight options 
AirNet Express www.airnet.com 
Provides national 
overnight services with 
late-night pickup 
Monday through 
Thursday 
Golden State 
Overnight 
www.g old en sta teove r n ig h t.com 
Provides afternoon 
pickup and next-morning 
delivery to any address in 
California and Western 
Nevada 
For same-day, e-commerce fulfillment: 
NextJet, Inc. 
www.nextjet.com 
Offers same-day, next- 
jet-out delivery from 
doorstep to doorstep and 
technology that allows 
merchants' online 
customers to arrange 
shipping from their point 
of purchase 

Fulfillment Channels That Work 
113 
systems of your brick-and-mortar and online stores and then allow 
consumers to discern online whether the item would be in stock at a store 
near them. In other words, fulfillment can come in many forms, and your 
Web site can be more than a means of getting products shipped to the 
home. It can also be a brand presence and important informational tool. 
What Are My Other Business-to-Business 
Shipping Options? 
If the common carriers listed in Table 6.1 cannot provide good 
options for shipping your products in bulk to other businesses, a quick 
search via an Internet search engine will reveal a virtual smorgasbord of 
vendors waiting to help you fulfill your online orders. Searching www. 
yahoo.com for "shipping" produces a list including 791 cargo services, 
67 courier services, 180 postal services, as well as categories for product- 
specific transport services, such as the transport of animals and vehicles. 
Many large business-to-business shipping companies also offer supply- 
chain management for meeting demand, which we address later in this 
chapter. 
One major B2B package carrier is BAX Global (www.baxglobal. 
corn), a $1.8 billion global transportation and supply chain management 
company that offers freight forwarding to business-to-business shippers 
worldwide. The company has its headquarters in Irvine, California, oper- 
ates more than 500 offices in 121 countries, and employs more than 
7,600 people. 
C. H. Robinson (www.chrobinson.com) is a $2.3 billion transporta- 
tion and supply-chain management company that has its headquarters 
in North America and has 3,314 employees working among 132 offices 
worldwide. 
BAX Global (www.baxworld.com, formerly Pittston BAX Group) 
ships to more than 120 countries and helps customers keep track of their 
loads. Overseas corporations account for about two-thirds of the freight 
transport and logistics company's revenue. In the United States, the com- 
pany offers door-to-door delivery and overnight service between major 
cities. BAX Global ships by ocean and air, acts as a broker to clear items 
through customs, and maintains warehouses and distribution points 
worldwide. 
Another carrier, APE (www.apl.com), provides worldwide container 
transportation by sea via its fleet of 76 ships and 450,000 deployed con- 

114 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
tainers. Subsidiary ACS Logistics provides supply-chain information sys- 
tems and cargo-consolidation services. 
Emery Worldwide (www.emeryworldwide.com) provides global air 
and ocean freight transportation logistics management, customs broker- 
age, and expedited services to manufacturing, industrial, retail, and gov- 
ernment customers. Emery specializes in international shipments to 229 
countries through a network of more than 600 service centers and agent 
locations around the world, door-to-door transportation to and from 
any location in North America, and business-to-business moves for 
heavyweight shipments of 5 lb or greater. 
Tackle Other E-Fulfillment Issues 
Other important e-fulfillment issues often neglected in favor of 
shipping issues include online escrow and business credit rating compa- 
nies. In large business-to-business transactions, employing both types 
of fulfillment channels can ensure smooth and profitable transactions, 
as well as erase the doubts businesses with no prior relationship have 
about entering into transactions with one another. 
Escrows 
Escrow companies are impartial services that hold the money dur- 
ing online transactions and monitor the transaction to ensure that the 
deal is completed on time and to the satisfaction of all involved parties 
(see Table 6.2). The goal is security for both buyers and sellers. Sellers 
want to know that the buyer's payment is received before the goods are 
shipped, and buyers want to know that their funds will be released from 
escrow only after they approve the transacted merchandise. The method 
of payment, be it cash or credit, is often negotiable. 
Table 6.2 
Common Online Escrow Companies 
Escrow Net International 
W ww.esc row n et.co m.a u 
Escrow.co m 
w ww.esc row.co m 
i-Escrow, Inc. 
TradeSafe 
www.iescrow.com 
www.tradesafe.com 

Fulfillment Channels That Work 
115 
Credit Rating Companies 
Credit rating companies provide debt verification and general up- 
to-date business credit ratings for the purpose of entering assuredly into 
business-to-business transactions. Many credit rating companies are 
mostly country specific, such as the United Kingdom's CreditStatus.com 
or India's www.careratings.com. 
In the United States, a recognized leader is Dun & Bradstreet 
(www.dnb.com), which offers a broad range of global credit investiga- 
tion and reporting solutions for corporations of all sizes to minimize risk 
and maximize revenue. D&B credit products and services are designed to 
offer up-to-the-minute credit information, in-depth reports, and exclu- 
sive risk indicators and scores. They include software solutions for 
automating the credit decision-making process, as well. Available reports 
include business background and information reports, European credit 
reports, international business information reports, and public records 
searches. 
As with any e-commerce solution, each company has its own partic- 
ular strengths and weaknesses, with many company databases covering 
a particular niche not included in a competitor's data. One corporation 
that claims to cross these boundaries is Instant Search (www.instant- 
search.com). The site was developed for those who want access to com- 
mercial business information databases but did not want to pay a 
subscription for occasional usage. Instant Search has links with all the 
commercial credit reference agencies and marketing databases, plus in- 
house access to a large number of libraries in both electronic and, in 
some cases, hard-copy format. The company has its own electronic data 
banks and links to international sources of company information. 
Engage New Technology 
The key to flawless fulfillment is heightened information exchange: 
the integration of order management, inventory management, capacity 
management, customer service, and delivery. Integrating such data 
would be an overwhelming, perhaps impossible, task without the 
advent of technology to facilitate real-time information sharing. 
Traditionally, proprietary electronic data interchange (EDI) systems 
were developed internally by businesses to fill their needs. An Internet 
standard now exists for data interchange, called XML. This standard 

116 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
allows trading partners to give data certain tags that make it meaningful 
and useful in their particular information exchange. 
Yet most systems integration today still relies on small-batch EDI 
and the copying of files. The result is sluggish fulfillment and bloated 
inventory. These traditional systems prohibit fluidly changing trading 
partners or business models. They prevent e-commerce fulfillment net- 
works from moving at the speed of the Internet. 
New information technology architecture integrates external sys- 
tems with internal systems. More architectures will be planned to 
accommodate external data and to be deployed across multiple trading 
partners, while allowing each trading partner to customize the internal 
"look" of the data to best suit their processing needs. The goal will be 
real-time information sharing across multiple networks, which will 
facilitate e-fulfillment networks' inclusion of visibility and will allow the 
real-time tracking of shipments by all partners, customers, and autho- 
rized parties. These networks also will enable visibility to reduce stag- 
nant inventory, to streamline distribution, and to improve performance 
internally and with trading partners. 
Find E-Fulfillment Solutions 
More and more companies are beginning to offer solutions for out- 
sourcing complete e-fulfillment solutions. One of the newest is ebHub 
(www.ebhub.net), which is designed to provide midsized merchants with 
complete and comprehensive services to help their businesses grow. 
Unlike traditional ways of building an online presence, ebHub offers mer- 
chants one point of entry where they have access to services, including 
first-step site launch capabilities and, in the end, selection of their ship- 
ping company, ebHub is the first to help furnish payment processing, 
shipping, fulfillment, customer care, and marketing services through a 
fully integrated network of globally recognized service providers, ebHub 
promises that its merchants will have maximum scalability as their busi- 
nesses expand, be able to improve the quality of their online offerings, and 
ensure profitability of their storefronts. 
Also popular is Descartes DeliveryNet solutions (www.descartes. 
com). DeliveryNet includes industry-specific e-fulfillment software and 
Web-hosted applications that allow the seamless integration of business 
processes across a fulfillment network. 

Fulfillment Channels That Work 
117 
Click Logistics is focused on reducing your transportation costs, 
increasing your service levels, and automating and simplifying the ship- 
ping process. They have hundreds of carriers and manage tens of thou- 
sands of transactions for shippers like you. Logistics Management services 
include: 
9 Transaction management 
9 Mode analysis (parcel, LTL, TL, intermodal, air, ocean, etc.) 
9 Consolidation/deconsolidation 
9 Optimization (rate, mode, carrier) 
~ Continuous move management 
9 Carrier management 
~ Information management 
9 Claims management 
VerticalNet's Logistics Online (www.logisticsonline.com) commu- 
nity offers additional links to trade partners, its logistics marketplace, 
and information about transportation and other fulfillment issues. As a 
whole, VerticalNet (www.verticalnet.com) offers a myriad of business- 
to-business e-fulfillment solutions through its industry-specific online 
communities. VerticalNet's offerings for building and managing centers 
of business include: 
9 Targeted communities where professionals and companies in a 
particular industry find fast, efficient business information, 
interaction, and transaction opportunities. 
9 Targeted content, including wide-ranging product and supplier 
information. 
9 Targeted solutions for increasing sales and reducing costs through 
effective online business connections and e-commerce avenues. 
VerticalNet helps online buyers and suppliers worldwide to exchange 
information, source products, and execute online transactions. The Inter- 
net can be a powerful tool for building bottom-line growth, and Vertical- 
Net helps companies to achieve their e-commerce potential with solutions 
that effectively increase speed, efficiency, and their return on investment. 
In addition, VerticalNet has developed unique technologies that allow 

118 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
buyers to source and compare complex products online and suppliers to 
participate in e-commerce without developing a costly infrastructure. 
E-Fulfillment Supply-Chain Management 
We've already established that customers are growing increasingly 
impatient with fulfillment systems that cannot keep up with the speed 
of information and transactions on the Internet. For competitors on the 
Internet, this means that the winners will be able to optimize the flow of 
goods and services so customers receive a unique and positive fulfill- 
ment experience. 
Many industry participants believe Internet-based supply chain 
management will revolutionize the way businesses bring products to 
market. Virtual supply chain integration networks will optimize estab- 
lished relationships of supply chain participants by streamlining the 
flow of information between all participants. They will connect numer- 
ous work environments and facilitate the real-time exchange of com- 
munication data. Cahners In-Stat Group, an e-business research group, 
predicts that these networks will eventually replace today's electronic 
marketplace structure, will lead to the eventual integration of market- 
places and online supply chains, and will result in an unprecedented 
level of connectivity among participants. 
Good Internet supply-chain management systems should be able to 
suit the three Ts: time, transparency, and trust. In addition, they should: 
9 Improve responsiveness to supply and demand fluctuations. 
~ Minimize inventory without sacrificing customer service. 
9 Improve reliability of delivery commitments. 
9 Maintain profit margin. 
9 Help establish global transportation networks. 
9 Synchronize manufacturers, suppliers, and logistics providers. 
~ Accommodate changes in product inventory, business practices, 
and trading partners. 
~ Create systems to leverage technology and processes among 
many customers, creating network effects such as group trans- 
portation buying power. 

Fulfillment Channels That Work 
119 
Time 
Transparency 
-a 
/ 
Supply-Chain Management System 
Trust 
Figure 6.2 Factors for good supply-chain management systems. 
9 Preserve the diversity of trading partners' business processes and 
information systems. 
We should note that some commentators have declared supply-chain 
management "dead" in this Internet age and have noted that general effi- 
ciency in factory operations have tossed aside any necessity for the field. 
Stanford University's Global Supply Chain Management Forum reports 
the following on its Web site, www.stanford.edu/group/scforum/: 
Due to the recent trends of vertical disintegration, international pro- 
curements, new information technologies and increasing pressure from 
customers on responsiveness and reliability, and the globalization of 
operations and markets, supply chain management has become at once 
a challenge and an opportunity. Indeed, many companies have now the 
viewed supply chain management as the core of their business strategy. 
The Forum brings faculty and students from different schools, 
departments, and disciplines together to work on theoretical and model 
based research, empirical research, and detailed field-based studies of 
supply-chain problems. 
We share in The Forum's belief that automating the supply chain is 
one of the loftiest goals that a business can attempt to reach. The ideal is to 
create a business system that functions automatically wherever possible 
and reasonable. More typically, however, companies are content to 
improve their processes incrementally, automating where practical. 
Because the strength and coherence of their relationships to suppliers and 

120 
THE E--COMMERCE 
BOOK 
buyers define most businesses, improvements in supply-change manage- 
ment can greatly improve a company's productivity. 
The benefits derived from effective supply-chain management com- 
pel companies to contribute even more resources to the management 
effort. Such benefits include reduced expenses. Less time is spent on 
pushing paperwork, phone calls, faxes, and on tracking all of this infor- 
mation. For example, the typical purchase order costs between $75 and 
$125 to process manually. With the improved automation that e-com- 
merce offers, that cost can be reduced to about $3. Bills can be cus- 
tomized for each client. Because many of a company's processes are 
automated, errors are naturally reduced (and often eliminated). The 
concept here involves creating a process that performs correctly and 
repeating that process. On the inventory management side, an online 
effort can result in just-in-time inventory, reducing storage and handling 
costs, and, if you manage clients' inventory, you can lock out the compe- 
tition. All of these improvements are available within the supply chain, 
without even having to address the sales side of the equation. 
i2 Technologies (ww.i2.com) leads the industry in supply-chain 
technology, i2 offers RHYTHM Supply Chain Management (SCM), 
which integrates all subprocesses that enable the exchange of informa- 
tion and the movement of goods between suppliers and customers, 
including manufacturers, distributors, and retailers. These subprocesses 
are demand planning, supply planning, and demand fulfillment. Often, 
customers' end goal in using the solution is to increase overall supply 
chain agility at the lowest possible cost. 
Another strategy for improving supply-chain management involves 
implementing an XML-based back-office system for applications such 
as supply-chain management, automated procurement, shipping and 
logistics, and aggregation of business intelligence. XML (eXtensible 
Markup Language), the universal language for structured data on the 
Web, can drive cost-efficient, reliable, and open means of communicat- 
ing between business partners and customers. Companies can leverage 
existing investments in virtual channel sales, marketing, customer ser- 
vice, and purchasing systems by replacing current and proposed elec- 
tronic data interface (EDI) systems with XML. Customers learn that 
XML is easier to deploy, is easier to understand, and can be adopted 
much more rapidly than traditional EDI solutions. 
webMethods (www.webmethods.com), a company focused on de- 
livering XML-driven products and services, enables enterprises to forge 

Fulfillment Channels That Work 
121 
automated links with customers, suppliers, and partners quickly, easily, 
and cost effectively. Their B2B products enable companies to leverage 
investments in existing Web sites, applications, and local data sources, 
reducing the time and complexity of implementing true business-to- 
business e-commerce compared to technologies such as CORBA and tra- 
ditional EDI. 
The resulting benefits of this XML deployment are compelling. 
Clients gain tight intercompany integration; linked Web sites, ERP sys- 
tems, databases, and EDI systems; improved customer service; leveraged 
current IT investments; an extensible, scalable solution path for their 
business partners (with no purchasing required); and a low cost of 
deployment. Implementation of an XML-based solution can be accom- 
plished in weeks, instead of months or years. 
By allowing companies to reduce the expense associated with their 
supply chain, some facilitating companies exploit the Internet very suc- 
cessfully. For example, the National Transportation Exchange (NTE) at 
www.nte.net, a Chicago-area company, has created an Internet-based 
exchange for empty truck space, promising to slash $15 to $20 billion a 
year in distribution and transaction costs from the $400 billion trucking 
industry. The company's president, Greg Rocque, and his staff have 
enlisted 350 members so far, and expected to handle approximately 
150,000 loads during 1999. Members pay a startup fee that varies 
according to the amount of deployment work that NTE engineers must 
perform to mesh a member's databases with NTE's. NTE also collects a 
small fee for every match they make. 
Plan for Spikes 
Even if you choose to engage supply-chain management solutions 
that help predict supply and demand, you still must plan and prepare for 
temporary spikes in demand. As e-tailers found during the 1999 holiday 
season, not planning for these spikes can cripple consumer confidence 
while it cripples your fulfillment capabilities. Spikes can be dangerous 
because they push capacity to the limit, and, so far, e-tailers are finding 
that postspike traffic doesn't settle to its previous level. Retailers actions 
this spring and summer demonstrate that they have learned from last 
year's experience; they are beefing up their inventories and leveraging 

122 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
their brick-and-mortar assets. Gone are any last-minute plans to revamp 
sites or to cut corners on distribution or fulfillment. 
The simplest measures to plan for spikes without the help of soft- 
ware solutions include: 
1. Research newsletters, user groups, and other Web-based infor- 
mation channels to discern what your biggest-selling products 
may be in any particularly busy time, such as the holiday season. 
Collect as much information as you can on what consumers 
want, and plan ahead to secure appropriate supply. This is a risky 
move but could benefit your bottom line if your research is thor- 
ough and your intuition is on target. 
2. Finish any Web site or business process alterations two or three 
months before an anticipated rush to avoid site outages or other 
major infrastructure-related problems during the crunch. 
3. Plan for securing temporary workers, if needed. Because compe- 
tition for temporary workers can be fierce, begin relationships 
with local temp agencies long before you anticipate requiring 
their services. This should prevent shortages in customer care 
fulfillment, such as the long hold times the Amazon.com cus- 
tomer service line saw during the 1999 holiday crunch. 
4. Work with your shipping fulfillment channels to make sure your 
shipping processes are easily scalable to significant increases in 
traffic. Forewarn them of your expected period of increased ship- 
ping, and remember that traffic may remain elevated after the 
spike has passed. 
Williams-Sonoma, the popular furniture and housewares store, 
decided to address customers' special-occasion delivery doubts straight- 
forwardly on its Web site. The merchant's site dearly tells customers 
when orders must be placed in order to arrive on time. This information 
alleviates customer worry and prevents disappointment over late deliver- 
ies. When customers click "Shop" on the home page, they are taken to the 
main product page that presents various product categories. In the bot- 
tom right-hand corner of the product page, Williams-Sonoma informs 
customers: "Order by 3:00 PM (PST) February 9th for Valentine's Day 
delivery" If customers click on the text, they go to a page with order 
deadlines for Valentine's Day and other forthcoming holidays, such as 

Fulfillment Channels That Work 
123 
Passover and Easter. The page further states that customers who miss the 
order deadline by a few days can rush the delivery for an extra $10. 
Remember that the best planning for spikes mirrors the best plan- 
ning for dependable e-fulfillment at any time. This best planning hap- 
pens when you employ the information technology and software 
solutions that can optimize the fulfillment cycle, increase fulfillment visi- 
bility, and thus enable fulfillment systems to quickly handle increased 
capacities whenever necessary by synchronizing trade, supplier, and 
shipping partners' diverse systems. 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Choose Your 
Payment Systems 
When buyers and sellers engage in commerce, they agree upon what 
is being sold and at what price. The logical outcome is systems of pay- 
ment, as sellers deliver the goods as promised in exchange for compen- 
sation. In the virtual world, screens display images of goods, and mouse 
clicks on "Buy Now" buttons reflect buyers' acceptance of purchases. 
FedEx or FTP typically replaces the sellers in delivering the hard goods 
or digital content. But the core commerce transaction remains the same 
and requires the secure exchange of payment. This commonly has 
become the first technical and psychological obstacle for most mer- 
chants' e-commerce efforts. 
Separated into discrete parts, a transaction is comprised of an offer, 
authentication, payment, and delivery. An e-commerce site and associ- 
ated systems must protect the interests of both the buyers and the sellers 
during each part by providing security and integrity. Security protects 
the seller from illicit use of the payment instruments while shielding the 
buyer from misrepresentation. Integrity guards the buyer from an 
unauthorized disclosure of the transaction and shields the seller from 
disputes about the timing or terms of a sale. These requirements signifi- 
cantly raise the bar of complexity for Web sites and protocols. 
Electronic payments generally are representative of real-world 
exchanges. Payment protocols provide an electronic counterpart to 
paper-based methods of exchanging goods. In fact, if performed correctly, 
125 

126 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
electronic purchases prove far more secure than other purchases, as tradi- 
tional, paper-based methods frequently display complete and unen- 
crypted credit card numbers. 
Most credit card transactions within the U.S. economy occur over 
dial-up lines between merchants and cardholders. In the Internet econ- 
omy, many sites still rely on these protocols; this is especially true for 
merchants with existing retail systems in which a Web site acts as a 
counterpart to brick-and-mortar storefronts. 
Electronic payment systems handle the monetary exchange transac- 
tions for goods and services. Along with traditional monetary instru- 
ments such as bank notes, drafts, and credit cards, the e-commerce world 
employs a variety of tools. However, each tool can be judged on its con- 
formance to the following requirements: independence, security, privacy, 
anonymity, transferability, divisibility, ease of use, and total cost. 
Follow these steps in order to choose payment systems that will best 
facilitate your transactions: 
1. Learn the various categories of electronic payment systems, 
including new smart card options. 
2. Find the category that dominates e-commerce. 
3. Examine the differences in how transactions work in the 
physical world versus online. 
4. Plan to put the components to enable electronic payments into 
place. 
5. Evaluate payment methods for their ease-of-use by all parties 
involved, including consumers, merchants, and financial 
institutions. 
6. Know the actual costs of a transaction. 
7. Set up credit card verification. 
8. Enact protocols that ensure online security. 
9. Help your customers develop trust in online transactions. 
Payment System Categories 
Electronic payment systems fall into a variety of categories, based 
on their function. Micropayments, although measured in pennies, will 
enhance several aspects of e-commerce when a more innocuous busi- 

Choose Your Payment Systems 
127 
Figure 7.1 Different forms of payment for online purchase. 
ness model is implemented. Smart cards, either disposable or reload- 
able, store monetary value on a card that can be debited. Electronic 
billing enables the presentment, payment, and posting of bills on the 
Internet. Open exchange relies on traditional bank or credit card clear- 
ing procedures to process a transaction, typically initiated by an e-mail 
message or HTTP form. Secured linkage is the encrypted transmission 
between merchants and customers where security-enhanced software 
and front-end browsers provide authentication. A trusted third party, as 
a mediator, handles all credit or check clearing functions between mer- 
chants and customers. After the process is complete, the trusted party 
provides the transfer of funds. Digital check, another category of elec- 
tronic payment systems, replaces the traditional check with the security 
of an encrypted transmission. Digital cash resembles cash with its serial 
numbers, but it travels electronically. 
These categories represent generalizations about the function of 
electronic payment systems. As a practical matter, your customers are 
likely to compensate you for goods or services in one of four ways: 
micropayment, smart card, electronic billing, or credit card. 

128 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
Micmpayments 
Imagine you want to read an article from a subscription magazine 
published on the Web. Instead of paying for a year of subscription ser- 
vice or even a single issue, you might be willing to pay for only the spe- 
cific article. Micropayment technology allows consumers to pay for 
digital content in increments of cents or fractions of cents. Such content 
typically includes music, videos, published articles, or software. The 
advantage of micropayments is that funds do not have to be reloaded 
for each transaction, and minimum transaction amounts are much 
lower than for credit cards. 
A typical micropayment transaction consists of four steps: 
1. The customer sends a request to load funds using his or her wal- 
let software. 
2. Via the banking network, the funds are verified as available in the 
customer's bank or credit card account. Bank accounts and credit 
cards are handled differently as sources of funds. 
3. After approval, credit card funds are available immediately, while 
bank account funds might require up to a five-day wait. 
4. After the money is transferred into the wallet, the customer can 
make micropayments at Web-based stores. The wallet automati- 
cally debits the amount of purchases from the balance. One of 
the main advantages of the micropayment method is that funds 
do not have to be transferred from a credit card or bank account 
each time a purchase is made. 
The challenges of reasonably implementing micropayment systems 
are twofold: delivery of the technology and charging for digital content. 
Several companies have established reliable business models based on 
micropayment technology, particularly on the delivery side. Qpass sells 
content from publishers such as The Wall Street Journal Interactive Edi- 
tion on a short-term or per-article basis. Cybergold allows users to pur- 
chase digital content such as MP3 songs, software, and video files. Both 
companies have set up micropayment programs to address the chal- 
lenges of charging small amounts online. These companies receive a 
portion of their revenue as fees from content partners. 
One disadvantage to the micropayment system is apparent from the 
customer's perspective. Typically a customer might not object to paying 

Choose Your Payment Systems 
129 
Figure 7.3 Credit card authorization. 

130 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
Figure 7.4 Credit card settlement. 
five or ten cents to read an article or to access some specific information. 
However, multiply this experience twenty times within a single Web ses- 
sion, and your customer becomes exasperated. The merchant, in this 
example a publisher, would increase the revenue stream by charging a 
per issue, quarterly, or yearly subscription. 
There are some micropayment systems in use online. The two 
micropayment models are debit and credit. A debit system like Com- 
paq's MilliCenff M Microcommerce Network (www.millicent.com) most 
closely mirrors a cash payment system. At the beginning of the month, 
buyers charge a certain amount to their micropayment accounts, and 
MilliCent deducts each payment from their electronic wallet. The disad- 
vantage of MilliCent is that few online stores accept it as payment, mak- 
ing buyers' cash deposited into the account nearly useless. 
Microsoft Wallet, which we also address as an electronic wallet pay- 
ment method, is a credit-model micropayment system built into Internet 
Explorer 4 and above. Microsoft Wallet collects all the charges you make, 
pays them, and sends you one bill at the end of the month. The disadvan- 
tage is this system's tracking of purchases, which more mirrors credit 
card payments than cash payments. The advantage is that Microsoft has 

Choose Your Payment Systems 
131 
the muscle to get vendors to support its payment program. The program 
is most popular in Australia. 
Smart Cards 
The smart card is an integrated circuit chip embedded in a small 
piece of plastic. Some models of these chips can hold 100 times the 
information contained on a standard magnetic-stripe card. The chips 
also add "smarts" to the card, allowing it to store and to process infor- 
mation. Smart cards are available in disposable (or memory) and 
reloadable (or processor) versions. Disposable cards have value the user 
can spend. In contrast, most reloadable smart cards have more memory, 
more information, and a higher level of security. They can contain mul- 
tiple applications on a single chip, manage several passwords, and use 
authentication and encryption techniques to combine freedom of use 
with security. 
Around the world, there are more than 100 smart card programs in 
operation. The most common use of smart cards is telephone cards. A 
major card manufacturer estimates that 420 million phone cards were 
sold worldwide in 1996. Many leading banks also issue smart cards that 
function as credit and debit cards. In the United States, as part of its 
Smart Ship Project, the Department of the Na W uses stored value cards 
to replace all cash transactions aboard the Aegis class cruiser USS York- 
town. In Mexico, Bancomer, S.A., issues stored-value smart cards to 
truck drivers for automated toll collection in remote parts of the coun- 
try, eliminating most error, theft, and abuse in reporting expenditures 
back to the company. In Thailand, Thai Farmer's Bank issues smart 
cards that combine a customer's emergency medical records with smart 
bank IDs and electronic purse features. Eventually, smart card technol- 
ogy may replace cash, checks, and credit cards in transactions that 
require safety, application logic, and convenience. 
Smart cards offer a variety of benefits to consumers. As a replace- 
ment for cash, smart cards increase security and simplicity and reduce 
paperwork and record keeping efforts. You no longer need to carry as 
much cash; you can print a transaction history at a convenient ATM; 
and you can avoid time-consuming forms. As a replacement for coins, 
smart cards increase transaction speed and convenience and reduce 
bulk. You no longer need to load multiple coins into a vending machine 
or carry around coins for routine transactions that require exact change. 

132 
THE E-s163 
BOOK 
Smart Card Integrators Inc. (www.s-ci.com) integrated smart card soft- 
ware and hardware with major casino slot machine manufacturers to 
create a cashless casino system. 
Smart cards also offer a variety of benefits to merchants, financial 
institutions, and other card issuers. As a merchant, you will appreciate 
higher sales, faster transactions, easier bookkeeping, reduced costs, and 
fewer losses. Smart card transactions are typically larger and faster than 
comparable cash transactions. In addition, electronic payments are eas- 
ier and less expensive to handle and to reconcile than cash payments. As 
a card issuer, you gain more customers, lower overhead, and decrease 
fraud through smart cards. 
American Express, with its new smart card "Blue" recently has cre- 
ated waves in using smart cards as effective, commonplace, and trusted 
payment method online. The card, which has an embedded chip, also 
works as a credit card. But when used in conjunction with sister Ameri- 
can Express products Online Wallet and Smart Card Reader, it provides 
an added two-factor level of security to online shopping enabled by the 
embedded chip. 
The Online Wallet is a free service that stores personal ordering 
information, such as a Blue card account number, as well as shipping 
addresses and can automatically fill out online ordering forms. The 
Smart Card reader attaches to a customer's PC. To make a purchase, a 
customer inserts the Blue smart card into the reader and inputs his or 
her personal identification number, or PIN. This process unlocks the 
Online Wallet for secure online payment. Because customers must have 
the combination of chip-embedded smart card and PIN to complete a 
transaction, the Blue card presents an extraordinary level of protection 
against the types of Internet credit card fraud that concern many cus- 
tomers today. Customers can instantly register for any of these services 
online at home4.americanexpress.com/blue/card_home.asp. 
Today, Blue is the only product to offer a smart card for shopping on 
the Internet with an additional level of PIN security. When PC manu- 
facturers start embedding smart card readers into computer hardware 
such as keyboards, more and more credit card issuers are likely to begin 
offering smart card-enabled security for online purchases. 
VeriFone (www.verifone.com) a division of Hewlett-Packard, offers 
a range of point-of-sale (POS) payment terminals and peripherals, inte- 
grated payment software solutions, and Internet commerce solutions. 
The company continues to explore new payment technologies, refine its 

Choose Your Payment Systems 
133 
product range, and actively promote industry initiatives, including U.S. 
smart cards and worldwide Internet commerce. The VeriFone Web site 
includes more information about smart cards and their benefits and 
how to establish smart card systems. 
The Smart Card Industry Association (www.scia.com) is a global 
trade association whose Web site provides information on smart card 
technology, technology applications, industry news, and links to other 
smart card sites, products, and information. 
Electronic Billing 
Electronic billing lends itself well to both business-to-consumer 
and business-to-business efforts. Whether you are currently sending out 
paper-based bills or have not yet developed a billing system, consider 
the role that electronic billing might play for your organization and its 
e-commerce solution. 
One of the reasons for electronic billing's growing popularity is its 
clear demonstration of revenue generation. When electronic billing first 
started gaining momentum, hillers and banks were looking at the tech- 
nology as a way to reduce printing and mailing costs and to speed pay- 
ment collection. Today electronic billing allows one-to-one marketing 
and dynamic information presentation. At its full potential, this method 
of billing allows companies to increase their contacts, deliver cus- 
tomized information, and provide links to other online services. 
Electronic billing enables the presentment, payment, and posting of 
bills on the Internet. Presentment involves taking the static statement 
data, which is typically directed to printers, and hosting that informa- 
tion on an interactive Web-based bill presentment server. With the Web, 
merchants can customize the user interface to each individual customer. 
By processing payments online, electronic billing provides cost savings 
and cash management benefits that can consummate the collection 
process directly on the biller's own Web site. After the statement is pre- 
sented and payment is secured, billing merchants must post to their 
accounts receivable system and update the account. 
A typical electronic billing transaction comprises of six steps: 
1. After verifying user name and password, the bill is presented to 
the customer. 

134 
THE E-s163 
BOOK 
2. The customer reviews, analyzes, and pays the bill. The resulting 
transaction typically debits either a bank account or a credit card 
of the customer. 
3. The transaction is posted to the clearing house (ACH) flat file. 
4. A success or failure response of the verification and posting of 
the transaction information is sent back to the biller. 
5. An electronic customer receipt is generated, indicating success or 
failure of the transaction. 
6. The merchant's clearing house (ACH) file is reformatted and 
submitted for account settlement. 
This burgeoning practice has attracted a variety of companies, each 
of which is a good source for more information. The large players 
include Microsoft and CheckFree (www.checkfree.com), a company 
specializing in payment processing. Other electronic billing vendors 
include BlueGill Technologies, @Work, Novazen, and eDocs. Service 
bureaus and billing-service providers, including Pitney Bowes, IBS, and 
Bell & Howell, ease the transition to electronic billing. 
Credit Cards" Web Leaders in Payment Systems 
While micropayments, smart cards, and online billing each play an 
interesting and important role in electronic commerce, the top three 
credit card companies handle over 98 percent of all purchases made on 
the Web. Contrast this figure with transactions outside the Internet, 
where only about 20 percent of all purchases are made with credit cards, 
and it's obvious that credit cards are the driving force behind online 
business-to-consumer transactions. Most financial institutions, credit 
card verification systems, and e-commerce software programs integrate 
the credit card systems of companies, including American Express, 
Carte Blanche, Diners Club, JCB, MasterCard, Novus/Discover, and 
Visa. In fact, MasterCard and Visa account for just over 70 percent of all 
purchases made by credit cards. 
A credit card transaction online is financially akin to any physical 
credit card transaction. Each transaction is actually a loan made by a 
lending institution to a customer. A major reason for credit cards' popu- 
larity online are consumer protection laws issued by the Federal Reserve 

Choose Your Payment Systems 
135 
Board, which limit a customer's liability for the fraudulent use of his or 
her card to $50. Banks sometimes waive this fee if the customer reports a 
lost or stolen card to them immediately, reducing the potential loss to 
the bank by allowing quick deactivation of the account. Credit card 
transactions are handled in much the same way, whether in the physical 
world or online. The components of a typical transaction include 
authorization and settlement. Authorization refers to the approval 
process of a credit card transaction. Settlement refers to the payment of 
various fees to companies that assist the transaction, as well as payment 
of the merchant by the bank. 
Credit card authorizations can be separated into a series of finite 
steps. First, a consumer visits a Web site by using a standard Web 
browser. The consumer selects an item to purchase at the merchant's 
Web site and adds it to a shopping cart. After entering shipping and 
credit card information, the consumer is presented with a summary of 
the item, its price, and the billing information. The payment informa- 
tion is protected by Secure Socket Layer (SSL) encryption and for- 
warded with the order form to the merchant's commerce site. The server 
software adds the merchant's identification information to the packet. 
The secure payment request is forwarded over the Internet and is 
received through a secure firewall by a series of servers that pass it to the 
merchant's financial institution. From there, the packet travels to the 
customer's credit card bank to approve or decline payment authoriza- 
tion. The consumer's credit card bank sends its response back through 
the merchant's financial institution to the merchant's system. Typically, 
this authorization process takes 20 seconds or less to accomplish. 
After the transaction is authorized, the consumer's credit card bank 
settles the transaction (a process also known as interchange). As a mer- 
chant, you should understand the process by which credit is settled in 
order to determine if accepting credit cards at your online store makes 
financial sense and, if so, how you can structure your prices to account 
for these costs. The merchant delivers the goods to the consumer and 
requests financial settlement. For a $100 transaction, the merchant 
receives $98 based on a 2 percent discount rate. That money is deposited 
in the merchant account at the merchant bank (also known as the 
acquirer bank). The acquirer bank receives $.67 of the $2 paid by 
the merchant (the cost of offering credit card service to consumers). The 
merchant bank pays the association (Visa or Mastercard, for example) 

136 
THE E-s163 
BOOK 
$.08. The issuer of the credit card (issuer bank) receives $1.25 for own- 
ing the cardholder relationship. Eventually, the consumer is billed for 
the purchase and either makes payment or incurs credit card debt. At 
this point, the entire transaction is complete. 
Enable Electronic Payments 
Enabling electronic payments over the Internet for your e-com- 
merce business requires establishing an account with a financial institu- 
tion and an Internet payment company and also setting up your 
merchant register to accept payments. These payments originate from 
your customer, who makes purchases by using an electronic wallet or by 
completing a form with purchase information incorporated into the 
merchant Web site. The following sections describe each of the compo- 
nents that must be enabled for electronic commerce. 
Electronic Wallet 
The software component that a consumer uses to make purchases 
electronically is referred to as an electronic wallet. The wallet allows the 
customer to store information on his or her desktop, eliminating the 
need to continually refresh information such as customer name, ship- 
ping and billing address, and payment information. Electronic wallets 
support several types of credit cards, digital cash, paper and digital 
checks, and purchase orders. Software versions of electronic wallets 
include vWallet (VeriFone), CommercePOINT Wallet (IBM), and 
Microsoft Wallet (Microsoft). Most sites do not rely on wallets, because 
their implementation forces the user to download software and to 
establish a relatively complicated configuration. 
A popular alternative to the electronic wallet is a form that the mer- 
chant incorporates into the Web site. This form, filled out by the cus- 
tomer, captures contact information, payment information, and 
product choices. Most popular commerce solutions, usually via tem- 
plates, allow these forms to be designed, developed, and deployed easily 
by the merchant. Although the resulting electronic commerce is form- 
based, instead of wallet-based, the remainder of the components per- 
form the same functions. 

Choose Your Payment Systems 
137 
Merchant Register 
A merchant register represents the software that businesses use to 
exchange payment and order information with cardholders and to col- 
lect payments from cardholders' financial institution. Features of these 
registers include support for a variety of payment types, security proto- 
cols (SET and SSL), complete integration with a merchant's storefront 
technology, and financial institution support. A typical merchant regis- 
ter allows the merchant to accept payment via credit cards, micropay- 
ments, and smart cards for both time-of-purchase and electronic 
billing. Most commerce solution vendors allow easy integration of 
CyberCash and VeriFone products into the register, eliminating the 
need for extensive programming. In addition, most merchant register 
software is supported by a wide variety of financial institutions. Versions 
of merchant registers include vPOS (VeriFone), CommercePOINT eTill 
(IBM), and CashRegister (Cybercash). Information regarding the prod- 
ucts can be found at each vendor's Web site. 
Internet Payment Service 
An Internet payment service functions as an intermediary between 
merchant register software and the financial institution. Capabilities, 
provided by Internet payment services such as CyberCash or VeriFone, 
enable a merchant to accept online payments from customers. These 
payments are securely processed from a merchant's storefront through 
the existing system of financial institutions and credit card processing 
companies. 
When considering various Internet payment services, focus on the 
key qualities of security, ease-of-use, and price performance. Ensure that 
the service you select provides security for credit card authentication, 
transaction confidentiality, server host integrity, and server virus protec- 
tion. At a minimum, the service should provide Secure Socket Layer 
(SSL) protocol security and Secure Electronic Transaction (SET) encryp- 
tion and authentication. An Internet payment service creates an easy-to- 
use experience by featuring real-time payments, scalability, easy 
installation and upgrades, and multiple payment methods. Real-time 
payments mean immediate bank approval of a sale as well as expedient 
deposit and settlement of payments. Effective scalability allows smooth 

138 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
growth of transaction volume and additional payment features. Deter- 
mine the complexity and workload required to install and upgrade soft- 
ware and hardware products. Your Internet payment service should 
allow your customers to change the methods that they use to pay for your 
products or services. Finally, the company should offer compelling price 
performance driven by its integration with your storefront and its rela- 
tionship with a wide variety of financial institutions. 
Financial Institutions 
A financial institution contracts with a merchant to enable the 
acceptance, processing, and deposit of credit card transactions. Mer- 
chants must maintain an account with a financial institution to receive 
credit for credit card sales. The financial institution deposits daily credit 
card sales into the merchant's account, minus any applicable fees, and 
delivers regular reports based on any transactions. 
Acquiring financial institutions sometimes perform merchant ser- 
vices in-house, while others outsource these functions to a third-party 
processor (i.e., First Data Corporation, Global Payment Systems, Nova 
Information Systems, or Vital Processing Services). A third-party proces- 
sor is a company that provides credit card services to merchants on behalf 
of acquiring financial institutions. Services may include billing, customer 
support, reporting, authorization, and settlement services for merchants. 
Establishing an account with a financial institution is reasonably 
uncomplicated. Merely contact the institution, describe your e-com- 
merce configuration (what components you are using), and select an 
Internet payment service. Initially, make sure that the financial institu- 
tion is authorized to underwrite credit card services to merchants. 
Direct the financial institution to set up the account to accept credit 
cards over the Internet using your choice of payment services. Deter- 
mine the details of establishing a merchant account, including the appli- 
cation and approval process, the fees and charges, and the requirements 
for opening a deposit account for conducting business. Assume that the 
entire process will take two to fourteen working days to complete. 
Implementing Credit Card Verification 
The final phase of enabling electronic transactions is to set up a 
credit card verification system. Each solution vendor has specific 

Choose Your Payment Systems 
139 
instructions for incorporating verification services into its commerce 
software. As an example, let us walk through the CyberCash (www. 
cybercash.com) procedure for implementing credit card verification. 
CyberCash has just released a service called CashRegister 3, a new Inter- 
net payment architecture that makes it easy to integrate storefronts, 
operate payment services, and upgrade to new services, standards, and 
options as they become available. 
Implementing CyberCash technology begins in one of three differ- 
ent ways. You can use the services of a Merchant Development Partner 
to integrate and/or to host the CyberCash commerce-enabled Web site 
for you. You could implement the solution yourself by downloading the 
CyberCash software and integrating it into your storefront. Or, rather 
than building a commerce-enabled Web site from scratch, select an e- 
commerce application or storefront solution in which CyberCash ser- 
vice is already integrated. 
In order to accomplish the second option, perform the following 
steps. Collect and review information about CyberCash and Internet 
payments (www.cybercash.com). Register with CyberCash, and down- 
load the software. Apply for a merchant bank account. The bank accepts 
your application and then notifies CyberCash. CyberCash enables cash 
register functionality and e-mails you a notification. Configure your 
storefront for CyberCash. Then retrieve setup information from Cyber- 
Cash, and enter it into the storefront. Submit a test transaction. Assum- 
ing that everything works, ask to begin service. CyberCash notifies you 
that service can begin. Now you can open your store for business. 
A variety of companies provide credit card transaction solutions for 
merchants. Bank of America's Merchant Services division is involved in 
several Internet pilots to facilitate secure payments over the Internet. 
Charge Solutions provides Internet-based real-time credit card process- 
ing to merchants. Credit Card Network, a credit card authorization ser- 
vice, handles credit card transactions for merchants who have already set 
up their electronic storefront. Epoch Transaction Services offers secure, 
real-time billing solutions for membership and product-based Web 
sites. First Data, a huge provider of merchant processing services, han- 
dles credit card transactions in the retail, hospitality, supermarket, direct 
marketing, and health care industries, iBill provides credit card process- 
ing services. Paymentech offers full-service electronic payment solu- 
tions for merchants, third-party transaction processing, and total 
commercial card payment programs. Secure Trading, a British company, 

140 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
also offers credit card processing services for Internet electronic com- 
merce sites. 
Ensure Online Transaction Security 
One form of security, the Secure Electronic Transaction (SET) pay- 
ment protocol, is an Internet standard designed to provide a high level 
of security and antifraud assurances for payment card transactions over 
the Internet. Visa and MasterCard, along with technology partners such 
as VeriFone, developed SET with the goal of replicating the level of con- 
fidence that all parties to a transaction receive when an in-store transac- 
tion is conducted. The authentication process involves a series of 
security checks performed using digital certificates issued to customers, 
merchants, banks, and payment brands. 
The four SET components include a cardholder wallet, a merchant 
server, a payment gateway, and a certificate authority. The cardholder 
wallet generates SET protocol messages that can be accepted by the three 
other components. The merchant server component processes payment 
card transactions and authorizations. The payment gateway component 
(run by an acquirer or a designated third party) processes merchant 
authorization and payment messages and interfaces with private finan- 
cial networks. The certificate authority component issues and verifies 
digital certificates as requested by the other components. 
A transaction secured by a SET-enabled browser and a SET-enabled 
server follows these steps. The customer opens a bank account that fea- 
tures Mastercard or Visa services. The customer receives an electronic 
file (a digital certificate) that functions as a credit card for online pur- 
chases. Third-party merchants also receive digital certificates from the 
bank. The customer then places an order, either over the Web, via e- 
mail, or by telephone. The customer's browser receives and verifies the 
validity of the digital certificate from the merchant. The browser then 
sends encrypted purchase details. The merchant receives and verifies the 
validity of the digital certificate from the customer. The merchant then 
sends to the bank the order information, including the bank's public 
key, the customer's payment information, and the merchant's certifi- 
cate. The bank then verifies the merchant certificate and the order infor- 
mation message. The bank digitally signs and sends the proper 
authorization to the merchant. Finally, the order is filled. 

Choose Your Payment Systems 
141 
The SET protocol provides confidentiality, data integrity, verification 
of identity, and nonrepudiation of disputed charges. The SET protocol 
uses advanced public key cryptography algorithms to assure that mes- 
sages are transmitted and received confidentially~safe from the prying 
eyes of any uninvolved parties on the Internet. Cryptography algorithms 
generate the encryption (scrambling) and decryption (unscrambling) of 
information. The process of public key cryptography allows anyone to 
send an encrypted message to a designated recipient, using what is 
known as a public key. The recipient then uses a private key to decrypt 
the message. Therefore, only the designated recipient has the ability to 
read the message. 
The SET protocol can also send credit card information directly 
from the consumer to the merchant's financial institution, without 
allowing the merchant access to the cardholder's account information. 
A consumer can therefore make a purchase with confidence that no 
fraudulent activity will take place with his or her credit card number 
after the card number has been transmitted. Merchants accepting SET 
transactions in this manner are protected from the liability of credit 
card numbers in their database, because they do not receive the credit 
card information. 
When a message sent via the SET protocol is encrypted, a unique 
numerical value is generated for that message. If anyone attempts to 
tamper with the data contained in the message, the numerical value for 
the message would change and would therefore be detected. This 
process ensures the integrity of the message. 
The SET protocol uses digital certificates to verify the identity of all 
parties involved in a transaction. When a consumer makes a purchase 
using the SET protocol, a digital certificate is sent from the consumer to 
the merchant and, simultaneously, from the merchant to the consumer. 
The consumer's digital certificate functions as a signed credit card 
slip to the merchant. The digital certificate provides verification of the 
consumer's identity and offers a high level of assurance that the credit 
card is not being used fraudulently by the consumer. 
The merchant's digital certificate provides the consumer with verifi- 
cation of the merchant's identity and leaves the consumer with a high 
level of confidence that the merchant is operating a legitimate business 
and that the purchased items will be shipped. 
The process of digital certificate distribution that takes place during 
SET transactions also holds the consumer and merchant accountable 

142 
THE E-s163 
BOOK 
for information contained in the transaction. Therefore, if a consumer 
places an order for a product using SET and then receives the product, 
he or she cannot deny that the order has been placed. Similarly, mer- 
chants cannot later deny that they received the order. 
Additional Security" The Secure Sockets Layer 
Another form of security, Secure Sockets Layer (SSL), is a com- 
monly used program layer for transmitting payment information 
between a buyer and a seller. SSL, which was developed by Netscape, 
sends data back and forth between the cardholder's Web browser soft- 
ware (such as Netscape Communicator or Microsoft Explorer) and the 
merchant's Web server software (such as Netscape's Enterprise Server or 
Microsoft's Commerce Server), within a secure environment. SSL 
encapsulates data into transactions and guarantees the confidentiality 
and integrity of the individual blocks of the transaction. 
The "sockets" part of the term refers to the sockets method of mov- 
ing data back and forth between client and server in a network. A socket 
is defined as the endpoint in a connection. Passing sockets is a method 
for communicating between a client program and a server program in a 
network. Sockets are created and used with a set of programming 
requests (or function calls), sometimes called the sockets application 
programming interface (API). 
The "layer" part of the term refers to the program layer between an 
application and the Internet's TCP/IP layer. The programming code for 
keeping your messages secure is contained in the program layer. 
SSL uses the public key/private key encryption system from RSA, 
which also includes the use of a digital certificate. The secure environ- 
ment for SSL is created through the use of public key cryptography, 
which consists of the encryption (scrambling) and decryption 
(unscrambling) of information. Public key cryptography allows anyone 
to send an encrypted message to a designated recipient, using what is 
known as a public key. The recipient then uses a private key to decrypt 
the message. As a result, only the designated recipient has the ability to 
read the message. 
The SSL protocol is a powerful tool for the secure distribution of 
information but does not address all of the risks associated with sending 
and accepting transactions over the Internet. For example, SSL estab- 

Choose Your Payment Systems 
143 
lishes a secure session between a browser and a server. During the 
period when the browser is logged onto an SSL server, authentication 
between the browser and the server takes place. However, SSL does not 
authenticate the parties who are using that software. Thus, while card- 
holders using SSL can submit payment information free from the pry- 
ing eyes of a third party, there is no way of verifying the identity of the 
online storefront that they are visiting. 
Help Customers Trust You 
Whether you are a buyer or a seller, the initial requirement of any 
real-world transaction is identification. Answering the question, "Who 
are you?" is essential. When you, as a shopper, walk into a franchise 
hardware store, let's say Home Depot, you already are comfortable with 
the brands offered, the service you receive, and the store's return policy. 
You do not enter the store wondering whether you could be subject to 
theft or fraud in the process of your shopping experience there. Instead, 
it is more likely that Home Depot may wonder who you are and whether 
you may subject the store to theft or fraud. 
The tables of suspicion turn when shoppers go online. Once online, 
the shopper questions the merchant's integrity, and the merchant feels 
confident because it has established layers of security to protect its inter- 
ests prior to opening for business. Therefore, from a merchant's per- 
spective, establishing the trust of customers is critical to the success of 
any e-commerce solution. 
Encouraging trust in e-commerce 
involves six primary components: 
seals of approval, brands, 
navigation, fulfillment, 
presentation, and technology. 
Encouraging trust in e-commerce involves six primary compo- 
nents: seals of approval, brands, navigation, fulfillment, presentation, 
and technology. 

144 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
Seal of 
Approval 
Brands 
/ 
Navigation ~ 
E-Commerce 
~ Fulfillment 
Trust 
Presentation 
Technology 
Figure 7.5 The primary factors for gaining trust from customers. 
Seals of approval, represented by symbols like VeriSign, are designed 
to reassure visitors that sites have established effective security mea- 
sures. Known as security brands, these seals of approval testify to the 
safety of a merchant's site, its technology, and the network behind it. 
Consumers recognize these signs and feel more comfortable in a mer- 
chant's identity knowing that merchant is affiliated with these known 
vendors. 
Brand refers to a company's implicit promise to deliver specific 
attributes, based on a company's reputation and a visitor's previous 
experience with its products. The concept of branding, which we cov- 
ered in Chapter 3, includes online and offline brand recognition, portal 
or marketing affiliations, community building, and the sense of a site's 
breadth of product offerings. 
Navigation refers to the ease of finding what a visitor is seeking. 
Navigation is aided by understandable terms, the consistent placement 
of navigation elements, clear instructions to help shoppers make their 
way through a site, and simple, appropriate terms to describe site con- 
tent. 
How clearly a site indicates the way orders are to be processed, its 
return policy, and how well it explains the way customers can seek 
recourse to problems are all elements associated with fulfillment. The 

Choose Your Payment Systems 
145 
assurance that a customer's personal information will be kept secure 
and private is a key attribute of fulfillment. 
Presentation implies the ways in which the look of a site communi- 
cates meaningful information. On the home page, a site's purpose must 
be clear to the first-time visitor. 
Visitors evaluate technology largely in terms of speed and function. 
They notice how well a Web site's technology operates and how quickly 
each page loads. Therefore, it is important to balance page-loading 
speeds with helpful functionality. 
In order to address each of these components and to establish cus- 
tomers' trust, begin by adding a policy statement explaining how trans- 
actions work and how returns are handled. Provide your corporate 
history. Add a variety of security seals, including VeriSign and the Better 
Business Bureau. Display a message indicating that any transactions that 
take place are secure and encrypted. Also, provide a toll-free number to 
allow users to pay by phone if they choose. When designing the security 
features of your e-commerce site, assume the perspective of customers 
and address their needs. 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Know Your Infrastructure 
Even with the emphasis placed on the business focus of e-commerce 
solution development, an understanding of the underlying technologies 
is critical. Few individuals will actually have responsibility for imple- 
menting or installing the software required to deploy a solution. How- 
ever, knowledge of product functionality, limitations, and technical 
requirements offers a measurable competitive advantage. 
Knowledge of product functionality, 
/imitations, and technical 
requirements offers a measurable 
competitive advantage. 
Overview of Components 
The components that comprise the typical electronic commerce 
solution are Web clients, Web server software, commerce server software, 
connectivity tools, and back-end systems. Learn the features and func- 
tions of each of these components, as well as how they relate to each 
other. In later chapters, we address vendor solutions, payment systems, 
and security considerations, with each chapter focused on the compo- 
nent nature of a solution. The vocabulary associated with these five corn- 
147 

148 
THE E-s 
BOOK 
ponents enhances your understanding of the design process and proves 
invaluable as you select software and hardware packages for implementa- 
tion. Figure 8.1 illustrates a typical e-commerce architecture. 
Web server software publishes hypermedia documents on the fly for 
the Web client interface. Commerce server software generates and sup- 
ports storefront functionality for merchants. The Web server software 
and the commerce server software reside on the same hardware compo- 
nent. Customers access the vendor site via Web clients (or, as they are 
more commonly known, Web browsers). Back-end systems, which typi- 
cally already exist in an organization, require a connectivity tool to link 
them to the server software. This linking allows companies to leverage 
data such as product information, customer information, and transac- 
tion records. 
Figure 8.1 Typical e-commerce architecture. 

Know Your Infrastructure 
149 
E-commerce is historically a direct descendent of electronic data 
interchange (EDI). This technology is used to communicate between 
large companies. However, standards, based on the specific industry, are 
required for the exchange of information (data) electronically between 
computer systems. For example, the automotive industry requires that 
each participant use the Automotive Industry Action Group (AIAG) 
standard to communicate. Grocery retailers are required to use the Uni- 
form Communications Standard (UCS). Furthermore, all participants 
are required to be connected to the same private network. So, how do 
the smaller companies participate? This is one of the major problems. 
EDI is very costly to implement, and it is difficult to provide interoper- 
ability between different industries, because each industry has its own 
standard for data exchange. 
For companies that currently communicate via EDI, e-commerce 
software vendors provide solutions that allow the integration of existing 
EDI systems. Microsoft, IBM, Lotus, Netscape, and other software ven- 
dors provide EDI extensions as part of their tool sets to integrate into 
existing EDI-based systems. As part of these solutions, companies that 
were restricted to automating processes between business partners that 
follow the EDI standards can now send information, such as purchase 
orders, directly to smaller business partners via a Web browser. 
The electronic commerce architecture, in comparison, allows com- 
panies to communicate using one standard communication protocol, 
called TCP/IP (Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol), and 
a data format called HTML (HyperText Markup Language). Think of a 
protocol as a language. In order for two people to speak and then under- 
stand each other, they need to communicate in the same language. What 
happens when one person speaks and understands only German and 
the other speaks and understands only Italian? They need a translator. 
The communication between these individuals requires some addi- 
tional time and effort. In addition, the transaction costs a little more, 
because the translator must be paid. That is the beauty of communicat- 
ing in one common language.., no additional translation cost. Elec- 
tronic commerce has enabled interoperability between different 
business systems, increasing efficiency and lowering costs. Businesses 
can now easily communicate with each other through Web servers and 
with consumers through Web browsers. That is why we are seeing a big 
shift in the way business is being conducted on a city-, state-, country-, 
and worldwide basis. Everyone speaks the same language. 

150 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
Web Clients 
A Web client (from the perspective of the merchant) or browser 
(from the perspective of the customer) is an application program that 
provides a graphical interface to view and interact with all the informa- 
tion available on the World Wide Web. The word browser originated as a 
generic term for user interfaces that let you browse text files online. As 
Web content began to also include graphics, the term became more 
common. 
Technically, a Web browser is a client program that uses the Hyper- 
Text Transfer Protocol (HTTP) to make requests of Web servers 
throughout the Internet on behalf of the browser user. A commercial 
version of the original browser, Mosaic, is still popular today. This ver- 
sion, including many of the user interface features in Mosaic, is 
Netscape Navigator. As Microsoft began to realize the growing popular- 
ity of the Web, it developed and freely distributed Internet Explorer. 
Although online services such as America Online, CompuServe, and 
Prodigy, originally featured their own browsers, virtually all providers 
now offer the Netscape or Microsoft browser. Other common browsers 
include Lynx, a text-only browser for UNIX shell and VMS users, and 
Opera, a sophisticated, yet compact, Web browser. 
An important component of the development process for an elec- 
tronic commerce solution is testing your resulting Web site pages, 
embedded code, and scripts on the dominant browsers available to the 
public. Currently, those browsers are Microsoft's Internet Explorer and 
Netscape's Navigator (or the Communicator suite). Microsoft com- 
mands a 73 percent market share to Netscape's 25 percent with 2 per- 
cent shared among several others. Statistics on browser usage are 
available and updated daily at www.statmarket.com. Always build solu- 
tions for the latest proven version of the de facto standard browser. 
Web Server Software 
Web server software serves as a liaison between back-end systems 
and front-end Web clients. Its primary function is to generate and 
deliver hypermedia documents based on HyperText Markup Language 
(HTML). In most cases, the HTML code is generated on the fly by the 
Web server software. The World Wide Web Consortium (www.w3.org) 

K n o w  Your I n f r a s t r u c t u r e  
151 
Figure 8.2 How server components relate to Web client software. 
sanctions the latest standards of HTML. Vendors of these Web server 
products support a variety of network operating systems, including NT, 
UNIX, Novell, and OS/2. Web server candidates for your electronic 
commerce solution include Microsoft Internet Information Server 
(IIS), Domino Server, Netscape, and Apache Server. Figure 8.2 illustrates 
the Web server/commerce server components and their relationship to 
Web client software. For more information about Web server software 
and its functionality and suitability, visit the major vendors’web sites. 
Commerce Server Software 
At the heart of an e-commerce solution lies the commerce server 
software, with capabilities for creating an online storefront. Several 
major vendors on the market offer a variety of software solutions that 
allow you to establish an e-commerce site on the Web. Most vendors 
offer business-to-consumer features and functions as part of the tem- 
plate. Other vendors focus on solutions that provide options to set up 
net marketplaces, business-to-business sites, supply-chain manage- 
ment, and procurement. 
The storefront is the focal point for selling your products and ser- 
vices. Storefronts may incorporate and support products for sale, ser- 
vices provided, company information, job postings, special events, 
featured products, store registration, and other elements that add value 
to your customers’ experiences at your site. 

152 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
Selling Products 
The most common shopping model on the Web involves using 
storefronts to sell products. When buying products, the customer selects 
the item to purchase and adds it to a shopping cart. Once the customer 
has finished shopping, he or she pays for the item online using a credit 
card. After the credit card is approved, the system sends the customer a 
confirmation, and the items are delivered. The concept is very similar to 
the product catalogs currently used by thousands of companies. Each 
product has a product SKU, name, description, and price. Other fea- 
tures may include color, size, weight, images of the product, or any other 
attribute that is specific to the product you are selling. 
Selling Digital Content 
As bandwidth available to the consumer increases, electronic deliv- 
ery of digital content becomes more practical and more popular. Most 
commerce software does not provide an "out-of-the-box" solution to 
support the sale and delivery of electronic goods that customers down- 
load. However, the major solutions do support the purchase side of the 
transaction. Typically, a third-party component is required to support 
the delivery side of the transaction. This chapter addresses only the pur- 
chase side of the transaction, a common ground for the major com- 
merce software components. 
When initially creating the storefront, standard wizards are used to 
select your store model. Several vendors have sample stores that you can 
use as a basis for the site. The selected template serves as a model for 
your eventual store and represents the hub of your e-commerce site. 
After you walk through the wizard screens, the site still requires 
modification. The most common question about these wizards is 
whether people really use them. The answer is yes, if they are creating a 
storefront to sell products or services. The rationale is that these wizards 
contain the basic information you need to create the site, such as the 
storefront home page, product information, tax and shipping informa- 
tion, credit card information, design, and layout. These wizards also 
allow you to easily integrate third-party credit card verification systems 
(such as Cybercash or VeriFone), Tax-ware International services, UPS 
tracking capabilities, and inventory tracking systems. The integration of 
these third-party components represents the most compelling reason to 
at least consider the wizards. 

Know Your Infrastructure 
153 
Why reinvent the wheel? It is much easier to create a store using these 
tools than it is to construct a store from scratch. If you build your solu- 
tion from the ground floor up, it may take several developers several 
months to reach the same outcome offered by the wizard-based solution. 
Put your efforts where your expertise is most developed. Where it is less 
developed, harness the expertise of others. In the field of e-commerce, 
time is your primary opponent. Do not spend time learning a skill that 
you can rent instead. 
Why reinvent the wheel? 
When selecting a commerce solution, it is important to review the 
built-in templates or wizards that are part of the product. Each vendor 
has solutions that vary slightly in their out-of-the-box capabilities. By 
purchasing a package that meets your business needs, you can reduce the 
amount of time and resources required to customize a solution. You 
must compare the cost of a standard software solution with that of a cus- 
tom solution designed and developed by internal or external resources. 
After you have designed, developed, and deployed your store, your 
focus falls on administration of the store's products. The easier, the bet- 
ter. Several e-commerce solutions allow you to tweak the commerce 
component of your site via any common Web browser. Administration 
includes capabilities such as changing product properties with point- 
and-click expedience, as well as adding, updating, and deleting products. 
The ability to track inventory varies from solution to solution. Some 
vendors offer the capability of integrating your commerce site into 
existing inventory tracking systems. However, most vendor solutions 
stop short of supporting order tracking. What happens to stock on hand 
after an order? To take the next logical step, most systems require cus- 
tomization to tie into existing inventory tracking systems. As support 
for this integration seems to be a weak point with most of this com- 
merce software, you are likely to be forced to build your own solution. 
Your solution, because it is developed from the ground floor up, 
may track incoming products, items ordered by customers, and stock on 
hand. For new companies, you need to create your traditional and your 
online transaction systems. This means creating additional tables to 
store data, integrating the items ordered from the online site, building 

154 
THE E-s163 
BOOK 
an inventory system to track items ordered, assessing stock on hand, 
determining low supply of stock, and establishing reorder levels. 
Purchase order (PO) generation is a standard capability for most 
commerce packages, but some require more customization than others. 
This feature is important in business-to-business commerce where 
most companies work with PO instead of credit card transactions. One 
of the weak links of the typical PO system is automating the updating 
process of internal systems between companies. 
Although the majority of payments at Web-based stores are made 
through traditional credit card transactions, you need to be in position to 
accept as many payment methods as possible in order to maximize your 
sales. The most common credit cards accepted by these packages are Mas- 
terCard, Visa, American Express, and Novus/Discover. However, you can 
also customize a package to include other credit cards. On the credit veri- 
fication system side, Cybercash and VeriFone represent the two vendors 
that usually provide easiest integration into commerce software. Of the 
two systems, Cybercash dominates the market. Other payment methods 
include micropayments, smart cards, and online billing systems. Choose a 
solution that supports a wide range of electronic and traditional payment 
methods. For more information, see the Payment Systems chapter. 
Most commerce packages include the option to specify sales tax and 
shipping costs. Calculating a customer's sales tax and shipping costs is a 
vital component of any good e-commerce software package. Customers 
want to know their total cost prior to placing their order. Shipping costs 
need to be calculated in real time. Further complicating this issue, a sig- 
nificant proportion of orders in your Web store may come from inter- 
national customers. Select a solution that allows you to calculate and 
specify shipping costs with a great amount of detail. 
Remember that taxes vary by state and by nation. How do you 
address this element of your commerce package? Third-party tax and 
accounting packages such as Taxware International or Great Plains 
Accounting Software allow you to integrate their product into your Web 
site. Even some of the store design wizards support this integration. 
Site analysis provides you with the option to track visitors to your 
site, products purchased, and pages accessed. Because several of these 
packages have thousands of items you can analyze, we recommend 
spending some time planning prior to setting up the tools. Decide 
exactly what you want to monitor. If you do not plan out exactly what 
type of trends and analysis you are trying to capture, the analysis tools 

Know Your Infrastructure 
155 
available could overwhelm your efforts. The goal is to produce valuable 
information, not just data. And for all you technologists reading the 
book, ask the marketing, sales, and product development departments 
what information is valuable to them for their work. 
Commerce packages vary on how much they offer for site analysis. 
The packages that do not provide the features you need typically have 
third-party solutions that you can substitute. It is important that you 
review site analysis results to determine which advertising campaigns 
are generating sales, which pages are not accessed, and, finally, how 
effectively your site supports your e-commerce ambitions. You can use 
this information to customize your site for an optimal return on your 
Web site investment. 
Order Tracking 
Another standard feature of commerce software is order tracking, 
both internally for your company and externally for the consumer. 
Order tracking allows you to view pending, disapproved, and processed 
(completed) orders. Typically, once a customer's credit card is approved, 
the status of an order changes automatically from pending to approved. 
For purchase orders, the process may include a combination of auto- 
mated approvals and manual approvals. The goal, however, is total 
automation of the process. Once an order is approved, the order is com- 
pleted, and the product is shipped to the customer. 
Most commerce packages provide an option to allow customers to 
track their packages via UPS or Federal Express (FedEx). For example, 
tracking is part of UPS Internet Tools, which is designed to help mer- 
chants serve their customers better. UPS Internet Tools allows customers 
to track their packages worldwide without leaving your commerce site. 
UPS tracking is available in local languages in sixteen countries and terri- 
tories via the Internet. Tracking is also available via the UPS home page. 
FedEx, the other dominant shipper, is now offering a set of tools to 
provide shipping and tracking functionality. FedEx ShipAPI provides 
you with a shipping application programming interface (API), sample 
templates, and instructions on how to connect seamlessly to FedEx. It 
streamlines your online shipping process by integrating FedEx shipping 
templates and tools into your company's site or corporate information 
system. You can connect directly to FedEx when placing shipping orders 
and scheduling pickup requests. 

156 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
You can also let customers check on the progress of a shipment 
instantly from their own Internet-enabled computer. You can track 
multiple packages simultaneously, consolidating several inquiries into 
one simple transaction. You can access available shipment information, 
using ship date and country code or account number to check progress. 
You can customize sample templates for tighter integration into your 
online environment. And, finally, you can retrieve and store additional 
shipment information to provide your users instant access to detailed 
historical shipping data. Built-in error-checking capabilities verify the 
accuracy of required tracking information. The tracking system uses 
public-key encryption software to help protect confidential data infor- 
mation, as well as to verify data integrity and authentication. 
As the popularity of the World Wide Web gains momentum, the 
amount of information available online rises dramatically. Site visitors 
experience increasing difficulty in finding specific information. If site 
visitors cannot locate the information they want (and quickly), they 
move on to another site. Commerce solutions provide site administra- 
tors with tools to gather and index information and to create key word 
search capabilities on your site. 
Keyword search capabilities enable site visitors to use highly tar- 
geted search queries to find and retrieve the specific information they 
need. You can gather and index information by crawling the Internet, an 
intranet, Exchange Public folders, NNTP newsgroups, an ODBC data- 
base, or a file system. Document properties are the characteristics of the 
document, including the author's name, date created, title, subject, doc- 
uments address, and contents of the document. Once extracted, the 
document properties are stored in a central location. 
In addition, search tools provide your site visitors with a Web page 
from which they can initiate a search and a page to display the results of 
the search. These pages can be extensively tailored to the needs of your 
site visitors and to the information that is available in your catalogs. 
Customer Registration 
Customer registration is also a standard feature for commerce soft- 
ware solutions. Registration may be set up as soon as visitors access the 
site, as soon as visitors want to purchase a product or service, or when 
visitors access confidential information. For the first scenario, where 
access to information is dependent on the user login name and pass- 

Know Your Infrastructure 
157 
word, multiple vendors can access your site and be provided different 
products or services to purchase. An example of the second scenario is 
The Wall Street Journal, which requires that you register and pay a fee 
when accessing the newspaper online. An example of the third scenario 
is American Express, which offers online options to view credit card 
information. The site requires that visitors enter information prior to 
accessing their personal accounts. 
Another reason that registering visitors is extremely important to 
your company is that it allows you to capture data about your customer. 
This data can later be used to analyze buying trends, send product infor- 
mation back to your customer, and set up personalization of options 
based on their preferences. 
Cross-selling features use shopper trends and existing transaction 
information to recommend products of interest to customers. For 
example, Amazon recommends additional books to customers based on 
their previous purchases or based on a book they are browsing. 
Think about visiting a store. The natural links between products 
arise almost automatically. When you visit a camera store, the store 
owner strategically places all of the other associated items that you may 
need: film, batteries, flash, photo albums, and the like. By the time you 
finally leave the store, you have spent twice what you originally intended. 
As a store owner, you should offer products associated with the products 
that your customer seeks. You provide convenience. The customer pro- 
vides additional revenue. 
Once your store is operational, you need the option to run promo- 
tions. You should be able to quickly change a price or offer discounts for 
volume purchases or to special customers. Advertising capabilities may 
include banners, featured products, and special discounts. Some of 
these packages even provide options to track how many clicks have been 
made on each banner and allow you to set up the banners and ads so 
that when a visitor searches for a specific piece of information a related 
banner is displayed. Other types of ads included are "buy now" ads for 
impulse buyers. Some commerce software includes great options for 
advertising. Other commerce software offers very little, requiring that 
you purchase a third-party advertising plug-in or build the functional- 
ity into the site. 
Push technology provides users with channels that deliver specific 
content. The user subscribes to a channel and related information is 
pushed (delivered) to the browser on the desktop. Most people have 

158 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
heard of PointCast, one of the first push technologies out on the market. 
Now commerce vendors provide solutions featuring push technology as 
one of their delivery mechanisms. 
Direct mail is similar to an electronic version of paper-based direct 
mail. The difference is that you can use direct mail to deliver personal- 
ized content to thousands of users with lower costs than paper-based 
mail. In addition, direct mail offers automated delivery (a standard of 
marketing). 
Commerce server management tools may be included as part of the 
commerce software or as part of the management software provided 
with a commerce solution. Most vendors include the following capabili- 
ties: content management, replication and clustering, site usage statis- 
tics, and remote administration. 
Content Management 
Content management is a feature that allows you to manage your 
content, including new products, the design of pages, and additional 
categories. Think of content as all of the information displayed on the 
site prior to that information being displayed to the world. Content 
management is critical to the success of any site. The world is full of 
visually stunning sites. However, sites often feature misspelled words, 
poor grammar, and incorrect data. Remember that your customer's first 
impression could become a last(ing) impression. 
When selecting a commerce package, ensure its content manage- 
ment capabilities. This includes the ability to review your information 
prior to replicating it to the servers that your customers or suppliers 
access. Typically, content management involves a central hub server 
where all changes are made. Approvals are set up by assigning privileges 
to specific employees within the company. These employees are 
required to approve the pages prior to sending them out to the external 
servers. If they are not on the list as approvers of the information, they 
do not have the right to modify the information. Once approved, the 
pages are replicated out to the production servers. This review should 
include both the Web page design and the specific contents. 
Figure 8.3 illustrates a typical content management process. The 
author of a document sends (1) the document to the hub server, the 
person responsible for authorizing the document reviews (2) the docu- 

Know Your Infrastructure 
159 
Figure 8.3 A typical content management process. 
ment needed to be approved. Once approved, the document is sent (3) 
to the external commerce servers. Clients retrieve (4) the document 
from the commerce server. 
Connectivity Tools 
Connectivity tools act as translators to connect back-end systems to 
server software or front-end clients (browsers). Early e-commerce Web 
sites required the use of programming languages, such as C++, to per- 
form the appropriate data translations that link these components. Today, 
many commerce software providers and third-party vendors provide 
tools that offer connectivity with minimal programming efforts. These 
tools are designed typically to push and pull data from the Web/Commerce 
server to the back-end system. 
Back-End Systems 
When designing and deploying an e-commerce solution, make sure 
that you can easily integrate your existing back-end systems. 
Make sure that you can easily 
integrate your existing 
back-end systems. 

160 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
Figure 8.4 Connectivity tools are needed to translate information to the 
front-end client. 
Determine exactly what systems you have in place. Your commerce 
solution requires that you pull data from these systems to your com- 
merce site. Gather the names of the software vendor and the software 
packages (with version numbers). In addition, you need to understand 
your current infrastructure. Back-end systems may include relational 
databases, transaction-based systems, ERP systems, EDI, third-party 
software, and proprietary systems. 
Integration with existing relational databases is provided in most 
commerce package solutions. Each vendor has its own set of tools that 
provides integration to specific relational databases. The question you 
must answer is how easily a commerce system can be integrated. Com- 
monly supported databases include Microsoft's SQL, IBM's DB2, and 
Oracle's relational databases. Even if there is not an out-of-the-box solu- 
tion, some other database vendors, such as Sybase, have built tool sets 
that you can use to tie into these systems. Some database vendors have 
code at their site that you can use as a starting point to tie into these sys- 
tems. Begin your research at the commerce system vendor's site to deter- 
mine if they include a tool to support integration. 
The goals of the integration of commerce systems with transaction- 
based systems are seamless processing of orders and timely, accurate 
updates. Most commerce vendors offer connections to a variety of 
transaction-based systems, although with varying degrees of compati- 
bility. The questions you must address in your research include how dif- 
ficult the implementation is and how robust the solution is. 

Know Your Infrastructure 
161 
The focuses of IBM and Lotus include integration into any back- 
end environment, especially legacy platforms (CICS and IMS) and 
transactional middleware (MQSeries). Their solutions have grown 
more robust and user friendly with each release. Integration tools 
include database tables, scripts, sample code, and documentation to 
support transactions and message queues with other environments. In 
contrast, some vendors, including Microsoft, have not focused on pro- 
viding the same breadth of connectivity. 
Most vendors provide solutions to integrate with some of the most 
common enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems, including People 
Soft and SAE Commerce server systems add value to your existing ERP 
system by passing only fully formatted orders, by acting as a firewall, by 
eliminating direct access of Internet users, and by enhancing the cata- 
logs presented to customers with more interactivity. 
If you have an accounting package, tax software, or any other type of 
system that you want to integrate into the commerce environment, go to 
the commerce vendors and the third-party vendors to determine if an 
integration tool is available. If it is not, you must write the API to per- 
form the integration. 
Electronic data interchange (EDI) allows program-to-program data 
exchange over private or public networks. It is based on a set of prede- 
fined relationships and standards between the participating parties. 
These predefined relationships and standards include interfaces, trans- 
lators, consistent data, and mapping protocols. Commerce server solu- 
tions support electronic data interchange by delivering merchant orders 
or customer special orders to the supplier and by allowing suppliers to 
report order status to the merchant. 
Connecting a commerce system to a proprietary software system 
requires building an application programming interface (API). An API 
serves as a liaison by making requests between the two systems. For 
example, many companies use a proprietary credit card verification sys- 
tem. An API connects the commerce server to that proprietary system, 
ensuring efficient and accurate communication. 
Tuning and Load Balancing 
Your Web site might perform adequately as soon as it is deployed. It 
might continue to function effectively for days or even weeks. At some 
point, the demands made on the system will overtax it, reducing its per- 

162 
THE E--s 
BOOK 
formance. Servers deliver Web pages with increasing delay. Some pages 
are not even available. Site traffic bogs down the system. And then the 
traffic vanishes. Customers, frustrated with the delays and navigational 
obstacles, stop visiting your site. 
The performance of your electronic commerce solution is typically 
measured by its fault tolerance and load balance. Fault tolerance refers 
to the capacity of a site to continue to provide service, even when a 
server node fails. A fault tolerant configuration features server nodes 
that immediately pick up the requested load with minimal disruption to 
visitors when a server node stops working. The process of automatically 
transferring workload from one server node to another server node is 
called failover. The process of restoring the workload back to the origi- 
nal server node is called failback. Failover and failback are processes that 
clustering applications perform automatically and transparently, so that 
the visitor is typically unaware of their occurrence. 
Load balance indicates that the amount of traffic on an individual 
server within a group of servers is relatively equal to the demand placed 
on each of the group members. Rather than overloading one server 
node and underloading another server node, the load can be handled 
efficiently by distributing the load between the two. Load balance can be 
achieved by assigning Web sites to a specific server node manually. This 
configuration allows a Web site to be accessed from either node, 
although a specific Web site may not be accessed from both nodes 
simultaneously. 
Clustering supports load balance of a system, as well as fault toler- 
ance capabilities. Replication supports quicker retrieval of data by users 
and fault tolerant operation of the e-commerce solution. Software ven- 
dors incorporate both of these features into most commerce packages. 
An additional component (either software or hardware), called a router, 
helps balance the load demand for individual servers. The following sec- 
tion describes each of these enhancements to your system. 
Clustering 
Clustering allows two servers, with real-time updating, to appear as 
one to site visitors. The servers are connected not only physically, by 
cables, but also programmatically, with clustering software. This con- 
nection allows the servers to support failover and failback functionality 

Know Your Infrastructure 
163 
Figure 8.5 Clustering and routing software support load balance of a system. 
as well as load balancing. Clustering software is typically included with 
the commerce package. 
Replication 
Replication refers to the copying of configuration information and 
content from one server to another so that both servers offer the same 
resources to visitors. The site administrator determines and schedules 
the frequency of further updates of data. The advantages of replication 
are improved performance and better availability. Applications can 
operate on local copies instead of having to communicate with remote 
sites, improving performance. A replicated server remains available for 
processing as long as at least one copy remains available. The primary 
disadvantage is that when a replicated server is updated, all copies must 
be updated. Replication is supported by most commerce packages. 
Routers 
In both of the previous diagrams, a router sits between Web/ 
Commerce servers and Web clients. Although these diagrams are sim- 
plified (packets of information travel to and from other servers across 

164 
THE E-s163 
BOOK 
Figure 8.6 Replication improves server performance. 
the Internet before reaching clients), the position of the router is accu- 
rate. A router is a hardware device or, in some cases, software incorpo- 
rated into the server, that determines the next network point to which a 
packet of data should be forwarded toward its destination. The router is 
connected to at least two network pathways and determines which path- 
way to route each information packet based on its understanding of the 
state of the networks. 
A router creates or maintains a table of available routes and their 
conditions. The router then combines this information with distance 
and cost algorithms to determine the best route for a specific packet. 
From the perspective of the commerce package, the advantage of routers 
is their load balancing functionality. Leading manufacturers of routers 
include Ascend Communications, Cisco, and 3Com. More information 
about routers and their implementation is available at the vendors' sites. 
Network Architecture 
While the concept of architecture within this chapter primarily 
refers to the functionality and relationship of electronic commerce com- 
ponents, a higher-level perspective concerns the actual configuration of a 
network. Any network can be classified as one of three arrangements: 
Internet, intranet, or extranet. The significance of this classification is 

Know Your Infrastructure 
165 
that it establishes the audience, security considerations, and performance 
levels that your commerce solution must address. 
Internet 
The Internet, usually called the"Net," is a worldwide system of com- 
puter networks, a network of networks in which users at any one com- 
puter can, with permission, get information from any other computer. It 
was conceived by the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) of the 
U.S. government in 1969 and was first known as the ARPANet. The orig- 
inal aim was to create a network that would allow users of a research 
computer at one university to be able to communicate with research 
computers at other universities. A side benefit of ARPANet's design was 
that, because messages could be routed or rerouted in more than one 
direction, the network could continue to function even if parts of it 
were destroyed. 
Today, the Internet is a public, cooperative, and self-sustaining facil- 
ity accessible to hundreds of millions of people worldwide. Typical users 
include company employees, government workers, researchers at educa- 
tional institutions, and private individuals. Physically, the Internet uses 
a portion of the total resources of the currently existing public telecom- 
munication networks. Technically, what distinguishes the Internet is its 
use of a set of protocols called TCP/IP (Transmission Control Proto- 
col/Internet Protocol). Two recent adaptations of Internet technology, 
the intranet and the extranet, also use the TCP/IP protocol. 
The most widely used part of the Internet is the World Wide Web 
(often abbreviated "WWW" or called "the Web"). Its compelling feature 
is hypertext, a method of instant cross-referencing. In most Web sites, 
certain words or phrases appear in text of a different color than the rest 
and underlined. When users select one of these words or phrases, they 
are transferred to the site or page that is associated with this word or 
phrase. Sometimes there are buttons, images, or portions of images that 
are "clickable." If you move the pointer over a spot on a Web site, the 
pointer changes into a hand, indicating that you can click and be trans- 
ferred to another site. 
The Web allows access to millions of pages of information. Web 
surfing (moving from page to linked page) requires a Web browser, the 
most popular of which are Netscape Navigator and Microsoft Internet 
Explorer. The appearance of a particular Web site may vary slightly, 

166 
THE E-s163 
BOOK 
depending on the browser used. Also, later versions of a particular 
browser are able to render more bells and whistles, such as animation, 
virtual reality, sound, and music files, than earlier versions. 
Intranet 
An intranet is a series of networks contained within an enterprise. It 
may consist of many interlinked local area networks (LAN) and also 
relies on leased lines in the wide area network (WAN). Typically, an 
intranet includes connections through one or more gateway computers 
to the Internet. The main purpose of an intranet is to share company 
information and computing resources among employees. An intranet 
can also facilitate working in groups and teleconferences. Web browsers 
allow companies to deploy the intranet infrastructure by providing a 
graphical user interface (GUI) that is inexpensive and easy to deploy. 
An intranet uses TCP/IP, HTTP, and other Internet protocols and in 
general resembles a private version of the Internet. With tunneling, 
companies can send private messages through the public network with 
special encryption/decryption and other security safeguards to connect 
one part of their intranet to another part. 
Typically, larger enterprises allow users within their intranet to 
access the public Internet through firewall servers that have the ability to 
screen messages in both directions to maintain company security. When 
part of an intranet is made accessible to customers, partners, suppliers, 
or others outside the company, that part is an extranet. 
Extranet 
An extranet is a private network that uses Internet protocols and the 
public telecommunication system to securely share part of a business' 
information or operations with suppliers, vendors, partners, customers, 
or other businesses. Think of an extranet as part of a company's intranet 
that is extended to users outside the company. The same benefits that 
HTML, HTTP, SMTP, and other Internet technologies have brought 
to the Internet and to corporate intranets now facilitate business-to- 
business transactions. 
An extranet requires security and privacy. These characteristics 
require firewall server management, the issuance and use of digital cer- 
tificates or similar means of user authentication, encryption of messages, 

Know Your Infrastructure 
167 
and the use of virtual private networks (VPNs) that tunnel through the 
public network. 
Companies can use an extranet to exchange data using electronic 
data interchange (EDI), allow access to product catalogs exclusively for 
wholesalers, collaborate with other companies on joint development 
efforts, and develop and use training programs with other companies. 
They can also provide or access services provided by one company to a 
group of other companies, such as an online banking application man- 
aged by one company on behalf of affiliated banks, and share news of 
common interest exclusively with partner companies. 
Architecture Security 
Protecting your system components typically requires both firewalls 
and proxy servers. Firewalls protect the resources of a private network 
from users of other networks. Proxy servers ensure security, administra- 
tive control, and caching service. A proxy server is associated with or 
part of a gateway server that separates the enterprise network from the 
outside network and a firewall server that protects the enterprise net- 
work from outside intrusion. 
FIREWALLS 
A firewall is a set of related programs, located at a net- 
work gateway server, that protects the resources of a private network 
from users of other networks. The term also implies the security policy 
that is used with the programs. An enterprise with an intranet that 
allows its workers access to the Internet installs a firewall to prevent out- 
siders from accessing its own private data resources and for controlling 
what outside resources its own users can access. 
A firewall, in conjunction with a router program, filters all network 
packets to determine whether to forward them toward their destination. 
A firewall also includes or works with a proxy server that makes network 
requests on behalf of workstation users. A firewall is often installed in a 
specially designated computer separate from the rest of the network so 
that no incoming request can directly access private network resources. 
There are a number of firewall screening methods. A simple one is 
to screen requests to make sure they come from acceptable, previously 
identified IP addresses and domain names. For mobile users, firewalls 
allow remote access into the private network with secure logon proce- 
dures and authentication certificates. 

168 
THE E--s163 
BOOK 
A number of companies make firewall products. Features include 
logging and reporting, automatic alarms at given levels of intrusion, and 
a graphical user interface for administrators. 
PROXY SERVERS For an enterprise that accesses the Internet, a 
proxy server is a server that acts as an intermediary between a worksta- 
tion user and the Internet so that the enterprise can ensure security, 
administrative control, and caching service. A proxy server separates the 
enterprise network from the outside network, while a firewall server 
protects the enterprise network from outside intrusion. 
A proxy server receives a request for an Internet service, such as a 
Web page request, from a user. If it passes filtering requirements, the 
proxy server, if it is also a cache server, looks in its local cache of previ- 
ously downloaded Web pages. If it locates the page, it returns it to the 
user without needing to forward the request to the Internet. If the page 
is not cached, the proxy server, acting as a client for the user, uses one of 
its own IP addresses to request the page from the server out on the Inter- 
net. When the page returns, the proxy server matches it to the original 
request and forwards it to the user. Proxies mask the return address of 
the requesting computer, providing anonymity for users. 
An advantage of a proxy server is that its cache can serve all users. If 
one or more Internet sites are frequently requested, these are likely 
cached by the proxy, which reduces user response time. A proxy can also 
log transactions between it and its user group. In addition, some proxies 
run virus detection programs on incoming packets. 
The functions of proxy, firewall, and caching can be in separate 
server programs or incorporated into a single package. Different server 
programs can be in different computers. For example, a proxy server 
may be located in the same machine with a firewall server or it may be 
on a separate server and forward requests through the firewall. 
With an understanding of electronic commerce components, per- 
formance enhancements, network configurations, and security soft- 
ware, we turn our attention to the heart of any compelling solution, the 
commerce server software. 

Selecting the Right 
Commerce Package 
Commerce packages are the technology enablers of Web sites, often 
forming the backbone of the Web site's technology. These predeveloped 
commerce applications provide the tools and technologies needed to 
quickly build a site from the ground up within six to twelve weeks. Yes, 
e-commerce entrepreneurs still need to do the planning, understand 
their business, build their teams, and so on. However, these commerce 
packages contain a boatload of features and functions built directly into 
the application. The benefit? Having core Web site features such as man- 
agement tools, the ability to categorize products, credit card payment 
systems, auction technology, and shopping cart technology built directly 
into a prepackaged application allows you, the entrepreneur, to spend 
more time researching your customers and customizing your site to suit 
their tastes. It gives you a competitive advantage over those who, instead, 
would spend months of precious development time trying to build fea- 
tures and functions that are expected from the consumer's perspective. 
The purpose of buying versus building is time to market. Often 
companies will attempt to build the solution from the ground up. That's 
great if you have the time. However, in the e-commerce world, you must 
be out on the market first, with a Web site that is easy to use that pro- 
vides immediate value to your customer. Most e-commerce entrepre- 
neurs will choose a combination of e-commerce packages to empower 
169 

170 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
their Web site and provide up to 80 percent of the features required for 
the site to be up, efficient, and valuable in the least amount of time. For 
example, a company may select a Microsoft E-Commerce Package and 
then include other vendor technologies in order to provide personaliza- 
tion for site visitors, inventory management, and tools for content cre- 
ation and management. 
Selecting vendors is essentially a three-step process. Step one, which 
you should have already have completed by this stage, is to have evalu- 
ated your business processes and how your company will fit into the 
electronic marketplace. Step two is to consider which applications will 
best suit your needs. Answering the following questions should prove 
helpful: 
1. What products and services are you providing on the Internet? 
2. What are your requirements? 
3. What does your current technology landscape look like? 
4. When do you need your site up and running? 
5. Who are your competitors? 
After you answer those questions, step three is to evaluate vendors 
who provide workable solutions based upon their quality in five areas: 
1. Dominant features. 
2. Commerce server management tools. 
3. Integration tools. 
4. Vendor and third-party plug-ins. 
5. Hosting services. 
Determining Your Needs 
1. What Products and Services Are You Providing 
on the Internet? 
Your answer to this question should include the essential elements 
that define your Web site, including your value proposition to the cus- 
tomer, your customers' incentives for becoming return customers, and 
your Web site's appeal to online shoppers. 

Selecting the Right Commerce Package 
171 
For example, your commerce site provides toys at the lowest price 
on the Internet with great customer service. In this example, selling 
products that are shipped to customers will be straightforward, because 
most packages support this feature. The second key is that you want to 
provide great customer service. Customer service features will vary from 
application to application. So the key will be to define the requirements 
statement to include those tools needed to provide great customer ser- 
vice such as Question and Answer databases, allowing consumers to 
include product comparison, guiding your customer to the products of 
interest by including a Q&A database that leads you customer to a prod- 
uct. Other options may include online chat rooms, extensive product 
information, and clearly stated policies and procedures on returns, 
delivery information, and product tracking. You may ask yourself, then, 
how are they making money? Advertising! This means that they will 
need to have the best commerce analyses and marketing tools available 
so they can provide target advertising for each customer hitting the site. 
Currently, Juanita Ellis is working on a project that provides a digi- 
tal marketplace for designing boxes and sending out RFPs to participat- 
ing suppliers. Their value proposition is that they streamline the entire 
process of designing boxes by providing a collaborative work space for 
users to download CAD drawings, change the dimensions of the boxes, 
and add designs on the boxes and other necessary features for package 
design. After the businesses have designed the boxes, they will send out 
RFPs to multiple suppliers. At that point, shipping dates, costs, and the 
like, will be negotiated between the buyer and seller. In this scenario, 
there are two main components. The first is the collaboration piece, 
which provides the real value for businesses because they can reduce the 
time and costs of using traditional methods of designing. This part of 
the site is critical and will need to seamlessly allow business groups to 
exchange ideas and designs online. The second component is the 
exchange piece, which allows the businesses to send out RFPs to suppli- 
ers. This is a great part to the puzzle, however, it is not what will bring 
the consumer the most value. 
Other sites also may make their revenue from selling products 
online. However, to make their sites unique, they are also providing 
extensive content that is customized to shoppers accessing the site. So, 
when selecting a vendor solution, content management and aggregation 
will become critical to the success of the site. Several vendors provide 
these types of features. 

172 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
2. What Are Your Requirements? 
Once you have decided what technologies your Web site will require 
to function optimally, the vendor selection process becomes much sim- 
pler. For example, if your requirements consist of providing features 
such as online chat, product comparisons, content aggregation, and 
extensive personalization, you will be able to compare each package to 
find the one that most closely fits your needs. However, you will to need 
to customize. The goal here is to find the closest fit. Even with a com- 
merce package, you will be lucky if it provides a 60 to 70 percent solu- 
tion to your needs. However, that 60 to 70 percent may save your 
organization a lot of time and costs in the long run. With today's con- 
sulting costs of $150 to $200 per hour, using a team of six or seven devel- 
opers for three months could end up costing more that the cost of 
purchasing the software you need and spending the dollars instead on 
making your site unique. Why spend the extra time and money on rein- 
venting the wheel? 
Your requirements statement will include, but is not limited to, 
answers to the following questions: 
9 What is required to sell products, content, and/or services? 
9 What is required for marketing? 
~ What is required for customer service? 
9 What is required to provided customization and 
personalization? 
~ What is the required content, and how will I aggregate or 
publish the content? 
9 What is required for distribution? 
9 What languages will I need to incorporate? 
3. What Does Your Current Technology Landscape 
Look Like? 
Review your current business process, and start mapping the cur- 
rent architecture and systems. The goal is to document all the existing 
systems that are part of the current architecture. Once you know the 
current architecture, you can determine what additional systems are 
needed and what commerce software to select. 

Selecting the Right Commerce Package 
173 
Some of the major systems to document include network operating 
systems, Web server software, relational databases, transaction-based sys- 
tems, ERP systems, EDI systems, and all hardware capacities and plat- 
forms. In addition, if you are integrating your systems with those of other 
businesses, document their systems that you need to integrate. The result- 
ing documentation should include a high-level architecture diagram and 
a description of the data required from each system. Remember that your 
initial work requires that you capture your current architecture. 
4. When Do You Need Your Site Up and Running? 
In the past year, companies have discovered the importance of the 
first-mover advantage. Gone are the days when companies spent 
months and months on planning and months and months on deploy- 
ment. Today's corporations and start-ups want to hit the market with a 
bang as quickly as possible. So it is critical that companies break from 
traditional methods of software selection and deployment and that they 
move toward getting to market as quickly as possible. In one scenario, 
Juanita Ellis was with a company that sought to get its first launch up 
and running within eight weeks. The company evaluated several con- 
suiting companies as well as different technologies. In the end, they took 
a two-phase approach. Company leaders selected one vendor solution 
for phase I, and, while building the phase I site, they selected other ven- 
dor solutions that would best fit the environment. Why? They decided 
that the company had to get to market within a short time frame in 
order to implement the other solutions. Otherwise, full deployment 
would have taken close to four months. An important consideration was 
that the first vendor package used cost just $20,000 for phase I and phase 
II, while the software they would later decide upon cost about $500,000. 
So if company leaders decided they needed to scrap the first vendor 
package, they had not suffered a substantial or costly setback or taken 
that high a risk. 
5. Who Are Your Competitors? 
Why would you want this information for selecting a vendor solu- 
tion? Well, you want to find out what capabilities are being offered at 
you competitors' sites in order to ensure that your solution will be 

174 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
designed to provide unique capabilities. You must be one step ahead of 
your competitors. 
Evaluate Vendor Solutions 
Once these questions are completed, the vendor selection process 
begins. There are hundreds of commerce vendors on the market. These 
solutions range in cost from free (see those at www.yahoo.com) to mil- 
lions of dollars. So how do you decide which solution in which price 
range will be most effective and economical for your site? This will 
depend on several factors ranging from the features and functionality 
required for supporting your site to the integration tools available to tie 
into your current infrastructure. There is a catch. You may find a great 
commerce solution with all of the bells and whistles, but the cost may be 
out of range. So, let's take a look at a range of high-end and low-end 
solutions. 
BroadVision 
BroadVision (www.broadvision.com) provides robust business-to- 
business as well as business-to-consumer solutions. Their solutions focus 
on several industries as well as providing an e-commerce storefront 
package. The primary solutions support retail distribution, financial ser- 
vices, technology/manufacturing, telecommunications, and the travel 
industry. The key to BroadVision's success is the features available for 
personalizing site content to businesses and consumers accessing the 
site. For example, one of the main reasons Boeing selected BroadVision's 
e-business platform to power myboeingfleet.com is for the capability to 
tailor content. 
Banks such as Argentaria Bank Group and Banco Santander are 
using BroadVision's financial services component to provide customers 
with banking services online. Customers such as Audible and Blackwells 
have implemented retail distribution service for selling goods and ser- 
vices to online customers. BroadVision's products tend to be used by 
larger corporations that are moving toward the e-commerce arena. 
They also have customers worldwide. 
BroadVision provides applications for several market areas. Each 
application is geared to a specific market. This provides great flexibility 

Selecting the Right Commerce Package 
175 
in that you need to purchase only those components pertain to your 
commerce site. Table 9.1 lists some of these applications. 
Table 9.1 
BroadVision Applications 
One-to-One Billing 
One-to-One Business Commerce 
One-to-One Enterprise 
One-to-One Financial 
An e-bill delivery and payment solution 
that enables revenue enhancement 
based on one-to-one relationship 
marketing through customers' bills. It 
can also reduce the costs associated 
with both customer care and paper- 
based billing. 
A complete e-commerce solution that 
includes all the functionality needed to 
establish and maintain a business-to- 
business e-commerce site. It fulfills 
seven fundamental requirements: 
complete functionality, scalability, 
manageability, relationship 
management, business system 
integration, full transaction handling, 
and ease of use. 
This is the foundation for all other 
modules. Its components provide 
individualized, real-time targeting of 
Web interactions through customized 
business rules, profiling, clickstream 
analysis, and tools for business users. It 
even supports wireless standards such 
as WAP.b. 
Provides several components that 
include Real Time Quotes, quote 
services that enable institutions to 
offer personalized stock tickers to their 
customers for tracking their individual 
stock portfolio on a real-time basis, 
customer service functions for 
managing users, alerts on quotes, and 
bank balances. 
(continued) 

176 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
Table 9.1 
BroadVision Applications (continued) 
One-to-One Instant Publisher 
BroadVision MarketMaker 
BroadVision Procurement 
One-to-One Publishing 
One-to-One Retail Commerce 
Provides Web-based tools that allow 
even nontechnical users throughout an 
organization, in multiple geographic 
locations, working on multiple 
computer platforms, to publish content 
in multiple languages, personalized to 
reach the appropriate recipients. 
Support is provided for content created 
with any tool, including HTML editors, 
Microsoft Office products, Lotus Notes, 
and Documentum. 
A complete, out-of-the-box 
application for creating and managing 
online B2B marketplaces. 
Automates the purchase process, 
from generating the requisition to 
generating the purchase order. It 
provides real-time order status and 
easy access to requisition and order 
history and is fully integrated with and 
certified by CommerceOne MarketSite. 
A powerful content management 
system that enables companies to 
manage and deliver targeted, timely, 
personalized, and media-aware 
electronic content. 
Offers business-to-consumer 
functionality, including personalized 
contents, advertising, cross-selling, and 
other features required to provide B2C 
functionality. 
OpenMarket 
OpenMarket is another dominant vendor of e-commerce solutions. 
OpenMarket's customers include Lycos, America Online, Consumers 
Union, Business Week, Standard & Poors, USA Today, Playboy Online, 
RealNetworks, Acer, Ingram Micro, Milacron, and Cablevision. 

Selecting the Right Commerce Package 
177 
OpenMarket is also the leader in the commerce service provider mar- 
ket with a worldwide infrastructure of telecommunications providers, 
banks, Internet service providers, and portals. Some of these companies 
include AT&T, Barclays Bank, First Union National Bank, France Tele- 
corn, Hiway, Netcom, NTT, Sage Networks, SBC Communications, Swiss 
PTT, Telecom Italia, and Telstra. OpenMarket has also provided several 
solutions for smaller businesses to get online at very little cost. OpenMar- 
ket's comprehensive Web site (www.openmarket.com) details additional 
customer solutions, ISVs, and hosting partners. 
OpenMarket provides solutions for content management and com- 
merce management. This vendor also provides and suite of applications, 
each providing specific functionality to the site. Table 9.2 includes some 
of these applications. 
Table 9.2 
OpenMarketApplications 
OpenMarket's Content Server 
Transact 
Provides for rapid deployment of 
systems that enable multitargeted 
delivery of content. As a result, 
businesses can publish a single asset 
to multiple Web sites, cell phones, 
or other Internet appliances. 
Allows merchants to manage orders 
from the initial purchase of an item to 
the updating of internal inventory 
systems. Transact provides capabilities 
to capture, store, and integrate with 
existing systems and to process various 
forms of purchase payment. In 
addition, the software allows you to 
fulfill orders and send that information 
immediately to your customer service 
department. Other features include 
online customer authentication and 
authorization, automated tax and 
shipping calculations, and online 
customer service. Also supports partial 
shipments and backorders. 
(continued) 

178 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
Table 9.2 
OpenMarket Applications (continued} 
Content Centre 
Personalization Centre 
Catalog Centre 
ShopSite 
A browser-based application that 
enables nontechnical users to create, 
manage, manipulate, and deliver 
content to multiple targets, including 
multiple Web sites, e-mail, and wireless 
devices. 
Enables businesses to implement 
site personalization, including 
personalization based on concept 
mapping, creating and storing visitor 
profiles, and creating and managing 
the segmentation of visitors. 
Helps vendors create and maintain an 
online catalog. 
Allows medium-to-small merchants to 
set up an online store in as little as 
fifteen minutes. The store creation 
wizards provide all of the features for a 
fully fuctional e-commerce solution, 
including an "on sale" module, product 
up-selling and cross-selling, associates 
tracking, order management, and 
processing. 
Ariba and CommereeOne 
Ariba and CommerceOne are two competing vendors in the pro- 
curement and exchange market. These vendors provide very similar 
solutions for large organizations or companies participating or hosting 
an exchange. Both companies customers reads like a "Who's Who" list 
from several of the major markets. 
Ariba customers range from large manufacturing companies such as 
Volkswagen and Honda Motors to energy companies such as Chevron 
and Texaco. Ariba has been the leader in procurement and market 
exchanges. Their solutions consists of the applications listed in Table 9.3. 

Selecting the Right Commerce Package 
179 
Table 9.3 
Ariba Applications 
Ariba Buyer 
Ariba Marketplace 
Ariba Dynamic Trade 
Ariba Commerce Services Network 
Ariba's answer to the procurement 
needs of today's global enterprises. This 
single solution can be used to buy both 
direct and indirect goods, acquire 
services, track travel costs and other 
expenses, and analyze strategic 
spending. The application facilitates the 
buying process and claims to reduce 
costs, eliminate inefficiencies, and speed 
up the transaction flow from end to end. 
The industry's leading marketplace 
application: a flexible, rapid- 
deployment solution for market makers 
of all kinds. Suitable for all types of 
B2B exchanges-from horizontal 
procurement marketplaces to highly 
specialized vertical marketplaces and 
commodity exchanges-the application 
bridges the gap between traditional 
buy-side and sell-side solutions. An all- 
in-one solution developed for market 
makers to efficiently deploy effective 
online trading communities. 
A highly configurable, fully integrated 
auction and exchange application that 
delivers the full range of dynamic 
pricing mechanisms-auction, bid/ask 
exchange, and reverse auction-in a 
flexible architecture. Supports B2B 
trading situations including multitier 
channel relationships, approved vendor 
lists, price and bidder confidentiality, 
time sensitivity, and differing quality or 
support levels. 
Tightly integrated with the Ariba B2B 
Commerce Platform, the Commerce 
Services Network provides sourcing, 
liquidation, supplier content and 
(continued) 

180 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
Table 9.3 
Ariba Applications {continued} 
directory services, secure transaction 
routing, multiprotocol exchange of 
transaction information, payment 
services, and logistics. Ariba's leading 
set of network-based commerce 
services helps businesses streamline 
their supply chain and seize new 
revenue opportunities. Offered both 
directly and through partnerships with 
other leading service providers, these 
services allow businesses to take 
maximum advantage of online B2B 
trade. 
CommerceOne provides similar solutions to those offered by Ariba. 
Some of their customers include Lockheed Martin, Boeing, Compaq, 
and General Motors. The solutions offered by CommerceOne provide 
both procurement and exchange capability. These solutions are listed in 
Table 9.4. 
For smaller businesses going online, some of the solutions above 
may fit the bill, although they are very expensive to purchase. Commerce 
service providers or application service providers provide a viable alter- 
native to purchasing the package directly. With these providers, mer- 
chants can host their application and rent these applications on a 
monthly or per-transaction basis. However, if this is still out of reach, 
there are other commerce packages aimed at the smaller businesses. Most 
of these applications are geared toward business-to-consumer online 
sales or pure auctioning sites. Let's take a look at a few of these solutions. 
ICat 
iCat Commerce Online (www.iCat.com) is a storefront creation ser- 
vice geared for small businesses that are new to e-commerce and need a 
fast solution within considerable budget constraints, iCat Commerce 
features include extensive sales reporting and real-time credit card 
authorization. At the time of publication, iCat charged a one-time fee of 
$249, then a $49.95 monthly charge to host up to fifty items. With ten or 
fewer items, there was no monthly charge. 

Selecting the Right Commerce Package 
181 
Table 9.4 
CommerceOne Applications 
BuySite 6.0 Enterprise Edition 
MarketSite Global Trading Portal 
Global Trading Web 
Comprehensive procurement 
functionality that addresses the entire 
purchasing cycle from requisitioning to 
payment. Features include managed 
content via a buyer-managed, 
multisupplier catalog; requests for 
ordering off-catalog of one-time 
purchases; and services for ordering or 
configuring items from a supplier Web 
site. 
The U.S. portal for exchanging goods 
and services among businesses 
worldwide. This open portal integrates 
with a wide variety of buying and selling 
applications, including s 
BuySite, and it connects to the 
s 
Global Trading Web. 
CommerceOne's Global Trading Web 
(GTW) is the world's largest business- 
to-business trading community. 
Comprised of many interoperating 
portals, the Global Trading Web 
provides economies of scale for buying 
organizations, suppliers, and service 
providers worldwide. Each portal is 
independently owned and operated by 
a leading market maker in a region or 
industry. The result is the largest choice 
of suppliers, prices, and selection for 
buyers; the largest market for goods 
and services for suppliers; and new 
efficiencies and opportunities for 
market makers. 
MerchandiZer 
MerchandiZer (www.merchandiZer.com) is a simple, low-priced 
solution for small-business owners. For an initial setup fee of $149 and 
monthly hosting fees starting at $79.95, MerchandiZer delivers support 

182 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
for unlimited items and storage space. MerchandiZer is an online-only 
solution that allows merchants to build an online store with an Internet 
connection and a Web browser. The Web site's setup is handled through 
MerchandiZer's manager utility, where merchants select from a number 
of prebuilt themes and templates for their storefronts. They can also add 
custom graphics to differentiate their Web site. 
IBM HomePage Creator 
IBM HomePage Creator for e-business is a new entry in the small 
business e-commerce field, and it boasts a top-notch storefront creation 
tool. With a one-time setup fee of $24.95 and a monthly fee of $24.95, 
the basic plan offers merchants five pages, twelve catalog items, 3MB of 
storage, and 40MB of bandwidth. Furthermore, it promises to automat- 
ically list storefronts with twenty search engines. 
Mthough a few solutions have been covered here, more complete 
lists are available at the following Web sites: 
http://ecommerce.internet.com/resources/vault/commserver/ 
http://www.ecommercevendors.com/ 
Partners 
Features or Functions 
The Evaluation Process 
,i" 
Customer Base 
Scalability 
Figure 9.1 The evaluation process. 

Selecting the Right Commerce Package 
183 
Regardless of the package, you will want to evaluate the following 
on each commerce vendor solution available. This evaluation process 
should consist of the items shown in Figure 9.1 (these may vary based 
on the business). 
Many e-commerce software solutions include standard store tem- 
plates that can be readily customized or storefront creation wizards that 
will walk you through the construction phases of building a store. Sev- 
eral vendors have sample stores that you can use as a basis for the site. 
The selected template serves as a model of your eventual store and rep- 
resents the hub of your e-commerce site. 
After you walk through the wizard screens, the site still should 
require modification. It's important to differentiate your site from oth- 
ers in branding and online features. The most common question about 
these wizards is whether people really use them. The answer is yes, if 
they are creating a storefront to sell products or services. The rationale is 
that these wizards contain the basic information you need to create the 
site, such as the storefront home page, product information, tax and 
shipping information, credit card information, and design and layout. 
These wizards also allow you to easily integrate third-party credit card 
verification systems (such as CyberCash or VeriFone), Taxware Interna- 
tional services, UPS tracking capabilities, and inventory tracking sys- 
tems. The integration of these third-party components represents the 
most compelling reason to at least consider the wizards. 
The basic principle behind wizards is simple: Why reinvent the 
wheel? It is much easier to create a store using these tools than it is to 
construct a store from scratch. If you build your solution from the 
ground floor up, it may take several developers several months to reach 
the same outcome offered by the wizard-based solution. Put your efforts 
where your expertise is most developed. Where it is less developed, har- 
ness the expertise of others. In the field of e-commerce, time is your pri- 
mary opponent. Do not spend time learning a skill that you can rent 
instead. 
When selecting a commerce solution, it is important to review the 
built-in templates or wizards that are part of the product. Each vendor 
has solutions that vary slightly in their out-of-the-box capabilities. By 
purchasing a package that meets your business needs, you can reduce 
the amount of time and resources required to customize your solution. 
You must compare the cost of a standard software solution with that 

184 
THE E-s163 
BOOK 
of a custom solution designed and developed by internal or external 
resources. 
Most commerce vendors provide business-to-consumer and business- 
to-business capabilities. However, as the e-commerce field is gaining 
greater grounds, vendors are focusing on key areas of business. 
Platforms Supported and Integration Tools 
Each commerce vendor solution will support specific network 
operating systems, Web servers, and out-of-the-box, back-end integra- 
tion tools that allow you to connect your databases to your e-commerce 
solution. To make a reasonable decision when selecting one vendor's 
product over another, you need to identify and define exactly what sys- 
tems you have in house so you can determine if the solution will easily 
fit into the environment. Based on your business needs across the vari- 
ous components of your infrastructure, ask the following questions: 
1. What network operating system (NOS) is required? 
2. Which Web server is required to run the chosen commerce soft- 
ware? Some vendors allow you to run their commerce software 
on several types of Web servers available on the market. 
3. Does the vendor provide plug-in tools to the relational databases 
currently deployed at my or my business partner's company? 
Relational database systems supported by these vendors include 
Oracle, SQL, and DB2. 
4. Does the solution have the capability to integrate into my trans- 
action-based systems (often, CICS and IMS)? 
5. Are there tools that provide connectivity to the enterprise resource 
planning (ERP) systems currently used by my organization? ERP 
systems include SAP, PeopleSoft, Baan, and ]. D. Edwards. 
6. If you employ electronic data interchange (EDI), what connec- 
tivity is provided by the vendor solution? 
Also, determine if plug-ins are available to any other third-party 
software solution you may currently employ. These software systems 
include document management software, image management software, 
and accounting packages. 

Selecting the Right Commerce Package 
185 
Ease of Modifications and Extensions 
It is important that the solution selected be fairly flexible as far as 
making modifications to work flow, integrating other applications, and 
third-party plug-ins. Some commerce vendors provide solutions that are 
easy to modify and include third-party applications integration. These 
third-party plug-ins include integration of credit card payment systems, 
customer relationship management systems, collaboration software, and 
tax and accounting and marketing and analysis applications. Third-party 
vendors are building plug-ins for most of the larger commerce vendors. 
Because a commerce package can provide between 40 percent and 60 
percent of a solution, it is important that the package you select allows 
you to easily add features and functionality to your site. Your must be 
able to modify and add to the total solution as technology changes and 
your business grows without the time- and money-intensive process of 
overhauling it. Based on your business needs, find out if the commerce 
solution supports the plug-ins required for your site. 
Companies listed as supporting the commerce application are usu- 
ally listed as independent software vendors or technology partners. You 
can find this listing directly at each commerce vendor's Web page. For 
example, at BroadVision's technology partner web page, some of the fol- 
lowing partners are listed: CyberCash, CyberSource, Epiphany, Interwo- 
ven, Macromedia, Moai, Net Perceptions, Oracle, PaylinX, Sybase, 
Taxware International, and VeriFone. Ariba also has a technology part- 
ners Web page that list vendors such as BEA Systems, Extricity Software, 
i2 Technologies Inc., ]. D. Edwards, Mercury Interactive, and Siebel Sys- 
tems, Inc. 
Companies such as IBM and Microsoft provide their own plug-ins 
for their e-commerce software packages. For example, both IBM and 
Microsoft sell an auction technology plug-in. Other commerce vendors 
provide plug-ins for package tracking through UPS or FedEx, additional 
management tools, and development tools. This information is usually 
provided at the vendor's Web site. Because these vendors continue to 
improve their products via plug-ins, it proves very advantageous for you 
to keep updated. Visit vendor sites at least every couple of weeks to 
determine what additional tools have been developed to integrate into 
your e-commerce solution. Remember that it is much easier and faster 
to deploy a plug-in than to create the same functionality. 

186 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
Scalability 
Depending on the applications running on the server and the num- 
ber of concurrent users hitting the system, the number of servers 
required and the hardware and software requirements will vary. When 
selecting a software vendor solution, it is critical that the application 
architecture provides features that manage the load and provide scala- 
bility. When selecting a solution, ask the vendor questions that include: 
9 What tools do you provide for load balancing? 
9 Does the server provide caching features? 
~ Do you have analysis tools that will allow us to test the server 
performance based on applications running on the server and 
simulate concurrent users? 
~ Is it easy to distribute the application so we can run different 
processes on different servers in order to balance the load? 
9 Has the application best tested in a production environment? 
What was the result? 
Partners 
Partnerships are essential in e-commerce. Your partners will help 
you design and deploy a solution and host your commerce application. 
Partnerships fall into three main areas: 
1. Consulting firms 
2. Technology 
3. Hosting 
Certain consulting firms have partnered with each commerce ven- 
dor in order to help customers design and develop the site. Because each 
technology and solution will vary, it is important that the consulting 
firm you select has worked with the products you are evaluating and 
have deployed solutions in similar industries. By selecting an experi- 
enced consulting firm, you reduce the risk of designing a site that will 
fail. In addition, consulting firms have developed their own best prac- 
tices that will provide a methodology and foundation for developing 

Selecting the Right Commerce Package 
187 
and deploying your site. Think about it. Consulting firms have been 
involved with a number of customers in your type of business and will 
be able to take their experience to your project. Yes, there is the risk that 
they may take one of your ideas and bring it to a competitor. If you've 
selected the right firm, however, by the time one of your ideas reaches a 
competitor, your solution is up and running effectively on the Internet. 
This leaves you free to think actively about developing a newer, height- 
ened function that will leave your customers saying, "Wow!" 
We discussed technology partners in the previous sections. These 
technology partners will provide solutions that have been implemented 
as part of the commerce solution. You will want to find out how to inte- 
grate each of these solutions into your commerce site prior to making 
the decision. 
Hosting companies that participate in these partner programs have 
experience managing and implementing the commerce vendor solu- 
tion. Not every hosting company has experience in each application; it is 
important that you select the hosting company that does. In addition, 
we strongly recommend getting references from each partner to discern 
the reliability, performance, and support of each hosting company. 
Although they may be listed as a partner, you cannot always assume that 
they are the best fit for you company. The best way to find out is to 
directly ask the businesses that have experience with the hosting partner 
about their experiences with that partner. 
Customer Base 
Who are the vendors' customers, and how are they using the pro- 
posed vendor solutions? 
When choosing your vendor solutions, you must ask this question. 
Your greatest fear at this point should be choosing a vendor solution that 
will use your Web site as a testing ground. Mthough cost incentives may 
exist, merchants cannot have their Web solutions serving as a learning 
opportunity for a vendor. If a vendor has successfully deployed their 
solution, your confidence can be buoyed. Otherwise, heed your natural 
skepticism. If the vendor provides you with a significant list of customers 
using the same solutions you are interested in, then ask the commerce 
vendor for customer references from this list. Your goal is to determine if 
their solution met other customers' expectations, what difficulties other 

188 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
customers experienced, and whether these customers would recommend 
the product. Furthermore, by spending the time required to review the 
vendors' customers, you can gauge their overall experience level in differ- 
ent industries, including content providers, manufacturing, travel, and 
entertainment. 
A Final Reminder before You Buy 
Before you select a vendor solution, remember that selecting the 
best possible vendor solution for your venture relies absolutely on how 
you have determined your company will fit into the e-commerce mar- 
ketplace. That is, you must enter the vendor selection process with a 
well-defined vision statement, set of goals, and strategies and have 
refined any business processes. If you understand fully how you intend 
to exploit this compelling opportunity, choosing a solution becomes 
painless and profitable. If not, the sea of vendor solutions is vast, rough, 
and practically unnavigable. 
Reading through the chapter, you may have noticed that some ven- 
dors provide solutions that cater to selling to other businesses rather 
than selling to consumers. Other software solutions include features 
that support specific certain industries, such as banking, manufactur- 
ing, and travel. Still other software vendors provide solutions geared 
toward selling digital content versus selling products that are physically 
shipped to customers. 
Once you know where to move your business in the electronic com- 
merce marketplace, judge each vendor based on the five basic guidelines 
outlined in the chapter: 
1. Dominant features 
2. Commerce server management tools 
3. Integration tools 
4. Vendor and third-party plug-ins 
5. Hosting services 
Then choose and deploy. 

Secure Your Investment: 
Secu rity Th reats a nd 
Solutions 
In the previous chapter, we addressed security issues regarding 
online payment systems. Although they are most visible to the cus- 
tomer, those risks encountered in transactions are just the tip of the 
e-security iceberg. The Internet can provide as many security risks as 
opportunities for a company~and some would number the opportuni- 
ties online "infinite." 
Security issues~hackers, viruses, and the like--are frightening 
issues for companies with any level of Internet connectivity. Often com- 
panies address these issues by focusing only on the hardware and soft- 
ware needed to keep hackers and viruses outside their intranet systems. 
Hardware and software considerations represent only one layer of secu- 
rity. Implementing solid security measures also means establishing poli- 
cies and procedures that require users and network administrators to 
take precautions. 
Security threats have steadily increased from both outside and inside 
corporate boundaries. Traditionally, 80 percent of security threats have 
been generated from within a corporation. These threats typically 
include employees within a company gaining access to company systems 
through loopholes in security and by access to employee passwords. 
189 

190 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
These percentages are changing due to the growth of the Internet and 
corporate extranets. Intruders from outside your corporate boundaries 
now represent a growing concern. 
Research conducted in early 1999 by the Computer Security Insti- 
tute with the participation of the San Francisco Federal Bureau of Inves- 
tigation's Computer Intrusion Squad revealed that both internal and 
external security threats are rising. For companies that acknowledged 
unauthorized use in 1999, 43 percent reported between one and five 
incidents originating outside the organization, and 37 percent reported 
between one and five incidents originating inside the organization. This 
report was based on responses from 521 security practitioners in Amer- 
ican corporations, government agencies, financial institutions, and uni- 
versities. 
The report offers some other striking considerations: 
9 Companies that reported their Internet connection as a frequent 
point of attack rose for the third consecutive year from 37 
percent of respondents in 1996 to 57 percent in 1999. 
9 Unauthorized access by insiders rose for the third consecutive 
year with 55 percent of respondents reporting incidents. 
With the number of security threats and their severity increasing, 
e-commerce entrepreneurs must take proactive roles in reducing their 
vulnerability. However, it is important not to fall into "security para- 
noia" by implementing such high security measures that employees and 
customers are prevented from communicating effectively. 
This chapter focuses on methods to reduce security risks in areas 
most vulnerable to hackers, viruses, and other forms of network intru- 
sion. Specifically, we explore the following security issues: network 
threats, security policies and procedures, firewalls and proxy servers, 
encryption, digital signatures, authentication and access control, virus 
prevention, and auditing your network. 
Keep in mind when developing a security strategy that you must 
balance the need for communication and information transfer between 
your company and customers, vendors, suppliers, and the public, with 
the potential for harm that this access creates. Understanding security 
risks, especially those associated with electronic transactions, helps your 
company design and architect a secure infrastructure. 

Secure Your Investment: Security Threats and Solutions 
191 
Network Threats 
Hackers continue to invent new techniques for accessing internal 
networks and personal computers. One Web site, www.alt2600.com, 
provides information on the latest sites attacked by hackers and links to 
tools that they use. The sections that follow provide information on 
some of the ways intruders compromise security on corporate networks 
and personal computers. 
Port Entrance 
Several hacker tools, available free on the Internet, scan a system's 
open ports in an effort to gain entry. For example, Portscan 1.2 is a utility 
that allows the user to scan ports on any target system. The user specifies 
the target IP address. The program then scans all ports between port 1 
and port 65536. The resulting information can be used to find loopholes 
in a security setup. In addition, the program identifies FTP and WWW 
services on any assigned port. A similar tool called IP-Prober allows open 
ports to be scanned in order to gain entrance to the network. 
To prohibit intruders from entering open ports, disable all ports 
and enable only those that are required to gain access to the network. 
Once you enable the selected ports, use firewall security to prevent 
unauthorized access. The firewall section of this chapter describes port 
security in more detail. 
Password Cracking 
Password cracking represents another method hackers use to enter 
your network. Several cracking tools, available throughout the Internet, 
generate and test a series of potential letter and number combinations 
until they determine the correct password. 
To prevent password cracking, follow these basic guidelines. 
Require users to create and use passwords of eight or more characters 
that combine alphanumeric elements. In addition, many system admin- 
istrators regularly run a tool called Crack. This tool tests users' pass- 
words to determine if they are easy to crack. This tool is available for 
download at www.cert.org. 

192 
THE E-eOMMERs 
BOOK 
E- Mail Spoo ring 
E-mail spoofing results when a user receives e-mail that appears to 
have originated from one person but was actually sent by another per- 
son. The goal of this spoofing is to trick the user into divulging informa- 
tion or replying with information that is confidential. 
One method of preventing spoofing is to use electronic signatures 
to exchange authenticated e-mail messages. Electronic signatures, also 
known as digital signatures, provide a mechanism to ensure that mes- 
sages have not been altered during transmission and that the messages 
are from the person listed as the sender. E-mail offers options to send 
messages that incorporate digital signatures. 
Virus Intrusion 
Virus intrusion represents a constant threat. Virus exposure results 
from receiving e-mail, sending documents over the network, and even 
from installing software or copying files from another hard drive or 
diskette. In 1999, the Melissa virus, the CIH/Chernobyl virus, and the 
Happy99 virus made headlines, causing huge damage to personal and 
corporate computers around the world. 
On March 27, 1999, the Melissa virus began propagating via e-mail 
attachments. When attachments were opened in Word 97 or Word 2000 
with macros enabled, the virus infected the Normal.dot template caus- 
ing documents referencing that template to become corrupt. If the 
infected document was opened by another user, the virus would propa- 
gate. Because the virus continued to propagate, mail servers experienced 
performance slowdowns. 
On April 26, 1999, a virus called Chernobyl (CIH) started spread- 
ing. This virus infected executable files and then spread by executing an 
infected file. Eventually, when the CIH virus was activated, it began 
deleting information from hard drives and overwrote each system's 
BIOS. 
On January 20, 1999, the Happy99 virus hit the Internet. The 
Happy99 virus is an executable file that displays fireworks and the words 
"Happy 99" on a user's screen. During its run cycle, the virus modifies 
files on the system. 
In early May 2000, the ILOVEYOU virus, also coined Love Bug or 
Love Letter, caused unprecedented damage. The self-propagating and 

Secure Your Investment: Security Threats and Solutions 
193 
destructive "ILOVEYOU" virus crippled mail servers and destroyed jpeg 
image files at tens of thousands of networks around the world. Love Let- 
ter spawned at least twenty-five copycats with varying levels of destruc- 
tiveness. Computer Economics, a research company based in Carlsbad, 
California, estimated that the virus and its variants caused $6.7 billion 
in damage. The virus was first reported in Hong Kong and spread 
rapidly west, infecting government and business computers. 
With viruses attacking both the corporate and private world of per- 
sonal computers, most computers feature virus protection software. If 
you do not have a version of this software, you can obtain it via the 
Internet from a variety of vendors. Remember to update the virus pro- 
tection software to ensure you have protection against the most recent 
viruses. For corporate organizations, institute the appropriate policies 
and procedures to require users on the network to deploy and use the 
latest virus protection software. 
Good informational sites for virus threats, research, and protection 
include: 
9 Symantec AntiVirus Research Center: 
www.symantec.com/avcenter/index.html 
~ IBM's AntiVirus Online" 
www.av.ibm.com 
9 Virus Bulletin: 
www.virusbtn.com 
Other Hacker Attacks 
Hackers employ a variety of other methods to attack servers around 
the world. This section describes a few more areas of risk. Most of these 
hacking methods are preventable using sound security policies and 
appropriate software and hardware implementations. 
The "ping" command can be used to exploit your system. Several 
free hacking tools allow hackers to send either oversized packets or con- 
tinuous packets to your server. The result is a system interruption or 
even a crash. For example, Ping-g is a tool used to specify an IP/Host 
address to continuously send a specified amount of ping packages. 
Another tool is the Ping of Death, used to send oversized packets to the 
server, resulting in a system crash. 
Most operating systems now include the functionality of accommo- 
dating these larger packet sizes. In addition, if a hacker is using a tool 

194 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
such as Ping-g, monitor your system activity. If necessary, deter the 
sending system from accessing your server. 
A tool called SScan performs probes against servers to identify ser- 
vices such as Telnet and FTP. You may be vulnerable to access by an 
intruder. The tool can be configured to automatically execute scripts of 
commands on your system, causing major problems. To prevent the 
SScan tool from locating vulnerabilities, use firewall filters to monitor 
any TCP/IP application ports and to detect unauthorized scripts run- 
ning on the system. 
Security Policies and Procedures 
Any concerted effort to counter common network threats begins 
with comprehensive administrative policies and procedures. User-level 
security focuses on ensuring that employees are aware of the impor- 
tance of security within the organization. Administrator-level security 
ensures that hardware, software, and user access is documented and 
granted according to the established guidelines. The following section 
describes the most critical areas to consider when defining security poli- 
cies and procedures. Depending on your company's needs, some re- 
quirements may vary in how intensely they are monitored. For example, 
in environments of highly confidential information, more time and 
money resources may be expended to deploy multiple layers of firewall 
security instead of just a single layer. 
User-Based Security 
User education and security awareness programs should be the 
starting point for developing a secure environment with the support of 
your employees. Often, employees work unaware of the implications 
associated with the following situations. 
Do you allow others to access the network with your user name and 
password? You may have asked, "Can I log on with your name and pass- 
word to get access to the network?" The response is typically, "Sure, no 
problem;' Actually, the problem has just started. Ensure that personnel 
within the company understand the importance of not allowing others 
to use their login name and password. If someone is logged on as 

Secure Your Investment: Security Threats and Solutions 
195 
another user, it becomes difficult to determine who actually caused a 
security breach. 
Do you leave your computer on when you leave your work area? Do 
all of your colleagues? Most do. This situation creates a risk that most 
people may not even consider. It is time for lunch or a meeting, and you 
are working on a document. Instead of logging off the system and turn- 
ing off the computer, you just walk away from it. Now consider that a 
virus can be deployed within 30 seconds or less. An entire system could 
be infiltrated or otherwise compromised during one employee's jaunt 
into the next office. Establish a policy that requires users to log off prior 
to leaving the work area. This simple action can save a company a lot of 
time and money. 
Do you write your password on a note lying next to the computer or 
stored in a drawer? Our workplace has become the "login name and 
password" game. Each system requires multiple login names and pass- 
words. However, writing them down on a piece of paper means not hav- 
ing security at all. Ensure that users do not practice the "sticky note" 
habit. Remind them how critical these user names and passwords are to 
protect their data as well as company information. 
Users must understand that the information they are granted access 
to is secure and is confidential. Users must be informed that they are 
given different degrees of access to sensitive company information 
based solely on their user name and password. 
Companies can take additional steps to help users manage confi- 
dential information. For example, when sending e-mail or documents 
electronically, an option is provided to include the word "Confidential" 
in red letters across the top. This tagging informs employees who may 
have access to this information that the document is of a sensitive 
nature and should not be sent or discussed with others in the company. 
Administrator-Based Security 
Administrator security policies must be established to protect com- 
pany information and computer systems. These rules dictate both a pro- 
tective arrangement of hardware and software and a series of regular 
practices to ensure an organization's technical health. Setting security 
policies and procedures begins on a physical level and includes operat- 
ing system security, Internet security, remote access rules, virus preven- 
tion, and commerce application protection. 

196 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
Physical Server Security 
Physical server security is the first level of policies and procedures 
that must be established. Keep servers in a locked room with controlled 
access. Someone who can get to the server can often very easily access 
the information. Make sure these servers are secure, and register each 
person who enters and exits the server room. 
Protect keyboard access with passwords. If controlled access is 
breached by an intruder, the security afforded by passwords may protect 
your company. Exercise reasonable caution by ensuring password 
lengths are more than eight characters and by using alphanumeric char- 
acters. Systems requiring double passwords to access information might 
be appropriate in some circumstances. 
Establish security procedures to prevent unauthorized users from 
gaining access to the network. Some companies require badges and dig- 
ital cards to access computer rooms. Other companies require pass- 
words prior to allowing access to the computer center. However, based 
on our corporate experience, administrators have often given their 
access information to outsiders, such as consultants working on site. 
Establish and enforce policies and procedures for these situations. You 
do not know who may be lurking in the hallway. 
Basic Operating System Security 
The operating system requires its own set of security rules and regu- 
lations. Even if you have set security for the Web server through firewalls 
and proxy servers, access through the operating system remains a big 
risk. The following sections suggest a variety of security policies. 
Define user, server, and group access rights to files and directories. 
You must determine who has read, write, delete, and modify access to 
directories and files on the system. It is also a great idea to set up a "no 
access" group. This is especially useful if someone from the company 
leaves the organization. You can easily and immediately place that user 
in this group, preventing access to system files. 
Require passwords to be greater than eight characters in length. This 
will make it more difficult for users trying to access the system. Further- 
more, require a combination of alphanumeric characters which are 
more difficult to crack. Another tip is to set up the system so users are 

Secure Your Investment: Security Threats and Solutions 
197 
required to change passwords every two to three months. Again, this 
provides another layer of protection. 
Place system files on a separate partition. This will make it easier to 
manage the information. For example, place all of the system files on the 
C: drive, and give only administrators access to the information. Once 
you have done this, log all additions, deletions, and modifications to 
these systems files. These are the files hackers seek. Also monitor server 
log files for suspicious queries or unusual system access. 
Limit almost all root access. Someone who has root access can per- 
form basically any command on the system. This includes adding, delet- 
ing, and monitoring of files. 
Internet and Port 5ecurity 
Internet security policies and procedures include defining Internet 
access and ensuring port security. Define Internet (external) access for 
buyers, suppliers, trading partners, and customers as a whole. The best 
method to set these policies is to determine the main groups who 
require access and then determine their level of access to the informa- 
tion on your site. For example, you may have company A, company B, 
and anonymous Internet customers. Once you have set up these groups, 
setting up site access proves much more manageable. Imagine that com- 
pany A has access to certain products you are selling at the site. When 
members of company A log on, they immediately are placed at the site 
that contains products and services specific to their company. In addi- 
tion, you can provide specific vendor discounts and server access (based 
on user login name and password). 
Port security is also critical to Internet security policies. Internet 
port and security configuration allows enabling or disabling port 80 for 
HTTP access and enabling and disabling port 443 for SSL access. When 
Web clients access the server, they access port 80 by default, similar to a 
door that allows access to the Web server. When this door is opened 
(enabled), they have access to the information at your store. This port 
should be enabled to allow customers to access the information at the 
site. However, there are also several other ports that provide an open 
door to other applications on the network. For example, 20/21 is used to 
access the FTP server on the network. This port should not be displayed 
if you do not plan on having an FTP server for your e-commerce site. 

198 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
The bottom line is to allow access only to those applications, such as 
HTTP, that are required by your customers on the Internet. 
Firewall and proxy server security adds another layer of security to 
your site. The firewall is used to protect your intranet or internal net- 
work from the Internet. As a complement, proxy servers limit the sites 
which your internal users can access on the Internet. We discuss firewall 
and proxy server security in more detail later in the chapter. 
Security for Servers with Dial-In Access 
Policies and procedures are also required when providing access to 
servers that have dial-in capabilities. When setting up a remote server, 
ensure that the server is behind the firewall, and follow strict access and 
operating system security procedures. Other forms of security include 
using dial-back and password protection for modems. Keep in mind 
that as soon as someone dialing into the network is online, he or she is 
participating in your environment as another node on the network. 
Virus Protection Software Security 
Policies and procedures on virus protection software must also be 
established for the company. For example, require that virus scanning 
software is installed on all computers and that updates are provided on a 
regular basis. Because new and updated viruses are a constant threat, a 
systematic approach to distributing these updates to users within the 
company helps protect the systems. Other measures include prohibiting 
users from copying/installing files or programs from home onto corpo- 
rate computers. We discuss viruses in more detail later in the chapter. 
Commerce Application Security 
Commerce application security includes defining those users and 
groups who have permission to perform specific tasks on the commerce 
server. Ensure that there are defined policies about who has access to 
perform particular tasks on the commerce site. Most commerce server 
software packages provide the capability to create user groups and 
assign access rights to each level of your storefront. These rights define 
who has the ability to add, modify, or delete product information, 
approve customer orders; and modify site design, and they include 
administrative rights to perform all tasks on the Web site. 

Secure Your Investment: Security Threats and Solutions 
199 
Separating Your Net from the Net" 
Firewalls and Proxy Servers 
Firewalls and proxy servers provide security between your intranet 
and extranet and/or the Internet. Organizations install firewall software 
to protect their intranet from unauthorized external access. A firewall 
works at the hardware or software level to control access to the internal 
system. Firewalls implement such security measures as packet filtering, 
application-level gateways, and circuit gateways, and they are often used 
in conjunction with a proxy server. A proxy server mediates between 
client requests in your company, such as HTTP requests from a browser, 
and servers outside your firewall. Proxies mask the return address of the 
requesting computer, providing secure anonymity for users and deny- 
ing any potential targets. Some proxies run virus detection programs on 
incoming packets. The following sections describe firewalls and proxy 
servers. 
Firewalls 
In simple terms, a firewall consists of a server and two network 
interface cards. The external network card communicates with the 
Internet or extranet, and the internal network card communicates with 
the intranet or internal network. In Figure 10.1, the firewall is placed 
between the internal servers and the external servers. This firewall 
design provides protection against external users accessing the internal 
network. 
Firewalls provide a method to filter information that is transmitted 
over the network. This method is sometimes called a datagram or 
packet. A packet-filtering firewall examines where the packet is going 
and what type of information it contains. It then checks whether the 
network allows delivery to that destination and allows that type of 
information to enter or exit your network. If the packet passes these 
tests, it is allowed to continue to its destination. Typically, packet filter- 
ing is implemented with router software. 
Packet filtering provides a way to filter IP addresses based on IP 
addresses and ports. For example, you could allow only known IP 
addresses access to the network. On the other side, you can deny access 
to all unknown or unreliable IP addresses (including competitors). 

200 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
Figure 10.1 Firewalls are an essential measure for protection. 
Another example of firewall security involves denying all outsiders 
access to port 80, resulting in no one from outside the organization 
accessing the HTTP server. If you decide not to implement this type 
of security, consider an alternative. The same result could be achieved 
by assigning another port to the HTTP server. Those intruders who 
attempt to violate the system security via port 80 would be unsuccessful. 
What firewalls can do for your network: 
9 Prevent unauthorized logins. 
9 Block outside traffic from inside your network. 
~ Filter unwanted network traffic. 
9 Provide security and access logs. 
9 Act as an effective tracing or monitoring tool. 
9 Enforce security policies. 
What firewalls cannot do for your network: 
9 
Cannot protect against traffic that does not flow through the 
firewall. 
9 
Cannot protect against bad, unrealistic, or nonexistent security 
policies. 
9 
Cannot protect against viruses. 

Secure Your Investment: Security Threats and Solutions 
201 
9 
Cannot 
protect against data-driven attacks, such as e-mail, FTP, 
or copied data, executed on the host. 
~ 
Cannot 
protect against data theft by authorized users, such as 
industrial spies or disgruntled employees. 
When planning your firewall architecture, the first step is to define 
firewall policies. The planning process is often the most time consuming 
and cost intensive. At this point, you must decide who has access, what 
servers they have access to, and what elements to monitor on the system. 
Based on security needs within the company, select the vendor software 
solution that addresses the security requirements defined for your cor- 
poration's architecture. Table 10.1 lists a variety of major firewall ven- 
dors, their products, and contact information. 
Table 10.1 Top Firewall Vendors 
Company Name 
Product Name 
Web Site Address 
Ascend 
Cisco 
Sterling Commerce 
CyberGuard Corp. 
CyberGuard 
LanOptics 
Guardian 
Microsoft 
Check Point 
Software Technologies Fire Wall 
Ascend Secure Access Firewall www.ascend.com 
Cisco lOS Firewall 
CONNECT Firewall 
MS Proxy Server 2.0 
www.cisco.com 
www.sterling.com 
www.cybg.com 
www.lanoptics.com 
www.microsoft.com 
www.checkpoi nt.com 
Proxy Servers 
A proxy server functions as an intermediary between a secure net- 
work and a nonsecure network. Most firewall products offer proxy 
server capabilities. With a proxy server, you can monitor information 
such as who has access to particular sites on the Internet. If necessary, 
you can prevent users within the company from accessing specific 
servers on the Internet. For example, the user can access a site if the Web 
server name is www.microsoft.com. However, if the user then tries to 

202 
THE E-s163 
BOOK 
Figure 10.2 A proxy server allows you to monitor information. 
access www.playboy.com, the proxy server has been configured not to 
allow that access. This situation is illustrated in Figure 10.2. 
Proxy servers also include a caching service for Web pages. The next 
time a user accesses a previously cached page, response time improves 
because the server does not have to access the Internet to reproduce the 
page. The process of caching often dramatically improves response 
times. A proxy server receives a request for an Internet service, such as a 
Web page request from a user. The proxy server passes its IP filtering 
requirements, or firewall, and looks in its local cache of previously 
downloaded Web pages, or cache services. If it finds the page, it returns 
it to the user without needing to forward the request to the Internet. If 
the page is not in the local cache, the proxy server uses one of its own IP 
addresses to request the page from the server out on the Internet. After 
the page is received and filtered, the proxy server forwards the page to 
the user. 
When setting up a proxy server, configure it as application-based or 
generic. Depending on how you plan to monitor user access to the net- 
work, you can select either of these two options. 
An application proxy uses the same method as a packet filter. It 
examines where the packet is going and the type of information it con- 
tains. However, an application proxy does not let the packet continue to 
its destination. The application proxy delivers the packet for you. 

Secure Your Investment: Security Threats and Solutions 
203 
An application proxy firewall is a server program that understands 
the type of information that is being transmitted, for example, HTTP or 
FTP. Application proxies control the flow of information between inter- 
nal and external clients and servers. This option may be used if you want 
to control access to FTP sites but not specific Web servers. Web browsers 
have built-in settings to specify proxy server configuration. For exam- 
ple, the browser contains a setting to require a proxy prior to accessing 
the Internet, FTP, Gopher, or Web servers. 
A generic application proxy is similar to an application proxy except 
that it does not need to understand the type of information that is being 
transmitted. For example, SOCKS servers can function as this type of 
proxy. This method may be used if you want to monitor traffic from 
your intranet to the Internet. 
Firewall and proxy server planning and implementation are critical 
to securing your corporate information and helping to prevent unau- 
thorized user access. Firewalls are used primarily to control traffic from 
the extranet and/or Internet to your corporate information systems. 
Proxy servers, on the other hand, are used to control sites that employ- 
ees can access from the internal network to the Internet. In the following 
sections we discuss other areas that are required to prevent corporate 
information and data from falling prey to a hacker. 
Encryption 
Encryption is the transformation of data to a scrambled form that 
cannot be read or interpreted without the appropriate translation key. 
Encryption and decryption require the use of common information, such 
as a key or key algorithms, to scramble and unscramble data. Encryption 
and decryption are crucial online, because cryptography is the only prac- 
tical method of protecting information transmitted electronically. 
Consider that contracts, documents, money orders, and other legal 
information travel across the Internet. With the threat of hackers, wire- 
taps, competitors, and dishonest insiders, a method must exist to scram- 
ble data while stored on the system or during electronic transmission. 
Understand the following few data encryption methods in order to 
understand how to use this technology to empower your own business: 
symmetric key encryption, asymmetric key encryption, and Pretty 
Good Privacy freeware. 

204 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
Figure 10.3 Symmetric key encryption. 
Symmetric Key Encryption 
Symmetric or single-key encryption features a single key to encrypt 
and decrypt information. This technology works well when sender and 
receiver can arrange ahead of time to exchange the key. In most business 
cases, such exchanges are cumbersome, especially among multiple par- 
ties. Figure 10.3 illustrates symmetric key encryption. 
Asymmetric Key Encryption 
Asymmetric or public-key encryption requires two complementary 
keys to encrypt and decrypt information: a private and a public key. The 
public key, freely distributed, is only used for encryption and is not able 
to decrypt any encrypted documents or files. Only the complementary 
private key can decrypt the information. Figure 10.4 illustrates the 
process of asymmetric key encryption. 
Encryption and Decryption Algorithms 
Two algorithms are widely used for the public-key encryption: the 
Rivest, Shamir, and Adleman (RSA) algorithm and the Diffie and Hell- 
man algorithm. The RSA algorithm randomly generates a very large 
prime number for a public key. Then the RSA algorithm relates the pub- 
lic key to another very large prime number, which functions as a private 

Secure Your Investment: Security Threats and Solutions 
205 
Figure 10.4 Asymmetric key encryption. 
key. The integrity of the algorithm is based on the difficulty of finding 
the prime factors of a large integer. The Diffie and Hellman algorithm is 
based on the difficulty of computing discrete logarithms in a finite field 
generated by a large prime number. 
Pretty Good Privacy 
Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) freeware is a public-key encryption/ 
decryption program that can be downloaded from www.pgp.com. Com- 
mercial versions are available. The program will automatically create 
public/private keys and key rings and will distribute public keys through 
public servers on the Internet. It supports all major e-mail packages and 
allows encrypting and decrypting of data and files. PGP supports the 
Rivest, Shamir, and Adleman (RSA) algorithm and the Diffie and Hell- 
man algorithm. 
Different software vendors offer at least one of these levels of encryp- 
tion for sending e-mail or documents within an intranet or over an 
Internet or extranet. The benefit to encryption is preventing would-be 
snoops from reading data by using a sniffer or other tool that can capture 
the data as it passes over the communication link or while on the server. 

206 
THE E-s163 
BOOK 
Authentication and Access Control 
Authentication is used to identify users and programs and to grant 
access levels according to information on the network. Authentication 
also assures accountability. Because activity tracking is a standard tool 
featured in most corporate intranets and extranets, activity tracking 
such as file access, modification, and deletions can be set to track 
according to user login names and passwords. Login names and pass- 
words are one of the most common methods of ensuring authentica- 
tion, because security breaches can be tracked to a central point of 
contact~the person logged on to the network. 
Authentication can be established by requiring a single login to 
access information on the network. This is the most common method 
of gaining access to resources, computers, and data on corporate 
systems. In more secure environments, double or even triple authen- 
tication methods are required for access. For example, in some environ- 
ments, double authentication, or requiring two individual logins, may 
be required to access extremely confidential information. With Domino 
software you can set multiple authentication requirements when adding 
new servers or users to an environment. Two or more people need to 
enter, for example, their user names and passwords prior to allowing 
these additional users into the environment. 
Authentication technology may rely solely on logins and passwords. 
Login names and passwords are used primarily by employees to access 
network resources. More advanced methods are used to access sensitive 
data or servers. Smart tokens; smart cards; biometric measuring devices 
for thumb prints, palm prints, and voice patterns; keystroke recogni- 
tion; and even retinal scans can also prove effective. Based on the com- 
pany's security needs, many variations can be exploited. 
Digital Signatures for Authentication 
The digital signature replaces the handwritten signature as certifica- 
tion of an individual's identity. Signatures provide information such as 
proof of origin, proof of submission, and proof of delivery. Digital signa- 
tures can be used when sending electronic mail or documents on the 
Internet. These signatures authenticate the author/sender of a document. 
Authentication proves critical because e-mail messages and electronic 
documents are more susceptible to forgery or misrepresentation than 

Secure Your Investment: Security Threats and Solutions 
207 
other means of communication. However, because digital signatures can 
be based on Social Security numbers and other possibly attainable per- 
sonal data, they have encountered a certain level of scrutiny from online 
users and the media. Digital signature technology is still progressing. 
Viruses 
A computer virus represents one of the most serious threats to the 
security and integrity of a computer system. Viruses damage systems by 
deleting files, modifying security, and changing hardware configura- 
tions, leaving some systems unusable. Computer viruses spread from 
user to user, program to program, and system to system. Due to this 
rapid growth pattern, a virus might be detected too late. 
Warning Signs 
Some viruses are obvious, while others remain difficult to foresee. 
The Happy99 virus, for example, displayed fireworks on the screen. The 
ILOVEYOU virus displayed few symptoms while it destroyed jpeg image 
files and replicated madly throughout e-mail systems. Basic symptoms 
of virus infection can serve as a cautionary warning. Mthough they are 
not always an indication of infection, these symptoms should raise your 
suspicion. Potential symptoms include: 
9 Time stamp or length of files changing unexpectedly. 
9 Program load time increasing. 
9 Unexplained writing to write-protected media. 
9 Amount of available memory on a computer decreasing 
unexpectedly. 
9 Executable files modified or deleted. 
9 Workstation rebooting at random. 
How a Virus Works 
A computer virus pursues two primary objectives for its creator. First, 
the virus copies itself into programs or files on a system. Second, the virus 
executes the instructions that the creator of the virus incorporated. This 

208 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
execution may be triggered by a date, a time, or execution of another pro- 
gram within the computer system. 
The virus instructions may include commands to display messages 
on the user's screen, format disks, oddly reboot the computer, and create 
other not-so-pleasant effects. Viruses target areas such as executable 
files, program load files, device drivers such as video, and, in some cases, 
the Microsoft Normal.dot template. 
How do these viruses enter a system? Diskettes traditionally repre- 
sented the most common vehicle for intrusion. Hackers now introduce 
viruses via e-mail attachments, software purchased from commercial 
companies, malicious employees, Internet sites, and other electronic 
sources. Most of these viruses are aimed at infecting workstations. 
Keeping Them Out 
Preventing viruses from entering your company's systems can be 
addressed systematically. The initial step requires policies that dictate 
security measures. Reduce the number of viruses that intrude. Mini- 
mize the damage caused by those that you discover. Incorporate the 
guidelines that follow as corporate policies. 
Back up data regularly so that when a virus does hit the company, all 
of your data is not lost. In environments where users store most of their 
information on local computers, ensure appropriate backups. Some 
companies require that employees place all of their files on a network 
shared on a central server to help ensure daily backups. 
Scan all backups prior to restoring information so viruses are not 
reintroduced into the system. 
Do not allow software other than corporate software to be installed 
on computers within your company. Often employees carry programs 
from home and install them on their workstation or download applica- 
tions and application upgrades from the Internet. Ensure that policies 
prohibit this activity, or outline which downloads are appropriate and 
when. 
Teach user awareness of potential virus risks and how to minimize 
possible infections. If people are aware of methods to keep viruses out of 
corporate boundaries and how to minimize the damages if a virus does 
appear, they will understand their responsibility in your environment. 
Users should recognize the signs of viruses. Institute a procedure for 
reporting potential threats or suspicions of viruses. 

Secure Your Investment: Security Threats and Solutions 
209 
Use virus protection software to detect known viruses. It is also 
important to download or install updates continually. Remind your 
employees to download updates every few months, if not more often. 
Several vendors offer virus scanning protection and detection software. 
Some of these vendors include Data Fellows F-Secure Anti-Virus 
(www.datafellows.com), Network Associates/McAfee (www.avertlabs. 
com), and Symantec/Norton AntiVirus (www.symantec.com). 
Auditing an Attack 
How do you know if you have been attacked? Tools incorporated 
into any operating system, firewall programs, and other third-party ven- 
dor services enable you to monitor information within a corporate 
infrastructure. In terms of security, determine who is accessing the net- 
work, how files are being changed on the system, and where there are 
excessive "failed login" attempts. In some cases, tools are just a starting 
point. You may also need to monitor physical forms such as access to the 
computer system, electronic data storage media access, and access logs. 
When conducting audits, weigh your resources, including time, staffing, 
and money, against the damaging effects of an intrusion. Strive for con- 
sistency, frequency, and depth. 
Some of the areas to audit include: 
~ Changes to directories and files. 
9 System logs for information such as login failures, deletion of 
system files, and system security changes. 
9 Activities involving sensitive data. 
9 Changes in user account access control privileges. 
9 Possibilities of physical intrusions, including computer access or 
backup media access. 
Monitoring tools allow you to determine whether or not an activity is 
successful. Examples include successful and unsuccessful logins, file and 
directory access, use of user rights, security policy changes, and system 
restart and shutdown. If there are consecutive unsuccessful attempts by 
users, there may be a problem. In addition, several operating systems and 
applications deny access to a user for a specified amount of time if login 
attempts have failed beyond the prescribed limit. These systems can also be 
set to require the administrator to reset the password when failures occur. 

21o 
THE E-COMMERs 
BOOK 
CERT 
The Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT) represents one 
of the main agencies for Internet security. This organization was formed 
by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) in 
November 1988. CERT's mission is to work with the Internet commu- 
nity to facilitate its response to computer security events involving 
Internet hosts, to take proactive steps to raise the community's aware- 
ness of computer security issues, and to conduct research targeted at 
improving the security of systems. 
CERT products and services include twenty-four-hour technical 
assistance in responding to computer security breaches, product vulner- 
ability assistance, technical documents, and seminars. In addition, the 
team maintains a mailing list for CERT advisories and provides the Web 
site www.cert.org and an anonymous FTP server ftp://info.cert.org/pub 
where security-related documents, CERT advisories, and a variety of 
tools are available. 
Visit the CERT Web site to view the latest security alerts, including 
viruses and network vulnerabilities. In addition, CERT acts as a central 
location to report incidents relating to any corporate security problems. 
In your quest to secure the computer systems of your company, a 
comprehensive plan with consistent implementation is your first and 
best line of defense. Your goal is to prevent a hacker from entering or 
affecting your network without limiting the communication between 
your employees and your customers. If you lack inspiration, take 
another look at www.alt2600.com, which offers descriptions of hacker 
attacks and their weapons of choice. If you lack direction, review the 
policy and procedure instructions throughout this chapter. 
Use any of the security measures available to you: user procedures, 
access restriction, passwords, firewalls, proxy servers, encryption, digital 
signatures, and audits. Determine which measures serve your goals by 
weighing their benefits against the cost of implementation and mainte- 
nance. Keep in mind that, in the end, your security is only as good as 
your governing policies and procedures. Enforce them so that everyone 
is aware of risks and remains accountable. Hardware and software 
deployments alone are insufficient. Make the commitment to secure 
your company. 

Get Ready for Wireless! 
Few technologies in the history of technology have generated the 
promise, potential, and excitement of wireless communications. The 
twenty-first century bridge between our perception of science fiction 
and the reality of science and technology is being created and developed 
at breathtaking speeds. Mobile communication is beginning to affect 
the daily lives of a huge number of people worldwide. More so than the 
advent of the personal computer and the World Wide Web, wireless 
communications technologies and applications will penetrate every 
aspect of our lives. This not only involves data retrieval, electronic com- 
merce, messaging, and Web access; it also will create the ability to send 
and receive wireless signals to control machines and devices. 
To maximize your benefits and prepare yourself for the wireless 
future, it is important to know more about the technology being devel- 
oped and the pace at which it is approaching. A working understanding 
is critical for your future success, whether you are a consumer, a busi- 
nessperson, or an information technologist. 
To truly understand how wireless technology will affect you, it is 
necessary to see the big picture. Although this book is centered on effec- 
tive e-commerce solutions for your business, the advances in wireless 
technologies will influence far more than new avenues for marketing 
and selling products. In essence, the wireless technologies we talk about 
in this chapter will change the way in which people carry on the daily 
aspects of their lives. The design and use of products will influence how 
and what people buy. So if you want to truly understand your potential 
211 

212 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
for the future, you must put yourself outside the box and consider the 
entire future world of wireless communications. 
In this chapter we will cover some of the basic aspects of wireless 
communications in the context of how they might affect your life and 
business. Because of the explosive changes happening in technology and 
applications, before this paragraph is finished the world will have 
advanced beyond what we talk about. The key to success in the wireless 
world will be to keep abreast of the changes and advances and to realize 
that the ground rules of behavior for this new world are new to 
everyone~and you have the unique opportunity to help establish those 
rules. The next five years promise to be a time of extraordinary excite- 
ment. Enjoy the ride. 
From E-Commerce to M-Commerce 
With every new technology comes the inevitable buzzword or 
catchphrase that quickly becomes part of our everyday conversation 
and language. Because the primary goal of most companies is to capital- 
ize on wireless technologies and services to make money through trans- 
action-based applications, many involved in this aspect of business are 
calling this technology mobile electronic commerce or m-commerce. 
Only those just arrived from another planet will not have noticed 
the worldwide proliferation of mobile phones and handheld wireless 
communication devices. The world has leapfrogged the required access 
to the Internet and voice communication through wired telephony. 
Mass quantities of wireless communication devices can now be found in 
every corner of the globe. Social scientists are labeling these widespread 
communication devices as the world's best hope for future world peace, 
because the instant flow of information creates a level playing field 
for all. 
With the ability for a mass of people to achieve instant communica- 
tion also comes the increased consumer need for instant gratification 
from these same devices. People want their information, and they want 
it now. Satisfying this need, whether for information, for data, or for 
m-commerce, unleashes unlimited possibilities for the entrepreneurial 
businessperson. 

6et Ready for Wireless! 
213 
How Many Customers? How 5oon Will This Happen? 
In researching the statistics on e-commerce users for the first and sec- 
ond editions of this book, it became clear that consulting firms are very 
conservative in their estimates. Each month, five- and ten-year projections 
have been released with greatly increased projections over the month 
before. This may also be the case with projections for m-commerce users. 
Take a look at Figures 11-1 and 11-2, which display the number of current 
and projected wireless communication device users in the United States 
and worldwide over the next six years and the number of the total users 
who are expected to engage in some form of m-commerce, respectively. 
The chart in Figure 11-1 is the estimated number of people sub- 
scribing to wireless portals in the United States, as given by The Strategis 
Group. If the projections shown in Figure 11-2 hold true, this number 
may be greatly understated. 
The figures show that most analysts expect that approximately 25 
percent of wireless users will engage in some type of m-commerce on 
their mobile sets. Given the vast array of commercial applications that 
are being developed in all corners of the world, this may be a great 
underestimate. Suffice it to say that with an anticipated base of two bil- 
lion wireless customers by 2005, with 25 percent or more engaged in 
m-commerce, the numbers are very impressive and very inviting for the 
creative entrepreneur. 
The financial firm Merrill Lynch estimates that $25 billion will be 
spent worldwide by 2005 on wireless software and m-commerce. If the 
projections of two billion are correct for the number of wireless device 
users worldwide, and if 500 million users are engaged in m-commerce, 
then it appears that the estimate of $25 billion could be understated if 
only $5 per user is anticipated to be spent. Needless to say, it's a large pie, 
and we should expect a large number of businesses and people to want a 
piece of it. 
The Devices... Now, Then, and in the Future 
When we talk about wireless devices, our speculation on the future 
of these machines is only that, speculation. We assume that no matter 
what happens in the development of future hardware, software, and 

214 
THE 
E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
Figure 11.2 Of the 2 billion worldwide wireless phone users by 2005, 500 million users 
will engage in some form of m-commerce. 
applications, one truism will remain, and that is that the device must be 
portable. Whether you are a fan of wireless phones, PDAs (personal dig- 
ital assistants), pagers, or palmtop computers, you can expect the 
designers of the world to concentrate on portable devices that can easily 
fit in the purse, in the pocket, and, most importantly, in the hand. 
Mthough wireless technologies will be used in a myriad of devices, such 
as General Motor's On-Star system, or in remote-controlled appliances, 
the overwhelming priority will be the development of personal portable 
communication tools. 

6et Ready for Wireless! 
215 
The challenges associated with developing handheld portability are 
enormous and are not to be taken lightly. The number of people and the 
number of companies involved in the design of hardware, software, 
middleware, and communication systems to overcome these challenges 
are considerable. Compared to large traditional engineering projects, it 
would be safe to say that the total R&D expenditures, the total number 
of people, and the total number of work hours being invested in wireless 
technologies far exceed the total input in the worldwide space program 
of the last forty years. 
In the "old" world of e-commerce, on the Internet through phone 
lines, the physical design of your terminal was not critical to how the 
machine was used. Of course the speed of your modem, the quality of 
your monitor, and the size of your computer memory contributed to 
the quality of your e-commerce experience. However, you probably sat 
at the computer and typed and used your mouse to conduct your shop- 
ping. Consider the difference in potential m-commerce scenarios when 
you are carrying your device. This creates a new business paradigm 
where the human-device interaction, coupled with the design of the 
device, helps determine the vast array of potential uses for m-commerce. 
We will cover this in more depth in the following sections, but consider 
the possibilties created by the mere fact of having a portable device. 
Mobile Phones and PDAs 
According to a study by The Yankee Group, by the year 2003 more 
people will utilize wireless communication devices to go on the World 
Wide Web than will use computers. They go on to report that the world 
already has more people using wireless phones than the total number of 
people using the internet. And in four years, twice as many people will 
be using wireless phones than will use the Internet. 
As mentioned before, the surge in the sale and use of digital wireless 
phones over the past two years has been spectacular. We are bombarded 
with advertisements selling phones and services. Or, considering a very 
unusual business model, selling services and giving away phones or sell- 
ing phones and giving away services. No matter how they are bought 
and sold, we know they have quickly been absorbed by and merged into 
our culture. 
In addition to wireless phones, PDAs or personal digital assistants 
and palmtop computers have gained widespread use in business and 

216 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
other settings. Developed simultaneously with, yet independently from, 
mobile phones, the goal and long-term business plans for each provided 
for a future involved in m-commerce. 
What's Available Now in E-Commerce? 
The list of currently available wireless services available on mobile 
phones and PDAs is limited but expanding on a daily basis. Although 
the services may not be as robust, fast, or efficient as similar Internet ser- 
vices, all groups are attempting to improve the quality and quantity of 
information delivered. 
You can now get reliable up-to-date sports scores, news, and weather 
reports, as well as access to a limited Web environment. Services that list 
restaurants and shops, as well as discounts and other e-commerce pro- 
motions, are expanding. PDAs and similar devices have also advanced 
the ability to edit and send data, word-processed documents, and spread- 
sheets to other sites. These devices also allow you to interact directly with 
your personal computer to exchange and store information. In addition, 
limited direct m-commerce is starting to be a real option. Advancing very 
quickly is the ability to track, buy, and sell stocks and bonds via a service 
through mobile phones. 
Current physical device limitations, coupled with low communica- 
tion transfer speed, add to the challenges facing wireless technologies 
and m-commerce. However, where there are large profits to be made, 
solutions usually follow. In later sections in this chapter we explore 
some of the possibilities. Unlike science fiction, most of what we discuss 
is not only possible but probable and a lot closer than you may imagine. 
What Will Be on the 5creen? 
Consider your personal computer and the amount and quality of 
information and visual images you can see on your screen. Now, for 
those of us old enough to remember, think about the look and feel of 
the pioneering computer game "Pong" that was released just over 
twenty years ago. Who could have imagined that the progress in tech- 
nology in such a short period of time would take us from "Pong" to the 
World Wide Web, to DVDs, to MP3? 
It is not out of the realm of possibilities to use the prior paragraph 
as an analogy to the difference between the current state-of-the-art in 

6et Ready for Wireless! 
217 
wireless communication devices and those being developed for the 
future. Except for the ability to carry around a seventeen-inch full-color 
display screen, you may expect your wireless device to meet the abilities 
of your current PC. (Of course, with advances in projection displays and 
holographic imaging, someday a big display may be possible.) 
Right now, the display quality and the bandwidth do not allow an 
easy transition between how you currently create, store, retrieve, and 
view Web-based material on a wireless device. As users, we may have to 
change our perceptions and desires when using these devices; however, 
the device designers and engineers are doing everything possible to 
please the consumer. We can't guess at the future, but we can anticipate 
the progress. Later in this chapter we will examine some of the current 
technologies of other devices in anticipation of the possibilities of the 
handheld wireless devices of the future. 
Mobile devices are playing the central role in communication is 
today's world. An extension to the Internet is just logical. New genera- 
tions of wireless devices will provide us with data and information 
residing on the Internet, not only in the form of pure data but also in the 
form of music, video, and interactive media communication. The key 
component of wireless communication is WAP (wireless application 
protocol). 
News services such as CNN Mobile provide news and information 
service directly to cell phones and wireless devices. Generic wireless por- 
tals will allow interacting with different web services. MSN Mobile 
(http://mobile.msn.com/), for example, allows the user to read e-mail 
through Hotmail.com and to browse MSNBC.com, to receive news, 
sports, and weather updates. MSN allows allows the user to review travel 
and flight itineraries through Expedia.com and use MSN Yellow Pages. 
Yahoo Mobile (http://mobile.yahoo.com/wireless/home) allows access 
to a wide range of services such as Yahoo! Auctions; mail forwarding and 
messaging; and WAB directory services, which feature vendor solutions 
and mobile alerts for sports, stocks, weather, and horoscopes sent to cell 
phones or wireless devices. 
Wireless Portals 
Perhaps the most important aspects in the future of wireless com- 
munication and particularly regarding m-commerce is the creation, 

218 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
design, and control of wireless portals. A wireless portal, as defined by 
The Strategis Group, is a customized point of entry through which a 
wireless subscriber can access Internet sites and information. 
The best examples of wired portals are currently AOL and Yahoo! 
They have established a strong market model based on a one-door 
entry. It appears that consumers prefer the ease of going through one 
site (a portal) to reach the majority of their information, e-commerce, 
and communication needs. Even if you are going to a consumer Web 
site to purchase something directly, it is likely that you will log on 
through an internet service provider such as AOL. 
The assumption by most industry experts is that consumers will 
come to expect a similar single-entry wireless portal to meet their needs. 
Early surfers of the Web will remember the difficulty of using one com- 
pany as an ISP (internet service provider) while still needing to purchase 
other software pieces, such a search engines, in order to reach some level 
of functionality on the Web. 
Another aspect of single wireless portal access that should not be 
underestimated is the consumer preference for a single payment and 
billing site. This appears to be the desired method because of convenience 
and control, although not necessarily of savings. When AOL switched the 
majority of its customers to single-rate monthly billing, many were skep- 
tical of its possibility for success. The question was, how many people 
would be willing to pay the fee when the hourly rate of the vast majority of 
Internet users was lower than the monthly fee? Evidently, most people are 
willing because of the strong perception of controllable billing. 
This is a very important factor in considering m-commerce. Will 
customers prefer to have their unified wireless portal service provider 
also be the one source for billing? If you become a frequent buyer from 
different stores, would you prefer the convenience of the billing and 
payment to be done through your wireless portal provider? This may 
seem a bit irrelevant at this stage; however, it is one of the most impor- 
tant elements in the fight to become the winners in the portal wars. 
Consider the fact that you can expect the cost of wireless portals to 
be charged back to you in a variety of ways: by subscription to the ser- 
vice, through service charges from your wireless communications car- 
rier; and/or by commissions paid to your wireless service provider. With 
an estimated 500 million people taking part in m-commerce by 2005, 
you can only imagine the huge amount of money at stake. 

Get Ready for Wireless! 
219 
No one is certain who will dominate the wireless world's version of 
the ISPs, but let's take a look at some of the current elements. 
Who Are the Players? Carriers vs. Internet 
Service Providers 
With such huge potential for revenues and customer access over 
wireless communication devices, the competition between companies 
for a share of this market is tremendous. In a recent article in The Wash- 
ington Post, Leslie Walker summed it up well by saying, "It is the second 
great land grab of cyberspace, the one for control of the wireless Web. 
Phone carriers are competing against and partnering with Web portals, 
device makers, and a new class of mobile service providers in pursuit of 
revenue from mobil e-commerce." 
"The second great land grab of 
cyberspace . . . " 
During the last five years we have all been witnesses to some of the 
most interesting business phenomena in history, from the huge amount 
of wealth created in the computer and Internet world to the vast 
amounts of cash gained and lost on "dot-com" investments. 
Few scenarios are as interesting as the rise to dominance of compa- 
nies such as AOL in an arena that we might have expected to have been 
dominated by the communication carrier companies. After all, the carri- 
ers owned the telephone lines, and they had direct access to the customer 
base. All the carriers needed to do was design and deliver a portal for 
their customers. But, by the time the carriers realized that this business 
even existed, it was too late. 
Both the management of the telecom carriers and the stockholders 
of communications stock are determined not to let this happen in the 
wireless world. With wireless communications and particularly wireless 
portals up for grab, the carriers think they have another unique advan- 
tage. In this case, they not only control the lines or wireless airways 
through their subscription services, they also are closely tied to the con- 
trol and development of the wireless devices. 

220 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
The carriers are also counting on recapturing m-commerce users 
because of consumer confidence in the phone company as a billing and 
payment organization. Would a customer feel more comfortable paying 
for an m-commerce purchase through his or her phone bill rather than 
through an ISP or directly to a business? Perhaps yes, given that a utility 
company may give a customer a sense of security of information as well 
as the added convenience of single billing. 
To push their version of m-commerce ahead, the carriers are 
engaged in a huge array of partnerships with hardware and software 
companies, as well as with information providers and businesses in 
order to build wireless portals. 
However, do not underestimate the power of the ISPs in capturing 
the wireless portal business. After all, what is the one service that will be 
offered on wireless portals that has become the most important aspect 
of the internet? E-mail! It is something most people can no longer live 
without. For those of you who have tried, how difficult is it to change 
your Internet e-mail address? With a pool of hundreds of e-mail con- 
tacts, this is no easy task. Anne Bentley of AOL, while talking about the 
ISP fight for the wireless portal market, said, "We're banking on the fact 
that we've got 23 million customers who are used to AOL services and 
will not want a separate e-mail address" on their mobile phones. 
In addition, the AOLs and Yahoo!s of the world are structured to 
design and adapt user interfaces that meet the needs of their customers. 
With such a large market share, consumers may expect the look and feel 
of Web-based sites currently available form ISPs. Don't expect the carri- 
ers to capture or take away the brand loyalty of ISPs. 
Mso, as one report expertly pointed out, there is nothing that could 
prevent AOL from selling and leasing mobile phones and devices. In the 
wired world of the Internet, this would have been impossible. However, 
given the unrestricted boundaries of the future of wireless, coupled the 
size and market clout of AOL, this is not out of the realm of possibilities. 
What Will Happen? 
It is important as a businessperson and consumer to understand the 
battle for the wireless portal market being waged between carriers and 
ISPs--not because it will directly affect your business in the future, 
but because this competition is pushing the introduction of unlimited 

Get Ready for Wireless! 
221 
m-commerce services far faster than they normally would develop. If 
you wish to be a player in this current and future m-commerce market, 
you will benefit from following these developments. 
Overall, most experts do not expect either the carriers, the ISPs, or 
any third party to dominate and control your Web portal. Most likely it 
will be a combination of a variety of companies who engage in what 
they do best. The design and use of Web portals may lean toward the 
expertise of ISPs and the control of devices and the airways toward car- 
riers. It is anyone's guess at this point, but it will no doubt be exciting. 
At this point, let's look at the developments in the international 
market outside the United States. Certain factors in the development of 
the Internet, coupled with diverse social and industrial structures, may 
make Europe and Asia the models for the future of the wireless world. 
International Perspective 
If Americans believe that the use of mobile telephones is exploding 
across their country, they must understand that introduction of wireless 
communications in the rest of the world is more like a nuclear explosion. 
From the sophisticated cities of Europe to the bustling markets of 
Asia, mobile phones are everywhere. As we showed above, the market 
penetration of mobile phones may reach two billion sets worldwide by 
2005. With the vast majority of users outside the United States, we expect 
that the major influence on both wireless portals and m-commerce may 
come from Europe and Asia. 
We have discussed the competition between carriers and ISPs for the 
burgeoning Web portal market. Although this is happening now, it is pri- 
marily a fight being waged in the U.S. markets. With the great population 
of users outside the United States, developmental factors, particularly in 
Europe, may have a greater influence on worldwide m-commerce than 
the carrier/ISPs of the United States. 
Although AOL Europe has strongly developed a European base, it in 
no way has been as influential on the internet users of Europe as in the 
United States. The same can be said for electronic commerce on the Inter- 
net. More people in Europe and Aisa use mobile phones than the Internet. 
Most likely, customers' first exposure to e-mail and e-commerce will be 
on a wireless device. Therefore they will not have the built-in brand loyal- 
ties or the expectations of the human-computer interaction of ISP-type 
portals. 

222 
THE E-s163 
BOOK 
Without ISPs playing a central role in the daily computing life of 
Europeans, the cooperation between carriers, device manufacturers, 
information providers, and merchants has been greater and more wide- 
spread. Manufacturers such as Ericson and Nokia in Scandinavia work 
directly with consumer-oriented companies to develop products that 
deliver what the customer wants. 
The development and the acceptance of wireless products depends 
on the underlying culture and lifestyle of communities and countries. 
The future of wireless portals and subsequently of m-commerce 
depends on pleasing the customer. Few people would disagree that 
Europe has dominated the world of industrial design. From Sweden to 
Italy, the design of furniture, appliances, automobiles, and clothing has 
created a culture of responding to the needs and desires of the con- 
sumer. Expect this to continue with the design of Web portals. 
In addition, in Europe and Asia the populations are far more 
densely located and subsequently more urban. This creates two reasons 
why these markets may become more influential on the development of 
Web portals and wireless devices. First, the density of the market makes 
it easier to advertise and evaluate new products. Secondly, changes and 
new products can be absorbed by a larger percentage of the population 
than in less urban markets. This is an enviable consumer group for any 
supplier of information, goods, and services. 
One other factor that should make the transition to m-commerce 
easier in Europe is a far greater acceptance of electronic transfer of 
funds. In many countries in Europe the telephone companies were cre- 
ated as public utilities, often under the same management as the postal 
system. In addition, the banking system was closely tied with each ser- 
vice. Long before debit cards were introduced in the United States, 
Europeans were paying utility and other bills electronically through 
their banks. In addition, debiting an account to pay for restaurant bills 
and goods is quite common. 
On the other hand, in Asia, where the majority of the population 
could never afford wired telephone service, mobile phones are 
everywhere. This leaves open a number of paradigms and business mod- 
els where customers have no experience with either a carrier or an ISP. 
The reaction of these consumers on the look, feel, and usability of Web 
portals will be pure and objective and not based on any preconceived 
notions. What an excellent market for testing products this will make! 

6et Ready for Wireless! 
223 
Keep an eye on developments internationally in order to follow 
what is best for your business. In the early part of this chapter we said 
that wireless communication has the opportunity to contribute greatly 
to world peace because of better interpersonal communications. The 
same can be said for world trade. Don't assume that because the United 
States has dominated the wired world of the Internet that it will control 
the future of the wireless world. The more open and knowledgeable you 
are of worldwide advances, the better your chances of success in the 
world of m-commerce. 
Customer Satisfaction 
A handheld wireless device is the ultimate tool for the "me genera- 
tion." Along with a society that needs instant gratification comes the 
need for instant satisfaction. With the mobile/wireless environment, the 
customer is already"walking," and he or she won't hesitate to walk away 
if things don't function. 
The customer has never been more 
right than he or she will be in the 
world of m-commerce .... 
Therefore the customer has never been more right than he or she 
will be in the world of m-commerce. This creates quite a challenge for 
everyone involved in the wireless world. The carriers, the wireless por- 
tals, and the device manufacturers, as well as the m-commerce mer- 
chant, must realize that the very technology that has brought the 
customer to them can also lead the customer to another supplier. 
The idea of "throughput levels" or the success of downloading 
information, can be extended to the customer. Customers who do not 
see or receive what they expect will go elsewhere. Because much of the 
display and communication technology is still in rather rudimentary 
stages, one should also expect that the charges for services and devices 
should be low until the quality is there. 
To the merchant, this may mean little or no profit in the short run. 
The goal should reflect the need to gain and keep customers, particu- 
larly those customers who will help you learn from their experience. 

224 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
Early ISPs suffered very high rates of "churning" (signing up and 
subsequently dropping a service) compared to current mobile carrier 
churning rates. In order to survive, each business must have a plan to 
monitor and respond to customer feedback to prevent churning. 
Wireless Internet Convergence" 
Merging Technologies 
A vast array of technologies and applications have been developing 
for nearly twenty years. Not only have people and businesses become 
accustomed to using devices and data in new efficient ways, the manufac- 
turers of devices, the middleware/software developers, and the communi- 
cation companies have been increasing the offerings and capabilities of 
available goods and services. As you can see from the list below, many of 
these technologies developed from totally independent sources with inde- 
pendent needs and goals. However, the capabilities and possibilities are 
now intersecting at a record pace. Throughout the next five years a huge 
number of applications that people have not even considered will arise. 
You have the opportunity both to use these applications and also to con- 
tribute and gain from creating your own possibilities. 
The following list shows a brief scan of some areas that are taking 
advantage of wireless applications. It is not important to dwell on the 
specific devices for the purposes of this chapter. They are presented here 
to give the reader an idea of what is currently happening. You can safely 
assume that all of these applications will be developed to work on the 
smallest of portable devices or at least interface with small wireless 
devices. 
1. Portable work devices. These are already being seen as UPS driv- 
ers' tracking systems and rental car company wireless handheld 
terminals for car returns. 
2. Transportation management. Trucking companies utilize laptop 
computer systems to monitor, track, and manage every aspect 
of their drivers' and vehicles' daily activities, including the driv- 
er's log (sleep, hours of driving), fuel prices, weather and road 
conditions, parking availability, load tracking, speed, and gas 
efficiency, as well as complete company-driver communica- 
tions. 

Get Ready for Wireless! 
225 
3. GPS and mapping devices. Global positioning devices let you 
know, through satellite tracking, where a device is located. In 
addition, wireless availability of maps and charts allows the user 
to plot directions. 
4. Personal vehicle systems. Systems such as the highly promoted 
On-Star system from General Motors combine wireless com- 
munications and GPS tracking with live communication to a 
customer service person to give a vast array of services. 
5. Inventory and ordering systems. For years the grocery and the 
parts businesses have used direct wireless systems to take inven- 
tory and automatically order. In addition, new technologies in 
cash register sales/returns tracking provide instant wireless 
communication between retailers and suppliers. 
6. Banking and finance. Banks and other financial institutions are 
leading the way in offering services available through wireless 
devices as well as sending fund transfers through wireless net- 
works. 
7. Utilities. For many years the power companies, phone compa- 
nies, and cable providers have used wireless devices both to ana- 
lyze on-site problems and also to communicate with centralized 
information sources. 
8. Toll roads. Driving through toll booths using the "e-lanes" 
allows you to save time by paying tolls through a wireless com- 
munication account. 
9. Science. Field work and laboratory work can now combine 
notes, GPS data, and computational power as well as instru- 
mental data, all through wireless networks. 
10. Palrntop/PDA applications. These available devices combine a 
vast array of functionality, including calendars, clocks, address 
books, e-mail connectors, Web searches, database communica- 
tions, limited searches, and developing products such as elec- 
tronic books. 
11. Military. In the military, wireless devices are being developed 
for everything from team communication, to field medical 
guidance, to target tracking, to information sharing, to troop 
strength management. 

226 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
rsports Scores, 
]Stock Prices. | 
|Restaurants, | 
i ~wireless 
~1 [Online Trading/ 
I Voice and 
|~ 
/ 
1 f 
/H!gh-Sp~d( / 
/ 
I Tr~king, 
/ 
L.H,gh Bandw,dth~ 
/ 
I Research Devices, I 
r GPs 
~ 
~ 
/ 
kMilitary DevicesJ 
/Systems, 
/ 
~ 
/ 
/ 
|Inventory 
L 
~ 
,L 
/ 
C 
/Systems 
I~ 
~ 
~ ~ :  
/ wireless 
k 
d 
~ 
~ 
~ 
]Transportation 
.~ 
_ 
~ 
/ 
......... 
\ ~1 
Management 
f Personal Digital ~ 
[ 
,. _vv__,re! ess.:__ 
,~- 
I System s 
/ Assistants, 
[ 
~ k 
Luf~l,f,i~'~caau 
~u" 
} 
/Pagers' 
I 
\ 
........... 
/ 
- 
- 
/Portable 
/ 
~,~ 
/ 
f Wireless 
Lc~ 
J 
/ 
~"'-"--'"~~ 
~I 
Debit and 
I 
/ 
/ 
/ 
\ 
\ 
I Credit Fund / 
~Intranet/ 
~/ 
/ 
/ 
\ 
\1 
Transfer 
/ 
/ Internet/Searchwww 
[ 
/ 
/ 
~ 
"~ /- 
d 
/,- 9 
I 
/ 
/ 
\ 
I E-Commerce 
k tng'nes 
d / 
/ 
r 
\ 
~ I Marketing' 
,r 
~ 
I 
/Two-way 
I I Selling, and 
IE-commcrr162 I CD.t.bascsZ 
Ividr 
II Customer 
_/S~176 
II Data;aiaMininqM,n 
_, / / c~ 
/I L.Acceptance 
IHardware and I I R~, Time 
I |Calling 
] 
L s~ 
j CDat~ 
J'~ 
-, 
Figure 11.3 Wireless Internet convergence by 2005. 
Advancin 9 M-Commerce Applications 
We have looked at a number of diverse applications from a wide 
variety of sources using wireless technologies to enhance their busi- 
nesses. Let's now examine some advances in wireless applications that 
you could consider part of m-commerce. This is a short list, but perhaps 
it will open your imagination. 

Get Ready for Wireless! 
227 
1. Point-of-purchase checkout. Mobile phone manufacturer Ericsson 
and English food giant Safeway are developing point-of-purchase 
checkout for customers. Customers will be able to scan the prod- 
uct they wish to purchase at the shelf, place it in their cart, and be 
automatically checked out with a debit transaction sent to the 
customer's bank. 
2. Coupon downloading. Many services now offer discount coupons 
to products with which you can be at the point of purchase, 
determine what you wish to purchase, and then download a dis- 
count coupon and send it via wireless to the cash register of the 
store you are visiting. 
3. Marketing and promotion searches. Do you know what you are 
looking for, but want to know where to find it? A wireless Web 
search can let you know where to find it as well as let you know of 
any sales and discounts available. 
4. Wireless debiting~electronic wallets. Nokia and other device man- 
ufacturers are working with companies to send wireless signals to 
debit the consumer's electronic wallet or bank account. Imagine 
using a vending machine without change. Your wireless device 
sends a message to the machine that gives you what you wish 
while at the same time debiting your account. 
Let's take this one step further. Imagine that in addition to every- 
thing else listed in this chapter, your new wireless device can also do the 
following; open your garage door; start your coffee maker; keep track of 
your children; control your smart-house devices, such as thermostats 
and window shades; carry out simple tasks such as opening your house 
and car doors and remote-controlling your television; and, who knows, 
even program your VCR. The possibilities are endless. 
We could go on and on with ideas, but let's use one case study that is 
often referred to in the context of many of these applications rolled into 
one m-commerce scenario. After considering this situation, why don't 
you see what you can come up with for your future? Don't limit yourself 
to what is currently happening, but put all of your ideas together to see 
what you can do. 

228 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
Case Study" Year 2005 
You are walking down the street of a commercial district when the 
personal wireless device you are carrying signals you that the store you 
are passing has a sale on brown widgets. The global satellite system 
senses that you are in the immediate vicinity of the store. You have pro- 
grammed your personal preferences into the computer, and the device 
"knows" that you would like to find a brown widget if convenient. At the 
same time, the device logs into the Internet and does a search for avail- 
ability and prices of brown widgets and shows that this brown widget is 
a good deal. Also, the wireless device can download any available dis- 
count offers from the merchant or the manufacturer directly into your 
machine. You proceed into the store, pick up the item in question, and 
walk out of the store knowing that your wireless device has paid for the 
item, minus any discounts, and debited your account. 
Make Your Plans 
If you can foresee your participation in business involving any 
aspect of the wireless world, from m-commerce, to information 
provider, to device maker, make sure to start building it as an integral 
part of your business plan. If you redefine your vision and goals, you can 
start developing your strategy to deploy the best possible solution. So, 
unfold your vision and establish a strategy that will meet your business 
goals. You are limited only by the limits of your imagination. 
You are limited only by the limits of 
your imagination. 
Note to Readers 
The statistics and information in this chapter are compiled and 
averaged from data available in numerous published articles, and much 
of the data is commonly attributed to the outstanding research firm 
The Strategis Group (www.strategisgroup.com), which is known for 
its superb tracking and analysis of the wireless world and also from 

Get Ready for Wireless! 
229 
Forrester Research (www.forrester.com), which we have frequently 
mentioned as the business world's key resource for information on elec- 
tronic commerce. If m-commerce and wireless technologies are in your 
future, purchasing the research reports from these companies may be 
well worth the investment for your business. Visit the Web sites for these 
companies, as well as those for Jupiter Communications, Merrill Lynch, 
The Gartner Group, IDC, The Yankee Group, and others, as well as wire- 
less magazines and newsgroups, to keep abreast of these rapidly chang- 
ing markets. In order to get a broad picture of information on wireless 
technologies and markets, try doing an Internet search on "wireless por- 
tals." You may wish to try this search online rather than through your 
wireless device, unless you are prepared for some unusual displays of 
information. 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Commit to Never-Ending 
Improvement 
As we look back at e-commerce as it was two years ago, we have seen 
major shifts in the way companies are doing business online. What was 
hip then is not what customers want today. Those companies that are suc- 
cessful and staying successful are constantly reshaping and reevaluating 
their e-businesses. Companies such as Amazon, eBay, and Dell (and the 
list goes on) have made sure to stay ahead of the curve in the e-commerce 
arena. Commitment to never-ending improvement is the key to staying 
ahead. 
In this chapter we will look at what a few companies have dome to 
stay ahead and remain successful in this market. You will notice that it is 
a combination of offering more and better services, redefining their 
position in the marketplace, researching customer buying trends, part- 
nering with companies, and continuing to take advantage of technolog- 
ical changes. 
The Dell Story 
Dell was one of the first companies to reap the benefits of e-commerce. 
Dell has continually improved its site to include more personalization and 
one-to-one relationships with it customers. It has consistently increased 
231 

232 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
online customer service and has expanded its business to provide added 
value services. Currently, more than 40 percent of the company's revenue 
is from sales online. This year it has generated approximate $15 million 
per day of revenue online. Dell expects to generate half its revenue online 
by the end of 2000. 
Dell attributes its success to customer service and providing a per- 
sonalized experience for its shoppers. In 1999, Dell was named one of 
the winners of the Ten Best Web Support Sites from the Association of 
Support Professionals. 
Although Dell is one of the leading e-commerce success stories, it 
has not stopped thinking ahead. This year it invested $26 million into 
SiteSmith, an application service provider that is expanding its services 
worldwide. You may ask, why would Dell go into the application service 
provider market? Well, Dell's acquisition is part of the company's efforts 
to expand into new markets and increase its revenue stream beyond just 
selling computers online. Dell's goal is to increase its infrastructure ser- 
vices using the ASP business model. 
Another initiative is the development of Dell Ventures, which will 
focus on making strategic investments in early-stage private companies. 
Dell is also offering clients value-added services such as Web design and 
e-commerce storefronts. 
The eBay Story 
eBay, with a simple concept (Web-based auctions) and a market 
capitalization of $16 billion, has harnessed the resources of the Internet 
to capture over two million registered users. Has it stopped looking 
ahead? No! eBay is constant looking for ways to increase its markets by 
providing international sites and moving into new markets. 
This year, eBay partnered with zipReality.com to provide a new cat- 
egory of products and services called eBay Real Estate. zipRealty.com 
will provide professional real estate services as part of the new category. 
By taking advantage of zipRealty.com and the powerful technology and 
infrastructure of eBay, both companies will win in this market. Even 
though eBay is a brand name for auctioning online, it still keeps moving 
forward and thinking of the next steps it must take to stay ahead of the 
market. 

Commit to Never-Ending Improvement 
233 
The Amazon Story 
Amazon is another branded company on the internet known for 
selling books. Mthough Amazon is selling other products, such as lawn, 
patio, and kitchen products, it is still known for providing quick and 
reliable delivery of books. Amazon is one of the online companies that is 
constantly improving the way it does business. One of Amazon's key 
innovations is the 1-Click ordering. 
Once a customer has made a purchase online or registered, they can 
select the 1-Click ordering. This will automatically select all of the previ- 
ously entered billing and shipping information. Amazon realized that its 
market was based on convenience and impulse buying. So, it was 
extremely innovative in using technology, which allowed customers to 
bypass all of the billing and shipping forms and focus more on making 
the one click. 
The JCPenney Story 
JCPenney.com has generated over $79 million in sales online 
through June 2000. The authors initially met with JCPenney over two 
years ago to talk about e-commerce and how it is changing the way 
companies are doing business. It is amazing how JCPenney went from 
including a few catalog items online to becoming one of the most visited 
sites on the Internet. 
In order to move ahead, it formed a separate subsidiary called 
JCP Internet Commerce Solutions, which focuses primarily on its 
e-commerce presence and catalog. The key to JCPenney's success was 
thinking about how it could provide the best customer service, fulfill- 
ment, and personalization online. 
We are seeing that often brick-and-mortar companies will create a 
new department or company purely related to e-commerce. Why? 
Because e-commerce is not completely the same as selling via catalog or in 
a brick-and-mortar store. Customer service, personalization, sales and 
marketing and other areas are addressed differently. By creating a new 
division or spinoff company, the company can bring in the right resources 
and experience. Yes, you can retrain people within the company. However, 
it takes time to shift a large corporation to think in e-commerce. 

234 
THE E-COMMEREE 
BOOK 
The Bid.com Story 
Bid.com was a company that created an auction-based site focused 
on business-to-consumer auctions. It wanted to provide a site similar to 
eBay. The results~it lost substantially over the year. In the spring of 
1999, the company's share price crested at $30.70 in Toronto but then 
suffered a long decline, bottoming at the end of May at $2.80 per share. 
Did Bid.com keep on pushing its site to the business-to-consumer 
market? No! Instead it rethought its business model and shifted toward 
the business-to-business model. The company knew it had a great auc- 
tion technology, so it moved to a business model based entirely on sell- 
ing the online auction technology and services to other businesses. The 
company business revenue model is now based on implementation fees, 
monthly hosting fees, and transaction fees from the businesses. 
Bid.com is now seeing some successes with this new model. Cus- 
tomers such as GE Capital and strategic partners such as Pricewater- 
houseCoopers are becoming part of Bid.com. In this example, we see a 
complete shift in the offerings from an e-company. Keep in mind that 
the e-commerce market is fairly new. Companies will need to test what 
works and what does not work. The key is to do it right once. You may 
find over time that what you thought would work does not work. For 
example, you may think that selling XYZ products is your company 
direction. Over time, you may realize you are strongest in distribution 
and customer service and very weak in the product sales area. So, you 
think about providing distribution and customer service for other 
e-companies instead of focusing on selling products. 
Think! Think! Think! What's Next 
We have covered the way a few companies are thinking ahead. 
Because the e-commerce field is constantly changing with innovative 
individuals and companies moving ahead, never-ending improvement 
is the key. 
The following is a great list to help you make sure you are not for- 
getting the areas to focus: 

Commit to Never-Ending Improvement 
235 
IV. 
Vl. 
I. 
Read. 
a. Know what the latest research/inventions/tech solutions are. 
b. Know what is happening in the market around you. 
II. 
Research the trends. 
a. Your customers change daily-do you know how they've 
changed? 
b. Available products change daily. 
i. Do you know what's out there? 
ii. Can you add new products to your site? 
c.. Your competitors change daily. 
i. Do you know what they're planning? 
ii. How can you position yourself away from them? 
iii. How can you keep your selling point unique? 
III. 
Invest in change that improves access to your goods and services. 
a. Invest in marketing repositioning. 
b. Invest in Web site enhancements. 
Invest in change that adds value to your goods and services. 
a. Invest in service upgrades. 
b. Invest in product upgrades. 
c. Invest in information upgrades. 
V. 
Create barriers to entry for subsequent competitors. 
a. Make sure the value of your product/service increases with 
higher use or distribution. 
b. Keep your branding unique and strong. 
c. Define yourself apart by honing your unique selling point. 
Network! 
a. Become involved in groups that feed on success. 
b. Join the e-commerce consortium. 
Read 
Reading both trade magazines and e-commerce magazines will 
keep you informed about what is happening in your market from both 
the business and technology perspectives. When consulting to busi- 
nesses and in our courses, we stress spending at least 20 minutes a day 
keeping up on e-commerce technology and business specific in your 
industry. This will help ensure that you are at least current on the 
e-commerce market. In addition, it is a great method to come up with 

236 
THE E-COMMERCE 
BOOK 
Research Trends 
Create Barriers to Entry 
for Competitors 
/, 
Read 
Never-Ending 
Improvement 
Improve Access to 
Goods and Services 
Add Value 
Network 
Figure 12.1 E-commerce is an ongoing adventure. 
ideas on how to improve your e-commerce solution. Some of the best 
reading sites for e-commerce are included in Table 12.1. 
Research the Trends 
You should research both industry trends and e-commerce trends. 
You should also spend a considerable amount of time researching your 
own customer buying habits. Most commerce applications come with 
analysis tools that will help you determine what people are buying, 
when they are buying, what advertising campaigns were successful, and 
so on. You may find that certain products are not doing well on your site 
versus other products. This could stem from a few reasons. Some of 
them may include the following: 
9 Type ofproduct being sold. Is it an impulse item, such as a book, or 
is it an item, such as clothing, that customers may be a little wary 
of buying online? 
9 Positioning of item on the site. Is the item in a location that is diffi- 
cult to access? Is the consumer being led to this area, or does it 
require extensive searching? 
9 Cost to the consumer. Are the costs too high--either product or 
shipping? 

Commit to Never-Ending Improvement 
237 
Table 12.1 
Reading Sites for E-Commerce 
www.internet.com 
www.cyberatlas.com 
www.a d reso U rces.co m 
www.zdnet.com 
www.ecommercetimes.com 
www.entrepreneur.com 
www.t h esta nd a rd.com 
Provides the latest new on internet and 
e-commerce business and technology trends 
Provides statistics on demographic and 
geographic buying trends 
Provides information on marketing your site, 
statistics of advertising mechanisms, and new 
advertising technologies 
Provides general e-commerce information for 
small and large businesses; also has a great 
section called 10 best and 10 worst e-commerce 
sites on the Internet 
Great site for getting overall trends on 
e-commerce; additionally, has a section 
called Success Stories of e-commerce 
companies 
Online magazine that contains great 
information for small businesses in the 
e-commerce arena; also provides an 
"Ask the Expert" section so you can get 
specific information 
Site filled with great information on company 
profiles, e-commerce mergers, and other 
information on e-commerce 
Mso, make sure you know what your competitors are providing on 
their sites to attract customers. They may be providing incentives such 
as coupons or special discounts for the same items. They may also be 
providing additional services that you may not have incorporated. You 
do not want to look exactly like your competitor. You must still differen- 
tiate yourself. However, you should know at a minimum what they are 
providing so you position yourself away from them and keep your sell- 
ing point unique. 

238 
THE E-COMMERs 
BOOK 
Invest in Change That Improves Access to 
Your Goods and Services 
Think about how you can improve access to the goods and services 
on your site. Are you incorporating all possibilities for marketing to 
include both traditional media and online media? Have you checked 
which are working and not working to your advantage? This will allow 
you to determine where to place your marketing time and dollars. Why 
spend thousands in one area if it only brings you a minimal amount of 
business? 
Once the customers get to your site, are you making impulse buying 
easier? Are you providing information on your site to help customers hit 
the final "Pay Now" button? Does your site reflect your current and 
potential customers as far as site design, look, and feel? 
Invest in Change That Adds Value to 
Your Goods and Services 
Are you constantly thinking about how you can add value to your 
customers' buying experiences? Are there other servers, products, or 
information that can be provided. Think about Dell, which keeps on 
thinking about the next steps and how to add value. 
Create Barriers to Entry for Subsequent Competitors 
Always stay one step ahead of your competitors or, better yet, two. 
Constantly think about what's next, how you can improve customer ser- 
vice and sales and marketing. What do you have that your competitor 
does not that would increase market share? It may be something like 
strong relationships with your suppliers who in turn may allow you to 
make special deals such as direct distribution to the consumer or mar- 
keting revenue. It may also include a unique way of selling a product or 
providing customer service, like the 1-click offered by Amazon. 
Network! 
Go to trade shows; show your products and services. Networking is 
one of the best methods to keep updated. You may want to start attend- 
ing trade shows of potential customers to find out what they would like 

Commit to Never-Ending Improvement 
239 
to see on your site. At the same time, you are building relationships. 
Think about all of the marketing and relationships you will create. 
In addition, by attending e-commerce trade shows, you will be able to 
directly communicate with commerce vendors and consulting groups 
that can help put your site together or improve your current functionality. 
This is a time of remarkable 
opportunity for those businesses that 
harness the power of the new 
market.., e-commerce. 
Enjoy the ride! 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Index 
A 
Access control, 206-207. See also Security 
Access issues, 35-36, 70 
Acer, 176 
Acquisition costs, 44-45 
ACS Logistics, 114 
Ad Up, 65 
Administrator-based security, 195. See 
also Security 
Adobe Photoshop, 70 
AdResource.com, 43, 64, 237 
Advanced Marketing Corporation, 64 
Advertising, 63-65, 157. See also 
Marketing 
AIAG (Automotive Industry Action 
Group), 149 
Airborne Express, 109, 112 
AirNet Express, 112 
AllNetResearch, 35 
AltaVista, 45-46, 51 
Amazon.com, 7, 28, 36, 44, 57, 62, 231, 
233,238 
customer service representatives, 87 
order fulfillment difficulties 
experienced by, 103-104, 122 
product recommendations, 98 
American Airlines, 67 
American Express, 132, 134, 154 
Ameritrade Holding Corporation, 62 
Andersen Consulting, 106 
AOL (America Online), 150, 176,218, 
219-221 
Apache Server, 151 
API (application program interface), 
142, 155, 161 
APL.com, 113-114 
Approval, seals of, 144, 145 
Ariba, 15-16, 178-180, 185 
Armstrong, Arthur, 96-97 
ARPA (Advanced Research Projects 
Agency), 165 
ARPANet, 165 
Ascend Communications, 164, 201 
Association of Support Professionals, 
232 
AT&T (American Telephone & 
Telegraph), 177 
ATMs (automatic teller machines), 131 
Auctions, 16-17, 59, 217, 234 
Auditing, 209 
Authentication, 206-207. See also 
Security 
Automobiles, 9-10, 180, 214, 225 
Autoweb.com, 9 
B 
B2B e-commerce, 11, 14-15, 113, 
121 
Baan, 184 
Baby boomers, 27 
Back-end systems, 147-148, 159-161 
BaltimoreSun.com, 54 
Bank of America, 139 
Banners, 51-54, 73, 75, 157 
Barclays Bank, 177 
241 

242 
Index 
BarnesandNoble.com, 28, 62 
BAX Global, 113 
BEA Systems, 185 
Better Business Bureau, 145 
Beyond Interactive, 65 
Beyond.com, 7 
Beyondldeas.com, 75 
Bid.com, 234 
Billing, 127, 133-134 
Bizrate.com, 93 
Bluefly.com, 37, 101 
BlueGill Technologies, 134 
Boeing, 180 
Branding, 41-42, 62-63 
Brightware.com, 85 
BroadVision, 174-175, 185 
Browsers, 142, 149, 165-166 
basic description of, 150 
connectivity tools and, 159 
development of, 150 
Business models 
basics, 10-19 
business-to-business, 11, 14-15, 113, 
121 
business-to-consumer, 11, 12-14 
consumer-to-consumer, 11-12 
Business Week, 176 
C 
C++ (high-level language), 159 
Cablevision, 176 
Caching, 168 
Camera World, 43 
Carte Blanche, 134 
CashRegister, 137, 139 
Catalogs, online, 15-16 
CDNow, 28, 62, 98 
CERT (Computer Emergency Response 
Team), 210 
Channels, 157-158 
Charles Schwab, 6 
Chat forums, 96-97 
Chemdex, 15-16 
Chevron, 178 
Children, 23, 24-25 
Churning, use of the term, 224 
Cisco, 164, 201 
Classified advertisements, 54 
Clustering, 162-163 
CNN Mobile, 217 
Coca-Cola, 26 
Commerce One, 15-16, 178-180 
CommercePOINT, 136, 137 
Compaq, 14, 130, 180 
Competitors 
entry for, creating barriers to, 238 
identifying, 173-174 
CompuServe, 150 
Computer Industry Almanac, 23, 29, 
32-33 
Computer Security Institute, 190 
Consumers Union, 176 
Content management, 158-164 
Convenience, 63 
CORBA, 121 
CPM (cost per thousand impressions), 
53 
CrateandBarrel.com, 11, 14 
Credit card(s), 95, 126-127, 134-136 
commerce software and, 154 
verification, 138-140, 152 
security and, 39, 140-143 
Credit rating companies, 115 
Cross-linking, 57-58 
Cross-selling, 157 
Customer service. See also Customers 
features, determining, 171 
keeping customers through, 83-102 
responsiveness of, 38, 39 
Customers. See also Customer service 
acquisition costs for, 44-45 
empowering, 8-9 
expectations of, regarding order 
fulfillment, 106-107 
keeping, 83-102 
knowing your, 21-39 
registering, 156-158 
researching, 21-22 
satisfaction of, 223-224 
targeting, 21-22, 36-40 
Cyber Dialogue, 24, 28, 99 

CyberAtlas, 35, 69, 72,237 
CyberCash, 7, 137, 139, 152, 154, 185 
CyberGuard Corporation, 201 
CyberSource, 185 
D 
DARPA (Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency), 210 
DB2, 160, 184 
Deadlock Web Design, 65 
Dell Computer Corporation, 6, 14, 34, 
231-232,238 
Department of the Navy, 131 
Descartes DeliveryNet, 116 
Dick's Sporting Goods, 61 
Digital 
certificates, 140-142 
checks, 127 
content, selling, 152-153 
"divide" 27-28 
signatures, 206-207 
Digital River, 7 
Diners Club, 134 
Direct Hit, 51 
Direct mail, 158 
Directories, 45-51 
DirectoryGuide, 46 
Discussion lists, 58-59, 96-97 
Distribution centers, 108 
Domino Server, 151 
E 
Ease of use, 37-38 
EBay, 11-12,232 
ebHub.net, 116 
EcommerceTimes.com, 237 
EDI (electronic data interchange), 
115-116, 120-121,149, 160-161, 
167, 173, 184 
eDocs, 134 
Education levels, 27-28 
Efficiency, 67-68 
Electronic 
billing, 127, 133-134 
Index 
243 
payments, 136-140 
wallets, 130-131,136, 227 
Ellis, ]uanita, 89-91,109-110, 171,173 
E-mail 
customer service and, 85-88, 90-95 
discussion lists, 59, 96-97 
giveaway promotions and, 61 
spoofing, 192 
Encryption, 166, 190, 203-205. See also 
Security 
Entrepreneur.corn, 237 
Epiphany, 185 
Epoch Transaction Service, 139 
Ernst & Young, 28-29 
ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning), 
160, 161,173, 184 
Escrow companies, 114 
Escrow Net International, 114 
Escrow.com, 114 
eToys.com, 29 
ETrade Group, 44, 62 
Exchanges, 18-19 
Excite, 45-46, 49, 51 
Expedia, 217 
Extranets 
architecture of, 164-165, 166-167 
security and, 198-203 
Extricity Software, 185 
Eyescream, 65 
F 
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 
190 
Federal Express (FedEx), 108-110, 112, 
126, 155, 185 
Federal Reserve Board, 134-135 
Feedback forms, 86, 88 
Financial institutions, 138 
Firewalls, 166-168, 190, 198-201 
First Data, 139 
First Union National Bank, 177 
Flexibility, 82 
Fonts, 78 
Forrester Research, 1-2, 3, 12-13, 35, 45, 
110-111 

244 
Index 
France Telecom, 177 
FreeMarkets, 16-17 
Friendliness, principle of, 82-88 
FTP (File Transfer Protocol), 191,194, 
197,201,203,210 
Functionality, 63 
G 
Gartner Group, 229 
Gender, 23, 28-29 
General Motors, 180, 214, 225 
Geography, 29-30 
Giveaway promotions, 61 
Global economy, 10, 30-25 
Global Reach, 30-32 
Global Supply Chain Management 
Forum, 119-120 
Goals, setting, 82. See also Visions 
Golden State Overnight, 112 
GoTo.com, 51 
GPS tracking, 225 
Graphics, 35-36, 69-70, 74-78 
Great Plains Accounting Software, 154 
GUI (graphical user interface), 166 
H 
Hackers, 189-191,193-194, 203. See also 
Security 
Hagel, John, 96-97 
Hewlett-Packard, 132 
Home Depot, 143 
Honda Motors, 178 
HotBot, 45-46, 48-49, 51 
HTML (HyperText Markup Language), 
149, 150-151,166 
HTTP (HyperText Transfer Protocol), 
127, 150, 166, 197, 198,200,203 
I 
IBM (International Business Machines), 
136, 137, 149, 160-161 
AntiVirus Online, 193 
DB2, 160, 184 
HomePage Creator, 182-184 
iCat Commerce Online, 180-181 
IIS (Microsoft Internet Information 
Server), 151 
Income brackets, 27-28, 35 
Infoseek, 48, 51 
Ingram Micro, 176 
InstantSearch.com, 115 
International Data Corporation, 2, 24, 
29,33 
Internet 
architecture of, 164-165, 166 
routers and, 163-164 
security and, 196-203 
Internet Explorer browser, 150, 165. See 
also Browsers 
Internet.com, 43,237 
Interwoven, 185 
Intranets 
architecture of, 164-165 
security and, 198-203 
Inventory tracking, 153 
IP (Internet Protocol) addresses, 168, 
193, 199, 202 
IP-Prober, 191 
iShip.com, 109, 112 
ISPs (Internet Service Providers), 58, 
218-222,224 
] 
JCPenny.com, 233 
J.D. Edwards, 184, 185 
J.D. Power and Associates, 9 
Jupiter Communications, 229 
K 
K2 Design, 65 
K&L Wine Merchants, 43 
Kelley Blue Book site, 52 
L 
Land's End, 34 
Languages, 30-35 
LanOptics, 201 

Index 
245 
LANs (local area networks), 166 
Legacy platforms, 161 
Links 
broken, 72-73 
interior/exterior, 72 
L.L. Bean, 107 
Load balancing, 161-162 
Lockheed Martin, 180 
LogisticsOnline.com, 117 
Lotus, 149, 161 
Lycos, 43, 45-46, 49, 51, 176 
Lynx browser, 150. See also Browsers 
M 
McKinsey & Co., 44-45 
M-commerce, 212-213. See also Wireless 
communications 
Macromedia, 185 
Market(s) 
B2B e-commerce and, 14-15 
horizontal, 14-15 
makers, community, 17-18 
predictions, 1-3 
vertical, 14 
Marketing. See also Advertising 
agencies, 63-65 
basic description of, 41-65 
challenges facing, 42-44 
using banners, 51-54 
using search engines, 45-51 
MasterCard, 134, 135, 140-141,154 
Mediamark Research, 27-28 
Mercury Interactive, 185 
Merrill Lynch, 213,229 
Message boards, 54-55 
META tags, 48, 49 
Micropayment systems, 126, 127-131 
Microsoft Corporation, 134, 149, 170 
Microsoft Internet Information Server 
(IIS), 151 
Microsoft Network (MSN), 51, 217 
Microsoft Proxy Server, 201 
Microsoft Wallet, 130-131,136 
Microsoft Web site, 201-203 
Milacron, 176 
MilliCent Microcommerce Network, 130 
Modem speeds, 35-36, 70 
Mosaic browser, 150. See also Browsers 
MSN (Microsoft Network), 51, 217 
MSNBC.com, 217 
N 
National Telecommunications and 
Information Administration, 27 
National Transportation Exchange, 
121 
Navigation, ease of, 67-72, 143-144 
NEC Research Institute, 26, 45 
Needs, determining your, 170-174 
Net Perceptions, 185 
Net2b.com, 43 
Netcom, 177 
Netscape Corporation, 142, 149, 151 
Netscape Navigator browser, 150, 165. 
See also Browsers 
Networks 
architecture of, 164-168 
security and, 191-194 
Newsgroups, 58, 156 
Newsletters, 55-57, 122 
Next]et, 112 
Nickelodeon/Yankelovich Youth 
Monitor, 25-26 
Nielsen Net Ratings, 35 
NNTP (Network News Transfer 
Protocol), 156 
Nokia, 222,227 
Nordstrom, 89 
Northern Light, 46 
Novazen, 134 
Novell, 151 
Novus/Discover, 134, 154 
O 
ODBC (Open Database Connectivity), 
156 
OfficeDepot.com, 11 
Omaha.com, 77 
On-Star system, 214, 225 

246 
Index 
Online & Multimedia Marketing 
Group, 65 
Onsale.com, 6, 53 
OpenMarket, 176-177 
Opera browser, 150. See also Browsers 
Oracle, 160, 184, 185 
Order fulfillment 
basic description of, 93-95, 103-123 
customer expectations regarding, 
106-108 
solutions, finding, 116-118 
spikes in demand and, 121-123 
tracking, 155-156 
OS/2, 151 
"Ounce of prevention" principle, 95 
P 
PaperExchange, 18-19 
Partnerships, 186-187 
Passwords, 133, 189, 191,194-197, 
206-207. See also Security 
PaylinX, 185 
Payment system(s). See also Credit cards 
basic description of, 125-146 
categories, 126-136 
Paymentech, 139 
PDAs (personal digital assistants), 214, 
215-216, 225. See also Wireless 
communications 
PeopleSoft, 161, 184 
Personalization, 101-102 
PGP (Pretty Good Privacy), 205 
ping command, 193 
Ping of Death, 193 
Ping-g, 194 
PINs (personal identification numbers), 
132 
Pitney Bowes, 134 
Playboy Online, 176 
Plug-ins, 38, 185, 188 
PO (purchase order) generation, 154 
PointCast, 158 
Port entrance, 191 
Portscan, 191 
POS (point-of-sale) terminals, 132-133 
Press releases, 60-61 
Privacy, 38-39, 79. See also Security 
Product(s) 
information, 90, 99 
newsletters, 94 
returns/exchanges, 100, 111 
selling, 152 
Proxy servers, 168, 190, 198-203. See also 
Servers 
Push technology, 157-158 
Q 
Quality, 88-91 
Question-and-Answer (Q&A) sections, 
89-91,109-110 
R 
Racial differences, 28 
RealNetworks, 176 
Realtor.com, 7 
Reengineering, your business, 8 
REI Online, 21-22, 24 
Reliability, 72-73 
Replication, 163 
Requirements statement, 172 
Research, 21-22,236-237 
Response Marketing Group, 60 
Responsiveness, 38, 39 
RFP (Request for Proposal), 80, 171 
RHYTHM Supply Chain Management 
(SCM), 120 
Rocque, Greg, 121 
Routers, 163-164 
S 
Sage Networks, 177 
SAP, 161,184 
SBC Communications, 177 
Scalability, 186 
SciQuest, 15 
Search engines, 45-51 
Search.com, 51 
Secure Trading, 139 

Index 
247 
Security 
administrator-based, 195 
architecture, 167-168 
basic description of, 189-210 
commerce application, 198 
encryption and, 166, 190, 203-205 
extranets and, 166-167 
Internet and, 196-197 
intranets and, 166 
operating system, 196-197 
passwords, 133, 189, 191,194-197, 
206-207 
policies/procedures, 194-198 
physical server, 196 
port, 196-197 
user-based, 194-195 
Server(s) 
firewalls, 166, 167-168 
proxy, 168, 190, 198-203 
routers and, 163-164 
security for, 166, 167-168, 196, 
198-203 
software, 147, 148, 150-151 
SET (Secure Electronic Transaction), 
137-138, 140-141 
Shipping, 93-94, 107-114 
costs, 99-100, 108, 109-110 
times, 100 
tracking, 108 
Shopping basket, 100 
Sidewalk, 43 
Siebel Systems, 185 
Simba Information, 43 
Smart Card Industry Association, 133 
Smart Card Integrators, Inc., 132 
Smart Card Reader, 132 
Smart cards, 127, 131-132 
SmartShip.com, 110, 131 
SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol), 
166 
SOCKS servers, 203 
Southwest Airlines, 67 
Spikes, in demand, 121-123 
SScan, 194 
SSL (Secure Socket Layer), 135, 137, 
142-143, 197 
Standard, The, 108,237 
Standard & Poors, 176 
Stanford University, 119 
StatMarket.com, 150 
Sterling Commerce, 201 
Strategic Group, 218,228-229 
Supply-chain management, 118-121 
Swiss PTT, 177 
Sybase, 185 
Symantec, 193,209 
T 
Taxware International, 154, 185 
TCP/IP (Transmission Control 
Protocol/Internet Protocol), 142, 
149, 165, 194 
Teenage Research Unlimited, 26 
Teens, 23, 25-26 
Telecom Italia, 177 
Telnet, 194 
Telstra, 178 
Temporary workers, 122 
Texaco, 178 
Text, layout of, 77-78 
"Thank you, please come again" e-mails, 
92-94 
TheGap.com, 11, 14 
TheKnot.com, 61 
TheStreet.com, 7 
THINK New Ideas, 65 
Throughput levels, 223 
TITLE tag, 48 
Toll-free numbers, 39, 91, 145 
Toysrus.com, 103 
TradeOut, 11, 16-17 
TradeSafe, 114 
Travel planning, 2-3 
Trust, encouraging, 143-145 
Tuning, 161-162 
U 
UCS (Uniform Communications 
Standard), 149 
Ultimate Promotion service, 64 

248 
Index 
UltraEX, 112 
United States Postal Service, 109, 112 
UNIX, 150, 151 
UPS (United Parcel Service), 108-110, 
112, 152, 155, 185 
USA Today, 176 
User names, 133 
User-based security, 194-195 
USWeb/CKS, 65 
V 
Value, adding, 97-98 
VeriFone, 7, 132-133, 136-137, 152, 154, 
185 
VeriSign, 144, 145 
VerticalNet, 17-18, 117-118 
Virus Bulletin, 193 
Viruses, 189-190, 192-193, 198,207-210 
Visa, 134, 135, 140, 154 
Vision(s) 
revisiting, 82 
setting, 1-19 
VMS, 150 
Volkswagen, 178 
VPNs (virtual private networks), 167 
vPos, 137 
vWallet, 136 
W 
Walker, Leslie, 219 
Wall Street]ournal, The, 6, 128, 157 
Wallets, electronic, 130-131,136, 227 
WANs (wide area networks), 166 
WAP (wireless application protocol), 217 
Washington Post, The, 75, 219 
Watchfire, 69, 72 
Weather Channel, 101 
Web browsers, 142, 149, 165-166 
basic description of, 150 
connectivity tools and, 159 
development of, 150 
Web clients, 147, 150, 163-164 
Web Developers Virtual Library, 81 
Web server(s) 
firewalls, 166, 167-168 
proxy, 168, 190, 198-203 
routers and, 163-164 
security for, 166, 167-168, 196, 
198-203 
software, 147, 148, 150-151 
Web site(s) 
design, basic description of, 67-82 
load balancing for, 161-162 
managing the content of, 158-164 
tuning, 161-162 
visitors, tracking, 154-155 
WebCrawler, 51 
WebEx.com, 96 
WebMethods, 121 
Williams-Sonoma, 122-123 
Wireless communications 
basic description of, 211-229 
devices for, 213-217 
portals for, 217-219 
World Wide Web Consortium, 150 
X 
XML (eXtensible Markup Language), 
115-116, 120-121 
Y 
Yahoo!, 6, 43, 45-46, 49-53, 57, 113 
Auctions, 217 
wireless communications and, 217, 
218 
Yankee Group, 215, 229 
Yellow Freight, 109 
Z 
ZDNet, 81,237 
ziReality.com, 23 

