

Esther Schindler
The Secrets Behind Great
One-on-One Meetings
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing

978-1-491-96731-7
[LSI]
The Secrets Behind Great One-on-One Meetings
by Esther Schindler
Copyright © 2016 O’Reilly Media Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Laurel Ruma
Production Editor: Kristen Brown
Proofreader: O’Reilly Production 
Services
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Karen Montgomery
Illustrator: Rebecca Demarest
August 2016:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2016-08-10: First Release
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. The Secrets Behind
Great One-on-One Meetings, the cover image, and related trade dress are trademarks
of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
While the publisher and the author have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the author disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without limi‐
tation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this work.
Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own risk. If
any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is subject to
open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your responsi‐
bility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or rights.

Table of Contents
The Secrets Behind Great One-on-One Meetings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
What’s a One-On-One?                                                                            2
Why One-on-Ones Are Important                                                        3
Important Viewpoints to Adopt                                                             7
Making the Process Work                                                                      10
What to Talk About                                                                                18
Ensuring Success                                                                                     23
Judging Success                                                                                       29
v


The Secrets Behind Great
One-on-One Meetings
These regular meetings improve team communication, identify fix‐
able issues before they transform into big problems, and increase
employee loyalty.
Wonderful idea. But when you’re sitting there, staring at each other,
what are you supposed to say?
As individuals, we all want to feel good about the work we do.
Whether we work for a huge company or a tiny mom-and-pop busi‐
ness, each of us wants to create quality products, and to know that
our contributions make a difference.
We want to be appreciated for that work, too, by the people around
us: our colleagues, project managers, the company executives, cus‐
tomers. When we stumble, we want someone to help us figure out
how to resolve the problem, or at least to act as a sounding board
while we figure it out ourselves. And that’s all just as true whether
we’re at the beginning of our careers, in our first internship position,
or we work from an executive suite.
Every company wants to attract the best employees, people who
share its values and are committed to excellence. The organization
wants its people to be loyal, creatively productive, and engaged with
their work. To accomplish that, its managers need to help those peo‐
ple make the right decisions about what to work on and how to do
so efficiently.
These goals don’t need to be in conflict. In fact, there’s a business
process that can give each of us a stepping-stone toward that ideal
situation: a regular one-on-one meeting with the person to whom
1

we report. That one-on-one meeting is an opportunity to break
down barriers, to give and receive useful and immediate feedback, to
connect with someone who cares about our success, and ultimately
to build team loyalty.
But, as with anything else in business communication, the knowl‐
edge of how to do this well doesn’t always come naturally. Whether
you’re a new team lead, an experienced corporate manager, or a
“worker bee” yourself, the skills and techniques shared herein can
transform one-on-one meetings from an irritating waste of time to a
valuable “special time” for both the worker and manager.
What’s a One-On-One?
As described in this document, a “one-on-one” is a meeting between
two people, wherein one individual reports to the other. These
meetings usually are held on a regular schedule, usually weekly.
One-on-one meetings are usually for internal management relation‐
ships, such as a team lead and the programmer who reports to her,
or the vice president of sales and a subordinate salesperson. For sim‐
plicity, we describe the two parties as manager and team member.
But one-on-one meetings also apply to other work relationships,
such as meetings between consultant and client; those have a few
extra wrinkles, as you’ll see, but the key elements are the same.
This definition may be blindingly obvious to you, but don’t assume
that the person with whom you’re meeting has the same assump‐
tions. It’s a good idea to begin your new era of Great One-on-Ones
by setting expectations.
It’s also important to understand what a one-on-one meeting isn’t:
It isn’t a “working meeting” whose purpose is to reach a decision.
In those ordinary business meetings, your attention is on gath‐
ering enough data to solve the problem at hand, and then to
move on.
It’s not an emergency meeting called when a situation goes pear-
shaped.
This isn’t the scary moment when a team member is called onto
the carpet for an infraction that might result in someone being
walked out of the building. These are the meetings that exist to
prevent that emergency from happening.
2 
| 
The Secrets Behind Great One-on-One Meetings

It’s not a yearly performance review.
While one-on-one meetings often touch on career issues, the
focus is on the future rather than past performance. In fact,
when one-on-one meetings are done well, they ensure that
nobody is surprised at the annual salary review.
Don’t be embarrassed. Plenty of people start out with these miscon‐
ceptions.
Why One-on-Ones Are Important
The overall purpose of a one-on-one meeting is to enable genuine
communication between two people who work together. That com‐
munication occasionally may take the form of a data dump—“Here’s
what you need to know, see you next week”—but the best one-on-
one meetings build an ongoing, productive relationship between
two human beings.
Relationships lead to trust. Trust leads to honesty and to better out‐
comes. And for managers, “better outcomes” is the whole point of
the job.
In 2016, job search board CareerCast surveyed 834 employees to
learn what they considered the most stressful parts of their jobs.
According to the CareerCast findings, the most common work
stress factors are unpredictability (26%), workplace environment
(21%), and deadlines (20%).
Managers can’t fix every problem that their teams encounter. But
with regular communication, team members may cope better with
those common causes of stress. A manager who shares information
about corporate plans (“The execs are putting their attention on this
strategy; how can we support that?”) minimizes unpredictability. A
team member who feels safe in confiding in his manager about fric‐
tion with a colleague (“I’ve waited for a week for his feedback, and I
can’t move forward until he responds”) may learn a way to resolve
workplace environment issues. And while we all struggle to meet
deadlines occasionally, a one-on-one meeting can serve as an early
detection system for identifying scheduling issues—so you don’t
learn, only two days before the ship date, that the QA team ran into
a troublesome issue.
Let’s take a look at what effective one-on-one meetings can accom‐
plish:
Why One-on-Ones Are Important 
| 
3

• Develop trust between team members and managers
• Align everyone’s tasks
• Share business information privately
• Provide mentoring and feedback
• Get a gut check: How are we doing?
Need a few examples?
Develop Trust
A one-on-one meeting can be a sacred time during which the man‐
ager and team member make an individual connection, both as
coworkers and as human beings. That doesn’t mean that you’ll
become best buddies with everybody you work with, but it sure
helps to build rapport.
“The primary focus for the one-on-ones is relationship-building
and most importantly, building trust,” says Islin Munisteri, a petro‐
leum engineer. “You’re putting relationship capital in the bank so
that you have a wing man (or woman) to back you up in times of
crisis. Hint: It’s always a time of crisis.”
The meeting is a personal time to be honest and direct with each
other in a safe setting. Only if a team member can talk about what is
really worrying her can a manager offer useful advice, or at least an
understanding ear.
For one software engineer, the best part of her one-on-ones was that
her manager was human and kind when she brought up personal or
health concerns. “She cared about me as a person, not just as a
worker,” explained the engineer.
If you come to one-on-one meetings from a business culture of
sharing—“Aren’t team status meetings enough?”—you might not
realize how much this private time matters. Some team members are
introverts who don’t like to speak up in public. Or they don’t want to
take up others’ time with a discussion that is relevant only to their
to-do list. For instance, says Mae Demdam, director of media at
Digital Edge, a marketing agency in Jacksonville, Florida, “Individu‐
als won’t speak openly with other people around in an effort not to
offend anyone and feel singled out.”
4 
| 
The Secrets Behind Great One-on-One Meetings

Align Everyone’s Tasks
One-on-ones are not a reiteration of operational status meetings,
such as Scrum meetings, during which each team member shares
what he accomplished, what he’s currently working on, and what’s
blocking his progress. Some of these tasks are bound to come up as
discussion items during a one-on-one (not the least of which are
obstacles the manager might help the team member to overcome),
but the true benefits come from both parties getting a larger view of
the situation.
For managers, that may include an early-warning system for prob‐
lems; for team members, it’s an opportunity to recalibrate to-do lists
to ensure everyone is working toward the same goals.
“When done right, one-on-one meetings keep up open communica‐
tion between manager and worker,” says Elise, who’s been managing
professional teams for 20 years. “They align the day-to-day tasks of
the worker with the fast-moving shifts in business priorities into
which the manager has closest insight. It’s like a dance, and these
meetings help adjust the steps.”
Share Business Information Privately
One-on-ones give people a way to share information that helps
them move forward. That might be a heads-up on changing initia‐
tives, progress updates about items that affect a single individual
(rather than impacting the entire team), or other information that
improves relationships with upper management.
“If you’re a fairly competent person, your boss isn’t sitting in meet‐
ings with you,” explains Greg, a senior system administrator. The
manager is working on her own tasks, such as budgeting, or collabo‐
rating with other departments, which means she can’t know every‐
thing you’re working on, and you can’t know the other teams’ efforts
that could impact you.
“The one-on-one meeting provides two-way communication about
those things,” Greg points out. It’s an opportunity for the manager to
learn how things are going for the team member, and to pass along
anything coming from above that might influence the things you are
working on. “At most places I’ve worked, a scheduled communica‐
tion time, a one-on-one meeting, was the only time one could relia‐
bly find one’s manager to get their take on some issue,” says Greg.
Why One-on-Ones Are Important 
| 
5

Managers have many ways of communicating downstream, and
should take advantage of those. For example, use team status meet‐
ings to let the group know things everyone should be aware of, such
as “We decided to adjust the product launch date” or “The account‐
ing person is going on maternity leave at the beginning of the
month, so be sure to send in your expense reports before then.”
Sometimes it’s important to share information with just one person,
though, such as when a big change is coming, and you want the
senior team member to help you deliver the message.
However, one-on-one meetings are a team member’s opportunity to
communicate upstream privately. This may be for privacy reasons
(“If Heidi is leaving, does that mean we’re going to hire a new senior
staff member? I’d like to throw my hat in the ring”) or because the
details are irrelevant to the rest of the team (“I’m leaving tomorrow
for vacation, so how can I get my expense report done before the
accounting person disappears?”).
Provide Mentoring and Feedback
The most rewarding parts of a one-on-one meeting often are those
in which the manager and team members learn from one another.
“Listening, being present, and asking questions that prompt deeper
insights is super important,” says Zach, a vice president of engineer‐
ing.
Andrew, a web designer, appreciates that his manager pays attention
to Andrew’s mood and work effort. His manager uses those observa‐
tions to provide encouragement: “Are you having any problems with
Suzanne while working on that project?” or “I think you could have
done that design more efficiently; what happened?” or “You really
crushed it on solving the CSS problem, nice work.”
The meat of a one-on-one meeting usually is collaborative problem
solving. Often it goes beyond facts ( “I got that done!”) to motiva‐
tions, emotional issues, challenges. That might include, “I noticed at
Tuesday’s meeting that you were irritated with Todd. What’s up with
that?” or “To do a good job on this project, we need Marketing to
work with us. Let’s figure out what they need, so they’ll be motivated
to help us meet our deadline.”
Feedback goes in both directions. The manager may spend quite a
bit of time giving advice based on his own experiences, or coaching
6 
| 
The Secrets Behind Great One-on-One Meetings

the team member on how to deal with a difficult problem (“What do
you think you should do?”).
A key part of a manager’s role is to remove the obstacles that prevent
their employees from doing their jobs. So the best way for a man‐
ager to improve his own skills is to ask team members how he could
improve his own skills, such as asking, “How can I help you make
this happen?” Ideally, at the end of every one-on-one, the manager
has learned something new, too.
A Gut Check: How Are We Doing?
Most day-to-day business issues put our attention on current events,
how things are right now: How’s this task going? What fires need to
be stomped out? What has to be completed this week?
But among the joys of one-on-one meetings is that they can provide
an opportunity to look backward and to look forward. When things
are going well and there aren’t any big issues to chew over, manager
and team member can use the time to measure past successes (yay
us!), identify ongoing issues (why do we keep having trouble with
that Internet service provider? Should we consider changing ven‐
dors?), and think about innovative ideas (including the “dumb
ideas” that might not be ready to share with the team). You can ask:
“Anything particularly interesting that you’ve learned while you
worked with that new tool?” or “Any ideas for things we should
change, improve, look at for the future?”
Because not everything is day-to-day. One-on-ones create relation‐
ships of trust—and those enable people to think about new possibil‐
ities.
Important Viewpoints to Adopt
You can achieve an amazing amount just by being open with one
another. If you meet regularly, respect each other’s viewpoints, and
talk about “whatever comes up,” in all likelihood you’ll discover
most of the best practices shared in this document.
But before we get into the nitty-gritty of logistics or cheat sheets
about how to raise uncomfortable topics, there are a few attitudes it’s
wise to adopt. Doing so can ease the process—and can surprise team
members in the best possible way.
Important Viewpoints to Adopt 
| 
7

This Is Not the Manager’s Meeting
Managers have plenty of opportunity to express what they think is
important, and the worker bees who report to them usually have no
recourse except to listen. That’s part of what makes a one-on-one
special: It’s not primarily to serve the manager.
This is the team member’s meeting. This is time set aside to address
whatever the team member thinks is important. The team member
should feel confident that the manager is paying attention, giving
him his undivided attention, and doing so in utmost confidence.
“One-on-one meetings offer an opportunity for leaders to very
specifically address the needs of each person on their teams,” says
Jim Rosas, founder of business consulting firm @Revenue. “They
give permission to the employee to be open and honest behind
closed doors in a way that may put him or her in a vulnerable posi‐
tion with other teammates. Look at it this way: We all have strengths
and weaknesses, but do we all want them addressed in public? Of
course not.” 
It’s a one-on-one, not a one-on-zero. This is the time for team mem‐
ber to express his views, to share what he thinks is important and
that the manager should take note of.
There’s information that a manager can impart to the team member
during a one-on-one meeting: “You oughta know” updates, praise,
suggestions on how to improve a skill. But under most circumstan‐
ces, the meeting isn’t about the manager. That shapes the conversa‐
tion—or it should.
And, as with any relationship, bad things happen when someone
feels unvalued and unlistened-to. Phil Stella, a workplace communi‐
cation consultant, tells a story about Joe (the supervisor) who met
with Maria (the production analyst) about problems with a new
manufacturing process. Joe should have led a dynamic and creative
dialogue to explore possible causes, analyze each different solution,
and choose the best one, says Stella. “Instead, Joe shared his
thoughts first, barely listened to Maria’s comments, told her how to
solve the problem, and then blamed her when it didn’t work. Maria
got angry, quit, and took a different job where her new boss wasn’t
such an idiot.” That’s not exactly the ideal outcome.
8 
| 
The Secrets Behind Great One-on-One Meetings

This Is a Conversation: Expect Bumpy Bits
A one-on-one meeting isn’t a report or a presentation. Those belong
in many other types of business meeting, where “just the facts,
ma’am” is what is wanted, and other issues are tangential distrac‐
tions. That’s not the case for one-on-one meetings, in which the pur‐
pose is to create an atmosphere of trust and personal connection in
which you sincerely care about one another.
That doesn’t mean that every one-on-one is a wallow in human
emotion—most are not—but the manager, at least, should be ready
to respond if the team member lets his feelings show. And really, it’s
okay for emotions to flow.
Doing a great one-on-one requires you to exercise your communi‐
cation skills—whatever those may be. Not everyone is a good lis‐
tener by nature, particularly when the team member is upset or shy
or recalcitrant.
One-on-one meetings can test a manager’s verbal facilitation skills
(getting them to talk); listening facilitation (mental and nonverbal);
and graphic facilitation skills (recording what they say). Among
those—thankfully learnable—skills are displaying interest without
judgment, and acknowledging a team member’s viewpoint even
when you disagree with it. Don’t worry: You can get better at this.
Over time, a manager can learn to ask open-ended “how” or “why”
questions such as, “What happened when you asked her about the
issue?”
Managers need to be particularly cognizant of each team member’s
communication style and what each individual needs. That’s espe‐
cially true in technology fields, which have a high percentage of
introverted workers who are slow to open up.
Team members are not always forthcoming, especially when their
previous one-on-one experiences have been disappointing. Trust
takes time. However, when people do confide in you, it’s a powerful
thing. Do not interrupt them. Let them speak. 
This may make you uncomfortable if you’re new to leading teams—
or if you recognize your own weaknesses in this regard. Perhaps
that’s something to raise in a one-on-one with your own manager:
Can you get a bit of leadership training?
Important Viewpoints to Adopt 
| 
9

Don’t Be Afraid to Be Personal
You probably don’t need to be told to show a sincere interest in the
team member. But some managers, concerned about crossing an
“inappropriateness” line, are loath to ask about the team member’s
interests outside work.
You don’t have to pry. In fact, you shouldn’t. You can, however, ask
friendly questions to learn what team members care about after they
leave the office. Your team members’ families probably are pretty
important to them; find out (and remember!) the names of spouses,
children, siblings. It isn’t an over-personal question to ask about
Susie’s kindergarten graduation party.
“Bonus points go to the manager if they pay attention to my life out‐
side of work and ask questions based on those current events,” says
Andrew, the web designer. “Such as: I know you’ve been talking
about buying a house for a while; any progress on that?”
Be open to personal details, but don’t expect them. “I actively
encourage my team to just chat, but I shy away from asking probing
personal questions,” one team lead says. “I prefer each person to set
the tone they’re comfortable with.”
But part of the point of the meeting is to establish comfortable com‐
munication. “That cannot happen if they aren’t open to non-work
discussions,” says Greg.
Getting personal sometimes means that the team member com‐
plains about a coworker. “The manager needs to permit that without
making a capital case of each gripe,” says Greg. “It could be clashing
personalities, or it could be the warning signs of a case where the
manager needs to step in directly.”
Be transparent. Be honest. The consequence of doing so is that
you’ll hear a lot of real concerns, some of which may be uncomfort‐
able to hear. If you can’t answer a question directly, say so. If you
hear about a problem, acknowledge it and explain how you’re going
to fix it. Above all, be worthy of your colleague’s trust, or you won’t
have it for very long.
Making the Process Work
In a sense, the basic logistics are simple: Get together regularly (once
a week is good), in a comfortable place, and talk. Have an agenda to
10 
| 
The Secrets Behind Great One-on-One Meetings

start with, and then be ready to jettison it if something else comes
up.
But to make one-on-one meetings an ongoing success, it helps to
know a bit more than that.
Schedule the One-on-One as a Recurring Meeting
Those who like to “manage by walking around” sometimes feel that
a one-on-one makes sense only when they see something to talk
about. But that violates the premise that this is primarily the team
member’s meeting. If the manager doesn’t happen to walk by when
the team member’s brow is furrowed, she may not know that there’s
something bothering him. And for many people, the act of asking
the boss, “Um, can we talk?” is a big deal. Asking for a meeting sug‐
gests that something is “important”—which means it’s already
passed into some level of criticality. Meetings should be held when
both parties are comfortable saying, “This might sound like a dumb
thing to bother me, but….”—because sometimes they aren’t that
dumb.
“Schedule one-on-one meetings in advance,” advises Tim Evanchick,
district manager for retail furniture company Yogibo. “Impromptu
meetings can often seem adversarial. In contrast, scheduled meet‐
ings allow both parties to prepare.”
If one-on-one meetings only happen when there’s something
“important” to talk about, the experience is viewed as a negative one.
Elise once had a manager who held the meetings only when he had
to, such as when bad news was coming from on high. “It resulted in
poor morale, and I ultimately left that manager and that company,”
she says.
It’s far better for the one-on-one meeting to be part of everyone’s
weekly rhythm. Make these recurring meetings (such as every Mon‐
day at 2 pm) to establish predictability. Book a regular meeting
room; add a dial-in if needed for remote workers. Whatever format
the meetings take, keep it consistent so everyone knows what to
expect and how to prepare.
Again: The meeting is about the employee. You demonstrate that
you are trustworthy by ensuring there is a prioritized, dedicated
time every week when you are ready to listen.
Making the Process Work 
| 
11

Don’t Cancel It. Really, Don’t.
The most damning thing you can do to your managerial reputation
is to cancel one-on-one meetings.
Treat these as sacred. If you must, reschedule to later in the day
rather than tell the team member, “Let’s just skip it this week.”
Canceling is the easiest way to communicate to an employee that
he’s not valued or respected. The one-on-one is an essential time to
share what’s on their minds—and if you minimize its importance,
the team members feel hurt. Wounded feelings about canceled
meetings were the most common complaints I encountered when I
asked for advice for doing great one-on-ones.
“Those meetings need to happen,” says Samantha, a software devel‐
oper. “When your manager is constantly rescheduling them, that’s a
sign that your manager isn’t making management her main priority.”
Trust is lost, information is not shared, and the team member will
lean on another team member for confidences or support.
And the result? “Usually the same things that happen when you
aren’t communicating with someone,” says Samantha. “You both
build up resentment and assumptions where you don’t give each
other the benefit of the doubt.”
“I’d say 75% of my managers in my career held one-on-ones infre‐
quently, cancelled or moved them around the calendar, or were ter‐
ribly late to each meeting,” says experienced manager Elise. “This
resulted in me (as a worker) feeling that I and my work was not a
priority.”
And the fix? Just keep the appointment. “I appreciated a recent man‐
ager who was religious about one-on-ones and respectful of my
time, keeping the weekly time slot, and rescheduling only as a last
resort when we mutually agreed,” says Elise. “I modeled that behav‐
ior with my own team one-on-ones after that experience.”
Ideally, schedule adjustments should be in the hands of the team
member, who has a better idea of how much oversight he needs at
the moment. “Tell your boss if you think you’re meeting too fre‐
quently or not frequently enough,” suggests Jen, a mid-level man‐
ager who’s survived several enterprise management changes.
“Discuss this in person (not email). And have a reason for request‐
12 
| 
The Secrets Behind Great One-on-One Meetings

ing the change other than, ‘I really dread meeting with you and
would like to do it never.’”
The one-on-one meetings are important to everyone, at every pro‐
fessional level—but particularly so for those with less experience.
“One-on-one meetings with junior people were a lot more impor‐
tant in their eyes,” says Elise. “They were nervous if I cancelled the
meetings, as they needed more direction from me weekly. More
senior reports often made the mistake that they did not need to
meet with their manager as often, but I made sure to use these times
to share strategic information that would help them do their job
more effectively.” 
That’s not to say that cancellations never make sense. Sometimes,
things come up: doctor’s appointments, urgent deadlines, and so on.
If the manager and team member have a relationship of trust, an
occasional skip isn’t troublesome.
“If you really don’t have anything to discuss, then cancel the meet‐
ing,” says Jen. “But note that if you are cancelling every meeting with
your employee, you might want to look at the frequency of your
meetings (too much?) or your lack of specific goals.”
How Often Should You Meet? For How Long?
The accepted wisdom is that a one-on-one meeting should be held
weekly, and you should allow 30–60 minutes. Some people have
more to say, particularly when a team member holds multiple roles
(e.g., someone is both chief architect and member of a corporate
advisory board), or the relationship is a new one (thus you need to
spend more time getting to know one another).
With experience, you may decide to schedule meetings for 30
minutes—though it’s always a good idea to let the team member
suggest that change rather than the manager.
If an hour seems like too much time to give each team member, a
manager should consider whether the time crunch is a warning sign.
“This is one of the main reasons why it’s typically not good to have
more than eight direct reports,” says Lou, an information security
manager. “Busy people always make time. This allows a regular
cadence for non-urgent issues, which enables a culture that is less
interrupt-driven.”
Making the Process Work 
| 
13

But wait! That means that a manager who supervises eight people is
spending eight hours a week in meetings with those team members.
That’s a full day of work!
Except: That is your work. “Think you’re too busy and don’t have
time to have one-on-ones with every employee every week?” asks
Darryl, an experienced network manager. “For this small invest‐
ment, you get something back. You don’t need to interrupt their
work just every time you think of a question; you know you’ll have a
meeting with them in less than a week.”
“So now you have more time for your work, and the team members
have more time too,” says Darryl. “They really wish you’d stop inter‐
rupting them and let them get their work done.”
Once you’re in a rhythm, it’s fine to recalibrate the meeting fre‐
quency—but don’t do that too soon. As you work to apply these
guidelines in your own organization, make yourself stick to the
meeting cadence for a solid month before you decide, “Oh, that’s too
often” or “That’s too much time.”
“I have found it helpful to have a regular one-on-one even when
there’s ‘nothing to talk about,’” says Liz, a software engineer. “Often,
in a recap of the past couple weeks or the work ahead, something
comes up that is worth discussing.”
Elise’s experience echoes Liz’s. “I often think I don’t need to meet
with a report. I feel like we are aligned because we sit near each
other and are in some meetings together. But I go ahead anyway
with the meeting, and we surface up a lot of issues to discuss, or do a
brainstorm to take a topic further. So, I avoid canceling meetings
now and just show up to see what surfaces. These meetings help to
go deeper in the relationship as well as with project strategy.”
Choose a Comfortable Place
The usual venue for a one-on-one meeting is in the manager’s office
or a company meeting room, and that’s fine. The only thing that
really matters is that both people are comfortable.
You can consider alternatives, however. If your company has an
open office plan, for example, you may lack a private space—partic‐
ularly important if the team member needs to throw a hissy fit, or is
emotionally distraught enough about a situation that she might
14 
| 
The Secrets Behind Great One-on-One Meetings

burst into tears. Other people can be intimidated by talking in the
boss’s office; it doesn’t feel like neutral ground.
One option is to go offsite. Take a walk together (though that
presents challenges for taking notes), or go to a nearby coffee shop.
Don’t let technology get in your way. Team members who work
remotely need their one-on-one meetings even more than do people
who are co-located. Videoconferencing works remarkably well, once
you detangle any tech challenges, since much of the “connecting
with each other” conversation benefits from visual feedback. Hold
the meeting by telephone, if necessary.
Have an Agenda
Whenever and wherever you sit down together, each of you should
have some idea of what you want to talk about today. Both manager
and team member should write down an agenda, both a “things we
gotta cover” and “things we should discuss at some point.”
The team member should create the agenda and email it to the man‐
ager an hour before the meeting. The manager can add items, but it
starts with the team member.
So, for instance, Bob might create an agenda that looks something
like this, and send it to Julie:
• What’s the status on the site navigation project?
• We talked last week about bringing in a contractor to help with
the Foobar project. Any update?
• Just to let you know: Manny’s white paper is in Dave’s hands for
review. But Dave’s out on vacation this week, so we won’t hear
back immediately.
• I need to ask Creative for new signup banners. We need to fig‐
ure out what the banners should say.
• I had some thoughts about what we might do in our trade show
booth, but that’s Hannah’s area. Can I share them with you
before I make suggestions?
• Remember, I’m on vacation in two weeks. Who’s going to cover
for me while I’m out? What do they need from me?
Some of these are just status updates (though the sort that only Julie
needs to be appraised of rather than the entire team). Julie might
Making the Process Work 
| 
15

add an item or two—Bob doesn’t know yet about the project from
the new customer, and how that’ll affect Bob’s workload—but in
most cases there are fewer of these. Expect 90% of the conversation
to be driven by Bob’s agenda.
One reason to put the agenda-creation in the team member’s hands
is that it underscores that this is his meeting. If nothing is pressing
(“Really, Julie, it’s all the same as last week”) it lets him be the one to
suggest that the meeting be canceled.
“It’s their time to surface issues, build rapport, and gain insights
from their manager,” says Elise. “I’ve had many team members who
looked to me to drive the agenda of these one-on-ones, even writing
their own goals. That led to micromanagement and a passive
approach on the part of the worker.”
Another reason for the team member to supply the agenda is that it
alleviates anxiety: You’re setting the stage for what you’ll talk
about. “I had terrible, directionless meetings with one of my bosses
until I started sending him agendas beforehand,” says Jen. “He
seemed pleased that I did it and the meetings went more smoothly.
Plus, he asked me fewer ‘out-the-blue impossible-to-answer-on-the-
spot’ questions.”
The agenda also helps the team member prepare. “If you need to
approach your boss about a concern, come to the table with what‐
ever information you may need to support your concern, and offer a
solution or two to the problem,” says Yogibo’s Evanchick. “Other‐
wise, you’re just a complainer.”
This process might not come naturally to some team members, so
it’s okay to provide an outline to get things started. For example, one
manager supplied the team with a list of questions to answer before
each meeting:
• What are you proud of in the last month?
• What are you not so proud of in the last month?
• What are you not looking forward to in the next month?
• What are you looking forward to in the next month?
It’s okay to go off script. Don’t worry about covering every item.
Most business meetings aim to end with a firm decision, such as
choosing the website color scheme. This is more of a laid-back con‐
16 
| 
The Secrets Behind Great One-on-One Meetings

versation, so both of you should prioritize the issues that must be
addressed and which can slide until next time.
Build Follow-Up into the Process
You can create great rapport during the one-on-one, and perhaps
brainstorm new ways to tackle ongoing problems. But this is still a
business meeting, and someone has to be responsible for taking
notes, turning them into actionable items, and making sure the
items are acted upon.
In almost all circumstances, it should be the team member who
takes notes. She’s the one who is most invested in the outcome, and
probably holds the most responsibility for making something hap‐
pen.
As a practical matter, that usually means the team member sends an
email message to the manager right after the meeting. In it, Bob
records what he and Julie agreed to, giving both people a paper trail
to counter faulty human memory.
It’s also a nicety for Julie to send an acknowledgment of the new to-
do items—even when minor—as well as a sincere thank-you to Bob
for the meeting. “I appreciated it when things discussed in the one-
on-one (i.e., salary request, personal time off, budget requests) were
followed up on promptly,” says Elise. “That made me feel recognized
and respected.”
A written summary has other advantages, points out Yogibo’s Evan‐
chick, when the one-on-one meeting includes an uncomfortable
evaluation or correction. The email thread provides a record of what
was said, so it doesn’t become a “he said, she said” situation.
Every week’s agenda should refer back to earlier one-on-ones and
what each person committed to. If the team member doesn’t include
them on the agenda, the manager should do so.
That all sounds so pretty and easy, doesn’t it? But a lack of follow-up
can poison all the good that was accomplished during the meeting.
Is it too much to ask for this to be done with empathy and the desire
to help the team member accomplish agreed-upon goals? To actually
take action on issues?
One developer described her one-on-one meetings as “a kind of
‘gotcha,’ tracking what we talked about in a spreadsheet and pounc‐
Making the Process Work 
| 
17

ing on me if I asked about something twice by saying, ‘We talked
about this already on March 26th.’”
What to Talk About
The guidelines above may help you calibrate expectations—but that
doesn’t mean you know what to say when you’re faced with a live,
breathing coworker.
If you’re stumped, here’s a general process you can follow, with some
techniques that can make both of you more comfortable and pro‐
ductive.
You won’t touch on every item in every one-on-one—there isn’t
time for that!—but it may be helpful to treat this as a kind of check‐
list to ensure that each issue is addressed over time.
The General Start: How Are Things Going?
It’s a deceptively simple management tactic. Ask, “How are you?”
And then wait for an answer.
Really. Wait. Don’t fill the silence.
Sometimes, things are fine, and the team member says so. Or you
hear a happy little tidbit, such as the joy of fixing a mysterious bug.
But every so often, a sincere “How’s it going?” causes the team
member to launch into a tirade that demonstrates the burning issues
that truly do need to be addressed (“I’ve had it with him! Just had
it!”). Then you can crumple up your carefully constructed agenda,
and chuck it out the window. You likely won’t need to say anything
for a solid five minutes, because the team member has been waiting
to share this with you.
In which case the manager should quietly celebrate, because it
means the one-on-one is achieving its goal: Creating a relationship
in which you both feel free to express whatever comes to mind.
Because now that you’ve heard about the team member’s real frus‐
trations, you can do something about it.
It might be work-related: the nincompoop in Accounting, or the
bozo who decided to upgrade the production systems in the middle
of the workday. Or you may hear about personal issues, good or bad:
18 
| 
The Secrets Behind Great One-on-One Meetings

her daughter’s birthday party, or at-home struggles that have affected
his work lately.
That “How’s it goin’?” introduction is also a manager’s early warning
system. Michael Lopp, author of Being Geek: The Software Develo‐
per’s Career Handbook (O’Reilly), writes “As I’m listening to the
answer I’m discerning your mood and I’m throwing you into one of
three buckets regarding the type of 1:1 we’re about to have:
• The Update (All clear!)
• The Vent (Something’s up…)
• The Disaster (Oh dear…)”
Your Agenda Is Your Friend
As we already discussed, the agenda lays out the items that are top-
of-mind and gives the meeting some kind of structure. This pre‐
vents surprises and gives each of you an opportunity to prepare for
any data-gathering that’s needed. It helps you identify the areas of
concern to address immediately, whether minor or major: vacation
scheduling, troublesome bugs you need help with, prioritizing work
items.
Also, if you’re shy and nervous, it gives you something to consult
and helps you get started talking.
Follow-Up from Last Time
It’s a good idea to revisit the items you discussed in the previous
one-on-one, particularly if those generated any kind of to-do list.
If the manager made a commitment, discuss where that stands, says
Darryl. “If, at the last one-on-one, you said you’d talk to the vendor’s
support manager to get the equipment replaced, then share the
results at this one-on-one.”
Here’s What’s Happening
Even though the one-on-one is not meant to focus on specific tasks
—those fit better in team meetings—it is about the work you’re
doing. But don’t let yourself get lost in the details.
What to Talk About 
| 
19

At Sara’s company, she is encouraged to talk about expectations
rather than specific tasks underway: What do you expect from me in
the next six months? Is working for this company reaching my
expectations? “While my one-on-one meetings do tend to at least
touch on work from the last two weeks,” Sara says, “I try to keep it to
how I’m feeling, what I’m struggling with, and expectations. I’ve had
jobs end badly because of mismatched expectations before, so it’s
really important to me to make sure things are going ok/not going
ok, so I can work on improvements.”
“Make it clear that you’re more interested in outcomes and results,”
says Jen. “I don’t want a laundry list of what you did all week. I want
to hear about what you accomplished, and how you do it. I don’t
care that Person X never called you back, or you couldn’t get the
code to work, or whatever. I want to know what you did to fix the
problem.”
“Talk about the progress you made around larger initiatives of the
business,” says Elise. “The goal of one-on-ones is to stay aligned to
business goals and help you be successful against defined goals.”
The manager probably has things to share, too. Don’t rehash the
staff meeting, suggests Darryl, but if you’re concerned about an
employee’s ability to meet a deadline, bring it up now and ask how
he intends to proceed.
That’s when it gets fun: you can consider possible solutions without
regard to today’s current emergency-du-jour. In a one-on-one meet‐
ing with Kean Graham, CEO of ad tech firm MonetizeMore, a team
member suggested a way to improve the performance and efficiency
of working with their clients. “We also brainstormed tools we could
use to complement the team ad optimization. We implemented the
process a few months later, and it turned out to be one of the best
innovations of this year,” Graham says. “It wouldn’t have been dis‐
cussed without having that one-on-one.”
Bidirectional Feedback
In the best one-on-one meetings, both people learn something new.
It’s a moment to step back from the daily grind and evaluate pro‐
gress with a wider view.
The one-on-one’s real goal is to help the team member get the work
done—and that includes whatever forces the manager can bring to
20 
| 
The Secrets Behind Great One-on-One Meetings

bear to help that happen. We like to think that the manager can
make a difference, since she usually has more experience with the
process, the technology, or the company culture.
This is a long-winded way of saying: we’re all here to help one
another. That happens through feedback (here’s what I saw) and
coaching (here’s a way to do it better). Ideally, feedback is immediate
(whether positive or negative), continuous (no one should be sur‐
prised by a job performance review), and informed (based on meas‐
urable data, not just a gut response).
Some managers imagine that the information flows only one way:
I’m the boss, and this is what you should be doing. But the best
working relationships are based on both getting and giving feed‐
back, and those are reflected in every one-on-one meeting.
Always do your best to find something to praise. It’s hard to say
“Thank you” too often. Few of us resent a compliment, especially if
it’s something we’re proud of.
Other resources can teach you how to give feedback effectively, in
more depth than is possible here. Keep in mind, though, that the
overall goal is to help the person reach his own answers rather than
to accept yours. For example, if the team member failed, both of you
gain something from that investment if you ask, “What did you
learn?” instead of saying, “This is what I would have done instead.”
Career Development
Every so often, take a step back from project discussions, and talk
about what the team member wants to accomplish. What long- or
short-term goals does he have, and how can they be worked into the
day-to-day trajectory?
For example, says a web designer named Jamie, imagine a team
member who wants to get better at public speaking. The manager
can help set up a few opportunities to speak to the team about a tech
topic. “These sorts of goals give you tangible actions that can be fol‐
lowed up on and parlayed into bigger opportunities (like being in on
a client pitch),” says Jamie.
Every so often, expect to have—and to encourage—a higher-level
discussion about the employee’s career and satisfaction on the team,
sometimes called “stay interviews.”
What to Talk About 
| 
21

“Find out what their goals are,” says Darryl. “It’s likely that they don’t
want to do their current job forever; maybe that next position is
something you can help them achieve. Maybe it’s within your own
department and you can help them get some experience with and
knowledge of their potential future role.”
How Can I Help?
Ultimately, it’s the manager’s job to help the team member succeed.
Use this time to learn how to do so.
What is the team member struggling with? If she can’t finish a task
because she’s waiting on someone in another department, perhaps
you can run interference by talking with the other department man‐
ager to remove the roadblock.
“If you’re not hitting your goals, how, as a manager, can I help you
remove obstacles to doing so?” asks Jen. “One of my biggest jobs as a
manager is helping you clear the way so you can get your job done. I
may not always be able to untangle the bureaucracy, but I can try.”
Don’t promise solutions on the spot. This is an opportunity for each
of you to raise issues; you don’t have to fix them immediately. But
then both of you should go away and think about how to facilitate
some solutions.
“Ask about impediments and blocks outside the team,” suggests
Esther Derby, an expert in organizational dynamics. You want to
know about their dissatisfaction and understand when and how pol‐
icies get in the way of teamwork and team work. “You can’t fix
everything, but you can investigate, look for patterns of blocks men‐
tioned by multiple team members,” she says. “You can create an
impediment backlog and post your burndown to the team.”
Lastly, whether you are a company executive or a brand new hire in
the mailroom, at the conclusion of every one-on-one you should
humbly ask, “Is there anything you would like to see me start doing,
stop doing, do more of or less of?” Says @Revenue’s Rosas, “This
question almost always exposes a nugget or two that will help your
organization.”
22 
| 
The Secrets Behind Great One-on-One Meetings

Need more questions to ask?
• What could I be doing better as a manager?
• How could the team/the company improve?
• What isn’t fun about working here?
• If you were me, what changes would you make?
• What’s wrong with our products?
• If you had the time and budget to improve this issue, what
would you do?
• What opportunities are we missing out on?
• What do you want to do better that you haven’t had a chance to
do yet?
Ensuring Success
Most of the advice offered here assumes that everyone at your com‐
pany is competent, kind, and trustworthy. It would be ever so nice if
that always were the case.
One-on-one meetings can build lasting professional relationships.
However, there are also areas where you must be sensitive (some‐
times overly so), or you’ll run into trouble.
What Not to Talk About
Although the goal is to create an relationship based on trust and
openness, some topics are minefields. Don’t go there.
First, eschew gossip. There’s a difference between, “This person is
blocking me” and “He is a horrible person.” A good rule of thumb is
to pay attention to rants about someone’s behavior (“He said a stu‐
pid thing”) versus identity (“He is stupid”).
Avoid talking about people not in the room in a negative way or
complaining about leadership. That only leads to poison waters.
“Getting in the middle of a feedback between team members when
you don’t need to only creates problems and erodes trust on the
team,” advises Derby. “When someone comes to you hoping you’ll
carry a message for them, coach them on how to offer effective feed‐
Ensuring Success 
| 
23

back, so the situation gets handled where it lives, between the team
members.”
Similarly, you shouldn’t let the conversation get derailed by talking
about things that are too personal.
What’s too personal? Where do you cross the line between company
information and gossip? Good luck with that. It may help to adopt
the attitude: Ranting is okay; it lets people blow off steam. Whining,
not so much.
Besides, whining doesn’t move toward a solution. “Don’t let people
sit there and complain the whole time. You have to cut that off
before it spirals,” says Jamie. “I’ve done this in the past as a supervi‐
sor, and it was the worst thing I could possibly do for my team
members.” Do listen to the complaints; they’re real to the team
member. But move the conversation in the direction of constructive
feedback. “Brainstorm solutions that they can follow through on,”
says Jamie. “Don’t forget to follow up with them so they know you
care about their success and not just your own agenda.”
The only thing you can do is to redirect the conversation to busi‐
ness. When the discussion makes you uncomfortable, say so—and
why—and then change the subject.
Secret-keeping is another bad idea. “There is some value in sharing
information,” says Elise. “I often found out key office news in one-
on-ones, such as people leaving.” But gossip that has no actionable
outcome creates problems—particularly for the listener. “One exam‐
ple is my boss telling me someone was to be fired in a few weeks
time. There was no reason I needed to know this and then I had to
hold that information for a few weeks to myself. Bad idea.”
“Generally, if you wouldn’t say it to your entire team or the com‐
pany, than it’s probably not appropriate to say to an individual,” says
Zach, the VP of engineering. “People are smart. If they get that you
may be ‘letting them in’ on something secret, then they are going to
also think about what you’re keeping from them and telling others.”
Encountering Bad Attitudes
You’re a warm, well-meaning, devoted person. You’re genuinely
interested in the success of the company in general and your
coworkers in particular. So the idea of doing a great one-on-one
24 
| 
The Secrets Behind Great One-on-One Meetings

meeting is one you celebrate: see, we can work together even better!
We can be productive and innovative! We can make more fun!
And then you bump into someone who thinks that one-on-one
meetings suck. Thus, when forced to engage in one, they do so with
the enthusiasm suitable for getting a root canal.
It’s not that your team member or manager doesn’t want to succeed.
Quite to the contrary. But all of us establish expectations based on
our past experiences. Those who have had rotten one-on-ones in the
past won’t be joyful about the prospect of a meeting with you.
Happily, these attitudes can be addressed—once you recognize
them.
They don’t have reason to trust you.
You, O reader, are a wonderful person. We know that because
you have devoted a considerable amount of time to reading this
in order to improve the relationship with the people you work
with. (And thanks for doing so.)
But your team members and managers may not know that.
They may come to the meeting with fear and trepidation, sim‐
ply because you’re the boss. Or, given past one-on-one meet‐
ings, they “know” that the meeting is only for the manager’s
benefit, not their own.
That’s in direct contrast to seeing the goal as enabling the man‐
ager to make the team member happy and productive—much
less treating the individual with respect. One team member
encapsulated this attitude when he wrote, “What communica‐
tion needs to happen in order to make you, as my boss, happy?
Let’s start from there.”
“Employee one-on-ones almost always come loaded with hier‐
archy,” says Annie, a longtime corporate programmer. “You’re
usually not treated like the domain expert, even if you are.”
Team members don’t trust a meeting with that kind of power
play. “It feels like a meeting ‘at their mercy,’ where you’re being
sized up again and again, for your productivity, personal health,
and optimism,” she says. “It feels as if you’re being sniffed by
search dogs, interrogated as a possible suspect of a crime, and
evaluated for the quality of your blood by a hungry vampire, all
at once—all the while trying to pretend this is a casual discus‐
sion that does not directly affect your current career choice.”
Ensuring Success 
| 
25

The effect is bitterness toward the entire process. “I’ve never
seen a one-on-one meeting schedule that was regularly upheld,
anyway,” says Evelyn. “They are always postponed or put off as
being less important, and eventually we stop having them. I’ve
never seen it last more than four months.”
Every organizational weakness is highlighted in the one-on-one
meeting.
If the company has troubles, from poor leadership to money
woes, they will be reflected in the conversations downstream.
Even the best manager can’t fix problems in another depart‐
ment. If the programmers repeatedly complain to their manager
about the IT staff messing up the production servers, the man‐
ager can try to remedy the situation—but cannot always suc‐
ceed. If the marketing professional cannot get budget for a
project she sees as critical to the company success, frustration is
inevitable.
Those weaknesses can show off (real or imagined) personal
imperfections, too. Beth, a senior software developer, complains
that in one position, her manager wasted time complaining
about other people and parts of the company. “He seemed to
want me to ‘mommy’ my manager with sympathy, because I was
the only woman who reported to him,” she says.
“In these types of meetings, I’ve never once been asked ques‐
tions from the perspective of my domain expertise,” says Annie.
“Instead, I get questions which feel invasive, judgmental, and
make me feel at risk. I answer slowly, carefully, walking on glass.
It’s a pretense of a meeting, where nothing gets done but to rein‐
force the hierarchy and ask the only important question in the
mind of most management: Are you getting your work done
efficiently?’ There’s nothing productive about this.”
Annie has reason to be upset: she once lost a job after she
answered, “How are you doing?” honestly. She says, “How can
you tell when one-on-one meetings aren’t search-and-destroy
meetings, designed to weed out employees who may raise
issues? If you have to be on the defensive, you simply can’t tell
the difference.”
Contemplate this: Annie might come to work for you. (After all,
she’s a great programmer.) But if she has this kind of emotional
26 
| 
The Secrets Behind Great One-on-One Meetings

baggage, how can you get her to trust that your one-on-one
meetings are going to be different?
They see one-on-ones as a distraction from “real work.”
When one-on-one meetings don’t follow the guidelines dis‐
cussed in this report—they repeat team status updates, the
“advice” is only criticism, the manager never follows through—
many people conclude that the meetings are a distraction from
getting their “real work” done. “Meeting is often the opposite of
working,” says Evelyn.
Sometimes, you won’t succeed in changing their minds. But you
still do need to impart information to the manager and to let
team members know what’s going on.
“I’ve found that bosses fall into two categories: Those who want
to hear your problems and issues and help you solve them, and
those who don’t,” says Jen. “If they don’t, it’s best to come to the
meeting with not only the problem, but your proposed (or
already attempted) solution. Show them that you’re proactively
attacking it. They may be more willing to help you problem-
solve if you aren’t dumping the whole gnarly mess in their laps.”
Don’t feel that you must wait for the manager. Take the initiative
and schedule a one-on-one with your manager, says Rudolf, a
career coach. “Make a short list of things you want to discuss
and keep the one-on-one focused. Your manager will find it just
as useful and will appreciate your initiative.”
If that’s more than the manager is willing to do—she keeps can‐
celing meetings—you should still keep the lines of communica‐
tion open. Send a short email message of what you’ve been
working on as well as any ongoing problems or issues. “An
unpleasantly surprised boss is not a happy boss,” says Jen.
Understanding Unique Roles
Most one-on-ones take place in an office environment, where one
person is the “boss” over the other. Different roles or environmental
issues can put a wrinkle in the process, however.
One-on-one meetings are particularly important when employees
work remotely or in distant offices—particularly when time zones
are a factor. “An open door policy doesn’t suffice for remote employ‐
ees who specifically have daytime exclusively during my sleeping
Ensuring Success 
| 
27

hours,” says an engineering manager based in Europe. “While I let
the team know I’m generally available, the one-on-one is a known
time where they can bring things up.”
It’s more than the “devoted time,” however. Managers with remote
team workers need to treat one-on-one meetings as even more criti‐
cal to relationship-building.
As has been demonstrated by plenty of research on remote workers,
it’s essential to make them feel part of the team. Everyone else gets
“water cooler time,” and hangs out by the coffee machine, during
which people catch up on the latest videos, who’s expecting a baby—
and the “hall track” during which a casual work conversation turns
into a innovative brainstorming session. The one-on-one becomes
an important way to connect team members even when there are
frequent group meetings.
And for some people, that personal connection occurs only after
they meet in person. Varda Meyers Epstein, a parenting expert at
Kars4Kids, didn’t meet her current manager until she’d worked at
the nonprofit organization for a year. Phone calls and email were
awkward, says Epstein. “We couldn’t really forge a relationship. Our
correspondence and conversations were always a bit stilted.”
When the organization brought Epstein to spend a month in the
office in New Jersey, she and the manager hit it off. “I think [previ‐
ously] we saw each other as adversarial presences to a certain extent.
But when we met we found a place of warm connection.”
Consultants and contractors often have a different relationship with
their clients than do regular employees—and it’s always hard to dis‐
cern in what ways that will be so. There’s no right or wrong way to
manage one-on-ones in this circumstance, though it’s a wise idea to
talk about the process and expectations early.
The fact that the contributor is active for a short time shouldn’t be a
factor. Though, quite often, it is. Many consultants, brought in for
“heavy lifting,” aren’t given personal attention, and the managers see
no reason to invest in mentoring. After all, the managers assume,
this person won’t be around long enough for it to matter. Plus, since
the consultant is brought in to solve a specific problem, it’s rare for
the individual to participate in the decision-making process; he’s
there to address the problem, not to define it, and the one-on-one
doesn’t address that “meta” view.
28 
| 
The Secrets Behind Great One-on-One Meetings

In some cases, however, the one-on-one meetings actually are better
for consultants, in part because the manager sees them as experts
and grants them additional respect. Also, a clear contract with well-
defined deliverables and possible outcomes can set expectations and
make the meeting more professional.
Some organizations treat consultants and contractors “just like any
other employee” (with the only differences determined by an
accounting department), including a regular one-on-one. That’s a
good idea, since anyone contributing to the team’s success ought to
have the same opportunity to share concerns, provide updates, and
to get feedback that adds to project success.
Judging Success
A manager’s job is to grow people, to enable team members to get
the work done. There’s no better feeling than knowing you’re help‐
ing people become more productive and proud of their work.
How do you know you’re succeeding? Here’s a checklist for self-
assessment:
• You see forward progress on the team’s and organization’s goals.
People make better decisions.
• Both manager and team members look forward to each meet‐
ing. Extra points for frequent laughter.
• Nobody is surprised or upset by what’s said during the annual
performance review—if one is even necessary—because feed‐
back is delivered regularly while it can still be acted upon.
• The team members trust one another more. There’s less emo‐
tional drama, and fewer foot-stamping incidents.
• Managers are trusted. They’re in sync with the team members
and know they’re providing whatever’s needed to get the work
done.
• The company’s reputation is enhanced, making it easier to
recruit and keep staff, because people learn that it’s a great place
to work.
Ultimately, you know that your one-on-one meetings are working
when trust becomes the norm. “Relationships aren’t built on blind
trust; trust is built on relationships,” says Darryl. “When you trust
Judging Success 
| 
29

your employees, you know they’re doing the right thing even when
you’re not around. You don’t need to check up on them all the time
to make sure. When your employees trust you, they know what you
expect of them. They don’t need to be fearful of their jobs. They
don’t assume conspiracy in the absence of knowledge. They know
you will support them even if something goes wrong.”
And isn’t that a great place to be?
30 
| 
The Secrets Behind Great One-on-One Meetings

About the Author
Esther Schindler has been writing for the tech press since 1992. She
specializes in translating from Geek into English. Her name is on the
cover of about a dozen books, most recently The Complete Idiot’s
Guide to Twitter Marketing. Esther quilts (with enthusiasm if little
skill), is a top Amazon reviewer, and is a dedicated chocoholic. She
works from her home in Scottsdale, Arizona, with one of two cats
on her lap. Follow her on Twitter at @estherschindler.

