
 
 
The Niche Website ATM
How You Can Set Up a Stupid Simple Niche
Website and Make Hundreds a Month On
Complete Autopilot!
 
 
By Redd Myles
 
 
Copyright © by Redd Myles
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed, or transmitted in any form or by any means, including photocopying,
recording, or other electronic or mechanical methods, without the prior written permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations
embodied in critical reviews and certain other noncommercial uses permitted by copyright law.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
 
Introduction
Chapter 1: How To Choose a Profitable Niche
Chapter 2: Basics To How To Research and Find Good Keywords In That Niche
That Will Drive Traffic To Your Website
Chapter 3: How To Buy a Domain, Set Up and Host a Website With Godady.com and
Hostgator.com
Chapter 4: Simple Way To Outsource Writers On Odesk.com

Chapter 5: Basics To Putting Keywords  Into Content For SEO
Chapter 6: How To Build Quality Backlinks To The Website To Help The Website
Rank Better
Chapter 7: Why It’s Important To Have An Email list and How To Set Up An Opt In
Form For The Email List
Chapter 8: How To Monetize The Website Through Clickbank, Jvzoo, Amazon
Associates, and Google AdSense
Chapter 9: Set Up and Site Maintenance
Conclusion

 
Introduction
We all want passive income, the ability to be able to travel the world and still get paid, I
know I do.   I’ve always wanted to have this ability and I am striving to get it.  This is one
way to achieve passive income.  This book may be long and difficult to understand but
stick with it and you will learn a lot.  Please disreguard any mistakes in this book because
I was trying to put this information out there as soon as possible.
First this is Your Online ATM Machine
Here’s a 100% legal way to have your own online ATM machine…
…Printing you cash like there’s no tomorrow!
==> http://bitly.com/NicheWebsiteATM
==> http://bitly.com/NicheWebsiteATM
Grab this now. And you can thank me later :-)
==> http://bitly.com/NicheWebsiteATM
To your success,
Redd Myles

How To Choose a Profitable Niche
 
Choosing profitable niche is very important. Choosing a niche for blogging is not
especially difficult; however choosing a profitable niche is not all that simple. We know,
four niche classifications are Success, Relationships, Health and Beauty, and Money and
Business. Then narrow down your selection into a niche within the category. The Websites
that draw high traffic and make money which is the objective of a successful online
business, are the micro-niched sites that appeal to a specific group of crowed. For
instance, within the Money and Business categories there are a number of niches like,
“how to make money from home”, “starting online businesses”, or “passive income from
business”, and “how to profit from day trading”, another hot topic is “online jobs for stay-
at-home moms” and so on. Finding a profitable online niche comes first from your passion
and knowledge about a certain subject and second from what people are searching for in
the internet.
You can start by making a list of things for which you have a great deal of passion and
then order your list into subjects that you can write about at ease. Once you’ve done, you
must determine how great the demand is for the niches you are tackling. The greater the
demand, measured in number of monthly searches, the greater the potential is for your
success. To learn how to measure demand look at the market niches in big name retailers
like, Ask.com, Amazon,  Google AdSense, e-bay and so on. Each of these industry giants
sells in multiple niches. All you need to do is look at the books, products and categories
and then select your money-making topic or (niche).
The explanation for narrowing your niche is simple. In the event that you don’t you will
get gobbled up in the goliath ocean of competition. Additionally if you need to choose
profitable niche then you has to think about this following things.
1. What is a niche?
A niche website is a theme based website that is focused on one particular topic or subject.
A Website that focuses on specific information that is both useful and interesting for the
audience. You can look upward the meaning of the saying “niche” in the word reference,
however give me a chance to provide for you my own particular understanding of “niche”

in connection to sites and online business. They are two points or viewpoints when
alluding to this kind of web business.
1. 
First, a niche site is a site that focuses on any particular business or certain
point. Give me a chance to provide for you a few samples.
Instead of a house cleaning business, a niche would be cover cleaning,
and a more slender niche would be cleaning fleece rugs.
Instead of a site about chasing, a niche site would be about bear
chasing, and a more slender niche would be about bear chasing in
Alaska.
Instead of a site/business about cakes, a niche would be cake
enhancing, and a more slender niche would be cake enlivening with
fondant.
2. 
Secondly, a niche site can allude to a point that is particularly suited to you
and your diversions, capacities, and enthusiasm. You’ve most likely heard
somebody say, “I’ve at last discovered my niche in life” or something
comparative.
2. Are passions really profitable?
Yes. You can make money with a website about pretty much anything. Sometimes you
have to get a bit creative with how you actually market products and services, but yes,
hobbies, passions, interests – they can all be profitable.
A few Tips to Turn Your Passion into Profit:
         Don’t rely on energy alone.
While enthusiasm is a great place to start, it’s not enough to sustain your business for the
long term. Before launching your business, do a realities check and make sure you have
the other components needed for success, such as a willingness to work hard and a market
for your services or products.
“Sometimes passion can blind you to the potential downside of your idea,” says John
Torrens, a serial entrepreneur and an entrepreneurship professor at Syracuse University.
“The one non-negotiable factor for any sustainable business is that they solve a problem
for a specific customer segment in a way that is appreciably better than the next best
alternative. Get as much feedback from potential customers as possible. No matter how

great you think the idea is, you still need to understand what your market thinks.”
Without excitement for your venture, you probably won’t be successful, according to
Doug White, a small-business consultant and co-author of Let Go to Grow: Why Some
Businesses Thrive and Others Fail to Reach Their Potential. However, that alone won’t
guarantee success. White says would-be entrepreneurs who want to turn their hobbies into
a business must be aware of the following things:
Be good at what your business does. “This is probably not an issue if the primary work of
the business is your passion,” White says. “But we have seen too many people buy a
franchise or start a business only to discover that they didn’t like or weren’t good at the
primary work of the business.”
Remember the details. There are tons of ancillary functions that go along with running a
business that must be performed well for it to succeed. These may include ordering
inventory, paying the bills, invoicing customers, keeping the books, sweeping the floor,
marketing and selling. “You will need a plan for accomplishing these tasks,” White says.
“You can do them yourself if you have the inclination and the skill set. You can outsource
them if the cash flow of the business will allow that. Or, you could take on a partner to
perform some of the functions.”
Dole out responsibility. When the business grows, you’ll have a choice to make: You’ll
either have to delegate the primary work to others, or you may choose to delegate
managing the operation to someone else so you can continue to focus on the primary work
yourself.
         Hire energetic individuals.
Most new hires get a job at Red Frog Events through the company’s internship program,
and there are approximately 150 applicants for every internship position. “If you go
through our application process and our internship program, we know you’re passionate
about the job, the company and about life,” Reynolds says.
         Share your passion.
If you have a hobby, likely there are others out there who share that interest and would
like to learn more about it. Sharing your knowledge can be a great way to build your
business, says Katie Weber, who quit her job in 2001 to turn her feng shui hobby into a
consulting business. She started by launching an e-mail newsletter, the Red Lotus Letter:
Feng Shui for Wealth, which helped establish her name in the field.

         Keep the energy alive.
Once your business gets going, you can become mired in the daily tasks of running a
company and watch your original excitement dry up. “Keep your passion alive by staying
involved in the aspects you love most,” says Alan Hall, founder of DooBizz, a free
resource that offers online lessons in entrepreneurship. “Spending too much time on
repetitive tasks you can delegate to others will ultimately dampen your enthusiasm and
end up burning you out. Remember the elements you loved most at the start of your
business, such as creating a new design or a product or meeting new customers in hobbyist
groups, and make a conscious effort to include at least some of those activities in your
ongoing role. Otherwise, your work will turn into a form of drudgery that may kill your
passion for the original hobby.”
         Prioritize fun.
Naturally, entrepreneurs who start businesses based on their interests find their business to
be fun, but keeping it fun takes a bit of work, Syracuse‘s Torrens says. “There’s a palpable
difference between companies that have a culture led by a truly passionate entrepreneur
and those that use passion and fun as sales and recruiting gimmicks,” he says. “In the
authentically passionate companies, everything grows from that passion, including the
people, policies, branding and community relations. That obsessive focus on whatever it is
that gets you out of bed can’t be faked, but it takes work to create the circumstances under
which it can thrive. Maintaining primacy of mission and having the strength to stay on
course and avoid distractions is critical.”
         Expand your passion.
When you start a business based on a personal interest, it can be easy to assume that the
business must remain on the same track to maintain your dedication. But the most
successful entrepreneurs understand that change is good and that there may be more than
one way to meet your original goals.
3. Can you make money in any niche?
There’s a saying that gets repeated a lot when folks are trying to choose a niche for the
first time. That saying is, you can make money in any niche. If you aren’t making money,
you’re doing something wrong. That’s not meant to be discouraging! The meaning is a bit
more subtle, and it ties into my point above. Don’t blame the niche just yet. Look into the
details of your campaigns and see what you can change. There is a profit to be made
somewhere; you just have to find it.

But the question you need to ask yourself before you get started is just how profitable can
this niche be. For example, i’ve seen a couple sites in the “stuffed toys for kids” niche.
How much can these things sell for? $20 for one? If you make a 6% commission from
Amazon, that’s $1 per sale. And that means you have to sell 6,000 of these bad boys every
month to make a decent living. Now if instead you try the “educational toys for kids”
niche, now we’re looking at $200 tablets, $50 dvd sets, specialized board games, and
repeat sales from customers that want to keep educating their kids. Large commissions and
a potential for repeat customers makes this a much more profitable space to be in.
So picking an individual distraction is fine, yet you ought to without a doubt consider the
business side of things before hopping in 100%. Here are some different things I consider
before going into a niche. An immense piece of this is additionally going to be picking a
decent partner program, however how about we keep centered.
4. How can I write about something I don’t care
about?
In general, most legitimate training programs will have you focus on something you care
about for your first website. They do not have you focus on money AT ALL, because
flashing dollar signs in your eyes can be the worst enemy for a beginner niche marketer.
But for someone who is looking to really commit to a website, you absolutely have to at
least consider the monetary side of things. This can be a real challenge, especially if this is
your first website for profit EVER. If you start to get stressed, calm down. Do a website
on a personal interest, and you can always change later.
If you are starting to see the bigger picture here, then you’ll see the advantage of maybe
choosing a topic with good profit potential that you are not passionate about. Heck, if
you’re making money, anything can be interesting. I wrote about coffee enemas for 2
years. Please don’t take this as a recommendation to build a website based around
projected profitability instead of personal interest. That can be even worse that have a
zero-profit website about a topic you care about. I only want to present the bigger picture
to you so that you can make a better, and more informed decision from the beginning.
5. Is there a method for a fruitful niche?
Sadly, there is not recipe for achievement. Likewise considering that everybody’s concept
of “achievement” is diverse, this is going to must be your choice.
I mentioned in the beginning of my post that my passion was movies. Unfortunately I

wasn’t able to effectively monetize it, but by trying, I stumbled upon related industry
software that I was able to successfully promote and bring my business to huge
profitability and eventually quit my job. (No, the coffee enema thing didn’t work out).
I created a successful business in a market wasn’t passionate about. I was able to research,
learn, and eventually become knowledgeable in the niche, and still run that site to this day.
At the same time, I couldn’t have done it without starting out on a site about a niche I
cared about. I hate to leave you guys without a clear conclusion here, but hopefully these
stories and suggestions will spark some ideas in your own head about where you want to
take your business in the future. If you made it this far, congratulations. Here are two
videos showing you how to choose a niche.
Underneath you will discover some late examples of overcoming adversity. They are here
to both show and move you and they serve as evidence that my techniques work.
Story One: Born in Brooklyn, New York in 1946, Jeff S. acted as a server to put
himself through school so he could turn into a dental specialist… in any case his genuine
passion was music and mail request.
In the end he claimed a chain of dental specialist centers. At the same time when the
anxiety got an excess of he bounced out of dentistry and into post office based mail.
Structure 1996 - 1997, he was conveying 1 million bits of regular postal mail a month and
profited in one year than most dental practitioners make in their lifetime.
Presently he rakes in millions every year on the web.
Story Two: Dan T. begun building partner destinations. He was laid off from his
corporate occupation. Dove into business fulltime in 2001 and has since built up a
straightforward recipe for raking in huge profits by diving deep into a niche business
sector offering data and apparatuses to both the open air and self improvement markets.
He now has the opportunity ruin his wife with rich treks in colorful areas, invest time with
his young kids, and he’s picked up an aptitude that gives him a chance to profit as he
needs, whenever he needs
Story Three: Rich T. begun as a telemarketer scarcely scavenging enough cash to
pay his bills. Today he meets expectations only 4 hours a day - in the event that you can
call it work - and brings home the bacon in his own business on the web. In spite of the
fact that he’s simply a normal fellow, the insider facts he imparts would cost you
thousands in the event that you enlisted somebody to show you. Perhaps 10s of thousands

on the off chance that you needed to make sense of it all alone.
As he says in his own particular words, “I’m not a mogul or anything, yet I make my own
timetable, which is incredible. What’s more I just work physically, in the same way as 4
hours a day. This implies I’ve got time to manufacture an alternate online business that
I’m passionate about.
There is nothing more essential than picking the proper niche.

Basics To How To Research and Find Good
Keywords In That Niche That Will Drive
Traffic To Your Website
Keyword research is one of the most important, valuable, and high return activities in the
search marketing field. Ranking for the right keywords can make or break your website.
By researching your market’s keyword demand, you can not only learn which terms and
phrases to target with SEO, but also learn more about your customers as a whole. It’s not
always about getting visitors to your site, but about getting the right kind of visitors. The
usefulness of this intelligence cannot be overstated; with keyword research you can
predict shifts in demand, respond to changing market conditions, and produce the
products, services, and content that web searchers are actively seeking. In the history of
marketing, there has never been such a low barrier to entry in understanding the
motivations of consumers in virtually any niche.
First things first, why the hell does you need keyword research? And more importantly,
what the heck is a keyword anyway? Basically, a keyword is the specific word (or phrase)
someone searching Google (or Yahoo or Bing) uses to find information on whatever it is
they want to read, watch, download, or buy. Your job then is to identify what the best
keyword phrase is for you to target, based on how many people are searching for it and
how many other people are ranking for it. But how do you go about identifying these
keywords? Well, you could start with reading my basic beginner’s guide to keyword
research for niche websites.
The Step-by-Step Process of Finding Profitable
Keywords
Stay with me now. You should simply take after this careful procedure:
1. Go to bit.ly/JdwF0N
2. Sign in with your Gmail account
3. Click “Devices and Analysis” in the header bar
4. Click “Search for new keyword and promotion bunch thoughts”
5. Type for the sake of the item you are advancing or the general

torment point your item unravels (i.e. “the most effective method to
get more fit quick” on the off chance that I was advancing an
eating regimen pill item)
6. Pick the most significant sub classification (dive as deep as would
be prudent)
7. Target “All Locations”
8. Click the “Get thoughts” catch
9. Once you get your outcomes, click on “Keyword Ideas” which
ought to present you with a solid rundown of results
10. Repeat this methodology until you discover a ton of keywords
significant to the niche
From there you just go through the lists and look for keyword phrases (i.e. longer than 2
words) that hit the sweet spot, or have between 300 and 2000 global searches. Personally,
I like to look for longer phrases (or long tail keywords) that can be worked into the title of
a website, blog post, or even a sentence. That way when I am targeting specific phrases
within my content it won’t sound unnatural or forced, and will be much more fluid for
someone to read. Now it’s important to understand that our method for keyword research
might be tad different to other marketers out there. What we have found to work for our
niche sites is to target one main primary keyword which will appear in the post title, the
URL, and throughout the content 1-2 times. We then include 1-2 sub-keywords that appear
throughout our post only once, but are enough to get picked up and recognized in Google.
Here’s exactly how we do that:
1. 
Make yourself a list of 4 primary keywords to use as the target keyword for each post—for this method
you will want to use the keywords that have the highest search volume, but less than 200 relevant results
(which I’ll explain in a minute)
2. 
Make another list with 1-2 sub-keywords that are relevant to the primary keyword you are targeting in
each post. So if your primary keyword is “best diet pills” then a sub-keyword could be “how to lose
weight fast”
3. 
Open up a Google search
4. On the bottom right hand side of the search page you will see “Settings”, click on it
5. 
Choose “Search settings” from the menu
6. 
Scroll down until you see “Results per page”

7. 
Slide the box all the way to the right so you select “100”
8. 
Click save
From there, simply copy and paste your keyword phrase into the search bar with quotes
around it. When you get your results, scroll all the way to the bottom and click on the very
last page. Right under the search box you will see a results notice that says “page
(number) of (number) results”. If you find a search returns less than 200 results, you know
you have found yourself a keyword that is easy to rank for right away.
The goal here is to find you a keyword that has as many searches as possible with the
lowest amount of Google results, and one that can be worked into the title and body of a
blog post. Find yourself a list of 4 rankable primary keywords and write them down with
the number of searches each gets and how many results each have. And just like that you
have found yourself 4 money-making keywords that you can start writing on straight
away.

How To Buy a Domain, Set Up and Host a
Website With Godady.com and
Hostgator.com
 
How to Set-up Website with GoDaddy Domains:
 
Some people believe that buying a domain name is also buying a whole website. They
think that after they have bought a domain name from a web hosting provider or a domain
name registrar, they are already able to create a website from that purchase alone. That is a
misconception that often puts people into frustration. So to clear things up, here is a
simple guide on how to set-up your own website on GoDaddy domains.
Making Your Own Website
1. After the Domain Name Purchase
After you have bought your domain name, say, from GoDaddy – a very good
domain name registrar, you should purchase a web hosting plan. This web hosting
provider has lots of tools that will help you set up your own website easily and
quickly. Thus, you will be able to create your own website even if you are a newbie
or not that familiar with website creation techniques.
Your web hosting will be where you will upload and store your data that you want
to put on your website. It is like a massive storage that stores your files and puts
your data on the Internet so that people will be able to access it. So, when your
visitors visit your website through your domain name, it will be pointed to your
server. Your server will be the one that sends the content of your website to the
Internet, enabling your visitors to view and access it.
2. Creating Your Hostgator Web Hosting Account
 

You just have to go to Hostgator’s website and purchase a web hosting plan that
you think is best for you. You can start off by purchasing their basic plan if you are
a newbie. There are tools and tips in Hostgator that will help you know how to set-
up your own website on Go Daddy domains so you won’t have any problems.
 
3. Link Your GoDaddy Domain Name to Your Host Gator Web Server
After you have bought your web hosting plan, you can now link your Go Daddy
domain name to your Hostgator web server. This will enable Internet users to be
able view and access your website.
Just set up your DNS settings on your domain name account – point your domain
name onto your web server by providing the name servers of your web hosting plan
– ns1.Hostgatorcom and ns2.Hostgator.com. Just go to your domain name registrar
account and change the nameservers.
4. Website Creation
 
Once you have linked your Go Daddy domain name on your Hostgator web server,
you can now set up your own website using your GoDaddy domain. You can use
lots of website creation tools that are available on Host Gator. But if you are not
that familiar with these tools, you can install website creation software that will
make your job easier. You can install WordPress so that you can easily set up your
website and start uploading your content on your new blog site.
How to Host a Go Daddy Domain on Host Gator : 
Experienced website admins and bloggers search at the best costs on domain names and
Web hosting. Experienced webmasters and bloggers shop around for the best prices on
domain names and Web hosting. A great number of them host a Go Daddy domain on a
HostGator hosting plan. For the inexperienced, this might sound daunting, but it’s a very
simple thing to do, and could end up saving you plenty of money each year.
Instructions:
1. Select a domain name for your website. Take some time with this and make

sure that the domain name you choose is descriptive and spelled correctly.
2. Explore to Go Daddy (godaddy.com) and register your domain name.
3. Go to HostGator (hostgator.com) and register for a hosting plan for your
website. Choose a plan that will suit your current and future goals. If you think
you’ll eventually have more than one blog in the near future, it’s a good
financial decision to purchase a plan that will let you host more than one site
for one low price, rather than paying $5 per site each month.
4. After completing your host plan purchase, HostGator will send you a
confirmation email thanking you for your purchase. The site will also send you
an email with the subject line, “Your HostGator Account Information.” Save
this email (save a hard copy by using your computer printer, and save it in your
email account).
5. Navigate to Go Daddy once again, and log in.
6. From the top navigation bar, click “Domains” and select “My domains” from
the drop-down menu. A new page or tab (depending on your browser) will
appear, listing all of the domains you’ve purchased from Go Daddy. Check the
box next to the one you want to host on HostGator. After checking the box, a
navigation bar will fill in above the domain name list.
7. Click “Nameservers.” This will open up a new section at the top of your
screen.
8. Select the “Custom nameservers (I host my domains elsewhere)” radio button.
9. Open up the saved email that HostGator sent you and find the section that
states, “Your name servers:”
10. In the Go Daddy Nameservers Control Panel, replace the nameserver in the
“nameserver 1” box with the first value that HostGator sent you. It should look
like XXXXXX.hostgator.com (with the Xs being your unique values that
HostGator assigned).
11. Next, replace the nameserver in the “nameserver 2” box with the second value
that HostGator sent you. It should look like XXXXXX.hostgator.com (with the
Xs being your unique values that HostGator gave you).
12. Click the orange “Okay” button to finish the process.
13. Log in to your HostGator account. Add your Go Daddy domain to your
hosting plan and you’re done.

Simple Way To Outsource Writers On
Odesk.com
 
Why Outsource?
To start with, you can spare time on those assignments. For sites, there have a set of things
that need to be carried out on a week by week premise. This incorporates backlinking,
articles, SEO issues, and general social networking undertakings. When you have a couple
of sites it practically turns into a load on the grounds that you can no more concentrate on
procedure yet are concentrating on simply keeping things going.
When you outsource, you have the capacity to take those undertakings and offer them to
another person to finish.
Second, you can concentrate on giving more esteem in your administrations. Placed you in
the shopper’s shoes and truly ask whether this is the thing that they need. By outsourcing
undertakings that are unimportant to esteem, you have the capacity to concentrate on
worth. Most importantly, you will have the capacity to concentrate more on the business
as opposed to the undertakings of the business.
At long last, you can concentrate on yourself. On the off chance that you are striving to
make effective niche sites, that you are likely investing a ton of time working and you
have to keep up equalization. On the off chance that you can outsource 40 hours every
month and spend 50% of those hours taking a shot at different issues, you have an extra 20
hours every month for yourself.
When Should You Outsource?

There are two reasons clarifying when you ought to outsource. Initially, in the event that
you know your site will benefit in overabundance of $175.00 every month then you can be
guaranteed that it will work out. Remember that benefits will diminish yet ideally over the
long haul the $175.00 will be cash well spent. Then again, this would truly be a
supposition. Then again, on the off chance that you do have that hunch and overabundance
capital, then you could in any case do it.
The second reason is whether you have a site genuine making in abundance of $175.00
every month. On the off chance that you are profiting, either through time or really
spending the cash, you have to be reinvesting in your niche site properties.
Getting Started on Odesk
         First, sign up on odesk and connection a charge card to your record. This is an
extremely basic process so no stresses there.
         Click the Recruit tab then click Post a Job.
         In your employment posting, you will need to be as point by point as could be
expected under the circumstances. This incorporates clarifying what they will be
expounding on, what number of articles, what number of backlinks, the assets you
will be giving them, and virtually whatever else might be available in regards to the
employment.
         In your posting, incorporate a KEYWORD. Case in point, at the base
incorporates the accompanying expression “Please Write Niche Website at the
Bottom of your Application.”  This guarantees that you are getting applications
from individuals that really perused your entire employment posting.
         Do not make it hourly. In the event that you do, it turns into some more
confounded. Make it to a greater extent a mass undertaking. You ought to
additionally clarify to what extent every ought to take and that each one article and
backlinking ought to take not exactly an hour. One might say,  attempt to advocate
the expense.
         Make beyond any doubt you make an infectious title, for example, information
entrance and essayist required!
         Now hold up 12 to 24 hours for applications. You will get anywhere in the
range of 20 to 50 applications. Alternately you at any rate ought to!

         When searching through the applications, verify the rating is a 4 or above and
they have a sufficient arrangement of work. Also  look to English capability and the
quantity of tests they have gone to highlight their aptitudes.
Presently, a standout amongst the most vital issues is correspondence. Pick your foreman
admirably.

Tips for selecting the right worker
A typical battle with outsourcing is winding up with individuals that can’t take care of
business or leave half of the way finished with a venture. One approach to conquer this
issue is to contract individuals that have great input and appraisals. In the event that we are
posting a complex occupation, we never employ anybody with fewer than 30 finished
employments and they must have evaluations of higher than 90% (or 9 out of 10). An
alternate approach to analyze your candidates is to keep away from any nonexclusive
reactions. In the event that somebody hasn’t tended to your criteria in an acceptable and
straightforward way, it’s most likely not worth taking a gander at their work history. You
can even put a basic test in your set of responsibilities like “specify the saying elephant
when you are answering with the goal that I know you’ve perused our set of expectations
in full”.
10 Tips for posting projects requirements:
1. Write your depiction as though you are disclosing them to a 10 year old
youngster
2. Set acceptable developments in the event that you need utilization them for
installments
3. Ask another person to peruse your venture portrayal before uploading it – in
some cases things that sound good to you will have neither rhyme no reason to
somebody who has no contribution with your undertaking or organization
4. Invite specialists who have matching background. Case in point, on the off
chance that you are searching for Joomla help, and search for specialists with
Joomla experience and great appraisals. Sort them by the by the last sign in
date and after that welcome them to your venture.
5. If you are agonized over ensuring your protected innovation or thought, make
a NDA and verify you are trading it with a genuine element. Make your terms
and conditions sensible (the vast majority of these locales have a standard
NDA you can alter).
6. If you would prefer not to attract thoughtfulness regarding what you are doing,
keep your set of expectations ambiguous and talk about subtle elements just
with gatherings you are keen on living up to expectations with.
7. Post the dominant part of your set of expectations in a connection and leave a
little “test” to verify the individual has perused the depiction (for instance,

specifying a specific word or requesting that they address 2-3 key criteria).
8. Use an administration like gomockingbird.com to plainly plot your thoughts in
a visual medium
9. Make your undertaking sound energizing and incorporate that it will look great
in any portfolio
10. Post your business to particular geographic districts relying on the kind of
specialist you.

Basics To Putting Keywords 
Into Content For SEO
Adding quality content to your website on a regular basis is a very good SEO tactic. If
your keyword strategy has been crafted properly and your content is nicely optimized for
the right keywords, adding content will increase your fundability.
Choose a focus keyword that is used to search
Your keyword strategy should have given you some idea what you want to write about.
For blog posts, you will usually aim for a long tail keyword (containing multiple words).
In our  WP SEO plugin  you will find a drop down menu which supplements your entry
with suggestions. These suggestions are actually based on Google Suggest. This is exactly
the same as what you’d see when you type the search term into a Google search box.
The terms you will find in the suggest drop down menu are thus terms and combinations
of words that are logical and used by actual people to search on the web. This tool can be
very helpful in giving you some first ideas about the search behavior of people in the area
you want to write about.
.

Discover some information about search volume
You should put some effort into discovering whether or not the search volume of your
chosen focus keyword is high. Google has made this really hard. The only way to know
‘for sure’ how often a search term is used is by having an active and alive AdWords
account and by bidding on the search term of your choice. Not to worry, using Google
Trends should give at least some idea, in a creative way, about search volume.  Google
Trends allows you to compare the search volume between two search terms over time.
This will give some insights in the volume of the search terms people use (always relative
to another term).If you already have some (blog)posts that rank well for good terms, you
will know how many visitors these posts attract. Using Google Trends to compare the
focus keywords of older posts (of which at least the number of visitors to your website is
known) with the focus keyword you have in mind for your new post, could give you some
idea about the potential of traffic this new focus keyword could have. Make sure to choose
older posts that are as much similar to the post you are planning to write: if you are
planning to choose a long tail keyword, compare posts with long tail focus keywords as
well.
Google your proposed focus keyword
Apart from knowing which search terms are actually used by people, you need to know
whether or not your idea for your post or page fits the desires and expectations of the
people who use the search terms. The best way to find out whether or not your content fits
these desires is to Google your proposed (sets of) keywords yourself.
Take the time to look at the first two result pages. Are the articles Google shows of the
same character that your article will be like? Does your website fit between the results
shown in these result pages? If you decide to write your blog post or page, while
optimizing for this exact focus keyword, you are aiming for a display of your page
amongst these. Make sure to use the content of the result pages as an inspiration for your
blog post. Are there any useful ideas or not.
Picking a focus keyword is not easy
Choosing a perfect focus keyword is not an exact science. You should aim for a
combination of words that are actually used by a search audience. Aim for a focus
keyword that is relatively high on volume and aim for one that will fit your audience.

How To Build Quality Backlinks To The
Website To Help The Website Rank Better
Backlinks always add improvement to your site. It is very significant thing for SEO of any
site. Most of the people always think how to generate or get backlinks?Infect, one ought to
discuss to get quality backlinks and backlinks for SEO. The essential truth is Backlinks are
critical element to enhance your site working execution. It serves to investigate your site
to distinctive systems, advance your site and associate your site to significant systems.
Subsequently it assumes a significant part to add movement to your site.
What is backlink?
A backlink is an incoming hyperlink that connects the web page or content to another
website. Basically, a backlink is any link on another website that points to your website.
Backlinks are very important when it comes to page ranking as Google rates them highly.
However, the backlinks themselves must be of good quality in order to generate the
rankings needed to boost your content ahead of the competition.
What is a quality backlink?
The reputation of the website that links to your website decides the quality of the
backlinks. Search engines looks at backlinks and accordingly it evaluates popularity of the
website and gives it a rank.
All Backlinks Are Not Created Equal
Backlinks are compelling. They can be utilized for good—helping your site attains to page
one status—or they can be utilized for detestable as a feature of connection purchasing
plans that do only cause hurt. Next, we are going to clarify both high and low-quality
backlinks, and demonstrate to you precisely proper methodologies to get the sort of
backlinks that will enhance the internet searcher positioning of your site.
Trust nobody
Don’t rely on the tips you read from unknown sources. If somebody discovers the secret to
rank first on Google for competitive keywords, it’s very unlikely that they will share it

with strangers. Always do your research and make your own tests. With very little money,
you can create a website to test all types of backlinks and have your own case studies.
Build backlinks with persistence
If you have just created your website, the chances of getting fast and natural links are
almost zero. Saying your prayer before going to bed, in hopes that Forbes or Washington
Post will link to you, won’t get you anywhere. Instead, you will have to build some links
and drive relevant traffic to your website. How do you do this? One common method is to
write guest posts on reputable websites in your niche.
When you write articles for other websites, don’t do it just for the purpose of getting a link
in the author bio. This method has been abused a lot lately, but with the right strategy you
can stand up in front of the crowd
.
Don’t leave foot shaped impressions on your
backlinks
A very common mistake many SEO’s do is to leave footprints when building backlinks.
All your links should look natural, even those that you are building for SEO.
If you are doing guest posts, always change your author bio and use different
pen names.
Don’t use the same description for your website all over the web.
Make all your links look natural and untraceable.
The good links you can build to your website
The best links to your website are the ones coming from real websites, with good content
and lots of social media shares.
You can either earn these backlinks, or build them yourself. As long as they come from the
authority websites in your niche, they have great SEO value. I will not insist to talk about
a specific link building method, because what works for me, might not work for you. This
is the reason, why, at the beginning of the article I said you should do your own tests and
decide what’s best for your website.
You can also check what your competitors are doing in terms of SEO, and if their strategy
works, try to build the same links.

The most common methods to build quality backlinks are:
Guest posts on related websites
Infographics
Broken links method
Niche forums
Social media

What backlinks you should avoid
There are several types of links you should avoid in your backlinks profile. The worst you
can have are the spammy ones you can’t control. Here are several examples of bad
backlinks:
         Links from pages with thin content Google devalues pages and websites with
very little content, and it’s obvious that links from these types of websites carry
little SEO value.
         Websites that don’t provide value to users the best examples on this category are
social bookmarking websites, directories and article directories. All of these can be
used only for the purpose of SEO, and Google doesn’t give them a lot of credit.
What’s even worse, it’s that once submitted your link to any of these websites, it’s
almost impossible to remove it.
         Comments spam nobody likes spam, and neither Google. If you are posting
spammy comments like all over the internet, you will lose your website’s
reputation, and you might also lose your rankings in search engines. Even nofollow
comments can be suspicious if you abuse them..

Tips to Get Quality Backlinks
Here are some tips to scale your guest posting technique:
Don’t look only for websites that have a “write for us” page. The best websites
from where you should get links are the ones without these pages.
Only write for highly reputable websites in your niche. Don’t waste time and
efforts to write for websites with domain authority level below 40. Your link
will have very little value, and you might end up having your link removed
without further notice.
Write more than one time for each website. Otherwise, it will be obvious you
are writing only to build backlinks.
Nofollow links are great. Not for SEO, but for traffic and to get more followers
on social media.
Monitor the links from your guest posts. Use our SEO tool and keep track of
all your backlinks. Sometimes, webmasters remove or change your links from
dofollow to nofollow, and you should know about this.
Always link to your social media accounts in the author bio of your articles.
Here are a few tips to scale your visitor posting system:
Don’t search just for sites that have a “compose for us” page. The best sites from where
you ought to get connections are the ones without these pages.
         Only compose for exceptionally respectable sites in your corner. Don’t waste
time and endeavors to compose for sites with area power level underneath 40. Your
connection will have next to no worth, and you may wind up having your
connection uprooted without further take note.
         Write more than one time for every site. Else, it will be clear you are composing
just to fabricate backlinks.
         No follow connections are awesome. Not for SEO, yet for activity and to get
more supporters on online networking.
         Monitor the connections from your visitor posts. Utilize our SEO device and
stay informed regarding all your backlinks. In some cases, website admins expel or
change your connections from dofollow to nofollow, and you ought to think about

this.
         Always connection to your online networking records in the writer bio of your
articles.
         By utilizing the strategies, I composed above; I figured out how to get
extraordinary SEO results, furthermore immediate activity to one of my sites, from
the creator bio of my visitor posts.
Building backlinks to your site must be finished with wary and learning. You ought to
screen every backlink you make or win and confirm in the event that it conveys any SEO
esteem. Continuously abstain from getting backlinks from pages where you don’t have
any control. The exact opposite thing you would need is to have several backlinks you
can’t evacuate. You can simply utilize these routines relying on your time and plan (on the
off chance that you need to utilize star programming). Your innovativeness matters a ton
and your commitment towards your site and site will lead you to create brilliant backlinks
in awesome volume.

Why It’s Important To Have An Email list
and How To Set Up An Opt In Form For
The Email List
Importance of mailing list
Before we begin, I have to tell you about an amazing program that WILL make you
thousands (if applied) and could change your life!
Check it out now before it’s too late!
=    http://bit.ly/EmailMobileMonopoly
=    http://bit.ly/EmailMobileMonopoly
Mailing records empower capable one-to-numerous interchanges. Since mailing records
are in view of email, they impart the key gimmicks of email. Mailing records likewise
expand on that innovation to make another capacity called “one-to-numerous” usefulness,
empowering one individual to speak with numerous individuals in the meantime. This
peculiarity is a virtual Internet augmentation of this present reality correspondence force
of an individual addressing a gathering, with the exception of that the individuals from the
crowd may be placed anyplace on the planet. The converse is additionally genuine:
mailing records can provide for one individual interesting access to the educated
supposition of a different gathering of individuals on different subjects with little exertion
- the email lands from the gatherings they have subscribed to, and they then read the ones
they need.
Like so a significant number of the Internet advancements, mailing records are vital
basically in view of their energy to bring individuals around the globe together in a
solitary correspondence setting. Having an email rundown is something that is enormous
in a LOT of masterful groups, An email rundown is essentially what it seems like. It’s a
rundown of client email addresses that they intentionally provide for you, so you can
email them when you have something new out. Presently, this is immense in the
independently publishing world. The thing that is marvelous about an email rundown is
that it is the most individual correspondence you can have with fans outside of gathering

them in individual, and obviously, you can’t generally meet every one of them in
individual.
A post office based mail battle is best when the mailing piece is sent to an exceedingly
focused on gathering of people – individuals you know or accept are responsive to
purchasing your item or administration. Contrast this with Newspaper and magazine
promoting, which is extremely extravagant in light of the fact that you are paying per
users, not every prospect. The greater part of the readership has no enthusiasm on your
item or administration. Your focused on mailing rundown can be contained your current
clients and prospects. Then again, in the event that you don’t have a rundown of prospects,
there are mailing rundown administrations accessible where you can buy a rundown that
focuses on your business sector as per any number of demographic criteria, for example,
area, age, sex, pay, and kind of business or industry and so on.
Direct Mail List Accuracy
Your current database will rapidly go out of date. Individuals move, postal codes change,
unique information section may be available and some individuals may have joined with a
“don’t mail me” enrollment administration. It is vital that your current database is
professionally cleaned before you embrace any mailing.
The additional expense of sending mailings to undeliverable or undesirable addresses far
exceeds the expense of cleaning your information. So fare thee well when you bring down
subtle elements. In the event that your prospect’s name is spelled erroneously, they are
unrealistic to request from you.
Buying a mailing list
In the event that you don’t have a rundown you could call your own, you can really
purchase or rent a mailing rundown. This is viable when you are another business or you
need to venture into new market territories. There are mailing rundown benefits that
represent considerable authority in ordering precise mailing records for any business sort
of mailing you could envision. When you focus on your business like this, you are not
squandering cash via mailing to individuals who won’t be occupied with your item or
administration. When the prospect answers to you specifically, you can honestly add their
name and location to your own mailing rundown and contact them again later on. Thusly,
you will develop your own database of clients and prospects. This will turn into the center
of your business. Shaft Mailing can help you gain a legitimate mailing rundown and reveal
to you approaches to spare.

How to set up an opt in form for the email list
Create an opt-in form so that your new subscribers can easily join your list.  The form can
be hosted by us or you can generate HTML code and host the opt-in form yourself.
Simply follow the steps below to create your own website sign up form.
For a form with more fields than just “Email Address”, you must first add new fields to
your list. Interested in a more dynamic sign up form with pull down choices, radio
buttons, or large comment boxes? This tutorial explains how to edit fields for just that!
1. Navigate to Lists and click on the list for which you would like to create an
opt-in form.
2. On the Tools quick link bar, click on Create a website Opt-In Form under List
Tools.
3. Select your preferences on the 4 tabs provided and click Update Opt-In
Form to preview your email signup form. (Note: If you can’t at first see the
changes, click twice on the Update button.)
4. When you are happy with your opt-in form design, you may view it live by
clicking the View the live opt-in form link. This will pop up a window with the
opt-in form. You may copy the URL in this window and link to it from you
website and emails.
5. Alternatively, you may copy the HTML code and add this form to your own
site.  To grab the HTML code, click the Give me HTML Code link.

How To Monetize The Website Through
Clickbank, Jvzoo, Amazon Associates, and
Google AdSense
Monetize the website through clickbank:
Since 1998, ClickBank has helped countless individuals increase more budgetary control
and flexibility by turning their insight, passions, diversions, and work encounters into an
extra wellspring of continuous pay.
Through ClickBank’s imaginative online stage, these infopreneurs get the apparatuses,
preparing, and access to a worldwide system of more than 100,000 partner advertisers so
they can gainfully advertise remarkable and valuable data items to niche gatherings of
people all as far and wide as possible.
Monetize the website through jvzoo:
On the off chance that you haven’t officially become aware of JVZoo, it’s one of the best
offshoot promoting stages online at this moment. It’s similar to Clickbank and has a
tremendous number of offshoots and distributers whom they are collaborated with. I think
JVZoo is an awesome spot to fire up your offshoot advertising vocation in light of the fact
that the site is anything but difficult to move through and its allowed to sign up to advance
the items in their commercial center. Regardless of the possibility that you’re not new to
associate promoting and are now profiting as an offshoot utilizing an alternate stage,
despite everything I prescribe investigating JVZoo and advancing their items
notwithstanding what you’re as of now doing. I say this on the grounds that they have a
few items that are entirely accessible just to them.
In the event that you login to JVZoo and discover an item you need to advance, you can
demand to be a subsidiary for it. You simply need to round out a basic appeal
authorization structure for support. Some of these items will favor you immediately, yet
take note of various them take a day or two; it won’t take quite a while to get affirmed for
any item. Once you’re endorsed you’ll be given a subsidiary connection that you’ll use to
direct individuals to lead catch and deals pages for you. It’s greatly basic and simple to

profit with JVZoo and in case you’re doing all the right things as a subsidiary, you’re
ensured accomplishment with this astonishing stage.
Monetize the website through amazon associates:
Amazon Associates is one of the first online partner showcasing projects and was
dispatched in 1996. The Amazon Associates program has a 15+ year reputation of creating
answers for help site holders, Web designers, and Amazon dealers profit by publicizing a
large number of items from Amazon.com. At the point when site holders and bloggers
who are Associates make connections and clients navigate those connections and purchase
items from Amazon.com or Endless.com, they win referral expenses. It’s allowed to join
and simple to utilize.
Give clients the comfort of alluding them to a trusted site where they can instantly buy the
items you promote on your site. Furthermore when they do, you can acquire up to 15% in
referral charges. Exploit different Amazon retail advancements and influence our recently
made promoting peculiarities to drive movement and acquire referrals.
Monetize the website through Google Adsense:
Begin with quality keyword rich substance, (regardless of the fact that you are offering an
item, despite everything you need to deliver exceptionally wise quality substance that
comprises of the fundamental SEO basics). At that point seek an Adsense record, set up
size, style and area of the promotions, and afterward keep your substance pertinent and
unique to your crowd.
Detailed Step By Step Instructions on How To Monetize With Google Adsense:
Create high quality keyword rich content on your website or blog. You want a
balance of valuable information, and a good ratio of keywords to attract the
search engines, and to have ads relevant to your web page. SEO optimization
is important in order to be discovered by search engines in the first place, but
please don’t over use or over optimize for any one keyword term or phrase.
 Keep your content natural, but still targeted toward a specific theme or topic.
Start your account with Google Adsense. This is basically self guided
at https://www.google.com/adsense/signup, you will need a valid postal
address, a Google account, and of course a web page or website. If you are in
China or India your page needs to be at least six months old.

The next step is to tell Google about your content in a form, then fill out a
short application online. It can take anywhere from a few days, to a few weeks
for approval.
Once approved, you have control over the location, and size, and color of the
ads on your web page. You want the ads to be where people will naturally
look. The process is very simple and self guided from this point on. Google
makes it very easy for beginners to monetize their own web pages.
Choosing a size for your ad is a matter of taste, however some ad size and
placements seem to work better than others. You will have a choice between
medium rectangle, large rectangle, (which can be placed anywhere on your
page) and leader-board (work best placed on top of the page), and of course,
the skyscraper ad  (works well on the side of your web page).
Choosing Colors for your ads is also a matter of taste. It is recommended that
you go with the Google recommended color scheme for each ad if the
background of your web page is white. You can choose from a list of
predefined customizations, or if you are creative, and a little tech savvy, you
can make your own.  A lot of internet marketing specialists recommend
blending the ad colors with your web page or making it stand out highly with a
specific call to action.  In my experience, I have had a lot better success in
blending the ad colors with color schemes that are already on the web page.
Choosing the locations for the Google Adsense ads depends on the web page,
and the size of each ad. If your web page is selling a product, you will want to
place your own products more accessible than the ads, while still allowing the
ads to be viewed. If you are offering information, and your main revenue is
through ads, then you will want the ads more obvious, yet not intrusive. It is all
a balancing act and then definitely requires a lot of testing to be successful.

Set Up and Site Maintenance
 
How to Setup Niche Websites Quickly:
You can use WP Twin to install each of websites quickly. It is highly recommend getting a
copy of it if you want to save yourself a lot of time and hassle.Use the CTR theme with
your sites because it has a very high Click Through Rate, meaning that each visitor is
making you the most amount of money possible with Adsense. This also isn’t mandatory
to buy, but it is recommend it if you want a theme that is proven to get results.
You definitely don’t need to buy WP Twin in the beginning, but if you decide to really
scale out your niche site making process then it’s something that can really help you out.
For those of you who decide to build your sites manually  you can download the following
plugins
Contact Form 7- An easy way to put a contact form on your sites
Dagon Sitemap Generator- Makes a fully customizable sitemap
Google Analytics - Easily add Google Analytics to your sites
Google XML Sitemaps – Add an XML sitemap so Google will index you faster
Login Lockdown – Stops people from breaking into your site
WordPress SEO – Makes your site more search engine friendly
WP Insert-  use this to add a privacy policy

How to Maintain a Website:
Consistent site support is an unquestionable requirement in the event that you need your
site to be effective.
Why is Website Maintenance Important:
With consistent site support your site will run easily. No disappointed guests on the
grounds that something on the site didn’t work or a connection you gave are broken.
Consistent guests are searching for what is new, so furnish them with new and energizing
data, items or gimmicks.
Regular Website Maintenance Tasks:
There are some standard site upkeep errands you ought to perform on a planned premise.
Planning in any event month to month would be the timetable to begin with.
Backing Up Your Website
Moving down your site is something you ought to do constantly, particularly in the event
that you are the sort that uses the online interface of your store or website to roll out
improvements. Things happen. Despite the fact that the web facilitating organization says
they reinforcement the destinations on their servers, their last reinforcement could have
been before your last alter. In the event that the server crashes for reasons unknown or
your webpage gets hacked, your alters will be gone if the web facilitating organization
restores what they had moved down. Picture loosing an entire day’s worth of effort, simply
in light of the fact that you didn’t take a couple of minutes to reinforcement the site.
Monitor Website Outages
In the event that your site goes down, you need to be the first to know and not get an email
from another person they cannot get to your site. Regular website maintenance is a must if
you want your site to be successful.
Check Domain Registration Information
Gaze upward in the WHOIS records what data is recorded for your space name. Verify it
is right. In some cases when you at first sign up for your space you would have utilized an
email address that is no more valid. This needs to be redesigned as when there is an issue
with your area or an expiry notice is conveyed you won’t get the messages. They are sent
to the email address on record.

Test Website Speed
Testing the download rate of your website frequently is vital. Particularly on the off
chance that you have included another peculiarity. Web surfer has a short consideration
compass. In the event that your site is moderate to load, they are not going to hold up. You
have to do all that you can to enhance the download pace of your website or blog so guests
stay to peruse your substance and ideally give you natural approaching connections by
spreading the statement for you what an eminent webpage you have.
Link Check
Connections get to be broken over the long haul. With changes inside the site and on the
off chance that you referenced somebody in one of your articles or someplace else inside
the site connections could have changed or are broken. The assignment to discover broken
connections isn’t excessively hard. Simply utilize a connection checker to test your
outside connections and inward connections in any event once a month.
Software Updates
Outsider programming, in the same way as your ecommerce programming, WordPress and
Joomla for instance, are continually redesigning their product. You have to continue beat
these overhauls and introduce them when they turn out. The overhauls won’t simply be
new peculiarities, they will incorporate security redesigns as well.
Analyze Your Stats
Break down your deals details as well as your site details as well.
Traffic Stats
Take a gander at your web server details to focus your site movement. On the off chance
that your web facilitating record doesn’t have site details then get one introduced.
Something like Awstats that gives:
         Pages entered on and left on
         Time spent on the site
         Bounce rate
         Referring destinations
         Countries your guests are from

         Keywords/phrase that were utilized to discover you.
Google Analytics will give some of this data. It may not be as complete as a site details
program that is run from your real server. One thing a site details system introduced on
your server will do that Google Analytics doesn’t is demonstrate to you who is hotlinking
(connecting straightforwardly to your pictures on your site) . e.g. your pictures, PDFs,
reports, and so on.. These individuals are taking your substance and your data
transmission in the event that they don’t have your authorization to do as such. With this
data your can stop the hotlink.
Search Engine Results
Is it true that you are appearing on the first page for the keywords/expression you need to?
On the off chance that you have provided for it eventually, e.g. a couple of months, to get
onto the first page of the search comes about commonly then perhaps the time it now, time
to take a gander at your substance and reexamine it.
Reputation Management
Utilizing Google Alerts, you can screen your site name, your name, your image and your
substance on the web.

Conclusion
Thank you so much for reading this book. By reading this book you can gain all basic
knowledge about building online niche sites. This book will help you to build online niche
sites as you need. It contains all information and can meet all your requirements. Hope
you have enjoyed reading this book. Since you finished my book, I can only assume that
you have enjoyed it so can you please do me a huge favor, can you leave me a nice review
on amazon. Thanks again.

