
THE MANAGER’S
HANDBOOK FOR BUSINESS
SECURITY

THE MANAGER’S
HANDBOOK FOR BUSINESS
SECURITY
SECOND EDITION
GEORGE K. CAMPBELL, Contributing Editor
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON • NEW YORK • OXFORD
PARIS • SAN DIEGO • SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO

Elsevier
225 Wyman Street, Waltham, MA, 02451, USA
The Boulevard, Langford Lane, Kidlington, Oxford, OX5 1GB, UK
Originally published by the Security Executive Council, 2009
Copyright r 2014 The Security Executive Council. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek
permission, further information about the Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangement
with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency,
can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the Publisher
(other than as may be noted herein).
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and
experience broaden our understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices,
or medical treatment may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in
evaluating and using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein.
In using such information or methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety
of others, including parties for whom they have a professional responsibility.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors,
assume any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products
liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products,
instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Campbell, George, 1942-
The manager’s handbook for business security / George K. Campbell.  Second edition.
pages cm
ISBN 978-0-12-800062-5
1. Business enterprisesSecurity measures. 2. Risk management. I. Title.
HD61.5.C36 2014
658.407dc23
2013045269
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN: 978-0-12-800062-5
For more publications in the Elsevier Risk Management and Security Collection,
visit our website at store.elsevier.com/SecurityExecutiveCouncil
This book has been manufactured using Print On Demand technology. Each copy is produced
to order and is limited to black ink. The online version of this book will show color figures
where appropriate.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Concept: Bob Hayes
Content: Security Executive Council members, faculty, and staff
Contributing Editor: George K. Campbell
Development Editor: Kathleen Kotwica
xi

INTRODUCTION
The Manager’s Handbook for Business Security represents the
collective knowledge of the Security Executive Council’s mem-
bers, faculty (former security executives and subject matter
experts), and staff. It has been developed to provide current
best practices in security for new security managers, current
security managers who are in transition from public to private
or one corporate profile to another, and business executives
with an interest in or responsibility for corporate security. We
have sought to provide the reader with short, focused topics
with a view to validate, fine-tune, or overhaul existing programs;
create new programs; and assist in their growth.
While it is nearly impossible to cover the subject matter here
without some clear recollection of the available literature, this is
not a rehash of the many fine, comprehensive security manage-
ment publications that are available through a variety of quali-
fied sources. Instead, we have sought to provide a series of
short subjects that we hope will assist readers to lead and
inspire
more
effective
security
programs
within
their
organizations.
Our goal is to challenge readers to critically evaluate their
programs, better engage their business leaders, provide tools for
planning and enhancing security programs, pass along some
lessons learned, and, we hope, generate value-added ideas.
Our Vision for the Value of This Publication
The Security Executive Council seeks to serve current and
emerging corporate security leaders with knowledge-based tools
that will enhance their abilities to positively influence their
companies’ protection. This book contains many examples
from strategic initiatives the Council has undertaken and the
experiences of established security leaders. It is intended to
guide the security manager with actionable essentials that our
experience has shown will add value to the company and aid in
the perception of the incumbent as an effective leader.
Every enterprise has its own unique culture and expectations
for management and leadership. This book represents the
experiences of several of your predecessor colleagues, who
believe passing this knowledge on is a way to stay engaged in
the profession in which we have invested much of our lives.
xiii

If you find here a lesson or two or three that help you better
navigate the often stormy corporate waters, achieve an objec-
tive, or adeptly avoid a hazard, we have more than accom-
plished our mission.
Sincerely,
George K. Campbell, Contributing Editor
xiv
INTRODUCTION

1
UNDERSTANDING
THE BUSINESS OF SECURITY
Introduction
There is an old saying about new leaders: For the first six
months you are part of the solution, and after that you are part
of the problem. Management expects you to identify the
strengths and weaknesses in the security program. If you imme-
diately get caught up in the minutia, you will invariably lose the
opportunity to craft an objective assessment and set goals for
reinforcement
and
improvement. You need
to understand
where your program stands in management’s plus and minus
columns.
Unless you have spent significant time inside the company,
you need to get grounded early on in a thorough understanding
of the business. How does management convey the company
mission and values, what makes it succeed, what risks could
impact its value, and what metrics does it use to measure its
performance?
If you fail to understand what really moves your business
and its top management, you risk assessing and defining the
wrong security mission and priorities.
Who Are the Key Constituents?
To succeed, there are several relationships you need to
understand and develop. Who are your customers? What moves
them? How do they view security? Your definition of service
begins
with
the
perceptions
of
these
often
conflicting
constituencies:
•
public and investor relations
•
shareholders and customers
•
board of directors
1

•
senior management
•
line business unit managers
•
chief financial officer
•
chief information officer
•
general auditor
•
legal counsel
•
chief compliance/ethics officer
•
chief risk officer
•
chief marketing officer
•
facilities and real estate
•
employees
•
security teams
•
third-party vendors
•
supply chain participants
•
insurance carriers
•
regulators and law enforcement
Many of these offices may have conflicting views of the mission
and value of the security function. It is this diversity of percep-
tion that must be understood and managed.
What Issues Move Your Constituents?
All corporate organizations have a history, both pro and con.
Outstanding service is an expectation, but you need to under-
stand how prior engagements with the business have framed
opinions of the competency of your team and their mission
within the enterprise.
Don’t miss the potentially long-held bias from a prior incident
that left a bad taste. You may start out with a label that, while
admittedly undeserved, requires a new understanding going for-
ward. This is your program. Regardless of history, establishing
your style versus your predecessor’s is critical.
Each of these constituents has a different perspective and
agenda regarding security, which mark their individual views of
the following:
•
What could bite? What keeps them awake at night, and what
role does security play in their comfort or discomfort?
•
What are the regulatory and situational environments that
may impact their view of protecting the brand, the supply
chain, and shareholder interests?
•
What is their perspective on corporate culture, what is
“right,” and the shared view of “corporate integrity.”
•
How does security influence or fail to influence its contribu-
tion to business value?
2
Chapter 1 UNDERSTANDING THE BUSINESS OF SECURITY

•
What are the costs of security programs versus the measur-
able return?1
•
Do they see themselves as a champion or sponsor of an
internal corporate service model that includes security?
•
How might security be tied to their success?
Regardless of your industry or risk profile, there is a daunt-
ing array of relationships that you will have to develop and
maintain to understand your constituents’ needs and to know
who can be your “go to” customers. It’s important to under-
stand who has no clue about security but should, who is a
supporter and mentor, and who would welcome the program’s
untimely end—and to establish relationships with all these
individuals.
Knowing if your venture has an enterprise risk management
(ERM) framework may prove helpful to you in building partner-
ships and gathering insights from others with the same charge
but a different discipline. Understanding the scope and bound-
aries of the security function and where it fits into an ERM
framework would be helpful. Security would likely fall into the
operational risk bucket of an ERM structure, as in the model
depicted in Figure 1.1.
Where to Start?
Whether you have come from within the organization or
just arrived from a prior job, you must thoroughly examine
the organization you are leading and assess where the pro-
gram is headed and where you and your constituents think it
should be.
The need to assess the strengths and weaknesses of the secu-
rity organization.
1In the years since the global recession began, we find ourselves challenged on all
sides by this cost/value equation. Your mandate may well be to evaluate every
security program from top to bottom to determine where real value is being
delivered at a competitive cost. What would be the consequences of elimination? You
will need to have a clear picture of the hierarchy of risks confronting the business
and the levels of effort required to manage them, and failing that, to maintain a
baseline of resources to respond effectively enough to minimize the consequences of
a security event. There is a threshold below which you can no longer have confidence
that you are prepared to respond to what you know has an increasing potential to
occur. From your analysis of vulnerabilities and risk trends (see Chapter 3), you
should focus on demonstrating that at various levels of security resource reduction,
combined with the likely increase of risk, your ability to prevent, detect, and
adequately respond will not be possible.
Chapter 1 UNDERSTANDING THE BUSINESS OF SECURITY 3

Research
by
the
Security
Executive
Council
(SEC)
has
highlighted key areas that define a leading-edge security pro-
gram, as listed below:
•
The program is risk based.
•
Services provided correspond with risks of concern to senior
management and the board of directors (board-level risks).2
•
Comprehensive program elements have been defined.
•
The program has definitive costs and resource requirements
that may be tracked to specific risk management and
service-level objectives.
Programs are driven by at least four or more of the following
defined catalysts:
•
regulations
•
products or brand
•
incidents
•
sponsors
•
geography
•
corporate culture
•
return on investment (ROI) or value
•
combinations of the above
The desired maturity model of your program needs to be con-
sistent in all markets, business units, and functions; be sustain-
able in leadership3 and executive support; provide for measurable
security programs; and provide access to executive management
and the board of directors when necessary. Periodic peer review
assessment and validation is highly desirable. The guiding
service-delivery strategy should incorporate the elements of
Operational
Risk
Internal Audit
What is the structure of your
organization’s risk
management structure?
Where and how does the
security organization and its
programs fit in?
Be alert to the fact that points
of convergence can be points
of confusion.
Human Resources
Compliance
General Counsel
Risk Management
Corporate Security
Market
Risk
Credit Risk and Counter-Party
Risk
Figure 1.1 Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) Structure. An example of an
ERM structure with security as part of the operational risk bucket.
2See the complete description of these business risks in Chapter 3.
3See Chapter 4 for the desired next-generation leadership and service categories.
4
Chapter 1 UNDERSTANDING THE BUSINESS OF SECURITY

Unified Risk Oversight (URO)t. URO is a method of approaching
risk whereby any corporate peril is identified by a team of execu-
tives or managers who represent the company’s various business
units and is then managed with the best interests of the business
and its goals in mind. By “corporate risk” we mean not just the
compiled risks of individual business units, but also the new pic-
ture created when different departments’ risk considerations are
brought together and compared, combined, and prioritized.
URO does sound similar to another popular term—enter-
prise risk management (ERM).4 However, there is one crucial
difference: oversight. While ERM identifies all risks that may
impact the corporation at the board level, URO is about who or
what entity is watching over it all. It calls for one centralized
overseer, a component that is not necessarily an integral part of
enterprise risk management. When risk is managed by the URO
method, all decisions to transfer, avoid, mitigate, or accept risk
are made in full consideration of their impact on all business
units. Of course, this means not every decision will reflect what
you may feel is the best option for security, but every decision
will take security into account and seek to provide the best pos-
sible outcome for the business as a whole.
What Is the Real Cost of Security?
There are potentially significant security-related costs across
the company, which are not directly attributable to your over-
sight. These costs tend to be obscured and accountability can
be diluted. You should endeavor early on to probe and under-
stand the scope and “ownership” of these expenses. They may
more appropriately be under your control, or perhaps you
should at least have some policy-based input. However, you
may be perfectly happy having these expenses elsewhere, if this
lowers your visible expense profile. Use Table 1.1 to calculate
these costs as closely as possible. Seek out support from a
trusted colleague in risk management, internal audit, or the
CFO’s office to capture these budgeted items.
4The rating agency Standard & Poor’s (S&P) announced in 2008 a new policy
requiring a review of “enterprise risk management” (ERM) practices for all
corporations that it rates. Management from all companies rated by S&P in the
United States now have to present and discuss their ERM practices at regular
meetings with ratings analysts. ERM requires a firm to address all its risks on a firm-
wide basis; this includes the full range of risks, including credit risks, market risks, as
well as hazards to a firm’s operations (operational risks).
Chapter 1 UNDERSTANDING THE BUSINESS OF SECURITY 5

Task Assignment: Assess Where Your Program
Is and Where You Want It to Be
1. What clues on top management’s assessment of the
security program did you gather from the interview
process? What expectations were expressed and how
do you intend to get to the bottom of these
perceptions?
2. Is there a discernable legacy that you perceive and/
or are expected to address?
3. What are the key stakeholders’ views of security?
List your major security functions and rank their level
of support among knowledgeable consumers. Are
there common threads of positives and negatives?
4. To what extent are security programs integrated into
strategic business planning?
5. How well does your—and others’—early assessment
view the ability of the program to anticipate and
respond to the risks it is expected to understand and
address?
6. To what extent is your department proactively
assessing risk and using the results of these
assessments to influence policy and modify behavior?
7. What do you know of the competencies and needs of
your key subordinates? What are the priorities here?
8. If you use contract services, how competent and
responsive are they, both from the record and from
your knowledgeable constituents’ opinions? Are they
cost-effective?
9. If you were told to reduce your budget by 10% or
25%, which programs would you select to cut with
what anticipated consequences? If you could increase
your budget by 10% or 25%, what programs would
you create or enhance, and what positive results
would you anticipate?
10. Given your understanding of the business and the
risks confronting it, what issues most need attention
in your early days? Would your conclusion surprise
senior management? If so, build the business case
for addressing it.
11. The security program is one of many business
enablers; and, to some extent, it may serve as a
guardrail. What does top management see as the
culture they want to create or maintain? What is the
tone they want to set?
12. How do you assess your program’s ability to deliver
services that contribute to management’s vision in
growing the business, setting behavioral standards
and tone, and clearly defining a risk appetite?
13. How well does your staff understand what they are
doing, how they are doing, and why they are doing
it?
14. Armed with your results, what is your plan for
addressing your program’s shortcomings and
optimizing its strengths?

The Security Program Review
One of the earliest discussions you should have with your
boss is to indicate your intention to do a top-down review of
the security program to include interviews with internal custo-
mers. If you have been brought in to fix perceived problems,
your objective need analysis be expected. If they think nothing
is broken, you still need to find the weak spots and strengths,
because they are there regardless of opinions on high. Part of
this discussion should cover your flexibility to address needs
with new resources, your ability to increase employee head-
count if needed, and other support for “making adjustments”
with existing staff. If you are going to build a team, manage-
ment needs to be on board from day one.
Table 1.1 Security Budget Cost Elements
Cost Element
$
Direct security expenses for the most current 12 months to include all cost center items assignable to
any organizational unit with security-related responsibilites. Include guard services if assignable to
Facilities or some other non-security cost center.
Estimated indirect expense by non-security personnel in support of security-related activities.
Fire and life safety equipment required by codes and policy.
Estimated time associated with internal and external investigations by non-security personnel.
Annual expenses for security and compliance-related software.
Time for security-related audits by internal/external auditors.
Cost of unrecovered losses, business interruption, and insurance premiums.
Average daily time for all employees to comply with physical and logical access and other required
security procedures.
Capitalization expenses for security hardware, software, vehicles, etc.
Business unit staff time engaged in security-related risk analyses, awareness, and other training.
Expenses associated with regulatory compliance not included above.
Otherspecific to your company.
Total 5
Use this table to calculate the real costs of corporate security within an organization.
Chapter 1 UNDERSTANDING THE BUSINESS OF SECURITY 7

If your program is largely outsourced, convey your inten-
tions to the vendor(s). Get feedback from knowledgeable inter-
nal parties. Assess cost against demonstrable performance.
Review any existing contracts with your legal department to
determine your ability to modify terms or make necessary
adjustments.
Keep in mind that the only contact the average employee or
visitor will ever have with security is that security officer or con-
tract guard at some access point, on the phone when their
access badge doesn’t work, or when there is a minor incident. If
this first line of response fails to represent the professionalism
expected of a company representative, your organization has a
problem. Particularly where low-bid guard force vendors are
employed, this potential should be assessed early and be high
on your list of issues. See Chapter 5 for some thoughts on this.
This is an ideal time to supplement your own time with an
internal detailee, perhaps from the internal audit group, human
resources, or a business unit resource with experience in orga-
nizational reviews. The alternative is to use a qualified consul-
tant with whom you are familiar and who will provide objective
credibility to your conclusions. Plan to get this initial review
done in your first 90 days, because you will get overwhelmed
with normal business if you wait.
It’s important that you let your team know your objectives
early on, and that they will be key players in whatever steps you
will employ to take the program to the next level.
What Is the “Next Level?”
The assessment process reveals a documented baseline. If
expectations are high for incremental improvements, you will
have some targets set for you. This is also true if downsizing is
the expectation. However, when you are seen as the “expert,”
the next level is about bringing about perceived value, deliver-
ing measurably improved performance, and connecting in sub-
stantive ways with the company’s real business objectives.
If you were seen as really successful in connecting security mission to fundamental corporate value, isn’t it
possible that you might be challenged to take a broader and, perhaps, more business-centric set of responsibilities?
8
Chapter 1 UNDERSTANDING THE BUSINESS OF SECURITY

Build the Business Case for Crafting
a Measurably Effective Security Program
If you poll your management and stakeholders as well as a
sample of line employees, you will likely get a variety of answers
to the question, “Why do we have a security program here?”
The good news is that your selection for the job is a clear state-
ment that senior management understands the need for a secu-
rity program on some level. Nevertheless, they may not have a
full appreciation for the breadth and depth of contributions
your organization may, or should, offer. Your business plan will
need to take into consideration each of these benefits and the
degree to which they are prioritized and delivered with compe-
tence. Consider the list of potential benefits from a proactive
security program (see Table 1.2), and ask selected stakeholders
to rank them and comment on their opinion(s).
We acknowledge the size and scope of the list. That goes
with your portfolio of responsibilities, regardless of the degree
to which you share leadership for “corporate security’ with
others in the governance team. These are the issues that signify
the degree to which your programs are seen as an integral part
of the business by those who are paying for the services you
offer. If these customers do not perceive a benefit, it may be
that they have never been prompted to consider where they
could see value. If others see a benefit, how can you leverage
that understanding to the doubting constituency? Remember, in
the great game of corporate reorganizations, you never know
who your next boss might be.
Consider the checklist in Table 1.2 and commence filling in
where the security program contributes to each of these areas
in measurable ways. Keep track of areas in need of improve-
ment. Test the results with colleagues in the business. Work
towards an understanding of your mission and their needs. The
result of this analysis is an assessment of your program’s align-
ment with the business. Critically evaluate the feedback. Take
heed of where they see you to be unconnected with their con-
cept of value. Also, take note of where some see you as very
connected and why.
Given the possibility that many of those managers you have
selected to be interviewed have never thought about or been
challenged on the security program value connection, you may
need to be prepared to provide a brief summary of how your
programs deliver on each of the potential benefits in this list.
Be prepared with real, measurable examples. If you have the
Chapter 1 UNDERSTANDING THE BUSINESS OF SECURITY 9

Table 1.2 Perceived Benefits of Corporate
Security Programs
Perceived Benefits of Corporate Security
Programs
High
Low
Comments
5
4
3
2
1
Enhance investor, shareholder, and customer or market
confidence
Promote integrity in business
Preserve financial success
Provide a competitive edge by enabling peace of mind
Maintain an informed, engaged senior management
Reduced risk in business process reduces loss experience
Regulatory/legal requirements met at optimum cost
Reduced scrutiny by regulators
Proactively eliminate vulnerability in business process
Deter threats
Reduce the likelihood of events with the potential for
adverse impact
Reduce risk of service disruption
Identify, mitigate, and/or avoid risky relationships
Maintain a safe, secure, and productive work environment
Fiduciary responsibility protection
Recapture lost assets
Reduce insurance costs
Enhance community standing
Educate employees
Protect and enhance the brand
Other? (keyed to your industry)
Use this table to measure and track how security contributes to an organization in a quantifiable way.
10
Chapter 1 UNDERSTANDING THE BUSINESS OF SECURITY

metrics, lay them out so the manager can be more informed
and honest in his or her response. Use the time to educate
managers on the potential for a real business engagement.
Steps in Building the Business Case
It is highly likely that your company requires an annual or
multi-year business plan of its various units, nevertheless you
will need one to identify your priorities and chart your course.
Demonstrate to senior management that you have a vision for
what needs to be done in your core programs and to be more
aligned with key business issues. Set forth why and with what
resources you will take essential first steps in gaining their con-
fidence and buy-in for your plans.
One approach to developing your plan is through the use of
a business strategy map, which is commonly used in many
businesses today. If you are not familiar with a strategy map,
the Harvard Business Review published an article entitled
“Having Trouble with Your Strategy? Then Map It” in its
October 2000 issue. It serves as a helpful overview of the pro-
cess. The attached map5 (see Figure 1.2) is one developed from
the many messages contained in this thesis, and your unique
company requirements and program schedule should drive its
contents.
Another approach to business planning is portrayed in
Figure 1.3. Each step is described as follows.
1. Assess the program: You are in this job because management
has concerns, seeks a new level for the program, or has
some other agenda that you should understand at this point.
This first step sets the stage and provides the foundation for
the business plan.
1.1. Your business strategy must reflect and demonstrate an
understanding of the overall business strategy and how
your plans will align and support the overarching cor-
porate strategy.
1.2. Many of your priorities will focus upon the issues raised
in customer feedback sessions. Having sought them,
there will be an expectation that your plan will address
them on some level.
1.3. Corporate culture and management style represent
tremendous and often overlooked influences on the
success of the security program and the individual who
leads it.
5Thanks to Michael Ennis, formerly of Fidelity Corporate Security, for this diagram.
Chapter 1 UNDERSTANDING THE BUSINESS OF SECURITY 11

1.4. The competencies and shortcomings of your inherited
staff (or vendors) obviously require your honest assess-
ment,
as
will
your
approach
to
filling
any
gaps.
Consider utilizing your human resource contact to
assist in this process.
1.5. This initial assessment of risk clearly will place the pro-
cess set forth in Chapter 3, “Risk Assessment and
Mitigation,” the core of your way forward. Your intent
here is to ensure that the business plan addresses prior-
itized risks on your watch. Note any shared risks—those
where security partners with one or more other organi-
zational units for risk management.
1.6. Your assessment of the policy infrastructure is a critical
step, inasmuch as this provides the legal framework and
a good measure of the business case for security pro-
grams. “Policy” is a dirty word in many corporate cul-
tures. However, in these cultures, there still are rules,
Contribute to the Profitability, Success and Viability of the Business
Culture, Competencies, and Resources
Effectively Integrate
Obtain knowledge of the
business and engage in 
the business' performance, 
direction, and initiatives
Deepen understanding of
risks, promote risk-based 
decision-making, and clarify
policy framework
Build a high-performing
solutions organization
Access to and
engagement of
spheres of influence
Build depth,
breadth, and quality
of partnerships
Skills and Culture
Enablers
Contribute to revenue
growth and assest retention
Solutions and Practice Development
Deliver and maintain holistic security, safety, and continuity risk assessment
Provide a safe and secure workplace for visitors and invitees
Evolve to fact-based
decision-making
Improve quality,
reliability; decrease variation
Capture and incorpoate
client feedback
Do the right thing - always
Deepen knowledge of emerging risks
and safeguards
Develop KRI and KPI measures,
metrics, and an analytical competence
Be an enabler for growth, and be
aware of risk management obligations
Provide outstanding thought
leadership
Secure business processes from fraud and other criminal acts
Screen personnel with logical and physical access for integrity and ethics
Implement plans to maximize resilience and recovery from interruptions
Aggressively investigate and prosecute attempts of acts of crime
Implement controls to protect private information, systems and media
Implement education and awareness
Understand and 
maintain familiarity 
with inter/intra 
cultures
Recruit, develop, and
retain the best people
Maximize staff
talents and output
Leverage “all”
available resources
Benchmark
Lead by example
Operational Excellence and Client Value Delivery
Financial
Service Delivery and Execution 
Make risk-based
investment decisions
Meet or exceed budget
expectations
Figure 1.2 Corporate Security Map. An example of a strategy map used to help develop a business case to justify
a security program within an organization.
12
Chapter 1 UNDERSTANDING THE BUSINESS OF SECURITY

practices, or guidelines. Use whatever term works in
your culture.
2. Develop the business plan: As noted above, there may be a
preset format to follow, but this high-level view may accom-
modate almost any approach. As we note throughout, you
are here because the company needs your special expertise
to address a family of risks they appreciate but may not fully
comprehend. This plan will affirm those they recognize and
introduce and prioritize those you have uncovered in your
review.
2.1. Your risk mitigation strategy is structured to address the
risk analysis set forth in Step 1.
2.2. A cautionary note on residual risk. These are risks on
the playing field that you are choosing to tell manage-
ment are not on your watch but should be assigned
elsewhere. Clearly, you need to assign the manage-
ment of these risks to others in better positions (in
terms of ownership, via resource or accountability) to
effectuate responsive risk-mitigation tactics. For exam-
ple, you may understand that poor site selection and
POTENTIAL STEPS IN BUILDING YOUR PROGRAM
Identify and address
management concerns
Governance team / security committee engagement
Assess
the
Program
Business
strategy
Customer
feedback
Culture and
Mgt. style
Staff
analysis
Risk
analysis
Policy
framework
Risk
mitigation
•  Managing owned risks
•  Assisting on shared risks
•  Customer satisfaction
•  Business unit accountability
•  Relationship management
•  Staff competencies
•  Resource management
•  Protecting the brand
•  Protecting the supply chain
•  Demonstration of value
•  Promoting integrity
Decline
residual
risk
Business
alignment
Resource
requirements
Program
measures and
metrics
Develop
the
business
plan
Sell
the
program
Implement
the
business
plan
Reassess
the
program
Figure 1.3 Potential Steps in Building Your Program. An alternative approach to building a security program.
Chapter 1 UNDERSTANDING THE BUSINESS OF SECURITY 13

equipping
of
property
are contributing
to
security
risks, but the facilities organization neither consults
nor desires your contributions to site protection—at
least until a crisis occurs. You will find a number of
these examples in various corners of the business; but
without the charter and resources to deal with them,
decline to involve them in your plan and lay out your
rationale.
2.3. As we will discuss in many instances in this book, align-
ing your program with the overall corporate business
strategy is a key element in delivering real value to the
enterprise. Your understanding of the company busi-
ness strategy and culture provide direction on how to
focus your priorities for strengthening and improving
the program. Clearly, your varied constituents’ per-
ceived value of security programs as gleaned earlier
must influence your plan in responsive ways. This is
especially true if those perceptions demonstrate an
ignorance of risk that must be addressed in your mar-
keting strategy. Do not miss the opportunity to consider
the value of engagement of a security committee or, at
a minimum, partnering with the corporate governance
team as an integral part of the plan. When you both
demonstrate a willingness to collaborate, the common
sense conclusion is that managing risk is a shared
responsibility.
2.4. Resource requirements and program measurements are
obvious elements of any plan and particularly critical for
the
new
security
leader
crafting
the
way
forward.
Resources apply to the budget strategy you select at this
stage of business planning. You may want to use your
findings to make a strong move for additional resources,
where they clearly support improved risk management
and security value. Alternatively, you might want to con-
sider a year of positioning the program and moving exist-
ing resources in ways that better serve your priorities.
2.5. Whatever you select for program content, having mea-
sures and metrics to support progress and results
against specified objectives are absolutely essential. See
Security and Metrics chapter for more on metrics.
3. Sell, implement, and re-assess: These are the key ingredients
of any business plan. Remember that you are in competition
for scarce resources and annually (at a minimum) you have
to convince management of the necessity of security’s pro-
ducts and services.
14
Chapter 1 UNDERSTANDING THE BUSINESS OF SECURITY

3.1. Sell the program: Regardless of format, develop your
plan in sufficient detail to incorporate the tactics of sell-
ing your conclusions and solutions. Do not tie success to
objectives that have not been fulfilled by the availability
of new or redirected resources. In Chapter 5 we discuss
marketing the security program and the many aspects
of execution. Again, note the potential relationship to a
security committee, which you may formally establish
with key stakeholders or which may be a bi-directional
advisory body.
3.2. Implement the plan: This step involves your ability to
effectively utilize the resources you have been able to
retain or enhance. There is also the requirement to pri-
oritize execution to match available resources. At the
heart of your plan must be a principle of shared respon-
sibility for protection with line business units and other
governance bodies. Invariably, the risks you have tar-
geted in your plan must be addressed at several levels
of execution, often with the business unit comprising
the
front
line
of
defense.
The
multiple
plan-
implementation topics at the lower right of the chart in
Figure 1.3 are recommended elements of any compre-
hensive security strategy, but you likely will decide to
focus on some more than others in the shorter term.
3.3. Reassess the program: Your assessment of the security
team developed in Step 1 will identify both the potential
stars and those with whom you have concerns. Drill
down with HR on the latter. Review prior performance
reviews, and potential voids in them, for all individuals.
Determine where you need to fill gaps, and probe the
competencies and desires of the standouts. Build a
working relationship with HR now, and it will pay divi-
dends as you build your team. You will also benefit
from a trusting relationship with HR when those chal-
lenging internal business-conduct cases arise.
In your assessment of strengths and weaknesses in
programs and personnel, you will invariably identify the
need for new, improved, or different skills. Prioritize
and build them into your plan. Make the business case
for each one. This is an opportunity to absorb some
additions with headcount reductions in other programs.
Also, when you are doing your initial feedback ses-
sions with business unit leaders, encourage them to
suggest one of their stars who they think would make a
good coach for those on your team in need of this
Chapter 1 UNDERSTANDING THE BUSINESS OF SECURITY 15

support. If there is a particular program you need to fix
or want to launch, consider reaching into a business
unit or other governance organization for an intra-
business temporary duty yonder (TDY) assignment.
These are effective ways to build bridges with the busi-
ness without adding to budget or headcount.
Identify, test, and develop your successor(s). You owe
yourself a bench that finds several motivated and
increasingly qualified personnel in line for key positions.
Push succession planning downward across the organi-
zation. Combine planning with competency analysis to
emphasize
the
development
plans
for
high-profile
successors.
If you are reliant upon contractors, take ownership
for succession. If you identify an especially effective
leader in the vendor team, guarantee that that individ-
ual is slated to be assigned to a new, potentially high-
value target. Make your contract protect key individuals
or be prepared to offer them employment.
If your early feedback from the boss has been sup-
portive of additional headcount or contract resources,
carefully lay out your prioritized needs and the business
case for each one. Otherwise, make this part of your
longer-term plan. Don’t be afraid to give “stretch”
assignments to those on board whom you have identi-
fied as part of the future team. On the other hand, if
your program assessment uncovers work of nominal
value, consider redeployment of those individuals to
priority assignments where skills and jobs match. Your
ability to incorporate appropriate measures of success
will influence the quality of the reassessment process.
THE BOTTOM LINE: If you don’t know your company’s business
and what makes it successful, you don’t understand the risks and can-
not adequately define your mission. Define it and then build your
business strategy around adding real and perceived value.
Highlights for Follow-Up
•
Who are the two or three senior people you have met who
see value in corporate security and understand what you
want to accomplish? What is your plan for developing these
relationships?
16
Chapter 1 UNDERSTANDING THE BUSINESS OF SECURITY

•
Based on your review and feedback from constituents, what
is the most serious shortcoming of the program? What is
your plan to address this, and on what schedule?
•
Who are the two strongest players on your team, and how do
you
propose
to
use them
to measurably improve the
program?
•
Who are your weakest players, and what is your plan to
address their weaknesses?
•
Who among your constituents are going to be the most diffi-
cult to satisfy, and why? How are you going to address this
need?
•
If you had to identify one learning experience from your first
90 days, what would it be, and how will it influence your
business plan and priorities?
Chapter 1 UNDERSTANDING THE BUSINESS OF SECURITY 17

2
SECURITY LEADERSHIP
Establishing Yourself and Moving the
Program Forward
Introduction
What produces an effective leader in your particular com-
pany? There are competencies and styles that work well in one
culture and are less effective in others. Do you understand
yours? Where is a model you could emulate? Is there a positive
or negative legacy you need to address? What are your team’s
expectations for a leader they can respect?
Business Value
A good leader will manage a team that is respectful, knowl-
edgeable and committed to service excellence. Leadership in
anticipating and responding to risk, influencing policy, and
communicating on the shared responsibility for asset protection
are success factors for the shareholders of the company.
The Essentials
This chapter focuses on three interrelated, high-level views
of security leadership: leadership competencies, keys to organi-
zational influence and impact, and the “next generation security
leader.” Each grouping focuses on security leadership through a
different lens of personal impact, organizational impact, and
next generation security skills.
The first view offers nine competencies the individual should
bring to the job and further develop as part of a planned growth
strategy. The second view of security leadership summarizes
five measures of influence that are clearly reflective of organiza-
tional leadership, and the third displays 65 knowledge elements
and skills that serve to enhance corporate leadership. This latter
inventory enables rating yourself against a next generation
19

model as well as allowing you to outline the knowledge and
skills you seek to hire in order to complement the team.
Leadership Competencies
The successful security executive is a leader in a variety of
critically important ways:
1. Team leader—First and foremost, you are the leader of the
security team. Inspire them to learn, excel, and be customer
focused. Hire the best. Avoid those who seek to be the corpo-
rate cop. Only engage those contractors who are capable of
understanding the corporate culture and your vision for the
program.
2. Thought leader and subject matter expert—Our profession
brings unique expertise to the organization. You need to con-
sider how this knowledge can be blended into corporate
strategy and tactics.
3. Business enabler and creative problem-solver—We need to
support corporate efforts in succeeding in the competitive
marketplace. We do this by enabling the business to engage
in processes that might otherwise be too risky.
4. Business strategist and advisor—You must understand the
businesses you support! Security’s goals reflect the goals and
plans of the company, and your ability to lead will be tied to
your ability to engage business management on their own
terms.
5. Risk management guide—Risk is why you have a job. You
have a unique perspective; you see gaps in controls from
your risk assessments and incident post-mortems. Your pro-
grams provide an ability to connect the dots on risk-related
issues that others do not have. Anticipate! Operate the secu-
rity risk radar and use your pulpit to assure awareness.
6. Influencer of enterprise policy—As a leader, you will be in a
position to influence the scope and content of a core set of risk
management policies or guidelines. Communicate! Act as a
positive change agent on behalf of organizational protection.
7. Relationship manager—An effective working relationship
with business unit managers at all levels is a key element in
your protection strategy. From this collaborative foundation,
you may influence business strategy and better ensure issue
resolution.
8. Risk group and security committee leadership—You are a
member of the corporate governance team and see risk in
unique
ways.
Work
closely
with
legal,
audit,
human
20
Chapter 2 SECURITY LEADERSHIP

resources, risk management, and others to gain perspective
on risk and to influence risk management strategy.
9. Management model—You model the behavior essential to a
company that believes and acts with integrity. You lead your
team to excel and practice quality in their craft.
Note the absence of characteristics that resemble a command
and control orientation. While knowledgeable command is
essential in a crisis, security is effective only when it is embedded
in business process and ownership for secure operations is
shared with business unit managers and an aware employee
population. Your perceived authority is embedded in your corpo-
rate accountability; and, when security assumes a posture of
“corporate cop,” you may stray from being seen as a teammate
and enabler. Leadership that proactively aligns security with
business objectives and brand protection will add measurable
value and have strong management support for its programs.
Keys to Organizational Influence and Impact
If we were able to boil success down to a few factors that
will most likely assure your ability to be an influential leader
and make results happen because you have a responsive audi-
ence, consider the following (which we will discuss further in
Chapter 5, “Marketing the Security Program to the Business,”
and Chapter 6, “Organizational Models”).
1. A framework of security policies explicitly endorsed by senior
management—Sell a manageable set of high-level policy
statements to senior management. For example, “We will
provide safe and secure workplaces for our employees and
visitors.” Engage the CEO and others. Who can argue against
that statement, which is based in employment law? The
follow-up question is, what programs at what cost will
ensure that this policy will be met? You may find yourself in
a culture that abhors the perceived strictures of “policy.” In
that case, label these factors as business principles, jurisdic-
tions, guidelines, or program objectives. The point is that
you get buy-in for those few high-level statements that
enable goal-setting and a foundation of expectations. See
“Leadership is the art of accomplishing more than the science of management says is possible.” —Former secretary
of state Colin Powell
Chapter 2 SECURITY LEADERSHIP 21

Chapter 6, “Organizational Models,” for a more complete
discussion on this factor.
Why is this valid?
An accepted policy framework articulates management
expectations. As such, it supports your definition of the
work to be performed in order to deliver on each one. An
understanding of the work supports defensible alterna-
tives to staffing and budget development.
2. A core management philosophy that holds line managers
accountable for protecting the firm—Security is everybody’s
job, and you are there to provide leadership, expertise, a
workable infrastructure, and the tools to enable line man-
agers to share this important responsibility. Furthermore,
management must understand that protecting the company
and its shareholders is everyone’s job.
Why is this valid?
If they expect you to protect the company, update your
resume. You are an enabler of their fiduciary responsibil-
ity to protect the shareholders of the company. You are
the expert, the first responder, but the rest of manage-
ment are the custodians of corporate assets.
3. A clearly established role in the corporate risk management
program—Risk is why they hired you. You know about risks
that the rest of the governance team likely hasn’t ever
considered. Get on the team and lead in your area(s) of
expertise. Use metrics to track trends and measure the
results of security strategies. Collaborate on solutions with
your colleagues.
Why is this valid?
Consider this: there is a high-level discussion of the risks
confronting the company and nobody thought to invite
you or ask for your input. “Security” is about the absence
of risk! Without your perspective, they don’t have an
actionable handle on risk.
4. A qualitative risk analysis and reporting program—Security
generates lots of data on a variety of risks. Organize it. Analyze
it. Learn what contributed to incidents and identify the
What tone has management set with regard to responsibility for managing risk? This notion of delivered and
accepted accountability is critical to any security executive’s success. Where the tone across the business is one of
shared responsibility and accountability, security becomes the navigator and guide, providing tools and leadership
while anticipating risk and being prepared.
22
Chapter 2 SECURITY LEADERSHIP

vulnerabilities. Inform management and identify what steps
should be taken to mitigate future problems. “Qualitative”
means your findings are actionable. This is where you learn to
influence managers and determine what their individual hot
buttons are in order to make results happen.
Why is this valid?
You cannot lead if you are not aware of what could hap-
pen, given the presence of vulnerability in business pro-
cess. You are not leading if you fail to understand how to
inform your various constituencies. This is about your
ability to influence policy and behavior with the quality
information you possess.
5. A
comprehensive
communication
and
risk
awareness
program—The notion of delegated responsibility for secure
operations is introduced above. This completes the circle by
assuring that corporate security takes what it learns and
passes it on to the accountable people who are in the posi-
tion to take action. Remember that communication is a two-
way street. Provide the means for comfortable reporting of
concerns by your constituents to your organization.
Why is this valid?
This closes the loop. You have a framework for expecta-
tions, the means to learn where the risks reside, a venue
to communicate your concerns and advice, and now you
need to give accountable personnel the tools to execute
their responsibilities. Your influence is measured by the
willingness of the business to understand these respon-
sibilities and to accept the work that supports the pro-
tection strategy.
6. Engagement of the C-suite—You have access to the top, you
see the results of your services or messages implicitly or
explicitly in business plans, and you see responsive behavior
from the top and elsewhere in the organization.
Why is this valid?
Without top management’s engagement, the security pro-
gram is an orphan.
7. The value of partnerships—You have positive relationships
with control groups (legal, HR, risk, and audit) and business
unit line management.
Why is this valid?
Alliances and collaboration with the governance team
yields far better knowledge of risk and maximizes the
potential for results. Partnering with line business man-
agers builds trust and enables the notion of shared
responsibility for asset protection.
Chapter 2 SECURITY LEADERSHIP 23

The Next Generation Security Leader
The Security Executive Council (SEC) polled successful secu-
rity managers—members and faculty—and discovered six fac-
tors that frame a security leadership profile (see Figure 2.1).
These are highlighted in the following discussion, which pro-
vides a comprehensive view of the knowledge, competencies,
and skills we bring to our role as business security leaders and
those we must cultivate to maximize our value and impact
within our organization. This picture graphically displays the
diversity and complexity of our leadership roles and challenges
us to evaluate our strengths and opportunities for growth.
Obviously, the nature of the businesses you serve will influence
your assessment, since some elements may be more critical to
success than others.
Government backgrounds, for example, provide knowledge
of
leadership,
the
legal
framework,
investigations,
and
responsiveness. Information technology (IT) security skills
help in protection of critical information in both digital and
printed formats. Business backgrounds help to align security
value and business goals. A career in corporate security
ensures a security leader’s intimate knowledge of a company.
Executive
leadership
skills
produce
a
focus
on
business
results. Awareness of emerging issues helps to maintain situa-
tional readiness.
How well do you and your staff measure up to the security
leader of the future? Try this self-test. Evaluate yourself against
each of the skills identified in Figure 2.1. Give yourself 3 points
for skills that you already possess (rate E for expert). Give your-
self 2 points for skills that you can brush up on pretty quickly
(rate A for adequate). For a skill that needs improvement, score
1 point (rate I for needs improvement). If there is a skill that
you have no experience with and know nothing about, mark
down a zero (rate M for missing).
When you finish count up your points. Give yourself an addi-
tional point, up to a maximum of 5 points, for every year of
experience you have in one of the following fields: law enforce-
ment, IT, business, and security.
Divide your score by 2 to get your “Next Generation” score.
Those scoring 90 to 100 points should consider themselves
ready to take on the challenges of 21st century security. A score
from 80 to 89 points limits the role and level of your position in
24
Chapter 2 SECURITY LEADERSHIP

Figure 2.1 The Next Generation Security Leader. Six factors that frame a security leadership profile.
Chapter 2 SECURITY LEADERSHIP 25

the organization. If you scored below 80, you may be risking
your future. You should take steps now to expand your range of
skills.
Highlights for Follow-Up
•
If you accept the leadership competencies discussed above,
where do you see your strengths and weaknesses? Which of
these represents your best opportunity for influence and
leadership in your first six months to a year on the job?
•
If you have arrived at this position on your own merits, you
know where you need to grow and how to commence lead-
ing while this growth unfolds. Find a mentor who knows the
business and has a reputation for being a real leader that
people want to follow. What characteristics does he or she
possess that you might emulate?
•
Keep your eye on the target. Listen and learn how to get
things done in your corporate culture. A successful security
program leverages results from its understanding of the
culture.
•
Never forget that those you lead are watching.
•
Where does the program stand with regard to the five keys to
leadership and influence? Which of these do you believe are
the most important for your business planning? Which are
most important for your personal development?
•
What did you learn about yourself and your needs from your
Next Generation score?
Key Terms
•
Effective leader
•
Core competencies
•
Security model
•
Communication policy
•
Next generation security leader
•
Team leader
•
Thought leader
•
Business enabler
THE BOTTOM LINE: Management involves power by position. Leadership involves power by influence.
26
Chapter 2 SECURITY LEADERSHIP

•
Risk management
•
Security policies
•
Framework
•
Qualitative analysis
•
Program management
•
Risk awareness
•
Security leadership
•
Leadership competencies
•
Organizational influence and impact
Chapter 2 SECURITY LEADERSHIP 27

3
RISK ASSESSMENT AND
MITIGATION
Introduction
If management, your directors, and insurers did not see the
need to manage the types of risk they see—under your watch—
you would not be here.
Business Value
Business unit management likely does not fully appreciate
the depth and breadth of risk that you will understand. Your
department’s programs will enable the business to do what
would otherwise be too risky. Measure and communicate that
value.
The Essentials
Depending on the scope of your security responsibilities,
there are several relatively common business-based vulnerabil-
ities and risk exposures that you should consider in your risk
assessment strategy:
1. Absence
or
weakness
of
effective
business
controls—
combined impact of employee empowerment, business veloc-
ity, and growth on reliability of controls and effective care
2. Ethical lapses by employees in key positions—maintenance
of reputation and avoidance of corporate liability
3. The corporation as a property owner—crime, workplace
violence, and premises liability
4. Business interruption—failure to plan and be effectively
prepared
5. Adequacy of logical and physical access controls—unautho-
rized access to our facilities and proprietary information
6. Connectivity and reliability of safeguards—the company’s
reliance on technology and critical pathways
7. Lack of business—process-based ownership of security
29

8. Globalization of the business—internationalization of risk
9. Corporate visibility—the company and key executives as
high-profile targets
10. Inadequate focus on security-related risk—maintenance of
awareness on risk dynamics
Assessing Viable Threats
You can find any number of well-done articles on threat
assessment. The challenge is defining which threats are real for
your organization now and based on where they are going in
their evolving business plan. Threat assessment is a critically
important product of the security organization, because nobody
else has a clue, and no one is doing it in your space. On-line
threat-reporting security resources are numerous, but they can
only generalize and do little that is specific to your company,
unless you have a tailored and contracted service at your
disposal.
Threat is the source of the risk. The diverse threats confront-
ing our businesses are dynamic, not static. They may be natural
events beyond our control, man-made errors, accidents, or
criminal acts, and there are deficiencies in your system of inter-
nal controls or other risky business practices. When we talk
about threats, we often hear, But it hasn’t happened here. This
may be true, but as you see in Figure 3.1, there are incremental
steps in threat likelihood, and the more exposed you are to
exploitable vulnerabilities, the greater the likelihood of a threat
Threat assessment–measuring likelihood
High
Low
LIKELIHOOD
How critical and valued are
the assets of concern?
This type of incident
has occurred here
We have exploitable
vulnerabilities that
are known
We have exploitable
vulnerabilities that
are not known
Our industry is a
victim elsewhere
Significant incident
history elsewhere
Minor incident
history elsewhere
No known incident
history elsewhere
Be very, very aware!
Be aware
Figure 3.1 A representation of the incremental steps in measuring threat likelihood.
30
Chapter 3 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MITIGATION

becoming a reality. That situation underscores the critical need
for on-going risk and vulnerability assessments, with particular
attention to the threat from the knowledgeable insider.
Vulnerability Assessment
Drilling down within risk assessment finds the real focus of a
follow-up strategy: nailing down how exposed or vulnerable a
critical process or asset is to compromise or loss. Vulnerabilities
are flaws in protection that may be exploited by an adversary,
or a set of conditions that contribute to protection system fail-
ure. If there is a single compulsory exercise for the asset custo-
dian and the security team, it is to have an on-going program of
identifying vulnerability to critical assets and business processes
from specified threats. It’s an interesting exercise to sit with a
business process owner and ask, “If you wanted to [name the
attack] this asset, how would you do it and avoid detection?”
The incident post-mortem is an ideal opportunity to identify
vulnerability with one very notable exception: it’s too late.
Vulnerability is broad in scope and may be measured out-
right or with opportunities for compromise estimated. Building
weaknesses are exploitable and measurable. Access to the asset
(s)
is
measurable.
Probability
of
detection
is
measurable.
Protection systems can be disarmed, bypassed, or simply over-
looked. People in key positions make mistakes, may be compro-
mised,
or
have
dishonest
objectives
of
their
own.
If
redundancies are not in place, you can measure the ability of
employee response to pre-planned events. You can apply covert
and overt tests to measure effectiveness of safeguards. In some
cases, you may want to employ trusted outside experts to test
your security measures under carefully controlled conditions.
Risk within business activities comes in many flavors. The
keys to controlling these varied risks are to understand the
source of the threat to specific assets, where the gaps in protec-
tion may be found, and what kinds of controls need to be in
place to address these vulnerabilities and mitigate these risks.
The probability of experiencing a major incident is primarily determined by the strength of the controls applied to an
environment. —Information Security Forum
Chapter 3 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MITIGATION 31

Board-Level Risk and Security Program
Response Research
Enterprise risk assessments (ERA) are becoming more com-
mon. Soon, every major corporation will have conducted an
internal review or will have engaged outside contractors to con-
duct an assessment. Inevitably, this assessment will be pre-
sented to the board of directors or the executive management
team. Internal executives will be assigned to each risk and will
be required to report periodically to the board on progress to
mitigate the risk. This pattern is being repeated across the
United States and across the globe, and both members and
non-members of the Security Executive Council have observed
it. The Council wanted to address this trend by creating a tool
that members could use in presentations to the board of direc-
tors or senior management.
This project has resulted in a successful graphic representa-
tion of the board-level risks an organization may face, and the
security processes and programs designed to mitigate them.
The
Board-Level
Risk
Diagram
sample
that
follows
(see
Figure 3.2) facilitates executive management’s understanding of
board risk and the role security plays in reducing it.
The methodology employed involved numerous completed
ERAs provided by both member and non-member companies,
and several other ERA examples were found through research.
All ERAs were analyzed for commonality, and their content
was categorized into eight Council-identified board-level risk
topic areas. Faculty and staff were asked to review the risk
areas and report on any security programs or services provided
to their companies, which would remove or reduce the board-
level risk.
The Board-Level Risk Diagram can be modified to present
the overall ERA security response to the board in a succinct and
quickly understandable manner. The concept chart can also be
used to quickly position the value of security on par with any
other staff group addressing major risks to the corporation. It
may also be used for staff and departmental training and aware-
ness of the board-level risks, as well as the role the department
plays removing or reducing them. For companies in which an
ERA has not been completed, security directors have reported
this chart has been effective in establishing security as a leader
in identifying and communicating how departmental services
add to board-level value.
32
Chapter 3 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MITIGATION

A Risk Quantification Process
Having a list of security-related business risks and their asso-
ciated countermeasures is an essential part of the risk manage-
ment process. However, understanding how to quantify those
risks to set priorities is equally important. The flow chart in
Figure 3.3 lays out one approach to the analytical process asso-
ciated with risk exposure quantification.
In Step 1 of the diagram in Figure 3.3, the process com-
mences with an inventory of business risk information available
from internal risk management (values and volume impacts,
and insurance data), industry risk data, security’s risk and haz-
ard data, known incident data from all governance functions,
and incident post-mortem outputs. These profiles enable selec-
tion of a more likely set of single-incident risk scenarios. Based
on their unique consequences, you now have one or several
types of incidents you can value.
Sample of SEC Security
Strategies/Risk Mitigation Tools
Security Measures
and Metrics
ANY COMPANY
Measures of Control
Corporate Misconduct
Brand Risks
Insider Risks
Business/Technology
Compliance and
Regulations
Geographical/
Organizational
Due Diligence/Access
Financial
Business Continuity
and Resiliency
Reputation and Ethics
Human Capital
Information
Legal
Reputation/Compliance and Liability
New or Emerging
Markets for Business
Physical/Premises
and Product
50 ERA IDENTIFIED RISKS
COMMON IN 18 SECTORS
BOARD LEVEL
RISK CATEGORIES
Response to Misconduct
Allegations
2007 Corporate
Governance Report
Security Awareness
Program Tool
Information Protection
Program
Regulations and Compliance
Management Tool
Forces of
Change Research
Comprehensive
Security Program
Figure 3.2 Solutions to Reduce Board-Level Risk. A graphical representation of the eight board-level risk categories.
Chapter 3 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MITIGATION 33

These scenarios are forwarded to the second step to postu-
late multiple factors related to the potential consequences and
impact of a single incident of the specified type. Estimates of
cost may be made for each scenario using a worst-case base-
line, such as total loss of a known valued asset, or a less-
consequential result, such as an outage for a specified time.
Impact costs may be estimated by engaging the business unit,
which typically has loss-impact data calculations as part of the
contingency planning baseline. Other estimates may be merely
logical plug-ins supported by prior-event data.
The
single-incident
cost
estimates
are
then
processed
through the filter of the effectiveness of the countermeasures
that are in place for each risk event. For example, backup
1- Input: Factor In Available Data
on Risk Potential
2- Input: Postulate and Assess
Single Incident Estimate of
Business Impact and Cost
Single Incident Scenarios
Replacement
Value
Asset Cost
Time Lost
Revenue Lost
Lost
Business
Capability
Competitive
Impact
Cost of
Investigation
and Litigation
Value of
Compromised
Data
Lost
Customers
and Sales
Legal Fees
Judgments
and Fines
Investigation
Cost
Business
values and
Volumes
Insurance and
Other Validated
Risk Data
Industry
Events
Security
Hazard
List
Risk
Incidents
Here
Risk Events
Expressed
in scenarios
Cost and
Value criteria
(single incident)
Likelihood and
Frequency
Calculations per
Event
Countermeasure
Effectiveness
Calculations per
Event
Risk
Exposure
Quantification
Exposure Reduction
Achieved Through
Countarm assurus
Impact
to single
Incidence Value
Incident
Post-
Mortems
3- Output: Calculate single incident
cost impact vs. likelihood and
countermeasure effectiveness
Figure 3.3 Risk Exposure Quantification Strategy—Process Flow. One approach to the analytical process
associated with risk exposure quantification.
34
Chapter 3 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MITIGATION

resources are in place to respond to a natural disaster outage,
and the time to recover may be reliably estimated through prior
tests. That recovery time and other impacts may also be reliably
cost estimated. You will find your CFO and risk management or
insurance offices most helpful in identifying insurance industry
data associated with various security incidents, scoping single
incident costs to risk impacts, as well as approaches to potential
cost to various security scenarios.
Likelihood of an incident is a measure of knowledge of your
vulnerability to specific breaches based on test data, known
downtimes, audit data on unresolved business process deficien-
cies, and increased frequency of similar events within your indus-
try or nearby. Effectiveness of countermeasures is also based on
test data. The known resilience or identified weaknesses of the
countermeasures available in your scenario will drive your likeli-
hood estimates. For example, what if this process were to postu-
late a much wider impact of the disaster that limited or
eliminated the backup capability in our outage scenario above?
You will find that your best likelihood measure used for
influential impact will be your periodic testing of the effective-
ness of various safeguards applied by your resources and those
employed within business units, particularly where they are
required by standard or policy. Several key areas of measure-
ment include:
•
the
perceived
value
or
attractiveness
of
the
object
of
protection;
•
the degree of probable success in penetrating a specific
countermeasure; and
•
the greater the knowledge of that vulnerability within the
population, the greater the likelihood of successful attack.
Each of these concepts may be verified by testing.
There are a variety of risk-quantification tools available
through risk-management organizations and vendors. This is
but one exercise that may be engaged in by a governance team
approach or in cooperation with the potentially affected busi-
ness units.
The bottom line is the need to understand the potential
impact of the higher-likelihood risk events in financial and
other relevant terms.
More
in-depth
discussions
may
be
found
in
the
ASIS
International General Security Risk Assessment Guideline1 and in
the Institute of Internal Auditors booklet Business Risk Assessment.2
1ASIS International, Alexandria, VA, 2003.
2David McNamee, Institute of Internal Auditors, Altamonte Springs, FL, October, 1998.
Chapter 3 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MITIGATION 35

The chart in Table 3.1, developed by Sandy Sandquist, direc-
tor of global security at General Mills, provides an excellent way
to spell out sets of risk scenarios and estimate impact in finan-
cial and operational terms. Use it to specify your estimate of
risks appropriate to your assessment of likely exposure to the
business. In this example, “High” is equal to or greater than
$100 million; “Medium” is between $10 and $100 million; and
“Low” is equal to or less than $10 million. Use different impact
values to suit your own risk concerns.
A Risk Management-Based Concept of
Operations
A simple and straightforward way to approach security risk
mitigation is to think of it in three progressive levels: anticipa-
tion, preparation, and execution.
1. Anticipation—Risk is dynamic. Perhaps more than another
business executive, the CSO is paid to anticipate risk, to
think and understand “what if,” and to have in place a credi-
ble program to qualify viable threats. This program involves
the following elements:
the ability to maintain an actionable threat profile utiliz-
ing credible local and international resources and assets;
the ability to install and maintain an integrated set of
security controls that provide real-time indications of
risk—key risk indicators (KRIs);
the ability to reliably document and analyze security/risk
events to identify and mitigate vulnerabilities and develop
improved response capabilities that are tracked and mon-
itored—key performance indicators (KPIs);
the ability to be thoroughly knowledgeable in the capabil-
ities and competencies of security assets; and
the ability to attract and retain a customer-responsive
cadre of protection assets.
2. Preparation—There are three ways we learn the presence of
risk: (1) an unanticipated event; (2) we probed and discov-
ered conditions that could result in an event, and we did not
follow-up; and (3) we probed, discovered, and closed the
gap. Credible anticipation imposes an obligation to be pre-
pared for the “what ifs.” Preparation involves, but is not lim-
ited to, the following:
the ability to influence the organization and its leadership
so that response capabilities are in place and tested;
36
Chapter 3 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MITIGATION

Table 3.1 Corporate Security Potential Impact/Cost
Corporate Security
Issues/Risks with Potential Impact Greater Than $X Million Prior to Any Mitigation Efforts
Major Issue/Risk
Select
Impact
Possible Outcome
Catastrophic loss of key
staff in single event
& High
& Medium
& Low
& Loss of key personnel
& Delay or loss of new product launch
& Lawsuits
& Loss of investor confidence
Terrorism—regional event
& High
& Medium
& Low
& Loss of use of business-critical facility and employee logistics
& Possible loss of employee lives
& Loss of regional workforce
& Evacuation of all nearby businesses/residences
& Long recovery time with major business interruption
Workplace violence
& High
& Medium
& Low
& Possible loss of employee lives
& Temporary interruption with certain products if facility is sole
supplier
& Negative publicity
& Adverse litigation
Nationalization of
operation (international)
& High
& Medium
& Low
& Loss of use of production facility
& If plant is sole supplier, out of market with certain products
& Loss of business with minimum compensation
& Loss of proprietary business process to competition
Product tampering resulting
in death or serious injury
& High
& Medium
& Low
& Negative brand impact
& Possible loss of employee lives
& Possible loss of life by general public
& Public lawsuits
& Negative publicity
Product tampering—non-
Company product but in
associated category
& High
& Medium
& Low
& Negative brand impact
& Possible loss of life
& Slow business process recovery
& Public lawsuits
& Negative publicity
Theft and publication of
customer lists with private
data
& High
& Medium
& Low
& Negative brand impact
& Cost to protect customer privacy going forward
& Adverse litigation
& Regulatory sanctions
Loss of IT systems from
malicious act
& High
& Medium
& Low
& Interruption to market share
& Major impact on manufacturing, sourcing, and sales
& Loss of investor confidence
& Major cost of alternate site and restoration of data
Chapter 3 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MITIGATION 37

an integrated set of security elements keyed to the unique
and likely threats previously identified;
the ability to train the dispersed safety or security assets
to a level consistent with planned standards of incident
response; and
the ability to objectively test all critical defenses and
response capabilities and implement corrective actions.
3. Execution—This phase of the concept of operations relies on
the tested competence of security assets you have estab-
lished to respond to risk events:
the ability to lead as a risk event unfolds;
the ability to respond in such timely and effective ways
that the risk event is mitigated with minimal loss or dam-
age to corporate assets;
the ability to learn from the execution phase, to confirm
what was anticipated, or to understand why contributing
vulnerabilities were not previously identified; and
the ability to examine objectively plans, preparations, and
response.
Highlights for Follow-Up
•
Understand the risks you own and those in which you share
responsibility for some phase of management or elect to
defer.
•
Anticipate! Understand the potential source of the risk
event(s) and how it would likely occur.
•
Be aware of the impacts of emerging economic and strategic
pressures on the business, and how developing corporate
plans may impact the risks you should understand better
than others in the management team.
•
Advertise advice and requirements.
•
Establish ownership for risk management and response.
•
Offer assistance in installing and training on protection mea-
sures. Test their effectiveness frequently. Provide feedback on
THE BOTTOM LINE: You have a broad and unique view of enterprise risk. Link that knowledge to the business
alignment strategy, educate, and then take steps to ensure that your ability to respond is competent and prepared.
When there is an obligation to address resource reductions in response to adverse business conditions, use your
knowledge to establish a threshold of risk tolerance, below which you no longer have confidence that the company
is prepared to respond to what you believe has an increasing potential to occur.
38
Chapter 3 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MITIGATION

results. Escalate if you don’t see measurable improvement,
then repeat the test.
•
Establish key performance indicators appropriate to your
programs.
Key Terms
•
Risk assessment
•
Risk mitigation
•
Effective business controls
•
Corporate liability
•
Security program elements
•
Response research
•
Vulnerability assessment
•
Risk quantification
Chapter 3 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MITIGATION 39

4
STRATEGIC SECURITY
PLANNING
Introduction
Would you invest in a business that lacked well-established
goals and/or failed to have a thorough understanding on where
it was going and what it is going to take to get there?
Management has the same question for the security program.
Business Value
Successful businesses organize and deliver their products
and services based on a combination of long-term and annual
plans. These plans seek to maximize profit for the shareholders
(or achieve some specific objective) while minimizing risk.
Absent a plan effectively aligned with the strategic objectives
and likely risks confronting the enterprise, how can manage-
ment decide to allocate scarce resources to what will be seen as
a cost center?
The Essentials
Today, our needs are greater than ever to create and enhance
business goals to reduce costs, to increase profitability, and to
protect brand image. Moving from traditional security thinking
to business leadership thinking has already begun.
There are several business drivers that should frame your
strategic philosophy, including:
•
Security issues are clearly on the CEO’s and board of direc-
tor’s agendas. Security executives must thoroughly under-
stand
business
strategy
and
the
place
of
the
security
program in that strategy.
•
Traditional security programs and informational security
programs are seeing an increase in convergence in their goal
41

to protect, prevent, and mitigate risks; the issue is not com-
petition but coordination.
•
Security leaders engaged in turf battles run the risk of being
viewed as short-sighted and not thinking strategically or in
the company’s best interest.
•
Global supply chains, business open architecture,1 just-in-
time parts and services delivery, and outsourcing all point to
changing security risks and thinking beyond the fence. Your
company’s plant behind the fence can be secure, but if sup-
plies are disrupted or your partner cannot provide con-
tracted support, the safe plant becomes vulnerable.
•
The creation of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
and the increased focus on private sector security standards
will result in a significant growth in regulations impacting
corporate security departments for many years.
•
Brand exposure is increasing in importance. Adverse public-
ity from clients, customers, the media, or regulators can
reduce shareholder value, result in lost contracts, reduce
revenue, and result in senior management termination.
However, a good investigative capability can turn negative
client or customer issues into positive events by a solid,
timely,
professional
response.
Mitigation
of
the
risk
is
critical.
The goals of security are to:
•
develop
and
manage
security
programs
that
enhance
profitability;
•
make the company a tougher competitor;
•
enhance the company’s ability to reduce shrinkage, reduce
attrition of employees, and create a safer, more efficient
workplace;
•
assist in the creation of “peace of mind” for the consumer,
employees, directors, and investors; and
•
be in continuous dialogue with our business leaders to
ensure that security strategy complements business strategy
in order to accomplish the company’s goals.
If success only comes from the security department acting in
isolation, it does nothing to ensure the company’s future. The
linkage to the business side is crucial. A successful set of secu-
rity programs must “bring value” to the company, or they will
be viewed only as a cost by business leaders.
1Business open architecture refers to shared systems, customers, partnerships,
controls, etc.
42
Chapter 4 STRATEGIC SECURITY PLANNING

Strategic Security Program Focus
When developing a security program, the following must be
considered:
•
The security program aligns with business objectives.
•
The benefits of the security program outweigh the cost of
the program.
•
Security costs and performance are managed and measured
on a program basis.
•
Relevance is articulated.
•
Programs are constantly evolving.
•
Cross-pollination is an opportunity for improvement.
Figure 4.1 displays the high-level strategic management pro-
cess and the more action-oriented steps in security planning
and program development.
Using this model of understanding strategic management,
the work has been broken down into six major milestones:
Milestone
Maps to
Start-up
Strategic analysis
Examine existing strategy
Strategic analysis
Compare best practice
Strategic analysis
Strategic options
Strategic choice
Strategy and road map
Strategic implementation
Close down
Strategic implementation
Critical Business Structure
and Processes
Identify Strengths,
Weaknesses and Gaps
Generation of
Strategic Options
Evaluation of
 Options
Selection of
Strategy
Resource and Budget
Planning
Organization
Structure
Strategic
Choice
Strategic
Implementation
Strategic
Analysis
Expectation and
Objectives
People, Processes and
System 
Figure 4.1 Strategic Management Process. The high-level strategic management process and the more action-
oriented steps in security planning and program development.
Chapter 4 STRATEGIC SECURITY PLANNING 43

Some managers find it difficult to craft a way forward in mea-
surable steps. Milestones provide the navigation points from
start to finish in order to guide the plan’s progress. Milestones
must be related to the complexity, proposed duration, and
resource availability for each specific objective in the plan.
Eight Key Strategic Issues
The following eight key issues need to be addressed by the
strategy work:
1. Alignment of security strategy with organization’s business
objectives.
2. Risk appetite and attitude to protection and legislation.
3. Asset protection coordination and mutually supporting busi-
ness processes.
4. Approach to asset-protection investment.
5. Structure and organization of the corporate security group.
6. Future resources and skills mix.
7. Integration and assimilation of security strategy throughout
the organization.
8. Sustaining the security strategy.
The Security Planning and Program
Development Process
Look at Figure 4.2, which graphically displays the steps in a
strategic planning process. Adopting a model like this shows
that you have carefully selected a proven process to:
•
modify the security program to existing or new environments;
•
align services and support with business objectives;
•
validate and measure our results and value;
•
identify risks, get management input, and develop priorities
and consensus on risk mitigation; and
•
align services and support with business objectives.
Do you have a contingency plan for responding to management plans for incremental reductions in cost? Always
have a 10% plan, a 20% plan, and a 30% plan in your bottom drawer that you have developed with your
management team. Include impact assessments for specific line items you believe will increase business risk as a
result of security program reduction or elimination.
44
Chapter 4 STRATEGIC SECURITY PLANNING

If this process is new to the organization, you can add target
dates around the circle.
The security program targets the following six measures to
reduce risk:
1. assignment of security responsibility within the business
unit and site;
2. development of security policies, procedures, and guidelines;
3. employee security awareness, documentation, and training;
4. controlling access to people, property, product, information,
and facilities;
5. reporting
security-related
incidents
and
responding
to
reported incidents; and
6. annual validation of security systems and services.
Business Alignment and Demonstrating
Security’s Value
How effectively are we aligned with the businesses we serve?
In 2007, the Conference Board published a survey of several
Facility Security
Risk Assessment Senior Management Input
Country and Business Risk
Assessment
Regional/Area Facility Security
Risk Assessment
Control Assessment
Peer Company
Benchmarking Five to
Seven Companies
Security Options
Identify Security Vendors and
Service Agreements
Program Design
Facility Security
Risk Assessment Results
• Baseline Program
  Developed
• Resource Identified
• Services Developed
• Physical Control
• Procedural Controls
• Computer Security Controls
• Respond
• Correct
• Validate
• Monitor
• Direction
• Goals
• Legislation and Regulations
• FBI, Customer, DEA
• DHS and OSAC
• Emergency Response
• Personnel Protection
• Criminal Background Screening
• Controls Assessment Result
• Business Needs
• Identified Risks
Program Review
• Security Manager
• Local, Regional and
  Executive Management
Begin
Continue
IMPLEMENT
PROGRAM
Figure 4.2 Program Development and Business Alignment Process. A graphical representation of the steps in a
strategic planning process.
Chapter 4 STRATEGIC SECURITY PLANNING 45

hundred business executives that revealed a serious disconnect
between these business leaders and the value of the security
functions they perceived within their organizations. How can we
expect support for our programs, especially in the more challeng-
ing economic times, when many of our constituents believe we
bring no value to the bottom line?
There are multiple buckets of security-program objectives
and activity results that may be brought to the table to support
our alignment and value contributions. Consider these:
•
Increased level of protection with improved controls and less
cost: When we learn from incidents and develop improved
methods of protection, we can identify less labor-intensive
controls and innovative applications of technology.
•
Increased engagement of employees in securing corporate
assets: A more security-aware employee population enables
faster notification and improved engagement in protection.
Pushing security, awareness, and tools into the population
maximizes
protection
and
accountability.
Reductions
in
employee interaction with time-consuming security mea-
sures pay dividends in increased compliance.
•
Enhanced ability to satisfy customers with improved methods
of protection: Reduced risk to customers in sensitive transac-
tions and relationship management contributes to brand
loyalty and sales. A good example is in the resilience of pro-
tection measures around confidential customer information.
Without effective security tools, business could not do what
it does in cyberspace. Advertised and demonstrably effective
security measures not only enable customer satisfaction but
may also be a draw for new customers and sales. Being “the
secure choice” is a plus to the bottom line.
•
Increased recovery time to critical process interruption: Well-
planned and tested security and business continuity programs
reduce loss and enable faster recovery from an incident.
•
Reduced risk and increased integrity to revenue-generating
activities: Well-planned and integrated security capabilities
enable
profit
centers
to
conduct
their
activities
with
improved efficiency and less cost. Reduced notable audit
findings attributable to security defects build support for
measurably effective security controls. Pre-contract examina-
tion of risk potential in third-party vendor security measures
prospectively identifies vulnerabilities to enable favorable
contract terms and post-contract inspections, thereby reduc-
ing risk and consequence of loss.
•
Increased confidence in effectiveness and need for security
controls: Where integrated security measures succeed in
46
Chapter 4 STRATEGIC SECURITY PLANNING

preventing loss and reducing impact, and thus demonstrate
their value to the business, constituents understand and
lend support. Similarly, revenue-producing business activi-
ties benefit due to more efficient or constraining means of
protection.
•
Reduced risk of attack through more measurably effective pro-
tective measures: When security measures visibly succeed in
reducing risk, the cost of doing business is measurably
reduced through faster recovery and less cost of insurance.
Penetration testing yields data on safeguards effectiveness
and supports claims of reduced opportunity for attack.
Examination of incident trends, and probing post-incident
lessons learned produces metrics that enable affirmation or
redirection of internal controls, which then yield improved
risk-management practices.
Highlights for Follow-Up
•
Are your services seen as a cost or value center? Go back and
review the stakeholder statements you collected during the
Task Assessment in Chapter 1. Don’t rely on your frequent
customers, and look for feedback from executives where
security is less known.
•
What is your candid appraisal? If you have results that dem-
onstrate aligned value, how have you missed telling the
story? If you see a real lack of alignment with business objec-
tives, what steps might you take to better deliver?
•
How would you approach a proposal to outsource the cur-
rent portfolio of proprietary security services to achieve
potentially significant savings?
•
Do any of the alignment examples noted in this chapter res-
onate with you? Using these topics as a starter, how do your
security programs provide clear indications of alignment
with the business?
Key Terms
•
Strategic security plans
•
Minimizing risk
•
Business drivers
THE BOTTOM LINE: Your strategic plan is focused on two related targets—addressing risk and adding value.
Chapter 4 STRATEGIC SECURITY PLANNING 47

•
Strategic philosophy
•
Security planning
•
Program development
•
Security strategy alignment
•
Risk appetite
•
Legislation
•
Asset protection
48
Chapter 4 STRATEGIC SECURITY PLANNING

5
MARKETING THE SECURITY
PROGRAM TO THE BUSINESS
Introduction
Security is in the business of enabling enterprise asset pro-
tection. This involves engaging internal customers to accept
responsibility for protection. Just as the company requires a
marketing strategy, so too does the security organization. The
cornerstone of this strategy is the definition of the security
organization’s purpose and the policy framework for delivering
the work.
Business Value
A proactive marketing strategy informs the enterprise popu-
lation of its security-related responsibilities and the risks that
require their awareness and attention. “Selling” security under-
scores the reliance that the security organization has for aware
and engaged employees and maximizes the reach of the policy
infrastructure and its related safeguards.
The Essentials
Your unique perspective on risk requires a plan on how to
inform and engage employees, vendors, and others. Your culture
and internal communication infrastructure both provide direc-
tion on how to communicate the messages you deem timely
and essential.
A Marketing Strategy
The goals and related business objectives that follow in this
chapter offer multiple targets for your marketing strategy. Work
with your governance team colleagues to select content for the
49

strategy based on current risk exposure. If your company has a
corporate communications group, they can be very helpful in
crafting delivery tactics.
Don’t overdo it! Break rooms filled with security messages,
monthly brochures extolling good practices, or the corporate
intranet
constantly
barraging
employees
with
advice
and
admonitions are similar to watching ads on TV—we tune them
out. Pick your targets. If you know a business unit that is doing
a bad job at access control, tailor a program for them. Pick a
specific problem with security information that requires broad
engagement and deliver a message at desktop sign-on. Develop
an annual marketing plan that addresses the most risky issues
and those the population can impact with your well-crafted
messages. Avoid scare tactics; they invite less than serious
responses from employees. If you are heavily into outsourcing
of high-risk processes, engage the vendor with a program to
underscore their responsibilities to protect your assets. Make
every security employee or contractor representative a knowl-
edgeable sales agent.
Brand Recognition
Does your company’s mix of products and services imply
any measure of risk to the shareholders or the consumer popu-
lation? Are you moving into risky territory? Are you incredibly
dependent upon uptime reliability of online systems and pro-
tection of customer data? Are you in a “trust me” business? Is
product safety your middle name? Go to your marketing people
and find out what criteria they are using to poll customers on
brand recognition and expectations. Is there anything there that
could offer your programs an entre´e to supporting the reliability
of the brand message? This is about aligning your services with
business objectives.
When you craft your marketing strategy, you have to care-
fully consider how it reflects the picture of the brand your com-
pany is conveying. If their tagline is “Protecting your hard-
earned assets,” you might think about “Share the responsibility”
for the internal risk ownership message. Every company care-
fully develops and protects the image it conveys to the con-
sumer. Explore how your security programs fit with that
mission. Focus on how security programs might better enable
the business to convey a “secure” message to the customer
base. In these times, with the diversity of risk facing global busi-
ness, there may be multiple opportunities here.
50
Chapter 5 MARKETING THE SECURITY PROGRAM TO THE BUSINESS

The Mission Statement
A well-crafted mission statement allows you to focus the pro-
gram on more specific and action-oriented objectives. Engaging
and obtaining consensus from senior management on your
concept of mission enables buy-in and gives a basic structure to
security’s program plans. First, think about what makes your
company tick and how you want security to connect the brand
and its corporate objectives to enterprise success. Second, think
about how your mission statement can motivate the security
team and contribute to making the business more aware of
roles and responsibilities.
Policies and Business Practices
Many companies dislike the notion of policy, but they all
have a set of rules and formalized expectations, especially in
these times of regulatory and board-level oversight. Guidelines,
business practices, business objectives, or management principles
may be reasonable substitute terms in these environments and
may contain the essential expectations that serve to frame
implementing
procedures
and
the
security
programs
that
enable them.
Learning from experience is great. However, what is the real
cost of policy or procedure that has been created in response to cri-
sis or litigation? There are multiple benefits to a policy infrastruc-
ture accepted by senior management, including the following:
•
Policies establish the legal framework for the security pro-
gram. They become key components in the system of inter-
nal controls.
•
Policies communicate management’s approach to governing
the enterprise and define what behavior is and is not
allowed.
•
Policies
set
expectations,
clarify
roles,
and
establish
accountability.
•
A policy statement enables goal setting; compliance requires
planning and resource allocation. Thus, policies providing a
rationale for the security budget process.
•
Policies and related procedures provide a measure of protec-
tion from litigation.
Figure 5.1 offers several ideas for mission statements and
related high-level policies, and the eight high-level policy state-
ments form the framework of a comprehensive corporate secu-
rity program. Consider the implications of a CEO or senior
Chapter 5 MARKETING THE SECURITY PROGRAM TO THE BUSINESS 51

management team’s denying the validity of any of these, espe-
cially in these days of risk-sensitive boards of directors and
external regulators.
Security department’s mission
Enterprise protection policies
To add value to the business through the development and delivery of
cost-beneficial asset protection programs
To proactively focus on the identification and mitigation of risk
To seamlessy integrate security into business operations
To respond in a timely and effective way to incidents that
threaten the safety, security, integrity, or availability of the company’s assets
To conduct our security operation in a manner that
demonstrates the highest ethical and customer service standards
The company will maintain
safe and secure workplaces
for our employes and
invitees
The company will screen
the backgrounds of all
persons having logical
or physical access.
The company will
prospectively examine
business relationships
that may present
substantive risk.
Every manager will
plan for emergencies
that may impact
employee safety and
availability of critical
business resources.
The company will
analyze and communicate
risk-related information
to business units to ensure
awareness and accountability.
The company will maintain a
proactive program of crime
prevention and asset
protection.
The company will 
aggressively protect its
private information and all
processes associated with
its use, storage, and
destruction.
Access to the company’s
facilities and critical
systems will be closely
controlled by pre-approved
persons.
Figure 5.1 Security Department
Mission Statement. Several ideas
for mission statements and related
high-level policies.
Do you want to “sell” these high-level expectations? In your discussions with senior managers, ask them if they
accept the common-sense business principle embedded in each statement. You may get pushback on a couple, so be
prepared to discuss the risks and business consequences associated with the absence of some form of safeguards
like these.
52
Chapter 5 MARKETING THE SECURITY PROGRAM TO THE BUSINESS

Applying Standard Security Practices
to Business Objectives
Depending upon the internal business control orientation of
your company, security practices may be referred to as stan-
dards, procedures, guidelines, business practices, or whatever
term suits the culture. The point to be remembered is that high-
level policy or goal statements have to translate into elements of
work that can be planned, resourced, organized, and delivered.
Business Objective 1: To Proactively Identify and Monitor Risks to
the Security, Safety, and Continued Business Operations of the
Company.
To achieve business objective 1, the following standard prac-
tices should be implemented:
•
Assess risk to the assets and business activities of the com-
pany. This will include the clarification of the nature and
likelihood of the hazard event occurring and statements
of hazard consequences. A full threat evaluation for key
business processes and assets will identify the scope and
cost-effectiveness of possible countermeasures. Significant
expenditures will include a return-on-investment analysis.
•
Define the process relating to the evaluation of employee
and insider threats.
•
Monitor workplaces for hazards to health and safety.
•
Proactively identify risks of workplace violence.
•
Conduct a business-risk analysis for major disasters or other
business interruption scenarios.
•
Ensure that all investigations and incidents conclude with a
review, and that appropriate lessons are derived and fed
back into the business.
Business Objective 2: To Take Positive Actions to Provide a Safe
and Secure Place of Work for Our Employees and Visitors.
To achieve business objective 2, the following standard prac-
tices should be implemented:
•
Control access to company work and business space.
•
Apply
physical
security
measures
in
support
of
asset-
protection strategies.
•
Set guidelines for the use of manpower in a protective-
services role.
•
Plan and apply emergency services in support of employees’
safety and business continuity.
Chapter 5 MARKETING THE SECURITY PROGRAM TO THE BUSINESS 53

•
Define the minimum accepted security measures applicable
to the protection of critical business areas.
•
Define the minimum accepted level of security monitoring
of critical business assets.
Business Objective 3: To Take Appropriate and Cost-Effective
Measures to Secure Our Business Processes from Fraud and
Other Criminal Acts.
To achieve business objective 3, the following standard prac-
tices should be implemented:
•
Define the scope of proactive programs designed to ensure
timely reviews of current business processes. Measure and
add business controls that contribute materially to the early
identification and mitigation of fraud or other crimes.
•
Outline the role of security in the overall process of provid-
ing compliance to the U.S. Patriot Act and other regulations.
•
Outline the contribution that can be made by security to
customer identification programs and knowledge of your
customers’ requirements.
Business Objective 4: To Ensure that Our Staff and Others With
Free Access to our Property and Systems Meet the Highest
Standards of Integrity and Ethical Conduct.
To achieve business objective 4, the following standard prac-
tices should be implemented:
•
Define the process by which security provides timely support
to human resources for the process of pre-employment
background investigation for all new hires.
•
Define the extent to which background checks will be carried
out on persons with access to company space and systems
who are not full-time employees.
•
Define those activities that, in the domain of security, will
fall into the category of unethical conduct and practices.
•
Define the procedures and mechanisms by which company
employees and outsiders may report unethical behavior for
subsequent investigation.
Business Objective 5: To Put Appropriate Security Controls and
Mechanisms Into Place to Protect Our Private Information and
Systems Used to Process Such Related Data.
To achieve business objective 5, the following standard prac-
tices should be implemented:
54
Chapter 5 MARKETING THE SECURITY PROGRAM TO THE BUSINESS

•
Assure accurate identification by ensuring that each entity is
uniquely identified in all transactions and that we ask for
credentials.
•
Assure authentication by ensuring that identities are accu-
rately confirmed and credentials are verified.
•
Assure authorization by controlling and limiting access to
resources. Access is based on the concepts of “need to
know” and “appropriate to role.”
•
Assure
confidentiality
by
keeping
private
information
securely private. We can keep a secret.
•
Assure data integrity by maintaining proof that no unautho-
rized changes have been made and accurate records are kept.
•
Assure nonrepudiation by ensuring that parties are bound to
their actions—a deal is a deal.
•
Assure accountability by making sure actions are auditable—
we know who did what.
•
Assure effective administration by making sure all the prac-
tices listed above are carefully managed. It is people who
make or break security.
Business Objective 6: To Have Plans and Appropriately
Structured Business Resources to Maximize the Resilience of the
Company from Disasters and to Enhance the Recovery from any
Business Interruption.
To achieve business objective 6, the following standard prac-
tices should be implemented:
•
Define the scope and content of plans developed by business
units for the mitigation of damage in the event of a disaster
and the subsequent timely restoration of business.
•
Define the role of and give support from security to business
units in the planning and execution of business contingency
plans.
•
Define the scope of testing for and rehearsal of business con-
tingency plans.
•
Define the protection to be applied to critical business
resources against all forms of business interruption.
•
Define the minimum backup and standby facilities to be
prepared by business units for critical business facilities and
processes.
•
Define a standard security practice to outline the organiza-
tion, planning, training, and response actions to be taken in
support of safety issues in all occupied space.
•
Define a standard security practice to report the actual sta-
tus of testing and preparedness.
Chapter 5 MARKETING THE SECURITY PROGRAM TO THE BUSINESS 55

Business Objective 7: To Investigate Aggressively and Prosecute
Attempts or Acts of Crime Against the Company and Its
Resources.
To achieve business objective 7, the following standard prac-
tices should be implemented:
•
Outline the scope and responsibilities for investigation and
prosecution of all suspected criminal acts against the assets
of the company: human, physical, and intellectual.
•
Define the scope and procedures for recording, investigating,
and reporting to the appropriate authorities—or competent
bodies—criminal acts or suspected infringement of regula-
tory rules in the security domain.
Business Objective 8: It Is the Primary Responsibility of
Professional Security Staff to Plan, Manage, and Monitor
Security Practices, But it is the Responsibility of Every Member
of the Company to Positively and Responsibly Support Them and
for Managers to Ensure that Security Is a Normal, Everyday Part
of Managing the Business.
To achieve business objective 8, the following standard prac-
tices should be implemented:
•
Outline the responsibilities of managers and staff to report
suspected, intended, or actual acts of crime or security viola-
tions against or involving the company.
•
Define the responsibility of security to provide a proactive
program of security awareness, which will inform all employ-
ees of security risk and the steps they should take to assist in
the protection of corporate assets.
In evaluating the applicability of each of these practices, you
will see the clear implication that where management accepts
the high-level principle there are a series of corresponding busi-
ness
processes
that
enable
accomplishment
of
the
work.
Therein lies the essence of your business plan, the focus for
your financial requirements, and your marketing strategy for
engaging
business
units
in
their
responsibilities
for
asset
protection.
THE BOTTOM LINE: Leadership involves the power of leadership. Influence is shaped and focused by a
marketing strategy.
56
Chapter 5 MARKETING THE SECURITY PROGRAM TO THE BUSINESS

Highlights for Follow-Up
•
Has your security mission been articulated and accepted by
senior management?
•
What approach within your corporate culture would best
enable
implementation
of
a
set
of
high-level
security
policies?
•
Which standards or practices under the eight business objec-
tives is the security program currently performing? Which
ones do you think would be value-added for your program
and the company?
•
What constraints would exist for the implementation of each
one?
•
How might those barriers be overcome? Of those services
currently being delivered, to what extent are they at a stan-
dard of performance acceptable to you?
•
Are you satisfied that the security program is being effec-
tively marketed and sold within the company?
•
How are you measuring program acceptance or buy-in and
knowledge of shared responsibilities?
•
Where are the biggest gaps in the security program’s market-
ing strategy, and what would be required to fill these gaps?
Key Terms
•
Enterprise asset protection
•
Internal customers
•
Marketing strategy
•
Legal framework
•
Brand recognition
•
Mission statement
•
Policies and procedures
•
Internal controls
•
Governing the enterprise
•
Roles and accountability
•
Standard security practices
•
Business objectives
•
Appropriate practices
Chapter 5 MARKETING THE SECURITY PROGRAM TO THE BUSINESS 57

6
ORGANIZATIONAL MODELS
Introduction
As you move among your colleagues in other organizations,
you will learn quickly that there are no established security
model templates.1 History with regard to management’s view of
culture, acknowledgement of risk, regulatory influence, or cor-
porate whim will often determine reporting relationships and
the portfolio of programs assigned to a specific security respon-
sibility. When management decides to rearrange offices, we are
often caught up in the “who goes where” game. This is another
very good reason to have effective working relationships with a
variety of key senior managers. You never know who your next
boss might be.2
Business Value
Value lies in a combination of what works in the corporate
culture and the competencies that the incumbent security man-
ager brings to the table. It is likely that you will propose one
alignment of security functions early on and then discover
interdependencies that make more sense for proposals later on.
The value is in the wisdom of your rationale with regard to
improved cost and risk management, business alignment, abil-
ity to better enable the business to compete, or a combination
of these or other purely local objectives.
1Highly centralized organizations will tend to hold security policy, headcount, and
service delivery solid-line reporting to the chief security officer. A decentralized
model would tend to retain strategic security leadership, policy, and oversight in
headquarters while service delivery would be the responsibility of each applicable
business unit.
2Thus, the potential dilemma of “letting the chips fall where they may.” You may
conduct a sensitive investigation today that might shine a harsh light on a manager
who one day becomes your supervisor. So be it. If this manager fails to understand
your responsibility to corporate integrity, you should escalate when and if that
history impacts your performance or that of your organization. Carefully clarify the
history as the handoff takes place so you can gauge their objectivity.
59

The Essentials
As most practitioners know, there is no one “best” security
program, which is why we see so many variations based on sec-
tor, type of business, centralized versus decentralized, domestic
versus global, and so on. It is impossible to have one program
that is universally accepted as a best practice. However, by uti-
lizing the collective knowledge of the Security Executive Council
faculty and members, we have identified all the characteristics
that this group of successful practitioners, companies, and pro-
grams embody:
•
Baseline program elements, which define the program that,
members and faculty agree, should be in place to mitigate
major risks.
•
Business-aligned program elements, which faculty and mem-
bership define as programs that are above and beyond base-
line
and
unquestionably
add
measurable
value
to
the
company’s bottom line.
•
Program characteristics, which are the elements most fre-
quently identified in successful programs or that lead to the
success of programs and executive support. These character-
istics are most often the items included in benchmarking
studies, since they are readily observable and often most
similar in company sector comparisons.
Baseline Elements
Baseline
elements
for
consideration
should
include
the
following:
•
an
established
security
department
(internal
and/or
outsourced)
•
incident reporting
•
risk assessments
•
access control and site protection
•
information security
•
emergency response and disaster recovery
•
awareness and education
•
investigations
•
travel security
•
workplace violence
•
personnel screening, background investigations, and due
diligence
•
law enforcement liaison
•
product protection
60
Chapter 6 ORGANIZATIONAL MODELS

Program Characteristics
Some or all of the following characteristics should define
your security program(s):
•
risk-based
•
services correspond to board-level risks (BLR); risk commit-
tee ties to BLR
•
defined programs with comprehensive elements
•
programs have definitive costs and resource requirements
(e.g., full-time equivalents, or FTEs)
•
there is a positive correlation between the number of cata-
lysts that drive a program and program success:
•
regulatory driven
•
product driven
•
brand protection driven
•
incident driven
•
sponsor driven
•
geographically driven
•
corporate culture driven,
•
ROI/value driven
•
corporate security is the subject matter expert (SME) group
that provides risk mitigation-related consulting to the rest of
the organization
•
measure and communicate the impact and value of services
to the senior executive level of the organization
•
monitor and identify emerging security-related issues that
can significantly impact the organization; create and develop
strategies to mitigate the impact
•
consistently focus on services that positively impact the
financial business performance
•
effectively communicate to executive management the level
of residual risk they are accepting if the risks are not miti-
gated or transferred
•
both the risks and the risk mitigation strategies are well-
documented and transferable
•
validate strategies periodically through peer review
•
access to executive management and the board of directors
when necessary
•
consistent delivery in all markets, business units, and functions
•
demonstrate
leadership
and
receive
continual
executive
support
•
maintain an inventory of security key risk indicators
You may want to use this checklist to evaluate where your
program now stands and where your planning seeks to take it.
Chapter 6 ORGANIZATIONAL MODELS 61

These characteristics are also useful as a means to engage man-
agement on their vision for the security function and how these
capabilities and characteristics may enable security programs to
better contribute to company goals.
The Security Executive Council outlines five levels of matu-
rity
for
the
corporate
security
program
(see
Figure
6.1).
Comprehensive security programs start at Level 4.
What Organizational Model Works Best in
Your Company
The illustration in Figure 6.2 provides a representation of the
potential mix of services in a corporate-wide security program
potentially representing Level 4 or better. Within a box of global
business risk, we array a perimeter of global response services
and an inner core providing a wide array of security programs
aligned against current threats and global business risks. No
one is favored over another, since many risk profiles, cultural
influences, and demonstrated competencies of the incumbent
security executive will define the configuration that best serves
the company. As seen in the response to 9/11 or after a specific
legislative or regulatory initiative, events will often determine
placement and portfolio of services assigned to the security
organization(s).
Alternative Organizational Models
The illustration in Figure 6.3 represents one example of the
diverse range of services that may be found under the “corpo-
rate security” umbrella. Here we have a set of core services
existing within a global risk framework and surrounded by a
perimeter of proactive security operations that may be proprie-
tary or contractual. Ownership of any of these services may be
1. Start-up or initial service
2. Repeatable, consistent service
3. Defined/documented service
4. Enterprise-wide integration and
5. Innovation to meet business
    transformation
Lev e l s
Lev e l s
Figure 6.1 Maturity of the Corporate Security Program. The five levels of
maturity for the corporate security program.
62
Chapter 6 ORGANIZATIONAL MODELS

The Global Business Risk Environment
Physical/Operational Security and First Response
Other unique
Background
Vetting
Corporate
Safety
External
Investigations
and Fraud Risk
Management
Crisis Management
and Business
Continuity Planning
Internal Investigations
and Compliance Activities
Executive Protection and Offshore Risk Assessment
Security
Awareness
Information
Risk
Management
Supply
Chain
Risk Mgt.
3rd Party
Due Diligence
Risk Reviews
Corp.
Aircraft
Figure 6.2 The Global Risk
Environment. The potential mix
of services in a corporate-wide
security program.
?
Model defined by
culture and management
assessment of risk
C-Level Executive
CSO
Leadership of Integrated
Portfolio of Security Services
C-Level Executive
CSO
CISO
Investigations
and Physical
Security
Information
Security and
Business
Continuity
Facility Management
Security Management
Physical Security
Programs
Security Programs
Consistent with Corp. Policy
Security Director
General Auditor or
HR Executive
CIO or other
C-Level Exec.
Corp.
Security
Committee
CSO
Defined Security Missions
CISO
Figure 6.3 Alternative Organizational Models. One example of the diverse
range of services that may be found under the “corporate security” umbrella.
Chapter 6 ORGANIZATIONAL MODELS 63

centralized or distributed across business-unit activities or gov-
ernance functions. Using this illustration as a jumping off point,
we cannot possibly encompass the inventory of organizational
models that may be reflective of the diverse cultures and risk
profiles represented in the readership of this book. Perhaps
there is a challenge in that lesson that encourages a serious
evaluation of the mix of services appropriate to a service model
in your organization.
Consolidated Service Model
Where an organization adopts an approach that desires to
assure that corporate security responsibilities are unified under
an accountable chief security officer (CSO), the example in
Figure 6.4 is one of a consolidated or converged security organi-
zation consistent with a CSO’s portfolio of responsibilities.
Seriously Explore the Potential Advantages
of a Security Committee
It should be evident that security programs are interdepen-
dent and benefit from (if not rely on) strategic planning and
program integration under single-executive management. This
Security Awareness
Security
Operations
Business
Operations
Protection
Crisis
Management
North American
Operations
International
Operations
Cyber Incident
Response
Cyber
Investigations
Internal
Investigations
Fraud Risk
Management
Background and
Due Dilligence
Investigations
Corporate
Contingency
Planning
Information
Security
Services
Infrastructure Risk
Management
Corporate
Investigations
Security Committee
CSO
Figure 6.4 The Consolidated
Service Model. An example of
a consolidated or converged
security organization
consistent with a CSO’s
portfolio of responsibilities.
64
Chapter 6 ORGANIZATIONAL MODELS

fact argues in compelling ways for a full-service corporate secu-
rity organization. If they are under separate organizational func-
tions and there is no established means to share and analyze
risk data, a consolidated view of security-related risk will be
lost. The resulting picture of risk is likely to be very different
from one that emerges from a single, uncoordinated source.
This is too often a difficult lesson learned from tragic or
business-threatening circumstances.
If the consolidated model is not adopted, a security commit-
tee should be established and chartered by the CEO or COO
and supported by a corporate board of directors. Membership
should include all senior executives engaged in managing the
governance infrastructure and at least one senior executive
from a business line. Where security programs are administered
internally to a business unit (fraud risk management, business
continuity planning, and distributed information security func-
tions are examples), they should be represented as well. If more
broadly chartered, as with a governance committee, a security
subcommittee should be considered to more clearly gather and
analyze risk exposure data unique to their functions. Typical
membership of the security committee would include the chief
security officer (CSO) and senior management of corporate
security, the chief information security officer (CISO), the chief
auditor, general counsel, the chief risk officer, and the HR
employee relations designee engaged in business conduct mat-
ters. A senior business line executive with more extensive risk
exposure is a good candidate as well.
The business of the security committee should be to develop
a set of results-oriented measures and related metrics that
achieve the following:
•
Assist the board and senior management in understanding
security-related risk and framing the parameters of risk
tolerance.
•
Ensure that the dots are being effectively connected with
regard to a reliable picture of risk exposure.
•
Enable follow-up recommendations and actions and track
the results of risk-mitigation activities.
•
Provide a framework for assessing security’s value as a core
element of business strategy in an increasingly risky world.
Unified Risk Oversight
A particularly responsive way to effectively comply with the
mountain of legislation, regulation, and voluntary guidelines—let
Chapter 6 ORGANIZATIONAL MODELS 65

alone to ensure cost-effectiveness in meeting the dynamics of
business security threats—is to approach it in the context of uni-
fied risk oversight, which is a method of approaching risk
whereby the corporate risk is identified by a team of executives
or managers who represent the company’s various business
units, then manage with the best interests of the business and its
goals in mind. By “corporate risk” we mean not just the compiled
risks of individual business units, but the new risk picture cre-
ated when different departments’ risk considerations are brought
together and compared, combined, and prioritized. When risk is
managed by this method, all decisions to transfer, avoid, mitigate
or accept risk are made in full consideration of their impact on
all business units. This means not every decision will reflect
what you may feel is the best option for security, but every deci-
sion will take security into account and seek to provide the best
possible outcome for the business as a whole.
Access Is the Fundamental Essential
Regardless of the configuration of reporting and alignment,
security management must be able to have unfettered access to
the CEO and other key executives. Whether for routine updates
or crisis management, translation through multiple layers of
superiors will significantly inhibit awareness of risk, decision-
making, and the perceived value of security. There is no set or
best model for reporting other than to state clearly that you
need to report to someone who provides you with supportive
access to the top. If your important messages are being choked
off or unduly edited, you need to find a host who is secure in
his or her job and accepts the importance of your role in the
governance infrastructure. Is there a “best” home? No, it
depends on your culture and corporate reporting desires. There
are as many combinations out there as there are corporate
structural models, which are most often influenced by how the
top sees your role in the risk management priority scheme.
Several potential organizational models are displayed in the
following discussion. No one is favored over another since
many risk profiles, cultural influences, and demonstrated com-
petencies of the incumbent security executive will define the
configuration that best serves the company.
A Corporate Security Work Breakdown Structure
Regardless of how your organization decides to align security
programs organizationally, there is a significant inventory of
66
Chapter 6 ORGANIZATIONAL MODELS

services typically found in one degree or another in most global
businesses. Table 6.1 is a representative listing of work elements
involved in the administration of a full-service corporate secu-
rity function. Note that the list of tasks only delegates a few
levels downward. If you were to break each of these activities
down to a full work structure, it would take several pages. The
point is to understand the complexity of every work activity
that you propose, may accept, and adopt. It’s all about the rele-
vance of the work to mitigating the identified risk(s), and the
time each activity takes to accomplish at a level of targeted
competence. Time is money, and that time must be measured
against the return on managed risk.
“Rightsizing”
Periodic adjustments in the expense column are inevitable.
Stock analysts watch the quarterly numbers, and the typical
corporate move when those numbers fail to meet expectations
is to slash expenses. The further you are from the customer, the
more likely your budget will be targeted. This is the time when
we are clearly seen as “cost” centers. Always have a 10% to 20%
downsized plan in your file for when the call comes.
Table 6.1 is a good starting point for the exercise. Table 1.2 in
Chapter 1 outlines the perceived benefits of corporate security
programs and should support the value measures in Table 6.1.
Those services that have a clear legal or enterprise protection
requirement need to be protected. On the other hand, you will
always have some measure of “nice to have” services in the
portfolio that will be the first candidates for cuts. Management’s
expectation will be firm, but you still need to have the opportu-
nity to make your case on where cuts in a lean budget will
unnecessarily expose the company to unacceptable risks. Be
prepared to demonstrate with your risk assessment the poten-
tial impact of specific cuts.
A modified version might be to replace the “Xs” with head-
count
increments.
For
example,
Plan
and
Program
Development might be 1.75 full time equivalents (FTEs). This
will serve as a high-level staffing model of sorts and ensure the
program is properly balanced.
How This List Might Be Useful
As you plan or assess your program, you need to think about
the range of activities associated with the work you deem
important. Programs are comprised of subactivities, all of which
Chapter 6 ORGANIZATIONAL MODELS 67

Table 6.1 Full Service Corporate Security Work
Functions
Responsibilities for
Primary Corporate Security
Services
Where is there Clear Value in the Service?
Security Program
Element
Enterprise
Required
Bus. Risk
Mitigation
Life
Safety
Regulatory
or Legal?
Volume
Related?
Cost
Mgt.?
1. Program Administration
1.1 Budget and finance
X
X
1.2 Plan and program
development
X
X
X
1.3 Policy and standards
X
X
X
X
1.4 Personnel management
X
1.4.1 Performance
measurement
X
X
X
X
X
1.4.2 Personal development
X
X
1.4.2.1 Core competency
analysis
X
X
X
1.4.3 Job analysis and
recruiting
X
X
1.4.4 Skills training
X
X
X
X
X
1.4.4 Time tracking
X
1.5 Data analysis and reporting
X
X
X
X
1.5.1 Lessons-learned analysis
X
X
X
X
1.5.2 Management reporting
X
X
X
X
1.5.3 Trend analysis and
metrics
X
X
X
X
X
1.5.4 Specific incident analysis
X
X
X
X
X
1.6 Inspection and review
X
X
X
X
X
1.7 Contract management
X
X
2. Technology Management
2.1 Research and development
X
2.2 System design guidelines
X
X
X
X
X
2.2 Project management
X
X
2.3 Equipment procurement
X
X
2.3.1 Inventory management
X
X
(Continued )
68
Chapter 6 ORGANIZATIONAL MODELS

Table 6.1 (Continued)
Responsibilities for
Primary Corporate Security
Services
Where is there Clear Value in the Service?
Security Program
Element
Enterprise
Required
Bus. Risk
Mitigation
Life
Safety
Regulatory
or Legal?
Volume
Related?
Cost
Mgt.?
2.4 System design and
engineering
X
X
X
X
X
X
2.5 System installation
X
X
X
X
X
2.5.1 System maintenance
X
X
X
X
X
X
2.6 Fire and life/safety systems
X
X
X
X
X
3. Access Administration
3.1 Logical access administration
X
X
X
X
3.2 Physical access administration
X
X
X
X
X
3.2.1 Credentials and badging
X
X
X
X
3.3 Vendor/other special access
administration
X
X
X
X
4. Risk Management
4.1 Single point of failure
analysis
X
X
X
4.2 Alarm abatement
X
X
X
X
X
X
4.3 Vulnerability, strengths,
weaknesses, opportunities,
and threat analyses
X
X
X
X
X
4.4 Risk/cost analysis
X
X
X
X
4.5 Risk reporting and metrics
X
X
X
X
X
X
4.6 Risk mitigation activities
X
X
X
X
X
X
4.6.1 Fraud prevention
X
X
X
4.6.2 Practice risk identification
X
X
X
X
4.6.3 After-action review
process
X
X
X
X
X
4.6.4 Life and safety program
X
X
X
X
X
X
4.6.5 Alarm monitoring
X
X
X
X
4.6.6 Central dispatching
X
X
X
X
4.6.7 Emergency management
X
X
X
X
X
X
4.6.8 Computer virus response
X
X
X
(Continued )
Chapter 6 ORGANIZATIONAL MODELS 69

Table 6.1 (Continued)
Responsibilities for
Primary Corporate Security
Services
Where is there Clear Value in the Service?
Security Program
Element
Enterprise
Required
Bus. Risk
Mitigation
Life
Safety
Regulatory
or Legal?
Volume
Related?
Cost
Mgt.?
4.6.9 Response to computer-
based threats
X
X
X
X
X
4.6.10 Executive protection
program
X
X
X
X
5. Investigation
5.1 Background investigation
X
X
X
X
5.2 Due diligence examination
X
X
X
X
X
5.3 Criminal investigation
X
X
X
X
X
5.4 Incident response
X
X
X
X
X
X
5.4.1 Incident reporting
X
X
X
X
X
5.5 Sensitive case administration
X
X
X
X
X
5.6 Case management
X
X
X
X
5.6.1 File management
X
X
X
X
5.7 Law enforcement liaison
X
X
5.8 Workplace violence threat
assessment
X
X
X
X
X
5.9 Cyber incident investigation
X
X
X
6. Risk Communication and Business Unit Skills
6.1 Measures and metrics
X
X
X
X
X
X
6.2 Employee security orientation
X
X
X
6.3 Security communication
X
X
X
6.4 Business unit communication
X
X
X
X
X
6.5 Security committee liaison
X
X
X
X
6.6 Information security skills
development
X
6.7 Development of security
awareness material
X
X
X
6.7.1 Security awareness
program
X
X
X
6.8 Fraud prevention training
X
(Continued )
70
Chapter 6 ORGANIZATIONAL MODELS

Table 6.1 (Continued)
Responsibilities for
Primary Corporate Security
Services
Where is there Clear Value in the Service?
Security Program
Element
Enterprise
Required
Bus. Risk
Mitigation
Life
Safety
Regulatory
or Legal?
Volume
Related?
Cost
Mgt.?
6.9 Floor warden training
X
X
X
X
X
6.10 Business continuity training
and awareness
X
X
X
X
7. Business Contingency Planning
7.1 Emergency notification listing
X
X
X
X
X
7.2 Plan development and
maintenance
X
X
X
X
X
7.2 Plan review and
administration
X
X
X
X
7.3 Business function criticality
lists
X
X
X
X
X
7.4 Plan testing
X
X
X
X
X
7.5 Alternate site support
X
X
X
7.6 Crisis management testing
and maintenance
X
X
X
X
8. Information Security Administration
8.1 Information security
consulting
X
X
8.2 Information security
engineering
X
X
8.3 Proprietary Information
Program administration
X
X
X
X
8.4 Information security risk
assessment
X
X
X
X
8.5 Compliance monitoring
X
X
X
X
8.5.1 Safeguards installation
and maintenance
X
X
X
X
A representative listing of work elements involved in the administration of a full service corporate security function.
Chapter 6 ORGANIZATIONAL MODELS 71

involve elements of cost for a person’s time or other resources.
Why is this activity important? Where is the anticipated value?
What business objective drives the need for these resources to
be allocated? Each of the columns identifies a potential busi-
ness driver such as a business-directed activity, risk manage-
ment, activity volume, the need to manage cost, or a legal
requirement. Depending on your industry, corporate mission,
and resource management priorities, you may want to modify
the business drivers as well as the unique activities to better tai-
lor this list to your needs.
Use this higher-level checklist in your assessment of status
and planning for program development.
Highlights for Follow-Up
•
Using whatever criterion you believe is appropriate to your
company, how would you rate your ability to access senior
management for nonemergency communications?
•
Do you believe your current organizational model yields the
best results for influence and senior management access?
Why or why not? If not, what would be required to make this
model more impactful?
•
If one does not currently exist, would a security committee
work in your company? If so, how might it be organized and
sold?
•
How does your management react to the receipt of bad
news? How does this or other factors influence your prefer-
ence regarding placement of the security organization?
•
Considering Table 6.1, do you accept the value columns as
appropriate to your organization? If so, how would you check
the appropriate line of work? If not, which ones would you
include?
Key Terms
•
Organizational model
•
Alternative organizational models
•
Consolidated services model
•
Unified risk oversight
•
Program characteristics
THE BOTTOM LINE: Organize your resources and services for responsiveness to risk and clear connection to
your customers.
72
Chapter 6 ORGANIZATIONAL MODELS

•
Baseline elements
•
Business-aligned security program
•
Global risk environment
•
Regulatory driven
•
Product driven
•
Incident driven
•
Governance committee
•
Program administration
•
Technology management
Chapter 6 ORGANIZATIONAL MODELS 73

7
REGULATIONS, GUIDELINES,
AND STANDARDS
Introduction
Since 9/11 virtually every industrial sector and related regu-
latory agency has been actively examining potential vulnerabil-
ities to terrorism in its many forms and consequences. The
response has been a virtual glut of regulations and security
guidelines.
Business Value
Security executives are expected to be knowledgeable of the
potential impacts of security-related legislation and resulting
regulations. This enables them to advise management and
applicable trade associations on political, legal and economic
strategies. They also need to develop plans to support cost-
effective compliance.
Regulations are often enacted as a legislative or executive
branch knee-jerk response to a single incident. Think of the
acts of terrorism on September 11, 2001 and the Patriot Act, or
the
Enron
scandal
and
the
Sarbanes-Oxley
Act
of
2002.
Importantly, these responses reveal inattention to known vul-
nerabilities, or failure to be appropriately aware of emerging
threats. Standards are quantitative or qualitative assessments
employed by industry and professional groups to provide mea-
sures and targets of comparison. Some take on the impact of
codes such as those of the National Fire Protection Association
where, like regulations, noncompliance may involve serious
sanctions.
Essentials
As legislative, executive, or industry action unfolds, you
should work with corporate general counsel and legislative
affairs to assess impact and provide input to your trade
75

association and political representatives. You need to be the res-
ident expert for impact analysis and thoughtful compliance.
Typical Regulatory Elements
There are several elements that are typically involved in
security, safety, privacy, and ethics regulations, including
•
on-going risk assessment process coupled with a periodic
regulatory focus;
•
demonstrated willingness to open doors to independent
review of controls;
•
metrics to demonstrate degree of compliance or variation
outside of prescribed guardrails;
•
communication to inform and empower employees and ven-
dors on their responsibilities;
•
measurable risk mitigation plans in place and effective;
•
verifiable reporting upward and externally, as required;
•
verifiable engagement of senior management in compliance;
•
process for confidential reporting of suspected infractions;
•
appropriate positioning of a qualified individual to oversee
compliance;
•
appropriate funding of on-going compliance programs; and
•
support for regulatory reviews or inquiries.
As you approach assessment of the potential impact of pro-
posed regulations or conformance with current ones, each of
these elements should be evaluated and implemented appropri-
ate to your organization’s regulatory requirements and your
company’s status regarding compliance. Remember that instal-
ling any one of these contributes to some measure of compli-
ance with others.
How Many Security Regulations Apply
to Your Company?
Few security executives today can call their security organi-
zations unregulated, and those who do are probably in for an
unpleasant surprise.
Since 9/11, a hyper-charged interest in national security has
propagated a spate of new laws, regulations, and voluntary
guidelines that impact the operations of security programs in
both the private and public sectors. Growing concerns about
the privacy of information, business conduct and ethics have
also helped to boost the number of rules landing in the hopper.
76
Chapter 7 REGULATIONS, GUIDELINES, AND STANDARDS

The effect of regulation on the U.S. and international avia-
tion industry has been headline news for more than five years.
Additionally, there have been the types of corruption scandals
that
led
to
the
development
of
accountability
rules
like
Sarbanes-Oxley. Legislation to increase the security of sensitive
government information, the critical U.S. infrastructure, and
the national food supply has similarly received a great deal of
public attention. However, not all such legislation is high pro-
file. There are numerous rules with security significance that
appear to have slipped under the radar, not only of the general
public but of many security professionals.
The Security Executive Council has compiled a comprehen-
sive database of international security laws, regulations, and
guidelines—both for corporations in general and for specific
industries. As of 2013, the Council’s list of U.S. federal legislative
actions (including executive orders and statutes) sits at 43, the
list of U.S. federal regulations at 23, and the list of voluntary
guidelines or standards numbers 58. This current list only
scratches the surface.1
For one thing, security professionals have more than federal
mandates to contend with. For example, as of April 2012, 46
states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin
Islands have laws requiring notification of any security breach
involving personal information.2 States also develop their own
rules, dealing with such varied issues as critical infrastructure
protection, employee and workplace security, and identity theft.
For global corporations, international law also plays a major
role in security operations.
The length and breadth of legislative and regulatory coverage
poses a significant challenge for many security professionals, a
challenge complicated all the more by the fact that they are
often unaware of many of the rules that apply to their opera-
tions. New rules are being developed all the time, new amend-
ments are changing older rules, and some regulations that
would appear to apply to a specific industry group sometimes
carry a longer reach than their creators intended. The Chemical
Facility
Anti-Terrorism
Standards
of
the
Department
of
Homeland Security (DHS) are an example. Their stated intent is
to provide tighter security for high-risk chemical facilities, but
they are proving to be a thorn in the side of the food industry,
because the thresholds of many of the regulated chemicals are
1See the Council’s library at www.securityexecutivecouncil.com/public/lrvc/.
2Stevens, Gina, “Data Security Breach Notification Laws,” Congressional Research
Service, April 10, 2012, 75700, R42475, http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R42475.pdf.
Chapter 7 REGULATIONS, GUIDELINES, AND STANDARDS 77

undefined. This problem is putting many facilities that use, for
refrigeration purposes, even small amounts of a certain type of
ammonia under the thumb of the regulations.
Security professionals needn’t feel entirely helpless in the
face of this onslaught of governmental activity. By understand-
ing how these regulations and laws are made and knowing how
and when to take action, security professionals can become
agents of change for the good of their organizations, their
industries, and their nation.
The Legislation, Regulations, Voluntary
Compliance, and Standards (LRVCS)
Breakdown
It’s critical to understand the differences in the nature and
development of legislation, regulations, and industry voluntary
guidelines.
Legislation encompasses both executive directives and sta-
tutes. An executive order, sometimes called a presidential direc-
tive, is issued by the executive branch and may deal with such
matters as internal operations, national security, or foreign pol-
icy. Executive orders are binding on their own, but they are
often accompanied or followed by congressional statutes that
make them indisputable law. Statutes are the approved legisla-
tive acts that are developed by Congress, such as the Federal
Anti-Tampering Act and the Homeland Security Act. These
begin as proposed bills in either the House of Representatives
or the Senate. For example, if a bill is introduced in the House,
it is first sent to committee for research and consideration,
amended and sent up for debate, and finally voted upon. The
approved act is then sent to the Senate, which also puts it
through committee and votes before returning it to the House.
The final step is the signed approval of the president.
Legislation is generally broad in scope. It mandates that cer-
tain objectives be achieved, but it doesn’t often dig into the
details of who, what, when, where, and how. Instead, legislation
appoints certain federal agencies to develop and enforce spe-
cific regulations that will accomplish the stated goals. The
appointed
agencies
carefully
research the
issue
and
then
develop rules that are intended to be fair to the regulated group
by identifying multiple options and requesting public comment.
Voluntary guidelines may be created by federal and state
agencies
or
by
industry
organizations
and
associations.
78
Chapter 7 REGULATIONS, GUIDELINES, AND STANDARDS

Government entities may issue guidelines where regulation
would be unfeasible for an entire industry, or where strict regu-
lation could impose an unbalanced business or economic risk.
C-TPAT, the Customs-Trade Partnership Against Terror, is a
good example of voluntary guidelines. Organizations that follow it
earn the reward of easier, quicker international shipping. Industry
organizations often create guidelines to avoid future legislation; if
they police their own members through voluntary compliance,
the government may see no need to step in and mandate change.
Often, this strategy is successful, as is the case with C-TPAT. Other
times it is not a success, and the need for regulation surfaces
again. Industry and government standards created by organiza-
tions such as National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST), International Organization for Standardization (ISO),
ISACA (previously known as the Information Systems Audit and
Control Association), National Fire Protection Association (NFPA),
and American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA)
also fit in this category.
The Security Professional’s Role
It is imperative that the first obligation of the security execu-
tive is to understand completely the elements of compliance
and the means to cost-effectively demonstrate conformance
with applicable regulations.
Developing a Regulatory Compliance Strategy
Based on a review of several security-related government reg-
ulations, there are multiple elements involved in conformance to
their respective requirements. While you may want to track your
organization’s compliance with the specifics of those regulations
that apply to your operations, you may find the chart in
Figure 7.1 to be useful in preparing management for the com-
mon elements found in most regulatory compliance exercises.
Preparing for Regulation
Regulations and standards do not arrive overnight. They
often take years to discuss, refine, and gain support from key
constituencies. Security professionals and their corporations
can play a part in the creation and modification of any legisla-
tion or regulations that may impact their business. It’s just a
matter of knowing how to do it and recognizing when the win-
dow of opportunity is opened.
Chapter 7 REGULATIONS, GUIDELINES, AND STANDARDS 79

The elements of regulatory compliance strategy
What are the requirements of the regulation or guideline?
What corporate position have we taken on the evolution of this regulation?
Is it voluntary or mandatory?
What are the compliance deadlines?
What are the consequences of noncompliance?
Who (internally and externally) has the information we need to respond with?
What do we have in place now that will meet the regulatory standard(s)?
What, specifically, are we missing that is required of compliance?
Estimate time of internal contractor staff devoted to specific compliance activities.
Initial and on-going risk analysis–determine level of security required.
Prepare and maintain security plans.
Develop and implement policies and procedures.
Develop and deliver training and security awareness programs.
Install, operate, respond and maintain security countermeasures.
Estimate other cost impact to the compliance plan 
Estimate time/productivity lost to compliance activities.
Determine indirect cost imposed by ongoing compliance.
Determine cost recovery strategy, if any is possible.
Determine type and quantity of risk-based physical and logical security enhancement
to support enhanced security activities or address unmet requirement of
the regulation or guideline. 
What does initial analysis tell us about where we are vs. where we need to go?
Figure 7.1 The Elements of a Regulatory Compliance Strategy. The examples in this figure are useful in preparing
management for the common elements found in most regulatory compliance exercises.
80
Chapter 7 REGULATIONS, GUIDELINES, AND STANDARDS

Legislation
A bill receives its most intense scrutiny when in committee.
Committees request multiple reports on differing views for all
proposed legislation, and they are also authorized to hold hear-
ings that incorporate testimony from qualified experts on the
subject in question. In the legislative process, there are a few
ways to ensure that your voice is heard when it matters:
Make Contact
It’s important to make your views known to your senators
and representatives if or when you become aware of proposed
legislation that may impact your organization’s security opera-
tions. You can reach members of Congress by phone, mail, or
e-mail. Complete directories are available at www.house.gov
and www.senate.gov. When contacting a member of Congress,
keep your comments clear and concise. If appropriate, request
an in-person meeting with the congressperson, or offer yourself
as an on-call resource.
Build Relationships
If you’re in a heavily regulated industry, it will be particularly
useful for your organization to build ongoing relationships with
legislators. There’s no reason to wait until a significant bill
comes along. Actually, if your legislators already know your
organization, they may be more inclined to give weight to your
concerns when it really counts. Advanced notice of legislative
hearings is sometimes sent to relevant individuals and organiza-
tions, so it’s a good idea to do what you can to get yourself on
that list. Introduce your business early in the relationship. Some
organizations even invite legislators for facility tours to build a
more lasting impression.
Become Active in Industry and Security Organizations
Industry associations can amplify your voice by joining it
with the voices of others. They also have their own resources
dedicated to monitoring legislative and regulatory proposals,
as well as their own government-relations teams with exist-
ing legislator relationships. Speaking through an association
also
allows
your
organization
to work
against
sometimes
publicly popular legislation without suffering a PR hit for
doing so.
Chapter 7 REGULATIONS, GUIDELINES, AND STANDARDS 81

Regulation
When a government entity has created a draft regulation, it
is required to allot at least 30 days for public comment.
Typically, agencies allow 90 days of public comment on propo-
sals. The web site www.regulations.gov provides an up-to-date
list of all proposals that are up for public comment and that is
searchable by agency and keyword.
Make Your Own Comments
Generally, you may submit comments on behalf of yourself
or your organization through www.regulations.gov or by mail.
(Be sure to provide three copies of comments and reference the
appropriate docket number in your notice).
Comment Through an Industry Organization
As noted above, associations provide a unique opportunity
to approach an issue with a loud and unified voice. Regulatory
agencies carefully evaluate all public comments and execute
revisions before drafting final regulations for approval.
Voluntary Guidelines
As in legislative development, it is important to approach
government agencies and industry organizations with your
input on proposed voluntary guidelines. This means maintain-
ing strong relationships and being active in your association’s
meetings and committees where appropriate. Voluntary guide-
lines or industry standards are the most frequent starting point
for new regulations.
If you decide to take any of the above actions, you will find
success only if you act as a knowledgeable representative of
your enterprise, having coordinated with all relevant corporate
entities and keeping the best interest of the business in mind.
Standards
Standards are grounded on juried industry best practices
that set measurable targets for those who choose to comply.
Just as regulations have an independent review of compliance,
so too do standards, and there is usually a certification process
upon successful conformance review. Good examples are ISO
17799, the information security standard, NFPA 1600 Standard
on Disaster/Emergency Management and Business Continuity,
and Control Objectives for Information and Related Technology
82
Chapter 7 REGULATIONS, GUIDELINES, AND STANDARDS

(COBIT). More recent examples are from ASIS International,
which has transformed its guidelines program into a more for-
mal standards effort, and the American National Standards
Institute’s Homeland Security Standards Panel (ANSI/HSSP).
Know When to Act
Unfortunately, it doesn’t help to know how you can impact
new rules if you are unaware of them. You can’t change any-
thing if you don’t know what’s on the docket and what it might
mean to you.
While a security department can try to keep track of all
security-significant legislation, the complexities of proposed
rules and regulations make this a sometimes-insurmountable
challenge. It takes some digging to get to the security impact of
many regulations, and often that impact isn’t explicitly stated.
Unfortunately, it might not be recognized until the rule is put
into action.
Organizations would do well to make law-watching a coordi-
nated, enterprise effort. Most large companies already rely on
their government affairs department to watch laws that affect
their business, such as taxes, EPA issues, and FDA issues.
Security must partner with other corporate entities, such as gov-
ernment affairs, legal, quality, safety, and human resources, to
jointly track and understand the import of proposed rules. An
enterprise view helps individual departments more clearly under-
stand when it’s important to act and when it’s important not to
act. Some legislation affects numerous aspects of an enterprise,
some positively and some negatively. Only with a business mind-
set can the benefits and drawbacks be accurately measured.
Regulation Management Worksheet
Using the Responsible, Accountable, Consulted, Informed
(RACI) methodology (see Table 7.1), determine which of these
regulations and voluntary guidelines affect your organization,
either directly or indirectly, who should be involved, to what
extent, and who should carry them out. For each item, place
the
responsibility
in
the
appropriate
title
cell
as
either:
R 5 Responsible, A 5 Accountable, C 5 Consult, or I 5 Inform
(i.e., RACI). When completed, an additional exercise of replacing
the RACI letters with FTE estimates will serve as both a high-
level staffing model and provide insight as to how much labor is
going to be needed to support a given process or program.
If your company chooses to ignore any of these or the
myriad of other regulations or voluntary guidelines, you’d better
have a good reason why.
Chapter 7 REGULATIONS, GUIDELINES, AND STANDARDS 83

Table 7.1 The Responsible, Accountable, Consulted,
Informed (RACI) Methodology
Regulation or Guideline
CSO
Legal
Counsel
SVP of
Supply
Chain
CIO
Dir.
of
HR
Other
Control Objectives for
Information and Related
Technology (COBIT)
Issued by the IT Governance
Institute, this guideline has been
developed as a standard for good
information technology (IT)
security and control practices
that provides a reference
framework for management,
users, and information systems,
audit, control, and security
practitioners.
http://www.itgi.org/
http://www.isaca.org/0
Customs-Trade Partnership
Against Terrorism (C-TPAT)
A voluntary government/business
initiative developed to strengthen
and improve the overall
international supply chain and U.
S. border security.
http://www.cbp.gov/xp/cgov/
import/commercial_enforcement/
ctpat/
Executive Order 13224:
Blocking Property and
Prohibiting Transaction, with
Persons Who Commit,
Threaten to Commit, or
Support Terrorism
Prohibits government agencies,
contractor, and financial
institutions from sponsoring,
(Continued )
84
Chapter 7 REGULATIONS, GUIDELINES, AND STANDARDS

Table 7.1 (Continued)
Regulation or Guideline
CSO
Legal
Counsel
SVP of
Supply
Chain
CIO
Dir.
of
HR
Other
supporting, or otherwise funding
terrorists. Enforced by the U.S.
Treasury Department’s Office of
Foreign Asset Control.
http://www.treas.gov/offices/
enforcement/ofac/sanctions/
terrorism.Shtml
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (The
Financial Modernization Act
of 1999) (GLBA)
A federal law that requires
financial institutions to ensure
the confidentiality and security of
their customers’ personal
information.
http://www.ftc.gov/privacy/
privacyinitiatives/glboct.html
Health Insurance Portability
and Accountability Act of
1996 (HIPAA)
Regulation that provides patients
with greater access to their
medical records and more control
over how personally, identifiable
health information is used. The
regulation also addresses the
obligations of healthcare
providers and health plans to
protect health information.
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/hipaa/
ISO 17799
A code of practice for
information security management
developed by the International
Organization for Standardization.
The objectives outlined provide
general guidance on the
(Continued )
Chapter 7 REGULATIONS, GUIDELINES, AND STANDARDS 85

Table 7.1 (Continued)
Regulation or Guideline
CSO
Legal
Counsel
SVP of
Supply
Chain
CIO
Dir.
of
HR
Other
commonly accepted goals of
information security
management.
http://www.iso.org/iso/en/
ISOOnline.frontpage
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO/
lEC_17799
ISO 27001
Published by the International
Organization for Standardization
(ISO) on October 15, 2005, this
standard establishes best
practice for an information
security
management system and
complements ISO 17799. The two
standards are related but perform
distinctive roles.
http://www.iso.org/iso/en/
commcentre/pressreIeases/2005/
Ref976.html
Maritime Transportation Act
(MARSEC or MTSAct)
Regulations for U.S. port facilities
and vessels requiring the
development of security plans
and implementation of security
measures and procedures.
http://www.uscg.mil/hq/g-m/mp/
mtso.shtml
National Strategy for Physical
Protection of Critical
Infrastructures and Key
Assets
Voluntary guidelines to protect
physical infrastructures from
(Continued )
86
Chapter 7 REGULATIONS, GUIDELINES, AND STANDARDS

Table 7.1 (Continued)
Regulation or Guideline
CSO
Legal
Counsel
SVP of
Supply
Chain
CIO
Dir.
of
HR
Other
terrorist attacks. Like its
counterpart cyberspace strategy
(see immediately below), it
emphasizes public/private
partnership as the way to protect
critical infrastructures.
http://www.whitehouse.gov/
pcipb/physicol.html
National Strategy to Secure
Cyberspace
Voluntary guidelines make official
long-established best practices
for protecting information
security.
http://www.whitehouse.gov/
pcipb/
Public Company Accounting
Reform and Investor
Protection Act of 2002
(Sarbanes-Oxley)
The federal Sarbanes-Oxley Act
was created to protect investors
by improving the accuracy and
reliability of corporate
disclosures. The Act covers
issues such as establishing a
public company accounting
oversight board, auditor
independence, corporate
responsibility, and enhanced
financial disclosure.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Sarbanes_Oxley
Public Health Security and
Bioterrorism Preparedness
and Response Act (PHSBPR)
(Continued )
Chapter 7 REGULATIONS, GUIDELINES, AND STANDARDS 87

Table 7.1 (Continued)
Regulation or Guideline
CSO
Legal
Counsel
SVP of
Supply
Chain
CIO
Dir.
of
HR
Other
Establishes national, state, and
local preparedness and response
strategies and procedures to
protect U.S. food, water, and
drug supplies.
http://www.fda.gov/oc/
bioterrorism/bioact.html
Trade Act of 2002—Advance
Electronic Information
Requires advance transmission of
electronic cargo information to U.
S. Customs and Border Control
regarding arriving and departing
cargo. This consolidates the
implementation strategy of the
24 hour rule and the
implementation strategy of the
Trade Act.
http://www.cbp.gov/xp/cgov/
import/
communications_to_industry/
advance_jnfo/
U.S. Customs Container
Security Initiative
Places U.S. Customs officers at
major foreign ports to prevent
terrorists from accessing
container ships. The incentive for
foreign ports: In case of a
terrorist attack involving cargo,
program participants would be
less likely to be shut down.
http://www.cbp.gov/xp/cgov/
border_security/international_
activities/csi/
(Continued )
88
Chapter 7 REGULATIONS, GUIDELINES, AND STANDARDS

Table 7.1 (Continued)
Regulation or Guideline
CSO
Legal
Counsel
SVP of
Supply
Chain
CIO
Dir.
of
HR
Other
U.S. Dept. of Transportation’s
Pipeline and Hazardous
Materials Safety
Administration (PHMSA)
HAZMAT Regulations
Federal Hazardous Materials
Regulations set forth
transportation and packaging
regulations for all modes of
moving hazardous materials.
http://hazmot.dot.gov/regs/rules.
htm
http://www.access.gpo.gov/nara/
cfr/waisidx_04/49cfrv2_04.html
U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency’s Water Infrastructure
Security
Affects community water
systems. Organizations must
certify and submit vulnerability
assessments and emergency
response plans. Provisions could
one day be applied to factories
that discharge into public water
sources. Part of the U.S.
Bioterrorism Act of 2002.
http://cfpub.epa.gov/safewater/
watersecurity/bioterrorism.cfm
Use this table to determine how regulations and voluntary guidelines affect your organization, either directly or indirectly, who should
be involved, to what extent, and who should carry them out.
Chapter 7 REGULATIONS, GUIDELINES, AND STANDARDS 89

Components of a Cost of Security Compliance
Model
In the federal government’s rule-making process, there are a
number of milestones to enable impact assessment on your
organization. Trade associations will be engaged early on, and
typically, your legislative liaison or general counsel office will be
tracking legislation or regulations of consequence to the com-
pany. In the final stages of rollout of a piece of legislation in the
Federal Register, you will be able to identify the components of
work required by the proposed regulation. Table 7.2 provides a
template for consideration as you assess the potential cost of
compliance impact.
Prospectively tracking the progress of security-related regula-
tions and then estimating their financial and productivity
impacts is an excellent way to work collaboratively with counsel
and others in senior management. You are also demonstrating
the blending of your professional knowledge with the financial
objectives of the company.
The Implications of Noncompliance
The fact that regulatory compliance can be expensive is
unquestioned. However, the notion that regulatory noncompli-
ance can be far more expensive should be clear from the corpo-
rate failures of the past five to ten years. Enron and Global
Crossing together lost $190 billion in market capitalization.
Pfizer has lost $24 billion, and Hoffman-Laroche was fined 497
million Euros. Boeing has lost valuable Air Force contracts, and
several noteworthy players in the financial services industry
have individually paid millions in fines over the past several
years. A company simply cannot accept the risk of noncompli-
ance in today’s regulatory environment.
What Are Some of Those Risks?
Company brand can be significantly impacted, resulting in
loss of market share and reduced competitive position. After
Sarbanes-Oxley, boards are comprised of increasing numbers of
“independent” members who see their roles (and their personal
liability) as more aggressive on the adequacy of internal con-
trols and corporate integrity.
Fines can also be levied by the government. For example, in
the initial decade of the Sentencing Commission Guidelines for
90
Chapter 7 REGULATIONS, GUIDELINES, AND STANDARDS

Table 7.2 Components of a Cost of Security
Compliance Model
Cost Component
Unit
Cost
Ext.
Cost
Direct Costs (Assumes that the company using the model has an efficient time
tracking system in place and the items under the proprietary staff time logged to
compliance activities are defined in that system.)
Billable time directly applied to compliance administration (Divide annual salary
only by 2080 hours and multiply by 38% for hourly rate)
Proprietary staff time logged to compliance activities.
• Program planning and administration
• Policy development of modification
• Risk assessment
• System engineering/construction documentation
• Contract staff time logged to compliance activities
• Consultant fees directly related to compliance
• Training and awareness programs
• Program development
• Trainee participant time
• Activities that can be directly allocated to auditing for ongoing compliance
• Development and delivery of employee and agent awareness programs directly
related to appliance with regulations
• Development and ongoing administration and maintenance of required regulatory
reporting
• If security costs [e.g., account administration, access control list administration, etc.]
• Other direct charges
Capital Expenses to Meet Required Security Standards
Determine local capital expense depreciation rates for one-year cost. See following
equipment list for selected items:
• Security equipment
• Construction/installation/security system enhancement
• Unique software development directly related to compliance
• Other capital expense
Estimated Loss of Productivity Due to Compliance Activities
Redirected labor by specific persons, project delays, lost sales, etc.
Indirect Costs Confirm with CPO/Legal if allocatable to impact:
• Physical space costs
(Continued )
Chapter 7 REGULATIONS, GUIDELINES, AND STANDARDS 91

Corporations (19912000), there were 1,494 cases brought to
trial, 76% resulting in fines with an average of $2,069,675 and a
high of $500,000,000. It is noteworthy that the regulatory envi-
ronment for these cases was voluntary, whereas the 2004 revi-
sions are mandatory. As a result, it may be anticipated that
federal prosecutors will have far more measurable criteria to
use to assess the level of conformance or nonconformance at
the targeted organization.
Measurable Impact to the Bottom Line
Some of the risks of noncompliance can be measured
against the bottom line in the following ways:
•
direct cost of sanctions
•
indirect multiplier impacts from compensation ordered to
customers or others
•
loss of program or other funding (venture capital or other)
•
program suspension and related costs
•
“reactionary” costs related to status reporting on deficiencies
and corrective action
•
costs associated with other programs having a dependency
on the process deemed deficient
•
partial adoption puts at risk insurance or bond coverage
Table 7.2 (Continued)
Cost Component
Unit
Cost
Ext.
Cost
• Cost of supervision
• Recruitment costs
• Administrative costs
• Maintenance costs
• Third-party licensing
• Documentation maintenance
• Awareness and education costs
• Periodic filing costs
• The cost[s] at change and recertification
• Cost of repair
Offset to Costs Recovery from increased cost to consumers, one-time assessments, or
other recovery processes.
Use this table as a template for consideration as you assess the potential cost of compliance impact.
92
Chapter 7 REGULATIONS, GUIDELINES, AND STANDARDS

•
federal sentencing guideline implications
•
loss of customers and market share
•
vulnerability to class action suits
Highlights for Follow-Up
•
What organization or executive is responsible for state and
federal legislative initiatives, and how would you character-
ize your relationship with that office?
•
Are you aware of anything in the works that may impact
your company or organization, and to what extent are you
influencing your company’s strategy with regard to the
implications of its implementation?
•
What security-specific regulations apply to your organization
now, and to what extent have you been engaged in their pre-
implementation impact assessment and rollout?
•
What is the real cost of security-related regulations to your
company?
•
To what extent can proposed or active regulations assist you
in obtaining resources or influencing corporate policy in
terms of voluntary compliance?
Key Terms
•
Regulatory elements
•
Security regulations
•
Regulatory compliance strategy
•
Legislation
•
Regulation
•
Voluntary guidelines
•
Standards
•
Security compliance model
•
Noncompliance
THE BOTTOM LINE: Security regulations are here to stay. Maintain your industry-specific contacts with regard
to legislative and regulatory initiatives and work with your internal resources to influence policy at best; or, at least,
you need to understand the cost and operational implications.
Chapter 7 REGULATIONS, GUIDELINES, AND STANDARDS 93

8
INFORMATION SECURITY
Introduction
If you were to poll your top management by asking them to
rank corporate assets, it is likely that information and the infra-
structure around it would be at or near the top of every list.
Information, specifically sensitive, private information, is the
lifeblood of all business operations.
You may not have information security in your assigned
responsibilities, but it is essential for all security personnel to
have an appreciation of the criticality of this infrastructure in
the health of the business. The integrity and availability of
information goes to the heart of business efficiency, effective-
ness, and reputation. As a security executive, you will invariably
interact closely with your colleagues in the IT department. This
chapter is intended to provide you and your team with a basic
understanding of IT security to better enable your support for
their mission.
Business Value
Assurance that sensitive, private information is verifiably
secure is a fundamental requirement of business and a fiduciary
responsibility of officers and directors. Without this assurance,
shareholders, customers, and the viability of the business are
collectively at risk, merely waiting to learn how devastating the
compromise has been.
The Essentials
Information is a critical asset at increasing risk of loss or com-
promise. The heart of an information risk management program
is an ongoing process of risk assessment. This involves an under-
standing of risk tolerance, knowledge of likely risks and threats,
measured assessments of established controls, and executed
plans to address identified vulnerabilities. The resulting informa-
tion risk management strategy is focused on the preservation of
95

confidentiality, maintenance of data integrity, and assurance of
the availability of information for authorized users.
An effective information risk management program can only
be assured through the diligence of every individual who has
access to confidential information. Along with personal integ-
rity, diligence is the one critical asset that touches just about
every trusted individual in the enterprise. The notion of individ-
ual accountability is the model to be followed if information is
to be truly secured. The key to proactive protection is the recog-
nition that threat is truly dynamic. It is constantly changing and
adapting to our efforts to safeguard vital information assets.
Critical Importance of Information Security
Information security is given critical importance within an
organization if the following holds true:
•
You decide it makes “business sense”:
•
You
and
your
customers
care
about
privacy
and
confidentiality.
•
Information that has integrity and is available is critical
for effective and timely operations.
•
Competitive pressures demand it.
•
It might even be an effective market differentiator.
•
Society says it matters:
•
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA)
•
Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX)
•
Health
Insurance
Portability
and
Accountability
Act
(HIPAA)
•
California Breach Notification Bill (SB-1386 and AB-1950)
•
Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA),
the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI
DSS), the Personal Information Protection and Electronic
Documents Act (PIPEDA), etc.
Most regulations are very vague, but they still have to be
complied with. Long ago, the regulators understood that they
could never hope to give actionable and implementable guid-
ance about security controls that would work for all organiza-
tions. Consequently, the regulations say moderately clearly what
needs to be protected, who is responsible for the protection,
and, in general, what kinds of controls should be considered. It
is up to each regulated organization to determine how the regu-
lation applies to that organization, what controls make sense
for that organization, and how to implement and operate those
sensible controls.
96
Chapter 8 INFORMATION SECURITY

Core Information Assurance Requirements
Confidentiality, integrity, and availability (CIA) represent the
classic three-legged stool of information security. Be aware that
responsibility for these three concerns cannot be readily given
to a single person. Each is an important concern for multiple
organizations, so many people will feel ownership for them. CIA
is a great way to frame the challenge of protecting information,
illustrated below:
•
Confidentiality: Requirements that (some) information is to
be kept private, secret, and restricted to specific parties. This
requires business controls supporting access authorization
and accountability.
•
Integrity: Requirements that information must be accurate
and authentic in content, currency/time, and source data.
This requires business controls supporting change authoriza-
tion and accountability.
•
Availability: Requirements that information is to be available
in the appropriate form when needed. This requires business
processes supporting useful form and performance.
Information Has Value
Information has value to an organization’s well-being and
bottom line, which is why the information has to be protected
and why certain things represent threats to information. The
activities directed at understanding information value are deter-
mined from information risk assessment processes, which
include considerations such as the following:
•
What information do you have? (This requires an inventory-
like exercise.)
•
What defines the value of each information element? What
are the likely consequences if the value is reduced or
compromised?
•
Who owns the information? The owner is the custodian and
should be making the protection decisions.
•
Where does it come from, where does it flow, where does it
come to rest, where does it go?
•
Both inside and outside the enterprise (e.g., contractors
and outsourcing)?
•
Both electronic and nonelectronic forms?
•
What threatens the information?
•
What controls currently offer resistance to the threats and
how effective are those controls believed to be?
Chapter 8 INFORMATION SECURITY 97

•
What is the residual risk? Is the residual risk acceptable, and
if not, what do you choose to do about it?
All too often, the value of information is poorly understood
and rarely quantified. Therefore, most information-protection
programs operate on gut-feel, seat-of-the-pants, and other
judgment-based processes.
Information Moves at Warp Speed
This is not unlike people in a physical security program.
Physical assets often stay in one place, retain their form for long
periods of time, and are stable in other respects. On the other
hand, people move around from one threat environment or con-
trol environment to another, which is a much more demanding
protective challenge. Information not only moves around a lot
during its lifecycle (one application to another, one firm to
another, one machine to another, one network to another, etc.),
it can do so at very high speeds and in a wide variety of forms
and media. Once you have mastered herding cats, try your hand
at ensuring information is protected throughout its lifecycle.
Key Assessment: What Is the State of
Control?
How long would you be willing to operate your business
with all the security controls turned off? How long before the
consequences become catastrophic?
No control is perfect. A perfect control involves infinite cost.
A perfect control almost certainly makes the information totally
unusable, and therefore useless. Residual risk is a fact of life. No
amount of technology can make up for incompetent, erroneous,
or malicious human actions and behavior, if for no other reason
than that people invent, build, install, and operate all controls.
Almost always, someone (usually more than one someone) can
circumvent, override, or reset the controls and do anything that
is possible to and with the information, often unilaterally and
without an audit trail. Your digital fate hangs on such people,
and most organizations don’t even know who they are!
Different executives and organizations have different appe-
tites for risk and different tolerances for controls, in general.
Perhaps they have more tolerance for the perceived inconve-
nience of even common sense controls. Avoid concluding that
your control situation is unique. Repeatedly, it has been shown
98
Chapter 8 INFORMATION SECURITY

that quite a small number of “styles” or methods of control can
be defined that would serve in an enormous number of very dif-
ferent business circumstances.
What gets measured can be controlled. Without measurement
and monitoring you have very little idea what the state of control
really is. (See Chapter 16, “Security Measures and Metrics.”)
Measurement is something that is typically done very badly in
most enterprises, government agencies, and the like. Although
documenting the rate of attacks or similar event metrics may be
useful, it is much more sensible to work on measuring the state of
the control environment. What is the intended state of control?
What is the risk-based measurement of the actual state of control?
Are the controls actually there, and are they really working? If not,
what will it cost and how long will it take to fix the problems?
Figure 8.1 provides an example of high-level measurement
for five information security program elements. Note the issues
being measured. Any one of these that may be significantly
lacking in compliance could contribute to a serious breach of
information security.
All information should not be equally protected. Having
many variables implies one size does not fit all. Information
values vary in the following ways:
•
regulatory scope
•
threats and vulnerabilities
•
business models
•
appetites for risk
•
ability to fund controls
•
cost of controls
Percentage of key information security
management roles for which authority,
accountability and responsibilities are
assigned and required skills identified.
0%
20
40
60
80
100%
Percentage of Board meetings and/or
designated committee meetings for which
information security is on the agenda.
Percentage of security incidents which did
not cause damage, compromise or loss
beyond established thresholds to the
organization’s assets, functions or stake-
holders.
Percentage of strategic partner and
other third-party relationships for which
information security requirements have
been implemented in agreements.
Percentage of information security
program elements for which approved
policies and controls are operational.
Figure 8.1 High Level
Measurement of Information
Security Program Elements.
Any one of these that may be
significantly lacking in
compliance could contribute to
a serious breach of information
security.
Chapter 8 INFORMATION SECURITY 99

Organizing the Information Security Program
How the information security program is organized is very
important, because the organization model selected has to be
consistent with the organizational model and culture of your
enterprise. It should be decentralized if the business is decen-
tralized, or as centralized as it can be if your firm’s power model
works that way. It is not possible to gather together in one orga-
nization all the resources that have some significant role to play
in the information protection process. Rather, almost by defini-
tion, information protection is a cross-functional, collaborative
undertaking that defies centralization.
The technical aspects of information security are very impor-
tant and very complex. Specialists are necessary, and those spe-
cialists are likely to be part of the IT organization. Some sort of
extended “organization” for the information security program is
required in order to get the technical specialists into the mix. In
most organizations, the information infrastructure is so distrib-
uted (top to bottom, inside and out, and geographically) that
each custodial organization requires the assignment of trained
and accountable information security administrators to oversee
day-to-day adherence to policy.
If your background has not been in the IT world, you will
find the CISO (chief information security officer) is likely to be
a “techie.” This is because most enterprises think information
security is completely a technical problem, so they give it to the
CIO (chief information officer), or more likely someone who
reports to the CIO and brings a variety of technical types into
the role. Therefore, most of the CISOs of the world have a tech-
nical background and have been tasked to manage information
security as a technical function. If you are the non-IT security
manager, your willingness to engage the technical organization
in a coordinated protection strategy can go far to demonstrate
that there are critical nontechnical security practices that serve
proactive information protection.
We have discussed the potential of security committees to
assure the exchange of information, coordination of risk man-
agement efforts, and basic security infrastructure teamwork.
This is only one potential venue; but, as the senior security
executive or as the CISO, your joint operational relationship is
key to the effective administration of a proactive information
protection program. Non-IT security professionals need to
understand the range of information security risks confronting
the company and their relative role in the protection scheme.
Conversely,
CISOs
need
to
understand
and
engage
their
100
Chapter 8 INFORMATION SECURITY

security operational colleagues in their protection and incident
response strategy.
Information Security Infrastructure and
Architecture
When every business unit is doing its own thing regarding
choice and implementation of security processes and technolo-
gies, the company is in a losing game. There is a lot of power in
“security infrastructure”: security technologies implemented
across an organization as common solutions and enterprise
standards. The way in which all the security components relate
can be referred to as the security architecture, which, in turn,
must have clear and engineered relationships to other architec-
tures (IT, network, application, data, etc.).
The notion of a network perimeter matters a lot. You may
hear talk about “the disappearing perimeter.” It certainly is
changing, but it is not disappearing. Just as we envision effective
physical security, there has to be a perimeter (think firewall)
somewhere in the architecture, unless you intend for the asset(s)
to be totally exposed. A perimeter that tries to protect a large col-
lection of resources (such as an enterprise firewall) still has sig-
nificant value. If there is no enterprise perimeter control
environment, then each device, or smaller collections of devices,
has to become totally self-defending to a degree consistent with
its value. The perimeter has just been moved inward, but it still
has to be there as a control concept. Your computer at home is a
good example of a small domain, maybe even just one machine
protected by a firewall and likely other protective tools.
Day-to-Day Operational Security
The 24/7 security operations organization can play a vital
role in the information protection program. Providing a training
program focused on the likely threats that may be discovered
during tours can identify and eliminate—or illuminate—obvious
vulnerabilities. Unsecured laptops, credentials left in the open,
yellow sticky memos containing passwords, conditions contrib-
uting to fire or water damage, violations of policy, and other
hazards to information integrity are all within the scope of a
trained security officer. This engagement also makes the job of
providing tours more focused on risk identification versus tap-
ping a guard tour sensor.
Chapter 8 INFORMATION SECURITY 101

Cyber Incident Response Planning
A cyber incident is a real, perceived, or threatened event that
involves technology such as data, business applications, com-
puters, networks, or electronic communications with the poten-
tial to have a major negative impact on the business. Cyber
incidents may range in seriousness from no direct impact to
customers to major disruption of business operations or signifi-
cant impact to the company’s reputation.
The purpose of the cyber incident response plan is to define
the process to respond to cyber incidents, which significantly
impact the company’s critical business functions. It documents
the procedures for responding to situations, which impact the
company’s ability to provide services to customers or to meet
legal or regulatory requirements. The plan is limited to the
response to cyber incidents after detection or identification and
does not address ongoing preventative actions or detection
techniques. Objectives of the cyber incident response plan are
to supplement the cyber incident defense program by develop-
ing a response strategy that
•
facilitates timely assessment of potential problems while
ensuring a coordinated and comprehensive response to inci-
dents that cross business units;
•
minimizes the impact of cyber incidents on the company’s
ability to provide service while maintaining the company’s
public image and credibility;
•
facilitates prosecution of offenders as appropriate;
•
defines an organization to implement the response plan and
includes definitions of the roles of the leaders and members;
•
documents procedures to rapidly notify, deploy, and coordinate
corporate resources to assess and respond to the incident; and
•
documents the process to define how a decision to activate
the plan is made and by whom.
In order to maximize overall effectiveness for preventing and
responding to cyber incidents, a comprehensive, ongoing pro-
gram with emphasis on prevention and early detection forms
the foundation on which the response plan is based. In the
event of a major incident, business unit senior management
must be prepared to
•
accept the consequences of the required responses in order
to maximize the effectiveness of the response;
•
support a comprehensive and cohesive response effort if
required;
•
take actions that are in the company’s best interest, even
though they may not be the best for the specific business
unit, and which must be identified; and
102
Chapter 8 INFORMATION SECURITY

•
identify and understand roles of critical team members prior
to an incident, for support from their management is essential.
Development of a cyber incident response strategy and
related plans offers both the IT and corporate security teams an
opportunity to identify shared and unique skills and responsi-
bilities while building teamwork, which will serve beyond timely
and effective incident management.
Never
before has
cyber
security
been
more important
than it is today. The world is not only being confronted with
technology advancements on a daily basis, but is in the
midst of an evolutionary event that has a global impact. The
“bad guys” don’t have to be in the same room; they can be
on a different continent and obtain the same results—from a
safer haven.
To provide for a secure future, both corporations and com-
puter users must be constantly cognizant of the threats that are
continually present and stalking their systems. They need to use
safeguards (antivirus, anti-spam, anti-spyware, etc.) on their
computers and be leery of scams and frauds. They must recog-
nize changes in operation or other unusual characteristics of
their computers and take corrective actions quickly.
Today and in the future, information assurance depends on
an aware, accountable computer user, and that responsibility
has to be set in policy, communicated, and enforced.
The image in Figure 8.2 displays many of the diverse threats
and risks that confront an information protection program. The
key to proactive protection is the recognition that threat is truly
dynamic. It is constantly changing and adapting to our efforts
to safeguard vital information assets.
Highlights for Follow-Up
•
On a scale of 1 to 10, how dependent is your company on
the IT infrastructure?
•
Does your security strategy and planning reflect this level of
priority?
•
If you are not currently responsible for information security,
is there a designated manager in IT or elsewhere who is?
•
How would you characterize your relationship with this
colleague?
•
If you were the CISO, how would you respond to the same
questions?
•
Where the relationship may be less than mutually support-
ive, what steps might you take to move in a positive
direction?
Chapter 8 INFORMATION SECURITY 103

Loss or corruption
of critical data
Denial/theft
of service 
Perimeter Defenses
Physical security measures
Access Control & Authentication Processes
Corporate Culture & a Supportive Control Environment
A Knowledgeable Security Organization
Effective Policy & Standards
A Doctrine Of Personal Accountability & Responsibility
Information Classification & Control Processes 
Security Awareness Programs
Proactive Security Measures
Formal Risk Assessment Processes
Vulnerability Testing & Fault Remediation
User Management Processes
Firewalls
Intrusion Detection Systems
Duty Segregation
Preventive / Detective Control Framework
Virtual Private Networks
Upgrades & Patch Management
Monitor System Activities
Encryption
Malware
Hacktivism
User Vetting
Espionage
Unsuccessful litigation
Lost market
share
Eavesdropping
Inadvertent
disclosure 
Data manipulation
or falsification
Loss of access to
legitimate users
Loss of customer/
client/shareholder
confidence 
Open source
collection
Competitive
intelligence 
Fire 
Social
engineering
Regulatory
sanctions 
Technical data
collection 
Absent or poor
policy contributes
to compromise
Theft of vital
information
Bad data =
bad decisions
Ineffective business continuity
Lost access due to
natural disaster
Loss of
supply chain
Fraud
Figure 8.2 Information Protection Program Threats. The many and diverse threats and risks that confront an
information protection program.
104
Chapter 8 INFORMATION SECURITY

•
Is the annual risk assessment program a joint effort between
security and the CIO? How about other key stakeholders?
Where are the gaps in this critical business process?
•
Given that there is acknowledged interdependence between
logical and physical security, do you believe this interdepen-
dence is acknowledged by current business practice and
resource allocations?
•
Has
the
current
physical
security
deployment
strategy
(including
first
response)
been
effectively
coordinated
between security and IT? How about other key stakeholders,
like facilities and business units with specific convenience or
protection needs?
•
If the 24/7 security operations group is responsible for first
response to IT-related business continuity incidents, have
there been adequate orientation, procedural training, and
notification procedures made available?
•
Is there an established cyber incident response plan that has
been coordinated with business continuity, IT, risk manage-
ment (if appropriate), and security?
Key Terms
•
Information security
•
Information assurance requirements
•
Information security infrastructure and architecture
•
Operational security
•
Cyber incident response planning
Chapter 8 INFORMATION SECURITY 105

9
PHYSICAL SECURITY AND FIRST
RESPONSE
Introduction
Virtually every corporate security program contains some
elements of physical security, premises protection, and security
operations. Information security programs cannot securely exist
without a protective envelope of physical and operational secu-
rity. Critical and sensitive business operations also benefit from
in-depth physical security and access control. Given the breadth
and diversity of security hardware and software, a well thought
out security strategy is essential.
You may not have physical security in your assigned respon-
sibilities, but it is essential for all security personnel to have an
appreciation of the criticality of this protection suite in the
health of the business. The absence of effective physical secu-
rity places every employee, visitor, and asset at risk. This
chapter is intended to provide you and your team with a basic
understanding of physical security to better enable your support
for their mission.
Business Value
A case can be made that a proactive physical security pro-
gram effectively supports business performance by mitigating
employee and customer risk. A well-planned and secure busi-
ness environment is a competitive advantage as compared to
one that slows down and unnecessarily exposes the company to
physical security threats.
Absence of reasonable and responsive security measures in
the face of known vulnerabilities is a very serious risk. Purely
from a liability protection standpoint, business cannot safely and
securely exist without basic, if not in-depth, physical security.
Modern technology and networking has enabled a tremendous
range of protection options at an increasingly competitive price.
107

The Essentials
Virtually every company has some level of physical security
associated with its business operations, including the following:
•
A security cost is embedded in every lease.
•
Insurance carriers (and many municipal codes) require cer-
tain protection measures above and beyond fire and life
safety.
•
Locks and alarms are an integral part of facility build-out.
•
Various security procedures are employed in the protection
of assets.
•
Employee and invitee safety and security are basic expecta-
tions and legal precepts.
For the company as a whole, and at each specific site hous-
ing business operations, the risk profile will determine the need
for more specific security measures. However, you will generally
find that physical security operations represent a significant
portion of the business security cost. Therefore, what should
“an effective physical security program” cost? What level of
investment will ensure the management of known threats?
There is no single “best” answer that will suffice as a cost-
effective model program. Assuming that every company brings
to the “right” answer its own asset mix, range of threats, and
perceived risk, how do I measure what is right for my company?
To answer that question, we have to start with a solid under-
standing of what needs to be protected, against what set of
probabilities, and how that protection needs to be tailored to
mitigate risk at the lowest practical cost.
As we note throughout this book, security programs must be
based upon a thorough risk assessment process. It is through
this risk-oriented lens that specific threats and physical or oper-
ational vulnerabilities will be identified. The relationship of
these exposures to company assets—people, information, facili-
ties and mission critical products and processes—will define
the options, their cost, and the operational implications.
108
Chapter 9 PHYSICAL SECURITY AND FIRST RESPONSE

A Caution:
Security options range from a fairly simple approach with
few elements, to highly complex systems with multiple
parts that have to be integrated and aggressively managed.
At a high level, your options will depend on answers to
these questions:
•
What is the likelihood of what types of risk?
•
How severe are the likely consequences, at best and at
worst, of those risks?
•
What are our estimates of financial impact, at best and
worst?
•
Which of these risks are we willing to accept, and to
which do we choose to apply security measures?
•
For each risk you choose to retain:
•
How would you rank order each risk in terms of
severity?
•
What are the options to reduce our exposure to
each risk?
•
What is the comparative initial and continuing cost
of each option?
•
How would each option impact business operations?
•
Which option offers the highest level of confidence
for mitigating the targeted risk while presenting the
least impact to business operations?

Perhaps, more than any other set of safeguards, physical
security presents a face to the resident, visitor, and adversary.
It may be imposing, conveying a fortress with increasingly
discriminating layers of monitoring and control; it may be
welcoming on entry, with highly selective controls at specific
focal points of protection; or it may merely be a friendly con-
cierge politely asking for your identification. If you have ever
planned a comprehensive, integrated security system for a
business that has to work seamlessly every day, you realize the
range of opinions on the necessity of secure versus open
access and the presence of big brother in the workplace. After
9/11, or a significant workplace violence incident, the number
of changed views on the level of physical security desired is
extraordinary.
Your Objective: An Integrated Solution
The purpose of design, in security or any other area, is to
invent an order or arrangement of components and details of a
system in accordance with a plan. In all cases, a system is
designed for a purpose. In the case of an integrated security
systems design, the design method is to select and incorporate
the various technological and physical elements along with per-
sonnel and procedures into a unified system, which protects
identified assets and controls risks by reducing or eliminating
vulnerabilities based upon an identified threat.
The purpose of integration is to produce a complete, uni-
fied system, by bringing together individual parts. For the
security manager, system integration is the art of fusing
security
equipment,
facilities,
personnel,
and
procedures
together seamlessly in a manner that results in proactive asset
protection. The result is a fully integrated security system that
must respond effectively to dynamic threats and risks during
crisis conditions and, at the same time, function imper-
ceptibly during normal operating conditions. Whereas design
It is possible to secure an asset with 100% confidence in the security measures you have chosen to apply. The
problem is the degree to which your solution has adversely impacted the business and the confidence management
has in security.
110
Chapter 9 PHYSICAL SECURITY AND FIRST RESPONSE

generates the various security elements to respond to (or miti-
gate or prevent) a particular threat or risk, integration com-
bines them into a workable, day-to-day system and overall
security program strategy for effective asset protection. Proper
use and application of the integrated security design process is
the
single
most
important
aspect
in
the
defense
against
dynamic threats and potential catastrophic losses. The process,
when carefully and diligently adhered to, results in a fully
integrated security program that incorporates all of the essen-
tial elements needed to effectively protect critical assets and
control identified risks.
Physical Security at a Glance
Figure 9.1 displays the various elements involved in the
administration of an integrated physical and operational secu-
rity program. If you were planning a bottom-up retrofit of cur-
rent systems or development of a responsive system at a new
facility, you would do well to engage a qualified consultant with
no ties to a specific hardware vendor. The preparation of design
and bid documents, as well as the testing and acceptance pro-
cess, is a complex undertaking. Except in rare circumstances,
neither you nor your purchasing staff will have the time or
expertise to develop the requisite documentation essential to
project success.
Alignment with the Threat
Effective physical security is a relative term, dependent in
large measure on management’s understanding and acceptance
of the gravity and sophistication of the threats arrayed against
valued assets. Threats may be specified by regulation or your
expert opinion. The most serious source of threat is from the
knowledgeable insider who possesses access and knows where
the vulnerabilities in protection capabilities may be exploited.
Furthermore, any discussion about threat must be accompanied
by an understanding of likelihood. One approach is to display
your risk assessment findings something like the manner shown
in Figure 9.2.
Chapter 9 PHYSICAL SECURITY AND FIRST RESPONSE 111

Barrier/Delay Subsystem
Fences & Clear Zones 
Walls & Vaults 
Turnstiles & Mantraps 
Locking Devices 
Deployable Barriers 
Access Control Subsystem
Electronic Credentials 
Restricted Areas & Access Lists 
Audio/Video 
Staffed Portals 
Assessment Subsystem
Video/Audio 
Security Lighting 
Fixed Posts 
Security Patrols 
Informed/Aware Population 
Detection Subsystem
Sensors 
CCTV-Motion Detection 
Access Control Devices 
Explosives/Other Detection 
Informed/Aware Population 
Personnel Subsystem
Security Management 
Line Security Operations 
Off-site Response 
Selection & Training 
Plans & Procedures Subsystem
Operational Procedures  
Response Protocols 
Crisis Operations 
Testing & Maintenance 
Integrated Physical
Security Program 
Objectives:
Deter
Detect
Delay
Assess & Identify
Respond & Engage
Inhibit Adversary Success
 Support Subsystem
Primary & Secondary Power 
Voice & Data Communications 
Computers & Software 
Real-time Monitoring & Displays 
Independent Inspection/Review 
Fire & Life Safety Subsystem
Designed and deployed
consistent with the likely
threat and ability of the
business to operate
securely and efficiently
Operated with an
understanding that
the ability to
proactively identify
hazards is the
primary objective
of the protection
strategy    
Adaptable-
Tested to assure
quality of
response and
ability to learn
from actual
incidents      
Economical-
implemented
on system-wide
cost / benefit
standards
Technically adept-
ability to integrate
into the
technologically
evolving host
infrastructure
requirements
Defensible-
Meets legal &
regulatory
requirements
Operating
Environment
Figure 9.1 Integrated Physical and Operational Security Program. The various elements involved in the
administration of an integrated physical and operational security program.
112
Chapter 9 PHYSICAL SECURITY AND FIRST RESPONSE

Effective physical security has multiple objectives, including
the following:
•
Deter—Make protection visible enough to discourage the
potential adversary.1
•
Detect—Provide the capabilities necessary to ensure earliest
(and most reliable) possible notification of the threat.
•
Delay—Through the use of barriers, detection systems, or
active surveillance, impose time constraints in the adver-
sary’s path to his or her objective.
•
Assess and identify—Provide the capabilities to understand
clearly and to reliably record the nature and extent of the
threat.2
Program Strength & Effectiveness
Highly Effective
Ineffective
Risk Exposure
Minimal Security Program
Infrequent Risk Audits
Minimal Employee Awareness
Inadequate Board Attention
Inadequate Sr. Mgt. Attention
Failure to Conduct Risk Assessments
Failure to Examine Incidents for Lessons
Minimal Business Conduct Policy
Managed
Unmanaged
No Pre-employment Background Vetting
Minimal Risk-Based 3rd Party Due Diligence
No Security-Based Relationships
with Business Partners
No Periodic Management Updates
on Security Issues
Reliance on Low Bid Contract Security
Figure 9.2 Threat
Assessment Measuring
Likelihood. Any discussion
about threat must be
accompanied by an
understanding of likelihood.
1A case may be made that the most effective security is invisible, especially when one
considers the potential environmental impact of more highly visible security
measures. This is a cultural issue that you will have to consider.
2This depends upon your assessment of likelihood and the potential need to
successfully prosecute using reliable and defensible identification capabilities.
Chapter 9 PHYSICAL SECURITY AND FIRST RESPONSE 113

•
Respond—Provide resources sufficient to mitigate the threat.
•
Inhibit adversary escape—Provide detection, assessment,
and positioning of response forces to minimize probability
of adversary escape.
These terms are not meant to conjure up terrorists repelling down
the sides of your buildings. The sequence of events for response
to any attack incident has these elements. Obviously, each step
will be graded depending on the value of the asset and the level of
risk established between security and the asset owner.
A key point to make to management is that you can make
your facilities virtually impenetrable. The only problem will be
the business’s inability to get anything accomplished. Finding
the appropriate balance between being secure and insecure will
be the challenge. Business people want convenience, openness,
and absence of constraints on their work and the comfort of
their invitees. The law expects a safe and secure workplace, and
after a threatening incident, most employees want that sense of
security as well, at least for a while.
A casual tour of the ASIS (American Society for Industrial
Security) annual conference exhibit hall floor is enough to con-
vey the expanse and diversity of the physical security inventory.
What is clear is the convergence of physical security into the
larger infrastructure of the organization. Modern electronic
security is network-ready, and current open architecture stan-
dards facilitate communication among various components
from different vendors across the corporate data infrastructure.
Differing, dated security systems, largely incapable of true
integration, are a challenge often found by security executives
when preexisting property has been acquired during various
expansions. This situation may place extra burdens on a central-
ized monitoring capability and on the need for reliable mainte-
nance. Where acquisition is in the offing, be sure to inject
yourself into the due diligence of the infrastructure on the prop-
erty, and inform the accountable parties on what needs to be
done to bring the property up to your standards of protection.
There are excellent, expert resources available to assist in the
planning and preparation of bid documents. Carefully consider
how you will be (or are now) monitoring your suite of hardware.
Physical security is in the eye of the beholder. You have the ability to convey a fortress image or be virtually
invisible (yet still effective). Your test is to understand and be culturally sensitive to the unique needs of your
company. Ensure that your security strategy has executive endorsement.
114
Chapter 9 PHYSICAL SECURITY AND FIRST RESPONSE

Unfortunately, well planned, resilient, and reliable systems are
worthless in the hands of untrained, unaware, and unsupervised
central station or command center operators or unprepared
response personnel.
Security Operations
As noted in Figure 9.1, an integrated physical security system
effectively incorporates an operational element to establish a
qualitative program management and response infrastructure. We
discuss some of the noteworthy risk issues in Chapter 12, “Safe
and Secure Workplaces,” and in Appendix C we provide model
procurement documents for selecting a contract guard force. This
physical security operational element is the most visible compo-
nent of a corporate security program and typically comprises the
largest share of the security program budget. In many companies
it may be the only security program having that label. More
sophisticated investigations may be occasional and contracted
out under the purview of legal. Likewise, information security
becomes a mere operational element of the IT department. What
is important to underscore here is the need to establish clear qual-
itative
standards
and
expectations
around
these
response
resources, and to understand their role in the following: premises
liability protection; security incident, emergency medical, and
business interruption response; and operational management of
the security technology infrastructure.
Owing to the budget visibility of security operations, eco-
nomic downturn, downsizing, and other responses to business
pressure,
these
resources
are
a
potentially
fruitful
target.
Management needs to be cautioned that such times often bring
an increased potential for workplace hostility, theft, and sabo-
tage, and reductions in first responder and physical security
resources need to be carefully approached. What is that essen-
tial level of protection? What is the resource reduction baseline
below which you believe the cost of likely risk potential will add
to the cost of doing business?
If you refresh your understanding of risk assessment based on
the
steps
discussed
in
Chapter
3,
“Risk
Assessment
and
Mitigation,” and Chapter 4, “Strategic Security Planning,” you
have a handle on known vulnerabilities and risk trends. From this
foundation you can demonstrate that at various levels of security
resource reduction combined with the likely increase of people
and property risk, your ability to prevent, detect, and adequately
respond will be impacted at an unacceptable exposure to risk.
Chapter 9 PHYSICAL SECURITY AND FIRST RESPONSE 115

The Quality of First Response
The term “first responder” is justifiably at the center of the
post-9/11 vocabulary. What is missing in these discussions and
strategies is the fact that until public resources arrive, often it is
a member of the corporate security team who is the first
responder. Consider the following from a security executive
(who wished to remain anonymous) who manages a global,
proprietary security operation:
The rapid “quality” response goes beyond imminent life safety
issues. I might add that in the age of heightened terror alerts,
hoaxes, suspicious powders, and public sensitivity to air quality
issues, having a trained staff that works collaboratively with
facilities will go a long way to reducing risk, business impact,
and employee anxiety. Taking certain measures to proactively
contain a white powder substance, cordon off the area, and
isolate exposed individuals, or to proactively shut HVAC air
intakes when a fire rages next door (with unknown airborne
contaminants), goes a long way to building credibility with
public safety officials, employees, and C-suite executives when
you can return to business as usual faster than would have been
possible by watching and waiting.
As for defibrillators, as they become more ubiquitous, seconds
matter more than ever. According to the American Heart
Association (AHA) the chance of surviving a cardiac arrest
decreases 10% with each passing minute. The victim is brain
dead at seven to eight minutes. Even the best public safety
response can’t control traffic, weather, and “vertical response”
time, a.k.a. elevators. Therefore, if security can be there in three
minutes, that is a big difference. To complement response, we are
now training all floor wardens on automated external
defibrillators (AED) and CPR. The American Hospital Association
made the training simpler (less than two hours); and, my
thinking is, with these things in malls and airports, I’m putting
them in our internal “public” areas. There is no measurement for
the perceived quality of the security organization when the life
of an employee or visitor has been saved by quick, qualified
first response.
Now, consider this comparison of response times by trained
on-premises security officers and local emergency medical
technicians at ten locations throughout the United States (see
Figure 9.3).
116
Chapter 9 PHYSICAL SECURITY AND FIRST RESPONSE

All Space Is Not Created Equal
Your company’s business processes have varying levels of
criticality, some requiring complete redundancy to ensure
seamless rollover upon interruption, and some capable of being
restored in a matter of days or weeks. Plan your physical secu-
rity strategy around those most-secure areas at the center of
layered protection, with tailored protection suited to less sensi-
tive spaces. Effective access control is a key element from the
perimeter inward, for both outsider and insider adversaries.
Assets move, often without security’s knowledge, so it is impor-
tant to keep that risk assessment current, especially for the
most sensitive operations and spaces.
Physical Security as a Force Multiplier
The chart in Figure 9.4 illustrates how well-planned physical
access control can be a force multiplier while directly contribut-
ing to the bottom line. In this case, while business space was
rapidly expanding, security thought through how the combina-
tion of well-configured barriers, CCTV, and card access would
have enabled significantly less growth in guard force headcount.
Similar success has been achieved with 24/7 remote video mon-
itoring. Two additional advantages are the elimination of some
receptionist positions and depreciation of the equipment over a
five-year period.
Average medical response time by site
20
15
10
# Minutes from call
5
0
1
Emergency medical services
Security operations
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Figure 9.3 Average Medical Response
Time by Site. Comparison of response
times by trained on-premises security
officers and local emergency medical
technicians at ten locations throughout
the United States.
Chapter 9 PHYSICAL SECURITY AND FIRST RESPONSE 117

Equipment Removal and Value of Risk
Assessments
As businesses evolve and grow, physical security devices are
deployed throughout the enterprise, but with what frequency
are they removed when the risk dynamics they were intended
to aid change? Be wary of the cost of ownership for devices that
no longer add value because the assets they were intended to
protect have been eliminated, moved, changed, or otherwise
modified to change the protection objective.
Security Riding on the Corporate Network
Many of the legacy security systems you now possess origi-
nally communicated on dedicated wire installed from the
device in the protected area to some sort of local controller and
then to the on-site monitoring station. Pulling all this wire was
a costly exercise. Now, with the capabilities of corporate-wide
IT networks, much of the new device inventory can ride on this
extensive network at significantly reduced cost and typically
higher security. Consequently, you find a number of IT execu-
tives taking on the physical security program as a logical sub-
system of the larger IT system. Many of the access control
systems, network-ready CCTV, and other components require
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
% Growth in occupied space
% Growth in access control devices
% Additional security officers
Figure 9.4 Physical Security as a Force
Multiplier. Illustration of how well-planned
physical access control can be a force multiplier
while directly contributing to the bottom line.
118
Chapter 9 PHYSICAL SECURITY AND FIRST RESPONSE

little bandwidth and, importantly, are scalable to facilitate
growth. They are also attractive in that they enable smart-card
credentials or biometrics to be employed for more secure desk-
top log on. A term in contemporary use for this broader integra-
tion of IT and security systems is convergence, which is often
cited as revolutionary when it simply is an evolution, given the
growth of dedicated networks throughout the enterprise.
A Note on Convergence
Over the past few years, there has been a growing interest
and application of converged physical and IT security functions.
We allude to this in Chapter 6, “Organizational Models.” These
discussions often focus upon organizational developments such
as the following:
•
integrated IT security and physical security systems
•
unified auditing and response systems of physical and IT
events
•
systems for correlating physical and IT security events
•
common access policy management and control
•
common user provisioning
•
single access credentials
•
physical security solutions on IT networks3
There is a clear requirement for a converged security strategy
and shared responsibility for corporate-wide security, regardless
if physical and IT security (as well as contingency planning and
other protection functions) are under a single executive or are
separated.
Highlights for Follow-Up
•
If there were one fundamental improvement you could make
to the physical security of your facilities, what would it be?
How exposed are you with the knowledge of this need?
THE BOTTOM LINE: Your physical security program effectively should balance responsiveness to known risks
and an acceptable level of inconvenience to the business.
3Thanks to John McClurg, chief risk and security officer at Honeywell.
Chapter 9 PHYSICAL SECURITY AND FIRST RESPONSE 119

•
Are your in-house first responders qualified to provide defin-
itive care to victims of medical emergencies?
•
Is there any opportunity to expand the use of security tech-
nology to reduce the level of manpower?
•
Have you developed a policy or guidelines to influence the
protection standards of your company’s facilities and opera-
tions? Do you have a template for security system fit-out of
new facilities?
•
If you have objectively reviewed the security systems now in
place, do you believe you have an effectively integrated
physical security program?
•
If you are under the scope of any state or federal regulations,
are you now in compliance with applicable physical security,
access control, and other operational security requirements?
•
To what extent are you confident in the abilities of available
vendors to execute your plans for electronic security system
specifications and in their capabilities to upgrade and main-
tain your program consistent with the risk management pro-
file you have specified?
•
Evaluate your command center. How well does it provide
operators with real-time information that they can effectively
evaluate and act upon? How reliable is the system that col-
lects and displays alarm and other essential aural and visual
data? Does the head end essential to command and control
provide 99.9% uptime reliability?
Key Terms
•
Integrated solution
•
Threat alignment
•
Security operations
•
First response
•
Physical security
•
Risk assessments
•
Convergence
•
Physical security
•
First response
•
Physical security program
•
Threat assessment
•
Force multiplier
•
IT security
120
Chapter 9 PHYSICAL SECURITY AND FIRST RESPONSE

10
SECURITY TRAINING AND
EDUCATION
Introduction
The professional development of you and your security team
during this time of dynamic change is of utmost importance
and must be a top priority for the security organization. There
are a variety of developmental programs offered by professional
associations, trade organizations, governmental agencies, and
academic institutions to meet your organization’s requirements
and responsibilities. Many programs are offered online, requir-
ing minimum disruption to regular business activities, and they
range from certificate programs to university curriculums.
These outside learning activities, coupled with internal and
organizational development programs, will enhance the reactive
and proactive activities of the organization.
Business Value
A security organization that understands and can respond to
the needs of their customers in a timely manner, provides
value-added service. Staffs that are poorly trained and educated
will lack the skills and knowledge to properly respond to protec-
tion of asset issues (people, property, information, and reputa-
tion). Furthermore, a lack of understanding of current and
future asset protection trends and the strategic plans of the
parent organization will severely restrict the development of
proactive programs. For example, a poorly trained emergency
response team may result in unnecessary loss of life and prop-
erty. Inadequate competencies by information security and
business continuity teams impact the ability to foresee risk and
response capabilities. Insufficiently prepared and trained inves-
tigators alienate the business entities and maximize potential
recurrence of crime and misconduct with resulting exposure to
potential liability issues. Highly trained staff and business units
121

utilizing state-of-the-art asset protection programs may result
in
improved
insurance
coverage
and
deductibles
directly
impacting the bottom line.
The Essentials
At the core of any successful security program is an effective
training and education plan geared at both security personnel
and nonsecurity personnel.
Objectives of Security-Related Training and
Education
All security-related training and education programs should
contain the following:
•
Job-related
competencies
and
skills
are
identified
and
prioritized.
•
Job performance and capabilities are enhanced.
•
Training and educational programs are aligned with overall
business strategies.
•
Proactive requirements are identified and programs are
initiated.
•
Advancement opportunities are expanded, thereby increas-
ing incentives for self-improvement.
•
Pride and personal job satisfaction are enhanced.
•
Cost savings are obtained through reduced turnover and in-
house promotion versus costly external recruiting.
•
Customer satisfaction is increased through demonstrated
competency of security personnel.
•
Liability risk and future losses are reduced.
Training Options
There is a wide range of professional development and job
enhancement programs available. A search of the Internet or a
review of appropriate trade and association publications will
identify programs to meet a particular training objective or skill
set. Professional association or academic certificate programs
may require a fee. However, many governmental agency pro-
grams are free. Company programs in the areas of strategic
planning, financial management, human resources policies,
audit procedures, and information systems may be available
and need to be considered. The support of senior management
122
Chapter 10 SECURITY TRAINING AND EDUCATION

is demonstrated through employee incentives such as reim-
bursement upon successful completion, increased compensa-
tion, or annual bonuses for selected certifications such as
emergency medical technician (EMT), certified fraud investiga-
tor, and other critical job-related skills. Completion of special-
ized certificate or academic programs should be considered
during promotional opportunities. Undergraduate or graduate
programs in various asset protection disciplines are offered
locally
or
through
online
programs.
Such
programs
may
serve as a prerequisite for advancement or movement into
areas requiring unique competencies and technical skills. The
academic, training, and promotional policies of the security
organization should follow the same requirements and incen-
tives as other company business entities.
In-House Training
It is paramount that the security staff understands the core
values, competencies, and objectives of the business. After cur-
rent and future job-related competencies and skills are identi-
fied and prioritized, in-house developmental programs offered
by HR and other business units need to be explored. These pro-
grams will not only enhance the knowledge base of the partici-
pant but also demonstrate to others a willingness to learn the
operation of various business units. These partnerships will
enhance the development of proactive programs and ensure a
staff with current competencies. In special circumstances, it
may be beneficial to detail a security professional to a critical or
risk-prone business unit for a specified period to learn the unit’s
business processes, resulting in an asset protection program
meeting
the
overall
objectives
of
security
and
the
unit.
Participating in these in-house programs may enhance the
development of multidisciplinary teams to protect assets and
improve recovery or business-resumption time. For example, it
is particularly important for the investigative staff to understand
the beliefs of a particular business process that are arcane, mys-
terious, or secret, thus enabling improved understanding of
fraud potential and the nuances when interviewing a person
with a knowledge base in that particular field.
Certificate Programs
There are a number of certificate programs available through
professional associations, government agencies, and academic
Chapter 10 SECURITY TRAINING AND EDUCATION 123

institutions. These programs are usually designed to address a
particular skill. Many programs are offered online and may be
completed 24/7, while requiring minimum disruption to routine
business activities and personal obligations. These programs
may require participation involving several hours to several
months. As an added incentive, some programs may include
undergraduate or graduate academic credit, which may be
applied towards a degree program. The objectives and require-
ments of each program should be carefully considered to
ensure that it meets the employee’s career development and
business objective. Programs in homeland security, risk assess-
ment, business continuity and recovery, fraud investigation,
information security, and business practices may meet some of
the security organization’s needs.
Academic Programs
A number of renowned academic institutions offer under-
graduate, graduate, or doctoral degree programs in security
management, information systems, homeland security, or risk
management. Many of these programs integrate theory from
selected disciplines, particularly the social sciences and busi-
ness, to understand crime causation, terrorism, crime control,
and the administration and management of criminal justice
and corporate security. Many programs allow the participant to
take cross-disciplinary courses (supply chain, information sys-
tems, finance, product safety, business processes) to meet their
personal objectives. Aside from the traditional areas of curricu-
lum and study, many programs are enhanced by active outreach
staffs connected with practitioners’ concerns, applied research
and theory, international or study abroad programs, and gov-
ernment grants addressing current issues. These programs
should contain a strong academic emphasis, which also reflects
the changing needs of the student, practitioner, and commu-
nity. Institutions may offer a combination of undergraduate on-
campus or online programs. Some institutions offer an entire
graduate-level program online. Financial assistance may be pro-
vided through scholarships or company reimbursements upon
course or program completion.
Development Plan
All employees should have a developmental plan, in collabo-
ration with their supervisor, that meets department and HR
124
Chapter 10 SECURITY TRAINING AND EDUCATION

policies. The developmental plan should be a part of the
employee’s file and reviewed on an annual basis or when a posi-
tion change is made. Company assessment processes may help
to identify employees with promotional potential or those in
need of other skills. The formal performance review process
should cover progress made against agreed upon skills and
goals. The review should identify requirement shortfalls and
address next steps for training or improvement.
Contractors and Vendors
If various components of your program have been outsourced,
you should ensure that specified personnel skill sets and require-
ments are identified and mandated in contracts. This will require
a close partnership with the business unit receiving the security
service and the purchasing department or other entity responsi-
ble for supplier contracts and services. This may require criteria
for
pre-employment
selection,
pre-assignment
training,
and
on-site or on-the-job training. The cost and hours of training
must be clearly understood and stated in the contract. An audit
of the training received by contract employees must be made on
a regular basis, and the contract should include a breach-
of-training penalty. The security manager should view the skill
sets of contract employees, and they should be similar to proprie-
tary personnel who have previously performed the tasks. Inability
to perform a particular asset protection task should not be
dependent on whether the responder is a contractor or company
employee. Information security personnel, specialty investigators,
and first responders are examples of employees possessing spe-
cial skill sets. Security management needs to recognize that,
when outsourcing, they still maintain the responsibility of provid-
ing the business with competent services.
Training Business Units in Security-Related
Responsibilities
It has been emphasized that, in a decentralized business
activity, each business unit has the primary responsibility for
protecting its assets. However, by making this a partnership pro-
cess,
the
protection of
company
assets
is
enhanced,
and
all employees believe that they are stakeholders in the process.
The security organization must provide leadership and awareness
Chapter 10 SECURITY TRAINING AND EDUCATION 125

to each business unit and be their “broker” in asset-protection
initiatives. The units need to understand reactive and proactive
activities and develop the sensitivity on when to alert the secu-
rity organizations to threats beyond their scope of handling.
The security organization may need to develop awareness pro-
grams or advise business units on outside training programs, as
described earlier, to meet their particular risks. Business unit
employees must be made aware of risks and be provided with
the necessary skills sets to execute appropriate security tasks
effectively. The business unit must understand that they are the
first level of defense against threats and risk, which must be
controlled at their level.
Of course, these activities and partnerships are highly
dependent upon how the company has structured its security
services. In some business models, the security organization is
limited to a central staff function, essentially providing a pol-
icy framework and expert logistical support. In more decentra-
lized models, the security organization may take a more
“hands-on” approach. Regardless of the operating philosophy,
the security organization must ensure that the business units
or person with the primary asset protection responsibility
have the required skill sets. Typical examples of jobs, which
may be assigned to business units, are fraud detection or
investigation, risk management, information-security adminis-
tration, contingency planning, access control, loss prevention,
and other unique risk-specific jobs. Regardless of the struc-
ture, reaching into business units to provide awareness and
training maximizes the scope of the security program, obtains
buy-in from stakeholders, and eliminates plausible denial on
accountability.
Tracking Training Administration
It is important to maintain a training plan that not only pro-
vides for content but also records the targeted number of hours
versus those that were actually provided (as shown in Figure 10.1).
Such records are useful in demonstrating 111 regulatory compli-
ance and as a defense should litigation for deficient security be an
issue.
THE BOTTOM LINE: Given security’s mission, the highest level of competence of every member of the team is
essential.
126
Chapter 10 SECURITY TRAINING AND EDUCATION

Highlights for Follow-Up
•
How would you assess the work-related competencies and
skills of key members of your team? Are you doing every-
thing possible to address competency development and pro-
fessional growth?
•
Are you satisfied with the level of understanding of business
process by investigative, information security, and contin-
gency planning teams?
•
Which incentives does the company offer for employees to
pursue work-related training, professional certifications, and
educational opportunities?
•
Are you satisfied that the periodic performance review pro-
cess provides adequate assessment of competencies and
skills?
•
Are you knowledgeable about in-house, governmental, and
academic programs to address employee career development
needs?
•
Are your career development and training programs aligned
with other business units and HR policies?
•
Is there a clear understanding with company business units
regarding security responsibilities? Has guidance been pro-
vided on training requirements and resources?
•
Are you satisfied with the training provided to contract
personnel? In what ways do shortcomings evidence themselves?
•
Do outsourcing contracts contain selection and training
criteria, and is the responsibility clearly delineated?
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Security Force First
Responders
Business Contingency
Planners
Receptionists/Gatekeepers
Information Security
Administrators
Info Security Forensic
Team
Security Equipment
Technicians
Fraud Investigators
Current year
Prior year
Target
Figure 10.1 Hours of Security-Related Training. It is important to maintain a training plan that not only provides for
content but also records the targeted number of hours versus those that were actually provided.
Chapter 10 SECURITY TRAINING AND EDUCATION 127

Key Terms
•
Security-related training and education
•
Training options
•
In-house training
•
Certificate programs
•
Academic programs
•
Security-related responsibilities
•
Training administration
•
Corporate security training and education
•
Development plans
•
Personnel development
128
Chapter 10 SECURITY TRAINING AND EDUCATION

11
COMMUNICATION AND
AWARENESS PROGRAMS
Introduction
Just as the security policy provides the legal framework and
sets expectations, the security awareness program keeps those
expectations fresh and in front of those people who need to
know and understand them. Awareness eliminates denial and
focuses on accountability. Employees must share the responsi-
bility for securing the company’s reputation, its people, and its
assets.
Business Value
There are multiple benefits to an informed and aware
employee population, including the following:
•
Employees understand their role in protection and are in the
best position to see a hazard or vulnerability.
•
Employees can more intelligently identify, prevent, and
respond to potential issues.
•
Management views security as a business partner.
•
Employees understand the value of security for business.
•
Management depends on security to educate, inform, and
advise regarding security issues.
There are also consequences of an unaware population. The
security department represented in Figure 11.1 understands
that knowledge is critical to the notion of shared responsibility
for protection. The survey portrayed was conducted both over
the intranet and in brief, personal exchanges to determine
respondent awareness of five basic security policies. As a result,
the department now knows where and how to target increased
awareness.
129

The Essentials
Customarily, your company will have an internal communi-
cations function that can help craft and deliver your message in
ways that conform to current practice. The corporate intranet is
an especially powerful medium to convey both urgent messages
as well as the content of specific security awareness campaigns.
Security should also have a slot in the orientation program for
new employees. The focus of your program will be tied to risk
exposure and the role that either the general population or a
specific organizational group can play in mitigation. Urgency,
such as with a virus attack, will influence the media used, but
regardless, the purpose is to fix clearly the notion of shared
responsibility and what new employees need to do to play a
responsive role.
Your security communication program should include a
smart mix of the following strategies and tactics.
0
10
Exec. Group (N = 56)
Admin. Svcs. (N = 94)
Sales Div. (N = 247)
Visitor Escort Policy
Safe/Secure Workplace
Clean Desk Policy
Incident Reporting
Physical Access Policy
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Conducted Q2, 2005, 397 Responses = 62% Response Rate
Survey of Security Policy Awareness
Figure 11.1 Survey of
Security Policy
Awareness. Results of a
survey conducted both
over the intranet and in
brief, personal exchanges
to determine respondent
awareness of five basic
security policies.
An excellent source of data on lack of awareness may be found in incident post-mortems. If your message is stale,
absent, or the pitch did not work, this is the place to home in on improvements.
130
Chapter 11 COMMUNICATION AND AWARENESS PROGRAMS

Strategies
•
Send messages that are targeted to different functions or
owners.
•
Create a visual identity, such as a logo for security that is
included on all messaging.
•
Consider a tagline.
•
Focus security strategies on business issues.
•
Use site or facility coordinators to assist in communications.
•
Encourage employees to communicate with security.
•
Quickly
and
professionally
respond
to
any
employee
communications.
•
Fully utilize the power and reach of the corporate intranet—
get on employee desktops with important messages, but
don’t overdo this facility.
Tactics
•
Communications should be short and easy to read and
understand.
•
Advertise awareness initiatives on the corporate intranet.
•
Convey the benefits to business in every communication.
•
Determine the best communication time schedules per
audience.
•
Provide
a
means
to
evaluate
the
effectiveness
of
the
message.
•
Regularly update information, for example with via a hand-
book or the intranet.
•
Provide real-life examples, whether within the company or
about competitors.
•
Make security fun—use games or prizes to raise levels of
awareness.
Security Awareness Approaches
Table 11.1 displays various types of security awareness
approaches to several typical business risks usually found
within the mission of a corporate security organization. Bear in
mind that this is a baseline and does not include all factors of
an awareness program such as constituencies, roles and respon-
sibilities, and level of awareness by constituencies. Clearly, fac-
tors of an awareness program will also have items specific to
the type of company and industry.
Chapter 11 COMMUNICATION AND AWARENESS PROGRAMS 131

Table 11.1 Security Awareness Approaches to
Typical Business Risks
Risk
Category
Risk Issue
Countermeasure
Who Needs to
Know?
Awareness
Program
Elements
Business
Continuity
and
Resiliency
Business disruption
Business continuity plan.
All
Documentation,
training exercises,
company
newsletters,
leadership
briefings
Business
Continuity
and
Resiliency
Business disruption
Crisis management plan.
Corp. Security, BU
Leader, Senior
Management,
BOD
Documentation,
training, emails,
exercise
Business
Continuity
and
Resiliency
Business disruption
Disaster recovery plan.
Corp. Security, BU
Leader, Senior
Management,
BOD
Documentation,
training, exercises
Business
Continuity
and
Resiliency
Risk mitigation gaps
Unified Risk Oversightt team. Corp. Security, IT,
Audit, HR,
Compliance, BU
Leaders
Meetings, emails,
documentation
Business
Continuity
and
Resiliency
Outsourcing failures
Vetting program: Background
check, security check, user
references, compliance (if
relevant)
Corp. Security,
Senior
Management,
Legal
Meetings,
documentation
Financial
Fraud/embezzlement
Fraud protection program:
Prohibited activities policy,
background checks, and
audits.
All
Documentation,
Intranet,
leadership
briefings
Financial
Unauthorized access to
property, facilities, and
systems affecting
reporting integrity.
Facility access policy.
All
Documentation,
emails, posters,
leadership
briefings
Financial
Unauthorized access to
property, facilities, and
systems affecting
reporting integrity.
Role-based rules.
Corp. Security,
Senior
Management,
BOD, BU Leader
Emails,
documentation
(Continued )
132
Chapter 11 COMMUNICATION AND AWARENESS PROGRAMS

Table 11.1 (Continued)
Risk
Category
Risk Issue
Countermeasure
Who Needs to
Know?
Awareness
Program
Elements
Financial
Disruption, losses, or
reputation damage at key
events.
Offsite event program.
Corp. Security,
HR, BU Leader,
Staff
Documentation,
Intranet,
leadership
briefings
Human
Capital
Accidents involving
executives, employees,
contractors, customers,
guests, and visitors.
Environment, health, and
safety program: Policies,
standards, risk reporting, and
audits.
All
Emails, Intranet,
posters, training
Human
Capital
Criminal victimization of
executives, employees,
contractors, customers,
guests, and visitors.
Crime prevention program
policies and standards
including workplace violence
program and ethics program:
Prevention, response,
remediation.
All
Email, Intranet,
training
Human
Capital
Victimization in high-risk
(global/international)
assignments period and
travel.
Travel program: Assessment,
prevention, response,
remediation.
All
Documentation,
Intranet
Information
Theft of exposed
information.
Clean desk policy.
All
Emails, Intranet,
company
newsletters
Information
Inadvertent disclosure of
customer information.
Risk reviews.
All
Documentation,
emails, Intranet
Information
Inadvertent disclosure of
proprietary information.
Classification scheme and
audit.
All
Documentation,
emails, company
newsletters
Information
Misuse and information
loss through Internet,
email, IM, or other
application usages.
Information systems usage
policy.
All
Emails, Intranet,
company
newsletters
Information
Information loss through
IT systems.
System monitoring processes. Corp. Security, IT,
HR, Legal
Emails,
Documentation
Information
Unauthorized access to
systems.
Authorized use policy and
standards.
Corp. Security, IT,
HR, BU Leader
Documentation,
emails
Information
Unauthorized access to
systems.
Role-based rules.
Corp. Security, IT,
HR, BU Leader
Documentation
Information
Damage from virus, worm,
Trojan horse, or bots,
Computer use/email policy.
All
Emails, Intranet,
company
newsletters
(Continued )
Chapter 11 COMMUNICATION AND AWARENESS PROGRAMS 133

Table 11.1 (Continued)
Risk
Category
Risk Issue
Countermeasure
Who Needs to
Know?
Awareness
Program
Elements
Information
Loss through social
engineering of sensitive
or critical information.
Process for vetting external
requests.
All
Poster, emails
Legal,
Regulations,
Compliance,
and Liability
Regulatory compliance of
ethics
Corporate governance
program: Committee
formation, assessment,
policy, response, audit,
whistleblower protection
processes.
All
Policy sign-off,
Intranet, meetings,
company
newsletters,
leadership
briefings
Legal,
Regulations,
Compliance,
and Liability
Business regulatory
compliance
Environment, health, and
safety program including
hazard reviews and post-
event reviews.
All
Meetings,
Documentation,
training
Legal,
Regulations,
Compliance,
and Liability
Security regulatory
compliance
Compliance program:
Assessment, controls,
implementation, policies.
Corp. Security, IT,
Audit, Senior
Management,
BOD, Legal
Meetings,
Documentation
Physical and
Premises
Loss of property, product,
information, automated
capability, dependent
process, etc.
Property protection program:
Processes, assigned
responsibility, detection,
investigation, recovery.
All, Law
Enforcement
Documentation,
emails, Intranet
Physical and
Premises
Loss of property, product,
information, automated
capability, dependent
process, etc.
Exception detection,
reporting, investigation,
mitigation, and recovery.
Corp. Security,
Senior
Management
Emails,
Documentation
Physical and
Premises
Loss of property, product,
information, automated
capability, dependent
process, etc.
Authorized use policy and
standards.
All
Intranet, emails,
training
Reputation
Damage to brand
reputation
Brand investigations/diversion
period.
Corp. Security,
Senior
Management,
BOD, Legal, PR
Documentation
Reputation
Counterfeit products in
marketplace
Counterfeit prevention,
detection, and reduction
program period.
Corp. Security,
Senior
Management,
BOD, Legal
Documentation,
meetings,
Leadership
briefings
This is a baseline and does not include all factors of an awareness program such as constituencies, roles and responsibilities, and
level of awareness by constituencies.
134
Chapter 11 COMMUNICATION AND AWARENESS PROGRAMS

In this arena, you are very much the same as any advertiser
trying to sell a product or idea. You must know your audience.
Furthermore, your delivery has to be tailored to the knowledge
of what will grab them and create the solution or result you
expect. Would you give a tri-fold brochure on information secu-
rity
classifications
to
the
senior
management
team?
No.
However, you might spend some time with their administrative
assistants, who really administer the traffic and are aware of
what needs to be done to protect the executives.
Figure 11.2 displays an example of how an awareness pro-
gram, combined with physical security enhancements, engaged
the employee population to reduce costly and damaging laptop
computer thefts. Commencing in January we see a spike in
thefts and a post-mortem conclusion that they had been lost
in spaces with poor access control discipline, which resulted in
a focused and visible employee badge-display awareness effort.
The next spike in April requires more rigorous access limitations
and the engagement of local police and area businesses having
similar problems. With a continuing loss experience in May and
June, security developed a stick-on message that resembled a
city parking ticket with an easily recognizable icon for unse-
cured laptops found during security tours. When combined
with advertising that unsecured laptops will be seized if found
on after-hour security tours, and several seizures with embar-
rassing supervisory consequences, employee awareness signifi-
cantly contributed to hardened targeting and reduced loss
experience.
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Jan
Feb Mar
Apr May Jun
Jul
Aug Sep
Key arrests
made
Public/Private
Communications
Commence ticketing
unsecured laptop
Security advertises that
unsecured laptop will be
removed from workplace
Security commences
seizing unsecured laptop
Cable locks advertised
and installed
Access limitation
imposed at key entries
Badge awareness
program launched
Oct
Nov Dec
Figure 11.2 Combined
Awareness and Security
Program. An example of how
an awareness program,
combined with physical security
enhancements, engaged the
employee population to reduce
costly and damaging laptop
computer thefts.
Chapter 11 COMMUNICATION AND AWARENESS PROGRAMS 135

Tailoring the Message
Examples abound of businesses failing to understand where
the risks were housed and how to communicate with the resi-
dents of this space. For example, a company issues a strong
message on trade secrets protection and then invites someone
with a new gadget into the inner sanctum without being vetted
and several years of development of a new, benchmark product
go to the competition. The policy in this case was developed at
the insistence of the audit committee, and when it was pre-
sented, it went into the legal files. Other reasons communica-
tion programs fail include the following:
•
No communication strategy other than an intranet commu-
nication to all employees
•
No focused training for those who might have access to this
proprietary data
•
No signature on a statement that acknowledges employees’
obligations to protect
•
No coordination of planning on-policy rollout, therefore
•
No survey to identify the location of all applicable
materials
•
No retroactive security classification scheme for prior
proprietary processes
•
No revision of contracts with vendors on requirements for
protection of proprietary information or acceptance and
sanctions for noncompliance
•
No understanding that third-party vendors had key infor-
mation in their files
•
No rollout to the international divisions because of sepa-
ration of oversight, due to tax issues
Most likely, you have a diverse employee and vendor popula-
tion upon which you rely. If you have a multi-lingual popula-
tion, should you not tailor your program to those individuals
who have access and may fall within this employee group? How
many employees do not have routing access to the corporate
intranet?
You can complete this listing on your own, given your risk
assessment. The message is that awareness of policy, rules,
regulations, standards, accepted business practices, and other
necessary information all succeed where the issuing authority
thoroughly understands, in a detailed way, the risks associ-
ated with required security guidance. Furthermore, if you are
uninformed,
you
will
fail
to
understand
the
depth
and
breadth of dissemination of what you may think are “pro-
tected” materials.
136
Chapter 11 COMMUNICATION AND AWARENESS PROGRAMS

Highlights for Follow-Up
•
Are there any instances of internal investigations (or other
incidents) where the subject indicated a lack of awareness of
a policy that he or she is accused of violating?
•
Are there indications from incident post-mortems or around
any categories of loss investigation that lack of risk aware-
ness contributed directly to the incident? How are you
addressing incident follow-ups for awareness improvement?
•
Is security included
in
the new
employee orientation
program?
•
How are management’s messages conveyed to employees? Is
it via a corporate intranet or other electronic means? How
can your messages be best conveyed for impact? Who in the
corporate communications infrastructure could assist in
crafting and delivering timely and impactful awareness
materials?
•
Have you ever conducted any sort of survey around the
awareness of security policy or recommended practices by
first-line supervisors and other mid-level managers? If you
see more instances of security violations within a specific
business unit, it may be fruitful to determine how aware
and proactive these managers are about their responsibilities
for securing corporate assets and setting appropriate models
for their subordinates.
•
If your company is outsourcing critical business processes,
how are you being assured that your business partner is
making their people aware of their responsibilities to protect
their customer’s interests?
Key Terms
•
Security communication
•
Awareness programs
•
Strategies
•
Tactics
THE BOTTOM LINE: Every employee has a role to play in the protection of corporate assets. Finding responsive
ways to communicate this responsibility is a key building block in a proactive asset protection program.
Chapter 11 COMMUNICATION AND AWARENESS PROGRAMS 137

12
SAFE AND SECURE
WORKPLACES
Introduction
Employees and visitors have an expectation of safety and
security when they enter our workplaces. Having clear policies
to achieve this expectation, enforced by an aware and knowl-
edgeable supervisory team, contribute to a work environment
intolerant to abusive behavior, sexual harassment, or other
intimidating conduct. Key executives have similar expectations
but may resist the requirements of protection, an interesting
challenge for the proactive security manager.
Business Value
There is no upside to failure to protect, especially in the face
of what could happen without knowledgeable safeguards. Have
a senior executive do a quick drill on what they would say to
the press after a notable workplace violence incident that
clearly could have been avoided.
The Essentials
Premises liability and other legal precedents surrounding
deficient safety or security is a driving factor in the need to be
aware of preventable hazards in the workplace. In some states,
there is a legal concept of “one free crime and after that you are
on notice.” Regardless of the size or sophistication of the secu-
rity program, there is a clear need to assess risk, eliminate vul-
nerability, and maintain accurate records on safety and security
incidents.
139

Predictability of Risk
“Safe and secure” requires more than a physical security
program. It requires a thorough understanding of risk dynamics.
Environments and external influences are in constant change.
One new unvetted employee with a tendency or history of
violence can change the balance as clearly as a faulty or poorly
maintained fire alarm system. Know the hazards, test the safe-
guards, and engage employees in awareness. When it comes to
senior executives or their families who may be the focus of
risk, carefully evaluate the vulnerabilities and understand how
the various safeguard options might work within the execu-
tive’s total environment.
The Policy Framework
We cannot imagine a CEO who would reject a stated com-
mitment “to maintain safe and secure workplaces for our
employees and invitees.” This policy provides one of the princi-
pal pillars of the security program. While the prevention of vio-
lence in the workplace is a key concern, many other business
risks are addressed by a set of security activities focused upon
delivery of safe and secure workplaces that
•
protect
assets,
or
provides
stewardship
of
company
resources;
•
protect against business interruption;
•
provide
safety,
in
response
to
medical
and
other
emergencies;
•
provide the protective perimeter around information assets;
and
•
engage employees in hazard awareness and contribute to
employee morale.
Workplace Violence Policy
The sidebar represents a draft workplace violence policy that
may be considered if none currently exists in your company.
Have corporate or outside counsel examine the legal precedents in your state or jurisdiction so that you understand
the standards that have been applied around issues of premises liability and the obligation to protect employees and
invitees. Federal employment law generally requires employers to maintain safe and secure workplaces.
140
Chapter 12 SAFE AND SECURE WORKPLACES

Something like this sample policy, customized for your legal
and cultural environment, is a basic requirement of employ-
ment law.
Workplace Violence Policy
[Designate company] desires to provide a safe work environment for all employees. Any safety or health hazards
in the workplace should be reported to the individual’s manager or the appropriate department, as identified below:
•
To report an unsafe building condition, contact [designated person or department].
•
To report an unauthorized person on premises, contact Corporate Security.
•
To report a medical emergency, contact Corporate Security at [XXX-XXX-XXXX]. Calling the local emergency
medical service (EMS) without first calling Corporate Security could result in a delay in the ability of EMS
personnel to find the specific location of the emergency.
•
To report all work-related injuries and illnesses, contact HR within 24 hours, regardless of whether the employee
requires immediate medical attention. In addition, the manager must complete a Report of Injury form. This form
is available from and is to be returned to [business unit] Human Resources, and a copy should be sent to
[designated person]. For further information about this procedure, see the [name of policy document].
•
To report any act or threat of violence, contact Corporate Security at [XXX-XXX-XXXX] or Human Resources.
A Threat Assessment Team (TAT) has been formed to coordinate prompt investigations and provide advice in
appropriate cases. The TAT includes individuals from [business unit(s)]. As part of striving to maintain a safe
workplace, [company name] prohibits violence or threats of violence in the workplace, stemming from the
workplace, or while otherwise representing the firm. The “workplace” is broadly defined to encompass buildings
which [company name] owns and in which it leases space (including the parking lots, cafeterias, etc., which are
affiliated with those buildings) and the areas where work is performed.
Violence includes physical altercations, fights, the use of firearms, explosives, and other weapons, and any other
conduct which could cause injury or other damage. Threats of violence include acts of physical aggression or any
statements that could be perceived as expressing intent to cause harm to an employee or to the Company. Threats
can be direct statements or acts, as well as more subtle conduct, such as intimidating remarks or gestures,
“stalking,” or other menacing behavior. These threats must be taken seriously, and even comments that are intended
as jokes may be inappropriate. Regardless of the laws of a particular jurisdiction, the possession of any dangerous
substances, including firearms, explosives, and other weapons, is strictly prohibited in the workplace or elsewhere
while conducting company business.
For purposes of this policy, protective sprays (e.g., pepper spray) will not be considered a prohibited weapon
provided they are not inappropriately displayed or discharged in the workplace. Employees possessing protective
sprays must comply with legal requirements governing their possession and use.
If an incident is imminent or under way, the manager is to use good judgment to endeavor to de-escalate the
situation. If assistance is advisable, the manager should call Corporate Security. When at a location that is not
routinely serviced by Corporate Security representatives, building security or the local police should be contacted, as
appropriate.
Chapter 12 SAFE AND SECURE WORKPLACES 141

Protecting Key Executives and Key
Individuals
In the global business environment, senior executives and
key individuals travel extensively, increasingly to locations that
Employees should immediately report any infraction to corporate security, their manager, and/or HR. If the
report is made to the manager, the manager is responsible for taking action as appropriate and reporting any act or
threat of violence to Corporate Security or HR. If an employee has committed a violent act or made a threat, the
manager may immediately suspend the employee pending investigation.
As part of striving to maintain a safe work environment, [designated person or department] would like to be
made aware of certain legal proceedings that could affect the workplace. Specifically, if an employee has obtained a
restraining order or other similar order for personal protection, he or she is encouraged to notify Corporate Security,
HR, or the manager. If Human Resources or the manager becomes aware of a restraining order, this information
should be reported to Corporate Security. While Corporate Security, of course, cannot guarantee anyone’s personal
safety, it can suggest additional precautionary measures for the employee to consider, and it can assist in enforcing
the order in the workplace. Employees may wish to contact Corporate Security if they are concerned for their
personal safety, even if they have not secured a restraining order. The Employee Assistance Program under the
auspices of Human Resources is also a resource for employees to consider. The following (see Figure 12.1) is an
example of maintaining accurate records and informing management on the status of a safe and secure workplace.
Termination Assistance
Employee Conduct
Ex-employee Conduct
Domestic Violence
Hostile Visitor
Disgruntled Customer
On Site
Telephone Threats*
Mail threats to Co.
Bomb Threats
External Threat
Internal Threat
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
*Not bomb
(64% with restraining orders)
Figure 12.1 Workplace Violence: 2005. An example of maintaining accurate records and informing
management on the status of a safe and secure workplace.
142
Chapter 12 SAFE AND SECURE WORKPLACES

may present a variety of likely hazards and personal risks. Some
high-profile executives shun the presence of an executive pro-
tection detail, while others expect it as a perk or because they
accept that the threat is real. Protection programs may be
highly organized, comprising a cadre of dedicated and highly
trained and potentially armed security personnel. Others may
be limited to subscribed travel risk assessment services, case-
by-case in-house or contracted protection details, and elec-
tronic monitoring of residences. All of these services and those
detailed
below
require
careful
accounting
to
address
tax
implications.
The key focus is to tailor protection for specific corporate
executives consistent with risk to the employee and co-workers
(and their family members). Protection plans for the homes
must change and evolve with the needs of aging children. An
understanding of the threats and countermeasures posed to
teens via the Web were nonexistent ten years ago but now are
only a mouse click away for some unsuspecting teen or their
absent parent who is an executive. With ID theft claiming more
than 10 million victims a year and the proliferation of online
shopping, banking, trading, and so on, harried executives or
their caretakers must be knowledgeable of the latest trends con-
cerning identity theft, spyware, keystroke logging, and other PC
and network-based threats. It should be noted that personal
risks at home could leak into the scope of potential concern to
the security organization. Be prepared to incorporate these
issues into your executive protection plan.
The greater the ongoing or infrequent risk, the greater or
lesser the need to engage the executive in the potential for risk
and the recommended safeguards. Certain industries such as
financial services, pharmaceutical (e.g., animal rights), energy,
and those with union activism may have a higher degree of
exposure. Clearly, individuals at all levels working in foreign
locales susceptible to kidnapping, bombing, carjacking, and ter-
rorism need tailored protection. Regardless of the executives’
potential or actual threat level, a common risk that they share is
that of an acute health issue or accident. Given the hectic sche-
dules that high-level executives such as CEOs keep, accompa-
nied by the stresses involved with international travel (diet,
sleep deprivation, etc.), for many executives, the chance of a
health issue occurring is arguably greater than a targeted crimi-
nal attack. The executive protection (EP) program’s tool kit
must include basic or advanced medical training, again depend-
ing on individual risk profiles and the proximity of more quali-
fied resources. Portability of an automated external defibrillator
Chapter 12 SAFE AND SECURE WORKPLACES 143

(AED), advances in technology, and the rapid response of a
well-trained staff can have life-saving benefits, whether the
principal is traveling in Detroit or Delhi.
Executive Protection Program Options
As briefly noted above, the menu of protection options varies
consistent with the perceived threat to the individual and
acceptability to the executive.
Residence and Family Requirements
•
The security team is familiar and acceptable to the executive
and family (special attention to children’s needs).
•
Thoroughly vet and train household staff.
•
Provide safe rooms (confidentiality is essential!).
•
Securely monitor residences and selected office areas.
•
Consider personal protection training or techniques, includ-
ing protection devices for all family members or just the
female members.
•
If home is on corporate IT network or confidential informa-
tion is stored there, designate a dedicated, secure area for
limited access.
•
Provide easy-to-use document-destruction equipment.
•
Offer appropriate security coverage for valuable collections.
Offices and Business Environments
•
Provide a low-profile, trained, and dedicated executive pro-
tection security cadre.
•
Assess threat on an ongoing basis, given the public profile
and notable issues associated with the executive, the family,
and the company.
•
Establish manned visitor control posts at access points to
executive office areas or security-trained receptionists con-
nected to the security control center.
•
Vet background of selected personnel, such as personal
assistants and others with special or unlimited access.
•
Provide special handling for incoming packages and mail
supported by knowledge of current (chemical and biological)
hazards, not just letter bombs.
•
In-house and external event organizers or communication
services that are engaged in public relations and media
activities related to the executive and family are aware of
security issues.
144
Chapter 12 SAFE AND SECURE WORKPLACES

•
Keep a database of “persons of interest” or people with a
past history of “reaching out” to executives either in person
or via all forms of communication.
•
Provide
special
protection
for
laptops
and
personal
computers.
•
Establish secure meeting areas that address the risks posed
by compromising radio frequency (RF) emanations, visual
surveillance, and leave-behind information or other assets.
•
Consider sterile personal computer monitoring of groups,
activists, etc., who would target an executive or their firm
(e.g., Darfur, animal rights, eco-terrorists, or political activists
focused on the company, etc.).
•
Pre-position resources at contingency sites in the event of
power outages.
•
Pre-arrange strong relationships with local public safety
officials.
•
Be aware of social engineering risk to telephonic and logical
(computer) communications.
•
Provide special protection of communication devices and
selected meeting areas to prevent covert listening.
•
Establish special oversight of financial accounts to identify
fraud, extortion, or identity-theft attempts.
Travel
•
Security has the proposed travel itinerary for planning and
risk assessment.
•
Offer site-specific travel risk advisory services.
•
Review pre-risk and tailored protection of housing and
offices at frequently visited locations, with special attention
to high-risk sites.
•
Use key person kidnap and hostage insurance and related
services.
•
Offer awareness programs for corporate-travel personnel and
recommend limited engagement of outside travel services.
•
Offer security details for special events and travel as deemed
appropriate.
•
Provide armored vehicles and armed and specially trained
drivers as needed.
•
Provide coverage of communication devices used by execu-
tives (Blackberry, virtual private network [VPN], wireless
hubs, etc.); availability of technical support while traveling
may be limited or nonexistent.
•
Pre-position emergency medical equipment or prescriptions
as individually required. Be knowledgeable of what is and is
Chapter 12 SAFE AND SECURE WORKPLACES 145

not allowed in some countries or likely to be questioned at
an entry checkpoint.
•
Arrange for specially prepared food in high illness-risk
locations.
•
Provide dedicated or interval ownership of aircraft to include
emergency contact procedures for pilots or their tracking
agents.
Dealing with Pushback
Many executives (or family members) will rebel at proposed
protection, either occasionally or almost always. The security
executive needs to be prepared to stand his or her ground and
present the commonsense business case. Scare tactics will likely
backfire. The one time you engaged an outside service who sent
the highly visible car manned by the barely literate fellow with
no neck to meet the executive will come back to haunt you.
Use the list of potential safeguards noted above (and modify
as required to address your unique environment and execu-
tives) as a checklist and then develop a briefing for the appro-
priate executive. This will help drive the considerations to
verifiable risks and engage him or her in a discussion on the
risk exposure you have documented and the tailored options
you have selected.
Maintain your vetted list of security resources. Use your col-
leagues in other companies who know of trusted and reliable
resources in various locations. Where family members are
involved, resistance will likely be minimal; but know the story of
the person you are protecting when it comes to your recommen-
dations, and be prepared with a solid rationale for your plans.
Highlights for Follow-Up
•
Is the provision of a safe and secure workplace addressed
within your company’s business conduct or other policy
framework?
•
Where would you most anticipate a workplace violence inci-
dent within your company? Are you satisfied with the
THE BOTTOM LINE: A case could be made that the security organization’s first priority is to assure a safe and
secure workplace while still enabling comfort, convenience, and efficient business processes. The challenge is
finding that balance.
146
Chapter 12 SAFE AND SECURE WORKPLACES

safeguards you have in place? What other steps should you
consider?
•
How does your company handle notification of domestic
restraining orders that include the workplace?
•
What are the legal standards for a safe and secure workplace
in the states in which you have staffed operations and/or
visitor access?
•
Do you provide escort services from the office for employees
with active threats against them? What are the limits of that
coverage, and are you comfortable with the legal liabilities
attendant to such services?
Key Terms
•
Predictability of risk
•
The policy framework
•
Workplace violence policy
•
Protective spray
•
Procedure
•
Restraining orders
•
Executive protection
•
Residence and family requirements
•
Offices and business environments
•
Travel
•
Dealing with pushback
Chapter 12 SAFE AND SECURE WORKPLACES 147

13
BUSINESS CONDUCT
Introduction
The most serious and challenging adversaries confronting the
enterprise are knowledgeable, empowered insiders. They capital-
ize upon weak internal controls and a lack of clear signals from
the top that an expectation is integrity in everything we do.
The security executive is in a unique position to observe and
potentially influence issues of corporate integrity and ethics.
This perspective starts with the honesty associated with an indi-
vidual’s answers to a personal history statement in the back-
ground investigation, the values evidenced by the supervisor
and manager in their leadership responsibilities, and when the
individual employee makes the choice to “do the right thing.”
Business Value
Reputation is everything in the marketplace. The security exec-
utive cannot be the conscience of the organization, but he or she
can be the staunchest advocate for intolerance of wrongdoing.
The Essentials
Tracking business conduct cases and pointing out failures in
controls and lapses in effective oversight provide undeniable sig-
nals to management that must be addressed. If tested and legiti-
mate efforts to do this are quashed, seek other employment.
Know Your Adversary
Here are a few things to consider as you approach this
thought process:
•
What categories of employees or “trusted” vendors are in the
most advantageous positions to damage the company’s
health and reputation?
149

•
What specialized controls have been put in place to mitigate
the potential risks from these individuals?
•
Where your company has outsourced critical business pro-
cesses or custody of assets (customer lists, trade secrets,
etc.), what internal controls have you contractually imposed
on risk from insiders, and what steps are you employing to
be assured of the integrity of these assets?
•
Consider engaging a small group of knowledgeable indivi-
duals in a business unit to discuss how an insider with
access and desire might engage in a variety of criminal or
risky activities. Then analyze the adequacy of controls to
prevent, detect, and respond as required.
Corporate Hygiene
Much of what we see in corporate meltdowns due to ethical
lapses or total absence of standards of conduct is within the
scope of a business-astute security manager. We see the
instances of internal investigations for travel and entertainment
(T&E) fraud, sexual harassment, intranet abuse, workplace vio-
lence, substance abuse, and other events that strongly suggest
the absence of ethically oriented oversight. As a professional,
where are the boundaries of your investigation and reporting of
these risks? Does top management support your ability to work
collaboratively with HR, legal, and business units to find the
facts in these matters?
Business conduct investigations are one of the most sensitive
areas of security’s engagement with the business. It’s unfortu-
nately true that when the subjects of investigation are lower-
level hourly employees, there is little attention
from top
management. However, let the subject be a high-profile execu-
tive or one of the up-and-coming stars, and the security execu-
tive may be forced to walk a fine line with potential pushback
from various directions.
Confidential reporting lines are a regulatory requirement and
occasionally yield serious allegations of wrongdoing directed to
senior staff.1 Notification of general counsel is important if priv-
ilege is a consideration. Where allegations are found to be fac-
tual, and the investigation has yielded firm conclusions as to
the extent of culpability, the employee’s supervisor, counsel, HR,
and security need to evaluate carefully the range of sanctions
1This function should be under the CSO. Many companies elect to place the
confidential reporting line in human resources, where investigative competencies are
lacking and the implications of the allegation may be missed.
150
Chapter 13 BUSINESS CONDUCT

with a view to consistency of application. Inconsistency in sanc-
tions is a slippery slope opening a door to potential litigation
and undesirable public notice. The absence of candor by inves-
tigative subjects should be seen as an aggravating influence on
sanctions.
In Figure 13.1, a security department has compared their con-
fidential hotline calls to the data from the Security Executive
Council’s “2007 Corporate Governance and Compliance Hotline
Benchmark Report,” which analyzed more than 277,000 hotline
incident reports from more than 650 organizations across all
major industries over a five-year period (20022006).2 This
enables a high-level peer group benchmark.
These cases will be benchmarks of management’s stated
commitment to ethical management. If you have done a highly
objective, competent, and documented internal investigation,
then it is the notable T&E fraud case involving a star that will
test the commitment of management to “do the right thing.”
Work with the affected business unit and carefully draw the
lines on your intentions. If appropriate solutions do not work at
this level, escalate to whatever level is accountable. To the
degree appropriate, keep your boss advised of legal advice.
Incidents per 1000 employees
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
Prof. code violation
Corruption and fraud
Customer/competitor interaction
Employment law violation
Environmental/Health/Safety
Misuse of assets/information
Personnel Management
other
2006
2005
Our company—2006
Our company—2005
Figure 13.1 Confidential
Hotline Reporting.
Corporate confidential
hotline calls compared to a
national database.
2This report is available for download by registered users at https://www.
securityexecutivecouncil.com/research/.
Chapter 13 BUSINESS CONDUCT 151

Learning from Business Conduct Cases
Figure 13.2 shows the continuum of learning from cases.
Rather than seeing this trend as an anomaly, security has uti-
lized the investigative post-mortem process to drill down on
root causes of increased misconduct in this business unit. Poor
supervision has been exacerbated by a failure by top manage-
ment to convey expectations and inform employees on business
conduct policy. As a result, security and HR have collaborated
to prepare and deliver training to address these gaps, and
follow-up
measures
have
demonstrated
positive
results in
knowledge
of
expectations
and
reduced
incidents
of
misconduct.
High-Level Policy or Guideline Statement
Make certain that there is a business conduct policy that
guides business units and the governance infrastructure in
addressing allegations of business misconduct or criminal
activity. Work with HR, legal counsel, and senior management
Increased
numbers of
employees in a
business unit as
subjects in 
misconduct
cases
Investigative
post-mortems
reveal poor
supervision
HR evaluates
mgt. training
programs
New multilevel
program emphasis on
expectations
Joint HR-legal and
security teams
develop scenario
training modules
Training delivered
to key managers
Key managers hold
employee meetings
Intranet program
communications
Survery shows
improved awareness
for all investigation
subjects
X% decline in
misconduct cases
in targeted units
Beta and post-rollout
testing confirms
improved knowledge
of responsibilities
Post-rollout tests
confirm improved
knowledge of
expectations
Degree to which
current programs
address the need
Management
has not
adequately
conveyed
expectations
Employee
population
is unaware of
business
conduct
policy
Area of risk
Contributing cause
Mitigating actions
Measures
Figure 13.2 Continuum of Learning from Business Conduct Cases. Utilize investigative post-mortems to drill down
on root causes of increased misconduct in this business unit.
152
Chapter 13 BUSINESS CONDUCT

where these expectations are not clearly established and com-
municated to all employees and other applicable agents.
A model business conduct and ethics policy may be found in
Appendix E.
High-Level Survey of Reputation Risk and Business
Conduct Policy
Use this survey to understand your organization’s risk to rep-
utation based on current business conduct policies:
•
Has management clearly articulated their expectations on
business conduct, ethics, and “doing the right thing” inter-
nally and with our shareholders and customers?
•
Is there a way for employees and others to confidentially
report suspected wrongdoing?
•
How many allegations have been documented as reported
and investigated with outcomes consistent with policy or
stated expectations?
•
What is the company’s experience with regard to investiga-
tion of internal misconduct cases and the involvement of
HR, legal, and other management units?
•
Are appropriately placed senior managers aware of the regu-
latory requirements of your industry, and have requisite pro-
cedures been established to assure compliance with those
legal expectations?
•
Do any of your outsourced business processes involve assets
that could adversely impact the business and shareholder
confidence if those vendors were to misuse their access?
Have your due diligence processes and contractual docu-
ments adequately protected the company from these risks?
•
Are line business unit managers aware and adequately con-
veying expectations for business conduct and who to contact
to address concerns on a timely basis?
Please note: Additional coverage of the high-level survey of
reputation risk and business conduct policy may be found in
Appendix E.
Chapter 13 BUSINESS CONDUCT 153

Sensitive Investigations
A caution on the assignment, production, and
communication of internal investigations and other sensitive
subject matter:
We allude to several types of security work products and
their potential sensitivities throughout this book. Internal
investigations, risk assessments, regulatory reviews, metrics
indicating risk exposure, investigative reports, and a host of
other documented matters may be discoverable and require
special handling. Given the potentially litigious environment
of employee law, premises liability, government regulations,
corporate integrity, and other exposures, it is vitally
important for security executives to thoroughly understand
the protocols and legalities associated with the protection of
sensitive internal communications. These risks underscore
the importance of a healthy and trusting relationship
between the CSO and corporate general counsel to include
engaged outside counsel where appropriate.
The following are general guidelines that must be
explored within each corporate setting and set of individual
circumstances. Discuss the range of sensitive
communications with counsel and set the protocols so that
engagement is clear and timely.
There are two principle types of protected
communications that involve attorneys:
1. attorney-client privileged communications, and
2. communications that constitute attorney work product.
Both of these can be present in communications to or
from corporate security. Their potential utility should be
considered whenever applicable and, in particular, prior to
embarking upon an investigation that may have legal or
regulatory implications for the company.
Attorney-Client Privilege
Attorney-client privilege is an evidentiary doctrine that
protects certain types of communications from being
obtained by the opposing party during the discovery process
that attends litigation (or, in some cases, regulatory
investigations). For example, it would preclude certain
memoranda or reports from being produced or questioning
during a deposition about oral conversations. The attorney-
client privilege extends to confidential communications
between a client and his or her attorney for the purpose of
obtaining legal advice. The advice can be obtained at any
time, and the privilege is not dependent on the client’s being
worried about pending or potential litigation. This privilege
is absolute, unless the client waives it. A waiver occurs
when the client conveys the substance of the privileged
communication to a third party. The attorney-client privilege
is relevant to security investigations when, for example, a
corporate client decides to initiate an internal investigation
to gather facts to refer to an attorney for the purpose of
obtaining legal advice or to do a litigation risk assessment
or compliance audit.
Attorney Work Product Doctrine
Attorney work product doctrine is an evidentiary doctrine
that protects certain materials and reports from being
produced during discovery. Attorney work product consists of
reports or other written materials that were created by an
attorney or at the attorney’s direction in anticipation of
litigation or for trial. In some respects, it is broader than the
attorney-client privilege because it extends to materials that
were collected or created by non-attorneys. In other
respects, it is narrower, because it applies only to materials
gathered in anticipation of litigation or preparation for trial.
The protection afforded by the work product doctrine is
qualified, and it may be overcome by a showing of
significant need on the part of the opposing party. There is
no automatic waiver of attorney work product if it is
discussed with a third party, unless that communication
means that it is likely that the opposing party would learn of
it. Attorney work product is relevant to security
investigations that have been initiated by an attorney in
expectation of potential litigation or a regulatory inquiry or
while preparing for a trial.
(Continued )

Some Practical Pointers for Sensitive
Matters
Below are some practical pointers when conducting
internal investigations and other sensitive subject matter:
•
If one of the purposes for the activities of the security
department is to enable the company to obtain legal
advice, then contact the company’s attorney before
embarking on the activity. Explore whether the
communications in connection with that activity should
be privileged.
•
If one of the purposes for the activity of the security
department is because the company is concerned that
litigation or a regulatory investigation may arise, or that
information will be used in a trial, then contact the
company’s attorney before embarking on the activity.
Explore whether the communications in connection with
that activity should be attorney work product.
•
Obtain appropriate documentation from the company’s
attorney whenever it is determined that communications
should be privileged or should be considered attorney
work product.
•
Adhere to labeling requirements for all documentation as
determined by the company’s attorney.
•
Address all communications in connection with the
protected topic to the company’s attorney.
•
Do not discuss the substance of the security
department’s activities with anyone other than the team
doing the work and the company’s attorney. Other
communications should be approved by the attorney or
should take place in the attorney’s presence.

Checklist for Conduct of Internal
Misconduct Investigations3
Investigations of this type are often complicated, time-
consuming, and time-sensitive. The correctness of the actions
taken is dependent in large measure upon the quality of the
investigation that the security professional conducts or leads.
Well-conducted investigations are essential to protecting the
organization legally, protecting the rights of employees, and
observing the organization’s human resources policies and
principles.
The following materials are offered to assist security profes-
sionals to prepare for and conduct investigations into alleged
violations of law or organization policy. By investigating, we
mean fact-finding, often gathered for others who will make
decisions based upon your work. Of necessity, we discuss at the
outset the obvious fact that many issues do not require investi-
gation, and many other issues require the consultation or
involvement of persons other than those conducting the investi-
gation. Some of the advice reflects lessons learned when the
spotlight of litigation has been placed upon an investigator’s
practices.
The sensitivity of cases of this sort cannot be overstated,
especially those that involve higher-profile employees or agents.
Having investigative staff members who fully understand best
practices in investigation, evidence gathering, confidentiality,
interview techniques, and trusted relationships with legal coun-
sel and human resources are highly valued assets.
Identifying Investigators
•
Are special skills required?
•
Should an attorney conduct the investigation?
•
Are there actual or potential conflicts of interest that should
be addressed?
•
Are the proposed investigators objective and resistant to
pressure?
•
Will any party claim the proposed investigators are biased?
•
Are the proposed investigators the individuals who can maxi-
mize the information obtained in interviews?
3The checklist for conduct of internal misconduct investigations is drawn from John
Thompson’s book, The Compliance Response to Misconduct Allegations, 2nd edition,
Boston, MA: Elsevier, 2013.
156
Chapter 13 BUSINESS CONDUCT

Obtaining Documents
•
Personnel files
•
Telephone records
•
Expense account records
•
Personnel information on computer
•
Appointment calendars
•
Time cards
•
Building entrance/exit records
•
Computer
and
word
processing
disks
(and
hard
drive
memory)
•
Electronic mail records
•
Voicemail records
Planning the Investigation
•
Minimize witness intimidation.
•
Form an investigative team and divide duties.
•
Establish a timeframe for completion of the investigation.
•
Prepare confirmatory memorandum to complainant.
•
Obtain and review relevant documents.
•
Consider special investigative techniques.
•
Identify interviewees.
•
Establish an interview location.
•
Arrange order of individuals to be interviewed.
•
Prepare opening and closing comments.
•
Prepare a set of written interview questions.
•
Plan for multiple interviews of some individuals.
•
Decide whether to obtain written statements.
•
Take detailed notes of the investigation-planning process.
Procedural Interview Issues
•
Provide a general description of the situation.
•
Describe the purpose of the investigation and the interview.
•
Make clear that the organization will not reach any conclu-
sions until the completion of the investigation.
•
Instruct the interviewee not to discuss the investigation.
•
Explain
what
information
you
will
share
within
the
organization.
•
Do not make any promise regarding the outcome of the
investigation.
•
Describe any organizational policies involved.
•
Describe the seriousness of the issue under investigation.
Chapter 13 BUSINESS CONDUCT 157

•
Indicate the penalty for providing false or misleading infor-
mation, and tell the interviewee of his or her duty to cooper-
ate in the investigation.
•
Tell the interviewee that he or she is protected from retalia-
tion for participation in the investigation.
•
Obtain the identity of any other witnesses.
•
Identify and obtain relevant documents.
Technical Interview Issues
•
Make sure the interviewee is not recording the interview.
•
Do not allow the interviewee to have an attorney present
without consulting first with legal counsel.
•
Nonemployees have a right not to participate in and to ter-
minate any interview.
•
The organization may require the cooperation of its employ-
ees in the investigation and interview process.
•
Be careful not to invade the privacy of any individual.
•
Even if the interviewee has no attorney present, assume that
all parties are represented by and getting advice from an
attorney.
•
Assume that a verbatim recording of every interview will
exist.
•
Do not discuss your opinions or conclusions with any inter-
viewee, and do not discuss your opinions or conclusions
with anyone until you have completed the investigation.
•
Do not unnecessarily divulge any information to interviewees.
•
Assess the demeanor of interviewees as part of the overall
credibility assessment.
•
Avoid terms with criminal law implications.
•
Avoid an appearance that you are investigating a violation of
law or making legal judgments.
•
Ask open-ended questions and then press for details.
•
Identify hearsay and rumor.
Taking Notes
•
Designate a primary note taker.
•
Include date, location, time started and stopped, and identi-
fication of those present.
•
Make sure notes are complete, and fill in information imme-
diately after interview.
•
Exclude interpretation, subjective comments, and conclusions.
•
Write down objective evidence of demeanor of interviewee.
•
Always write for the jury.
158
Chapter 13 BUSINESS CONDUCT

Taking Written Statements
•
Seek voluntary statements.
•
You may require employees to provide statements.
•
Identify the topics the individual should discuss in the state-
ment, but not the content.
•
Statements should
•
include statement of being voluntary when appropriate;
•
discuss all pertinent topics;
•
be handwritten;
•
include a start and finish time at top of first page;
•
not skip lines;
•
have all cross-outs or erasures initialed;
•
have a concluding statement;
•
be witnessed by at least one person;
•
have signature and date of witnesses on every page; and
•
be provided to individual upon completion (as a copy).
Reporting Findings
•
Avoid putting preliminary conclusions in writing, but any
preliminary conclusions should be sent to legal counsel for
the purpose of obtaining legal advice.
•
Convene a meeting of the need-to-know group, and include
legal counsel.
•
If others need to see preliminary conclusions, ask legal coun-
sel to send out those conclusions as part of an attorney-
client privileged communication.
•
After the need-to-know group meeting has developed a con-
sensus, create a summary report of the investigation.
•
Do not communicate any investigation results beyond the
need-to-know group except with the advice of legal counsel.
•
Have legal counsel review the investigation file once the
investigation is over.
What Not to Do
•
Do not ignore an “informal” complaint.
•
Do not assume you will remember the case later—record it!
•
Do not skip over opening and closing statements during the
interview.
•
Never assume innocence or guilt.
•
Avoid terms with criminal law implications.
•
Do not ask “yes” or “no” questions.
•
Don’t assume you can do it all—know when to seek profes-
sional help.
Chapter 13 BUSINESS CONDUCT 159

Highlights for Follow-Up
•
Remember that the knowledgeable insider is the most dan-
gerous adversary you have! Engage those business units
owning critical business processes in an intelligent discus-
sion around how an insider (your own employee or a ven-
dor) might engage in conduct with serious implications for
the company’s health and reputation.
•
Engage counsel and HR (employee relations) in a review of
current business conduct policy and the adequacy of busi-
ness unit line management’s knowledge of that policy and
expectations
for
their
oversight
of
an
ethical
business
environment.
•
Conduct investigative post-mortems to identify contributing
causes and gaps in policy or other needs for improved con-
formance with high standards of conduct.
•
Are you satisfied with the level of support you get from
human resources (or others) in the investigation of employ-
ees in good standing? If not, what needs to be improved to
create a more constructive relationship in these cases? How
have you addressed this problem?
•
Are sanctions in these internal cases applied consistently
across the company and, if not, what legal exposure might
that inconsistency present?
•
Are you satisfied that the corporate business conduct policy
adequately conveys the scope and clarity of management’s
expectations on conduct?
Key Terms
•
Adversary
•
Corporate hygiene
•
Business conduct
•
Policy statement
•
Guideline statement
THE BOTTOM LINE: Discipline and ethical pursuit of detail are essential ingredients of internal business conduct
investigations. Facts outweigh the rank of the subject. As soon as the management jury overlooks the evidence, you
have lost the program.
160
Chapter 13 BUSINESS CONDUCT

•
Reputation risk and business conduct policy
•
Attorney-client privilege
•
Attorney work product doctrine
•
Internal misconduct investigations
•
Procedural interview issues
•
Technical interview
•
Written statements
Chapter 13 BUSINESS CONDUCT 161

14
BUSINESS RESILIENCY
Introduction
No matter who “owns” the responsibility for business conti-
nuity, the security executive will be right in the middle of
response and should be in the middle of preparedness. We own
the 24/7 incident reporting infrastructure, we are the first
responders, and we maintain much of the physical and elec-
tronic monitoring of critical operations. If a vital process tips
over, you will be in the harsh lens of crisis review.
Business Value
Being prepared for the possible is a competitive advantage.
An uptime of 100% for critical business processes is not likely to
be an achievable objective in these times of reliance upon a myr-
iad of infrastructures we do not control, the foibles of weather,
and the intentional or unintentional acts of individuals.
The Essentials
Formal planning for likely events is an essential part of
business operations and has repeatedly demonstrated its value
to organizations that have in-depth resources to respond to
interruption.
Your Focus
If there were two lists for you to carry at all times, they
would be your executive emergency contact list and those on
the top two or three levels of most critical business processes.
Understand the natural and manmade threats to those business
processes that ensure your company is reliably online 24/7, and
get on the record with the resilience of controls over prepared-
ness and response. If you own business continuity, be in the
middle of building competency around planning and testing.
163

Work closely with internal audit, the CIO, and business unit
heads owning the most critical business processes. Remember
that business interruption may be caused by hostile action of
knowledgeable, disgruntled insiders and outsiders. Be aware of
the effectiveness (or lack thereof) of security procedures within
outsourced business processes, and be proactive on due dili-
gence where critical processes are located in regions with highly
unreliable infrastructures.1
High-Level Policy or Guideline Statement
It is the responsibility of every manager within this company
to plan for emergencies that may impact employee safety and
the availability of critical business resources to those supporting
our customers’ and shareholders’ interests.
Consistent with this policy, the components of a business
continuity program may include but are not limited to the
following:
•
A thorough and ongoing risk assessment and impact analysis
process that includes estimation of maximum allowable
downtime and acceptable levels of operational and financial
losses, such as:
•
analysis of cost of business continuity operations com-
pared to cost of downtime due to business interruption;
•
prioritization of potential disruption with rated likelihood
of occurrence and potential consequences (Resource
A 5 0 downtime with full redundancy off-site, Resource
B 5 X hours with equipped alternate site, etc.); and
•
a rigorous analysis and inventory of single points of fail-
ure (SPOF) in critical business processes.
•
Decentralized, business unit accountability for contingency
planning that includes:
•
training for contingency planners and other essential
response elements.
•
Written plan dissemination with periodic updates reflective
of changes in business process, their criticality, and require-
ments for restoration of capability that includes:
•
clear accountability for action(s) to specify steps to be
taken in planned events; and
•
crisis-stage procedures to assure timely evacuation and
accounting of employees to specified assembly points;
1This includes, for example, corruption, personal risk, terrorism potential, difficult
supply-chain logistics, verifiably unreliable support infrastructure, and costly security
and support for ex-pat resources.
164
Chapter 14 BUSINESS RESILIENCY

•
recognition and incorporation of outsourced business pro-
cesses to essential business operations, and the resilience
of continuity planning within those contracted resources;
•
pre-positioning of hot and cold backup elements consistent
with business process criticality and downtime limitations;
and
•
provisions for insurance, site security, media communica-
tions, and coordination and communications with public
sector first responders.
•
Periodic testing of contingency plans with independent audit
under the oversight of the board of directors that includes:
•
percentage of business units owning highly critical busi-
ness processes should indicate percentage or number of
fully competent business continuity planners;
•
the number of incidents where recovery was within the
established time objective;
•
tested notification procedures upon indication of actual
or potential interruption;
•
the percentage of most critical uptime business functions
with tested and confirmed contingency plans;
•
the number and percentage of business units with up-to-
date (or outdated) response plans;
•
alternate seats and pre-positioned resources required ver-
sus available and ready;
•
after-action reports indicate business function resumption
occurred within defined timelines and planned results;
•
evidence that the severity of action items resulting from
tests decreases; and
•
all action items related to employee safety are addressed
through retesting.
•
Business unit management financial incentives that are
attached
to
positive
business
continuity
planning
and
execution.
Track Business Continuity Readiness
The chart in Figure 14.1 represents a simple tracking metric you
might want to consider for reporting on key readiness capabilities.
Note that the highest level of business process criticality is AAA.
You may label the zero downtime processes in other ways, but suf-
fice to say there are multiple functions that must be off-site yet
ready to recover should there be any interruption in continuity.
While there are several other processes that might be identified,
each of the seven items selected for tracking are interrelated in
terms of a reliably responsive business recovery strategy.
Chapter 14 BUSINESS RESILIENCY 165

NFPA Standard 1600
Be familiar with National Fire Prevention Association’s NFPA
1600:
Standard
on
Disaster/Emergency
Management
and
Business Continuity Programs (2013).2
Influencing business units through a consultative approach
builds bridges and facilitates business continuity planning and
preparations. You also receive an improved understanding of
those business processes that are most critical to the health of
the company. This, in turn, will influence your protection and
response strategy. For further information, see the Corporate
Incident Reporting and Response Plan in Appendix F.
National Response Framework
The National Response Framework (NRF), last updated in
2013, is a guide that details how the nation conducts all hazards
response—from the smallest incident to the largest catastro-
phe.3 This document establishes a comprehensive, national,
all-hazards approach to domestic incident response. The frame-
work identifies the key response principles, as well as the roles
and structures that organize national response. It describes how
communities, states, the federal government, and private sector
Updated and tested business continuity plans for
all Level AAA business processes
Business Continuity Dashboard
Appointed and trained business continuity
planning and response teams at all locations
Progress in reducing single points of failure in
Level AAA and AA functions
Required service continuity plans for third-party
vendors are tested and current
Documented, current, and tested biohazard response
plan for all facilities
Electronic sensing, early warning, and all required
crisis notification systems are 99.99% on-line
Public Safety first responders demonstrate
adequate response times over past 36 months
Figure 14.1 Business Continuity
Tracking. A simple tracking
metric for reporting on key
readiness capabilities.
2This and other NFPA standards can be found at http://www.nfpa.org/codes-and-
standards/document-information-pages.
3FEMA’s National Response Framework can be found at http://www.fema.gov/
national-response-framework.
166
Chapter 14 BUSINESS RESILIENCY

and nongovernmental partners apply these principles for a
coordinated and effective national response. In addition, it
describes special circumstances where the federal government
exercises a larger role, including incidents where federal inter-
ests are involved as well as catastrophic incidents where a state
would require significant support. It lays the groundwork for
first responders, decision-makers, and supporting entities to
provide a unified national response.
In addition to the NRF base document, the Emergency
Support Function Annexes and Support Annexes are available
online at the National Preparedness Resource Library (http://www.
fema.gov/national-preparedness-resource-library).
The
annexes
are a total of 30 individual documents designed to provide the con-
cepts of operations, procedures, and structures for achieving
response directives in order for all partners to fulfill their roles
under the NRF.
The NRF is written especially for government executives,
private-sector business, nongovernmental leaders, and emer-
gency management practitioners. The NRF’s clear, simple style
makes the serious work of incident management understand-
able for newly elected or appointed government officials, for
business executives, as well as for seasoned practitioners.
Regulatory Requirements
Many
antiterrorism
and
other
security
regulations
and
guidelines require thorough contingency planning and counter-
measure testing programs for those assets requiring targeted
protection. Where countermeasures may be postulated poten-
tially to fail, backup procedures must be in place to bring criti-
cal mission processes back online within established timelines.
Highlights for Follow-Up
•
Regardless of formerly assigned responsibility for business
continuity, the security organization is a critical part of the
early warning, crisis management, and response capabilities.
What parts does your organization play in these areas of
THE BOTTOM LINE: Some form of business interruption is an area of risk that you can count upon. There is no
substitute for knowing who and what you really need when the probable or improbable happens. Planning and being
prepared is an obligation to shareholders, employees, and the community.
Chapter 14 BUSINESS RESILIENCY 167

risk management, and are there value-added functions you
could offer?
•
Does your company annually conduct crisis management or
business continuity exercises? What would you conclude if
this sort of analysis has not been applied?
•
The typical contingency planning processes require each
business unit to priority rank their business processes by
criticality ratings, the most critical requiring zero downtime.
Use the resulting list to assure yourself that your security
programs provide the requisite level of protection to these
higher criticality processes.
•
Have after-action-reviews been applied to the most serious
business interruption events over the past three years? What
was learned that has implications for your vision of the
future security capability? What would you conclude if this
sort of analysis has not been applied?
•
Business is virtual, global, and increasingly risky. Know the
potential risks your “partners” bring to the table before you
sign on the dotted line. Hold them accountable for risk-
specific standards, and then inspect to assure compliance.
Key Terms
•
Business resiliency
•
Assessing risk
•
Business continuity
•
Readiness
•
National Response Framework
•
Regulatory requirements
168
Chapter 14 BUSINESS RESILIENCY

15
SECURING YOUR SUPPLY CHAIN
Introduction
Our businesses’ operations are now largely dependent upon
a variety of subcontracted business partners. What do we know
of their security policies and procedures? How susceptible are
their operations to natural, manmade, and political risks? What
proprietary resources are we sharing that could be compro-
mised? The list goes on. Go online and explore “supply chain
risk management” and you will find scores of treatises on the
critical importance of these chains and the variety of risks con-
fronting them. Despite the plethora of information available on
supply chain risk management, very few people recognize the
risks we understand and deal with. Whose fault is that?
Business Value
Clearly, we need to expand our due diligence to include
security-related risks. Our business operations must understand
the full range of vulnerabilities that these distributed “partners”
may introduce into our “trusted” business environments. We
bring unique risk assessment skills to the table. As the company
explores new relationships to assume processes formerly under
your umbrella, make sure they include your capabilities in ven-
dor selection and contractual requirements.
The Essentials
First and foremost, you must understand the array of risks
to each link in the supply chain. If you are a regulated indus-
try, you may be already under the aegis of post-9/11 security
regulations, which universally mandate a documented exami-
nation of security-related risks. Armed with this information,
you are in a better position to influence policy and the
individual relationships.
Second,
we
cannot
neatly
categorize
commonalities
of
supply chain requirements nor the risks confronting them.
169

Different companies with diverse supply requirements may
operate in far less risky environments than others. All compa-
nies reliant upon vendors in politically risky countries—those
having a high degree of commercial corruption, or areas with
highly unreliable infrastructures—share in risk exposure to one
degree or another.
Third, we have discussed the critical importance of our secu-
rity
strategy
being
aligned
with
the
business
strategy
in
Chapter 4, “Strategic Security Planning.” If you have been suc-
cessful in this essential alignment, you will be aware of emerg-
ing ventures and the targets of desired engagement. This
awareness will enable your engagement with the business in
proactively assessing risks. So much of the contemporary supply
chain is found in locations where business practices, cultural
mores, and political and physical risk are variables that require
careful assessment and contingency planning.
Given the access to our most sensitive data, final product
components or ingredients, and reputation that we are delegat-
ing to foreign and domestic business partners, why can’t we
find recognition of this potential exposure in the contemporary
literature and corporate risk management strategy? This lack of
foresight may have resulted in a government regulation such as
the following.
An Example of the Elements of Supply Chain
Risk Oversight: Customs Trade Partnership
Against Terrorism, Shipment Guard (C-TPAT)
Security Criteria for Importers
In November 2004, U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP)
issued its Strategic Plan for Securing the Global Supply Chain,
leveraging off from the voluntary criteria and best practices issued
in 2002. The 2005 final rule outlined in Table 15.1 conveys a far
more prescriptive approach to compliance than that of the origi-
nal guidance. “Must” is now used far more frequently, and the cri-
teria for importers have a broader scope of protection. This is a
frequent practice in the evolution of government regulations. The
benefit of proactive compliance is often lower cost controls that
translate to customer loyalty and satisfaction.
To repeat our admonition on the diversity of supply chain
risk, the list in Table 15.1 addresses a specific set of perceived
institutional risks. It is not necessarily representative of the
range of issues you may face in your business operations, but it
170
Chapter 15 SECURING YOUR SUPPLY CHAIN

Table 15.1 Strategic Plan for Securing the Global
Supply Chain
Security Element
Prepare Supply Chain Security Profile
Conduct comprehensive risk assessment of international supply chains and ensure that all partners meet or
exceed the C-TPAT security criteria.
Develop written, verifiable processes for the selection partners including vendors, suppliers, and manufacturers.
Identify all business partners and obtain documentation indicating whether or not each one is or is not C-TPAT-
certified.
For those not eligible, obtain a completed security profile questionnaire or a written/electronic confirmation of
conformance with C-TPAT criteria or equivalent World Customs Organization (WCO)-accredited security program
from a senior partner.
Develop (and periodically apply) a documented risk assessment for all non-C-TPAT eligible partners for verification
of compliance with security criteria.
Develop procedures to ensure that business partners have compliant security practices in place to enhance the
integrity of the shipment at point-of-origin.
Conduct periodic risk-based reviews of partner facilities and security processes.
Where partners are certified by a foreign customs administration, obtain documentation on their status of
participation.
Do business partner risk-based due diligence to include financial soundness, capability to meet contractual
security requirements and identify/correct security deficiencies documented by an internal management team.
Use procedures to confirm container integrity and sealing at point of staffing.
Use procedures for control and affixing of high-security seals that meet or exceed PAS ISO 17712 to containers.
Use procedures for verification of physical integrity of containers prior to stuffing to include lock reliability and a
recommended seven-point inspection of all surfaces.
Use written procedures for control of seals by designated persons, their affixing to containers, and a process for
recognizing and reporting compromised seals and/or containers to CBP.
Use procedures for identification, challenging, and addressing unauthorized/unidentified persons.
Designate secure areas for container storage.
Use procedures for identifying, challenging, reporting, and neutralizing of unauthorized persons or access to
containers and container storage areas.
Use application of access documentation and controls to ensure positive identification of employees, visitors, and
vendors, and limiting access to only those areas required for duties.
Use procedures by management or security to ensure control of issuance and removal of all identification badges.
Use documented procedures for issuance, removal, and changing of access devices.
Use visitor photo identification, badge display, and escort procedures.
Use procedures for vendor identification and random screening of packages and mail.
Develop process for verification of applicant history information prior to hiring.
Develop process for prospective employee screening and, where job sensitivity warrants, periodic post-
employment background investigation.
(Continued )
Chapter 15 SECURING YOUR SUPPLY CHAIN 171

Table 15.1 (Continued)
Security Element
Use procedure for removal of logical and physical access for terminated employees.
Develop and apply security measures for the transportation, handling, and storage of cargo in the supply chain.
Use procedures in place to ensure that information from business partners is reported accurately and timely.
Use procedures in place to ensure all information (including computer-based) used in the clearing of cargo is
accurate, complete, and protected against exchange, loss, or introduction of erroneous information.
Use procedures for positive ID of truck drivers delivering or receiving cargo.
Use control procedure for accuracy, security, and integrity of hard copy and computer-based documentation
related to arriving cargo.
Use procedures for reconciliation of manifest on all pieces in arriving cargo and for verification of delivery orders
for departing cargo.
Use process in place to investigate, resolve, and report to CBP all significant discrepancies, shortage, and
overages.
Use procedures to investigate unauthorized access.
Develop and deliver security procedures for antiterrorism threat awareness program for all employees to include
modules for personnel in ship/receive and mail operations areas and specific threat scenarios.
Conduct training and offer incentives to assist employees in maintaining cargo integrity, threat recognition, and
protecting access controls.
Use cargo handling and storage area perimeter fencing.
Use interior cargo handling segregation area fencing.
Use procedures for inspection and repair of fencing.
Vehicle/personnel gates be manned and/or monitored.
Buildings to be constructed to resist unlawful entry. Inspection procedures to assure structural integrity for areas
identified in the risk analysis as sensitive.
All external and internal windows, gates, and fences to be secured with locking devices. Make sure key
management procedures are in place.
Ensure private vehicles are prohibited from parking in or adjacent to cargo handling and storage areas.
Ensure adequate lighting is provided inside and outside a facility, including exterior perimeter, entrances/exits,
cargo handling and storage, and parking areas.
Alarm systems and CCTV should be utilized to monitor premises and prevent unauthorized access to cargo
handling and storage areas.
Automated systems are to use individually-assigned accounts requiring periodic change of passwords.
Use process for investigation and application of disciplinary action for systems violations.
Prepare and deliver employee training on information security policies and procedures.
Install and monitor information security tools to identify intrusion, password compromise, access violations, and
tampering of business data.
This 2005 final rule conveys a far more prescriptive approach to compliance.
172
Chapter 15 SECURING YOUR SUPPLY CHAIN

is a good example of the steps you should consider in develop-
ing your supply chain security plans.
Multiple initiatives on the part of the U.S. government to
assess and minimize the risks involved in the transportation of
goods include the following:
•
The
Advanced
Manifest
Rule
(AMR)/Advance
Cargo
Information (ACI). These were instituted by U.S. CBP in
conjunction with the Trade Act of 2002, and fully implemen-
ted in 99% of the ports by January 2005. It requires detailed
cargo data for all modes to be submitted to U.S. CBP prior to
arrival. An ocean container is allowed into the United States
only if detailed contents information has been provided elec-
tronically to U.S. Customs at least 24 hours before the con-
tainer is loaded on the ship at the foreign port of origin. The
information is useful for pre-screening questionable contain-
ers prior to arrival to U.S. ports and for selecting containers
for inspection at ports of departure and entry.
•
The Container Security Initiative (CSI). With the CSI, the
U.S. government and more than 25 trading partner govern-
ments are pursuing supply chain security by pushing inspec-
tions and screening upstream to originating ports. This calls
for pre-screening of containers coupled with fast tracking
when the cargo reaches the United States.
•
The
Customs-Trade
Partnership
Against
Terrorism
(C-TPAT). C-TPAT was launched in November 2001 with the
guiding principles of voluntary participation and jointly
developed security criteria, best practices, and implementa-
tion procedures. In exchange for the security investments
they had made, C-TPAT partners receive reduced inspections
at the port of arrival, expedited processing at the border, and
other significant benefits, such as “front of line” inspections
and penalty mitigation.
•
The Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-know
Act (EPCRA). EPCRA was passed by the U.S. Congress in
response to concerns regarding the environmental and
safety hazards posed by the storage and handling of toxic
chemicals. Among other things, it requires detailed infor-
mation regarding hazardous materials to be given to the
people in the community.
•
The Free and Secure Trade (FAST) initiative. It allows low-
risk goods transported by trusted drivers via trusted carriers
for trusted firms to pass rapidly through border crossings
while reserving inspection resources for unknown or high-
risk shipments.
Chapter 15 SECURING YOUR SUPPLY CHAIN 173

•
The Smart and Secure Trade-lanes (SST) program. This ini-
tiative was established in October 2002 by the container
shipping industry to ensure the security of cargo containers
globally. SST’s objective is to rapidly deploy a baseline infra-
structure that provides real-time visibility, physical security
through nonintrusive, automated inspection and detection
alerts, as well as a complete audit trail of a container’s jour-
ney from origin to final destination. In May 2003, the
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) for-
mally became involved with the SST program to gain insight
for setting international supply chain security and visibility
standards.
•
External to the U.S. government security initiatives, the
World
Customs
Organization
(WCO),
a
Brussels-based
consortium of 169 customs administrations, which represent
99% of global trade, promotes trade facilitation by developing
and promoting guidelines to help customs administrations
work together to support rapid clearance of low-risk, cross-
border shipments. Also, it has developed standard sets of cus-
toms data elements and guidelines for member countries to
enable
advanced
electronic
transmission
of
such
data.
Specifically, WCO members have developed the Framework
of Standards to Secure and Facilitate Global Trade (SAFE
Framework), which outlines a strategy that aims to secure the
movement of global trade in a way that does not impede but
rather facilitates the movement of that trade.
A Focus on Supply Chain Security Has
Multiple Benefits
A July 2006 report by the Manufacturing Institute, the
research arm of the National Association of Manufacturers,
entitled “Innovators in Supply Chain Security: Better Security
Drives
Business
Value,”1
analyzed
the
potential
values
of
improved supply chain security and confirmed multiple bene-
fits, as summarized here:
The goals of this study were to demonstrate that investments in
supply chain security can improve organizations’ business
performance and, whenever possible, to quantify those
improvements. We focused on collateral benefits of security
1“Innovators in Supply Chain Security: Better Security Drives Business Value,” The
Manufacturing Institute, National Association of Manufacturers (NAM), Barchi Peleg-
Gillai, Gauri Bhat and Lesley, July 2006, Stanford University, p. 29.
174
Chapter 15 SECURING YOUR SUPPLY CHAIN

investments to manufacturers and logistics service providers
(LSPs)/ocean carriers. Five major areas of improvement were
identified:
•
inventory management and customer service
•
visibility
•
efficiency
•
resilience
•
customer relations
We received inputs from 11 manufacturers from a variety of
industries and three LSPs/ocean carriers, all considered in our
opinion to be innovators in the area of supply chain security.
The vast majority of companies were able to realize many
benefits from their security investments, with some of them
reaching very significant levels. Based on these inputs, we can
conclude that investments in supply chain security can help
organizations to improve internal operations, strengthen
relationships with their customers, and overall increase their
profitability.
Highlights for Follow-Up
•
Which of the most critical business processes in your com-
pany rely in significant ways upon supply chain partners? To
what extent have your partner selection processes incorpo-
rated a risk management strategy that includes security-
related risk?
•
What are the most likely risk scenarios that could signifi-
cantly impact the top three most critical sources of supply?
Do you have a role to play in any of these, and if so, have
you effectively sold your risk management resources to those
business units?
•
Are you actively risk-profiling countries upon which you rely
for the supply of essential products or services?
THE BOTTOM LINE: Your corporate supply chain may be your firm’s lifeline in current business practice and
customer service, and yet these potentially critical operations may be outside the scope of corporate security
involvement. Find a mentor or an executive at risk and insert yourself and your resources into these business
strategies.
Chapter 15 SECURING YOUR SUPPLY CHAIN 175

•
To what extent have you identified and vetted in-country
security (or other logistical) resources that may be engaged
to assist in an interruption or other risk event in your critical
supply chain?
Key Terms
•
Supply chain
•
Internal resources
•
Business partners
•
Supply chain security
•
Voluntary government-issued guidelines
176
Chapter 15 SECURING YOUR SUPPLY CHAIN

16
SECURITY MEASURES AND
METRICS
Introduction
You need to be ready for these questions from on high: “How
secure are we?” “What does security cost for each dollar of reve-
nue?” “How much less risk do I buy with the budget you are
requesting here?” Your company consistently tracks a variety of
metrics, as do your shareholders and the marketplace. Security is
rich with data that can demonstrate performance, value, and
progress against specific risks. Understand the metrics that tell
your story and positively influence the business.
Business Value
Metrics are measures that reflect contribution to the bottom
line or an agreed indicator of success. They focus on the actions
(and results of those actions) that organizations take to reduce
and manage the risks of loss of reputation, assets, and business
discontinuities that arise when security defenses are breached.
The Essentials
If we reverse-engineer a metric example, we can better visu-
alize how we get from an area of risk to appropriate metrics.
When we analyze a risk trend and dig for knowledge, we are
able to focus on causes versus symptoms and develop counter-
measures that are reliably measurable.
What Are Measures and What Are Metrics?
It’s important to understand the differences between a
measure and a metric, as explained below:
•
Measurement: A single point-in-time view of specific factors
generated by counting.
177

•
Example: Number of life-safety vulnerabilities detected by
security officers on tours.
•
Metrics: A means of comparing a predetermined baseline of
two or more measurements taken over time and generated
from analysis.
•
Example: Change in number of life-safety vulnerabilities
detected by security officers on tours since last reporting
period.
What Are the Key Objectives for Our Metrics?
Objectives of a security measures and metric program
should include the following:
•
Positively influence action, attitude, and policy: Our metrics
must inform, tell a story, and be capable of leading manage-
ment to conclude that change in some form is required.
•
Materially impact exposure to specific risks: If we are
reporting on risk, we need to tell the story that will cause
behavior modification and/or resource allocation.
•
Measure the success of our diverse programs: We are con-
suming scarce financial resources. How are we demonstrating
success in the objectives we set for our security programs?
•
Demonstrate security’s value through clear alignment with
business strategy and objectives: Our metrics can focus on
our value by clearly demonstrating that we are delivering on
the first three objectives.
The chart in Figure 16.1 nicely lays out the response land-
scape for a specific area of security risk.
The steps are reasonably straightforward:
1. What is the specific area of risk you intend to attack?
2. Given
your
post-mortem
analysis
of
this
and
related
incidents, what have you concluded are the gaps in protec-
tion that contributed to these events?
3. Having analyzed and understood what happened and how
these events occurred, what specific countermeasures will
successfully mitigate future events such as these?
4. As you develop your countermeasures, how do you propose
to measure their success in whatever terminology you
may apply?
5. What are the results of your plans to mitigate these risks?
What worked and what did not meet the mark you set
and why?
6. How can you continue to use this information to educate the
right people and implement the changes that are necessary?
178
Chapter 16 SECURITY MEASURES AND METRICS

Incidents offer a host of high-value lessons that may be trans-
lated into security initiatives with measurable results. Metrics
come alive when they are tied to reliable analysis, positive objec-
tives, and reliable results. The real plus in a presentation like this
is the objective of influencing senior management’s awareness
and causing resulting change in risky business processes.
Why Measure? What Are the Benefits of
Measures and Metrics?
There are several good reasons to develop a measures and
metrics
program
throughout
security’s
service
delivery
processes, including the following:
•
The
businesses
we
serve
live
and
die
on
metrics.
Management expects us to demonstrate similar discipline.
•
Risk is measurable, and we are measured every day, incident-
by-incident! How is risk in your organization measurable?
Where are the consequences of risk intolerable? What’s the
threshold? Is it a metric?
Area of
Risk
Contributing
Vulnerabilities
Mitigating
Actions
Measures
& Metrics
For past year, 42%
Involved spousal 
conflicts with 
restraining orders
34% on night
shift involved
alcohol
Post mortems Indicate 
poor coordination & 
training of HR & 
Security personnel
Security not
informed by HR 
of pending
terminations
New policies 
on restraining 
orders & no
alcohol on site
1st line supervisors
receive managing
aggressive 
behavior training
Workplace
violence protocols 
& training
implemented 
Increases in 
reporting of 
restraining 
orders
% reductions 
in workplace 
violence & 
confrontations
% reductions 
in alcohol-
related cases
Post mortems 
show training & 
intervention 
techniques work
HR/Security
Intervention
Team formed &
trained
Increases in frequency and severity of workplace violence incidents
Moving from an Incident Trend to Metrics
Employee
surveys show
improved 
safety 
Figure 16.1 Moving from an Incident Trend to Metrics. Incidents offer a host of high-value lessons that may be
translated into security initiatives with measurable results.
Chapter 16 SECURITY MEASURES AND METRICS 179

•
Your management likely has a scorecard on the security
function. Is it yours?
•
Finally, you need to demonstrate security as a value center,
not a cost center. The value and influence of the security
organization is directly proportionate to its measurable
impact on the ability of the enterprise to manage and miti-
gate risk. Value indicators provide information on what or
how much security programs are contributing to corporate
health and profitability. Figure 16.2 presents a table that
summarizes a number of tangible benefits.
Roles and Responsibilities
As Figure 16.3 shows, various levels in the organization have
roles to play in an effective metrics program. The senior security
manager has the responsibility to ensure that collection and anal-
ysis processes for our measures and metrics data are accurate
and qualitative. A key point about the quality of the data you
select to present: It must be good data! Good means the following:
•
Regardless
of
the
source,
data
must
be
quantifiable,
repeatable (for trending), obtainable, and feasible to measure.
HIPPA, FISMA
Categories
Regulatory
Financial
Organizational
Requirements
Benefits
Reduce cost of compliance
Better assure compliance with
regulatory requirements
Acquire good will with regulators
Compound improvements across
related compliance elements
Measure successes and failures of
past and current security investments
Enable investment targeting to
identified areas of need
Assure best value from security
investments
Justify future investments
Demonstrate value in hard times
Improve accountability to
stakeholdors
Instill confidence in leadership
Demonstrate improvements to
stakeholders
Play key role in initiating
improvement actions based on
performance trends
Enable relevant, realistic, and
appropriate security procedure
modifications
Assure level of mission support
Determine Security program
effectiveness vs. risk exposure
Improve customer confidence
Cost vs. benefit: Demonstrate
leadership in contributing to the
bottom line
SOX, GLBA, ISO17799
Etc.
C-TPAT, MARSEC, MTSA
USSG, CIPAC-RPS
Figure 16.2 Requirements versus Benefits. Comparison of the two against regulatory, financial, and operational
categories.
180
Chapter 16 SECURITY MEASURES AND METRICS

•
Timely incident and investigation reports are competently
prepared and reviewed by security management.
•
Content of reports, logs, and other data sources are valid,
accurate, and reliable.
•
Your data resides in a platform that enables enterprise-wide
data entry from all sources of incident and event data, query
for trends, analytical searching, and interface with tools such
as Microsoft Excel and PowerPoint.
•
A data analysis process that enables and provides assurance
of verifiable conclusions is essential.
•
Ownership and accountability for data reliability is clear.
As you move up the organization, the need for accuracy
increases as the data influences enterprise risk-management
policy and business-process conduct. From the top down, the
senior management team has the responsibility to buy in, and
to assure organizational acceptance of the metrics program and
implementation of the conclusions drawn from its results.
There is a definite need for security practitioners to see their
metrics program as an integrated business process. It is not
about simply counting or reporting; it is a key element of
security risk management.
Responsibility
for metrics data
collection and
accuracy
* IT Security Metrics Guidance, Hash and Grance, National Institute of Standards and Technology
Responsibility for
organizational
acceptance of the
metrics program and
its implementation
CEO
Major Business
Function Sr. Executive
Business Unit Senior Manager
Security Program Manager
Chief Security Officer or Senior Security Manager
(in business unit or in the centralized security function)
Metrics-Related Roles and Responsibilities*
Figure 16.3 Metrics Related Roles and Responsibilities. IT Security Metrics Guidance, Hash and Grance, National
Institute of Standards and Technology.
Chapter 16 SECURITY MEASURES AND METRICS 181

It’s about Communication and Risk
Management
As security executives, we are paid to be effective risk man-
agers. The risk inventory confronting our organizationally diverse
environments has substantially broadened and deepened in the
past several years. Our counsel is increasingly sought in board-
rooms and before audit committees, who are now held to higher
standards of objective oversight. How do we communicate with
these executives and others on the governance team? First and
foremost, we communicate as managers and advisors on risk.
The National Association of Corporate Directors (NACD), in
its Report of the NACD Blue Ribbon Commission on Risk
Oversight,1 highlighted five steps in risk management:
1. Identify—Search for and locate risks before they become
problems.
2. Analyze—Transform risk data into decision-making informa-
tion. Evaluate impacts, probability, and timeframe; classify
risks; and prioritize risks.
3. Plan—Translate risk information into decisions and mitigating
actions (both present and future) and implement those actions.
4. Track—Monitor risk indicators and mitigation actions.
5. Control—Correct for deviations from the risk-mitigation plans.
At All Times, Communicate!
Provide information and feedback that is internal and external
to the project on the risk activities, current risks, and emerging
risks.
Consider the aforementioned five steps. They all end with a
need to present what you have learned, to convince with facts, to
influence. “Brief me” means just that. Be brief and lead me to a
conclusion.
Where Do I Find the Data for My Measures
and Metrics?
We generate volumes of data every day. There are many
sources for the data you will need to track and analyze as you
identify the metrics you want to report. Figure 16.4 presents a
1Report of the NACD Blue Ribbon Commission on Risk Oversight, the National
Association of Corporate Directors, 1828 L Street, Suite 801, Washington, D.C. 20036;
p. 22.
182
Chapter 16 SECURITY MEASURES AND METRICS

dozen categories you should consider as you build a metrics
program. Each of these also frames the focus of your analysis
and reporting.
Presenting to upper management can be daunting and
intimidating. These are individuals who live daily with statistics,
graphs, slides, and other sophisticated briefing materials. They
need focused dashboards to monitor the health and direction of
their businesses. (Dashboards will be discussed in more detail
later in this chapter, in the “Objective 4: Communicate Results”
section.) Corporate cultures, individual executives, and commit-
tees all have their unique biases on the protocol of presenta-
tions, so it is difficult to identify one type or style. Suffice to say
that if you pick Microsoft Office products and their associated
tools, you’re likely fit in the majority of corporate settings.
Business Alignment—Demonstrating Value
to Management
When you consider the breadth of data that may be contained
in
the
12
file
drawers
shown
in
Figure
16.4,
multiple
Your Business 
Plan: program 
performance 
against quantifiable 
objectives
Trends: external
and internal risk 
factors targeted by 
security programs
Change:
relationship of 
security programs 
to an improved 
state of risk 
management
Benchmarks:
how are we 
doing vs. our 
peers?
Accountability: 
the diligence of 
line business unit 
managers to 
protect against 
known risks
Value:
Risk assessment, 
cycle times, cost 
mgt., ROI, etc.
Security’s 
effectiveness as
rated by customers
Lessons-learned,
case results, 
defect reduction, 
after-action crisis 
reviews
Performance 
measurement of 
staff, vendors, etc.
The “hygiene”of 
the firm: business 
conduct, continuity, 
integrity, incident 
rates, etc.
Project 
implementation 
status: (time, cost, 
results, etc.)
Contributions to 
implementation of 
the business 
mission and strategy
“There are three kinds of lies: Lies, damn lies and statistics.”
12 File Drawers for Actionable Metrics
Figure 16.4 12 File Drawers for Actionable Metrics. Categories to consider when building a security metric
program.
Chapter 16 SECURITY MEASURES AND METRICS 183

opportunities are presented to demonstrate ways in which
metrics enable security to demonstrate its value. Consider as
well the 16 potential measures of security’s alignment with core
business strategies and objectives shown in Table 16.1.
Pitfalls to Avoid
Here are several potentially career-threatening problems to
avoid as you gather and evaluate your metrics and then prepare
your presentation.
You are a fool when the following occurs:
•
You have unreliable data and use it.
•
You have reported on symptoms and not causes.
•
You have only selected that which shines favorably upon you
and your team.
•
You don’t have the courage (or backing) to tell the real story.
•
Your metrics are irrelevant—you don’t know your audience.
•
Your data is not actionable—you have wasted their time.
•
Your advertised accomplishments have gone the wrong way.
•
You were right and nobody believed you, and now they look
like fools.
Table 16.1 Aligning Security with Business
Additions of Value
Reductions of Value
• Increased level of protection with improved
controls and less cost
• Increased risk, to revenue-gathering activities
• Enhanced ability to satisfy customers with
improved methods of protection
• Increased cost of security-related incidents
• Increased market penetration attributable to
security measures
• Increased cost of insurance
• Increased recovery time to critical process
interruption
• Increased notable audit findings attributable to security
defects
• Increased integrity to revenue-gathering activities
• Increased risk, exposure from cost-reducing outsourced
activities
• Increased recovery of losses
• Increased risk to customers in sensitive transactions
and relationship management
• Increased confidence in effectiveness and need for
security controls
• Increased risk of attack through less measurably-
effective protective measures
• Increased engagement of employees in securing
corporate assets
• Increases in employee interaction with time-consuming
security measures
A list of 16 potential measures of security’s alignment with core business strategies and objectives.
184
Chapter 16 SECURITY MEASURES AND METRICS

Five Metrics You Might Consider
Each of the following objectives employs a theme to enable
the presenter to tell a story to a specific audience. You are the
arbiter of the metrics you will choose to maintain and how you
will use them. The critical point is to pick those that best con-
vey the story you want to tell and the result you seek to obtain.
If you don’t have a set of metrics on your department’s perfor-
mance, you give others the opening to use whatever measures
they choose, without the benefit of your data and expertise.
Know your audience. What you measure and report may be
extremely sensitive. Always classify and label your presentations
according to its level of sensitivity (Figure 16.5.)2
Probability of finding an unsecure
perimeter access point after hours
(*Based on vulnerability tests conducted 10/15/07 to 11/15/07)
Probability of success in
T&E fraud > $100
Probability of entering and roaming
“secure” space unchallenged
Probability of uncovering one regulatory
infraction in one 24-hour period
Probability of finding unsecured
confidential information in C-Suite
Probability of obtaining another’s access
user ID and passwords from the workspace
Probability of locating unsecured laptop
in Customer Support spaces after hours
Probability of undetected intrusion to
Inventory Depot
PROBABILITY OF LOSS*
Figure 16.5 Probability of Loss. Based on vulnerability tests conducted 10/15/07
to 11/15/07.
2Our metrics may be particularly sensitive, given the litigious environments in which our
businesses reside. When reporting on insider risk, internal vulnerabilities associated with
privacy or customer data, cases subject to or involved with litigation, health, and safety
issues, and so on, it is wise to seek guidance from legal counsel on classification of final
presentation materials and to mark all in-process work as drafts with your highest level of
handling standards.
Chapter 16 SECURITY MEASURES AND METRICS 185

The focus in the following objectives is to intelligently
inform management on the potential for risk and loss in multi-
ple areas of potential concern. Our primary aim is to recognize
that these tests legitimately indicate vulnerabilities.
Objective 1: Measure Loss Probability
Have you ever heard “But it hasn’t happened here” from
someone you are trying to convince of your view of risk and to
invest in improved protection? Here is an approach that can
deliver some metrics calculated to provide verifiable estimates
of probability of loss, given known vulnerabilities.
Risk Management Strategy
This is a test of likelihood or probability that certain goals
would or would not be met based on multiple tests conducted
over a four-week period. We have organized and advertised tests
of policy-based or commonsense safeguards in a variety of pro-
tection categories. What you are presenting isn’t hype or scare
tactics. This data represents what is real, based on proactive
tests against several test objectives you have advertised in your
annual plan.
Think of the strategy in four levels or steps. First, protection
programs and tactics are built around the achievement of clear,
measurable results in terms of reduced exposure to risk—spec-
ify them! Second, by policy or accepted process, assessment
programs should be an essential component of corporate gover-
nance with results presented—as required to senior manage-
ment and internal audit processes and to include the audit
committee. Third, risk and protection performance assessments
are structured around measurable criteria of effectiveness (suc-
cess or failure) for the element(s) evaluated and will be specifi-
cally measured on an advertised basis. Fourth, thoroughly
analyze the data in your measures and report the results in a
way that is responsive to management’s format for action and
accountability for results.
Where Is the Data?
The data is in the quality of risk assessments you routinely
perform on the adequacy of key protection measures and to
uncover gaps in the quality of internal controls around critical
assets and business processes. If you have appropriately struc-
tured your ongoing recorded measures and planned your risk
186
Chapter 16 SECURITY MEASURES AND METRICS

assessment processes to provide comparative metrics, you will
have
•
results of tests that yield a percentage of protection system
or process failures and successes;
•
incident
post-mortem
findings
on
gaps
in
protection
measures;
•
training records showing preparedness of key players;
•
documented frequency and results of prior tests;
•
recorded downtimes of critical systems or business pro-
cesses; and
•
specific benchmarks of protection system performance and
test results for them.
Remember the objective. We want to use this to reinforce (or
introduce) an attitude of understanding and intolerance! In the
best of worlds, we want to hear, “I support your objectives in
assessing these risks and the discipline you have provided in
arriving at these results. I accept our responsibility to assure
remedial action on each of these corporate risks and ask our gen-
eral auditor to track the resolution of each of these findings.”
Objective 2: Identify Perpetrator Attributes
Through incident post-mortems, identify attributes of perpe-
trators to inform management and aid in the formulation of
preventive strategies. The chief security officer (CSO) possesses
a unique risk-focused database that should be used to track key
risk trends. This basic metric is used to alert management to
ensure awareness and support for corrective actions and their
effectiveness over an extended period of time.
Risk Management Strategy (Hypothetical Example)
This metric was started by security to highlight concern for
the number of incidents attributable to insider employees. In
partnership with human resources and legal, the CSO developed
and applied a focused effort to develop, communicate, and
applied a business conduct policy that has had a positive impact
on employee misconduct. The following year, the company
implemented a large-scale contractor program that resulted in a
significant increase in inventory losses, systems abuse, and cus-
tomer privacy violations. The services chosen for outsourcing
often involve some of the most sensitive processes and informa-
tion within the organization. The costs of compromise are
potentially lethal. The rush for cost savings without a thorough
understanding of the company’s ability and commitment to
Chapter 16 SECURITY MEASURES AND METRICS 187

protect their client is the stuff of the upper right corner of the
Wall Street Journal.3 Safeguards must be contractually imposed
and monitored with the associated costs if these risks are to be
managed.
In Figure 16.6, the obvious need to measurably reduce the
number of incidents attributable to “trusted” vendors has not
been addressed in spite of the CSO’s prior reporting on this trend
to procurement and business unit management. The solution
involves more stringent pre-contract security reviews, audit
engagement, periodic inspections, and procurement oversight.
Escalation to the CEO and audit committee is the overdue and
likely next step.
Where Is the Data?
Effective tracking of data on the three incident types in Figure
16.6 requires much more than security’s investigative reports.
Our internal business partners in HR, procurement, audit, and
various managers overseeing outsourced programs all have data
that represents the more complete picture; partnering with them
gives us solid opportunities to influence policy and strategy.
These metrics require action and go to the fundamental mea-
sures of business reputation. The CSO in our hypothetical exam-
ple
understands
the
unique
risk-management
perch
the
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
Incidents Attributable to Insiders
Incidents Attributable to Outsiders (not vendors)
Incidents Attributable to Trusted Vendors
Figure 16.6 Tracking Source of the Threat. Use a metric similar to this one to keep track of how many threats
come from various sources, including insiders, outsiders (not vendors), and trusted vendors.
3The upper right corner of the Wall Street Journal was typically used to highlight a
company involved in some sort of wrongdoing.
188
Chapter 16 SECURITY MEASURES AND METRICS

security role provides, what metrics are important, how to track
it, and how to use it to successfully engage and influence senior
management. The CSO understands that security is only a piece
of the solution and is anxious to collaborate and partner with
other members of the corporate governance team.
The trends in Figure 16.6 reflect very significant (and sensi-
tive) data on the source of threats to the reputation and well-
being of the company. The knowledgeable insiders are always
the most serious threat, since they live inside the protective
measures and have unique understanding of where the soft
spots in protection vulnerabilities are located and how to use
them to advantage. With outsourcing, we have brought a whole
new population into this “trusted” realm: contractors and third-
party business partners. You can bet that individual business
units don’t go around briefing senior management when they
have insider misconduct, so it’s important that security main-
tain the radar. Also, the multiple incident trends are what tell
the story in this reputational risk area much more severely than
individual cases.
What we want to achieve here is change. We need to elimi-
nate likely denial. Success means a new or revised policy, and
more security-aware business operations that contain the con-
trols essential to these new ways of doing business.
Objective 3: Assess Business Unit Security
To assess the security of various business units and effectively
communicate our findings and recommendations to business
leaders. We are using metrics to engage in positive change. We
want local management to be more focused on their responsibil-
ities for reducing risk, rather than leaving it to us as the inspec-
tors of last resort.
Risk Management Strategy
There are two ways to deal with business units’ security trou-
ble spots. One way is to bring them directly to the attention of
the CEO and the audit committee. If we go this route, we may
gain points for a “gotcha” that makes security look good in the
eyes of upper management, but we will probably gain an enemy
in the ranks who may remain a powerful thorn in the side of
our objectives. A second way is to work prospectively with the
business unit to assess and report on several key areas of risk
exposure and collaborate on solutions.
Chapter 16 SECURITY MEASURES AND METRICS 189

The scorecard process is risky from an internal business rela-
tion’s perspective; no line manager wants headlines highlighting
his or her failure to protect the enterprise. This process must be
a pre-advertised, coordinated, and accepted part of the corpo-
rate risk management strategy. When appropriately planned,
incorporated as a consolidated part of the periodic metrics
reporting process, and sold to participating line managers, it
will be a powerful tool for addressing business units’ perceived
shortfalls with attention to specific areas of vulnerability.
We are not the corporate cops who get our headlines from
nailing idiots who should know better. We are resident experts
who have a unique perspective on operational risk, and we
need to see ourselves as change agents intelligently using this
unique knowledge. By informing the manager of this proposed
assessment process and working with designated individuals in
the business unit, we can create and present an honest report
of past performance while still achieving a positive response
from the manager.
This is similar to the process employed in an internal audit:
We are coming, here is the focus, and we will work with you to
identify deficiencies and help you correct them—all on the
record. If you don’t want to play, we will do our job and let
the chips fall where they may. Few intelligent managers will
refuse to participate when it’s put to them in that way.
Where Is the Data?
Look at the categories of review of a fictional administrative
services unit in the example annual business unit security card
(Figure 16.7). Each one can point to a record to support the
conclusions. In this example scorecard, a score of 1, 2, or 3 was
assigned to 7 categories of security (1 is positive, 2 has both
positives and negatives, and 3 is negative). A color rating system
(green, yellow, and red) could also be used.
•
Maintaining an ethical environment: In the example in
Figure 16.7 there have been internal investigations that pro-
vide evidence that management has a low tolerance for mis-
conduct and supports doing the right thing. Administrative
services have been proactive in working with security as alle-
gations have emerged, and they have supported sanctions
where evidence supported them.
•
Protecting private information: Periodic inspections and
audits have shown poor controls in this area, according to
the records of security and internal audit.
190
Chapter 16 SECURITY MEASURES AND METRICS

•
Maintaining
safe
and
secure
workplaces:
Security
has
advised
administrative
services
for
propped
doors
and
disabled controls and the potential for workplace violence
this vulnerable position creates. They are getting the point,
so the scorecard acknowledges improvement with a score
of 2.
•
Plan and prepare for business continuity: Security can find
no record of contingency plan testing for one-third of this
unit’s critical business operations, which raises concerns.
•
Employee vetting: Security gives administrative services the
results of background investigation findings, and hiring
records show they are not hiring the bad guys security has
identified.
Business Unit:
Administrative Services
Accountable Executive:
Paul Jones
Risk Manager:
Charles Brown
Scope: Corporate-wide
1
3
2
2
1
3
2
Issue Resolution:
Management's response to multiple incidents has been collaborative
with good follow-up to address noted vulnerabilities.
Annual Business Unit Security Scorecard
All issues identified within this review have been addressed within a risk mitigation plan
scheduled for completion by the end of Q2.
Response to Security Incidents
Excellent awareness and support for business conduct policy
throughout the management team.
Repeated notable audit findings. Frequent source of network virus.
Poor laptop controls. Management insufficiently engaged in risk. 
Propped doors and disabled access controls. Improvement in timely
notification of emerging issues having workplace violence potential.
65% compliance with full plan testing for critical business processes
needs improvement.
No hires of candidates or vendors with notable adverse backgrounds
in the past year.
80% of all engagements in the past two years failed to conduct
adequate risk-based due diligence.
Maintaining an Ethical
Environment 
Protecting Private Information
Maintaining Safe and Secure
Workplaces 
Plan/Prepare for Business
Continuity
Employee Vetting
Vetting Third-Party Business
Relationships
Figure 16.7 Annual Business Unit Security Scorecard. Use a scorecard like this one to annually review a specific
business unit’s security.
Chapter 16 SECURITY MEASURES AND METRICS 191

•
Vetting third-party business relationships: Security can find
no record that more than one in five third-party relation-
ships has been vetted for security or business risk.
•
Response
to
security
incidents:
Where
incidents
have
occurred, the business unit has responded well.
The final piece of data is the response by the business unit.
If properly sold and executed, it will be difficult for them to
push back if your data is solid. Negotiate a resolution. If they
fail to appreciate the process and its implications, you can and
should escalate.
Objective 4: Communicate Results
We are no different than any other business unit that is
required to communicate its results to management periodically.
Security departments often do not do that well and need to focus
on those critical few measures and metrics that (1) management
needs to hear, and (2) we may or may not want to convey.
Risk Management Strategy
There are two aspects to your risk management strategy at
work here. First, you have an obligation to report, but the
results may not shine favorably on you or your organization’s
performance. So be it. Welcome to metrics. Second, you have
an obligation to inform management on key risk issues.
You need one or more dashboards (see Figure 16.6) to track
your priorities. As you get comfortable with assembling the data
of importance and various means of presentation, using simple
applications of Excel or PowerPoint, you will develop ideas for
broader and more specific uses.
Where Is the Data?
Figure 16.8 represents a basic CSO dashboard. Our CSO has
selected five to six key measures relevant to the organization
and the focus of reporting. This one speaks for itself. Target five
key indicators that can represent a 15 to 20 minute briefing
with the CEO or the senior management team. What do you
want them to do with this information? What are you doing to
address their issues, and is that metric here? What are the mile-
stones of moving an issue from negative (red) to positive
(green)? Pick your topics. Your focus will likely change from
reporting period to reporting period, depending on the “hot”
issues or a trend you want to update or highlight. The following
192
Chapter 16 SECURITY MEASURES AND METRICS

example offers a different, more comprehensive treatment of a
CSO dashboard.
In Figure 16.8 we see a dashboard that uses several separate
topical displays. The CSO has laid out a landscape that includes
multiple metrics primarily focused on periodic updates on key
areas of risk. At the left are two measures of policy compliance:
one on the overall assessment of conformance with security
policy, and the other on the current status of contingency plan
testing. The former was gleaned from investigative results and
risk assessments, and the latter is from current test results. At
the center of the dashboard is a four-year analysis on four
notable trends of specific concern to the CSO, again from inci-
dent results. On the right are two warning indicators that com-
plement the notable trends, a quick look at the department’s
budget burn rate, and two color-coded status indicators on
issues that management has stated as goals.
This is a likely 30 to 45 minute presentation upward to the
CSO’s boss who has specific issues that he or she wants tracked,
Policy Compliance
Continuity Plan Testing
Top 100 Critical Business Processes
Notable Trends of Concern
Warning Alerts
Current Budget
Burn to Target
3rd Party Due
 Diligence
Lax Supervision in
Notable Trends
Succession Planning
needs attention
Customer Satisfaction
Survey @ 91%
2000
Internal Misconduct
Cyber Incidents
Workplace Violence
External Fraud
2004
2005
2006
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Security Department Dashboard
Figure 16.8 Security Department Dashboard. A basic CSO dashboard with five to six key measures relevant to the
organization and the focus of reporting.
Chapter 16 SECURITY MEASURES AND METRICS 193

or one in which the CSO wants to focus management on a com-
bination of discussion points. The format is easily adaptable to
incorporate charts from your inventory, and to simple red/yel-
low/green indicators for selected measures. This format would
also work well in a business plan update. All of the data to sup-
port the indicators should be readily available in your various
databases.
Objective 5: Identify Loss Areas
Identify key areas of loss and inform key constituents on the
causes to better assure awareness and accountability. Think
about what you could do with a presentation like this. Are there
any opportunities for increased awareness of actions that con-
tribute to security-related incidents? How about ownership for
improved risk management?
Risk Management Strategy
You report on losses due to various incidents. What have we
learned from these incidents? How and why did they occur?
How can we reduce our loss experience? Charting security-
related losses is a bland exercise. The chart in Figure 16.9
attempts to plot knowledge gained from events and make the
point that the lack of security or inattention to policy has
consequences.
Loss due to failure to address
known vulnerabilities
What is the cost of “insecurity”?*
(total current year to date = $18.5M)
Loss due to inadequate
supervision
Loss due to failure to follow
security policy
Loss due to inadequate business
continuity preparations
Loss due to failure to notify on a
timely basis
*Losses are fixed in noted categery
and not duplicated to assure accuracy
0
5
10
$ Impact (M)
Figure 16.9 The Cost of
Insecurity. In this
hypothetical example,
what has occurred, what
has been learned as a
result, and what is being
done to address each
incident?
194
Chapter 16 SECURITY MEASURES AND METRICS

The five examples in the chart in Figure 16.9 could easily
consume a half hour to hour presentation on what has
occurred, what has been learned as a result, and what is being
done to address each category of loss. For example, in “loss due
to failure to address known vulnerability” the key word is
“known.” The risk had been previously identified and corrective
action was not taken. Who failed to follow up? What process
should be in place to better assure attention to known risks?
Where Is the Data?
Useful, actionable data is the output of a thoroughgoing pro-
gram of incident post-mortems or lessons-learned analysis.
This is not about taking prisoners; it is about learning to avoid
future risk.
A presentation like this offers a tangible demonstration that
we have learned from our mistakes and that business units are
demonstrating improved ownership for protecting corporate
assets.
Conclusion
Metrics are based on a firm foundation of performance
objectives and designed to facilitate decision making, resource
direction, and accountability. They provide the engine of influ-
ence
and
the
substance
of
our
business
case
for
risk
management.
Metrics are about building a process the CSO can use to
ensure his or her focus is on target. Call it survival metrics.
Begin with a thorough understanding of the security-related
risks that confront the company and what measures are rele-
vant to progress in managing them. Be able to demonstrate that
the safeguards that are being employed are working. Secondly,
when you meet with senior management, know what keeps
them awake at night and the metrics that apply to reporting on
these issues. Finally, make sure you understand the cost of pro-
tection versus the potential or likely cost of loss. These three
skills will provide a broad portfolio of metrics and more effec-
tively enable your ability to influence business managers.
Whatever metrics you decide to use, make sure they are
SMART: Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Relevant and Timely.
THE BOTTOM LINE: If you are not measuring, you are not
managing.
Chapter 16 SECURITY MEASURES AND METRICS 195

Highlights for Follow-Up
•
What
metrics
are
you
currently
providing
to
senior
management?
•
If none, you are failing to demonstrate any value or ability
to influence.
•
If you stopped providing them, would anyone inquire
why and when they might see them again?
•
If you answered no or don’t know, you are missing the
mark, and you need to evaluate critically your security
program, because it is likely that you have no idea how
your areas of concern are performing.
•
Assuming you do maintain security metrics, what are the top
three weak spots in your measures and metrics program?
What steps should you take to improve these areas?
•
What are the most important metrics you need to manage
your assigned resources?
•
Which metrics have you successfully used to influence man-
agement action or policy?
•
Which of the 16 contributions on business alignment shown
in Table 16.1 can you demonstrate with your metrics? How
well are you advertising these accomplishments? Of those
you hadn’t considered, which ones could you examine for
development?
Key Terms
•
Security measures
•
Metrics
•
Corporate readiness
•
Impact on the bottom line
•
Potential pitfalls
196
Chapter 16 SECURITY MEASURES AND METRICS

17
CONTINUOUS LEARNING:
ADDRESSING RISK WITH
AFTER-ACTION REVIEWS
Introduction
The notion of continuous learning is about growth and
improvement from experience. In security, we live through inci-
dents that can provide high-value information about the perfor-
mance of plans, people, and processes, if we are willing to learn
and be disciplined in our reviews.
Business Value
The value of after-action reviews for the business is to learn,
to replicate processes done flawlessly, and not to repeat mistakes.
Essentials
Organizations that fail to learn from incidents are destined
to repeat their mistakes. The after-action review, the incident
post-mortem, or the lessons-learned analysis are all aimed at
providing qualitative information on the what, why, and how of
an event’s occurrence. Because security organizations are at the
center of crisis events, they are in a unique position to gather
and record data critical to learning.
After-Action Review (AAR) and Incident
Post-Mortem
The after-action review (AAR), originally developed for mili-
tary use, is a formal review performed following an incident or
event. It typically provides reviewers with insight into what hap-
pened, why it happened, and how to learn from the mistakes
and successes following the incident.
197

The incident post-mortem, also known as the lessons-
learned analysis, may be less formal, but it still requires a disci-
plined and objective review of events leading up to and taking
place during and after a security-related incident. They seek to
do the following:
•
Identify root causes or previously unknown vulnerabilities
that enabled the incident.
•
Determine where policy or procedural voids or shortcomings
exist.
•
Assess how people and systems performed against planned
standards.
•
Measure the quality of response capabilities.
•
Specify what needs to be fixed or improved.
•
Offer objective tools for learning how to improve business
processes.
These processes will lose their value if they become forms
of investigative reporting that seeks to identify perpetrators and
fix blame.
The security executive should assemble a team consisting of
individuals who were involved in response to the event, from
within business units that were affected, and individuals with
other internal expertise who may be in a position to contribute
to the examination and learning process. Ideally, team composi-
tion would not exceed eight people.
Know Your Audience
The incident post-mortem must be an objective and honest
assessment of what happened as well as why and how to prevent
recurrence. The process invariably uncovers previously unknown
or known and overlooked vulnerabilities in the protection pro-
cess. Depending on incident sensitivity, counsel may impose
attorney-client privilege, or the results may be classified to pro-
tect findings from disclosure. However, it is also critical that a
means be found to pass on learning and to inform and train
those in a position to prevent similar incidents in the future.
Outline for the Incident Post-Mortem
Management Plan and Briefing
1. Title and agenda
2. Key messages (23 key lessons from which we must learn)
198
Chapter 17 CONTINUOUS LEARNING: ADDRESSING RISK WITH AFTER-ACTION REVIEWS

3. What happened? Summarize
a. the initial impact and awareness of risk exposure; and
b. the incident timeline.
4. High-level analysis of incident and response, including our
a. ability to anticipate an incident of this type and the con-
sequence(s);
b. initial understanding of the potential business impact;
and
c. initial activities to limit consequences.
5. What worked well and why?
6. What did not work well and why?
7. Threat diagnosis—what is the potential for recurrence?
8. What should we do differently?
9. Action plan—short-term efforts to
a. update and prepare contingency plans and procedures
to deal with similar incidents;
b. reduce short-term risk and damage of reoccurrence; and
c. resource
requirements
to
address
immediate
vulnerabilities.
10. Action plan—long-term efforts to provide
a. metrics for reporting on plans and accomplishments and
b. resource
requirements
to
address
longer-term
vulnerabilities.
11. Open items include
a. specific task accountabilities;
b. deliverable schedule; and
c. anticipated benefits.
Highlight for Follow-Up
•
How does your company approach examining its successes
and failures? How might this influence your approach to the
AAR process discussed here?
THE BOTTOM LINE: How do you explain an intelligent business not learning from something bad or
unanticipated? Specific events provide a wealth of data on the root causes of risk and the failures and successes
of response. Scrape until it hurts.
Chapter 17 CONTINUOUS LEARNING: ADDRESSING RISK WITH AFTER-ACTION REVIEWS 199

Key Terms
•
After-action reviews (AAR)
•
Incident post-mortems
•
Lessons-learned analysis
•
Review documents
200
Chapter 17 CONTINUOUS LEARNING: ADDRESSING RISK WITH AFTER-ACTION REVIEWS

APPENDIX A: RISK REVIEW
ELEMENTS
Business Risk Environment
1. To what extent are there pervasive indications that integ-
rity—doing the right thing—is a cultural expectation of the
enterprise population?
1.1. Is it part of employee orientation?
1.2. Are there published value statements that encompass
integrity/risk management?
2. Growth Issues (score 15):
2.1. Pressure for performance
2.2. Rate of expansion
2.3. Inexperience of key employees
3. Cultural Issues (score 15):
3.1. Rewards for entrepreneurial risk-taking
3.2. Executive
resistance
to
bad
news—willingness
to
escalate
3.3. Levels of internal competition
4. Information Management (score 15):
4.1. Transaction complexity and velocity
4.2. Gaps in diagnostic performance measures
4.3. Degree of decentralized decision-making
5. Is there a communicated accountability model that holds
business unit managers accountable for risk management,
asset protection, and other security issues?
6. Are there indications that first-line managers are on top of
poor integrity and climate issues?
7. Are
controls
around
travel
and
entertainment
(T&E)
expenses, internet or intranet usage, or other behavior indi-
cators in place and effective?
8. What procedures are followed for business conduct monitor-
ing, investigation, and discipline?
9. Is there a means for employees to confidentially report
potential ethical breaches, suspected criminal conduct, or
other violations of policy?
201

Policy Framework
1. Are Business/Professional Conduct policies in place as an
integral element of corporate policy? Are they clearly made
part of line manager responsibility?
2. Is a security policy or similar guidance infrastructure in
place and distributed?
2.1. Does Internal Audit use it as a baseline expectation?
2.2. Are new employees and vendors made aware of expec-
tations on conduct and security as part of an orienta-
tion program?
2.3. Are all elements of security-related risk incorporated in
whatever guidance formats are utilized?
2.4. Does
the
IT organization
use
information
security
policy for all aspects of systems development and
implementation?
Threats
1. What are the postulated threat(s) and likelihood of exposure
at the site(s) under review?
1.1. Internal adversary—most serious; procedures-intensive
countermeasures
1.2. Information compromise, competitive intelligence
1.3. Systems sabotage
1.4. Theft
1.5. Disgruntled ex-employee: not yet purged from access
2. Outsider adversary
2.1. With (or without) knowledge of our security measures
2.2. Terrorist or organized criminal
2.3. Distributed denial of service, system sabotage, or hack-
ing for malicious or criminal intent
2.4. The Company as icon, disgruntled customer, violent
spouse, etc.
2.5. Crime of opportunity
3. Insider
in
collusion
with
outsider
(extortion
or
selfish
motive)
4. Natural disaster resulting in single building or regional
outage
5. The Company (site) is a victim of collateral damage from
attack elsewhere (infrastructure compromise)
202
APPENDIX A: RISK REVIEW ELEMENTS

Location Risk
1. FBI or other Crime Risk Score
2. Other high-profile/high-risk tenants in building
3. Adjacent or nearby risky properties that could impact the
company
4. Space is in a corporate campus or served by on-site security
or other support
5. Urbanization
6. Adequacy of life safety and other essential local response
capabilities
7. Known response times versus first responder assets
General Data
1. Resident headcount
2. Square feet occupied
3. Most Critical Business Functions/Processes
3.1. Ease/time to fail over to alternate site(s)
3.2. Are all business-critical assets located here exclusively?
3.3. Test frequency and results
4. Current assessment of business unit information security
and business continuity staff influence and competence
5. Risk management assessment of competence of program
6. Other less business-critical functions
7. Adequacy of floor warden program, ratios, drills, etc.
Business Continuity Incidents
1. Total downtime of critical business processes here in past
12 months
2. Incident types
2.1. Bomb threats
2.2. Fire related
2.3. Hazardous materials
2.4. Power related
2.5. Critical systems related
2.6. Water related
2.7. Weather related
2.8. Other
APPENDIX A: RISK REVIEW ELEMENTS 203

Internal Risk
1. Prior workplace violence or issues of disgruntled insiders
2. Extent to which vendors or contractors have unsupervised
access to sensitive space
3. Any issues associated with resident labor pools, background
issues, etc.
Information Security
1. Components of the program
1.1. Identification—Each entity must be uniquely identified:
ask for credentials
1.2. Authentication—Identities
must
be
accurately
con-
firmed: verify credentials
1.3. Authorization—Control or limit access to resources:
access based on need to know
1.4. Confidentiality—Information must be kept private: we
can keep a secret
1.5. Data Integrity—Proof of no unauthorized changes: we
keep accurate records
1.6. Nonrepudiation—Parties are bound to their actions: a
deal is a deal
1.7. Accountability—All actions are auditable: we know who
did what
1.8. Administration—All of this is carefully managed: people
make or break security
2. What is the policy infrastructure and application process?
Internal Audit role?
3. How is logical access managed?
3.1. Is access properly aligned with job responsibilities?
3.2. When are transferring and exiting employees removed
from access?
3.3. Is there a single universal identifier for all with logical
and physical access?
4. Observations on adequacy of proprietary information pro-
tection within interior spaces
4.1. Labeling appropriate to sensitivity
4.2. Storage (is there a clean desk policy?)
4.3. Disposal and destruction process
4.3.1. Cleaning vendors—issues?
4.3.2. Shredders and secure containers deployed at key
locations
204
APPENDIX A: RISK REVIEW ELEMENTS

4.4. Awareness of policy
4.4.1. Are there any indications of sloppy business
practices around sensitive data?
5. What strategies and tactics are being utilized to protect the
technical environment from intrusion, hacking, viruses, etc.?
Hazardous/Dangerous Material Issues
1. Jurisdiction
2. Response agency to threat
3. Company protocol approved by municipality?
4. Local response tests employees?
5. Third party testing agency available?
5.1. Do they provide decontamination?
6. Extent to which incoming mail, courier, or common carrier
deliveries are screened
7. Can base building air handling systems be quickly shut
down if required
7.1. Can the system be placed on full (100%) outside air?
Base Building Risks
1. Leased or owned?
2. If leased:
2.1. Extent to which we are an anchor tenant
2.2. Lobby and vertical attractions that impact public risk
to Company spaces
2.3. Visitor sign-in/sign-out process in place and enforced
2.4. Does Property Manager have appreciation for security
issues?
2.5. Current square foot cost for security in lease?
2.5.1. Comparison with Class A space locally?
3. Prior incidents:
3.1. Is data available?
3.2. CAP Index risk scores (if available)
3.3. If problems occur, are they proactive on awareness?
4. Perceived or measurable competence of security vendor
4.1. Security supervision and management
4.2. Training provided prior to posting
4.2.1. First responder qualifications
4.3. On-site versus occasional
4.4. Knowledge of resident issues and risks
APPENDIX A: RISK REVIEW ELEMENTS 205

5. Adequacy of staffing
5.1. Any issues with current vendor that give concerns?
5.2. Apparent turnover
5.3. Communication and recording competencies
5.4. Attention to detail
5.5. Post coverage and awareness of procedures
6. Engagement of security vendor
6.1. Apparent knowledge of tenant and local risk
6.2. Ability to respond to changed threats
6.3. Proactivity with tenants
7. Physical security
7.1. Base building automated access controls
7.2. Manned visitor and other access control posts
7.3. CCTV,
other
safeguards
that
indicate
risk-based
planning
7.4. Property introduction and removal procedures in place
8. Protection of critical allied systems:
8.1. Ventilation and HVAC
8.2. Incoming power and other utilities exposed to access
8.3. Other building systems essential to business
9. Garages
9.1. Access policy—limited versus virtually open
9.1.1. Business versus off hours
9.1.2. Access credential usage
9.2. Approach to vendor access—open versus checking
9.3. Deliveries—open versus checking
9.4. Staffed security presence
9.5. Limited automated access
9.6. CCTV and/or duress capabilities
9.7. Lighting adequacy
10. Is there a property removal process in place?
11. Are we dependent upon base building backup power or
other vital equipment?
11.1. Adequacy of protection at these locations
Owned Properties
Refer to all above (as appropriate) to owned space issues.
1. Card access authorization list review. Excessive? Purge process?
1.1. What outsiders have access to our space? (cleaners,
plants, building security and maintenance, etc.)
2. Are all critical spaces (Secure Areas) covered by appropriately
configured electronics?
3. Is alarm management (nuisance alarms) being addressed?
206
APPENDIX A: RISK REVIEW ELEMENTS

Contractors
1. Access requirements? (background investigation, escort pol-
icy, etc.)
2. Are nondisclosure and confidentiality agreements executed?
3. Are due diligence examinations performed on (any or all)
contractors and vendors?
3.1. Is the sensitivity of the work to be performed a driver in
a vendor risk review?
Background Investigation
1. Are pre-employment investigations performed on (all or
some) employees and others with (physical or logical) access?
2. Are there clear and uniform suitability standards? What
background elements are included?
2.1. SSN verification
2.2. National Credit check
2.3. Military service
2.4. Motor vehicle (if a condition of employment)
2.5. Criminal or criminal litigation search
2.6. Civil litigation search
2.7. National corporate affiliation(s) search
2.8. Online media search
2.9. Education
2.10. Registrations
3. Who performs the background checks? What quality man-
agement process in place?
4. What impact does the BI have on the hire decision? What are
the derogatory rates?
5. What part does an executed personal history statement play
in the process?
Data Management
1. What is the accountability model for report preparation and
integrity?
2. How are incidents documented? Is it a consistent process to
a central function?
3. Are incident and other workload data analyzed to influence
resource allocation?
APPENDIX A: RISK REVIEW ELEMENTS 207

Business Continuity Planning
1. Program management model—accountability?
1.1. Is there a policy that every business unit must have an
up-to-date plan?
1.1.1. Is there a hardcopy with senior management
sign-off?
1.1.2. Frequency for plan maintenance?
1.2. What level is the contingency plan organization and
local responsibility?
2. What is the high-level strategy for business interruption and
recovery?
2.1. Single site or regional outage?
2.2. Regulatory or other implications for interruption?
3. Emergency notification procedures (pagers, published emer-
gency notification lists, conference bridge process, etc.)
3.1. What is the established routine for notification horizon-
tally and vertically?
4. Are alternate sites provisioned for most critical processes?
4.1. If contracted, what is the procedure for activation and
risk of nonavailability?
4.2. What are the proximity criteria for alternate sites?
5. Is there a program to identify and back up all vital records?
(backup storage and frequency)
6. Identification of a hierarchy of critical business functions
6.1. Documentation of systems, personnel, and resources to
perform functions
6.1.1. Is essential technology inventoried
6.2. What is the downtime allowance?
6.3. What are the critical interdependencies external to this
business unit?
7. Are plans tested on an established basis? Frequency for each
of the following:
7.1. Call notification
7.2. Walk-through/tabletop exercise
7.3. Alternate site activation
7.4. Full test
8. Employee awareness procedures (are all employees knowl-
edgeable of what to do if?)
9. Is there a method for documenting expenses related to out-
age response?
208
APPENDIX A: RISK REVIEW ELEMENTS

Emergency and Crisis Management
1. Floor warden program in place and tested? Do all wardens
know what to do if?
1.1. Is there a clearly established hierarchy for evacuation
orders?
2. Who comprise the crisis management team? Who is the
decision-maker? Other member responsibilities?
3. Responsibility for media contact
4. Bomb threat procedures in place and understood?
5. What are the guidelines for kidnap or hostage and extortion?
6. Is there a plan for a cyber incident? What are the various
responsibilities?
Security Awareness
1. How are employees made aware of security policy and
practice?
2. Are there outward signs of a knowledgeable and compliant
population?
APPENDIX A: RISK REVIEW ELEMENTS 209

APPENDIX B: SECURITY
DEVICES, EQUIPMENT, AND
INSTALLATION LABOR COSTS
A significant number of guidelines and regulations have
physical security components that require estimating cost to
procure and install. Table B.1, reprinted here from a previous
publication of the Security Executive Council, displays the typi-
cal array of security devices that may be employed at a facility
seeking to enhance physical security as a potential result of
increased regulatory scrutiny. Installed costs are noted with
three different labor rates to provide for regional diversity, and
an annual inflation factor is noted in the footnotes. Equipment
prices embedded in the estimates are typical of competitive
products.
211

Table B.1 Summary of Security Device Costs
Description
Quantity
Installed
Cost (Labor
Rate: $50/hr)A
Installed
Cost (Labor
Rate: $65/hr)A
Installed
Cost (Labor
Rate: $85/hr)A
1.
Site Work
• Fencing  7’ Chain Link with
3 Strands of Barb Wire at a
45 degree angle
13z
lf
$34.00
$35.00
$36.00
• Ornamental Iron Fencing
1
lf
$171.00
$173.00
$175.00
• No Trespassing Sign
1
each
$68.00
$69.00
$70.00
• Lighting  Exterior Wall-Mount
High-Pressure Sodium
1
each
$364.00
$368.00
$370.00
• Lighting  Exterior Wall-Mount
Low-Pressure Sodium
1
each
$396.00
$398.00
$400.00
• Lighting  Exterior Wall-Mount
Incandescent
1
each
$141.00
$143.00
$145.00
• Lighting  Exterior Wall-Mount
Metal Halide
1
each
$400.00
$402.00
$405.00
• Perimeter Lighting  30’ Pole-
Mounted High-Pressure SodiumB,E
1
each
$2,145.00
$2,195.00
$2,245.00
• Perimeter Lighting  30’ Pole-
Mounted Low-Pressure Sodium
1
each
$2,175.00
$2,225.00
$2,275.00
• Perimeter Lighting  30’ Pole-
Mounted IncandescentC,F
1
each
$1,920.00
$1,970.00
$2,020.00
• Perimeter Lighting  30’ Pole-
Mounted Metal HalideD,G
1
each
$2,180.00
$2,230.00
$2,280.00
• Parking Area Lighting  30’ Pole-
Mounted High-Pressure SodiumH
1
each
$2,590.00
$2,540.00
$2,690.00
• Parking Area Lighting  30’ Pole-
Mounted Low-Pressure Sodium
1
each
$2,730.00
$2,780.00
$2,730.00
• Parking Area Lighting  30’ Pole-
Mounted Metal HalideI
1
each
$2,560.00
$2,610.00
$2,660.00
2.
Access Control System Head End
Components
• Security Management System
Server PC
1
each
$8,400.00
$8,520.00
$8,680.00
• Security Management System
Software  up to 64 card readersJ
1
each
$8,500.00
$9,700.00
$11,300.00
3.
Access Control Components
• Access Control Panel Controller
1
each
$2,900.00
$3,140.00
$3,460.00
• Alarm Output Board
1
each
$1,100.00
$1,160.00
$1,240.00
(Continued )
212
APPENDIX B: SECURITY DEVICES, EQUIPMENT, AND INSTALLATION LABOR COSTS

Table B.1 (Continued)
Description
Quantity
Installed
Cost (Labor
Rate: $50/hr)A
Installed
Cost (Labor
Rate: $65/hr)A
Installed
Cost (Labor
Rate: $85/hr)A
• Alarm Input Board
1
each
$1,300.00
$1,360.00
$1,440.00
• Network Interface for Access
Control Panel
1
each
$650.00
$680.00
$720.00
• Access Control Panel Enclosure
1
each
$950.00
$1,010.00
$1,090.00
• Access Control Panel Power
Supply
1
each
$800.00
$860.00
$940.00
• Lock Power Supply
1
each
$1,000.00
$1,060.00
$1,140.00
• Card Reader  Proximity (Surface
Mount)
1
each
$350.00
$365.00
$385.00
• Card Reader  Proximity with
keypad
1
each
$450.00
$480.00
$520.00
• Card Reader  Long-Range
Proximity
1
each
$1,050.00
$1,095.00
$1,155.00
• Biometric  Finger Print Reader
1
each
$950.00
$995.00
$1,055.00
• Biometric  Hand Geometry
Reader
1
each
$3,365.00
$3,410.00
$3,470.00
• Request to Exit Device  Wall
Mount
1
each
$125.00
$140.00
$160.00
4.
Door Hardware and Accessories
• Electric Mortise Locking Device
1
each
$900.00
$990.00
$1,110.00
• Electric Strike Locking Device
1
each
$525.00
$585.00
$665.00
• Electric Cylinder Lock
1
each
$675.00
$735.00
$815.00
• Electric Exit Device
1
each
$1,700.00
$1,790.00
$1,910.00
• Electromagnetic Lock (Single Door)
1
each
$590.00
$650.00
$730.00
• Electromagnetic Lock (Double Door)
1
each
$880.00
$970.00
$1,090.00
• Door Hardware  Non-Electrified
Storeroom Function
1
each
$475.00
$565.00
$685.00
• Electrified Keypad Lockset
1
each
$1,178.00
$1,268.00
$1,388.00
• Mechanical Pushbutton Keypad
Lock
1
each
$550.00
$595.00
$655.00
• Mechanical Crashbar  with
audible alarm
1
each
$725.00
$785.00
$865.00
• Delayed Egress Crashbar
1
each
$1,535.00
$1,625.00
$1,745.00
• Power Transfer Hinges
1
each
$425.00
$455.00
$495.00
• Door Cords
1
each
$85.00
$100.00
$120.00
• Pushbutton Exit Device
1
each
$152.00
$167.00
$187.00
(Continued )
APPENDIX B: SECURITY DEVICES, EQUIPMENT, AND INSTALLATION LABOR COSTS 213

Table B.1 (Continued)
Description
Quantity
Installed
Cost (Labor
Rate: $50/hr)A
Installed
Cost (Labor
Rate: $65/hr)A
Installed
Cost (Labor
Rate: $85/hr)A
5.
Intrusion Detection Devices
• Door Contacts Recessed
1
each
$70.00
$85.00
$105.00
• Door Contacts Surface Mount
1
each
$80.00
$95.00
$115.00
• Door Contacts  Industrial
1
each
$140.00
$170.00
$210.00
• Tamper Switches
1
each
$62.00
$77.00
$97.00
• Glass Break / Shock Sensors
1
each
$165.00
$195.00
$235.00
• Passive Infrared Motion Sensor 
Wall Mount
1
each
$95.00
$110.00
$130.00
• Passive Infrared Motion Sensor 
Ceiling Mount
1
each
$160.00
$190.00
$230.00
• Audible Alarm
1
each
$350.00
$365.00
$385.00
• Door Release Button
1
each
$155.00
$170.00
$190.00
• Duress Alarm Hardware
1
each
$80.00
$95.00
$115.00
6.
CCTV Equipment
• Video Matrix Switcher  32 video
inputsK
1
each
$10,615.00
$10,735.00
$10,895.00
• Matrix Control Keyboard
1
each
$1,245.00
$1,260.00
$1,280.00
• Fixed Wall-Mount Interior Color
Camera
1
each
$650.00
$680.00
$720.00
• Fixed Wall-Mount Interior B&W
Camera
1
each
$375.00
$405.00
$445.00
• Fixed Wall-Mount Exterior Color
Camera
1
each
$850.00
$895.00
$955.00
• Fixed Wall-Mount Exterior B&W
Camera
1
each
$525.00
$570.00
$630.00
• PTZ Wall-Mount Exterior Color
Camera
1
each
$3,195.00
$3,255.00
$3,335.00
• PTZ Pole-Mount Exterior Color
Camera
1
each
$3,395.00
$3,455.00
$3,535.00
• PTZ Corner-Mount Exterior Color
Camera
1
each
$3,495.00
$3,555.00
$3,635.00
• CCTV Power Supply
1
each
$225.00
$255.00
$295.00
• Monitor 14” Color  CRT
1
each
$500.00
$515.00
$535.00
• Monitor 14” Color  Flat Screen
1
each
$1,400.00
$1,415.00
$1,435.00
• Monitor 20” Color
1
each
$850.00
$865.00
$885.00
• Monitor 20” Color  Flat Screen
1
each
$1,500.00
$1,515.00
$1,535.00
• Quad Multiplexer
1
each
$355.00
$370.00
$390.00
(Continued )
214
APPENDIX B: SECURITY DEVICES, EQUIPMENT, AND INSTALLATION LABOR COSTS

Table B.1 (Continued)
Description
Quantity
Installed
Cost (Labor
Rate: $50/hr)A
Installed
Cost (Labor
Rate: $65/hr)A
Installed
Cost (Labor
Rate: $85/hr)A
• 14” Monitor with built in Quad
Multiplexer
1
each
$600.00
$615.00
$635.00
• Video Multiplexer (Color)  16
inputs
1
each
$1,275.00
$1,320.00
$1,380.00
• VCR  Time Lapse
1
each
$950.00
$965.00
$985.00
• Digital Video Recorder  8 Inputs
1
each
$7,295.00
$7,415.00
$7,575.00
• Digital Video Recorder  16 Inputs
1
each
$10,795.00
$10,975.00
$11,215.00
7.
Visitor Management System
Components
• Visitor Management PC
1
each
$2,195.00
$2,255.00
$2,335.00
• Visitor Management Software
1
each
$3,900.00
$4,020.00
$4,180.00
• Visitor Management Camera
1
each
$230.00
$245.00
$265.00
• Business Card Scanner
1
each
$560.00
$575.00
$595.00
• Driver’s License Scanner
1
each
$775.00
$790.00
$810.00
• Signature Pad
1
each
$532.00
$547.00
$567.00
• Touch Screen Display
1
each
$2,825.00
$2,855.00
$2,895.00
• Temporary Badge Printer
1
each
$410.00
$425.00
$445.00
• Adhesive Badges  100-count roll
1
each
$46.00
$46.00
$46.00
8.
Photo ID System and Components
• Photo ID PC
1
each
$2,195.00
$2,255.00
$2,335.00
• Photo ID Software
1
each
$1,400.00
$1,460.00
$1,540.00
• Photo ID Capture Camera
1
each
$1,676.00
$1,706.00
$1,746.00
• Signature Pad
1
each
$781.00
$796.00
$816.00
• Photo ID Lighting Kit
1
each
$475.00
$490.00
$510.00
• Tripod for Capture Camera
1
each
$147.00
$162.00
$182.00
• Color Badge Printer with Magnetic
Stripe Encoding
1
each
$8,010.00
$8,025.00
$8,045.00
• Cleaning Kit
1
each
$84.00
$84.00
$84.00
• Ribbon and Consumables
1
each
$253.00
$253.00
$253.00
• PVC Badges
1
each
$4.25
$4.25
$4.25
9.
Signal Transmission Components
• Fiber Optic Transmitter  Video/
Data  Single Mode Fiber
1
each
$2,300.00
$2,360.00
$2,440.00
• Fiber Optic Receiver  Video/
Data  Single Mode Fiber
1
each
$2,300.00
$2,360.00
$2,440.00
• Fiber Optic Transmitter  Video/
Data  Multi-Mode Fiber
1
each
$820.00
$835.00
$855.00
(Continued )
APPENDIX B: SECURITY DEVICES, EQUIPMENT, AND INSTALLATION LABOR COSTS 215

Table B.1 (Continued)
Description
Quantity
Installed
Cost (Labor
Rate: $50/hr)A
Installed
Cost (Labor
Rate: $65/hr)A
Installed
Cost (Labor
Rate: $85/hr)A
• Fiber Optic Receiver  Video/
Data  Multi-Mode Fiber
1
each
$820.00
$835.00
$855.00
• Fiber Optic Transmitter  Video
(Multiplexed)  Single Mode Fiber
1
each
$2,545.00
$2,560.00
$2,580.00
• Fiber Optic Receiver  Video
(Multiplexed)  Single Mode Fiber
1
each
$2,545.00
$2,560.00
$2,580.00
• Fiber Optic Transmitter  Video
(Multiplexed)  Multi-Mode Fiber
1
each
$1,845.00
$1,860.00
$1,880.00
• Fiber Optic Receiver  Video
(Multiplexed)  Multi-Mode Fiber
1
each
$1,845.00
$1,860.00
$1,880.00
• Fiber Optic Equipment Rack
1
each
$1,100.00
$1,160.00
$1,240.00
• Wireless Transmitter / Receiver
and Antenna (up to 1500’)
1
each
$1,550.00
$1,625.00
$1,725.00
10.
Communications Equipment
• Base Radio with AntennaL
1
each
$2,076.00
$2,316.00
$2,636.00
• Hand-Held Radio
1
each
$291.00
$291.00
$291.00
• Master Intercom Station (allows
up to 10 remote intercoms)
1
each
$335.00
$365.00
$405.00
• Remote Intercom Station
1
each
$99.00
$114.00
$134.00
• Master Video Intercom
1
each
$624.00
$654.00
$694.00
• Remote Video Intercom
1
each
$445.00
$460.00
$480.00
• Assistance Call Station  Surface
Mount
1
each
$1,082.00
$1,127.00
$1,187.00
• Assistance Call Station  Surface
Mount  with strobe light in
enclosure
1
each
$2,325.00
$2,370.00
$2,430.00
• Assistance Call Station  Tower
Mount  with strobe light
1
each
$4,625.00
$4,745.00
$4,905.00
11.
Miscellaneous Equipment
• Burglar Protection Safe  20”
W 3 36” H 3 17” D
1
each
$550.00
$550.00
$550.00
• Fire-Resistant Safe (2-hour rated) 
19” W 3 28” H 3 18” D
1
each
$800.00
$800.00
$800.00
• Burglar-Rated Fire Safe  17
W 3 34” H 3 16” D
1
each
$1,900.00
$1,900.00
$1,900.00
• High-Security Padlock
1
each
$30.00
$30.00
$30.00
(Continued )
216
APPENDIX B: SECURITY DEVICES, EQUIPMENT, AND INSTALLATION LABOR COSTS

Table B.1 (Continued)
Description
Quantity
Installed
Cost (Labor
Rate: $50/hr)A
Installed
Cost (Labor
Rate: $65/hr)A
Installed
Cost (Labor
Rate: $85/hr)A
• C-TPAT High-Security Truck/
Container Bolt Seal  500 count
1
each
$625.00
$625.00
$625.00
• Tamper Evident Seals  1000
count packs
1
each
$88.00
$88.00
$88.00
• Annual Charge for Central Station
MonitoringM
1
each
$550.00
$550.00
$550.00
AThis data was generated in 2005 and should be adjusted for inflation.
BWhen using with CCTV, use 400W HPS flood light with quartz back-up on 30’ pole at 100’ intervals.
CWhen using with CCTV, use 30’ pole at 50’ intervals.
DWhen using with CCTV, use 400W metal halide flood light with quartz back-up on 30’ pole at 80’ intervals.
EWithout CCTV, use 400W HPS flood light with quartz back-up on 30’ pole at 150’ intervals.
FWithout CCTV, use 30’ pole at 80’ intervals.
GWithout CCTV, use 400W metal halide flood light with quartz back-up on 30’ pole at 120’ intervals.
HUse 400W HPS area-type luminaire on 30’ pole at 100’ on center each way.
IUse 400W metal halide area-type luminaire on 30’ pole at 80’ on center each way.
JAssumes 80 hours of programming labor.
KAssumes 8 hours of programming labor.
LInclude installation and tuning of base radio.
MAssumes monitoring of 64 alarm zones.
APPENDIX B: SECURITY DEVICES, EQUIPMENT, AND INSTALLATION LABOR COSTS 217

APPENDIX C: REQUEST FOR
PROPOSALS FOR CONTRACT
SECURITY SERVICES AT
[SPECIFIC COMPANY
LOCATION(S)]
Dear Sir or Madam:
Introduction
The [Company] is in the process of identifying, qualifying,
and contracting with a Supplier to provide for Contract Security
Services at [Location(s)]. You are invited to submit a proposal
in response to this Request for Proposal (RFP). The intent of the
selection process is to determine the Contractor who will meet
the requirements of this RFP and offer the best service at the
best price.
The remaining sections of this letter outline the requirements
of the RFP, instructions to bidders, proposal contents, general
information session, selection criteria, general conditions of the
RFP, as well as several ATTACHMENTS which provide more
detail regarding the scope of work, pricing requirements, and
contractual arrangements.
General Information Session
A general information session and site tour for all participat-
ing suppliers has been scheduled for [set date] at [set time] and
will be held at [Location(s).] Attendance is required. This will
be the primary opportunity for all suppliers to address ques-
tions and concerns regarding this RFP.
Please RSVP by Fax (or in person) with the number of
employees attending to the name and number listed immedi-
ately below. Prior to the general information session, questions
219

for this RFP should be submitted by Fax only no later than [set
date and time] to:
Name of Company Representative
Address
Fax #/Tel #
All questions will be compiled and addressed in a group fash-
ion during the general information session. No further ques-
tions will be accepted in the time period after the general
information session.
Instructions to Bidders
Proposals shall be submitted in an organized manner, and
each copy (two copies are required) will be separately bound
with sections appropriately tabbed and identified as follows:
PART 1
EXPERIENCE, CAPABILITIES, AND REFERENCES
PART 2
RESOURCES
PART 3
TRAINING
PART 4
FINANCIAL
PART 5
AGREEMENT
Information requested herein shall be furnished completely
in compliance with the instructions. The information requested
and the manner of submission is essential to permit prompt
evaluation of all quotations on a fair and uniform basis.
Accordingly, [Company] reserves the right to declare as nonre-
sponsive and to reject any quotation in which material informa-
tion requested is not furnished or where indirect or incomplete
answers or information are provided.
Whenever repetitious requests of information occur any-
where in the RFP, SUPPLIERS need not repeat the information.
Reference shall be made, however, to the exact location in the
quotation where the information is already recorded. By sub-
mitting a quotation, SUPPLIER agrees that the quotation shall
remain valid for ninety (90) days after the closing date for sub-
mission of quotations and may be extended beyond that time
by mutual agreement.
Completed responses to this RFP are due at the locations
below no later than [set date and time]. Any proposals submit-
ted after this deadline may not be accepted or considered, at
[Company’s] sole discretion.
220
APPENDIX C: REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS FOR CONTRACT SECURITY SERVICES

Two (2) copies of your proposal must be sent to:
Name of Company Representative
Phone
Fax
Proposal Contents
Experience, Capabilities, and References
Contractor shall provide a detailed description of its experi-
ence and capabilities to perform the work described in this RFP
and shall list a minimum of three (3) references with a descrip-
tion of scope of work performed as well as the name and title of
key Contractor personnel involved in the project. For each proj-
ect listed provide a client reference, which shall include the
name, title, address, and current telephone number of the indi-
vidual directly responsible for the work.
Include any additional descriptive literature or information,
relevant to the specification and/or services proposed that indi-
cates unique qualifications, particular competence in this field,
technical
capabilities,
proprietary
techniques,
or
special
resources. You should specifically indicate location and experi-
ence with Class A properties.
Resources
SUPPLIERS shall provide sufficient information and docu-
mentation to substantiate the following:
•
Provide a key contact person at Supplier’s management
offices who will be accountable for the quality of this rela-
tionship and assure the competency and responsiveness of
the on-site security team.
•
Provide an on-site Manager who will be responsible for man-
agement of the overall relationship between the Supplier’s
firm and [the Company.] This person will be responsible for
•
maintaining the risk profile of the property, communicat-
ing and addressing identified hazards and security risks;
establishing and improving post orders and operational
procedures;
•
assuring the training, competency, and appearance of all
assigned security personnel;
•
checking specific assignments, addressing operational
inadequacies,
and
providing
proactive
leadership
to
assigned security staff;
APPENDIX C: REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS FOR CONTRACT SECURITY SERVICES 221

•
providing knowledgeable and responsive leadership in
non-routine, emergency, and/or hazardous situations;
and
•
maintaining necessary communications and being acces-
sible at all times during supplier’s normal business hours.
This is considered a key person in the adequacy of the property’s
security program and the development and effective maintenance
of this contractual relationship.
Training
SUPPLIERS shall provide sufficient information and docu-
mentation to substantiate the following:
•
Provide qualified, trained personnel, properly supervised, in
numbers sufficient to respond to day-to-day protective ser-
vices and non-routine security incidents and consistently
maintain the equipment in areas covered by the Contract.
•
Enforce
discipline
and
good
behavior
with
Supplier’s
employees and take all necessary steps to assure that they
are familiar with, and abide by, [Company] and Supplier
safety, security and other rules and policies.
•
Provide quality control measures for all work performed.
Financial
Contractor shall provide a copy of its most recent annual
report.
Agreement
At the conclusion of this RFP process, [Company] intends to
negotiate an agreement with one SUPPLIER to provide the
aforementioned services. Exhibit C is the standard Master
Agreement [Company] will use to acquire these products and
services. If the SUPPLIER has any comments or exceptions to
this Master Agreement, the SUPPLIER shall provide such com-
ments or exceptions in its proposal. Submittal of comments
shall not constitute acceptance by [Company], but shall be
used in the selection process. Comments provided after submit-
tal of the proposal may result in disqualification. The final
agreement, once executed, supersedes all previous agreements
for these products and services.
222
APPENDIX C: REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS FOR CONTRACT SECURITY SERVICES

SUPPLIER must provide evidence of insurance as required in
Article 5 of the Agreement.
[Company] may, but is not bound by any contract executed as
a result of this process to enter into an Agreement for shred-
der services for a three (3) year period, and may extend for
one (1) additional year upon mutual written consent of the
parties involved, subject to the termination rights provided
in the Agreement.
Selection Criteria
Quotations shall be considered from selected responsible
organizations now engaged in the purchase and maintenance of
shredders comparable with those described in this document.
A process has been identified to select the SUPPLIER or
SUPPLIERS that best meet [Company’s] needs. Proposals will be
reviewed by designated [Company] representatives. Key factors
that [Company] will use to determine the select list include, but
are not limited to, the following:
Quality—Overall experience and capability of the SUPPLIER.
Personnel—Ability to provide highly trained and experienced
personnel with special consideration of on-site management/
supervisory personnel.
Service—Willingness to provide immediate response to situa-
tions or concerns as they arise.
Pricing—Competitive pricing that will be guaranteed for the
term of the Agreement.
Financial Stability—Sound financial condition.
Commitment—Willingness to work with [Company] in pro-
viding cost-effective quality service.
Contract—Willingness
to
execute
[Company’s]
Master
Agreement.
General Conditions of the RFP
Confidentiality. All materials contained in this RFP, or later
distributed or referred to, including, without limitation, the
descriptions of [Company] and its organization, systems and
procedures, are the [Company’s] property. The SUPPLIER
agrees, by accepting this RFP, that it will keep all such mate-
rials and information in confidence within its company on a
need-to-know basis, and will not provide duplicates of such
materials or information or disclose such materials to any
APPENDIX C: REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS FOR CONTRACT SECURITY SERVICES 223

person outside its organization without the prior written
consent of Heritage Property.
News Releases/Public Disclosure. News releases or public
disclosure in any manner pertaining to this RFP or the selec-
tion of a SUPPLIER related to this RFP will not be made by
any participating SUPPLIER.
Cost of Preparing Proposals. All costs incurred by the
SUPPLIER in connection with responding to the RFP are the
responsibility of the SUPPLIER.
Other. The written responses to this RFP will be an impor-
tant consideration in the selection process. [Company], at its
sole discretion, reserves the right to cancel or significantly
modify the terms and provisions of the RFP if it is in its best
interest to do so. If the RFP is significantly modified or
amended by [Company] prior to the submission of the pro-
posals, a change in the requested submission date for the
proposal may be made accordingly.
RFP Timeline
The following schedule outlines [Company’s] timeframe for
selection of the Supplier(s):
Please do not call or fax to determine the status or outcome
of your company’s Proposal. Timely notification will be made
when final selections are complete.
We look forward to your continued participation in the pro-
posal process. If you should have any questions or require addi-
tional information please contact me at [(xxx) xxx-xxxx] or
[designated alternate] at [(xxx) xxx-xxxx.]
Sincerely,
[Designated Representative]
cc:[Designated Alternate]
Activity/Event
Target Date
RFP mailed to SUPPLIERS
[Specify date]
Bid Informational Meeting
[Specify date]
Proposals due to [Company]
[Specify date]
[Company] reviews proposals
[Specify date]
Final Contractor selection
[Specify date]
Agreement executed
[Specify date]
Contractor start date
[Specify date]
224
APPENDIX C: REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS FOR CONTRACT SECURITY SERVICES

APPENDIX D: WORKPLACE
VIOLENCE INCIDENT RESPONSE
GUIDELINE
Introduction
The templates in the series of toolboxes found in this appen-
dix, which were developed by the Security Executive Council,
are intended to introduce essential workplace violence preven-
tion program elements such as awareness training, case man-
agement, response options, and crisis management. Its primary
purpose is to present an overview of the components of a good
baseline program with the focus being on essential elements
needed to build a workplace violence prevention program
rather than teaching about it.
Real research and initiatives in workplace violence began in
the mid-1980s. National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health research provided a foundation from which workplace
violence issues could be examined and risk reduction methodol-
ogies developed. Dr. Park Dietz and 3M Corporation, who devel-
oped a program and process for Supporting a Nonviolent
Workplace, were pioneer thought leaders. To this day Supporting
a Nonviolent Workplace is the only scalable offering developed
out of research of a multidisciplinary cross-functional team
approach. Dr. Dietz and the Threat Assessment Group (TAG) is
the sole source licensed distributor of this process.1 It is currently
used by hundreds of global companies within the Fortune 500
and beyond.
The
Security
Executive
Council has
used
Supporting
a
Nonviolent Workplace as a basis for further development of the
security program components contained in this book. There is
no product that is more cost-effective, customizable, and scal-
able than Supporting a Nonviolent Workplace, and the Council
strongly recommends incorporating it into your program and
utilizing it concurrently with the elements we are providing in
this book.
1For more information about Supporting a Nonviolent Workplace, visit http://www.
taginc.com/products/threat-management-supporting-a-nonviolent-workplace/.
225

Workplace Violence Prevention
Program Template
Purpose
To provide a basic process for the handling of a workplace
violence incident that can be adapted for use at all [company]
sites.
Overview
[Company] sites should have a plan of action that will allow
them to respond quickly and appropriately in the event of a
workplace violence incident. The following guidelines will pro-
vide the framework for [company] site management to devise a
plan for their individual sites in the event of a potentially vio-
lent incident.
There are three key components of a workplace violence
response plan: (1) Proactive, (2) Planning and Preparation, and
(3) Reactive Response.
Prevention and Early Intervention
(Proactive) Toolbox
Proactive
Prevention and Early Intervention
Recognize early warning signs and behavioral indicators that
identify troubled employees or troubling situations2 and respond
early and appropriately.
Measures and Resources
•
Workplace Violence Training
•
Supervisor and manager training3
•
Troubled employee or troubling situations

Employee Assistance Program

Counseling

Administrative

Disability

Termination
2The terms “troubled employees” and “troubling situations” were developed for use
with the Supporting a Nonviolent Workplace program, created by Dr. Park Dietz and
3M Corporation.
3See previous footnote.
226
APPENDIX D: WORKPLACE VIOLENCE INCIDENT RESPONSE GUIDELINE

Managing Potential Workplace Violence
•
Establish policy management team
•
Awareness education and training
•
Corporate central reporting policy
•
Effective security organization
•
Intake and data entry
•
Investigate all reports
•
Risk assessment
•
Situation classification
•
Risk response options
•
Security plan
•
Case management and documentation
Preliminary Intake Information4
Name:
Address:
Home
Work Location
Phone:
Home
Work Location
Gender:
Date of Birth:
Supervisor/Manager:
Position:
Social Security #:
Date of Hire:
Height:
Weight:
Description:
EEO Classification:
Make
Model
Color
License #
State
Vehicle 1
________ ________ ________ __________ ________
Vehicle 2
________ ________ ________ __________ ________
Employment Status: Currently working Y N STD ____
LTD ____
Leave of absence ____ Layoff ____ Terminated ____
Retired ____
Marital Status: Spouse name
Spouse address and phone if different
Military Status:
4This preliminary intake form is available as part of Supporting a Nonviolent
Workplace program and was created to assist in gathering pertinent information
and guiding investigations in order to make appropriate decisions and take
appropriate action. As with all of the Supporting a Nonviolent Workplace elements,
cross-functional teams of experts collaborated on this material, and there are no
other programs publically available to our knowledge that provide these types of
resource materials.
APPENDIX D: WORKPLACE VIOLENCE INCIDENT RESPONSE GUIDELINE 227

Some Critical Elements to Consider In
Determining Dangerousness
1. THREATS
Did _____________ make a direct threat?
An implied threat?
A conditional threat?
A veiled threat?
Did _____________ repeat the threat in the presence of
others or the interviewer?
Does ___________ have a clear reason in his mind for
making the threat, however illogical?
Does ___________ admit to threatening others in the past
2. PROJECTION ONTO OTHERS
Does ____________ blame (project responsibility onto)
others/another for any personal problems he or someone
close to him may be having?
Does ____________ brood over perceived injustices or
wrongdoings by specific others?
Does ____________ possess a violent attitude toward an
administrative decision, policy, or action, and does he
hold any specific other as the responsible party?
3. FAMILY HISTORY/SOCIAL ENVIRONMENTAL FUNCTIONING
Have there been a series of recent events which have
had a negative impact on ___________ life? (Loss of job,
status,
significant relationship, family member, court
case, etc.)
Has there been a loss of structure in his life?
Has __________ been recently released from a mental
institution?
A penal institution?
History of chronic unemployment? Transience? Difficulty
keeping jobs?
Has _______ suffered repeated failure in his life?
Does ____________ have a history of hostility towards
authority figures? (Home, school, employment, military,
law enforcement, mental, penal, etc.)
Does ____________ have any social support system?
Is there any evidence that _____________ was physically,
emotionally, or sexually abused by his parents, either
directly or indirectly? By others?
Was _____________ exposed to violence and/or other anti-
social behavior within his family setting? (Alcoholism,
228
APPENDIX D: WORKPLACE VIOLENCE INCIDENT RESPONSE GUIDELINE

drug abuse/dependency, criminal activity, sexual perver-
sion, etc.)
Does _____________ discuss his “feelings of desperation”?
Is
there
evidence
of
violence
towards
other
family
members?
Are family members afraid of subject? Why?
Are associates afraid of ___________? Why?
Does _____________ accept violence as a means of solving
his problems?
What has ____________ reaction been to any/all of the
above firings, lay-offs, criticisms, suspensions, expulsions,
reprimands, etc.?
Does ____________ have a history of threatening former
bosses, co-workers, teachers, students, associates, friends,
strangers?
Has ____________ ever acted upon previous threats? How?
Do former bosses, co-workers, teachers, students, associ-
ates, friends, strangers, fear _____________? Why?
Has _____________ expressed his grievances to associates,
seeking reinforcement? Their response? His reaction?
Did ______________ grievances outline potential threats
towards specific others? Method? How recently? Reasons?
4. CRIMINAL HISTORY
Is there any evidence of violence and/or threats of vio-
lence in _________criminal history?
Evidence of arrest for violent crime? Domestic violence?
Violence/cruelty towards animals? Fire-setting? Burglary/
criminal trespass? Property crime/vandalism?
Evidence of violence and/or threats of violence towards
family, neighbors,
co-workers, doctors,
hospital
staff,
therapists, counselors, probation officers, police, teachers,
students, etc.?
What is the most violent thing ____________ has done?
Circumstances?
How similar is current situation?
How recent, and what is the severity, and frequency of
violent acts?
5. MENTAL HISTORY
Has ____________ ever been diagnosed by a mental health
professional as being dangerous?
Has ____________ ever been diagnosed as being psy-
chotic? Specific prior diagnosis?
Does
___________
take
any
specific
antipsychotic
medication?
History of going off medication?
APPENDIX D: WORKPLACE VIOLENCE INCIDENT RESPONSE GUIDELINE 229

Does ____________ state that he has a special mission to
fulfill?
Does ____________ state that he is only doing what
greater
powers
are
telling
him
to
do?
(Command
hallucinations)
What are voices telling him? Do voices include identifi-
able others? How?
Has _____________ ever heard voices commanding a cer-
tain act, and has he complied? Did acts involve violence?
Does ____________ history indicate any homicidal fanta-
sies involving authority figures? Identifiable others? Who?
Why? When? What in fact happened?
Has _____________ ever attempted/threatened suicide?
Does ____________ feel that he has little to lose?
Does ____________ express hopelessness ?
Do prior diagnoses by mental health professionals include
terms such as explosive, impulsive, hostile, aggressive,
unpredictable,
deceitful,
manipulative,
poor
control,
“grudge against society,” angry, homicidal, suicidal, dis-
trustful, agitated, paranoid, or belligerent?
6. INTEREST IN ASSAULTIVE, HOMICIDAL, OR SUICIDAL
BEHAVIOR
Is there evidence of a plan to carry out a threat or actual
assault upon persons or property?
Does
____________
appear
to
be
mentally/physically
capable of carrying out his threats or actual assault
against persons or property?
Do behaviors and circumstances indicate that he could
carry out threat/assault?
Have identified others been stalked? Their movements
monitored? Itineraries investigated?
Has __________ collected personal data, photos, etc.,
reflecting obsession with identified other? Has he written
stories, poems, created a diary dedicated to or centering
around identified other?
Has ____________ made reference to membership in any
special organization, cult, association, etc., which advo-
cates violence?
Does ___________ have a history of attention-seeking
behavior?
Desires
for
fame,
notoriety,
celebrity
status?
Power?
Control? Positive or negative recognition?
230
APPENDIX D: WORKPLACE VIOLENCE INCIDENT RESPONSE GUIDELINE

7. DRUGS AND ALCOHOL ABUSE
History of drug/alcohol abuse?
Violence while under the influence?
Chronic abuser? Frequency of abuse? Recent change in
pattern?
Does criminal history show evidence of alcohol or drug-
related offenses?
Type of alcohol/drugs used? Quantity?
Does ___________ procure and brandish weapons while
under the influence of alcohol/drugs?
8. MILITARY HISTORY
History of insubordination, court martial, fighting, refusal
to obey orders, other defiant acts?
Dishonorable discharge, bad conduct, undesirable dis-
charge, or release for other than honorable reasons?
Circumstances of less than honorable discharge?
Any
special
skills
acquired
relevant
to
THREAT-
ASSESSMENT? (Explosive ordnance, sniper training, SEAL
training, Special Forces, RECON, etc.)
Prior military service in full combat?
Any grudges against government, society, or authority rel-
ative to military service?
9. WEAPONS OWNERSHIP/ACQUISITION
Does ___________ own any weapons? Type? Number?
Recent attempts to purchase/procure? Borrow?
Evidence
of recent practice at range or
at isolated
location?
Does ___________ have weapons fixation?
Extensive weapons collection?
Weapons permit? Hunting license?
Prior weapons arrest or weapon-related crime?
Reputation for keeping a weapon on his person? At his
residence? In car?
Is _____________ known as a local “gun nut”?
Is _____________ a subject of record to local or residen-
tially historical ATF or USSS office? Local police, county,
state, FBI, other?
10. MISCELLANEOUS
Does ___________ initiate conversation regarding sexual
themes?
Type? Detailed? Repetition of theme?
Has ____________ exhibited any overt sexual perversity?
Drawings?
APPENDIX D: WORKPLACE VIOLENCE INCIDENT RESPONSE GUIDELINE 231

Writings? Photos? Sexual paraphernalia? Type? Theme?
Are interpretable materials obtainable?
Full descriptions of vehicles to which he has access?
Evidence of rape kits within same?
Documented
residence?
Description?
Prior
residency?
Appropriate checks prior to residences, schools, etc.
Hobbies, pastimes, ascertainable habits?
VCR ownership? Video club membership? Types of videos
viewed?
Any other relevant subjects available for interview who
might
assist
in
providing
insight
into
_____________
personality?
How do others feel about ___________ potential for dan-
gerousness? To what degree? Why?
Victim  Suspect Internal Response Options
•
Work schedule adjustments
•
Time off
•
Assignment change
•
Travel/training
•
Leave of absence
•
Temporary/permanent relocation
•
Job transfer
•
Employment separation
•
Re-employment
•
Workers’ compensation
•
Disability
•
Benefit extensions
•
Outplacement
•
EAP assistance
•
Engage, win-lose, workers’ compensation
•
Disability
Planning and Preparation Toolbox
Planning and Preparation
Conventional physical security safeguards will deter, but not
prevent, an armed intruder from gaining access. Corporate
Security managers and staff are available to assist site manage-
ment in devising a plan for specific locations.
It is important to approach the planning process as a team
with your local authorities. As you enter into this partnership,
you should identify strengths and limitations of the response
plan. Work to refine the limitations of the plan. Discuss
232
APPENDIX D: WORKPLACE VIOLENCE INCIDENT RESPONSE GUIDELINE

expectations. What should you expect to see happen in an inci-
dent, and what is the timetable for response and resolution. Be
sensitive to the needs of the police department in the areas of
familiarization with your facilities, types of chemicals being
used, hazardous work areas, and electrostatic limitations. As
part of your planning process, invite the police to tour your
facility to get a firsthand look at your operation.
This plan should be developed as component of your other
Emergency Response Plans. Many of the issues that must
be dealt with during a violence situation can be handled
through a typical incident command system. It is important
to review these processes on a regular basis to ensure that
those persons who work within the system understand their
responsibilities.
Security Plans and Programs
•
Facility security risk assessment
•
Centralized incident reporting
•
Local security responsibility assignment
•
Site security coordinator
•
Site security committee
•
Local law enforcement liaison
•
Notification and communication plan
Measures and Resources
•
Facility preparation
•
General guidelines manual
•
Corporate security programs
Risk Assessment
•
Risk rating assigned
•
Best available method
•
Automated or subjective
•
Internal team
•
Consultants
•
Law enforcement
Security Plan
•
Personnel Security Plan
•
Facility Security Plan
•
Emergency Response Plan
APPENDIX D: WORKPLACE VIOLENCE INCIDENT RESPONSE GUIDELINE 233

Law Enforcement Intervention Plan
•
Damage control
•
Corporate image
•
Mitigate liabilities
Effective Security Organization
•
Mission
•
Adequately staffed
•
Effectively organized
•
Member of management team
•
Assigned responsibilities
•
Professional development
Police Preparation
•
Police response times will vary for every jurisdiction and
location. Establish approximately how long a response time
should take.
•
Many police departments are not equipped to manage a tac-
tical situation. Establish which law enforcement agency will
be responsible for oversight of the incident.
•
The police will establish an inner and outer perimeter. They
will also typically take care of traffic control as part of their
overall management of the incident scene. The police may
enlist company security to assist in this task.
•
Identify a location for the police command center. It should
be in a convenient location to your facilities, while at the
same time not close enough to become a danger to the peo-
ple working there. Identify a [company] representative to get
location and phone number.
Facility Preparation
•
Identify a [company] command center.
•
Identify a single point of contact to represent [company]
to communicate procedure information and brief police
on
the
situation.
This
person
must
be
empowered
to make decisions. This person will interact with the
police commander to provide necessary information and
resources.
•
Witnesses should be identified for police interviews. If possi-
ble, a separate staging area for the witnesses is desirable, or
a dedicated phone line may need to be established.
234
APPENDIX D: WORKPLACE VIOLENCE INCIDENT RESPONSE GUIDELINE

•
Electronic access capability to shut down and give police
access cards.
•
Determine who can lead police into buildings.
•
Have building maps available for police review.
Identify Your Resources
•
Incident management team members
•
Security
•
Facilities
•
Medical
•
Law enforcement
Trespass Policy and Badge Removal
•
Person may be put on administrative leave due to an investi-
gation until the investigation is finished.
•
Trespass orders make it clear that the person is not supposed
to be on [company] property.
•
Person should sign trespass form, or it can be sent registered
mail.
•
Trespass notification should be in writing, rather than verbal:
puts [company] and police in better position to take action
if it is violated.
•
Create a box on the restricted access notice that there is a
trespass letter on file.
•
If possible have police present when person is told, so it’s on
record at police department.
•
For larger cases consider getting a court order.
•
If person is given a trespass warning at the time of separa-
tion, create a form to have them read and sign, so the tres-
pass warning can be on file.
Building Hazards
•
Identify building hazardous materials, and determine if
Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) are available and how
police will react in hazard areas.
•
Reactive
Prevention strategies directed at potential workplace violence
situations will only reduce the possibility of an actual violent
event. It is not possible to prevent all such incidents. It is
important to identify and classify any incidents of violence or
eminent danger as quickly as possible and be prepared to
implement a specific plan of action.
APPENDIX D: WORKPLACE VIOLENCE INCIDENT RESPONSE GUIDELINE 235

The ability to continuously communicate detailed informa-
tion about the incident will enable [company] and local author-
ities to provide a prompt and appropriate response.
Response Procedures
•
Facility response
•
Assigned responsibilities
•
Crisis communication procedures
•
Evacuation procedures
•
Immediate protection
•
Trauma counseling
Measures and Resources
•
Administrative options
•
Medical/psychological
•
Termination
Reactive Response Procedures Toolbox
Intake and Data Entry
•
Central reporting
•
Master database
•
Incident analysis
•
Uniform quality control
•
Incident tracking
Investigate All Reports
•
Investigation appropriate to incident
•
Broad-based to microscopic screening
•
Uniformly objective
•
Criteria-based
Threat Evaluation
•
Internal
•
Incident management team
•
Law enforcement
•
Forensic psychiatrist
•
Profiling, psycholinguistics, specialists
236
APPENDIX D: WORKPLACE VIOLENCE INCIDENT RESPONSE GUIDELINE

Facility Response
•
Notify the police immediately. Do not hang up the phone.
Continue providing information for as long as possible with-
out compromising your safety.
•
Notify [company] Corporate Security at [(xxx) xxx-xxxx],
immediately after local notifications have been made.
Evacuation
•
Decisions to evacuate are driven by the situation, although it
is always better to get out of the building if it is possible to
do so safely.
•
The perpetrator is an intelligent threat. Unlike a natural
disaster or fire, he or she knows where people will go and
what they will do and may adjust the search for targets
accordingly.
•
One option to consider is making an announcement naming
the perpetrator, and stating that he or she is in the building
and is armed. Advise that everyone in the building should
take appropriate actions to ensure their own personal safety.
•
Lock as many interior office doors as possible in order to
slow the perpetrator(s) progress, but not to hinder emer-
gency egress by employees.
•
Do not try to be a hero. Unnecessary injuries may be sus-
tained if the perpetrator is encountered. Either hide or
vacate the building.
•
Security or police will lock-out elevators to try to contain
perpetrator; trespass warning to perpetrator by police.
•
Determine if the situation requires local resident evacuation.
First Aid
•
Identify First Responders and prepare them to assist until
Emergency Medical personnel arrive.
•
Identify on-site medical staff and have them on scene and
available to assist.
•
If there is a “hot area,” have police move the injured to a
staging area.
•
Ensure that adequate first aid supplies are available for
emergency use.
•
Identify
a
triage
area
for
the
wounded
and
injured.
Determine capabilities of local hospitals for dealing with
trauma-related injuries.
APPENDIX D: WORKPLACE VIOLENCE INCIDENT RESPONSE GUIDELINE 237

Perpetrator Information
•
If perpetrator is a [company] employee or former employee,
make every effort to gain information from supervisor and
have supervisor and Human Resources manager available.
•
Have EAP counselor available at the command center or by
phone.
•
Procedures for release of information will be streamlined to
give information that will assist authorities, e.g., EAP files,
medical files, attorney-client information.
•
Supervisor to provide technical background and military
background.
Communication
•
The police will want the option of talking with the perpetra-
tor via the telephone system. Determine if your telephone
system can be used to pinpoint the exact location of the per-
petrator inside the building.
•
Identify and shut off fax communication; fax lines are analog
lines and can be set up with a recording device.
•
Secure communication line from negotiating center to per-
petrator; set phone line of perpetrator to automatically dial
the negotiating center when perpetrator picks up the tele-
phone receiver.
•
Radios, pagers, cell phones, and public address systems are
other means of communicating with people in the affected
area. Ensure that these devices are in working order and that
you have access to telephone and pager numbers.
•
Determine if all outgoing calls can be stopped. With the
exception of 911 calls, outgoing calls will only exacerbate the
situation.
Witness Call-In
•
Utilize available resources that are already in place.
•
Determine where to direct calls from family members.
Media Releases and the Press
•
Expect that the press will probably arrive at the scene before,
or at the same time, as the police.
•
Identify one person to be liaison with the police.
•
Identify an area to which the press can be taken. Ensure that
Corporate Communications is apprised of the incident, so
238
APPENDIX D: WORKPLACE VIOLENCE INCIDENT RESPONSE GUIDELINE

that they can begin preparing appropriate news releases for
the press. Identify someone to do this task.
•
Media representative to gain police dispatch number.
•
Press releases should be coordinated through the police pub-
lic relations officer at the scene. This precaution is taken to
ensure that no operational information is inadvertently
released that could endanger the welfare of the police or
employees involved in the incident.
•
A [company] media representative should be located in the
communication command center. Contact police immedi-
ately to determine where it is located and a dedicated phone
line number.
Aftermath Trauma Counseling
•
Ensure that Employee Assistance is notified via Human
Resources. This will ensure that all effected personnel and
their families will receive trauma counseling. This is an
important part of the recovery process, and allows people to
process and deal effectively with their emotions. Trauma
counseling should be done at the earliest possible time.
APPENDIX D: WORKPLACE VIOLENCE INCIDENT RESPONSE GUIDELINE 239

APPENDIX E: CODE OF
BUSINESS CONDUCT AND
ETHICS TEMPLATE
[Company] is proud of its high standards of honesty and
integrity in the workplace and in the conduct of its business
affairs. It is the continuing policy of [Company] to maintain
these standards and conduct business in an ethical manner.
The provisions of this Code of Business Conduct and Ethics
apply
to
all
directors,
officers,
employees,
and
agents
of
[Company] and its direct and indirect subsidiaries and affiliates,
regardless of location. Thus, throughout the Code of Business
Conduct
and
Ethics,
the
use
of
the
term
[Alternate
or
Abbreviated Company Name], or “company” refers to [Company]
and its subsidiaries.
No corporate code of conduct can cover all relevant topics,
and this Code of Business Conduct and Ethics may be supple-
mented (but not superseded) by divisional or departmental pol-
icy. Thus, in addition, employees are bound by various other
corporate
policies—such
as
the
[Company]
Antitrust
Compliance Policy, policies on weapons, workplace violence,
electronic mail, and Intranet usage—which are not included in
this Code. Any questions regarding this Code or other policies
governing
conduct
of
[Company]’s
employees
should
be
directed to your manager or to the Business Conduct and Ethics
Committee. The Committee consists of representatives from the
Legal, Internal Audit, and Security departments.
The last two pages of this employee handbook are tear-out
sheets. After you have read the Code of Business Conduct and
Ethics, sign both the Acknowledgement and Certification and
return to the Business Conduct Committee. We want everyone
to understand the Code and have also provided space on the
last page for you to pose any question or concern you may have
to the Committee.
Any violation of the Code of Business Conduct and Ethics by
employees will result in appropriate disciplinary action up to
and including termination of employment. Violations by non-
employees can result in termination of the business arrange-
ment and barring the individual from [Company] facilities.
241

Company Assets
We all have an obligation to safeguard company assets,
including exercising care in using company equipment and
vehicles, as well as using company time for company business
rather than for personal purposes. We all also have an obliga-
tion to bring to the attention of higher management any waste,
misuse, destruction, or theft of [Company] property or any
improper or illegal activity.
You may do so anonymously, if you so desire, by calling the
Business Conduct and Security Hotline.
Compliance with Laws and Regulations
You must comply with all laws and governing regulations
applicable in the country, state, and local jurisdiction where
business is conducted. [Company] and its employees shall not
violate the laws of any country, nor shall any employee assist a
third party in violating the law.
The laws of many jurisdictions may impact a [Company]
operation. These laws include not only those of the United
States and of the country in which the operation is located, but
those of other countries in which the operation conducts busi-
ness. [Company]’s managers must comply with such laws and
regulations, even though their competitors may not choose to
do so.
Government Investigations
[Company] fully cooperates with government investigations.
The [Company] Legal Department must coordinate such activi-
ties. If you are subpoenaed or contacted in any way by any U.S.
or foreign government investigative agency, contact the Legal
Department immediately. You should not respond to any gov-
ernmental authority until you have had an opportunity to con-
sult with [Company]’s Legal Department.
Laws Governing International Trade
and Transactions
[Company] complies with all applicable U.S. laws governing
imports, exports, and the conduct of business with foreign
corporations.
242
APPENDIX E: CODE OF BUSINESS CONDUCT AND ETHICS TEMPLATE

Payments Outside of the Country of Residence
Company employees must comply with all applicable tax
and currency control laws of the principal country in which
they work. No employee shall be paid any commission or any
other part of his or her compensation elsewhere than in his or
her country of residence if the Company has knowledge that
such payment would violate any local income tax or exchange
control laws. The same goes for any payment to non-employees
and unrelated entities for goods and services; no such payments
should be made to such parties in a country other than that in
which the party resides, maintains a place of business, or has
rendered the services for which payment is made if the
Company has knowledge that such a payment method would
violate any local income tax or exchange laws.
If you have any questions in this area, consult the [Company]
Legal Department.
Confidential Information
During the course of your employment, you may learn trade
secrets or other confidential or unpublished information relat-
ing to [Company]’s or its customers’ and suppliers’ business,
operations, research, or technology. You shall not use or disclose
to any third party any such information, either during or after
your employment, without the prior written consent of the
company. Under no circumstances may you use or disclose
such information for personal gain.
In general, you should only accept from sources outside the
Company information that is released through normal, publicly
accessible channels. Employees may not sign or enter into
confidential
disclosure
agreements
without
review
of
the
[Company] Legal Department.
Ethics—and the law—are involved here, and take precedence
over competitive advantage. All employees should be aware that
theft of trade secrets and economic espionage are crimes under
federal and state laws and carry severe sanctions.
If you are ever unsure about what to do regarding the
receipt, disclosure, or handling of confidential or trade secret
information, or have questions about the application of the
Code of Business Conduct and Ethics to competitor informa-
tion, consult with your manager or a representative of the
Business Conduct and Ethics Committee or the [Company]
Legal Department.
APPENDIX E: CODE OF BUSINESS CONDUCT AND ETHICS TEMPLATE 243

Competitors’ Information
From time to time, [Company] gathers information about the
markets in which it does business, including information about
competitors and their products and services. [Company] is
committed to gathering this information honestly and ethically;
however, we do not use, and we never encourage our employees
to use, improper means to obtain our competitors’ confidential
or proprietary information or their trade secrets.
It
is
entirely
proper
to
gather
competitive
information
through surveys, market studies, competitive analyses, and
benchmarking, as well as from published articles, advertise-
ments, publicly-distributed brochures, surveys by consultants,
and conversations with customers.
To avoid the appearance of improper conduct in the gather-
ing of competitive information, you must not
•
seek or receive such information directly from the company’s
competitors;
•
misrepresent your identity in attempting to collect such
information; or
•
attempt to acquire a competitor’s trade secrets or other
proprietary or confidential business information through
unlawful or unethical means, such as theft, spying, burglary,
wire-tapping, deceptive relationships with competitor’s sup-
pliers, seeking disclosures by a competitor’s present or
former employee, or breach of a competitor’s nondisclosure
agreement by a customer or other party.
Employee Information
[Company] also protects the confidential information of its
employees. You must not disclose any employee information
(whether it be compensation or other personnel data, medical
information, reasons for termination, or any other employment
matter) to any third party unless required by law, and you must
not disclose such information to anyone else in the company,
except those with a demonstrated “need to know.”
Conflict of Interest
Conflicts of interest occur when our personal activities and
financial affairs conflict or appear to conflict with our responsi-
bility to act in the best interests of [Company]. You must avoid
personal situations that might be construed as conflicts of
interest—i.e., any personal interest outside the company that
244
APPENDIX E: CODE OF BUSINESS CONDUCT AND ETHICS TEMPLATE

could make it advantageous for you to place such personal
interest above your obligation to [Company].
You should not have any position with, or substantial interest
in, any business enterprise operated for profit, the existence of
which would conflict or might reasonably be supposed to con-
flict with the proper performance of your company duties or
responsibilities, or which might tend to affect your indepen-
dence of judgment with respect to transactions between the
company and such other business enterprise. You must also
first make available to the company any business opportunity
that is related to any business activity of the company.
The following guidelines apply to most common conflict
situations.
Employment
•
If you are a full-time [Company] employee, your employ-
ment with [Company] must be your first priority. Any out-
side employment, investment, or other source of income
must be secondary and must not interfere with the perfor-
mance of your duties as a [Company] employee.
•
You may not serve as an officer, director, partner, or consul-
tant of, or work for, a supplier, customer, or competitor while
working for [Company]; however, certain company officers
and certain key employees may be allowed to serve as an
officer or director of another company upon prior written
approval from General Counsel and the CEO.
Finances
•
You may not loan or borrow money or accept monetary gifts
from individuals or organizations that do business with or
compete with [Company].
•
You may not buy or sell goods or services from or to any
company in which you or a close family member may per-
sonally benefit from such purchase or sale.
Business Opportunities
•
You should not make any investment that might affect your
business decisions. For example, employees may not own or
have a substantial interest in a company that is a competitor
or
one
that
has
current
or
prospective
business
with
[Company]. This prohibition does not apply to owning less
than one percent of the stock of a publicly traded company.
APPENDIX E: CODE OF BUSINESS CONDUCT AND ETHICS TEMPLATE 245

Reporting Conflicts of Interest
Employees are required to disclose to the company any con-
flicts of interest they may have under the guidelines described
in the Code of Business Conduct and Ethics. In the event of
conflicts that arise during the course of employment, employees
are required to report such conflicts by contacting a representa-
tive of the Business Conduct and Ethics Committee in a timely
manner.
Dealing with Public Officials
Contacts with or gifts to public officials are subject to an
expanding body of state and federal lobbying laws, rules, and
regulations. As a result, all such contacts or gifts should be
approved, in advance, by your regional government affairs man-
ager. Payments to public officials to secure sales or obtain favor-
able treatment are strictly forbidden.
In no event shall gifts of substantial value or extravagant
entertainment be permitted, since these actions could be con-
strued as attempts to influence government decisions.
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act
[Company] complies strictly with the United States Foreign
Corrupt Practices Act of 1977 that prohibits payments or offers
of payments of anything of value to foreign officials (including
employees of entities which a foreign government controls or in
which it has a controlling interest), political parties, or candi-
dates for foreign political office in order to secure, retain, or
direct business.
Environmental Protection
It is [Company]’s policy to operate its facilities in compliance
with all applicable environmental laws, regulations, and per-
mits. This includes those governing the control, transportation,
storage, and disposal of regulated materials as well as air emis-
sions, wastewater, solid waste, hazardous waste, and storm
water. All [Company] employees are responsible for performing
their individual job functions in accordance with the company’s
environmental policies. The Company will not tolerate the falsi-
fication of data or the reporting of false information regarding
environmental compliance to government agencies or within
246
APPENDIX E: CODE OF BUSINESS CONDUCT AND ETHICS TEMPLATE

the Company. Employees shall respond promptly and profes-
sionally, in accordance with applicable procedures, to any
potential threat to human health or the environment from the
company’s operations. Employees are also required to bring to
[Company]’s attention any violation of the company’s environ-
mental policies. Retaliation against those who report violations
in good faith will not be tolerated.
Equal Employment Opportunity
It is [Company]’s policy to provide equal opportunity in all
aspects of employment. We forbid discrimination on account of
age, race, gender, color, religion, national origin, disability, sex-
ual orientation, or any other unlawful basis. We also forbid all
forms
of
unlawful
harassment.
Discriminatory
harassment
includes any verbal or other conduct which disparages any indi-
vidual or group on account of race, sex, or any other unlawful
factor and which creates an offensive, intimidating, or hostile
working
environment.
All
forms
of
such
conduct
are
prohibited—whether in the form of pictures, cartoons, teasing,
jokes, e-mail, epithets, name-calling, offensive gestures, or other
discriminatory
behavior.
Sexual
harassment
includes
any
unwelcome sexual conduct that is made a condition of employ-
ment or creates a hostile work environment. All forms of such
conduct are prohibited.
Every employee is required to follow our policy against
unlawful discrimination and harassment and to bring to the
company’s attention any action that does not comply with that
policy or our commitment to equal employment opportunity.
Supervisors and managers must be watchful for any signs that
our policy is not being followed and must see that any possible
violations are immediately referred for investigation, whether or
not there has been a formal complaint. Retaliation against those
who report violations of our policy in good faith is grounds for
termination of employment.
Financial Records
[Company] has established and maintains a high standard of
accuracy and completeness in its financial records. These
records serve as the basis for managing the company’s business,
for measuring and fulfilling the company’s obligations to share-
holders, employees, suppliers, and others, and for compliance
with tax and financial reporting requirements.
APPENDIX E: CODE OF BUSINESS CONDUCT AND ETHICS TEMPLATE 247

In the preparation and maintenance of records, all employees
must do the following:
•
Record and report information accurately and honestly.
•
Comply with [Company]’s accepted accounting standards
and practices, rules, regulations, and controls.
•
See that all entries are promptly and accurately recorded and
properly documented. Company records are subject to audit.
No entry may intentionally distort or disguise the true nature
of any transaction.
•
Never establish any undisclosed or unrecorded funds or
assets for any purpose.
•
Maintain books and records that will fairly and accurately
reflect our company business transactions. No transaction
with a supplier, agent, customer, or other third party may be
structured or recorded in a way that is not consistent with
accepted [Company] business practices.
•
Sign only those documents believed to be accurate and
truthful.
•
Devise, implement, and maintain sufficient internal controls
to provide assurance that record-keeping objectives are met.
Financial records should be maintained in accordance with
the requirements of law and generally accepted accounting
principles.
Gifts, Gratuities, Favors: Giving and
Receiving
You must select and deal with those who are doing, or seek-
ing to do, business with the company in a completely impartial
manner, without any considerations other than the best inter-
ests of [Company] and the requirements of local, state, and fed-
eral law. This means you shall not seek or accept from any such
person or firm any gifts, entertainment, tickets for sports or
artistic events, trips, use of customer or supplier property or
transportation or other favors that go beyond common courte-
sies consistent with [Company]’s ethical business practices.
Acceptance of cash or gift certificates from customers or suppli-
ers is absolutely forbidden. Any appearance of impropriety
must be avoided. Prior disclosure to your supervisor, and
approval by your facility manager or operating officer, who is
not participating in the receipt of the gift, entertainment, or
favor, are required for acceptances beyond common courtesies.
There must be a business purpose for approval to be given.
248
APPENDIX E: CODE OF BUSINESS CONDUCT AND ETHICS TEMPLATE

This policy does not cover customer entertainment, such as
accompanying the customer to dinner where a business discus-
sion is held, except where such entertainment would be extrav-
agant or excessively expensive.
Special Rules Apply to Federal, State, and
Local Governments
Rules for dealing with federal, state, and local governments
differ from those dealing with other customers. Failure to
observe those regulations can result not only in loss of contract
work and revenue, but in civil and/or criminal penalties as well.
It is your responsibility to learn the applicable rules when deal-
ing with a government agency.
Please refer to the section entitled “Dealing with Public
Officials” for detailed information and guidelines.
Insider Trading
Federal securities laws prohibit your use of “inside informa-
tion” when engaging, directly or indirectly, in transactions
involving the stock of [Company], any company owned or con-
trolled by [Company], or any other public company. Such laws
also prohibit you from disclosing inside information to any
other person so that they may trade or tip others to trade in a
company’s stock. “Inside information” may take many different
forms and is broadly defined as any material nonpublic infor-
mation about a company. Information is “material” if it would
be likely to influence an investor’s decision to buy, sell, or hold
the company’s stock, and is “nonpublic” until it has been made
available generally to investors.
If you possess inside information about the company, you
may not trade, directly or indirectly, in company stock (includ-
ing exercising a stock option or changing your investment elec-
tion with regard to any [Company] Stock Fund under your 401
(k) or Savings Plan), nor may you disclose such inside informa-
tion to others, until such information has been publicly dis-
closed and the public has had sufficient time to absorb it
(generally, two business days after its announcement). Similarly,
you may not trade in the stock of any other company while in
possession of inside information about such company obtained
as a [Company] employee.
Certain employees of the company who have routine access
to inside information are subject to trading approval processes
APPENDIX E: CODE OF BUSINESS CONDUCT AND ETHICS TEMPLATE 249

and “blackout” periods described in the company’s “Policy
Regarding Inside Information and Trading in Stock.” If you have
a question as to whether you are in possession of inside infor-
mation at any given time, call your division counsel.
Intellectual Property Rights
Employees must not take any actions that may violate the
intellectual property rights of third parties.
It is [Company]’s policy to not knowingly infringe valid,
enforceable patent rights or trademark rights held by others. If
an employee is making, using, or selling a product about which
the employee has patent or trademark infringement concerns,
he or she should contact the [Company] Legal Department for
advice and guidance.
[Company] does not knowingly infringe valid, enforceable
copyrights held by others. Employees are prohibited from repro-
ducing or distributing copyrighted materials (including printed
publications, photographs, and music) not owned by the com-
pany unless permission is expressly granted by the copyright
owner. [Company]’s policy is to comply with all laws and con-
tractual obligations applicable to licensed software. This policy
applies to software used, installed, or stored on any company-
owned computer or related equipment, including equipment
authorized for home use.
Political Contributions
Under federal law and the law in some states, corporate
funds cannot be used for contributions to a political party, com-
mittee, organization, or candidate. Included in this prohibition
are tickets to political fund-raising events, transportation, or
other services provided at the company’s expense.
No corporate political contribution may be made unless and
until authorized in advance by [Company]’s vice president for
government affairs
Workplace Safety
It is [Company]’s policy that its operations be managed to
protect the health and safety of its employees and the commu-
nities where it does business. Sound operating practices will be
followed to foster a safe working environment. At [Company],
safety comes first.
250
APPENDIX E: CODE OF BUSINESS CONDUCT AND ETHICS TEMPLATE

Accident
prevention
is
an
operating
responsibility.
It
demands the same management and control given to other
aspects of improving efficiency in operations. Management at
all levels will diligently enforce this policy.
The company requires employees to follow safe work prac-
tices in the interest of their own safety as well as that of fellow
employees.
Employees are also required to bring to [Company]’s atten-
tion any violation of the company’s safety policies and proce-
dures. Retaliation against those who report violations in good
faith will not be tolerated.
Reporting Violations and Policy
Enforcement
Reporting Violations
[Company]’s Code of Business Conduct and Ethics provides
an overview of the legal and ethical responsibilities of all
employees. This Code is intended as a guide in making the right
choice; however, we do realize that the right choice isn’t always
obvious. If you need help sorting out or resolving an issue
regarding the Code, consult with any senior manager of the
company, or call a representative of the Business Conduct and
Ethics Committee.
If you have information or knowledge of any act or practice
that is illegal or prohibited under this Employees Code of
Business Conduct and Ethics, you must promptly report such
matter to either your supervisor, facility manager, operating
officer, the Legal department, representatives of the Business
Conduct and Ethics Committee, or Corporate Security at (xxx)
xxx-xxxx,
or
the
Business
Conduct
and
Security
Hotline.
Prompt reporting of violations by employees ensures the pro-
tection of the company’s employees, assets, and customers.
Failure to report a known violation of the Code may subject you
to discipline, up to and including termination of employment.
The Business Conduct and Security Hotline was specifically
created to provide employees with an avenue for confidential
and anonymous reporting. It is toll-free and available 24 hours
a day, 7 days a week. An independent service provider answers
the Hotline, and you have the right to remain anonymous. The
information you provide and your identity are kept in the strict-
est possible confidence. All issues reported via the Hotline are
addressed promptly and fairly.
APPENDIX E: CODE OF BUSINESS CONDUCT AND ETHICS TEMPLATE 251

Policy Enforcement
All managerial personnel shall be responsible for the enforce-
ment of and compliance with this Code of Business Conduct
and Ethics, including necessary distribution to ensure employee
knowledge and compliance. Supervisors will be evaluated, in
part, on their effectiveness in implementing these policies in
their respective departments, and disciplinary action may be
taken against a violator’s supervisor to the extent the circum-
stances of the violation reflect inadequate supervision or lack of
diligence.
Selected employees will periodically be required to certify
compliance with these policies in the Code of Business Conduct
and Ethics Program. Failure of a selected employee to sign and
return the Code of Business Conduct and Ethics Declaration
will subject that employee to disciplinary action, up to and
including termination.
Bringing suspected violations of this Code to the attention of
management will not result in any form of retaliation or disci-
pline as long as you are acting in good faith. “Good faith”
doesn’t necessarily mean you are right, but it does mean you
reasonably and honestly believe you are accurate in your assess-
ment
and
perception
of
the
situation
you
are
reporting.
[Company] will not, however, overlook, condone, or allow to go
unpunished the frivolous use of its policy for personal gain or
vendetta.
The standards of this Code are important to the company
and must be taken seriously by all of us. Accordingly, violations
of these standards will not be tolerated and, in accordance with
company policies and applicable collective bargaining agree-
ments, will result in discipline up to and including discharge. In
addition, reimbursement of losses or damages may be sought,
or referral for criminal prosecution or civil action may be
required.
It is never permissible to engage in any conduct that is a
violation of the law or of a government regulation.
Acknowledgement
This Acknowledgment Is a Condition of Your Employment
I have received a copy of the [Company] Code of Business
Conduct and Ethics and have fully read and understand my
responsibility to comply with the Code. I am not engaged in
and will not engage in any conduct that violates the Code, and
252
APPENDIX E: CODE OF BUSINESS CONDUCT AND ETHICS TEMPLATE

will promptly report any violation of the Code or any applicable
law of which I become aware.
I recognize that [Company] is committed to the guidelines
contained in the Code and that any violation will result in
appropriate disciplinary action, ranging from reprimand up to
and including dismissal. I understand that I may discuss any
questions or issues regarding the Code with any senior manager
of the company or with a representative of the Business
Conduct and Ethics Committee at Corporate Security at (xxx)
xxx-xxxx. I further understand I may remain completely anony-
mous and report a violation of the Code toll-free through the
Business Conduct and Security Hotline, 7 days a week, 24 hours
a day, at 1-800-xxx-xxxx.
————————————————————————————
Print or Type Name
Signature
Position
————————————————————————————
Facility Code Facility Street Address City/State Zip Code Date
Certification
This Certification Is a Condition of Your Employment
Conflict of Interest (please choose the applicable category):
___ I am not involved in any situation, and I hold no position
or interest that would represent, or raise issues of, conflict of
interest as set forth in the CONFLICTS OF INTEREST section of
the Code.
___ I am involved in the following situations/I hold the fol-
lowing positions and interest that constitute, or raise issues of,
conflict of interest (list the nature of each situation, position, or
interest, regardless of whether previously disclosed).
————————————————————————————
Print or Type Name
Signature
Position
I have the following questions or comments, or wish to
report the following violations:
————————————————————————————
————————————————————————————
Please complete, sign, and date
the Acknowledgement and Certification on the Previous Page
Fill out the above, if applicable
return to:
APPENDIX E: CODE OF BUSINESS CONDUCT AND ETHICS TEMPLATE 253

APPENDIX F: CORPORATE
INCIDENT REPORTING AND
RESPONSE PLAN
Planning Philosophy
Introduction
Every business is vulnerable to a serious incident that could
affect business operations, damage community relations, create
adverse publicity, or result in financial loss and civil liability. An
incident could occur at any time, without warning, and range
from a natural disaster such as a flood or wind storm to a man-
made emergency such as sabotage or kidnapping.
Responding
to
each
type
of
incident
requires
careful
research; planning, preparation, and training to ensure that it is
managed based on its specific and unique circumstances. But
this should be accomplished by utilizing a process, infrastruc-
ture, and plan that is short, concise, and flexible.
Each company should recognize that significant risks exist
regarding its ability to continue normal business operations fol-
lowing a serious, unexpected, disruptive incident. This vulnera-
bility is a result of the company’s level of dependency upon its
operations processes, critical facility infrastructure, and elec-
tronic data systems. Risks to these services must be assessed on
an ongoing basis. It is further recognized that response and
recovery actions must be professionally and efficiently managed
to ensure the safety of employees, compliance with regulatory
requirements, and provide for a speedy restoration of business
operations. The process to manage this requires a significant
level of advance planning and preparation and involves a three-
tier planning process.
•
Tier 1 provides for the Incident Reporting and Site Incident
Response Plan, which outlines procedures for reporting and
responding to and managing incidents at the local level. The
Site Incident Response Team implements the provisions of
this plan.
•
Tier 2 provides for the Corporate Incident Response Plan,
which specifies operational procedures in responding to
and
managing
incidents
that
significantly
impact
the
255

corporation. The Corporate Incident Response Team imple-
ments the provisions of this plan.
•
Tier 3 provides for the Corporate Crisis Management Plan,
which specifies corporate policy when dealing with incidents
that could disrupt business operations or damage the corpo-
rate reputation. The Corporate Crisis Management Team
implements the provisions of this plan.
Figure F.1 provides a graphical depiction of the Three Tier
Management Strategy.
Objective
The objective of the tiered approach is to provide a struc-
tured response to all incidents in support of site management.
The plan identifies guidelines to simplify and support the devel-
opment of a well-structured and coherent concept that enables
the organization to respond quickly and effectively to an
unforeseen emergency, which could escalate and interrupt nor-
mal business operations. The process places the responsibility
for managing incidents with local consequences with local
Corporate Crisis
Management Plan
(Step 1)
Corporate Crisis
Management Team
Corporate Incident
Response Plan
(Step 2)
Corporate Incident
Response Team
Site Incident
Management Plan
(Step 3)
Site Incident
Response Team
Figure F.1 Three-Tier Management Strategy.
256
APPENDIX F: CORPORATE INCIDENT REPORTING AND RESPONSE PLAN

management, yet provides for corporate support as the situa-
tion escalates. The Corporate Crisis Management Team or the
Corporate Incident Response Team may assume oversight of
crises that have regional, national, or international impact or
exceed the resources of the local site.
Strategy
Every business can experience a serious incident that results
in the disruption of normal business operations. This can range
from a flood or explosion to a serious computer malfunction or
information security incident. Management has the responsibil-
ity and need to recover from such incidents in the minimum
amount of time possible. This recovery process requires prepa-
ration and planning. Figure F.1 outlines the planning strategy
for managing incidents at all levels of the corporation:
•
Step 1. Planning begins with the development of a Corporate
Crisis
Management
Plan
and
the
appointment
of
a
Corporate Crisis Management Team. The responsibility for
completing
Step
1
usually
resides
with
the
Executive
Management Committee (EMC), with oversight provided by
the Board of Directors (BOD) if it is a publicly traded com-
pany. This program provides guidance and direction for
managing incidents throughout the corporation.
•
Step 2. A senior executive (i.e., chief legal officer) should be
assigned responsibility for the development of a Corporate
Incident Response Plan and organizations that provide repre-
sentatives to the Corporate Incident Response Team. The pur-
pose is to develop situation-specific response plans and
identify subject matter experts as team members. These plans
and response teams must be exercised semi-annually to
ensure proficiency in managing and responding to incidents.
•
Step
3.
The
development
of
the
Facility/Site/Building
Incident Response Plans and the establishment of Facility/
Site/Building Incident Response Teams are the responsibil-
ity of the senior manager at each site. The purpose of these
plans is to provide processes and procedures for reporting,
responding to, and managing incidents/circumstances with
local impact for that specific site.
Terms
Incident. A situation that requires an immediate reporting
and response to protect lives, property, product, information, or
business continuity.
APPENDIX F: CORPORATE INCIDENT REPORTING AND RESPONSE PLAN 257

Crisis. A crisis is any unplanned incident, event, occurrence,
or sequence of events that has or could result in regional,
national, or international consequences or that threatens busi-
ness continuity.
Corporate Crisis Management Plan. The Corporate Crisis
Management Plan establishes the requirement and develop-
ment of Crisis Management Plans applicable to all levels of the
corporation. It provides planning guidelines to ensure continu-
ity and consistency in crisis planning, performance standards
that meet acceptable performance levels, and protocols that are
applicable to operations. Additionally, the plan provides assis-
tance in managing serious disruptive events in a controlled and
structured manner. It contains emergency contact details, strat-
egies to mitigate the impact of an incident, and procedures to
establish a communication process. Plans should be structured
to
address
an
“all
hazards”
classification
and
be
easily
adaptable to at any level of the corporation. The plan should
include proactive measures to be taken in advance of, or in con-
junction with, a crisis situation
Corporate Crisis Management Team. A decision-making
body of senior corporate officers with cross-functional expertise
in management, operations, and support services critical to
managing the crisis and recovery operations.
Incident/Crisis Communications. A reporting and notifica-
tion process that alerts the appropriate key operational person-
nel of an incident and the potential of escalation. This process
should be established at all levels of the corporation.
Corporate Incident Response Team. A select group of staff
content experts (at the department head level) with operational
experience in managing real-time significant incidents as they
unfold. The team is a support service to site management when
the incident exceeds local resources.
References, if available, could include the following:
•
Corporate Natural Disaster Plans
•
Corporate Crisis Communications Plans
•
Corporate Workplace Violence Plans
•
Hazardous Materials and Spill Plans
•
Business Continuity Plans
•
Fire/Medical Emergency Response Guidelines
Senior management, at the direction of, or with approval of
the Board of Directors, will develop and publish the Corporate
Crisis Management Plan, identifying members of the Corporate
Crisis Management Team. Local site management will develop
a
Facility/Site/Building
Incident
Management
Plan
and
258
APPENDIX F: CORPORATE INCIDENT REPORTING AND RESPONSE PLAN

organize, train, and exercise Facility/Site/Building Response
Teams in the following areas:
•
safety
•
fire
•
security
•
medical
•
environmental
•
facilities
•
local community emergency services
Responsible corporate staff groups will publish incident plan-
ning guidelines in the following areas:
•
corporate crisis management guidelines
•
incident/crisis communications guidelines
•
natural disaster guidelines
•
bomb threat plans and procedures
•
workplace safety guidelines
•
workplace violence response guidelines
•
personal security guidelines
•
investigations guidelines
•
general security guidelines
•
computer security guidelines
•
kidnap and ransom response plans
Corporate Emergency Plan
Purpose
The purpose of the Corporate Incident Response Plan is to
formalize processes and procedures in providing an operational
response to incidents on the local, national, or international
level.
Concept
A response should be available for any event that has the
potential for escalating into a crisis situation that could affect
personnel, equipment, property, product, continued operations,
or corporate image. The management of such incidents must
be clearly defined, responses organized, and scenarios tested.
For ease of identifying actions to be taken, three separate and
distinct assessments should be made at both the local and cor-
porate level.
•
Situation Categories: The magnitude of the incident and
the impact it may have on the corporation is critical in
APPENDIX F: CORPORATE INCIDENT REPORTING AND RESPONSE PLAN 259

determining the required level of response. The impact of an
incident is evaluated in four categories, from a local minor
incident to major crisis that threatens the corporation. The
level of response to any category may be tailored based on
the magnitude of the incident.
•
Levels of Response. The initial response to any incident is
best managed at the local level. However, corporate support
is available on request or when it has been determined that
the incident exceeds local resources, or the long-term impact
of the situation affects the entire corporation.
•
Incident/Response Analysis. There is no unilateral relation-
ship between a situation category and the level of response.
The circumstances of the incident dictate the level of
response required. (Example: A Category A incident should
not automatically be associated with a Level 1 response. The
response level should be tailored not only to the incident
category but also to the specific situation.)
Categories of Incidents
The response to an incident will be dependent upon the
magnitude of the situation. The corporation should plan for
four classes of incident according to the impact they have on
employees, equipment, property, products, continued opera-
tions, corporate image, and recovery efforts. Table F.1 outlines
the four categories.
Levels of Response
The level of response should be commensurate with the
severity of the crisis. The selection of response level should be
based on the situation, and may be increased or decreased
based on the situation. The responses outlined in Table F.2
identify the actions that should be considered as the crisis situ-
ation escalates.
Reporting
The Corporate Crisis Management Team should be charged
by the Board of Directors and the Executive Management
Committee with oversight responsibility for any emergency situ-
ation that has the potential to impact the Corporation. Timely
communications and coordination between the incident site
and the Corporate Crisis Management Team will ensure
260
APPENDIX F: CORPORATE INCIDENT REPORTING AND RESPONSE PLAN

Table F.1 Categories of Incident
Category
Description
Catalyst
A
Local
Incident
Minor damage to property or equipment
No injuries
Local community not effected
No media coverage expected
Operations continue as usual
Minor accident or incident not involving fatalities
Incidents of workplace violence not involving a serious
injury or fatality
Any incident that could affect community relations
Rain, snow, or ice storm
Electrical storm
High winds
Confinable fire within site resources
Intermittent power failures
Equipment failure
Power surge
Minor flooding
Industrial accident
Labor/union dispute
Activist activity
Domestic dispute
Employee confrontation
B
Local
Emergency
Accidents or incidents involving minor to serious injuries
and damage to property or equipment
Minor damage to community property
Minor disruption of communications systems and local
operations
Brief hazardous chemical or vapor leak that does not
require evacuation
No health hazard to civilian population
Suspected incidents of sabotage of equipment or product
Incidents of workplace violence involving injury to one or
more employees
Any accident or incident that could result in media
coverage
Severe rain, snow, or ice storm
Electrical storm resulting in lightning
strikes
Gale winds
Fire requiring external emergency
response
Power failure
Flooding
Industrial accident
Labor/union dispute
Activist demonstration
Domestic dispute resulting in injury
Employee confrontation resulting in
injuries
C
Corporate
Emergency
Accidents or incidents resulting in life threatening injuries
or major damage to property or equipment
Significant damage to community property
Potential health hazard to civilian population
Temporary loss of communications systems
Local operations temporarily halted
Partial evacuation required
Hazardous chemical or vapor leak
Health hazard to local community
Tornado, hurricane, or earthquake
Major fire or explosion
Sabotage
Exposure to toxic chemicals
Explosion of any type
Industrial accident
Labor dispute
Activist demonstration
(Continued )
APPENDIX F: CORPORATE INCIDENT REPORTING AND RESPONSE PLAN 261

Table F.1 (Continued)
Category
Description
Catalyst
Partial shutdown of facility
Sabotage of company property or equipment resulting in
lost production time
National media coverage expected
Environment hazard probable
Domestic disputes that carry over to the
workplace and result in injury
Incidents of workplace violence that
result in injuries
D
Corporate
Crisis
Significant or multiple loss of life at a corporate facility,
neighboring community, or accident site as a result of an
incident originating at a corporate facility.
Significant threat or impairment of a facility due to an
industrial accident.
Product tampering resulting in serious injury or death
Serious off-site transportation/distribution incident or
other company-related accident
Incident that requires filing a report with EPA, OSHA, or
any other state or federal regulatory agency
Major destruction of company property by an act of
nature or man caused incident
Act of terrorism
Kidnapping and/or extortion
Financial crisis (real or rumored) that has an impact upon
company image
Action that results in significant negative attention from
national and/or international media or any key
stockholders
National and international media coverage
Total evacuation of facility
Severe impact on local community
Complete facility shutdown
Total loss of voice and data communications
Incidents that create a high probability of future lawsuits
Environmental hazard exposure
Incidents of product tampering
Disclosure of confidential information
Tornado, hurricane, or earthquake
Major fire or explosion
Sabotage
High-risk exposure to toxic chemicals
Explosion
Industrial accident
Labor dispute
Activist demonstration
Domestic disputes that carry over to the
workplace and result in severe injury or
death
Incidents of workplace violence that
result in a death(s)
262
APPENDIX F: CORPORATE INCIDENT REPORTING AND RESPONSE PLAN

Table F.2 Levels of Response
Level
Site Response
Corporate Response
1
Activate the Site Incident Management Plan
Provide first responder assistance as required
Assess the circumstances of the incident
Inform local officials as necessary
Inspect affected equipment to determine cause and
effect
Return to normal operations as soon as possible
Submit incident and after-action report to the
Corporate Incident Response Team
Provide assistance as requested
2
Activate the Site Incident Response Plan
Activate the Site Incident Response Team
Implement the Site Emergency Response Plan
Activate the Site Emergency Response Team
Provide first responder assistance as necessary
Request local emergency medical assistance as
required
Assess the circumstances of the incident
Telephonically report incident to the Corporate Crisis
Management Team
Secure the immediate incident scene
Advise local officials of incident and potential impact
on the community
Coordinate with Corporate Communications for media
release
Initiate inquiry to determine the cause and effect of
the incident
Return to normal operations as soon as possible
Submit incident and after-action report to Corporate
Crisis Management Team
Initiate the Corporate Incident/Crisis
Communications Plan
Assist with preparing media releases
Place Corporate Emergency Response Team on
alert to support the affected site
Provide assistance and support as requested by
the site
3
Implement the Site Incident Response Plan
Establish a Site Emergency Control Center
Implement the Site Emergency Response Plan
Activate the Site Emergency Response Team
Provide first responder assistance as necessary
Evacuate and secure the incident scene
Implement the Corporate Crisis Management Plan
Activate the Corporate Crisis Management Team
Implement the Corporate Emergency Response
Plan
Activate the Corporate Emergency Response
Team
(Continued )
APPENDIX F: CORPORATE INCIDENT REPORTING AND RESPONSE PLAN 263

Table F.2 (Continued)
Level
Site Response
Corporate Response
Report situation in accordance with the Corporate
Crisis Management Plan
Account for all personnel
Request local emergency medical assistance as
required
Assess the circumstances of the incident
Advise local officials of the circumstances and the
potential impact on the community
Coordinate with Corporate Communications for
media release
Return to normal operations as soon as possible
Submit incident and after-action report to Corporate
Crisis Management Team
Coordinate directly with site management
Corporate Security to investigate all incidents
involving a death
Coordinate logistical and procurement support
Assist with human relations issues
Determine potential impact on the corporation
Assist with preparing media releases
Assist with extraordinary financial support
4
Activate the Site Incident Management Team
Establish a Site Emergency Control Center
Implement the Site Emergency Response Plan
Activate the Site Emergency Response Team
Provide first responder assistance as necessary
Evacuate and secure the incident scene
Report situation in accordance with the Corporate
Crisis Management Plan
Account for all personnel
Request local emergency medical assistance as
required
Assess the circumstances of the incident
Advise local officials of the circumstances and the
potential impact on the community
Coordinate with Corporate Communications for
media release
Return to normal operations as soon as possible
Submit incident and after-action report to Corporate
Crisis Management Team
Implement the Corporate Crisis Management Plan
Activate the Corporate Crisis Management Team
Activate the Corporate Crisis Center
Implement the Corporate Emergency Response
Plan
Activate the Corporate Emergency Response
Team
Coordinate directly with site management
Corporate Security to investigate all incidents
involving a death
Manage all media inquiries
Coordinate logistical and procurement support
Assist with human relations issues
Determine potential impact on the corporation
Assist with extraordinary financial support
264
APPENDIX F: CORPORATE INCIDENT REPORTING AND RESPONSE PLAN

Event Occurs
Site
management
notified
Incident
category
Category A
(incident)
No corporate
notification
required
Response per
site incident
management
plan
Response per
site incident
management
plan
Response per
site incident
management
plan
Response per
corporate crisis
management
plan
Level of
response
Oversight
management provided
by site incident
management team
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Documentation
Corporate
notification
required
Corporate
notification
required
Corporate
notification
required
Category B
(local
emergency)
Category C
(Corporate l
emergency)
Category D
(Corporate
crisis)
Oversight management
by site incident
management team
supported by the
corporate crisis
management team
Oversight management 
bycorporate crisis
management team
supported by the site 
crisis management team
Figure F.2 Event Management Flow Chart.
APPENDIX F: CORPORATE INCIDENT REPORTING AND RESPONSE PLAN 265

optimum response to any crisis. Figure F.2 provides a diagram
that identifies the Event Management Process.
Corporate Emergency Response Team
Purpose
The Corporate Emergency Response Team functions as the
operational element of the Corporate Crisis Management Team.
Organization
The Corporate Emergency Response Team consists of a
team leader and a core cadre. Subject matter experts in
disciplines unique to the particular crisis may augment the
team.
•
Team Leader. A company officer from the affected business
unit who has a working knowledge of the operational intrica-
cies of the crisis site.
•
Core Cadre. The core cadre should consist of representatives
from:

corporate communications

corporate security

information technology

corporate safety

legal department
•
Subject Matter Experts (augmentation). The following are
examples of areas from which subject matter experts may be
required to assist the Corporate Emergency Response Team:

engineering

procurement

risk management

transportation

human resources

environmental
Procedures
Specific actions to be taken by the Corporate Emergency
Response Team will be dictated by the circumstances of the
event.
However,
the
following
procedures
should
govern
responses to every emergency:
•
Category A (Incident)

Monitor the situation.

Be prepared to assist as requested or as directed.
266
APPENDIX F: CORPORATE INCIDENT REPORTING AND RESPONSE PLAN

•
Category B (Local Emergency)

Draft press releases for local use.

Coordinate with Site Incident Response Team to assist
in developing response strategies.

Provide logistical or procurement support as required.

Be prepared to assist as requested or as directed.
•
Category C (Corporate Emergency)

Evaluate the situation to determine the composition of
the Corporate Emergency Response Team.

Dispatch team within six (8) hours of the reported incident.

Integrate site and corporate team functions under site
management with corporate oversight.

Develop
an
action
plan
addressing
roles
and
responsibilities.

Coordinate with counterparts in the local community.

Address additional administrative or logistical support
requirements.

Provide daily update reports to the Corporate Crisis
Management Team.

Prepare final report identifying lessons learned to cope
with future crisis situations.
•
Category D (Corporate Crisis)

Evaluate the situation to determine the composition of
the Corporate Emergency Response Team.

Dispatch team within three (3) hours of the reported
incident.

Integrate site and corporate team functions under corpo-
rate management with site assistance.

Corporate Security to conduct a criminal investigation of
any incident involving a death or a suspected sabotage.

Assume full responsibility for actions to be taken to
address the emergency.

Develop
an
action
plan
addressing
roles
and
responsibilities.

Coordinate with local, state, and federal agencies having
an interest or jurisdiction over the investigative or recov-
ery process.

Identify any potential violation of local, state, or federal law,
rule, or regulation that could put the corporation at risk.

Address additional administrative or logistical support
requirements.

Provide daily update reports to the Corporate Crisis
Management Team.

Prepare final report identifying lessons learned to cope
with future crisis situations.
APPENDIX F: CORPORATE INCIDENT REPORTING AND RESPONSE PLAN 267

Tactics
Each function represented by the Corporate Emergency
Management Team should develop, maintain, and update a
function specific plan identifying the processes and procedures
to be employed when addressing an emergency. To ensure con-
sistency and completeness in addressing response requirements,
checklists should be developed outlining actions to be consid-
ered when addressing a specific type emergency. At a minimum,
checklists should be developed in the following areas:
•
Kidnapping/extortion
•
Terrorism /sabotage
•
Civil protest
•
Labor strikes/work stoppage
•
Industrial accident
•
Fire
•
Major chemical release
•
Natural disaster
•
Product recall
•
Product contamination
•
Transportation interruption
•
Compromises of the corporate data network
Documentation
Each emergency will be unique. Valuable lessons may be
learned for the experience gained in responding to and manag-
ing the emergency. Additionally, documentation of actions
taken is important when a requirement exists to respond to reg-
ulatory agencies, criminal or fire investigators, or legal proceed-
ings that may result. The following documentation should be
maintained to document the corporation’s response to the
emergency.
•
Chronology of events: a day by day identification of activities
•
Chronology of media releases: a catalog of press and media
coverage of the emergency
•
Video or audio tapes of all press conferences provided
•
Chronology of reports (written or verbal) provided by the
Corporate Crisis Management Team
•
Copies or transcripts of any written or verbal submittals to
outside agencies
•
After-Action
Report
summarizing
all
actions
taken
in
response to the emergency and including the identification
of any lessons learned that may be used to improve the
corporation’s response to emergencies.
268
APPENDIX F: CORPORATE INCIDENT REPORTING AND RESPONSE PLAN

APPENDIX G: CONSIDERING
THE ESSENTIALS: QUESTIONS
FOR PEOPLE AND PROGRAM
DEVELOPMENT
Focus
We have tried hard in this book to assemble a set of topics
that will be useful to our readers: the new security leader, a
start-up security program, or a smaller corporation just consid-
ering the need and applicability of an asset protection program
for their emerging risk management needs. Our intent is to
provide a sampler of short but important subjects to give direc-
tion to this potentially diverse readership. Thus the following
action-oriented questions taken from the end of each chapter
are gathered here to enable review, provide grist for internal
discussion and debate, or simply to facilitate a quicker read
and perhaps send readers back for more information. We
think how some of these questions may be answered are the
essentials.
A Suggested Approach
Consider selecting one or two of the following questions or
concepts and using each one as a security team exercise.
Alternatively, use them to test the engagement of promising
subordinates or as an exercise with a business unit risk man-
agement team. You may find a few you would want to toss to
your CEO or other members of the senior management team.
Be ready for the comeback: “That’s your job. What do you
think?”
1. Who are the two or three senior people you have met who
see value in corporate security and understand what you
want to accomplish? What is your plan for developing
these relationships?
269

2. Based on your review and feedback from constituents,
what is the most serious shortcoming of the program?
What is your plan to address this, and on what schedule?
3. Who are the two strongest players on your team, and how
do you propose to use them to measurably improve the
program?
4. Who are your weakest players, and what is your plan to
address these weaknesses?
5. Who among your constituents are going to be the hardest to
satisfy, and why? How are you going to address this need?
6. If you had to identify one learning from your first 90 days,
what would it be, and how will it influence your business
plan and priorities?
7. If you accept the leadership competencies discussed in this
book, where do you see your strengths and weaknesses?
Which of these represents your best opportunity for influence
and leadership in your first six months to a year on the job?
8. If you have arrived at this position on your own merits,
you know where you need to grow and how to commence
leading while this growth unfolds. Find a mentor who
knows the business and has a reputation for being a real
leader that people want to follow. What characteristics
does he or she possess that you might emulate?
9. Keep your eye on the target. Listen and learn how to get
things done in your corporate culture. A successful secu-
rity program leverages results from its understanding of
the culture.
10. Never forget that those you lead are watching.
11. Where does the program stand with regard to the five keys
to leadership and influence? Which of these do you believe
are the most important for your business planning? Which
are most important for your personal development?
12. What did you learn about yourself and your needs from
your Next Generation score?
13. Understand the risks you own and those in which you
share responsibility for some phase of management or
elect to defer.
14. Anticipate! Understand the potential source of the risk
event(s) and how it would likely occur.
15. Be aware of the impacts of emerging economic and strate-
gic pressures on the business, and how developing corpo-
rate plans may impact the risks you should understand
better than others in the management team.
16. Advertise advice and requirements.
17. Establish ownership for risk management and response.
270
APPENDIX G: CONSIDERING THE ESSENTIALS: QUESTIONS FOR PEOPLE AND PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT

18. Offer assistance in installing and training on protection
measures. Test their effectiveness frequently, and then
provide feedback on results. Escalate if you don’t see mea-
surable improvement, then repeat the test.
19. Establish key performance indicators appropriate to your
programs.
20. Establish key risk indicators appropriate to the security of
your company’s business operations.
21. Are your services seen as a cost or value center? Go back
and review the stakeholder statements you collected dur-
ing the Task Assessment in Chapter 1. Don’t rely on your
frequent customers, and look for feedback from executives
where security is less known.
22. What is your candid appraisal? If you have results that
demonstrate aligned value, how have you missed telling
the story? If you see a real lack of alignment with business
objectives, what steps might you take to better deliver?
23. How would you approach a proposal to outsource the cur-
rent portfolio of proprietary security services to achieve
potentially significant savings?
24. Do any of the alignment examples noted in Chapter 4 res-
onate with you? Using these topics as a starter, how do
your security programs provide clear indications of align-
ment with the business?
25. Has your security mission been articulated and accepted
by senior management?
26. What approach within your corporate culture would best
enable implementation of a set of high-level security poli-
cies? (Or you could use “business practices” for a less con-
troversial term.)
27. Which standards or practices under the eight business
objectives is the security program currently performing?
Which ones do you think would be value-added for your
program and the company?
28. What constraints would exist for the implementation of
each one?
29. How might those barriers be overcome? Of those services
currently being delivered, to what extent are they at a
standard of performance acceptable to you?
30. Are you satisfied that the security program is being effec-
tively marketed and sold within the company?
31. How are you measuring program acceptance or buy-in
and knowledge of shared responsibilities?
32. Where are the biggest gaps in the security program’s market-
ing strategy, and what would be required to fill these gaps?
APPENDIX G: CONSIDERING THE ESSENTIALS: QUESTIONS FOR PEOPLE AND PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT 271

33. Using whatever criterion you believe is appropriate to
your company, how would you rate your ability to access
senior management for nonemergency communications?
34. Do you believe your current organizational model yields
the best results for influence and senior management
access? Why or why not? If not, what would be required to
make this more impactful?
35. If one does not currently exist, would a security commit-
tee work in your company? If so, how might it be orga-
nized and sold?
36. How does your management react to the receipt of bad
news? How does this or other factors influence your pref-
erence on placement of the security organization?
37. What organization or executive is responsible for state and
federal legislative initiatives, and how would you charac-
terize your relationship with that office?
38. Are you aware of anything in the works that may impact
your company or organization, and to what extent are you
influencing your company strategy with regard to the
implications of its implementation?
39. What security-specific regulations apply to your organiza-
tion now, and to what extent have you been engaged in
their pre-implementation impact assessment and roll-out?
40. What is the real cost of security-related regulations to your
company?
41. To what extent can proposed or active regulations assist
you in obtaining resources or influencing corporate policy
in terms of voluntary compliance?
42. On a scale of 1 to 10, how dependent is your company on
the information technology (IT) infrastructure?
43. Does your security strategy and planning reflect this level
of priority?
44. If you are not currently responsible for information security,
is there a designated manager in ITor elsewhere who is?
45. How would you characterize your relationship with this
colleague?
46. If you were the CISO, how would you respond to the same
questions?
47. Where the relationship may be less than mutually sup-
portive, what steps might you take to move in a positive
direction?
48. Is the annual risk assessment program a joint effort between
security and the CIO? How about other key stakeholders?
Where are the gaps in this critical business process?
272
APPENDIX G: CONSIDERING THE ESSENTIALS: QUESTIONS FOR PEOPLE AND PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT

49. Given
that
there
is
acknowledged
interdependence
between logical and physical security, do you believe this
interdependence is acknowledged by current business
practice and resource allocations?
50. Has the current physical security deployment strategy
(including first response) been effectively coordinated
between security and IT? How about other key stake-
holders, like facilities and business units with specific con-
venience or protection needs?
51. If the 24/7 security operations group is responsible for
first response to IT-related business continuity incidents,
has there been adequate orientation, procedural training,
and notification procedures?
52. Is there an established cyber incident response plan that
has been coordinated with business continuity, IT, risk
management (if appropriate), and security?
53. If there were one fundamental improvement you could
make to the physical security of your facilities, what would it
be? How exposed are you with the knowledge of this need?
54. Are your in-house first responders qualified to provide
definitive care to victims of medical emergencies?
55. Is there any opportunity to expand the use of security
technology to reduce the level of manpower?
56. Have you developed a policy or guidelines to influence the
protection standards of your company’s facilities and
operations? Do you have a template for security system
fit-out of new facilities?
57. If you have objectively reviewed the security systems now
in place, do you believe you have an effectively integrated
physical security program?
58. If you are under the scope of any state or federal regula-
tions, are you now in compliance with applicable physical
security, access control, and other operational security
requirements?
59. To what extent are you confident in the abilities of avail-
able vendors to execute your plans for electronic security
system specifications and in their capabilities to upgrade
and maintain your program consistent with the risk man-
agement profile you have specified?
60. Evaluate your command center. How well does it provide
operators with real-time information that they can effec-
tively evaluate and act upon? How reliable is the system
that collects and displays alarm and other essential aural
and visual data? Does the head end essential to command
and control provide a 99.9% uptime reliability?
APPENDIX G: CONSIDERING THE ESSENTIALS: QUESTIONS FOR PEOPLE AND PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT 273

61. How would you assess the work-related competencies and
skills of key members of your team? Are you doing every-
thing possible to address competency development and
professional growth?
62. Are you satisfied with the level of understanding of busi-
ness process by investigative, information security, and
contingency planning teams?
63. What incentives does the company offer for employees to
pursue work-related training, professional certifications,
and education opportunities?
64. Are you satisfied that the periodic performance review
process provides adequate assessment of competencies
and skills?
65. Are you knowledgeable about in-house, governmental,
and academic programs to address employee career devel-
opment needs?
66. Are
your
career
development
and
training
programs
aligned with other business units and HR policies?
67. Is there a clear understanding with company business
units regarding security responsibilities? Has guidance
been provided on training requirements and resources?
68. Are you satisfied with the training provided to contract
personnel?
In
what
ways
do
shortcomings
evidence
themselves?
69. Do outsourcing contracts contain selection and training
criteria, and is the responsibility clearly delineated?
70. Are there any instances of internal investigations (or other
incidents) where the subject indicated a lack of awareness
of a policy that he or she is accused of violating?
71. Are there indications from incident post mortems or
around any categories of loss investigation that lack of risk
awareness contributed directly to the incident? How are
you
addressing
incident
follow-ups
for
awareness
improvement?
72. Is security included in the new employee orientation
program?
73. How are management’s messages conveyed to employees?
Is it via a corporate intranet or other electronic means?
How can your messages be best conveyed for impact?
Who
in
the
corporate
communications
infrastructure
could assist in crafting and delivering timely and impact-
ful awareness materials?
74. Have you ever conducted any sort of survey around the
awareness of security policy or recommended practices by
first-line supervisors and other mid-level managers? If you
274
APPENDIX G: CONSIDERING THE ESSENTIALS: QUESTIONS FOR PEOPLE AND PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT

see more instances of security violations within a specific
business unit, it may be fruitful to determine how aware
and proactive these managers are about their responsibili-
ties for securing corporate assets and setting appropriate
models for their subordinates.
75. If your company is outsourcing critical business processes,
how are you being assured that your business partner is
making their people aware of their responsibilities to pro-
tect their customer’s interests?
76. Is the provision of a safe and secure workplace addressed
within your company’s business conduct or other policy
framework?
77. Where would you most anticipate a workplace violence
incident within your company? Are you satisfied with the
safeguards you have in place? What other steps should
you consider?
78. How does your company handle notification of domestic
restraining orders that include the workplace?
79. What are the legal standards for a safe and secure work-
place in the states in which you have staffed operations
and/or visitor access?
80. Do you provide escort services from the office for employ-
ees with active threats against them? What are the limits
of that coverage, and are you comfortable with the legal
liabilities attendant to such services?
81. Remember that the knowledgeable insider is the most
dangerous adversary you have! Engage those business
units owning critical business processes in an intelligent
discussion around how an insider (your own employee or
a vendor) might engage in conduct with serious implica-
tions for the company’s health and reputation.
82. Engage counsel and HR (employee relations) in a review
of current business conduct policy and the adequacy of
business unit line management’s knowledge of that policy
and expectations for their oversight of an ethical business
environment.
83. Conduct investigative post mortems to identify contribut-
ing causes and gaps in policy or other needs for improved
conformance with high standards of conduct.
84. Are you satisfied with the level of support you get with
human
resources
(or
others)
in
the
investigation
of
employees in good standing? If not, what needs to be
improved to create a more constructive relationship in
these cases? How have you addressed this problem?
APPENDIX G: CONSIDERING THE ESSENTIALS: QUESTIONS FOR PEOPLE AND PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT 275

85. Are sanctions in these internal cases consistently applied
across the company and, if not, what legal exposure might
that inconsistency present?
86. Are you satisfied that the corporate business conduct pol-
icy adequately conveys the scope and clarity of manage-
ment’s expectations on conduct?
87. Regardless of formerly assigned responsibility for business
continuity, the security organization is a critical part of the
early warning, crisis management, and response capabili-
ties. What parts does your organization play in these areas
of risk management, and are there value-added functions
you could offer?
88. Does your company annually conduct crisis management
or business continuity exercises? What would you con-
clude if this sort of analysis has not been applied?
89. The typical contingency planning processes require each
business unit to priority rank their business processes by
criticality ratings, the most critical requiring zero down-
time. Use the resulting list to assure yourself that your
security programs provide the requisite level of protection
to these higher criticality processes.
90. Have after-action-reviews been applied to the most seri-
ous business interruption events over the past three years?
What was learned that has implications for your vision of
the future security capability? What would you conclude if
this sort of analysis has not been applied?
91. Business is virtual, global, and increasingly risky. Know the
potential risks your “partners” bring to the table before
you sign on the dotted line. Hold them accountable for
risk-specific
standards,
and
then
inspect
to
assure
compliance.
92. Which of the most critical business processes in your
company rely in significant ways upon supply chain part-
ners? To what extent have your partner selection processes
incorporated a risk management strategy that includes
security-related risk?
93. What are the most likely risk scenarios that could signifi-
cantly impact the top three most critical sources of sup-
ply? Do you have a role to play in any of these, and if so,
have you effectively sold your risk management resources
to those business units?
94. Are you actively risk-profiling countries upon which you
rely for the supply of essential products or services?
95. To what extent have you identified and vetted in-country
security
(or
other
logistical)
resources
that
may
be
276
APPENDIX G: CONSIDERING THE ESSENTIALS: QUESTIONS FOR PEOPLE AND PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT

engaged to assist in an interruption or other risk event in
your critical supply chain?
96. What
metrics
are
you
currently
providing
to
senior
management?
a. If none, you are failing to demonstrate any value or
ability to influence
b. If you stopped providing them, would anyone inquire
why and when they might see them again?
c. If you answered no or don’t know, you are missing the
mark, and you need to critically evaluate your security
program, because it’s likely you have no idea how they
are performing.
97. Assuming you do maintain security metrics, what are the
top three weak spots in your measures and metrics pro-
gram? What steps should you take to improve these areas?
98. What are the most important metrics you need to manage
your assigned resources?
99. Which metrics have you successfully used to influence
management action or policy?
100. Which of the 16 contributions on business alignment
shown in Table 16.1 in Chapter 16 can you demonstrate
with your metrics? How well are you advertising these
accomplishments? Of those you hadn’t considered, which
ones could you examine for development?
101. How does your company approach the process of examin-
ing its successes and failures? How might this influence
your approach to the AAR process discussed here?
APPENDIX G: CONSIDERING THE ESSENTIALS: QUESTIONS FOR PEOPLE AND PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT 277

ABOUT THE CONTRIBUTING
EDITOR
George Campbell served until 2002 as the chief security offi-
cer (CSO) at Fidelity Investments, the largest mutual fund com-
pany in the United States, with more than $2 trillion in
customer assets and 32,500 employees. Under Campbell’s lead-
ership, the global corporate security organization delivered a
wide range of proprietary services including information secu-
rity, disaster recovery planning and crisis management, criminal
investigations, fraud prevention, property and executive protec-
tion, and proprietary security system design, engineering, and
installation. Since leaving Fidelity, Campbell has served as a
content
expert
for
product/content
development
for
the
Security Executive Council, of which he is a founding Emeritus
Faculty member.
Prior to working at Fidelity Investments, Campbell owned a
security and consulting firm, which specialized in risk assess-
ment and security program management. He has also been
group vice president at a system engineering firm that sup-
ported
government
security
programs
at
high-threat
sites
around the world. Early on in his career, Campbell worked in
the criminal justice system, and served in various line and
senior management positions within federal, state, and local
government agencies.
Campbell received his bachelor’s degree in police administra-
tion from American University in Washington, D.C. He served on
the board of directors of the International Security Management
Association (ISMA), and as ISMA’s president in 2003. Campbell is
also a long-time member of ASIS International. He is a former
member of the National Council on Crime Prevention, the High
Technology Crime Investigation Association, and the Association
of Certified Fraud Examiners, and is an alumnus of the U.S. State
Department’s Overseas Security Advisory Council.
279

ABOUT ELSEVIER’S SECURITY
EXECUTIVE COUNCIL RISK
MANAGEMENT PORTFOLIO
Elsevier’s Security Executive Council Risk Management
Portfolio is the voice of the security leader. It equips executives,
practitioners, and educators with research-based, proven infor-
mation and practical solutions for successful security and risk
management programs. This portfolio covers topics in the areas
of risk mitigation and assessment, ideation and implementa-
tion, and professional development. It brings trusted opera-
tional research, risk management advice, tactics, and tools to
business professionals. Previously available only to the Security
Executive Council community, this content—covering corporate
security, enterprise crisis management, global IT security, and
more—provides real-world solutions and “how-to” applications.
This portfolio enables business and security executives, security
practitioners, and educators to implement new physical and
digital risk management strategies and build successful security
and risk management programs.
Elsevier’s
Security
Executive
Council
Risk
Management
Portfolio is a key part of the Elsevier Risk Management and
Security Collection. The collection provides a complete portfo-
lio of titles for the business executive, practitioner, and educator
by bringing together the best imprints in risk management,
security leadership, digital forensics, IT security, physical secu-
rity, homeland security, and emergency management: Syngress,
which provides cutting-edge computer and information security
material; Butterworth-Heinemann, the premier security, risk
management, homeland security, and disaster-preparedness
publisher; and Anderson Publishing, a leader in criminal justice
publishing for more than 40 years. These imprints, along with
the addition of Security Executive Council content, bring the
work of highly regarded authors into one prestigious, complete
collection.
The
Security
Executive
Council
(www.securityexecutive-
council.com) is a leading problem-solving research and services
organization focused on helping businesses build value while
improving their ability to effectively manage and mitigate risk.
Drawing on the collective knowledge of a large community of
281

successful security practitioners, experts, and strategic alliance
partners, the Council develops strategy and insight and identi-
fies proven practices that cannot be found anywhere else. Their
research, services, and tools are focused on protecting people,
brand, information, physical assets, and the bottom line.
Elsevier (www.elsevier.com) is an international multimedia
publishing company that provides world-class information and
innovative solutions tools. It is part of Reed Elsevier, a world-
leading provider of professional information solutions in the
science, medical, risk, legal, and business sectors.
282
ABOUT ELSEVIER’S SECURITY EXECUTIVE COUNCIL RISK MANAGEMENT PORTFOLIO

INDEX
Note: Page numbers followed by “f ”, “t” and “b” refer to figures, tables and boxes, respectively.
24/7 security operations
organization, 101
A
Access, 6672
Access control, 117119
Actionable metrics, 183f
Advanced Manifest Rule (AMR)/
Advance Cargo Information
(ACI), 173
Adversary, 149150
After-action review (AAR),
197198
Alternative organizational
models, 6264, 63f
Antitrust Compliance Policy,
241
ASIS (American Society for
Industrial Security), 114
Asset protection, 44
Asset protection programs,
122123
Attorney-client privilege, 154
Attorney work product doctrine,
154
Awareness program, 135f
B
Background investigation, 207
Base building risks, 205206
Baseline program elements, 60
Board-level risks and response
research, 32, 33f
Brand exposure, 42
Brand recognition, 50
Business-aligned program
elements, 60
Business alignment, 4547,
183184, 184t
Business case, building, 916
Business Conduct and Ethics
Committee, 241
Business conduct cases, 152,
152f
Business conduct
investigations, 150
Business conduct policy
policy statement, 152155
reputation risk and, 153155
Business continuity incidents,
203
Business continuity planning,
208
components of, 164165
Business continuity tracking,
165, 166f
Business controls, effective, 29
Business drivers, 4142
Business enabler, 20
Business objectives, 5356
Business open architecture, 42
Business practices, 5152
Business resiliency, 163
policy statement, 164165
Business risk environment,
201
Business strategist, 20
Business strategy map, 11
C
C-suite engagement, 23
C-TPAT (Customs-Trade
Partnership Against Terror),
79, 173
California Breach Notification
Bill (SB-1386 and AB-1950),
96
CCTV, 118119
Certified fraud investigator,
122123
Code of Business Conduct and
Ethics, 241
certification, 253
company assets, 242
compliance with laws and
regulations, 242243
confidential information,
243244
conflicts of interest, 244246
dealing with public officials,
246
environmental protection,
246247
equal employment
opportunity, 247
financial records, 247248
gifts, gratuities, favors,
248249
insider trading, 249250
intellectual property rights,
250
policy enforcement, 252
political contributions,
250
reporting violations, 251
workplace safety, 250251
Communication and risk
awareness program, 23
Communication program,
130131
Components of a Cost of
Security Compliance
Model, 90, 91t
Confidential hotline reporting,
151, 151f
Confidentiality, integrity,
and availability (CIA),
97
Consolidated service model, 64,
64f
283

Container Security Initiative
(CSI), 173
Contingency planning, 164165
Continuous learning, 197
Contractors, 207
Control Objectives for
Information and Related
Technology (COBIT),
8283
Converged physical and IT
security functions, 119
Core management philosophy,
22
Corporate crisis management
plan, 256, 258
Corporate crisis management
team, 256, 258
Corporate culture, 11
Corporate emergency plan,
259266
categories of incidents, 260,
261t
event management, 265f
incident/response analysis,
260
level of response, 260, 263t
Corporate emergency response
team, 266268
Corporate hygiene, 150151
Corporate incident response
plan, 255257
Corporate incident response
team, 255256, 258
Corporate intranet, 129130
Corporate leadership, 1920
Corporate risk management
program, 22
Corporate security map, 12f
Corporate security potential
impact/cost, 37t
Corporate security program, 62f
potential benefits, 10t
Corporate security work
breakdown structure,
6667
Corporate security work
functions, full-service, 68t
Cost of insecurity, 194f
Crisis, 258
Cross-disciplinary courses, 124
CSO dashboard, 193f
Customs-Trade Partnership
Against Terrorism (C-
TPAT), 79, 173
Cyber incident, 102
Cyber incident response plan,
102103
objectives of, 102
purpose of, 102
Cyber security, 103
D
Dangerousness, 228239
Data management, 207
Dated security systems, 114
Department of Homeland
Security (DHS), 42
E
Electronic security, 114
Emergency and crisis
management, 209
Emergency medical technician
(EMT), 122123
Emergency Planning and
Community Right-to-know
Act (EPCRA), 173
Enterprise policy influencer, 20
Enterprise risk assessments
(ERA), 32
Enterprise risk management
(ERM)
framework, 3
structure, 4f
ERA (Enterprise risk
assessments), 32
Essentials, 269277
F
First response, 116
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act,
246
Framework of Standards to
Secure and Facilitate
Global Trade (SAFE
Framework), 174
Free and Secure Trade (FAST),
173
G
Global business risk
environment, 62, 63f
Global supply chains, 42
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act
(GLBA), 96
Guidelines see Voluntary
guidelines
H
Hazardous/dangerous material
issues, 205
Health Insurance Portability
and Accountability Act
(HIPAA), 96
I
Incident, 257
Incident/crisis
communications, 258
Incident post-mortem, 31,
197199
Incident reporting and site
incident response plan,
255
Information, value of, 9798
Information assurance
requirements, 97
Information protection program
threats, 104f
Information Security, 204205
Information security
architecture, 101
importance of, 96
infrastructure, 101
Information security program,
4142
high-level measurement of,
99f
organizing, 100101
Information security standard,
8283
Insurance carriers, 108
Integrated physical and
operational security
program, 112f
Integrated security systems,
110111
Integrated solution, 110111
284
INDEX

Internal misconduct
investigations, 156159
Internal risk, 204
ISO 17799, 8283
K
Key performance indicators
(KPIs), 36
Key risk indicators (KRIs), 36
L
Legislation, 78, 81
Legislation, Regulations,
Voluntary Compliance, and
Standards (LRVCS)
Breakdown, 7879
Lessons-learned analysis, 198
Location risk, 203
Locks and alarms, 108
M
Management model, 21
Marketing strategy, 4950
Measures, 177178
Metrics, 178
Mission statement, 51, 52f
N
National Association of
Corporate Directors
(NACD), 182
National Response Framework
(NRF), 166167
New employee orientation
program, 129130
Next Generation score, 2426
Next generation security leader,
2426, 25f
NFPA 1600 Standard, 8283, 166
Noncompliance, 9093
impacts, 9293
risks of, 9092
O
Organizational constituents, 12
Organizational leadership,
1920
Organizational model, 62
Owned properties, 206
P
Partnerships, value of, 23
Performance review process,
124125
Physical security program, 111
aligning, 111115
equipment removal, 118
and first response, 116
as force multiplier, 117, 118f
integrated program, 112f
and IT security, convergence
of, 119
objectives, 113114
risk assessment, 118
threat assessment, 113f
Policies, 5152
Policy framework, 201202
Professional development
programs, 121
Program characteristics, 6062
Q
Qualitative risk analysis and
reporting program, 2223
R
Regulation management
worksheet, 8389
Regulations, 75, 82
Regulatory compliance strategy,
79
elements of, 80f
Regulatory elements, 76
Regulatory requirements, 167
Relationship manager, 20
Request for Proposal (RFP)
general conditions of,
223224
general information session,
219220
instructions to bidders,
220221
proposal contents, 221223
selection criteria, 223
timeline, 224
Residual risk, 1314
Responsible, Accountable,
Consulted, Informed (RACI)
methodology, 83, 84t
Restraining orders, 142
RFP (Request for Proposal), 219
Risk appetite, 44
Risk assessment, 2930
Risk group and security
committee leadership,
2021
Risk management, 3638
anticipation, 36
communication and, 182
execution, 38
preparation, 3638
steps in, 182
Risk management guide, 20
Risk mitigation, 3638, 42
Risk quantification, 3336, 34f
Risk review elements, 201
S
Safe and secure workplaces
policy framework, 140
predictability of risk, 139140
Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX), 96
Security, as value center, 180
Security, goals of, 42
Security architecture, 101
Security awareness, 209
Security awareness approaches,
131135, 132t
Security awareness program,
135f
Security budget cost elements,
7t
Security committee
advantages of, 6465
membership of, 65
results-oriented measures, 65
Security communication
program
strategies, 131
tactics, 131
tailoring message, 136
Security device costs, 212t
Security Executive Council
(SEC), 24
Security executives, 41
Security infrastructure, 101
Security issues, 41
Security leader, 2021, 42
INDEX 285

Security leadership
core competencies, 2021
organizational influence and
Impact, 2123
Security measures, 177178
benefits of, 179180, 180f
data sources, 182183
objectives of, 178179
in reducing risk, 45
Security metrics, 177178
avoiding pitfalls, 184
benefits of, 179180, 180f
data sources, 182183
objectives of, 178179
potential metrics, 184
related roles and
responsibilities, 180181
Security operations, 115
Security planning and program
development, 4445, 45f
Security policies framework,
2122
Security policy awareness,
survey of, 130f
Security professionals, role of,
7990
Security-program objectives,
4647
Security programs, 78, 4142
Security regulations, 7678
Security-related costs, 5, 108
Security-related training and
education, 127f
academic programs, 124
certificate programs, 123124
developmental plan, 124125
in-house training, 123
objectives of, 122
outsourcing contracts, 125
security-related
responsibilities, 125126
training administration, 126
training options, 122123
Security riding on corporate
network, 118119
Security strategic issues, 44
Security strategy alignment, 44
Shared responsibility, 129130
Site incident response team,
255
Smart and Secure Trade-lanes
(SST) program, 174
Standard security practices,
5356
Standards, 8283
State of control, 9899
Strategic management process,
43f
Strategic Plan for Securing the
Global Supply Chain, 171t
Strategic planning process, 45f
Strategic security plans, 41
Strategic security program,
4344
Supply chain risk, 170174
Supply chain risk management,
169
Supply chain security, 174175
Supporting a Nonviolent
Workplace, 225
T
Team leader, 20
Thought leader, 20
Threat alignment, 111115
Threat assessment, 3031, 30f,
113f
Threats, 202
Three-tier management
strategy, 255256, 256f
Training and education,
127f
U
Unified risk oversight (URO),
45, 6566
V
Voluntary guidelines, 7879,
82
Vulnerability assessment, 31
W
Workplace executive protection,
144146
Workplace violence policy,
140141, 141b
Workplace violence prevention
program, 226227
planning and preparation,
232233
proactive, 226
reactive response, 236
World Customs Organization
(WCO), 174
286
INDEX

