Fully 
updated for 
iOS 9 & all 
iPads
The complete jargon free user manual for all new iPad owners
Just getting started with your iPad?
We answer all your questions inside...
 
 
NEW! For all iPads
iPad
The iOS 9
Manual
BDM’s
www.ebook3000.com


iPad
The iOS 9
Manual
BDM’s
Your iPad laid bare with crystal clear guides!
So you want to join the iPad revolution. This is where you start. The iOS 9 iPad Manual is 
perfect for those who are new to Apple’s exciting tablet. If you’ve not yet bought your 
iPad, check out our guide to the current iPad range. You can then set it up with the help 
of our easy-to-follow tutorial on activating your iPad, getting it onto the Internet and 
setting up your email accounts. The iPad’s built-in apps are explained, including Photos, 
Safari, Mail, Calendar, Contacts and more and we also show you how to use its built-in 
features such as multitasking, Continuity and Notifications.  
It’s all in The iOS 9 iPad Manual.
BDM Publications
@BDMpubs
www.ebook3000.com

Contents
The iOS 9 iPad Manual
08	
The Current iPad Range
10	
What’s Where on Your iPad?
12	
Setting Up Your iPad for the First Time
15	
Setting Up Your iPad on Your Computer
16	
Your iPad’s Touch ID
18	
Using Your iPad’s Touchscreen
20	
Using Your iPad’s Keyboard
22	
Your Apple ID
24	
Your iPad’s Control Centre
26	
Get on the Internet with Your iPad
28	
Setting Up Email on Your iPad
6     First Steps with Your iPad
3     Introduction
32	
All About the Messages App
36	
All About the Mail App 
40	
All About the Safari App
48	
All About the Contacts App
50	
All About the Notes App
54	
All About the Calendar App
58	
All About the iPad’s Cameras
62	
All About the Photos App
66	
All About the iCloud Photo Library
68	
All About the Maps App
30	
 How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
46	
All About the 
	
News App
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
4

ISBN 978-1-907306-30-3
Published by: Papercut Limited 
Manager Editor: James Gale 
Art Director & Production: Mark Ayshford
Production Manager: Karl Linstead
Design: Martin Smith
Editorial: Ian Osborne, Russ Ware
Sub Editors: Cliff Smith, Howard Pattison, Paul Beard
Digital distribution by: PocketMags.com
Copyright ©2016 Papercut Limited 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced in any 
form, stored in a retrieval system or integrated into any other publication, 
database or commercial programs without the express written permission of 
the publisher. Under no circumstances should this publication and its 
contents be resold, loaned out or used in any form by way of trade without 
the publisher’s written permission. While we pride ourselves on the quality 
of the information we provide, Papercut Limited reserves the right not to be 
held responsible for any mistakes or inaccuracies found within the text of 
this publication. Due to the nature of the software industry, the publisher 
cannot guarantee that all apps will work on every version of the iPad. It 
remains the purchaser’s sole responsibility to determine the suitability of this 
book and its content for whatever purpose. App images reproduced on the 
front and back cover are solely for design purposes and are not 
representative of content. We advise all potential buyers to check listing 
prior to purchase for confirmation of actual content. All editorial opinion 
herein is that of the reviewer - as an individual - and is not representative of 
the publisher or any of its affiliates. Therefore the publisher holds no 
responsibility in regard to editorial opinion and content. 
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual is an independent publication and as 
such does not necessarily reflect the views or opinions of the producers of 
apps or products contained within. This publication is not endorsed or 
associated in any way with Apple or any associate or affiliate company.
All copyrights, trademarks and registered trademarks for the respective 
companies are acknowledged. Relevant graphic imagery reproduced with 
courtesy of Apple. Additional images contained within this publication are 
reproduced under Licence from shutterstock.com and iStockphoto.com
App Store prices, international availability, ratings, titles and content are 
subject to change.  All information was correct at time of print.
Some content may have been published in previous volumes.
For all advertising & promotional opportunities  
please contact: enquiries@bdmpublications.com
98	
Using the iPad’s Notification Centre
104	
Using the iPad’s Siri Assistant
108	
Using Apple’s iCloud on Your iPad
112	
Using iCloud Drive on Your iPad
Papercut Limited
Registered in England & Wales No: 4308513
114	
Using the Family Sharing Service
118	
The Spotlight Search and Shortcut Menu
120	
Using AirDrop to Share Files
121	
Using Bluetooth on Your iPad
122	
Making Your iPad Secure
126	
Increasing Your iPad’s Battery Life
128	
Updating iOS on Your iPad
130	
Integrating Social Media
131	
Creating and Editing Folders
132	
Permanently Delete Unwanted Apps
133	
Managing the iPad’s Dock
134	
How to Turn Off In-App Purchases
135	
The iOS Sharing Button
136	
iOS and Mac OS Continuity
138	
Changing Your iPad’s Wallpaper
139	
Changing Your iPad’s Sounds
142	
Troubleshooting & Problem Solving
144	
Glossary of iPad Terms
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
96	
Getting More from Your iPad
Visit us at: www.bdmpublications.com • 
 Follow us on Facebook: BDM Publications • 
 Follow us on Twitter: @BDMpubs
74	
The Music App and  
	
Apple Music
140	 What’s New in iOS 9.3?
78	
All About the FaceTime App
80	
All About the Podcasts App
82	
All About the iBooks App
84	
All About the Clock App
86	
All About the Game Center App
88	
All About the Photo Booth App
90	
All About the Videos App
92	
All About the App Store App
94	
All About the iTunes Store App
International Licensing:   Papercut Limited
has many great publications and all are available for
licensing worldwide. For more information go to: 
www.brucesawfordlicensing.com
Email: bruce@brucesawfordlicensing.com
Telephone: 0044 7831 567372
5
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
Contents
www.ebook3000.com

BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
6

7
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
First Steps  
with  
Your iPad 
This is where you take your first steps with your iPad. If 
you’ve not yet bought one, our guide to the current 
range helps you to choose one. Our outline of the key 
features on your iPad will familiarise you with the 
buttons and controls and our setup guide shows how to 
get up and running with your amazing iPad.
08	
The Current iPad Range
10	
What’s Where on  
	
Your iPad?
12	
Setting Up Your iPad  
	
for the First Time
12	
Activating Your iPad
12	
VoiceOver Options
13	
Connecting to Wi-Fi
13	
Using Location Services
15	
Setting Up Your iPad  
	
on Your Computer
15	
Syncing Options
16	
Using Your iPad’s  
	
Touch ID Button
16	
Setting Up Your Touch ID
17	
How to Use Your Touch ID
18	
Using Your iPad’s  
	
Touchscreen
20	
Using Your iPad’s Keyboard
20	
Finding Accented Letters
20	
Using Emojis
21	
Auto Punctuation
21	
Quick Punctuation
21	
Keyboard as a Trackpad
22	
Setting Up and Using  
	
Your Apple ID
24	
Your iPad’s Control Centre
24	
Accessing the  
	
Control Centre
24	
Airplane Mode
25	
Do Not Disturb
25	
Screen Orientation Lock
26	
Get on the Internet  
	
with Your iPad
26	
Joining a Wi-Fi Network
27	
Joining a Mobile 4G or  
	
3G Network
28	
Setting Up Email on  
	
Your iPad
CONTENTS
7
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
www.ebook3000.com

Storage 
Weight and 
Dimensions
Available Colours
Processing Chip
 
Display 
Cameras
Mobile and 
Wireless
 
Battery Life Details
 
 
Price Comparison
The Current iPad Range
The iPad range was refreshed in the Spring of 2016, with the release of the amazing new 
9.7-inch iPad Pro. So the current line-up looks very exciting indeed.
Wi-Fi Only Model
£679 $799 €907,33 - 32GB
£799 $949 €1.087,33 - 128GB
Wi-Fi + 4G Model
£899 $1079 €1.237,33 - 128GB
12.9-inch iPad Pro 
32GB (Wi-Fi only)
128GB
Wi-Fi
Height: 12 inches (305.7 mm)
Width: 8.68 inches (220.6 mm)
Depth: 0.27 inch (6.9 mm)
Weight: 1.57 pounds (713 grams)
Wi-Fi and Cellular
Height: 12 inches (305.7 mm)
Width: 8.68 inches (220.6 mm)
Depth: 0.27 inch (6.9 mm)
Weight: 1.59 pounds (723 grams)
Silver, Gold, Space Grey
A9X chip with 64‑bit architecture and M9 motion coprocessor
12.9-inch (diagonal) LED-backlit widescreen Multi-Touch Retina display, 
2732-by-2048 resolution at 264 pixels per inch, fingerprint-resistant oleophobic 
coating, fully laminated display, antireflective coating
iSight camera: 8MP iSight camera, Autofocus, ƒ/2.4 aperture, Five-element lens, 
Hybrid IR ﬁlter, Backside illumination, improved face detection, Exposure control, 
Panorama (up to 43MP), Burst mode, Tap to focus, Photo geotagging, Timer mode
Video Recording: 1080p HD video recording (30 fps), Slo-mo (120 fps), Time-lapse 
video, video image stabilisation, improved face detection, 3x video zoom, video 
geotagging
FaceTime HD Camera: 1.2MP photos, ƒ/2.2 aperture, 720p HD video recording, 
Backside illumination, Auto HDR photos and videos, improved face detection, Burst 
mode, Exposure control, Timer mode
Wi-Fi
Wi‑Fi (802.11a/​b/​g/​n/​ac); dual channel (2.4GHz and 5GHz), HT80 with MIMO, 
Bluetooth 4.2 technology
Wi-Fi and Cellular
Wi‑Fi (802.11a/​b/​g/​n/​ac), dual channel (2.4GHz and 5GHz), HT80 with MIMO, 
Bluetooth 4.2 technology, UMTS/​HSPA/​HSPA+/​DC‑HSDPA (850, 900, 1700/2100, 
1900, 2100 MHz), GSM/EDGE (850, 900, 1800, 1900 MHz), CDMA EV-DO Rev. A 
and Rev. B (800, 1900 MHz), LTE (Bands 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 13, 17, 18, 19, 20, 25, 
26, 28, 29, 38, 39, 40, 41), Data only
Built-in 38.5-watt-hour rechargeable lithium-polymer battery gives up to 10 hours of 
use on a Wi-Fi network, or 9 hours using a cellular data network
12.9-inch display
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
8
First Steps with Your iPad

Wi-Fi Only Model
£319 US$399 389,00€ - 16GB
£399 US$499 489,00€ - 64GB
£479 US$599 589,00€ - 128GB
Wi-Fi + 4G Model
£419 US$529 509,00€ - 16GB
£499 US$629 609,00€ - 64GB
£579 US$729 709,00€ - 128GB
Wi-Fi Only Model
£499 US$599 689,00€ - 32GB
£619 US$749 869,00€ - 128GB
£739 US$899 1049,00€ - 256GB
Wi-Fi + 4G Model
£599 US$729 839,00€ - 32GB
£719 US$879 1019,00€ - 128GB 
£839 US$1029 1199,00€ - 256GB
iPad mini 4
16GB 
64GB
128GB
Wi-Fi
Height: 8.0 inches (203.2 mm)
Width: 5.3 inches (134.8 mm)
Depth: 0.24 inch (6.1 mm)
Weight: 0.65 pound (298.8 grams)
Wi-Fi & Cellular
Height: 8.0 inches (203.2 mm)
Width: 5.3 inches (134.8 mm)
Depth: 0.24 inch (6.1 mm)
Weight: 0.67 pound (304 grams)
Silver, Gold, Space Grey
A8 chip with 64‑bit architecture, M8 motion coprocessor
7.9-inch (diagonal) LED-backlit widescreen Multi-Touch display, 2048-by-1536 
resolution at 326 pixels per inch, fingerprint-resistant oleophobic coating, fully 
laminated display, antireflective coating
iSight Camera: 8MP iSight camera, Autofocus, ƒ/2.4 aperture, Five-element lens, 
Hybrid IR ﬁlter, Backside illumination, improved face detection, Exposure control, 
Panorama (up to 43MP), Burst mode, Tap to focus, Photo geotagging, Timer mode
Video Recording: 1080p HD video recording (30 fps), Slo-mo (120 fps), 
Time-lapse video, video image stabilisation, improved face detection, 3x video 
zoom, video geotagging
FaceTime HD Camera: 1.2MP photos, ƒ/2.2 aperture, 720p HD video recording, 
Backside illumination, Auto HDR photos and videos, improved face detection, Burst 
mode, Exposure control, Timer mode
Wi-Fi
Wi‑Fi (802.11a/​b/​g/​n/​ac), dual channel (2.4GHz and 5GHz), HT80 with MIMO, 
Bluetooth 4.2 technology
Wi-Fi & Cellular
Wi‑Fi (802.11a/​b/​g/​n/​ac), dual channel (2.4GHz and 5GHz), HT80 with MIMO, 
Bluetooth 4.2 technology, UMTS/​HSPA/​HSPA+/​DC‑HSDPA (850, 900, 1700/2100, 
1900, 2100 MHz), GSM/EDGE (850, 900, 1800, 1900 MHz), CDMA EV-DO Rev. A 
and Rev. B (800, 1900 MHz), LTE (Bands 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 13, 17, 18, 19, 20, 25, 
26, 28, 29, 38, 39, 40, 41), Data only
Built-in 19.1-watt-hour rechargeable lithium-polymer battery gives up to 10 hours 
of use on a Wi-Fi network, or 9 hours using a cellular data network
9.7-inch iPad Pro
32GB 
128GB
256GB
Wi-Fi
Height: 9.4 inches (240 mm)
Width: 6.6 inches (169.5 mm)
Depth: 0.24 inch (6.1 mm)
Weight: 0.96 pound (437 g)
Wi-Fi & Cellular
Height: 9.4 inches (240 mm)
Width: 6.6 inches (169.5 mm)
Depth: 0.24 inch (6.1 mm)
Weight: 0.98 pound (444 g)
Silver, Gold, Space Grey,  
Rose Gold
A9X chip with 64-bit architecture and M9 motion coprocessor
9.7-inch (diagonal) LED-backlit widescreen Multi-Touch IPS display, 2048-by-1536-
pixel resolution at 264 ppi, Wide Colour, True Tone display, fingerprint resistant 
oleophobic coating, fully laminated display, antireflective coating
iSight camera: 12MP with Live Photos, Autofocus, ƒ/2.2 aperture, five-element 
lens, hybrid IR filter, backside illumination, face detection, sapphire crystal lens 
cover, auto image stabilisation, improved local tone mapping & noise reduction, 
face detection, geotagging.
Video Recording: 4K HD video recording (30 fps), Slo-mo (120 fps), Time-lapse video, 
video image stabilisation, improved face detection, 3x video zoom, video geotagging. 
FaceTime HD Camera: 5MP photos, ƒ/2.2 aperture, 720p HD video recording, Backside 
illumination, Auto HDR photos and videos, improved face detection, Burst mode, 
Exposure control, Timer mode.
Wi-Fi
Wi-Fi (802.11a/b/g/n/ac), dual channel (2.4GHz and 5GHz), HT80 with MIMO, 
Bluetooth 4.2 technology
Wi-Fi & Cellular
Wi-Fi (802.11a/b/g/n/ac); dual channel (2.4GHz and 5GHz), HT80 with MIMO, 
Bluetooth 4.2 technology, UMTS/HSPA/HSPA+/DC-HSDPA (850, 900, 1700/2100, 
1900, 2100 MHz), GSM/EDGE (850, 900, 1800, 1900 MHz), CDMA EV-DO Rev. A 
and Rev. B (800, 1900 MHz), LTE (Bands 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 13, 17, 18, 19, 20, 25, 
26, 28, 29, 38, 39, 40, 41), Data only
Built-in 27.5-watt-hour rechargeable lithium-polymer battery gives up to 10 hours 
of use on a Wi-Fi network or 9 hours using a cellular data network
The iPad Air 2, a Cheaper Regular-Sized iPad
The iPad mini 2, the Cheapest iPad Available
The iPad Air 2 boasts the same screen size and resolution as the 
newer 9.7-inch iPad Pro, though it lacks the latter’s Wide Colour, 
True Tone display. Its A8X processor and M8 motion coprocessor 
aren’t as powerful as the A9X and M9 chips used in its more recent 
stablemate but they’re very powerful nonetheless. The Air 2 is 
available in every colour offered by the Pro except rose gold. The Air 
2 can handle iOS 9’s Picture-in-Picture, Slide-Over and Split Screen 
multitasking. It’s significantly cheaper than the iPad Air Pro too and is 
available in 16GB and 64GB capacities, two storage sizes that are 
missing from the iPad Pro’s line-up. There’s no 32GB, 128GB or 
256GB iPad Air 2 though.
With prices starting at just £219/$269/€289, the iPad mini 2 is ideal 
for those on a budget. It has the same screen as the more recent 
model and only negligible differences in size and weight. Like the Air 
2, it has an A7 processor and M7 coprocessor; and also like the Air 
2, it can manage Picture-in-Picture and Slide-Over but not Split 
Screen multitasking in iOS 9. There’s no gold version of the iPad mini 
2, so you’re restricted to space grey or silver finishes; and it doesn’t 
have Touch ID, just a regular home button. Storage sizes are different 
too. The iPad mini 2 comes in 16GB or 32GB capacities, while the 
iPad mini 3 offers 16GB, 64GB or 128GB. The iPad mini 2 (and 
indeed the Air 2) also lacks Touch ID.
9.7-inch display
7.9-inch display
9
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
The Current iPad Range
www.ebook3000.com

The touch sensor
With the latest iPads, you don’t 
even need to use a passcode to 
access your device. You can 
program in your fingerprint 
and unlock your iPad Pro, iPad 
Air 2 or iPad mini 3 and 4 by 
placing your finger on the 
Home button.
What’s Where on Your iPad?
Whether you own the latest 9.7-inch iPad Pro, an iPad mini 4 or an older iPad, you have 
an awesome piece of kit in your hands. Here we take you through the controls and the 
under-the-hood components of your amazing Apple tablet.
iPad Pro, 12.9 inches; smaller iPad Pro/iPad Air, 9.7 inches; iPad mini, 7.9 inches
The display
Because the high definition 
Retina screen plays such a key 
role in the appeal and the 
success of Apple’s iPad range, 
you would expect some 
serious features from the 
9.7-inch iPad Pro, and Apple 
hasn’t failed us. Offering a 
jaw-dropping 3.1 million 
pixels, this is the cleanest, 
most crisp and detailed display 
on any tablet currently 
available. Now you can enjoy 
HD movies and images in the 
rich clarity you would expect 
from a high-end desktop 
computer but in the palm of 
your hand. 
The design
The iPad Air and 9.7-inch iPad 
Pro are thinner and lighter than 
the older iPads and the iPad 
mini is even more portable. 
New models retain the 
aesthetics that make the iPad a 
design classic but add more 
power. They come in different 
colours too: silver or gold with 
a white trim or space grey and 
black. There’s also a rose gold 
9.7-inch iPad Pro.
Home Button/Touch ID
Front Facing Camera/FaceTime HD
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
10
First Steps with Your iPad

The processor
It is safe to say that the 
custom-designed Apple A9X 
chip in the iPad Air isn’t going 
to be bettered by any of its 
pretenders to the crown. The 
iPad can easily handle multiple 
tasks such as watching video, 
viewing photos or playing 
games. The iPad mini’s A8 chip 
and M8 motion coprocessor 
are also amazingly powerful.
Volume up/down
The sensors
The cameras
The Accelerometer is used by
the iPad to detect the current
orientation and to flip the
screen accordingly, making
gaming an utterly unique
experience!The ambient light
sensor tells the iPad how
bright the screen needs to be,
to help improve screen clarity
based upon your location.
The iPad Pro, Air and mini 
models all have two cameras. 
The front-facing FaceTime 
camera can take photos at 1.2 
megapixels and can handle 720p 
HD video – just the thing for 
FaceTime calls. The rear-facing 
iSight camera can record 1080p 
HD video and snap 12 
megapixel stills on the 9.7-inch 
iPad Pro, with 8 or 5 megapixels 
on all other current iPads.
The battery
Undeniably one of the most important features for any mobile device, the 
battery life on the latest iPads is very impressive, considering the numerous 
enhancements of the latest iPad models. There are no other rival products 
that can hope to match the iPad’s ten hours of life without upgrading the 
battery pack. It’s enough to last all day, especially with iOS 9’s new Low 
Power mode.
The connectivity
Want your online browsing and communication to be secure and fast? Both 
the Wi-Fi only and the Wi-Fi+4G LTE versions of the iPad Air 2 can connect 
to the Internet using superbly fast 802.11 ac wireless when in range of a 
wireless network, with the iPad mini 4 enjoying 802.11 n connectivity. The 
4G LTE version can also connect via the 4G network at speeds of up to 42 
mbps. The new iPad’s Wi-Fi is compatible with all major providers.
On/off Sleep/wake 
iSight Camera
Headphone Jack 
Speaker
Lightning  
Connector
What Sizes are the iPad?
There are currently three sizes of iPad. 
The large iPad Pro, mid-sized iPad Pro 
or Air, and the smallest, the iPad mini.
11
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
What’s Where on Your iPad?
www.ebook3000.com

From this screen, you are 
asked to choose your 
country or region. Do so by 
tapping on your choice, and 
you will then move on to 
the next screen. Once 
again, there’s a wide range 
of options to choose from, 
so scroll up and down if 
your own country or region 
isn’t immediately visible.
This next screen is 
fundamental to your 
progress as you will be 
asked to connect to a 
Wi-Fi network. To do 
this you will need to 
know your Wi-Fi 
network password, 
without which you 
cannot progress. Find 
your home Wi-Fi from 
the list offered, and tap 
on it to be taken to the 
password entry screen.
When you first power up 
your new device you will be 
greeted with the following 
screen; to move on simply 
move the lower slider bar to 
the right. You will also be 
greeted by a voiceover 
which will narrate your 
iPad’s actions. You can turn  
this off by triple clicking the 
Home button. The word 
‘Hello’ in several different 
languages is displayed.
Now you will find yourself 
on the welcome screen, 
where you will be asked to 
select the language that 
will be used to display all 
information and menus. 
Scroll up and down to find 
your choice and then tap 
it to select. The iPad 
supports 32 languages, 
several of which offer 
regional variations, such as 
UK, American or 
Australian English.
These days, you can set up and use an iPad without a computer. Instead, you carry out  
the initial activation using the iPad itself. It’s really easy to do too.
VoiceOver Options
When you first boot up your new iPad you will be greeted  
by a voice-over which will narrate your iPad’s actions.  
You can turn this off by triple clicking the home button. 
Setting Up Your iPad 
for the First Time
Activating Your iPad
The quick and easy PC Free option does exactly what you would 
imagine and completely removes the need for a PC and iTunes 
when it comes to activating and syncing your iPad. The only 
requirements are a Wi-Fi connection and your hardware; by 
following our guide you will be quite literally ready to go...
Step 3
Step 4
Step 1
Step 2
Power Up Your Device
Choose Your Language
Choose Your Country
Choose a Wi-Fi Network
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
12
First Steps with Your iPad

Now enter your Wi-Fi 
password and then tap  
the Join option to link  
your iDevice to your Wi-Fi 
network. Having joined your 
Wi-Fi network, you will 
automatically activate your 
iDevice. Your iPad will 
automatically connect to your 
home network from now on; 
there’s no need to select it and 
retype your password every 
time you want to use it.
Before you can complete 
the setup process and 
ultimately use your iPad 
you will need to read and 
then agree to Apple’s Terms 
and Conditions. You can 
have the document 
emailed to yourself if you 
wish, but this isn’t 
essential.
Step 5
Connecting to Wi-Fi
Step 6
Having activated your hardware you are now given 
three different options. Each will set up your iPad in a 
different manner. Your options are as follows: 
Set Up as New iPad – Click this option if this is your first iPad and 
you haven’t got an existing Apple ID. By selecting this option you will 
be taken directly to the Apple ID sign-up page, where you will need to 
fill in a brief form and agree to Apple’s Terms and Conditions. 
Restore from iCloud Backup – This option will restore your device to 
the last point you backed-up your information via iCloud. After 
selecting this option you will be asked to enter your Apple ID and 
password and then all backed up content from your account will be 
restored to your new hardware. 
Restore from iTunes – This option will restore your device to the last 
point you backed up your information via iTunes. By selecting this 
option you will end the PC Free setup and be required to link your 
iPad to your PC or Mac via the supplied USB cable. 
Having selected the appropriate option, now simply tap the next link in 
the top-right. If you’re restoring from a backup, your setup ends here.
Step 7
Step 9
Terms & Conditions
Using Location Services
The next screen you see asks 
you to confirm if you wish to 
use Location Services, such 
as Maps etc. Choose your 
preferred option to proceed. 
Activating Location Services 
allows you to use your 
current location in Maps, 
location-based reminders 
and more, so it’s very useful. 
You can always switch it on 
or off later if you change 
your mind.
If you already have an 
Apple ID, sign in with it 
now. If not, tap Create 
an Apple ID and follow 
the on-screen 
instructions. An Apple 
ID lets you buy from 
the App Store and 
iTunes, and also gives 
you a handy iCloud 
email address, so it’s 
worth doing.
Using Your Apple ID
Step 8
13
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
Setting Up Your iPad for the First Time
www.ebook3000.com

Next you will be asked 
to enter a four-digit 
passcode. You will be 
required to enter this 
passcode each time you 
use your iPhone so 
ensure it is memorable.  
You can always skip 
this step and set up  
a passcode at a later 
time when you have 
thought of a suitable 
code; the choice  
is yours.
This next step enables you 
to access the numerous 
services provided by 
Apple’s voice-activated 
personal assistant Siri. Tap 
the option you would like 
to use, although we 
would strongly advise you 
to “Use Siri” a lot! You 
can read more about Siri 
and how to use it later in 
this book, starting on 
Page 104.
Now choose whether to 
provide Apple  
and third-party 
developers with 
anonymous diagnostic 
and usage data; click 
the preferred options to 
move on. If you change 
your mind, you can 
switch it on or off after 
setup by going to 
Settings > Privacy > 
Diagnostics & Usage. 
Tap Get Started on the 
next screen to start 
using your iPad.
Step 14
Step 13
Step 15
Enter a Passcode
Set Up Siri
Send Data to Apple?
Step 11
Step 12
Activating Find My iPad
iMessage and FaceTime
On this screen you are 
asked to activate the 
Find My iPad feature. 
We would suggest you 
do this by using the 
slider at the bottom as 
this completely free 
service could prove very 
useful in locating a lost 
or stolen iDevice. To 
move on press the Use 
Find My iPad link.
During this stage of the 
setup process you will be 
asked to confirm that 
your linked details from 
your Apple ID can be 
used to contact you. It 
will also enable  
you to contact  
others using the 
iMessage and FaceTime 
features. Make sure all 
the options you want to 
activate are checked.
You are now asked to activate iCloud by moving the smaller 
slider at the bottom of the screen to the “On” position. We 
would advise you to do so, as 
with this option activated you 
can store contacts, calendars, 
photos, music, documents, 
books and apps. This 
information and any files will 
be uploaded to your iCloud 
account and can be accessed 
from all linked iDevices. To 
move to the next stage tap 
the Use iCloud link at the 
top-right of the screen.
Step 10
Activating iCloud
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
14
First Steps with Your iPad

Syncing to iTunes
Turn off Auto-Sync
Syncing Options
Set Your Preferences
The first thing you need to do is connect up your new iPad with 
your computer. To do this, open iTunes and connect the iPad to 
your computer using the USB cable that came with it. You can 
now follow the setup procedure detailed on the previous pages, 
skipping the Wi-Fi connection section. You can now also link your 
iPad directly to your computer to do the rest. 
If you want to turn off automatic syncing at a later time, click on 
Preferences in the iTunes menu, then select Devices and check the 
box where it says ‘Prevent iPods, iPhones and iPads from syncing 
automatically’ (Mac). If you’re using iTunes on a PC you’ll need to 
go to Edit then Preferences from the iTunes menu. 
You will automatically be taken through the setup process 
step-by-step. Choose whether you want your iPad to automatically 
sync your music, videos, contacts, calendar, bookmarks and so on 
every time it’s connected to the computer. Alternatively you can 
opt to sync things manually, choosing which music and media to 
transfer to your iPad as you go. It’s entirely up to you.
Regardless of how your preferences are set up you can prevent 
automatic syncing when you connect your iPad by holding down 
the command and option keys on Mac or the shift and control 
keys on PC. Your iPad is now ready to use and you can add a Wi-Fi 
network when you are in range of one at anytime as detailed on 
page 26.
Setting Up Your iPad on Your Computer
To set up using iTunes, you need a Mac running at least OS X 10.5.8 or a PC running Windows 10, 8, 7, 
Vista or XP (SP3), and the latest version of iTunes. Here’s how to go about it.
Step 1
Step 2
Step 4
Step 3
15
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
Setting Up Your iPad
www.ebook3000.com

Using Your iPad’s  
Touch ID Button
From the home screen tap the Settings app to bring 
up the menu screen, and then scroll down to the 
General link and tap the screen.
Enter your passcode and tap the Fingerprints link. At 
this point you can add a new fingerprint or 
additional fingerprints for other users.
From the list of 
options you will 
need to tap Add a 
Fingerprint… to 
begin the process 
of setting up your 
unique Touch ID 
or IDs.
From the next screen, scroll down and tap the Touch 
ID & Passcode link, look for the red icon with the 
fingerprint on it. You then need to enter your lock screen passcode.
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
The inclusion of the Touch ID fingerprint scanner now gives you access to your device 
with just your fingertip. Yet Touch ID goes much deeper than just the lock screen.
Setting Up Your Touch ID
Setting up your Touch ID is a seemingly easy process but one that has 
to be performed perfectly before it can be activated.
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
16
First Steps with Your iPad

Once you have registered your fingerprint with 
Touch ID, unlocking your device is easy. By placing 
your fingertip on the Home button, when your iPad is displaying 
the lock screen, you can bypass the passcode screen and open your 
iPad directly to the home screen. NOTE: After restarting your device 
you cannot gain access using Touch ID, instead you must first enter 
your passcode.
Making purchases is also easy. Open the App Store 
or the iTunes app and browse as normal. After 
initially setting up Touch ID, when you next make a purchase you 
will be asked to enter your Apple ID username and password as 
per usual. Any further purchases or downloads to your device can 
then be confirmed and downloaded by placing your finger on the 
Home button. The app or item will then download as normal.
Place your finger 
on the touch 
sensor (Home 
button) and the 
process will begin. 
Your fingerprint is 
gradually added to 
Touch ID, with the 
greyed fingerprint 
on the screen 
turning red a few 
lines at a time.
You will be asked (via 
an on-screen 
message) to lift your 
finger and then place 
your finger on the 
Home button, until all 
the grey fingerprint 
lines are red. You 
have to lift and 
replace your finger 
quite a few times 
before your fingerprint 
is fully logged.
Once you have added 
your fingerprint, you 
will be asked to adjust 
your grip. Now you 
will need to scan the 
outer edges of your 
finger to finish. This is 
because when 
you use your 
fingerprint to unlock 
your iPad, you might 
not always place it 
evenly on the button.
To remove your Touch ID, you will need to open the 
Settings app, tap Touch ID & Passcode and tap the 
Edit link. Then finally tap the red icon by the fingerprint.
Step 5
Step 6
Step 7
Step 2
Step 1
Step 8
How to Use Your Touch ID
There is much more to Touch ID than simply maintaining the 
security of your device. Let’s look at the other options.
What is Touch ID?
With Touch ID you can unlock your 
iPad using your fingerprint. Just place 
your finger on the Home button.
17
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
Using Your iPad’s Touch ID Button
www.ebook3000.com

There’s much more to using a capacitive, multi-touch screen than you might at first 
think, and it isn’t all tapping and dragging. Let’s look at gesture controls.
Using Your iPad’s 
Touchscreen
Tap quickly twice on a web page, map, or other screen to zoom. 
Double-tap a section of a web page in the browser to zoom fit it 
to the width of the screen. Double-tapping a piece of text can 
highlight a single word too.
Double-tap 
Many of the menus or web pages that you can access on the  
iPad require you to scroll. To swipe or slide, quickly move your 
finger across the surface of the screen, without pausing when  
you first touch it. For example, in Photos, you swipe to scroll 
through your pictures.
Swipe or scroll
Touchscreen Actions
Taking you through the various ways you will be able to 
interact with your iPad’s touchscreen. 
To activate items such as applications, to use the on-screen 
keyboard, or to press on-screen buttons, touch them with your 
finger. The touchscreen is sensitive to the tiny electrical charge in 
our bodies, so you don’t need to press hard.
Touch
Touch and hold is useful in a number of ways. You can touch and 
hold an item on the screen by touching it and not lifting your 
finger until an action occurs. This could be a menu opening, or an 
icon lifting off the screen and showing that it is able to be moved.
Touch and Hold 
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
18
First Steps with Your iPad

To drag items around the screen, touch and hold an item for a 
moment and then, without lifting your finger, move your finger 
across the screen until you reach the required position. Lift your 
finger off the screen and the item drops into that location.
Drag 
In the Photos app, you can rotate a picture by placing two fingers 
on it, and twisting them left or right. The picture follows the 
rotation of your fingers, and turns clockwise or anti-clockwise.
Twist to Rotate
Pinch and Spread
To pinch and spread, place your thumb and forefinger on the 
screen and bring them together or move them apart. It’s great for 
zooming into and out of photographs and Maps.
Using the Pinch to Home Screen
Access Notifications or Control Centre
Revealing the Multi-tasking Bar
Place all five fingers in an open palm position on the iPad screen. 
Close your fingers until they meet and the app will close.
To access the Control Centre, swipe up from the bottom of the 
screen with a single finger. To get to the Notifications, swipe down 
from the top of the screen.
Place four fingers at the bottom of the iPad screen. Now quickly 
move your fingertips towards the top of the screen. 
What is a Touchscreen?
The iPad has a capacitive touchscreen, 
which uses the body’s properties as an 
electrical conductor to detect where 
you put your fingers.
19
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
Using Your iPad’s Touchscreen
www.ebook3000.com

The keyboard is second only to the touchscreen when it comes to your interaction with the iPad. 
Familiarise yourself with it, and use of the iPad will become that much easier and quicker.
Using Your iPad’s 
Keyboard
Darkening the Colour 
Open the Settings app and from the General links tap Accessibility. 
From here tap Increase Contrast and then activate the Reduce 
Transparency slider. Your keyboard will now appear more solid. 
Show Lowercase Keys 
If you’ve used an older version of iOS, you’ve probably noticed that 
the keys now appear in the case in which you’re typing. If you 
prefer the older behaviour, where they’re always shown as capitals, 
go to General > Keyboard and switch off Show Lowercase Keys.
Finding Accented Letters
When you have to type an accented letter, you can easily do so by 
simply pressing and holding the letter until a pop-up appears. Now 
just tap on the letter you wish to use.
Using Emojis
To use Emojis, go to the Settings app, then tap 
General>Keyboard>Keyboards and Add New Keyboard, and then 
select Emoji from the list. Now when using the keyboard, tap the 
Globe icon and select the keyboard layout you wish to switch to.
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
20
First Steps with Your iPad

Auto Punctuation
When you are typing you can use the iPad’s automatic spelling 
correction in some interesting ways. If you wish to add an 
apostrophe to form a contraction such as “I’m, simply type “Im” 
and the iPad will do the rest. It’s a very useful feature, and greatly 
increases your typing speed when you’ve had a little practice.
Create Shortcuts
To create shortcuts for frequently used phrases, go to Settings > 
General > Keyboard and tap Text Replacement. Tap the Plus icon and 
then type the full phrase and your choice of shortcut. Now when the 
shortcut’s entered, it auto-corrects to the complete phrase.
Shortcut Icons
The new keyboard has several shortcut icons found above the keys. 
They differ from app to app, but are fairly self-explanatory. Here 
we see the Pages keyboard, with icons for cut, copy and paste on 
the left, and bold, italics and underline on the right.
Keyboard as a Trackpad
For more precise control over where you put the cursor, place two 
fingers on the keyboard and hold them there. When the keys go 
blank, as seen here, you can drag the cursor around the screen, 
using the keyboard as a type of trackpad.
Quick Punctuation 
Instead of switching between the punctuation/numbers and the 
letters versions of the iPad’s keyboard, you can quickly access 
punctuation and digits by pressing and holding the 123? key, then 
tapping the number or punctuation you require. You can input a 
quick full stop by double-tapping the space bar too.
Moving the Keyboard
Tap and hold the keyboard key in the bottom right for a pop-up. 
Select Undock and you can move the keyboard up and down the 
screen. Choose Split and you get this, a two-part keyboard 
designed to be used by your thumbs. Press and hold the key again 
to dock or re-join the keyboard.
What is a Virtual Keyboard?
Tap the part of the screen where you 
need to type and a keyboard appears on 
the screen. Use it like a physical keyboard.
21
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
Using Your iPad’s Keyboard
www.ebook3000.com

Setting Up and 
Using Your Apple ID
You need an Apple ID to download applications from the App Store, use FaceTime, 
buy music and movies from iTunes, and that’s just the beginning. Let’s set one up.
Open the Settings application from your iPad’s home 
screen, and scroll down through the options displayed 
until you reach iTunes & App Store, which is found just below the 
iCloud option. Tap iTunes & App Store to move to the next screen.
On this screen, you can see where you enter your 
Apple ID and your password. As you don’t yet have 
an Apple ID, you need to set one up. First of all, tap on the Create 
New Apple ID link to take you to the next screen.
You have started the process of setting up your 
Apple ID. You first need to select the country or 
region where you currently reside by tapping the correct link. Scroll 
up and down the list by dragging it with a single finger until you 
find your country.
Next up you’re faced with a very complex and 
detailed iTunes user policy document. You need to 
agree to this before you can progress by tapping Agree at the 
bottom. Again, scroll the document by dragging it with one finger. 
Reading is optional.
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
22
First Steps with Your iPad

You need to tap Agree once more when the pop-up 
appears. By doing so you reach the New Account 
screen. Here you need to enter all the required data in their 
respective fields to fill out the last line.
You have now successfully set up your Apple ID and 
you will be returned to the iTunes & App Store 
Settings Page. Enter the Apple ID and Password details you 
previously set up in their respective fields.
Remember this required data is used to protect you, 
so please ensure that you are happy with the 
answers given and the password you have picked. It might be an 
idea to make a note of them.
Having entered your details, tap the Sign In button 
located below your Apple ID and Password boxes, 
and you have finished setting up your unique identification. You 
can now make iTunes purchases.
You now need to enter your payment details to 
enable purchases from iTunes and App Store. 
Carefully enter them, along with your billing address. If you use a 
credit card, you need its number, expiration date and security code.
To test your Apple ID is correct and has been 
activated, open the App Store and tap on any free 
app and download it by using your new Apple ID. If the app 
downloads, your details are correct. 
Step 5
Step 8
Step 6
Step 9
Step 7
Step 10
What is Apple ID?
An Apple ID gives you an iCloud email 
account and is also used to buy apps and 
media from the App and iTunes Stores.
23
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
Setting Up and Using Your Apple ID
www.ebook3000.com

BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
Control Centre gives easy access to the iPad’s key functions. You’re one screen tap away 
from accessing key applications or adjusting core settings. 
Your iPad’s 
Control Centre
Accessing the Control Centre
Whether you’re on the home screen or using an app, 
swipe up from the bottom of the screen.
Airplane Mode
Wi-Fi
Bluetooth
Mute
By tapping this icon you will switch on Airplane 
Mode. This mode switches off all of your iPad’s 
access to incoming signals such as 4G, Wi-Fi etc., 
which could cause issues with the aircraft’s instruments while you 
are flying. To turn off Airplane mode, when you are back on terra 
firma simply open the Control Centre and tap this icon for a 
second time.
You may wish to turn off your links to your Wi-Fi 
connection or those around you when you are out 
and about, if you are accessing mobile data or 
wish to limit web access if you are sharing your iPad with a second 
party. To switch off all Wi-Fi connections to your iPad simply tap this 
icon on the Control Centre, to re-activate Wi-Fi it tap it once again.
Many accessories, or on some occasions, 
applications will require linked access to your iPad 
via Bluetooth. Pairing a device using a Bluetooth 
connection is a quick and easy way to link your iPad to another 
device without the need for Wi-Fi or mobile data. To switch on 
your Bluetooth signal tap this icon, once again to disable it repeat 
the process.
Tap this button to mute your iPad. If your iPad has 
a switch on the side that can be set as either a 
Mute or Screen Rotation Lock in Settings, the 
button here takes on whichever control the switch doesn’t. So if 
your switch locks the screen, the button in Control Centre mutes, 
and vice versa.
24
First Steps with Your iPad

What is Control Centre?
Control Centre is a quick and easy 
way of gaining access to the iPad’s 
most used controls and features.
Do Not Disturb 
Music/Podcast Controls
Brightness
Screen Orientation Lock 
AirPlay
AirDrop
Camera
Night Shift
Volume Controls
Timer
If you have set up your Do Not Disturb 
preferences, you can instantly switch on this mode 
via the Control Centre by tapping this icon. 
Remember, if you have this mode switched on you will not receive 
calls or messages so ensure you use this quick link on the Control 
Centre when needed.
Using Control Centre, you can instantly return to listening to your 
favourite podcast or iTunes music. You can also skip to the next or 
previous track, mark a track as a favourite or go to the sharing options. 
This is arguably the most useful Control Centre function of all.
Although the Auto Brightness option that comes as standard with 
the iPad will almost always find the perfect screen setting based 
upon the light sources that surround you, there may come a time, 
particularly when you are in bright sunlight, where you may wish to 
tweak the brightness settings yourself, and using this slider you can 
do just that.
Upon occasions you will want to lock your iPad in 
either landscape (Sideways) or portrait (Upright). 
Be it browsing the Internet in landscape mode or 
taking a photograph in portrait mode you don’t want the iPad to 
switch to the opposite view on its own. To avoid this simply tap this 
icon while holding your device in the position you wish.
Tap here for a list of nearby AirPlay-
compatible devices. Using AirPlay, 
you can transmit your iPad’s sound and/or video to devices such as 
speakers or Apple TV. Some AirPlay gadgets have to be on the 
same wireless network as your iPad, but others can make a direct, 
‘ad-hoc’ connection with no network needed at all.
Tap here to get a pop-up menu from 
where you can change your AirDrop 
settings, making yourself discoverable to the audience of your 
choice: everyone, contacts only, or no one (off). Using AirDrop, you 
can wirelessly share files and data with nearby Mac or iOS devices. 
Wi-Fi and Bluetooth have to be on for AirDrop to be active.
The countless excellent features of the 
iPad’s camera are covered in this guide 
so you won’t need any further 
motivation to make use of the iPad’s amazing camera. If your iPad 
is on the lock screen you can access the camera by swiping 
upward, when your iPad is in use you can access the camera via 
this shortcut link.
This new feature, introduced with the iOS 9.3 
update, uses your iOS device’s clock and 
geolocation to determine when it’s sunset. As 
the sun goes down it automatically shifts your 
display colours to the warmer end of the spectrum, reducing the 
blue light and making it easier to sleep after using your iPad.
Move the slider to raise or lower your iPad’s volume, system wide. 
The volume slider basically duplicates the function of the volume 
buttons on the side of your iPad, but it’s handy to have it there 
when you’re using Control Centre’s music controls.
The Control Centre offers you a quick 
link to one of the most useful features 
of the Clock app, the Timer mode. By tapping this icon you will 
instantly open this application on its Timer setting. The uses for this 
mode are many from boiling an egg to a learning aid, making it a 
fine inclusion.
25
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
Your iPad’s Control Centre
www.ebook3000.com

Get on the Internet 
with Your iPad
The Internet is a major part of your iPad experience. Here’s how to get online with your 
Apple tablet, using either a Wi-Fi network or a data connection.
Joining a Wi-Fi Network
After setup, the iPad connects to the Internet automatically whenever you use an app that requires it. There are two ways to do this; 
either via a Wi-Fi connection, or via a 3G/4G mobile network if your iPad supports it.
To turn on the Wi-Fi on your iPad go to Settings > 
Wi-Fi and turn Wi-Fi on. Now you will need to join a 
Wi-Fi network. Once you have switched Wi-Fi on, the iPad will 
search for all networks in range. 
If you’re at home, pick your home network from the 
list and enter the security details to be allowed 
access. Take care to enter your password correctly, making sure you 
don’t (for example) confuse the letter ‘O’ and a zero.
If you are at a public hotspot, maybe at a cafe or a 
hotel, it’s very unlikely to have no security so you 
can just connect. You probably need to find out the security details 
from whoever is providing the Wi-Fi service.
Naturally, you can use Control Center to switch on 
your iPad’s Wi-Fi instead. Swipe up from the bottom 
of the screen to show Control Center, tap the Wi-Fi icon and then 
swipe down to close it again.
Step 1
Step 3
Step 2
Step 4
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
26
First Steps with Your iPad

From now on, whenever you are in range of this 
Wi-Fi service, the iPad automatically connects to it 
without you having to input a password again. If more than one is 
in range the iPad rejoins the last network it joined.
If your iPad keeps connecting to a network you no 
longer use, open the Settings app, tap the Wi-Fi link 
in the left-hand column and tap the ‘i’ next to the network in 
question. On the next screen, tap ‘Forget this Network’. You will 
no longer automatically connect to it, but if you want to use it 
again, you have to re-enter its password.
Step 5
Step 6
Joining a Mobile 4G  
or 3G Network
Before you can use your iPad on a 3G network you will need to 
sign up to a mobile service provider. 
Checking Wi-Fi Strength
There is a Wi-Fi indicator on the status bar at the top of the screen, 
depicting the signal strength. The more bars visible, the stronger 
the signal.
When the iPad connects to the Internet using the 
mobile data network, you will see the 3G, EDGE or 
GPRS icon in the status bar at the top of the screen.
If you travel outside your usual mobile network 
coverage, you can still use the 3G functionality. To 
do this, turn Data Roaming on (Settings > Mobile > Data 
Roaming). But be aware roaming charges may apply. If you are 
not prepared to pay these charges make sure Data Roaming is 
turned off. 
You can monitor your mobile network data usage 
by going to Settings > Cellular Data > View 
Account. Mobile data settings vary depending on the carrier. The 
iPad isn’t locked to a specific provider, so you can sign up with 
whoever you wish.
Step 3
Step 2
Step 1
What is the Internet For?
The Internet is a means of connecting computers 
and mobile devices from all over the world, and is 
used for the web, email, media streaming and more.
27
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
Get on the Internet with Your iPad
www.ebook3000.com

Setting Up Email 
on Your iPad
Your iPad can send and receive email, just like a regular computer, but first you must set 
up your email accounts. Thankfully, this is not too difficult on an iPad. Here’s how.
From this screen tap on the iCloud link and enter your 
Apple ID and password, (these are the details you 
entered when you first set up your iPad). Tap Next to automatically 
verify your details. 
You now see a pop-up message asking you to give 
iCloud access to your location and Find My iPhone. OK 
both and you’re taken to this screen, where you select which apps use 
iCloud. Slide the Mail link to the On position.
Step 1
Tap the Settings icon located on the home screen of 
your iPad, and scroll down the left side panel and select 
the Mail, Contacts, Calendars option. From here tap the Add Account 
option at the foot of the Accounts section.
Step 3
Set Up iCloud Mail
Now enter a username for your new @iCloud.com email 
address. The name you pick is up to you, but always 
choose something memorable. Once you have entered your details, 
press Next and then confirm your details by pressing Done.
If you’ve set up an Apple ID, you already have an iCloud email address. You must now set it up with the Mail app,  
so you can use it to send and receive email messages on your iPad. Here’s how to do it.
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
28
First Steps with Your iPad

Finally enter a description of the account, this is useful if you intended 
to access numerous email accounts from your iPad, and click the Next 
link to continue. 
From this screen, you can select which features of your 
email account you also wish to sync with your iPad. 
When you have made your selections, and are happy to continue, tap 
the Save link and you’re ready to go.
Set Up Free Email
You can set up and use a variety of free, web-based email accounts in Mail, including Gmail, Yahoo, AOL  
or Microsoft Hotmail. It’s a little trickier than iCloud, but still not too difficult. Here’s how it’s done.
To access accounts from these email providers, you 
must have already set up an active account with one of 
them. To do this you need to visit their respective websites and follow 
the onscreen instructions, then come back to add the account to Mail.
On this screen you will need to enter your name; this 
name will be displayed to recipients of your emails. 
Next input your existing email address from one of the providers and 
enter your password for this account. 
From this screen, tap on either the Gmail, Yahoo, AOL 
or Microsoft Outlook link. The process is the same for 
them all; and if you have more than one free, web-based email 
account, you can come back and add another one later.
To start the process of collecting email on your iPad if your account is hosted by a provider other than those listed on this screen, or hosted 
via Microsoft Exchange, you will need to tap either the Other or the Microsoft Exchange link respectively. You will have to visit the support 
website of your email provider and seek out their help in setting up either a POP or IMAP email account on your iPad. As these details are all 
different for each provider, we can, alas, only send you in their direction for help.
Setting Up a Microsoft Exchange or Other Email Account
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
Which Email Account?
You can use your iPad with any email account, whether it’s 
your iCloud service, a web-based email such as Gmail or 
Yahoo, or an account offered by your Internet Service Provider.
29
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
Setting Up Email on Your iPad
www.ebook3000.com

BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
30

How to Use 
Your iPad’s 
Apps
Now you have your iPad up and running, you’ll want to 
make the most of its amazing apps. Browse the Internet with 
Safari, send and receive email with Mail, organise your life 
with Calendar, Contacts and Reminders, enjoy your music and 
movies with Videos and Music and more. Here we bring you 
crystal clear tutorials on how to use the apps that came with 
your iPad. It’s a fascinating journey!
CONTENTS
32	
All About the Messages App
36	
All About the Mail App
40	
All About the Safari App
44	
Clear Cache and Cookies  
	
in the Safari App
45	
Third-Party Browsers
46	
All About the News App
48	
All About the Contacts App
50	
All About the Notes App
52	
Notes’ New iOS 9 Features
54	
All About the Calendar App
57	
Inviting Contacts to an Event
58	
All About the iPad’s Cameras
59	
Opening the Camera App  
	
from the Lock Screen
62	
All About the Photos App
64	
Editing Techniques  
	
Made Easy
66	
All About the iCloud  
	
Photo Library
68	
All About the Maps App
70	
Using the Turn-by-Turn  
	
Navigation Feature
72	
The New Public  
	
Transport Feature
74	
The Music App and  
	
Apple Music
78	
All About the FaceTime App
78	
Making a FaceTime Call
80	
All About the Podcasts App
82	
All About the iBooks App
84	
All About the Clock App
86	
All About the Game  
	
Center App
88	
All About the  
	
Photo Booth App
90	
All About the Videos App
91	
Renting Movies
92	
All About the App Store App
94	
All About the iTunes  
	
Store App
31
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
www.ebook3000.com

The first thing you’ll need to do is make sure 
Messages is turned on. To do this tap the Settings 
icon on your iPad’s home screen. Select Messages from the list that 
appears. You may have to scroll down to find it.
On the Messages settings screen you’ll see an on/off 
switch. Slide it to the On position to enable 
Messages. Wait a few moments as Messages initialises. A message 
should appear to let you know it’s in the process of activating.
The Messages app is a great way of sending short messages to your friends and 
family, especially if they also use an iOS device. Let’s take a look at how to do it.
All About the 
Messages App
 Understanding the 
Messages App Made Easy
We’ve highlighted the key features of this application
to help you better understand how it works.
To delete any/all of 
the conversation 
hit the Edit button 
at any time.
When your text is finished 
tap the Send button and 
your task is complete. 
To quickly attach a 
photo to your text hit 
this camera icon.
Use the keyboard to 
enter your text message.
This waterfall 
display contains 
both your messages 
to and replies from 
this contact.
Step 1
Step 2
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
32

Send & Receive is where you set up the accounts 
through which you want to send and receive your 
messages. On your iPad, your phone number is set as your Receive 
At address. Show Subject Field lets you add or remove the subject 
line for your messages. Blocked shows a list of numbers you’ve 
prevented from sending you text messages.
In the To field, type the number or email address of 
the person you want to message. If that person is in 
your Contacts app, you can type their name instead, or tap the + 
icon in the top-left corner to open a list of your contacts. Scroll up 
or down, or use the search field at the top of the contacts window 
to find the person you want to message, then tap the device you 
want to send it to.
Tap Keep Messages and you can opt to save your 
text messages for 30 days, one year or forever. You 
can also set the amount of time to elapse before audio and video 
messages expire after you’ve sent, watched or listened to them, so 
they don’t take up space on your iPad. By default this is set to two 
minutes for each, but you can set them to never expire if you wish.
If the name, number or email address turns blue, 
the message can be sent through Apple’s iMessage 
service, which is free. If it turns green, it will be sent as a regular 
text message, which might incur costs from your service provider. If 
it turns red, the device you’ve selected to text isn’t able to receive 
your message at all. Tap it and remove it.
Now it’s time to open the Messages app itself. 
Return to the home screen by tapping the Home 
button, then tap the Messages app. To start a new Messages 
conversation, tap the pen-and-paper icon in the top-right corner of 
the side bar. This brings up the New Message screen.
Now it’s time to configure the Messages app to suit 
your requirements. With Send Read Receipts 
switched on, when you’ve read a message, the person who sent it 
is told that you’ve seen it. If you don’t want the senders to know 
this, turn it off.
Step 3
Step 6
Step 4
Step 7
Step 5
Step 8
What is the Messages App?
Your iPad can send text messages, just 
like your mobile phone. This guide 
shows you how it’s done.
33
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
All About the Messages App
www.ebook3000.com

The delivery status icon lets you know when your 
message has been sent. If the recipient of the 
message has Read Receipts turned on then, this will change to 
Read once they’ve looked at the message.
You can add photos or videos to your text message 
by tapping the camera icon to the left of the text 
field. From the pop-up menu, go to Photo Library to send a picture 
or video that you already have on your iPad, or Take a Photo or 
Video to take a new one with your iPad’s camera.
You can now send voice messages. Tap and hold 
the microphone icon to the right of the text field. 
Speak your message, and release when you’re done. You can then 
review your voice message by tapping the Play icon, send it by 
tapping the upwards-pointing arrow, or delete it using the X icon.
If you’re in a group conversation - that is, one in 
which the messages are sent to more than one 
person - you can access certain unique controls by tapping Details 
(top-right corner). You can add a name for the group, add 
contacts, and turn on Do Not Disturb to mute notifications from 
that particular conversation. At the bottom of the screen is an 
option to leave the group.
You can add multiple recipients. When group 
messaging, the name of the sender appears above 
each message so you can easily keep track of who said what. 
You can see when the other person is typing as 
three dots in a speech bubble appear in the bottom 
left of the message field. This is replaced by their message when 
they’ve sent it.
Step 12
Step 9
Step 10
Step 11
Step 13
Step 14
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
34

There’s a quick and easy way of sending video 
messages. Tap the camera icon to the left of the 
text field, and select Take Photo or Video. This opens the camera 
app, from where you can select Video, record your movie and tap 
Use Video. The movie appears in your message. Add any text you 
wish to write, and tap Send.
If you’re receiving nuisance messages, it’s possible to 
block a number so it can no longer call or message 
you. Highlight a message sent by the number you want to block, 
tap Details (top-right), then tap the ‘i’ icon in the top-right. In the 
menu you see next, there’s an option to Block This Caller. Tap it 
and you will no longer receive messages, phone calls or FaceTime 
from that number.
It’s now possible to share multiple photos in the 
same message. It’s easy too. Just tap the camera 
icon to the left of the text field and you’re shown up to 20 
recently-taken or imported pictures. Tap all the ones you want to 
send, then tap Send Photos. Alternatively, select Photo Library after 
tapping the camera icon and then add the pictures one at a time.
You can also send messages directly from the 
Notification screen, without opening the Messages 
app. If the notification appears as a banner while you’re using your 
iPad, swipe down to answer it. If it appears in Notification Center, 
you can swipe left and tap Reply, regardless of whether your iPad is 
locked with a passcode.
If you want to let people know where you are, you 
can share your location through Messages. Simply 
tap Details in the top-right corner and select Share My Location, 
which can let the recipient know where you are for an hour, until 
the end of the day or indefinitely; or select Send My Current 
Location, which forwards a map showing your current position.
There’s no need to scroll through a conversation to 
find a picture or other attachment you were sent. 
Now you can just tap Details in the top-right corner, and scroll 
down the screen to see them all gathered in one place. You can 
open photos and save them to your iPad, print them, post to social 
media, and message or email them to other contacts.
Step 15
Step 16
Step 18
Step 17
Step 19
Step 20
35
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
All About the Messages App
www.ebook3000.com

The ability to stay in touch via email from anywhere in the world is one of the main  
reasons to own an iPad. Let’s take a look at this essential feature.
All About the 
Mail App
In landscape mode - that is, holding your iPad 
horizontally - a list of emails received is shown on 
the left-hand side, with the currently highlighted email on the 
right. Tap Mailboxes to be shown a list of your email accounts and 
their respective mailboxes, and also boxes for VIP and Flagged 
emails, which we’ll cover later.
With the iPad held vertically, in portrait mode, you 
get a better look at the email you’re currently 
reading, writing or editing; but to get to your list of emails, you 
need to tap All Inboxes in the top-left corner. Tap the email on the 
right to dismiss it again. You can also move to the next/previous 
email by tapping the chevrons in the top-left corner.
Understanding the Mail  
App Made Easy
We’ve highlighted the key features of this application
to help you better understand how it works.
The main viewing 
window shows your 
latest email or any 
selected emails in full.
View a specific mail 
box, Inbox, Sent or 
Trash or search 
your mailbox using 
these links.
These four options 
allow you to 
flag, move, delete 
and reply/forward/
print your emails.
This column displays 
quick links to all of 
your current emails.
Tap this icon to 
open a new blank 
email template 
for your use. 
Step 1
Step 2
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
36

How to Send an Email
Now you’ve got the email client set up and ready to go, the next thing you’ll want to do is send an email to one of your friends. 
It’s really easy to do. Just follow these simple steps, and they’ll soon be reading your words.
Tap the Mail icon on your home screen to open the 
application. Unless you’ve moved it, you’ll find the 
Mail app in the Dock at the foot of the screen.
Next tap the icon at the top-right of the screen, the 
one that looks like a piece of paper and a pencil, to 
open a new blank email. The subject and recipient are not yet listed.
Enter the email address of the contact you wish to 
email in the ‘To:’ bar at the top. Or tap the + icon 
on the left to bring up a list of your contacts.
Enter your subject line and the contents of  
your email via the keyboard and tap Send, found in 
the top-right corner of your new email.
The progress bar at the bottom-left of the screen 
advances as the email is sent. If you’re sending a 
very large email it can take a while.
Organising Your Inbox
To refresh your inbox, swipe down on it until the update 
wheel appears. You can also swipe individual emails left or 
right for more options. Swipe right to mark an email as read 
or unread without opening it. Swipe a little way to the left 
for options to trash or flag it, or to summon a pop-up menu 
offering more options. Swipe it all the way to the left to 
delete it straight away.
Step 1
Step 4
Step 2
Step 5
Step 3
What is the Mail App?
With Mail you can send and receive 
emails, adding attachments if you wish. 
It’s one of the most used apps on the iPad.
37
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
All About the Mail App
www.ebook3000.com

Replying To/Forwarding an Email
Communicating via email is a two-way process, so you’ll want to know how to reply to messages you’ve received,  
and how to forward mail on to other recipients. It’s easy to do, and emails are received as soon as they’re sent.
Open your Inbox and select the email you wish to 
reply to from the list of received mails; the newest 
being at the top.  Now click the left point arrow icon on the top 
navigation bar to bring up the options tab.
Inserting Photos or Videos into Emails
Touch and hold on the message wherever you 
want to insert the media. An action menu will  
appear giving you several options. Tap Insert Photo or Video. 
Select the image or video you want to add from 
your camera roll (or other album) and then tap Use. 
The media is inserted into your message at the point where  
you touched. 
What better way to remember a treasured moment than to share it with your friends and family? Read this guide to  
discover how you can send photos and videos via the Mail app. 
From here, you can choose to Reply, Forward or 
Print your email. The Reply option lets you respond 
to the person who sent it to you, whereas Forward sends it to a 
third party, whose email address you must add to the To field 
before sending. Either way, you can type your message in the body 
of the email and then tap Send, just like you did when sending an 
email on the previous page.
Step 1
Step 2
Step 1
Step 2
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
38

Creating a VIP Senders List
One of Mail’s most popular features is VIP Senders, which makes it 
easier to access emails from your favourites.
Open the Mail app and find a message from 
someone you want to make a VIP Sender. Tap their 
name in the “from” field and you will be shown more details 
about them.
As well as the familiar contact options, you will see 
a new button to Add to VIP. Tap this and a small 
star will appear next to their email address to show they have been 
added to your VIP list.
Any new emails from people added as a VIP will 
now automatically be kept in a new VIP mailbox. 
You can remove VIP status by clicking their name in the “from” 
field and selecting Remove From VIP. 
If you need to send an email to more than one person, you can 
add more than one address in the To field. If you need to send it to 
another person for reference, tap the CC/BCC, From field (below 
the recipient’s address) and it expands into three separate fields. 
You can enter further addresses in the CC (Carbon Copy) and BCC 
(Blind Carbon Copy) fields. The difference between these two 
options is that addresses in the CC field are visible to everybody 
who receives the email, but those in the BCC field are hidden.
The Flag icon at the top of the screen offers several useful options. 
You can flag the currently selected email for later reference, or 
mark it as unread so it looks like it hasn’t been opened. If it’s a 
junk message, also known as spam, you can move it to your junk 
email folder; and you can also set up notification alerts for when 
someone replies.
If you want to change the default signature, which is automatically 
added to the bottom of your outgoing emails, go to Settings > 
Mail, Contacts, Calendars > Signature. You can then set a single 
signature for every email account the iPad uses, or separate ones 
for each account if there’s more than one. To change the 
signature, tap on the text and edit it using the on-screen keyboard.
Multiple Recipients
The Flag Icon
Changing Your Signature
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
39
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
All About the Mail App
www.ebook3000.com

Safari is the iPad’s web browser. If you’ve used Safari before, or any other  
browser for that matter, you’re sure to feel at home right away.
All About the 
Safari App
Using the Safari App
Safari is Apple’s very own web browser. If you’ve never used it 
before, here’s a quick run through of the basics.
To open Safari, tap the Safari icon on the  
home screen.
To enter a web address manually, tap the text field 
bar located at the top of the screen. This will bring 
up the iPad’s keyboard. Now simply type your web address, and 
tap Go when you have finished to load this page.
You can also search the Internet for a certain item 
or parameter by entering your search term in this 
bar. Type in your search term and tap Search; your results will then 
be displayed via the Google website.
When browsing online, to return to the previous web 
page you were looking at, tap the left arrow at the 
top of the screen and to move to the next page, tap the right arrow.
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
40

To bookmark a page, tap the middle button at the 
top of the screen that shows an arrow coming out 
of a square. Tap Add Bookmark.
You can add a shortcut for any website to your 
home screen. To do this tap the arrow in a square 
button and choose Add To Home Screen. When you return to the 
home screen you’ll see the web page you selected has appeared as 
an icon. Tap it to go straight to the site.
To email a link to the currently selected site, tap the 
arrow-in-a-box button and select Mail Link To This 
Page. You will then be taken automatically to your email where 
you can choose a recipient (you’ll need to have configured your 
email for this to work).
If you wish to have more than one web page open 
at any time, you can access the iPad’s tabbed 
browsing option. To open another web page without closing the 
one you are currently browsing, tap the ‘+’ icon at the top-right of 
the screen. Now simply enter the web address you wish to visit as 
usual to open a new page.
You can switch between these pages by tapping the 
corresponding tab displayed under the URL/Search 
bar. To close a tab tap the ‘X’ icon at the far left of the bar.
Pages can be oriented landscape or portrait by 
rotating the iPad. 
Step 5
Step 8
Step 9
Step 10
Step 6
Step 7
What is the Safari App?
Safari is your iPad’s web browser, 
like Internet Explorer on a Windows 
PC or Safari on an Apple Mac.
41
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
All About the Safari App
www.ebook3000.com

Tapping on any text field automatically brings up 
the keyboard. If you’re filling in a text field and 
need to refer back to the web page, tap the keyboard icon to hide 
the keyboard.
You can set Safari up to automatically fill in online 
forms, saving you time when signing up with 
websites. Go to Settings, select Safari and turn on Autofill. 
Tap the URL bar of the Safari window and enter 
your search parameters using the keyboard and 
when you are ready, hit the Search key to begin.
Your search results are listed in a pop-up window. 
Scroll to the bottom of the list, below the Google 
Search results, to find the On This Page results.
Tap this link and you’re taken to the first use of your 
keyword in the text on your current web page. Using 
the arrows at the bottom-left you can check each result in turn.
By turning on the Names & Passwords option, Safari 
will ask you if you want it to remember your login 
details for websites that require them. Tap Save and the data is 
now stored for your next visit.
Searching for Text on  
Safari Web Pages
With Safari, you can now search within the text of web pages 
displayed in the browser. Here’s how it’s done.
Step 11
Step 12
Step 13
Step 3
Step 1
Step 2
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
42

From this menu tap Add to Reading List and the 
page will be saved for later viewing.
To access your reading list tap the Bookmark icon -  
the third from the left on the top navigation bar - 
and your Reading List will be accessible as the top link.
From this link you will see the listings of all sites you 
have added to the list, offering a heading and a few 
lines of content description to tweak your memory. 
Click one and you will taken directly to the page, 
read on...and enjoy!
Open the Safari application and browse the 
Internet as normal. 
Using the Reading List
The Reading List feature was designed to give Safari users the chance 
to save a web page to view at a later time.
When you find something of interest that you want 
to give a little extra attention, click the the upward 
pointing arrow icon on the top bar to bring up the Options tab.
Step 3
Step 2
Step 6
Step 1
Step 4
Step 5
43
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
All About the Safari App
www.ebook3000.com

Click on the main Settings icon on your iPad 
home screen. Choose Safari from the list of 
apps to see the settings specific to that app.
A pop-up appears, inviting you to clear your history and 
data. This also clears the history from other devices 
signed into the same iCloud account.
At the bottom of the Safari settings you should see a 
blue link labelled ‘Clear History and Website Data’. Tap 
it now.
Tap the Clear button to clear your browsing history and 
other web data. Safari is reset to default, and no one 
can read where you’ve been online.
Clear Cache and Cookies in the Safari App
Your iPad tracks the sites you visit on the Internet, and also retains data from these sites. You might want to delete this information for 
privacy reasons. This short guide shows you how to remove your browsing history and cache.
How to Browse the Internet Privately
To maintain your privacy when you’re online, you can use Private Browsing mode. When activated, this stops the iPad storing your 
browsing history, so someone who picks up your iPad can’t tell which sites you’ve looked at.
Open the Safari application as normal and then tap the 
two square icon next to the + icon at the top-right 
corner of the screen. This will bring up the Top Sites screen; now tap 
the Private link. 
You will now open a new browsing window. Using this 
window your online activities will remain private and 
will continue to remain that way until you tap the Private link for a 
second time.
Step 1
Step 2
Step 1
Step 3
Step 2
Step 4
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
44

Using the Safari Tab View
Third-Party Browsers
Using the Safari Sidebar View
With a wealth of sites to visit, you may find that one browsing window just isn’t enough. Here’s a guide to using tabbed browsing, 
so you can view more than one site at once without closing pages, and swap between them at will.
Apple’s own Safari web browser, which comes preinstalled on your iPad, is probably the only browser you need. But there are other 
options, some of which are paid, and some of which are free. Let’s take a look at some of the more popular browsers on offer.
The Safari sidebar contains a wealth of useful information and handy features. When you’re browsing the Internet using Safari, you can 
access your Bookmarks, Reading List and Shared Links at any time by following this short guide.
When you are surfing the Internet, you may find 
yourself stumbling upon something completely different 
from the subject you were searching for. Should this happen, simply tap 
the + icon to quick-save your current page and start your search afresh. 
You can view your various Safari tabs using the scrolling 
bar beneath the URL/search bar. You can also select an 
additional view by tapping the double square icon to the right of the + 
icon. To visit any of the pages displayed on this screen, simply tap on 
the small Safari display link. 
To take a look at the other browsers that are available 
on your iPad, open the App Store app and enter ‘web 
browser’ in the search field. You’re shown a variety of apps, including 
Opera, Dolphin, Puffin, Red Onion and more.
Open the Safari application and browse the Internet as 
normal. If you wish to visit one of your bookmarked 
sites, an item from your reading list, or a link supplied by one of your 
social networking contacts, tap the open book icon to the top-left of 
the screen. 
One of the most popular non-Apple browsers for your 
iPad is Chrome, which was created by Google, Inc. It’s 
very fast and stable, and it’s free to download and use, so you’ve got 
nothing to lose by downloading and trying it.
From this sidebar you will be able to access all of the 
information you can gain from these links without 
having to leave the screen you are currently on. You can keep this 
sidebar open when you are browsing, or close by tapping the icon a 
second time. 
Step 1
Step 1
Step 2
Step 2
Step 1
Step 2
45
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
All About the Safari App
www.ebook3000.com

Getting Started with News
We take you through your all-important first few steps with 
Apple’s digital media application.
On the Welcome screen, tap Get Started; then 
follow the on-screen instruction, and choose at least 
three news sources as offered. Drag the screen upwards to reveal 
more. Tap an icon to select that news source, and tap again to 
deselect it if you change your mind.
When you’ve finished, tap Continue. If you want to 
sign up for regular emails about the top stories that 
could interest you, tap the link here and enter your details. If not, 
tap Not Now and continue to the main News app, and take a look 
at what it has in store.
Step 1
Step 2
All About the 
News App
Step 1
Understanding the News 
App Made Easy
We’ve highlighted the key features of this application
to help you better understand how it works.
Tap a preview to open 
the full story. Tap and 
hold for options to 
Share, Save or Like it.
News stories you’ve saved 
for later reading can be 
accessed here.
Tap here to search 
for specific news 
sources or subjects, 
or choose from the 
app’s suggestions.
For You: news 
stories that have 
been specially 
selected according 
to the topics 
you’ve expressed 
an interest in.
Your Favorites are the 
sources you choose when 
setting up the News app. You 
can edit the list here. Tap 
Explore to add more.
Introduced with iOS 9, the News app replaces the Newsstand app. You can get 
interactive feeds from all your favourite magazines and websites.
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
46

Tap For You (bottom-left) for a list of current news 
stories. To refresh the feed and download the latest 
stories, pull the screen down. Tap a news item to open it. If video 
is included, it can be played without leaving the app. When you’re 
done, tap the back arrow (top-left).
The Favourites icon at the foot of the screen takes 
you to the sources marked as favourites. Tap one to 
be taken to the source in question. To remove one, tap Edit 
(top-right) and tap an item’s ‘X’ icon to delete it. The Explore icon 
lets you add more channels and topics to your favourites.
When reading a news story, there are three icons in 
the top-right corner of the screen. The left-hand 
icon is the Share button, which lets you share the item with others 
by sending it via email, Messages or AirDrop, save it to Notes or 
Reminders, or post it to Facebook or Twitter.
Unsurprisingly, the Search icon lets you look for 
news topics using keywords. Just tap the magnifying 
glass icon at the bottom of the screen, enter search terms in the 
field that appears and then, in the list of results, tap the plus icon 
to add the topic to your favourites.
Tap the middle icon, shaped like a heart, to mark the 
item as a favourite. Doing so will help to shape your 
results, making them more in tune with your needs. The right-hand 
icon is the bookmark. Tap it to save an article for later reading.
The Saved icon gives a list of articles you’ve 
bookmarked for later reading. To delete a news item 
from this list, swipe it to the left. Also available through the Saved 
icon is your history – i.e. a list of articles you opened recently. 
Again, delete entries by swiping left, or clear them all using the 
Clear History link.
Step 1
Step 4
Step 2
Step 5
Step 3
Step 6
Making the Most of News
Now you’re up and running, how do you use your News app? What can you do to further tailor it to 
your needs, and how you read your news? Let’s take a look.
What is the News App?
After setting up your News app, it collates news 
stories and features from all your favourite 
publications and tailored to your interests.
47
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
All About the News App
www.ebook3000.com

The iPad includes advanced address book functionality that will enable you to keep  
all your important contact details organised and easily accessible.
All About the 
Contacts App
Adding New Contacts
Understanding the 
Contacts App Made Easy
We’ve highlighted the key features of this application
to help you better understand how it works.
Search for a specific 
contact, email or 
number via this 
search engine link.
Tap the “+” icon to  
enter the details of  
a new contact. 
A contact’s full details  
can be viewed and 
edited via this window.
Your complete 
contacts listings for 
a specific letter are 
displayed here. 
Search for a specific 
contact, email or 
number via this 
search engine link.
To add a contact, open Contacts and tap the Plus 
button. You can then add information including a 
phone number, email, website and address. If you want to add 
something that isn’t listed, click the Add Field button for more options.
You can sync your contacts with your Mac and 
other iOS devices using iCloud. Go to Settings > 
Mail, Contacts, Calendars > iCloud, and switch Contacts on. Any 
changes you make to your contacts are then synced with any 
device linked to the same iCloud account, as long as it also has 
iCloud syncing switched on.
Step 1
Step 2
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
48

Merging Duplicate Entries
If you have a contact that appears in your contact list multiple 
times, it’s easy to merge them into one contact. Just select one of 
the contacts you wish to merge, tap Edit in the top-right corner, 
and then scroll down to the Link Contacts option. Tap it, then 
choose which profile or profiles you wish to link. They’re then 
merged into one.
Viewing by Groups  
If you organise your contacts into groups, you can choose to 
display only some of these groups. On the main Contacts 
screen, tap Groups in the top-left corner. Tap Hide All 
Contacts to untick the groups, then tap the ones you want 
to show, then tap Done. The others are hidden. If you want 
to go back to viewing all your contacts, go back to the 
Groups page and tap Show All Contacts.
Deleting/Editing Contacts  
To delete or edit any contact, open the profile and tap Edit. 
More Contacts Options
Adding Pictures to Contacts 
If you add a picture to a contact’s details, it’s displayed 
when that person phones or emails you. Open up a contact 
and tap Edit, then select the Add Photo option. Tap Choose 
Photo and browse to the appropriate picture, or Take Photo 
to snap a new one there and then using your iPad’s camera.
Sharing Contact Details
From your Contacts app, select the card you wish to 
share and tap the Share Contact link towards the 
foot of the contact details. The Sharing options appear. Select the 
format you wish to send the details (we are using SMS, although 
the basics remain the same for Mail) and proceed.
You now see the contact details as an attachment. 
Enter any text you wish and tap Send to complete 
the process. Should you receive a contact in this way, tap the 
attachment to add it to your existing contacts list.
Step 1
Step 2
You can send the contact details from your Contacts app to 
another person to use in their own address book software.
What is the Contacts App?
Contacts is your digital address book. Use it to 
store friends’, family and colleagues’ addresses, 
email addresses, phone numbers and more.
49
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
All About the Contacts App
www.ebook3000.com

Notes is a very simple app, but incredibly useful. Use it to jot down anything, anywhere, 
at any time. With the latest version, you can even add photos and format the text.
All About the 
Notes App
Using Notes
Notes doesn’t just work like a notepad, it looks like one too! 
Here’s how to get the most out of it.
Open Notes and tap the ‘plus’ symbol to add a new 
note, then tap the page to open the keyboard and 
begin typing. All your existing notes appear as a list on the left of 
the screen in the order in which they were created, with the most 
recent at the top.
Tap a note to read or edit it, or scroll through your 
notes using the arrow buttons. Notice that above 
the notes list is a text field. Enter keywords in here to quickly 
search for key words. Finally to delete a note, open it and tap the 
bin icon or swipe it left in the list and tap the Delete button.
Step 2
Step 1
Step 1
Understanding the New 
Notes App Made Easy
We’ve highlighted the key features of this application
to help you better understand how it works.
This is a list of all the notes 
currently stored on your 
device, or on your iCloud. 
Tap on one to open it.
Tap the dustbin to 
delete the currently 
open note, or Edit to 
delete or move 
several notes at once.
The new Notes app adds lots 
more features, accessed using 
the buttons above the keyboard 
including a sketch tool
Undo, Make Checklist 
and Formatting facilities 
are available directly 
from the keyboard’s 
suggestion bar.
The new iOS 9 Notes app is 
better at handling 
attachments. You can even 
take a photograph from 
within the app.
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
50

The iPad comes with a fantastic built-in dictionary that can be 
accessed from the majority of apps that use the keyboard.
Using the Built-in Dictionary
The Auto-Correct Feature
The extremely useful Auto-Correction and Check Spelling features 
make your Notes and writing that little bit easier.
When you’re inputting your text and require access 
to the dictionary to look up a word, press and hold 
on this word until it is completely highlighted. This brings up a 
pop-up menu. 
First of all, open the iPad’s Settings app. Now tap on 
the General link in the left-hand column, then tap 
on the Keyboard link from the main pane as shown here.
Now tap on the Define link to bring up the 
dictionary option. To select a definition, tap it to be 
taken to the dictionary of your choice to see the full definition for 
the word in question.
From this screen make sure that the Auto-Correction 
and Check Spelling sliders are set to the On position, 
then return to the Notes application and open up. Please note that 
these features also work on other apps.
You can download additional dictionaries by tapping 
the Manage link from the bottom left of the 
dictionary window. Here you can add various dictionaries from a 
wide array of different languages and locations by tapping the 
cloud link to the right of each one.
When typing in the Notes app, or in any other app 
that requires keyboard input, if you make a spelling 
mistake the iPad either automatically corrects it or highlights it with 
a red line. Tap this word to bring up suggested replacements.
Step 1
Step 1
Step 2
Step 2
Step 3
Step 3
What is the Notes App?
Notes is an extremely useful digital 
jotter which can be synced with 
your Mac and iPhone using iCloud.
51
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
All About the Notes App
www.ebook3000.com

If your Notes app is not currently showing a list of folders in the 
left-hand sidebar, tap the chevron in the top left corner to see 
them. From here, you can tap on any of the folders to see all the 
notes contained in that particular folder.
To add a new folder, tap New Folder at the foot of the sidebar. 
You can then create a folder on your iCloud, or on your iPad. 
Folders (and their notes) on your iCloud are synced between 
Apple devices, while those on your iPad are only stored locally.
You can call a folder anything you like. After creating a folder, if 
you decide you no longer want it, you can delete it by swiping it 
left on the Folders sidebar. A window asks whether you want to 
delete just the folder, moving its contents to the main Notes 
folder, or to delete the folder and the notes within it.
Using Folders in Notes
You can arrange your notes into folders. You might 
have one for work and one for home, for example. 
Take a look at the new keyboard. Icons representing 
many of the new feature icons introduced with iOS 
9 are shown to the right and left of the predictive text options 
atop the virtual keys, as you can see here. 
To use the new features, iCloud-synced notes created 
in earlier versions of iOS must be upgraded. To do 
this, tap the chevron in the top left corner to get the Folders list, then 
tap Upgrade in the top right corner of this column. Upgraded notes 
can only be viewed in iOS 9 or Mac OS X El Capitan.
To create a checklist in Notes, first type what it is 
you want to make into a list in the usual way. Then 
select the text you wish to turn into the list, as shown here. It 
doesn’t have to be the entire note; you can leave a headline if you 
wish, or make a list within a note.
Notes’ New iOS 9 Features
The new operating system has brought a wealth of features to the 
Notes app. Here’s how to get the most from them.
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
52

Tap the middle icon on the left of the suggestion 
bar; the circle with a tick in it. The selected text is 
turned into a checklist, with each line prefixed with an empty, 
circular icon. Tap one and a tick appears within the circle.
Tap on the Camera icon and you get the chance to add 
a photograph or video to your note. You can pick a 
picture from your existing photo library, or you can tap Take a Photo or 
Video to use the camera, taking pictures directly from the Notes app.
Highlight a piece of text and tap the next icon, the 
one showing the capital and lower-case letter ‘A’. A 
pop-up window appears, showing you various formatting options. 
You can turn the text into a title, heading, a bulleted list, a dashed 
list or a numbered list.
There’s also a sketch facility in Notes. It gives you 
pen, pencil and felt tip nibs, an eraser, undo/redo 
icons, a large range of colours and even a virtual ruler. It’s not 
terribly sophisticated, but it might  
well prove useful.
You can still tap and hold on that text to get bold, 
italic and underline options by tapping ‘BIU’ in the 
menu. You can combine formatting features too. Here we have 
turned the text into a title, then underlined it.
You can share directly to Notes from other apps. For 
example, in the Safari app, to share a link to a 
website, simply tap the Share button, choose Notes from the 
pop-up menu and the link (with a preview) is added to a new or 
existing note.
Step 4
Step 5
Step 6
Step 7
Step 8
Step 9
53
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
All About the Notes App
www.ebook3000.com

With the iPad’s Calendar software you never need miss an appointment. You can organise 
your entire life, set recurring events, share your calendars, create alarmed events and more.
All About the 
Calendar App
Exploring the Calendar App
Calendar is very versatile. Let’s look at the many uses of the app, 
and how to get the most from it.
Tap the Calendar icon to open the application and 
you will find yourself taken directly to today’s page.
By tapping the Calendars link at the foot of the 
screen you’ll bring up a new box showing a list of 
all your synced calendars.
Step 1
Step 2
Understanding the 
Calendar App Made Easy
We’ve highlighted the key features of this application
to help you understand better how it works.
Select your current 
view point by 
simply tapping any 
of these options.
This is your visual 
timeline.
Any events linked 
to the selected 
date will appear 
in this area.
View events here, 
having clicked the “+” 
icon and entered the  
required information. 
Choose which items you 
wish to see displayed 
on your Calendar via 
this menu link. 
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
54

You can go back and activate or deactivate calendars 
at any time by tapping the Calendars link at the 
bottom of the screen. The pop-up window also lets you show all 
calendars by tapping the link at the top. There’s an On/Off switch 
that lets you show or hide events you’ve declined to attend too.
If you choose to receive an alert, you can determine 
how long in advance you want to it to occur. You 
can also enter any notes or details in the bottom field. When all 
details are entered, tap Done.
To edit your calendar list, tap Edit on the pop-up 
window, then the calendar you wish to edit. 
Alternatively, tap the ‘i’ icon next to the listed calendar. Here you 
can change the calendar’s name, share it, change its colour, choose 
whether to receive notifications for it and opt to make it public. 
There’s a link at the foot of the window to delete it altogether too.
To edit an event, tap the event and then tap the Edit 
button that appears at the top-right of the screen. 
From here you can tap on any of the fields to change the details.
To turn different calendars on and off, just tap on 
them. Active calendars have a tick next to them. Tap 
Done at any time to enter the main calendar view, where you’ll 
find events from all active calendars displayed.
To add an event, tap the ‘+’ symbol to the top-right 
of the screen. Enter a title and location for the event 
in the field provided, choose a start and end date and time, set 
whether the event is to repeat either daily, weekly, every two 
weeks, monthly or yearly, and decide whether you want to be 
alerted in advance.
Step 3
Step 4
Step 5
Step 6
Step 7
Step 8
What is the Calendar App?
With Calendar you can store your plans and 
appointments on your iPad and get it to send 
you alarms to remind you of upcoming events.
55
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
All About the Calendar App
www.ebook3000.com

To delete an event tap it, tap the Edit button, then 
tap the red Delete Event button at the bottom of 
the screen. You’re prompted to Delete Event or Cancel.
To search for specific events, tap the search field at 
the top of the main screen. You can search for titles, 
locations or keywords that appear in the event description.
As you type, matching events appear automatically, 
allowing you to open the appropriate one without 
having to type in the whole name or description.
Syncing Calendars with  
Desktop Apps
To sync the calendar on your tablet with other 
calendars on your computer via iTunes, connect your 
iPad to your computer and choose iPad Info on the desktop app.
To sync calendars over the air you’ll need to turn 
Calendars on in your Google, Yahoo!  or Microsoft 
Exchange accounts.
Don’t forget you can sync your iPad’s Calendar app 
with your Mac or another iOS device that’s linked 
with the same iCloud account simply by switching on this option in 
Settings > iCloud.
In this section, we look at how you can merge your iPad’s calendars 
with those you’ve set up on your desktop computer.
Step 9
Step 10
Step 11
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
56

Inviting Contacts to an Event
Open the Settings app and select iCloud. From 
these options make sure that the Calendar slider is 
set to the On position or this guide won’t work.
You can add a location by tapping the Location 
field, and then typing in the address of where the 
calendar event will take place. A postcode is sufficient.
Now scroll down to the Invitees link at the bottom 
of the Event fields, and tap on it to bring up a 
pop-up. Tap ‘+’ to select your invitees from your Contacts. Add as 
many as you like, then tap Done.
They are now sent a message about the event, and 
can confirm they are coming. The event is added to 
their Calendar app.
Open the Calendar app and tap on the ‘+’ icon on 
the top-right corner and input the information you 
require about the event using the keyboard.
Remember you’re sharing this with others, so you 
need to be quite specific regarding the information 
you input here for their reference.
You can use Calendar to invite friends and family from your 
Contacts app to an event too. This guide teaches you how.
Step 4
Step 5
Step 3
Step 6
Step 2
Step 1
57
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
All About the Calendar App
www.ebook3000.com

Understanding the  
Camera App Made Easy
We’ve highlighted the key features of this application
to help you better understand how it works.
The latest generation of iPads come with a feature laden 5MP, 8MP or  
12MP iSight Camera, depending on which model you opt for. Smile please!
All About the 
iPad’s Cameras
The front-facing camera on the iPad is known as the FaceTime 
Camera. It’s found in the centre of the top of the bezel, directly 
opposite the Home button. It’s for selfies and FaceTime chats, and 
can take 1.2MP photos and record 720p HD video.
The iPad’s rear-facing camera, known as the iSight Camera, is more 
powerful than the front facing one. It can take either 5MP, 8MP or 
12MP photos, depending on which model you have, and record 
1080p video. Its five element lens boasts autofocus and a hybrid IR 
filter. It’s positioned in the top right corner of the iPad, assuming 
that your tablet is held with the screen facing yourself.
Tap here to switch
between the front and 
rear mounted cameras.
Use this slider to switch 
between the photo and 
video camera settings.
Tap here to be taken
directly to your photo 
and video collection in 
the Photos app.
This is the main
viewing window, 
what you see here 
will be your photo 
or video.
The FaceTime Camera
The iSight Camera
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
58

The iPad’s camera is one of its most important features. In this guide we take you through the basics of the iPad’s camera, from 
taking photographs and video clips to adding real-time effects and other features.
Capturing Still Photographs and Video
Tap the Camera icon. To flip between the front and 
back cameras, tap the icon of a camera with arrows 
around it at the upper-right of the screen.
To switch between video and camera modes, move 
the slider on the right, moving between Time-lapse, 
Video, Photo, Square and Pano. 
With regular camera selected as default, you can 
access zoom control using two fingers: pinch apart 
to zoom in and pinch together to zoom out.
To take a photo, tap the white circle button at the right 
of the screen. Tap the screen to bring up the brightness 
adjustment, where brightness is altered by sliding up and down.
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
Opening the Camera App from the Lock Screen
If your iPad is currently locked, there’s an easy way to get to the Camera app so you never have to miss a shot.
Step 1: When your iPad is on lock screen, there’s a camera icon 
in the bottom right corner. This is a shortcut that lets you get 
straight to the Camera app without unlocking your iPad. Just 
put your finger on the icon and flick it up.
Step 2: After taking pictures, you can review them by tapping 
the preview in the bottom right corner, but only the shots 
you’ve taken during this session. If you want to go back and 
look at other pictures, you must unlock your iPad first.
About the iPad’s Cameras
The iPad’s front-facing camera (that is, on the same 
side of the iPad as the screen) is called the FaceTime 
camera. The one on the rear is the iSight camera.
59
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
All About the iPad’s Cameras
www.ebook3000.com

A preview of the last photo or video you took is 
displayed at the bottom-left of the screen. Tap it to 
see how it came out. To return to the camera view, tap Done. 
To record a video ensure that the slider selector on 
the right of the screen is moved to video. Press the 
red record button and the camera will start recording video.
While recording, a timer will appear at the top of 
the screen. When you have captured your video 
footage, tap the red shutter button on the right for a second time.
Hold your iPad steady as you follow the line on the 
screen, and the iPad takes a series of images, and 
then pastes them all together for a continuous, long picture. It’s 
great for photographing landscape scenes.
Step 5
Step 6
Step 7
Step 10
The next option available when scrolling the slider is 
the Time-lapse feature. Tap the shutter and you will 
take frame-long videos at set time intervals. This is used to show 
the passing of time.
The Pano option describes the panoramic camera 
feature. By pressing the shutter and moving the 
iPad along the onscreen marker you can take an amazing 
horizontal image. 
Step 8
Step 9
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
60

Next to this link is the Self Timer option, which 
can be set to either Off, 3 seconds’ Delay or 10 
seconds’ Delay. This allows you to put down your iPad and get  
in the photo too
For additional features you will need to return to the 
Settings app. From this link select Photos & Camera; 
and then switch on the Grid Mode to access facilities that will 
assist you in your composition.
 To turn off any of these features that you have 
added to the iPad’s Camera, you will need to 
leave the app, return to the Settings app and move the slider  
to the Off position.
Step 14
Step 15
Step 16
The Square photo option is best suited for taking a 
single image that will be used as an ID image for a 
passport, driving licence or a web avatar.
Notice the HDR options to the top-right of the screen. 
You can choose to set them to either Auto, On or Off. 
If set to On or Auto, an icon will appear above the shutter. 
‘HDR’ stands for ‘High Dynamic Range’, and it works 
by taking a series of photos in rapid succession at a 
variety of exposures. These are then combined into a single image, 
which is well detailed in both light areas and in the shadows.
Step 11
Step 12
Step 13
61
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
All About the iPad’s Cameras
www.ebook3000.com

Using the Photos Application 
This is where all the photographs and videos you take are stored. In this guide we’ll show you how to use and organise them,  
and also how to edit your photographs to make them look really impressive.
This application is where you can organise and edit all the photos and videos you’ve 
taken, as well as images downloaded from the web. It’s amazing what you can do.
All About the 
Photos App
Tap Photos to open your photo and video library. As 
you tap any photo or video to view it, it will open in 
full screen mode.
 Tap any picture or video to view it, or to go to the 
next or previous photo or video in your library, simply 
swipe your finger across the screen to the left or right respectively. 
To zoom in on a picture, just spread your fingers. 
When zoomed in you can move the picture around 
by dragging it with your finger to view different parts of the pic.
 To view any video you have opened, simply tap the 
play button located in the middle of the screen. To 
pause the video, tap the icon found in the top-right corner. 
Step 1
Step 3
Step 2
Step 4
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
62

To delete any photo or video, open it and tap the bin 
icon. You will need to confirm your intent before the 
file is deleted. 
Now select the images you wish to group together. 
When complete, tap Done on the top bar and these 
images will automatically be added to your new album.
To share any photo or video, open it, then tap  
the arrow-in-a-box button to bring up your  
sharing options. 
When you return to the Albums link you will see 
your new addition at the bottom of the page. 
To organise your photos into new custom albums, 
tap the Albums link from the bottom of the screen, 
followed by the + icon found in the top-left of the screen.
To delete a custom folder, tap the Edit button 
located in the top-right corner of the screen, and 
then tap the black circle icon containing the ‘x’ and confirm you 
wish to delete as you can see here. 
Step 5
Step 8
Step 6
Step 9
Step 7
Step 10
What is the Photos App?
Photos is for managing and organising your 
digital photo collection and for editing and 
correcting individual photographs.
63
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
All About the Photos App
www.ebook3000.com

Editing Techniques Made Easy
On other similar devices, if you wanted to edit your photographs you would need to download an additional application. 
Thankfully Apple has packed the iPad with a photo editing suite directly within the Photos app.
Rotational Controls
Using Auto Enhance
Applying a Filter 
Cropping Your Image
The present rotation tool found to the left of the Reset button will 
rotate your selected image through four 90 degree motions. The 
second option enables you to quickly resize the image by selecting 
one of a range of dimensions (you can move the image 
independently to focus on the subject). 
Open the Photos app and select the image you wish to edit from 
the camera roll. To bring up the key editing tools press the Edit 
button in the upper right corner. The first icon (reading top to 
bottom) on this scrolling bar is the Auto Enhance tool, which will 
adjust current levels to their optimum settings. 
Step 3
Step 1
The next feature is the Filter tool, which is identified by the three 
merging circles icon. It enables you to add a colour filter to your 
choice of image. To apply any of these nine preset filters simply 
scroll through them and tap the one you wish to use and it will be 
automatically applied to your chosen image. To finish tap Done. 
The second icon on the bottom bar is the crop tool, which enables 
you to resize and reposition the composition of an image. By 
using the dial below the image you can rotate the image, 
alternatively you can rotate it or resize it by using the present 
options to the left of the Cancel button to the lower-right. 
Step 4
Step 2
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
64

Reverting to Original
Using Smart Adjustment
You will now be given a series of options which are used to adjust 
key levels of your image, by using the slider to manually adjust the 
levels to your preference. When you are finished tap Done. NOTE: 
Any of the changes mentioned can be undone by tapping the 
Revert button.
Step 2: These suggestions break down your files into quick 
categories; simply tap the one that suits your search. You can 
perform a specific search by tapping the search bar and 
entering your search term using the keyboard. The results will 
appear on-screen beneath the search bar.
The final icon, the Smart Adjustment tool, offers you a series of 
options to tweak and adjust Light, Colour and Black & White 
aspects of your images. Select the area you wish to adjust from 
the three main options by tapping the arrow icon located beside 
each of the these options. 
Step 1: Open the Photos app and then tap on the magnifying 
glass (Search) icon located at the top of the screen to the left of 
the Select button, to begin the search process. Having tapped 
the search bar, enter your search parameters via the keyboard 
and you will instantly be presented with smart suggestions.
Step 6
Step 5
Finding an image or video from the Photos App collection gets harder the more you use your camera. 
Here we will show you how to dramatically speed up the process. 
Searching the Photos App 
65
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
All About the Photos App
www.ebook3000.com

Open the Settings app and select the iCloud link 
from the main listings. Then scroll down until you 
reach the Photos link; tap it and activate the iCloud Photo Library 
slider to the On (green) position.
Once you have activated the iCloud Photo Library, 
you will automatically upload your entire photo and 
video library to the iCloud. This may take some time if you have a 
lot of images and videos, or videos that are rather long.  
You also have the option to Optimise iPhone Storage 
or Download and Keep Originals. The former 
reduces the size of the files on your iPad and keeps the original in 
the iCloud; the latter stores your originals in both locations. 
When you’ve activated iCloud Photo Library, you can 
access your photos from any device with a web 
browser. Just go to  http://www.icloud.com, log on with your Apple 
ID and open the Photos online app.
Step 1
Step 3
Step 2
Step 4
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
66
Setting Up the iCloud Photo Library
This short guide will take you through the initial stages of setting up access to the iCloud Photo Library,  
so you are constantly logged in directly from your iPad.
The iCloud Photo Library enables you to share your photos and videos across all of your Apple 
devices, and the iCloud too, keeping your files safe and available across your entire network. 
All About the  
iCloud Photo Library

Using the iCloud Photo Library
When you’ve activated the iCloud Photo Library, whatever you do 
in the Photos app is mirrored in iCloud.
If you choose to reorganise or rename your Photo 
Albums, the next time you connect to the iCloud 
these changes will be automatically made to your entire Photo 
Library too.
Edit any of your images and these edits will be 
applied to your iCloud Photo Library; these edits can 
also be removed from their iCloud-based versions too. 
If you accidentally delete one or more files from 
your iPad, these images will remain on the iCloud 
Photo Library, from where they can be restored. 
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
What is the iCloud Photo Library?
Apple’s iCloud Photo Library is a free service that 
lets you synchronise your photographs across all 
your Apple devices.
67
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
All About the iCloud Photo Library
Restoring Deleted Photography
If you delete a photo accidentally, you can restore it to your 
iPad for a limited 30-day time period.
Step 1: If you have searched your Photo app for images 
and can’t find them, or if you have simply tapped the wrong 
button and deleted them by mistake, don’t panic. 
Step 2: Tap the Albums link at the bottom of the screen, 
and scroll to the bottom of the list to find the Recently 
Deleted album. Tap the icon to open this folder and 
explore the contents. 
Step 3: Find the file you want and tap the Select button 
in the top-right. Tap the image/video, and then tap and 
confirm the Recover link in the lower-left corner. The file 
will be returned to the main app. 
www.ebook3000.com

With the latest version of the Maps application, Apple has produced a navigation tool  
to rival the best GPS route planning tools currently on the market.
All About the  
Maps App
To find your current location, tap the button with an 
arrow in it at the bottom left of the screen. To 
determine the direction you’re facing, tap it a second time. To 
search for a location, type the address, postcode/zip code or road 
name into the search field at the top of the screen. If there’s more 
than one match you get a list. Tap on the correct one to find it.
Finding Places with Maps
To get information on a location you’ve selected, 
tap the blue information button next to its name. 
From the box that pops up, you can get directions, bookmark the 
location or assign the location to a contact.
Here’s how to find local services and businesses, such as the 
nearest post office or pizza restaurant, using Maps.
Step 1
Step 2
Understanding the  
Maps App Made Easy
We’ve highlighted the key features of this application
to help you better understand how it works.
Tap this text field here 
to initiate a search.
Here you get a list of 
previous searches, 
favourite locations and 
dropped pins. As you 
type in the search field, 
this list is narrowed to 
possible matches.
This icon zooms you in 
to your current 
location, wherever you 
are on the map.
Local services and 
features are 
grouped into 
categories now. Tap 
on one of these for 
a sub-group, then 
tap on a sub-group 
for suggested 
places of interest.
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
68

To change the view, tap the “i” icon at the 
bottom-right of the screen. You can then select 
from Standard, Satellite which displays a photographic map or 
Hybrid which displays the photographic map with street and town 
names overlaid onto it.
Search for a business by entering a name or type, 
(for example, ‘hairdressers’), into the search field. 
Pins appear on the map. For directions and contact numbers tap a 
pin, and then tap on the name of the location that pops up above 
it. You can zoom in and out at any time by pinching the screen. To 
move around the maps, swipe with your finger in any direction.
To get directions, tap the Directions button and 
enter a start point and destination. Select the mode 
of transport on the next screen. Alternatively, select any location 
currently pinned, tap the blue information button next to the 
name, and select ‘directions to’ or ‘directions from’. You can also 
tap the small car icon next to the name to see a route.
Using Route Planning
Maps will quickly calculate the best route, based on 
the mode of transport you chose, and display it on 
the map marked as a blue line. The total distance, and estimated 
travel time will be displayed at the bottom of the screen. 
If there are alternative routes available, these will 
also be displayed as lighter blue lines. You can 
switch between routes by tapping one of these light blue lines. 
Distance and travel time will update for each route selected. 
You can view a written step-by-step breakdown of 
the route by tapping the small three-line icon that’s 
found above the information icon at the bottom-right of the 
screen. Tap the icon again to close this list of directions. 
Why buy a separate sat-nav for your car when you’ve got an iPad, with its in-built GPS, and the Maps app? You can use Maps to 
find the best route from A to B, whether driving or walking, and have it track your progress as you go.
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 3
Step 4
Step 4
What is the Maps App?
You can turn your iPad into a very powerful 
sat-nav with Maps, as well as planning your 
routes and viewing a map in 3D.
69
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
All About the Maps App
www.ebook3000.com

Traffic Information
You can get traffic information at any time by tapping or the information icon – an 
‘i’ inside a circle – in the bottom-right corner. Tap Show Traffic and current conditions 
will be displayed on main roads. Red means the road is very busy and green means 
traffic is flowing smoothly. You can turn traffic information off at any time by 
tapping the page button then tapping Hide Traffic. When traffic information is 
turned on, you will also see small workman signs at various places. This means that 
there are scheduled roadworks happening in those locations. Tap any of the 
workman icons and then tap the information icon to get more details, including 
possible length of delays and how long the works will continue. 
Find your destination and select a route using the 
guides shown on the preceding pages (Finding Places 
with Maps and Route Planning). When you are happy with your 
chosen route, tap the blue Start button at the bottom. 
Step 1
The map will automatically zoom in at the start of your 
route and a large motorway-style sign will appear at 
the top of the map screen. These show the distance to the next 
change of direction, warn of roundabouts, etc. 
Step 2
As you travel, instructions scroll across the top of the 
screen. As each new instruction scrolls into view, 
spoken instructions are played. These can only be turned off using the 
main volume controls.
Step 3
You can scan through your route by scrolling the 
instruction signs manually. As you do this, the 
camera will also scroll along the route to show you the change of 
direction, roundabouts, etc. 
Step 4
Using the Turn-by-Turn Navigation Feature
What do you do if you get lost? Look for road signs? Ask for directions? With Maps, there’s another way. You can plan your route 
from your present location to your destination, with step by step directions.
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
70

You can zoom in on the map at any time, even whilst 
the turn-by-turn directions are being shown. To do 
this, simply double-tap anywhere along the route line. To zoom back 
out, you will need to use the pinch-to-zoom method. 
Step 5
You can also view an overview of the route at any 
time by tapping the word Overview button in the 
top-right corner of the screen. Whilst in overview, you can see a 
written list of directions by tapping List, at the foot of the screen. 
Step 6
Before you can properly view the maps in 3D, you 
need to switch to either Hybrid or Satellite view. In 
standard view the maps will still look flat. Tap the “i” icon. and select 
your view preference. 
Step 1
To now switch to 3D view, tap the 3D option found 
in the same menu. You will notice that the camera 
angle shifts when you do this. If you are zoomed out, you will 
hardly notice any difference. 
Step 2
Viewing Locations in 3D 
A great feature of your iPad’s Maps app is the ability to show areas in 3D. Although it’s not as useful for finding your way around, 
the third dimension really brings towns and cities to life. Here’s how to access and use it.
Zoom in to the map and you will start to see contours, 
hills and valleys rendered before your very eyes. The 
3D feature can slow things down if you are using a slow Wi-Fi or 3G 
connection, but not by much. 
Step 3
If you are viewing a large city that has rendered 3D 
buildings, you can change the camera angle to 
allow you to see the buildings better. When this is available, hold 
one finger still on the screen and drag a second finger around to 
change the perspective. 
Step 4
71
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
All About the Maps App
www.ebook3000.com

3D Buildings
The 3D feature of the new Maps app really comes alive 
when you are viewing a big city such as London or New 
York. When you are viewing a city, you can actually see 
buildings rising out of the map. You can zoom around Big 
Ben or fly up the side of the Empire State Building. It is 
probably impossible to extend this amazing feature to every 
building, but it would be a pretty impressive thing to see!
You can use the Maps app’s new Transport mode to 
plan a journey that uses more than one method of 
public transport, including buses, trains, short walks between stops 
and even ferries. First enter your start and end locations as usual.
Tap the estimated time at the bottom of the screen 
and a route using public transport is presented as 
shown. You can tap Start and get step-by-step instructions on getting 
from A to B, as you would walking or making a road journey.
Step 3 
Step 4
The New Public Transport Feature
With iOS 9, the Maps app gains a new Public Transport Mode to find your way around using trains, buses and even ferry services. It’s 
not yet available everywhere, but if your city is covered, it’s great. Let’s take a look at how it works.
If you tap on the name of a train or subway station, 
a pop-up showing its name appears. Tap on this and 
you’re shown a list of forthcoming departures from that station. 
This is great for planning your journey while, for example, in a taxi 
on the way to the train.
To access the public transport map, tap  
the ‘i’ icon in the bottom right corner of the maps 
screen to get the pop-up window as shown. Now tap the Transport 
button at the top of this window. Instead of concentrating on 
roads, it shows local public transport options.
Step 1 
Step 2
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
72

The way you search for nearby services in Maps has 
also had a revamp. Once again, start by tapping the 
search field at the top of the screen. But now you’re offered a series 
of categories such as Food, Fun, Health and Shopping, so you can 
make a more general search.
When looking for directions, having set up a location 
as a destination or a start point, the pop-up window 
offers new icons for Home, Work or Favourites. You can tap these 
icons to set that particular address, as found in your Contacts app, 
as one of these three options.
If you tap an icon but the address in question is not 
in your Contacts app, a pop-up appears giving you 
the opportunity to add it. If you choose to do so, you’re taken to 
the Contacts app. When you’re done, you can get back to Maps by 
tapping the link in the top left corner.
Tap one of these icons and it’s sub-divided into 
more specific categories. When you’ve found the 
store or service provider you want, tap on it for more information. 
Stores that accept Apple Pay are identified by an icon like the  
one shown here.
One excellent feature of the new Maps app is that 
buildings such as subway stations have been 
carefully surveyed, so Maps shows not only their location, but also 
all the entrances and exits to that station. This could save valuable 
time when catching a train.
The new Transport service isn’t available everywhere 
yet, but coverage will expand, with cities like 
London, San Francisco, New York, Berlin, Toronto and around 300 
cities in China already covered. No doubt more towns and cities will 
be added over time. 
Step 6 
Step 1 
Step 2 
Step 5
Step 8
Step 7
Set Contacts for Home, Work and Favourites
Maps has gained another feature that makes life easier when using your iPad. Now you can set up addresses stored in your Contacts 
app as your home address, work address or a favourite directly from the Maps app. Here’s how.
73
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
All About the Maps App
www.ebook3000.com

The Music app is your gateway to Apple Music, a new service that lets you stream sounds from 
a library of over 30 million songs for a set monthly fee. Here’s how to sign up for and use it.
The Music App and 
Apple Music
Understanding the Music 
App Made Easy
We’ve highlighted the key features of this application
to help you better understand how it works.
Your music collection 
is displayed via cover 
art in this area.
Cycle through these 
options to change how 
your collection is viewed.
The track listing of 
the currently selected 
album is shown here.
Choose a plan. An individual membership is 
£9.99/$9.99, or a family membership (up to six 
members) is £14.99/$14.99. Family memberships use Apple’s 
Family Sharing. You won’t be charged for the first three months.
If you’re not already signed into iTunes with your 
Apple ID, you must do so now. You then have to 
verify your payment details. Again, follow the on-screen 
instructions and do so, then confirm your purchase as requested.
When you first open the iPad’s new Music app (or tap 
the For You icon), you get this screen. If you’re already 
a member of Apple Music, tap the link at the foot of the screen to 
log in. Otherwise, tap the red button to begin the sign-up. Or go To 
My Music to play what’s already stored on your iPad.
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
74

Getting Started with Apple Music
Now you’ve set up your Apple Music account, it’s time to get 
started and listen to your favourite sounds. 
Tap the For You icon, illustrated with a heart, to get to a screen 
offering suggestions based on the choices you made while setting 
up Apple Music. These suggestions are playlists and albums. Tap 
one, then choose a track or an album to play. The music is 
streamed to your iPad.
On the For You screen, to reset the suggestions and load some 
more options, simply pull down on the screen. A spinner at the top 
of the screen shows they’re being reloaded. The first set of 
suggestions are still there – just scroll the screen up and down to 
cycle through them all.
After choosing an album or a playlist, tap the play button in the 
corner of the album sleeve or playlist graphic to play the tracks in 
order. Tap Shuffle to play them in a random order. Tap the heart 
icon under the title to identify it as a favourite of yours. This 
improves later suggestions.
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
You then see this screen, where you can identify 
musical genres you like. Tap on the red dot 
representing your favourite types of music. Tap twice for genres you 
especially like. When you’re done, click Next, and repeat the process 
for bands and artists as offered. When you’re finished, tap Done.
If you want to register a unique Apple Music 
nickname, first tap the silhouette icon in the top left 
to get to your account. Tap on your own name at the top of this 
screen, and on the next screen, tap Edit and enter the nickname of 
your choice. When finished, tap Done.
If you wish to switch off the recurring billing, so you 
won’t be automatically charged at the end of your 
three-month trial, open Apple Music, and tap the silhouette icon 
(top-left) to get your account details. Tap View Apple ID, and under 
subscriptions, tap Manage. You can then turn Automatic Renewal off.
Step 4
Step 5
Step 6
What is Apple Music?
Instead of storing your music on your iPad, 
Apple Music lets you stream it over the Internet. 
Listen to anything you like for a set monthly fee.
75
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
The Music App and Apple Music
www.ebook3000.com

The ubiquitous Share button is never far away. Tap it 
and you’re given the chance to share a link by 
AirDrop, Message, Twitter, Facebook, Mail and more. Tap the 
three-dots icon to the right of individual tracks for an option to 
share a single track in this way too.
Tap the Connect icon at the bottom of the screen, 
and you can select artists to follow, based on 
suggestions made by the app. You can also see who you’re already 
following. This gives easy access to the artist’s back catalogue, and 
you can add comments too, where available.
To see what’s new on Apple Music, tap the 
star-shaped New icon at the foot of the screen. You 
can narrow down what’s offered by tapping ‘All Genres’ at the 
top, and choosing a specific category. When you find something 
you like, play it in the same way you did with your suggestions.
Tap the Radio icon to access Apple Music’s range of 
radio stations. This includes the new Beats 1 station, 
which is exclusive to the service. It’s available worldwide, and 
broadcasts 24/7. Scroll down the screen to see music stations 
offered according to genres.
Tapping the magnifying glass in the top-right corner 
gives you the chance to search for tracks, albums 
and artists. You can choose to search either Apple Music, that is, 
Apple’s online library, or your own music which you’ve stored on 
your iPhone. Predictive suggestions are offered.
You can add songs and albums from Apple Music to 
your own music library. To add an album, tap the ‘+’ 
icon next to the album sleeve. It becomes a tick, and is then 
available in My Music. You may be asked to switch on iCloud 
Music Library first - do so, by tapping Settings in the pop-up.
Step 4
Step 7
Step 5
Step 8
Step 6
Step 9
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
76

You can also download music from Apple Music to 
your iPhone, to listen to offline. Just tap the 
three-dots icon next to the album or track you want to download, 
and from the pop-up menu, select Make Available Offline. It’s then 
downloaded to your My Music library. 
Throughout the app, the mini-player – a strip that 
sits above the icons at the foot of the screen – is 
available when something’s playing. This offers a play/pause icon, 
track details and the three-dot options icon. Tap on the mini-player 
to open the full-sized play screen, as shown here.
The tracks are downloaded to your iPad as shown. 
To remove them, repeat Step 10 but tap Remove 
From Downloads in the menu. Tracks you download in this way are 
tied to your Apple Music account. You don’t pay for them, but if 
your Apple Music subscription lapses, they’re lost.
To create a playlist, in My Music, tap Playlists at the 
foot of the screen. Tap New, then add a title, and if 
you wish, add a picture by tapping the camera icon. You can then 
add songs from your library by tapping the Add Songs link, then 
tapping the plus sign next to tracks you want to add.
Your own music, whether ripped from your CD 
collection or bought from the iTunes Store, is found 
in the My Music section. Tap the icon at the bottom of the screen 
to access it. It’s shown according to artists, in alphabetical order. 
Tap on an artist and you’re shown the albums and tracks.
This is the AirPlay icon. Wherever you see it in the 
Music app, you can tap it to stream your music to 
an AirPlay-compatible device such as Apple TV or AirPlay speakers. 
See the manufacturer’s instructions for the device in question for 
more information.
Step 10
Step 13
Step 11
Step 14
Step 12
Step 15
77
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
The Music App and Apple Music
www.ebook3000.com

FaceTime gives you real-time video calling. With it you can communicate face-to-face 
with anyone else who has FaceTime installed on their Mac, iPhone or iPad.
All About the 
FaceTime App
Understanding the 
FaceTime App Made Easy
We’ve highlighted the key features of this application
to help you better understand how it works.
You can check your 
camera and 
positioning via this 
small window.
To mute the 
sound simply tap 
here, to restore 
the sound tap 
here once again.
To end a FaceTime  
call just tap this  
button once.
To switch between 
the front-facing 
and rear camera 
tap here. 
This large area 
contains the view 
from your contact’s 
selected camera.
You can add contacts to your list and click on them 
to make a FaceTime call. You’ll need either a phone 
number or an email address. You can stay signed in and available 
to take FaceTime calls at all times. 
What Do I Need?
FaceTime offers video chat on all your Apple devices. To use FaceTime all 
you’ll need are an Apple ID, an Internet connection, and a contact who 
also has FaceTime on their Mac, iPhone, iPod or iPad.
The videophone has been a staple of sci-fi movies since the birth 
of the genre, but now it’s here with FaceTime.
Making a FaceTime Call
Step 1
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
78

Now select the contact from your list but instead of 
contacting them directly via their number, you press 
the FaceTime link displayed below their number. 
Step 2
Turning Off FaceTime
If you don’t want people contacting you unexpectedly, you 
can go into the Settings menu and then from this location 
you turn FaceTime off by switching the slider to the Off 
position, as shown here.
You may have to wait a moment until the call is 
answered and then the chat can begin.  
Notice you will appear in the small window, while your  
contact appears in full screen.
To end the call simply hit the large red End button 
at the bottom of the screen and you will be 
returned to the Contacts application.
Step 4
Step 3
The Do Not Disturb  
Mode Explained...
Step 1: If you don’t wish to be disturbed for a while, go to 
Settings and tap Do Not Disturb. Moving the slider marked 
Manual to the On position puts your iPad into Do Not 
Disturb mode. A moon icon appears in the top of the screen, 
and all incoming FaceTime calls are automatically rejected 
until you switch it off again.
Step 2: You can also schedule some Do Not Disturb time; 
flick the Scheduled switch, then set the hours for which 
you’d like the function to be active. You can also allow calls 
from certain groups to get through, and allow a call if the 
same person rings you a second time within three minutes.
What is the FaceTime App?
Video calls are no longer science fiction. With 
FaceTime, you can video chat with someone who’s 
also using an Apple device over the Internet.
79
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
All About the FaceTime App
www.ebook3000.com

The Podcasts app makes finding, listening to, watching and downloading podcasts easier 
than ever. There’s a wealth of interesting podcasts to choose from too.
When you first open the Podcasts app, you are 
greeted with the My Podcasts screen. To start 
choosing and subscribing to podcasts, tap the Featured link. 
If you are interested in downloading video or audio 
podcasts for your iPad you first need to boot the 
app. Thus from the Home screen on your iPad, select the Podcast 
application by tapping the icon. 
You will now see the Featured podcasts. These are 
divided into categories to make it easier to find your 
favourite podcasts, but also has a search feature for when you 
want to be more specific.
You can preview a podcast by tapping on the 
episode title whilst browsing. If you are previewing a 
Vodcast, a small video player will open from within the app itself.
Step 2
Step 1
Step 3
Step 4
All About the 
Podcasts App
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
80

To subscribe to a podcast, tap the Subscribe button 
in the information window. The app will switch  
back to the Library screen and you will then see your chosen  
podcast displayed in a pop-up window, as shown here. 
Subscribing to a podcast doesn’t mean the same as 
downloading a podcast. You can only listen to 
subscribed episodes when you have downloaded them using the 
download cloud link.
When you subscribe to a podcast it will automatically 
be added to your listings in the My Podcasts link. 
Simply tap the link to access your downloaded podcasts offline. 
To see a list of available episodes, open the 
podcast and then tap on the link. Using the control 
panel, you can play, skip to the next/previous episodes, tap on and 
adjust the volume.
From the Settings link shown here, you can control 
how new episodes are downloaded and even 
deleted after you have listened to them. New downloads are 
shown by a small red onscreen icon.
To share with a friend, tap on the podcast from  
your library. Tap the Share button in the upper-right 
corner, and choose how you’d like to share it from the  
options available including email, messages and social media.
Step 5
Step 6
Step 7
Step 8
Step 9
Step 10
What is the Podcasts App?
Podcasts are short audio shows shared 
over the Internet. The app makes it 
easy to find, subscribe to and listen.
81
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
All About the Podcasts App
www.ebook3000.com

All About the
iBooks App
iBooks is a fantastic way to buy and read books. It comes bundled with iOS 9, but is still 
available for free on the App Store if you’re running an older version of iOS.
Tap My Books at the foot of the screen to go to 
your library. Open a book by tapping on it. Tap on 
All Books at the top to view everything, only books or only PDFs. 
Tap the icon in the top left to switch to between list and cover 
view. To remove books, tap Select (top right), tap a book or books, 
then tap Delete. Books you bought but don’t have on your iPad 
are marked by a cloud icon. Tap it to download the book again; 
you won’t pay twice.
To buy books, open iBooks and tap one of the options 
at the foot of the screen to see Featured, Top Charts 
or Top Authors. Tapping Categories in the top left corner lets you 
filter the books by genre. Search for authors and titles using the 
search field. To buy a book, tap on it, then tap the price, then Buy 
Book. Tap Sample for a free taster. Sign into iTunes if requested.
Step 1
Step 2
Understanding the iBooks 
App Made Easy
We’ve highlighted the key features of this application
to help you better understand how it works.
Change the font 
size and page 
background 
colour, search for 
a word or page 
number or 
bookmark the 
current page.
See how far you are 
into your book and 
the current chapter 
here. You can move 
through the book by 
dragging the dot 
along the line.
Swipe left or right to turn 
forward or back a page.
Go to your 
Library, or use 
the three-line 
icon to view the 
contents page 
for the book 
you’re reading.
The title of 
your book is 
found here.
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
82

Reading Books
iBooks for Students
Adding PDFs
Syncing in iTunes
Having a Book Read to You
When in a book, turn the pages by tapping the 
right or left side of the screen. You can read in 
portrait or landscape mode, and iBooks remembers your place 
when you’re done. Tap anywhere on the screen to show or hide 
the controls. The slider at the bottom flicks through the pages and 
the ribbon (top-right) places a bookmark. Search is via the 
magnifying glass.
Tap the twin ‘A’ icon for settings controls to 
customise your pages. The top slider lets you set the 
brightness and with Auto-Night Theme on, it automatically 
switches to a white-on-black display when light is low. Scrolling 
View lets you scroll the text instead of turning the pages. The 
three-line icon in the top-right accesses the table of contents.
iBooks is great for students. In the Categories menu (tap 
Categories in the top-left), select Textbooks for a range of 
educational tomes. Many are packed with interactive features and 
videos that really set them apart from traditional books. You can 
highlight text or add notes by selecting a word or passage, then 
picking the option from the pop-up menu.
One of the best things about iBooks is you can copy PDFs to your 
iPad and read them in the app. It’s simple to do. Open iTunes on your 
computer, and connect your iPad. It appears listed under Devices in 
the left-hand sidebar of the iTunes window. If the sidebar isn’t there, 
go to the View drop-down menu at the top of the screen and select 
Show Sidebar. To copy a PDF to your iPad, simply drag it onto the 
iPad section in this sidebar. It’s then added to your iBooks library.
As iBooks is available for the Mac as well as iOS, you can use iTunes 
to sync your library between your devices. Connect your iPad to 
your computer and launch iTunes. Click on the iPad in the top bar, 
and choose Books from the sidebar. Check the Sync Books box to 
keep your library in sync between your computer and iOS devices.
The hard of hearing – or indeed, anybody – can have their iBooks 
read to them using a feature called VoiceOver. Go to Settings > 
General > Accessibility > VoiceOver.  Go back to Accessibility (tap 
once to highlight, then double-tap to go back) and tap Accessibility 
Shortcut. Select the VoiceOver option, which can then be switched 
on or off by triple-pressing the Home button. Not every book is 
VoiceOver compatible, though.
Step 1
Step 2
Now you’ve found yourself some books to read on your iPad, 
you’ll want to take a look at them in iBooks. Here’s how.
What is the iBooks App?
You can use your iPad as a versatile ebook 
reader using Apple’s iBooks app. Buy, read 
and manage ebooks direct from your tablet.
83
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
All About the iBooks App
www.ebook3000.com

By default, the world clock shows the time in several 
cities, including Cupertino (the home of Apple). You 
can either add your own time zones to the existing ones, or 
remove them and start from scratch. 
Step 1
To add a city to those already shown, tap the empty 
clock with the + in the middle of the face. An A-Z 
list will pop-up, allowing you to choose the city you want to add. 
You can also search for cities. 
Step 2
If you want to remove the existing cities, tap the 
Edit button in the top-left corner, then tap the
minus button next to those you want to remove. Tap Delete to 
confirm the action. You can also reorder the clocks by dragging 
them up and down using the three-lined icon to their right.
Step 3
On the large world map below the clock faces, you 
will see the locations of the cities you add. The time 
is shown on the map, as well as the temperature and current 
weather conditions. 
Step 4
Stopwatch is easy to use. The Start button starts the timer, 
which changes to a Stop button when the clock is counting. 
Each time you tap the Lap button, the lap time is displayed 
below the main stopwatch readout (which continues to 
count up). Reset returns it to 00:00:00.
The Stopwatch Feature
The Clock app does more than just tell the time. It’s also a great world clock, 
stopwatch, kitchen timer and alarm. Let’s see how to get the most from it.
All About the 
Clock App
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
84

Tap the Alarm tab at the bottom of the clock screen 
to start editing your alarms. To set a new alarm, tap 
the + button at the top-right of the screen. This opens an Add 
Alarm window as you can see here. 
Step 1
Setting Alarms
Use the two wheels to pick a time for the alarm to 
sound. You can also choose which days the alarm 
will play, the alarm sound you want, whether the alarm can be 
snoozed and what the alarm is called. 
Step 2
Your new alarm will be displayed at the top of the 
screen, as well as on the 24-hour display below. If 
you have more than one alarm set up, you can select each on this 
24-hour display. Just tap it to highlight, as shown.
Step 3
You can also alter the time and day the alarm will 
sound by touching and holding it on the 24-hour 
display. You can then drag it to whatever time and day you want. 
Or tap Edit in the top-left and manage or delete your alarms from 
this pop-up window. Tap an individual alarm for its settings, or the 
‘-‘ icon to its left to remove it.
Step 4
You can turn each alarm on or off independently by 
highlighting it and tapping the On/Off button. To 
remove or edit an alarm, tap Edit and either tap the time you want 
to change or tap the minus button to delete. 
Step 5
The Timer app can be set 
to count down from up to 
23 hrs and 59 mins. When 
it reaches zero an alarm 
sounds. You can change 
the alarm sound by 
clicking the Sounds button 
in the top-left corner. You 
can test any of the sounds 
available by tapping their 
name in the list.
Using the Timer Feature
The iPad’s Clock app also includes a handy alarm function, which is ideal if you need an alarm clock on holiday, for example, and 
only have your iPad. Here’s how you set an alarm, make it repeat, turn it on and off, and more.
What is the Clock App?
The Clock app offers more than just the time. 
You can also use it as a stopwatch or countdown 
timer or check on multiple time zones.
85
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
All About the Clock App
www.ebook3000.com

Understanding the Game 
Center App Made Easy
We’ve highlighted the key features of this application
to help you better understand how it works.
Opening a Game Center Account
Open Game Center and set up your account. You’ll need to come 
up with a unique handle for yourself that will be your Game 
Center ID. You can then add friends to your list using their Game 
Center handle or email address.
Finding Game Center-Compatible Games
You can search for all kinds of games on the App Store. However 
Game Center enables you to search specifically for Game Center 
supported games. Just tap Games at the foot of the screen, and 
look at the Recommended section. You’ll be taken to the App 
Store automatically where you can browse, read reviews and buy 
titles as normal.
This total shows you 
and other Game Center 
friends the number of 
games you have played.
Your total 
number of Game 
Center friends is 
shown here. 
These app links are 
recommended to your 
tastes, tap once to be 
taken to the App Store.
Customise your display 
by clicking any of these 
five options to focus on 
that key content.
This total shows the number 
of Achievements you have 
completed on your iPad. 
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
86
Playing games on your own is fun but let’s be honest – playing with and against 
friends is even better, and with this app you can do this any time you want.
All About the 
Game Center App

Tap the blank photo icon beside your username on the main 
screen. Either upload an existing photo or take one with the iPad 
camera. Take your picture and when you are happy with it, hit the 
Use button. The rest of your friends list can now view your new 
profile image.
Tap the Enter Status bubble next to your photo, and you’re given 
the chance to write a snappy message. Type it in using the 
on-screen keyboard, then tap Done. Your new status is displayed 
on your Profile screen, and is visible to all your friends.
If you know the email address or Game Center nickname of 
someone you want to friend, tap the Friends icon at the foot of 
the screen or the Friends bubble on your profile, and then tap the 
+ icon in the top-right corner of the left-hand column. Add the 
nickname or email of the person you want to friend, and add an 
optional message.
If any of your friends have challenged you to beat their scores or 
achievements, they appear under Challenges. You can make 
challenges yourself by tapping your scores or achievements. If 
you’re playing a turn-based game with a friend, and it’s your turn, 
this appears under Turns. Again, both of these pages can be 
accessed through the icons at the foot of the screen or the bubbles 
on your Profile page.
Open the Settings app and highlight Game Center in the left-hand 
column. From here you can opt to not allow invites from other 
players, or from players who are nearby. You can also find potential 
Game Center friends using your Facebook profile or Contacts app. 
Tap your Game Center name and you’re shown your profile 
settings, which you can also modify.
Tap on Friends at the bottom of the screen, or the Friends bubble 
on your Profile screen, and you’re shown a list of your friends and 
recommendations for people you might want to friend. To friend 
another Game Center user, tap their name in the left-hand 
column, then tap the Send Friend Request bubble.
Adding a Photo
Updating Your Status
Adding More Friends
Challenges and Turns
Settings
Friend Recommendations
What is the Game Center App?
If you use your iPad to play games, Game 
Center lets you challenge other gamers to 
beat your highest score.
87
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
All About the Game Center App
www.ebook3000.com

 Photo Booth is great fun, enabling you to add all kinds of crazy effects  
and distortions to photos in real time as you take them.
All About the 
Photo Booth App
Understanding the Photo 
Booth App Made Easy
We’ve highlighted the key features of this application
to help you better understand how it works.
The Thermal 
Camera offers 
an original look  
to your images. 
The Kaleidoscope 
option layers 
multiple images 
across the screen.
Use the Light Tunnel 
to add a real sense 
of movement to 
your image.
Tap any of the 
filters to be taken 
to a full-screen 
version with 
camera controls.
The Squeeze, Twirl and Stretch 
options distort your image in 
comical or horrible proportions.
First of all, open the app and angle your iPad so you 
can see yourself in the screen display. If you have a 
stand of some description for your iPad, it comes in very useful here.
As you can see, there are lots of effects on offer, as 
well as a ‘normal’ pic in the centre. Tap one to be 
shown this effect in full screen mode, as shown here.
Step 1
Step 2
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
88

To go back to the first screen, with the range of 
effects on offer, tap the three conjoined circles icon in 
the bottom-left corner of the screen.
To take a photo, tap the big white circle in the 
bottom-middle. Pictures snapped in Photo Booth are 
shown at the foot of the screen, above the controls, and are also 
added to your Photos app.
Some effects can be distorted by dragging your finger 
around the screen. When you get the look you want, 
remove your finger and the effect remains.
Tap on a photo in the bar at the bottom of the Photo 
Booth screen to open it. Using the Share icon, you 
can send it by Message and Mail, add it to Notes and more.
You can switch between the iPad’s front and rear 
cameras by tapping the camera icon in the 
bottom-right corner of the screen.
To delete a picture, tap the dustbin icon. If you 
delete it without leaving the Photo Booth app, it’s 
gone from everywhere. If you closed Photo Booth before deleting, 
it’s still in your Photos app.
Step 3
Step 6
Step 4
Step 7
Step 5
Step 8
What is the Photo Booth App?
Take photo and video selfies and add effects 
using the iPad’s versatile and amusing Photo 
Booth app. You can share them from the app too.
89
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
All About the Photo Booth App
www.ebook3000.com

When you first open the Videos app you will notice 
that it is empty, so your first port of call is to the 
Store link at the top-left to do a little shopping. Flip back to the 
Using iTunes feature for more details on purchasing movies. 
Step 1
Having downloaded your movies, return to the 
home screen and tap the Videos app. You will see 
your choice of downloads displayed in their home category, 
accessed from the links at the top of the screen.
You will notice that your Videos downloads are 
categorised in one of five areas: Films, TV 
Programmes, Music Videos, Home Videos and Shared. To start 
viewing one of your videos, tap the image and you will be taken to 
the main screen. Next, tap the Play icon in the top-right. 
Once you have started playback, you will have 
access to various controls. The volume is 
bottom-left, and the scroll bar at the top allows you to adjust your 
playback position (see Videos Playback Controls on the page 
opposite). Play/pause is located in the centre of the bottom bar.
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
The Videos App Explained
The Videos app is your one-stop shop for all of your big and small 
screen entertainment. Let’s learn how to use it.
With its amazingly sharp HD screen, the iPad is the perfect mobile platform for watching 
videos. It might well become your favourite place to watch movies and TV.
All About the 
Videos App
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
90

Subtitles (if available) can be toggled on or off, and 
additional languages selected by tapping the icon to 
the lower-right of the screen. From this icon you can also change 
the language of the feature, if other tracks are available.
If you are viewing a TV show which has multiple 
episodes, you can switch between them using the 
back and forth controls located next to the play/pause button. 
When you have finished watching you can return to the Videos 
app by tapping the Done button. 
Step 5
Step 6
Watch iPad Videos on a TV
You can connect your iPad to most modern TVs using the correct 
cable, available from your local Apple Store. Make sure you get the 
correct connector for your TV, and at the other end for your iPad. 
You can also use AirPlay if you’ve bought an Apple TV.
Sharing Videos
You can sync videos to your iPad from iCloud or iTunes. For iTunes, 
connect your iPad to your PC or Mac and open iTunes. If you’ve set 
it up to auto-sync, your videos copy across automatically; but if not, 
click on the Movies icon in the top-left, click and hold one of your 
movies and drag it onto the iPad icon in the sidebar that appears. 
For iCloud syncing you must open the iTunes and App Store link 
from the Settings app, and then move the slider for Music to the 
open position.
Videos Playback Controls
Having selected the video you wish to play as detailed previously, 
your feature will begin and will be displayed in widescreen mode, 
which is essentially the same effect as turning the iPad to 
landscape. This will display almost all videos better, taking 
advantage of the full screen. Touching the screen at any time 
during playback will bring up the progress slider at the top and the 
control panel near the bottom. You can skip through the video by 
moving the progress slider by dragging your finger along it. All 
controls will disappear again after a few seconds if not being used.
Renting Movies
You can rent movies in the iTunes 
store. New movies generally cost 
more to rent than older films. You 
need to let your chosen movie 
download fully before you watch it 
(no streaming), but this shouldn’t 
take long if you have a decent 
connection. All rented movies 
automatically delete themselves 
after a set amount of time. This time 
limit usually runs from the moment 
the movie starts to play, so make 
sure you have enough time to 
watch your rented movie before you 
download and play it.
What is the Videos App?
You can use the Videos app to enjoy movies 
on the move. It’s linked to the iTunes video 
store so you can buy them too.
91
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
All About the Videos App
www.ebook3000.com

Apps are the heart and soul of your iPad. Let’s take a look at how to find the apps 
you need and download them from the App Store.
All About the  
App Store App
Tap once on the App Store icon to enter 
the App Store. The are six ways to search 
for apps on the App Store, the most obvious being the 
search bar on the top right corner. To use this feature simply tap 
the search bar and enter your search parameters using the 
keyboard, and hit Search to see your results.
Step 1
To filter the apps by genre, tap Categories in the 
top-left corner of the screen and pick an option. Tap 
on an app to be taken to its front page, from where you can read 
a description, look at screenshots, read reviews, share it with a 
friend or buy it, whether for yourself or someone else.
Step 2
Understanding the App 
Store Made Easy
We’ve highlighted the key features of this application
to help you better understand how it works.
Search titles and 
app descriptions 
for the entire 
App Store via  
this link.
Focus your App Store 
search by selecting any 
of these categories.
In this area you will see 
the very latest apps that 
have been added to the 
App Store.
This window displays the 
latest recommended apps 
as chosen by Apple.
Tap any of these five options to be 
taken to that area of the App Store.
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
92

You can move about the App Store easily by  
using the search filters at the bottom of the  
screen or the Cancel button that appears at the top left of the 
screen when available.
To purchase an app, tap the button with the price in 
it (or GET if it’s a free app). If it’s a free app the 
button shows INSTALL, and for paid apps it changes to BUY NOW. 
Tap and you’re prompted to enter your Apple ID password. The 
app icon then appears on your home screen and installs.
Step 3
When the app is installed, the BUY NOW/INSTALL 
button changes to read OPEN. Tap here to launch 
the app. At the foot of the app’s front page you can find useful 
links taking you to the developer’s website, a list of in-app 
purchases for that app and other apps by the same developer, 
among other things.
Step 4
Tap the Share icon in the top-right corner of an 
app’s home page and you can post it to social 
media sites, mail or copy the link, gift it to a friend or add it to 
your Wish List. To review your Wish List, tap the three-line icon 
next to the search bar on the main App Store page.
Step 5
Tapping Search brings up a text field. Tap this to 
access the keyboard and enter keywords or a 
specific app title to search the entire app store. Search results start 
to appear automatically as you type and if you see the one you 
want you can tap it to go straight to the app’s screen.
Step 6
Step 7
To update apps select the final option in the 
bottom-right corner. Alternatively, head back to the 
Settings menu and then tap the iTunes & App Store link. From 
here, set the Updates option slider to the on position and your 
apps will update themselves.
Step 8
What is the App Store App?
The App Store app takes you to the online 
App Store, where you can buy and 
download new apps straight from your iPad.
93
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
All About the App Store App
www.ebook3000.com

Understanding the iTunes 
App Made Easy
We’ve highlighted the key features of this application
to help you better understand how it works.
The iTunes store is the place to go for all your musical, audio, video and podcast needs.  
You can search music by genre, artist, song title and album title.
All About the  
iTunes Store App
Buying Movies & Music
Click on Music or enter some keywords on the search field. Click on the 
matches and you’ll have the option to listen to a sample, buy the album 
or buy individual tracks. Movies works in exactly the same way. The 
difference is in some cases you’ll have the option to rent the movie. 
When you do this you have a limited time period in which to watch it 
before it’s automatically wiped from your device.
Where Do I Start?
The row of icons running along the bottom of the screen will take you to 
the section you require, be it movies, music, TV, podcasts or audiobooks. 
Click a category and you can start browsing, with featured items and 
recommendations also appearing. 
Select the category of 
content you wish to view 
via these links.
Tap here for your 
wish list, list of 
previewed tracks 
and Siri feature.
These three image 
links are promoted 
content via iTunes.
To select a specific 
item simply tap 
anywhere within 
this box.
iTunes content is 
separated into 
various categories 
as shown here.
Via this link you can 
access ALL previously 
downloaded content 
via the iCloud.
How to Use Your iPad’s Apps
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
94

Downloading Music and Videos Through iTunes Explained 
The iPad is one of the most technically advanced multimedia devices currently available. You’ll really be missing out if you don’t 
take full advantage of the wealth of audio and visual entertainment that is available on iTunes.
Open the iTunes application from your home screen 
and enter your Apple ID via the Sign In link at the 
bottom of the home page.
Step 1
Please Note: To access downloads from iTunes you must have a valid credit card linked to your Apple ID.
Search the iTunes store for your download or 
purchase via the Search bar link. This search  
covers all content, from music to podcasts, and the results 
will be categorised accordingly.  
Step 2
Select the link to the download or purchase you 
have chosen and tap the Price or Install (if the 
download is free) button and then confirm you wish to continue. 
Step 3
While your selection is downloading you can either 
exit the iTunes store or continue to browse. The 
number of downloads currently running will be displayed in the 
bottom-right corner. 
Step 4
To view the time needed to complete running 
downloads tap the Download link at the bottom 
right to view a projected download time. This time is based upon 
the speed of your connection and the size of download. 
Step 5
When completely downloaded you can access your 
file by exiting the iTunes app and opening the 
correct application. For audio files (Music and Audio Podcasts) 
open the Music app and for video files open the Videos app. 
Step 6
For safety reasons if you share your iPad with others it is best to 
sign out of iTunes after you have completed your session.  
Scroll to the foot of the screen and tap your Apple ID.
Remember to Sign Out
What is the iTunes Store App?
The iTunes Store app is for digital media 
what the App Store app is for apps. Use it 
to download movies and music.
95
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
All About the iTunes Store App
www.ebook3000.com

BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
96

Getting  
More from  
Your iPad
Now you’ve mastered the iPad’s amazing range of apps, it’s 
time to take a closer look at its built-in features. In this 
section we learn about services such as Family Sharing, 
whereby you can share media and apps with family members; 
also Siri, the iPad’s personal digital assistant and Notifications, 
which let you know what’s going on with your iPad. It’s all 
great fun and extremely useful.
98	
Using the iPad’s  
	
Notification Centre
102	
Using Your iPad’s New  
	
Multitasking Options
104	
Using the iPad’s   
	
Siri Assistant
106	
12 Ways to Use Siri
108	
Using Apple’s iCloud  
	
on Your iPad
111	
Sharing Photos with iCloud
112	
Using iCloud Drive  
	
on Your iPad
113	
Upgrading Your Subscription
113	
The iCloud Drive App
114	
Using the Family  
	
Sharing Service
118	
The Spotlight Search and  
	
Shortcut Menu
120	
Using AirDrop to Share Files
121	
Using Bluetooth on Your iPad
122	
Making Your iPad Secure
122	
Using Passcode Lock
123	
Using Find My iPhone
125	
Using the iPad’s Lost Mode
126	
Increasing Your iPad’s  
	
Battery Life
128	
Updating iOS on Your iPad
130	
Integrating Social Media
131	
Creating and Editing Folders
132	
Permanently Delete  
	
Unwanted Apps
133	
Managing the iPad’s Dock
134	
How to Turn Off  
	
In-App Purchases
135	
The iOS Sharing Button
136	
iOS and Mac OS Continuity
138	
Changing Your  
	
iPad’s Wallpaper
139	
Changing Your iPad Sounds
140	
What’s New in iOS 9.3?
142	
Troubleshooting &  
	
Problem Solving
144	
Glossary of iPad Terms
CONTENTS
97
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
www.ebook3000.com

iOS’s notification system makes keeping track of new notifications  
and acting on them very quick and simple.
Using the iPad’s 
Notification Centre
Understanding 
Notifications Made Easy
We’ve highlighted the key features of this application
to help you better understand how it works.
You can access the new Notification Centre at any 
time, no matter what app you’re in, simply by 
swiping your finger down from the top of the screen. When you 
swipe down, Notification Centre will be pulled into view and you’ll 
be able to see all your current notifications.
Step 1
 
 
To clear notifications that you don’t want to deal 
with, all you have to do is tap the cross next to the 
appropriate one and then tap Clear when prompted. This will 
remove the notification, enabling you to keep Notification Centre 
tidy and uncluttered.
Step 2
Your notifications 
are displayed in the 
categories in which 
they were received. 
By pressing the “X” 
icon you will 
instantly delete that 
notification.
Tap here to close the 
Notification Centre.
To open a notification directly 
through the app which 
generated it, simply tap it.
You can restructure the 
order in which your 
notifications are displayed 
via the Settings menu.
Getting More from Your iPad
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
98

Setting Up Notifications
Now you know where and how to access Notification Centre and its various functions, but there are also several options you can 
use to further tailor it to your liking. Using these guides will help you get the most from this application. 
With Manual selected, hold one of the parallel lines 
to the right of each app name, and drag up or 
down to reorder the list of applications. This is the order in which 
they appear on the Notifications screen when you choose the Sort 
Manually option.
Step 2
Go to Settings > Notifications > Sort Order. You can 
choose to sort your notifications manually or by time. 
If you choose Sort Manually, notifications are grouped according to 
the app that produced them. If you choose By Time, they’re listed in 
the order in which they arrived.
Step 1
Go back to the main Notifications settings screen, and 
tap on one of the listed applications to see its 
notification controls. Flick the switch at the top - labelled ‘Allow 
Notifications’ – into the Off position to stop notifications from that app.
Step 3
Below the Allow Notifications switch you will find 
customisation options. The Badge App Icon option, 
when on, displays a number on the home screen app icon showing 
how many items have arrived.
Step 4
There are three available alert styles, for displaying 
notifications when you’re using the iPad. ‘None’ is 
self-explanatory; no alert is shown. ‘Banners’ appear at the top of 
the screen, and vanish after a few seconds, and ‘Alerts’ appear in a 
pop-up window, which you must dismiss manually.
Apps not included in Notification Centre are 
labelled ‘Off’ in the apps list. You can, of course, 
tap on one of them and change the options so it’s included in 
Notifications again.
Step 5
Step 6
What are Notifications?
Your iPad can send you notifications for 
various reasons. Some are associated 
with apps, others with schedules.
99
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
Using the iPad’s Notification Centre
www.ebook3000.com

Replying Directly to Notifications from the Lock Screen
Adding Widgets to Notification Centre
You can access your notifications directly from the lock screen, without having to unlock your device and then open the host app. 
It’s a real time-saver, and easy to do when you know how.
You can add application-based widgets to your iPad’s Notification Centre. But what are they, and how do you add them?  
Here’s a guide to adding, managing and using Notification widgets.
If  you receive a notification while your device is 
locked, it will appear as usual on the screen and will 
be accompanied by the customary alert sound. 
In Notification Centre, in the Today section, press 
the Edit button at the bottom. Widgets for Apple’s 
own apps are already active, but those for installed third-party apps 
which have widgets are not. 
Tap the green Plus button to add a widget to your 
notification screen, or the red Minus button to 
remove one. You can reorder them by dragging the three-line icons 
to their right. When you’ve finished, tap Done.
To access the message - for this example we will be 
using an iMessage text, but the method remains the 
same for other apps - place your finger on the notification and 
swipe to the left.
You can now reply or confirm the notification using 
the standard input method. Once complete or sent, 
your device will return to the lock screen and the reply will be 
stored in the host app. 
Alternatively, on the lock screen, swipe the 
notification to the right and you’re taken directly to 
the application that produced it. Here we swiped a message, so we 
were taken to Messages.
Step 1
Step 1
Step 2
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
Getting More from Your iPad
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
100

Accessing Notifications when Unlocked
You can also access your notifications while currently running another application on your device, without spoiling your fun. This 
tutorial is for notifications set to display as Banners, which is the default option in Notification Centre.
There are a host of applications which send 
notifications that can be accessed when using 
another application - Mail, Messages, Calendar, Reminders and a 
growing list of others.
When you are in-app and receive an email 
notification, you can access the message by swiping 
down on the notification, and then view your options: to mark as 
read, or delete it. 
If you wish to view your email and any attachments 
it contains, you can skip directly to the Mail 
application by tapping the title of the email on the notification.
If you receive an invitation to a calendar event, you 
will receive a notification where you can reply or 
decline. If you confirm, the event will be added to your calendar. 
When you receive your notification, you can quickly 
access it by placing your finger on it and swiping in 
a downward motion. This will reveal a list of available options. 
Once you have chosen and completed your action, 
the notification will automatically close and you will 
be able to get back to what you were doing. 
Step 1
Step 4
Step 5
Step 6
Step 2
Step 3
101
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
Using the Notification Centre
www.ebook3000.com

iOS 9 introduces some exciting multitasking features for the iPad. They’re great for using 
two apps on the screen at once, but only if your device meets the minimum specifications. 
Using the 
Multitasking Options
Slide Over lets you use a second app in a sidebar, 
alongside the app you’re currently using. To access 
it, simply slide your finger left from the right-hand side of the 
screen. The sidebar is revealed. 
You can transfer information from the sidebar app 
into the main app. Here we looked up  
a web address in Safari in the sidebar, and pasted it into an email 
we were writing, using the standard copy and paste method.
Scroll the sidebar up and down to review all the apps 
that are available and tap on the one you want to 
open. It’s also fully functional within that sidebar, so you can send a 
message with Messages or an email from Mail, for example.
To go back to the list of apps from a secondary 
open app, swipe down from the very top of the 
sidebar. To close the sidebar, whether or not it has an app running 
in it, put your finger on its left-hand edge and slide it right.
Step 1
Step 3
Step 2
Step 4
Slide Over
The iPad’s new multitasking capabilities can greatly improve your productivity. Slide Over is great for looking at an app while using 
a different app, but you must be using an iPad Pro, an iPad Air or later, or an iPad mini 2 or later.
Getting More from Your iPad
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
102

You can use iOS 9’s Picture in Picture mode 
whenever you’re watching a video in a supported 
app. Look for the button you see here in the Videos app, the big 
square pointing at the little square in the bottom-right corner.
Split Screen mode only works in landscape mode, 
and only when the two apps you’re hoping to use 
are split-screen compatible. Open the side bar as described on the 
previous page, and open an app within it.
Tap that button, and you can watch your video in a 
window, while you use another iPad app on the 
screen. Press the Home button to get back to the home screen, as 
shown, then open an app of your choice.
If the two apps are split-screen compatible, you 
should see a line on the left-hand side of the 
sidebar. Drag it right, but not all the way to the right, as you’ll 
open the secondary app and close the main one.
You can drag the video window to any part of the 
screen, Pinch and Spread to change its size and tap 
it to reveal the picture-in-picture controls. They are (from left to 
right) go full screen, play/pause and close video screen.
Drag the line dividing the two apps left and right to 
set the space allotted to each app. To come out of 
split screen mode, slide the line all the way to the left or right, 
depending on which app you want to keep open.
Step 1
Step 1
Step 2
Step 2
Step 3
Step 3
Picture in Picture
Split View
With an iPad Pro, an iPad Air or later, or an iPad mini 2 or later, 
you can view a video in a window.
You can also run two apps side by side, but only if you have an 
iPad Pro, iPad Air 2 or iPad mini 4.
What is Multitasking?
In a nutshell, multitasking involves 
running more than one app at once. On 
your iPad you can run them side by side.
103
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
Using the Multitasking Options
www.ebook3000.com

Siri is the digital assistant included with all recent iPads and it can be a powerful and 
useful tool, but only if you take the time to understand how it works.
Using the  
Siri Assistant
Asking Siri a Question Explained
With help from Siri, many tasks can be made much simpler. The knowledge available via Siri is simply amazing. Here’s a short 
tutorial showing you how to access this wealth of information.
To access Siri, press and hold the Home button. The 
app will automatically launch and, ironically, you will 
be greeted with a question of your own from Siri, “What can I 
help you with?”
Step 1
That question is your cue to ask your question. 
Depending on the level of background noise you 
may need to hold your iPad close to your mouth so that Siri can 
hear you clearly. When you have finished release the Home button. 
Step 2
Siri will repeat your question back to you, and then 
attempt to answer it.
Step 3
Should it be required, Siri will open any applications 
it needs in order to answer your question. For 
example, if you asked a question regarding the temperature it will 
open the Weather application.
Step 4
Getting More from Your iPad
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
104

On the rare occasions that Siri isn’t able to answer a 
question, it will suggest making a web search. To 
instantly access this search simply click the on-screen icon. 
Step 5
You will be transferred to the Safari web browser, 
which will already have your search results and 
hopefully your answer.  
You can open applications from Siri. It’s easy. Just 
say “Open”, followed by the name of the app you 
wish to launch. For example, say “Open Maps” and you’re 
instantly taken to the Maps app. 
Siri’s programmers clearly have a sense of humour, 
which you can enjoy by asking silly questions. You 
can waste whole evenings having fun with your Siri assistant.
Step 6
The first thing to do is teach it who’s who in your life. You can say 
something like “Kari is my wife” to Siri and as long as that person 
is in your contacts, Siri will ask if you want to save that information. 
Kari will then be added as “Spouse” on your contact card. You can 
then use commands like “Tell my wife I’ll be home late”. You may 
think this a bit pointless, but it is usually easier for Siri to 
understand “Wife” or “Brother” than a name. 
Who’s Who?
To help Siri to help you, make sure that your Contacts app 
(including your own contact card) contains as much information as 
possible. Your contacts list doesn’t just need to include mobile 
phone numbers. You can add numerous addresses, email details, 
Twitter names, Facebook pages, birthdays and much more. The 
more information you can include, the more useful Siri will be. 
Contacts
Tell Siri your home and work address so it can be used to set 
reminders when you arrive or leave. You can also tell it other 
important addresses such as your girlfriend’s house, etc. You can then 
use commands like “Remind me to get milk when I leave work”. 
Important Addresses
The more you use Siri, the better it will understand you. It does this 
by learning about your accent and other characteristics of your 
voice. Siri uses voice recognition algorithms to categorise your voice 
into one of the dialects or accents it understands. 
Voice Recognition
Step 7
Step 8
What is Siri?
Siri is your iPad’s personal digital assistant. 
With Siri, you can carry out a wide range 
of tasks using only voice commands.
105
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
Using the Siri Assistant
www.ebook3000.com

12 Ways to Use Siri
Siri can do more than you think. Once you’ve mastered your personal assistant, you can use it for all sorts of things.  
Here we learn how to the make the most of the Siri assistant, with our top picks of the ways we use Siri in our daily routine.
Siri can tell you if you have any appointments on any particular date 
or even in a time frame. Say to Siri something like “What’s my 
schedule for April?” and it will tell you how many appointments 
you have in that month and list them on screen. If you want to be 
more specific, say “What are my appointments today?” or “What’s 
my schedule for June 19th?”, or if you prefer, “19th June”. Siri 
understands both.
Checking Appointments
Siri is particularly good at maths questions, from general things like 
“What is six multiplied by nine?” to more real-world problems 
such as splitting a restaurant bill, “What is ninety six divided by 
five?” If that isn’t impressive enough for you, try something harder 
like “What is the square root of 45,051?”
Adding Things Up
Siri is designed to make common tasks easier, but there are some 
things that you just might not think about using your personal 
assistant to do. Rather than fumbling about late at night to turn 
your morning alarm on or off, simply raise the phone to your ear, 
wait for the beeps and say “Turn on (or off) my alarm”. Siri will 
confirm the action and you can get to sleep knowing that you 
won’t be late for work. 
Turning Alarms On or Off
Say “Wolfram, password.” Wolfram generates a difficult-to-crack 
random 8-character password. You can then scroll down for a list 
of alternatives. Scroll further down and you can even see how 
difficult the password is to crack for hackers using known 
decryption methods. 
Creating a Secure Password
Siri works with normal web search, Wikipedia search and Wolfram 
Alpha (more for scientific questions). To look things up, speak to Siri 
as you would to anyone you were asking a question of. What is the 
average size of a polar bear? Which planet is the largest? Why does 
snow fall? Siri will use the source it thinks best able to answer the 
question. If you want to use a particular search engine, simply say 
the name before the question “Wolfram, how far is it to the Sun?”. 
Looking Things Up
As well as being able to search the web, Siri lets you search for 
things on your iPad. This includes notes, emails and messages. Ask 
Siri to “Find the email about iPad” and any emails containing 
‘iPad’ in the subject are displayed. You can also find emails from a 
specific person or organisation. For example, say “Find email from 
Gary Roberts” and Siri searches for every email sent by him. It 
works for organisations too. “Find email from Apple” gives you 
everything Apple has sent.
Finding an Email
Getting More from Your iPad
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
106

Siri finds and plays your music at your command. You can tell Siri 
to play a song by saying “Play <track name>”. You can also use 
commands such as “Play rock” and “Play my exercise playlist”. 
Assuming you have some music defined as rock or a playlist called 
‘Exercise’, they play. Ask for a band name and Siri plays shuffled 
tracks by that artist. You can also ask for an entire album by saying 
“Play <album name> album”. When the music starts, tap Show 
Music to go to the Music app.
Playing Music
This feature was once only available in America, but now UK iPad 
users can enjoy it too. Ask Siri for directions, or for a facility nearby, 
and it searches the Maps app to find what you need. The question, 
“How do I get home?” opens the Maps app and presents you with 
directions to your house. “Where’s the nearest post office?” is 
answered within Siri as shown here; but if you tap on the map 
you’re taken to the Maps app, from where you can tap Directions 
in the top-left corner if needed.
Getting Directions
Once you get used to how you need to speak to Siri, sending 
messages using the assistant becomes easy and even fun. When 
dictating a message (or email, note, etc.), you need to remember 
to speak the punctuation. To send a message, you can either say 
“Tell my wife I’ll be home late” or “Send a message to John”. Siri 
will then ask what you want the message to say. You can then 
speak the message, and Siri asks if you want to send or cancel it 
when you’re done.
Sending Messages
You can use Siri to set both time-activated and location-activated 
reminders. You can say “Remind me about my meeting at 4pm” or 
“Remind me to buy milk when I leave work”. Siri will then confirm 
the reminder and ask if it is correct. You then just say “yes” to set 
it. Naturally, if you want to use location-based reminders you need 
to have Location Services on. Go to Settings > Privacy > Location 
Services and make sure it’s switched on; and on the same screen, 
tap Siri and make sure While Using the App is ticked.
Setting Reminders
Press and hold the Home button to access Siri and ask to send an 
email to the name of one of your contacts (whose email address 
you have in your Contacts list). You will then be asked to add a 
title to your email. Next you dictate the content of your email. You 
will need to say the word “Comma” or “Full Stop” at the 
appropriate points. When you’re finished simply tap the Send link  
or answer “yes” when asked if you want to send the email by Siri. 
You can stop this process by saying “Cancel”.
Sending an Email 
Press and hold the Home button to access Siri and ask to send a 
“message” to the name of one of your contacts. Next say what 
you want the text content of the message to be. You will need to 
say the words “Comma” or “Full Stop” to add basic punctuation. 
When complete, simply tap the Send link or answer “yes” when 
asked if you want to send the text message or “Cancel” if not. If 
you answered positively, your message will now be sent.
Sending a Text Message 
107
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
Using the Siri Assistant
www.ebook3000.com

iCloud has changed the way we store things. From photographs, music and videos to 
simple notes; if it’s important, it can be saved to the cloud.
Using Apple’s  
iCloud on Your iPad
From the home screen, open the Settings app and 
scroll down the left column until you see iCloud.  
Tap this option, and you’re taken to the iCloud login screen, as 
seen here. As you can see, you’re not currently logged in, which is 
why your details are blank and the Sign In link greyed out.
You must now enter your Apple ID. At the top of 
the screen, where the greyed email address 
example@icloud.com is displayed, enter the email address you used 
to sign up for your Apple ID. In the field underneath it, type your 
password. If you’ve forgotten either, tap the ‘Forgot Apple ID or 
Password?’ link, which takes you to the screen shown here.
If you don’t yet have an Apple ID, tap the Create a 
New Apple ID link to be taken to this screen, where 
you can set up your new Apple account. For more information on 
setting up an Apple ID, see page 22 of this manual, where the 
process is explained in more detail.
When you’ve entered your details, the Sign In 
button is turned blue, indicating that it is active. You 
can now tap it to be taken to the next step in your iCloud setup. 
Your iCloud account is verified; if you’ve entered your details 
correctly, a tick appears next to your email and password. This step 
might take a little time.
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
Signing Up for iCloud
If you linked to iCloud during your initial setup, please go straight to Step 7 on the next page to see how you 
can customise your iCloud. If not, follow this short guide to signing up for iCloud.
Getting More from Your iPad
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
108

Once you have completed the registration and/or 
signed in, you will see the following request asking 
you if want to merge your account with iCloud. Assuming you 
want to go ahead, click the ‘Merge’ link. This merges the 
information stored on your iPad with that found on other Macs or 
iOS devices signed into your iCloud account.
The top two options on this screen allow you to set 
up a Family Sharing account, and to buy more 
storage if you want to expand on the 5GB you get free with 
iCloud. You can read more about Family Sharing on page 114 of 
this manual.
You now receive a second request. This simply asks 
you to confirm the use of your locational service on 
your device. Make your selection to proceed. A positive reply is not 
necessary but is suggested, and is definitely worthwhile if you want 
to make the most of iCloud on your iPad.
If you want to make sure your iPad is backed up to 
iCloud whenever it’s connected to a Wi-Fi network 
and a power source, scroll down to the Backup option and tap it. 
On the next screen, flick the switch so iCloud Backup is on. You can 
opt to back up immediately by tapping the Back Up Now link too.
You are now signed into your iCloud account on 
your iPad. The next screen, as seen here, allows you 
to switch off iCloud syncing for specific apps. If, for example, 
you’ve no wish to merge the notes you make in the Notes app 
with those you make on other Macs or iOS devices, switch off 
syncing for Notes by flicking the switch to its right.
Another useful option is iCloud Keychain, also 
found towards the bottom of the iCloud screen. Tap 
on this and turn on iCloud Keychain and your passwords and 
credit card information is backed up to iCloud. This data is 
encrypted, and cannot be read by Apple or any third party. You 
need to type your iCloud password and verify with another device 
signed into your iCloud account to activate this feature.
Step 5
Step 8
Step 6
Step 9
Step 7
Step 10
What is iCloud?
iCloud is Apple’s cloud computing service. You 
can use it to sync data across devices; this lets you 
always have what you need at your fingertips.
109
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
Using Apple’s iCloud on Your iPad
www.ebook3000.com

Using iCloud to Restore App Downloads
Thanks to iCloud you can now easily access every single app you have downloaded, whether free or paid for,  
without the need to pay for it again. It’s great if you need to free up space by deleting an app you might need again one day.
Open the App Store application and tap the 
Purchased link in the bottom menu bar.
 From this screen, tap the Not On This iPad link at 
the top of the page to access iCloud and the 
downloads contained within.
You can now access all your app downloads since 
you set up your Apple ID.
You can, of course, use the search field in the 
top-right corner instead, searching the App Store for 
the name of the app you want to download again. Here a search 
for ‘Candy’ produced several hits, one of which offers the cloud 
icon to indicate it can be downloaded again without cost.
Having selected the app you wish to download 
simply click the iCloud icon beside the app and it 
will instantly start to install.
When your app has finished downloading, it 
appears on your home screen. From here you can 
simply tap it to launch, just as you would any other app. You can 
delete and reinstall an app as many times as you like; there’s no 
limit imposed.
Step 1
Step 3
Step 2
Step 4
Step 5
Step 6
Getting More from Your iPad
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
110

Sharing Photos with iCloud
You can use iCloud to share photos with your friends and family, and even make an album public on iCloud.com. It’s great for 
letting the relatives see your holiday snaps before you’ve even got home. Here’s how it’s done.
Photo comments  
and notifications
If you are invited to start sharing a photo stream, you will 
be able to comment on and Like the images you see there. 
Once you have accepted the invitation to share, you will also 
receive notifications when new images are added to the 
shared stream (assuming you have notifications turned on in 
Settings). If you are the one who shared the photo stream, 
you will receive notifications when someone Likes or 
comments on your photos. 
This feature is turned off by default, so the first 
thing you need to do is turn on Shared Photo 
Streams in the iCloud settings. You don’t need to have Photo 
Stream turned on to use it. 
You’re now invited to add a comment. This is 
optional and can be left blank if you’ve nothing to 
say. When you’re ready, tap Post to make the photos available to 
the person or people you chose to share with.
Now open the Photos app and navigate to the 
album which contains the images you want to 
share. Tap Edit and select all of the images. When you have all your 
images selected, tap Share.
You can add others to the list of people you’re sharing 
with if you wish. Tap the Shared icon at the foot of 
the screen, open the album you wish to share and then tap People. 
Here you can invite more people to share, allow or stop subscribers 
from posting, and also make the album public on iCloud.com.
You will now see your sharing options. Tap the 
iCloud Photo Sharing option and a new window will 
open. Name the album then type the name you wish to share 
with, or tap the blue + button to select from your contacts. 
Step 1
Step 4
Step 2
Step 5
Step 3
111
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
Using Apple’s iCloud on Your iPad
www.ebook3000.com

Using iCloud Drive  
on Your iPad
Setting Up iCloud Drive
Before we tell you about the amazing sharing features that iCloud Drive opens up to you, let’s take you through the initial setup. 
This is how you get Apple’s iCloud Drive service up and running on your iPad.
iCloud Drive gives you even more opportunities to store and share your files, and to 
interact with other compatible hardware devices.
If you don’t already have an iCloud account, turn to 
page 108, where we show you how to sign up for a 
new account, sign in and start using your new Apple ID and iCloud.
Having opened this link, you will receive a warning 
message which requires you to confirm that, in 
order for the iCloud to work across your various Apple devices, 
they are running the latest OS. 
Once confirmed, you will now be able to access the 
iCloud Drive options screen. Here you can choose 
which apps you will use to share content across your various iOS 
and OS X devices.
Open the Settings app and then tap on the iCloud 
link; scroll down through the links until you reach 
iCloud Drive and tap on it. 
Step 1
Step 3
Step 4
Step 2
Getting More from Your iPad
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
112

Upgrading Your Subscription 
The iCloud Drive App
iCloud Drive comes with 5GB of free storage space, but you can 
buy more if you wish, and it’s inexpensive too.
With iOS 9, you can install and use an iCloud Drive app, accessible 
from your home screen. Here’s how to do it.
Open the Settings app and tap iCloud. Sign in if 
you haven’t already, then scroll down until you see 
the Storage option. On this screen it tells you at a glance how 
much storage you have remaining. Tap this option to be taken to 
the Storage options screen, which shows your total capacity as 
well as unused space. 
If you install the iCloud Drive app during your iPad’s 
setup, open the Settings app and go to iCloud. On 
the next screen, tap iCloud Drive and switch it on if need be. Now 
flick the switch labelled ‘Show on Home Screen’.
Tap Buy More Storage. This shows your current plan 
and other options that are available. As mentioned 
earlier, you get 5GB free of charge, but if you want more, there are 
plenty of paid-for plans that increase your total storage space for a 
set monthly fee. 
Tap the Home button to go back to the home 
screen. A window pops up inviting you to add 
iCloud Drive to your home screen. Do so. There’s now a new app 
available, called iCloud Drive. Tap it to open it.
To buy more storage space, tap on the plan you want, 
and then tap Buy in the top-right corner. You’re 
invited to sign in to the iTunes Store. After signing in and making 
your purchase, you’re charged every month. You can also use this 
screen to downgrade to a cheaper - or free - plan if you wish. 
You can now access, download and share your 
iCloud files from directly within this app, just like 
you would with your iCloud folder on your Mac. Open them in the 
apps in which they were created too.
Step 1
Step 1
Step 2
Step 2
Step 3
Step 3
What is iCloud Drive?
The iCloud Drive lets you store document files 
on the cloud, so you can review and edit them 
from any device with an Internet connection.
113
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
Using iCloud Drive on Your iPad
www.ebook3000.com

How to Use  
Family Sharing
From sharing music and apps, to organising your family calendar or managing your 
household’s purchases, Family Sharing is a feature you must learn to use.
To set up Family Sharing, first open the Settings app 
and select iCloud. Tap the Set Up Family Sharing 
link, found near the top of the right-hand column.
Tap the Get Started link to set up the Family 
Organiser (we suggest you give yourself this role), 
and tap Continue. You will be given a series of sharing options, 
starting with purchases. Tap Continue.
Share your location with your family first. Next, to 
add a family member tap on the Add Family Member 
link and then enter the name of the person you wish to add. 
Next you will set up a payment method for the 
entire family; tap Continue to move on. Next you 
will start adding family members to your Family Sharing account.
Step 1
Step 2
Step 4
Step 3
Getting More from Your iPad
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
114

Your contact will then be sent an invitation to join 
your Family Sharing listings. When they receive and 
accept this invitation they will be added to your listings. To add 
more people repeat the above. 
A notification confirms your contact has been 
successfully added to your Family Sharing listings, 
and you can now set up/edit their Family Sharing settings.
Now tap on the link from your added Family Sharing 
member. You can then set this individual as a Parent 
or Guardian to enable purchases for minors.
There are a few things that cannot be shared using 
Family Sharing. These include songs added to iTunes 
Match from outside the iTunes Store, in-app purchases, things that 
are no longer on the iTunes store, and apps the purchaser has 
hidden. You can’t access shared music on an Apple TV, and some 
apps cannot be shared at all – check the Family Sharing entry on 
their App Store page to see whether an app can be shared.
You can also remove an individual from your Family 
Sharing listings by visiting the link shown above then 
tapping and confirming the Remove option.
If you discover that you have removed this individual 
from your Family Sharing listings by mistake, you will 
need to re-invite them to join as detailed previously.
Step 5
Step 6
Step 7
Step 10
Step 8
Step 9
What is Family Sharing?
Why buy an album, movie or app more than 
once when you can use Family Sharing to 
share them with the rest of your household?
115
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
How to Use Family Sharing
www.ebook3000.com

Creating an Apple ID for a Child
More Great Family Sharing Features
If your children have iPads, you’ll want to protect them from unsuitable experiences and stop them running up huge credit card bills. Here’s 
how to create a special Apple ID for a child under 13.
Having set up your sharing list you will want to start exploring just how much you can do with 
your linked Apple IDs. This guide will take you through the key uses of the Family Sharing feature. 
Step 1: Open the Settings app and tap on the iCloud link in 
the left-hand column. From this screen, tap on Set Up Family 
Sharing. Then tap the ‘Create an Apple ID for a child (Under 13)’ 
link at the bottom of the screen.
Step 2: Confirm the Parental Consent form then set up the 
Apple ID for the child. When you have completed this and your 
payment method has been confirmed, the minor will be added 
to your list.
You and all of your listed Family Sharing members 
can access a specific family calendar from directly 
within the Calendar application where all events added are shared, 
so let’s open that app up.
Tap the Calendars link at the bottom-middle of the 
screen, and in the iCloud calendars listings you will 
notice the Family link. Ensure this link is active by tapping to add a 
tick next to it. It’s now accessible to everyone in your Family Sharing.
Step 1
Step 2
Getting More from Your iPad
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
116

Having set up Family Sharing, when you open the 
Find My Friends application the location of your 
family members will automatically be shown on your device should 
you need to find them. 
After adding a child to your Family Sharing list they 
will be able to browse the App Store and iTunes,  
but any attempted purchases must be confirmed by the parent  
or guardian. 
You can hide your location from your family 
members if you don’t wish to be bothered, by 
tapping the Me link from your location on the map and activating 
the Hide My Location slider.
You can also browse the purchases made by any 
members of your Family Sharing list by tapping the 
Family Purchases from the Purchases link in iTunes, iBooks and the 
App Store.
You can also locate your family members’ hardware 
too; open the Find My iPhone application and you 
will see the location of any hardware that is currently linked via an 
Internet connection.
If you wish to close down your Family Sharing and 
remove all the members from your listings, open 
your personal link from the main listings and tap/confirm Stop 
Family Sharing. 
Step 3
Step 6
Step 4
Step 7
Step 5
Step 8
117
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
How to Use Family Sharing
www.ebook3000.com

With iOS 9, the Spotlight and Shortcut menus were combined, and a few new 
features added. They are now even more useful and versatile than they were before.
Using the Shortcuts
The shortcuts that make it simple to send messages, make phone calls and initiate FaceTime video chats with contacts you 
regularly communicate with are still there, but they’ve moved from the app-switching screen.
To open the new Spotlight Search screen, swipe the 
home screen right to find the Spotlight Search 
screen to the left. You can see the contacts you’ve most regularly 
interacted with at the top of the screen.
Tap one of the contacts to reveal a series of icons. 
Tapping on the one that looks like a telephone 
receiver calls that contact. The speech bubble lets you send him or 
her a message, and the video camera starts a FaceTime call. 
If you tap the ‘i’ in a circle at the far-right end of the 
icon list, you open the contact’s card in your 
Contacts app. Tap the Back to Search link in the top left corner to 
take you back to the Spotlight Search screen.
Not every icon is available for every contact. If your 
contact doesn’t use an Apple device, Messages and 
FaceTime might well be missing. Also, to make phone calls, you must 
be using Continuity; see the tutorial elsewhere in this bookazine.
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
The Spotlight Search 
and Shortcut Menu
Getting More from Your iPad
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
118

Using the Spotlight Search
The Spotlight Search screen does more than give you easy access to commonly used contacts. It’s also an excellent Siri-powered 
search feature and an app launcher for recently accessed applications.
Under the contacts you see a row of app icons. Tap 
on one of these to launch its app. Again, these are 
the apps you used most recently, so if you’re in and out of apps all 
the time, it’s a great way to quickly switch.
Tap the search field and start to type. Top 
suggestions are offered at the top of the screen, 
giving quick access to the most likely hits. If that hit is a contact, 
icons for calls, messages and FaceTime are offered.
Under the app icons you see a list of recent news 
items, all sourced and suggested by Siri. Above the 
top right corner of these news items is a link marked Show More. 
Tap it for a longer list of news stories.
Spotlight Search penetrates your Apple iOS apps, 
bringing you potential hits from Music, Mail, 
Calendar, Notes, Messages and more. At the foot of the screen are 
links to search the web, App Store and Maps too.
The source of these news items is printed underneath 
the preview of the news story. Tapping the preview 
takes you to the whole story on the website that produced it. Tap 
Back to Search (top left) to return to the Spotlight Search.
You can search within the Settings app in iOS 9. Just 
open Settings, and pull the left-hand column down 
as far as it will go. A search field is revealed, through which you 
can search your settings.
Step 1
Step 4
Step 2
Step 5
Step 3
Step 6
What are These Features?
The Spotlight Search lets you search for documents, 
apps and more throughout your iPad. The Shortcuts 
take you straight to where you need to go.
119
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
The Spotlight Search and Shortcut Menu
www.ebook3000.com

You can select to turn AirDrop off, sharing only  
with contacts or sharing with everyone. 
The latter option will require you to accept any shared files, thus 
maintaining security.
Now select the file you wish to share, whether it’s 
an image, a Safari link or a document, and then tap 
the AirDrop option and choose your recipient from those available.
When you are being sent a file using AirDrop, you will 
see this screen. Here you can either Accept or Decline 
downloading the file. When you have accepted and downloaded the 
file it will be accessible from its host application. Safari links will open 
via Safari, photos via the Photos app and so on.
Before you attempt to use AirDrop you will need to 
confirm that the Bluetooth function has been 
activated on both devices and the devices have been paired. Open 
the Control Center by using an upward swipe motion on the home 
screen, then tap on the AirDrop link to open your sharing options.
AirDrop makes sharing files easier. Here we show you how to share a file between 
your iPad and another iOS device using AirDrop.
Using AirDrop 
to Share Files
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
Getting More from Your iPad
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
120

The Bluetooth function on your iPad allows you to use many peripherals such as 
keyboards and headphones. You may need to pair them to your iPad, here’s how… 
A list is shown, from which you must choose the 
device you wish to pair. Tap on it. You might need 
to enter a PIN, which should be supplied with the Bluetooth 
device. If you’re using a Bluetooth keyboard and you want to 
switch back to using the virtual keyboard, simply turn off 
Bluetooth, or simply switch off the keyboard. The device will still 
be paired with your iPad.
Make sure that Bluetooth on your iPad is turned on. 
To do this, go to Settings > Bluetooth and tap the 
button to turn Bluetooth on. 
Open the main Settings, open the General settings 
page and then select Bluetooth. You will need to 
turn Bluetooth on if it isn’t already. 
Choose the device you want to unpair from the list, 
select it and touch Forget This Device. You can now 
choose a different device to pair with. 
Unpairing a Bluetooth Device
Using Bluetooth  
on Your iPad
Step 1
Step 2
Step 2
Step 1
The Bluetooth icon which appears at the top of the screen 
lets you instantly see if you are paired with a device or not. If 
the icon is white, that means Bluetooth is on and paired to a 
device. If the icon is grey, Bluetooth is on, but no devices are 
paired with your iPad. 
Pairing with Bluetooth
First, follow the instructions given with your chosen Bluetooth 
peripheral to make it visible to your iPad.
If you no longer want your iPad to be paired with a particular 
Bluetooth device, follow these steps.
121
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
Using AirDrop and Bluetooth on Your iPad
www.ebook3000.com

Making Your 
iPad Secure
These short tutorials may help you to make your iPad a little less 
attractive in the eyes of a potential thief or snooper.
Using Passcode Lock 
While on this menu screen we would advise you to 
select the “Immediately” option which is available 
from the Require Passcode options screen. 
Step 3
The most basic but easily overlooked way to 
protect your iPad is to simply add a passcode to 
your home screen. To do this click on the Settings icon, and then 
the General link.
Step 1
Here you will find the Passcode Lock settings; from 
here tap the Turn Passcode On link at the top of the 
page. Now you will need to set the standard four-digit passcode 
itself; this code must be entered twice for verification purposes.
Step 2
Adding Fingers
If you use Touch ID, you can add more fingers if you wish. 
Go to Settings > Touch ID & Passcode and enter your 
passcode when asked. In the Fingerprints section, tap the 
Add a Fingerprint link and follow the on-screen instructions.
Getting More from Your iPad
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
122
Here we take you through the various options that will help you increase your iPad’s 
security. Ensuring your data is protected from unauthorised attempts to gain access to it.

What is Passcode Lock?
When Passcode Lock is active on your iPad, 
you need to use your passcode or Touch ID 
to wake your device from sleep mode.
If you’re not already signed into your iCloud account, turn to page 
108 and set it up now. When you’re done, go to Settings > iCloud, 
and scroll the right-hand column down until you get to Find My 
iPhone at the bottom. Tap on this link, and then tap the switch to 
turn on the Find My iPhone service.  Tap ‘Allow’ in the pop-up box.
Step 2
You’e now invited to choose a new passcode; not a four-figure one 
typed on a numeric pad, but a full-length password of up to 25 
characters in length, which can contain letters and numbers. You 
have to do this twice, then tap Done on the pop-up window.
Tap the Home button to go back to the home screen. Open the 
app which, bizarrely, is called ‘Find My iPhone’ (even on an iPad), 
and log in using your Apple ID and your password. You can now 
use the Find My iPhone app and locate any device that’s logged 
into the same iCloud account, is currently switched on and is 
making a network connection. 
Step 2
Step 3
Activating Find My iPhone
Choosing a Long Passcode
Log in to Find My iPhone
Entering Your Passcode
Step 3
When you next unlock your iPad, instead of the numeric keypad 
you get a full keyboard as shown. It works in the same way: type 
your passcode to open your iPad. If you prefer the shorter, numeric 
code, go back to Settings > Passcode, and flick the Simple Passcode 
switch back on. You can then choose a four-digit number again.
To activate the longer passcode option, open the Settings app and 
tap Passcode in the left-hand column. On the next screen, look for 
the Simple Passcode switch and turn it off. You may have to 
re-enter your passcode, if you already have one set up. If not, tap 
the link at the top of the page which reads ‘Turn Passcode On’.
During initial setup, you can choose to install and use the Find My 
iPhone application, and the app becomes available from your 
home screen. Alternatively, you can also download the app directly 
from the App Store before following this guide.
Step 1
Step 1
Visit Setting Options
Initial Setup and Activation
Creating a More Secure Passcode
You can change your four-digit passcode to a massive 25 character 
code using any mix of digits, letters and characters if you wish.
Using Find My iPhone
Find My iPhone is an important addition to iOS, and it works for 
your iPad too. Follow this guide to set it up.
123
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
Making Your iPad Secure
www.ebook3000.com

After entering your Apple ID and password into the app, you’re 
shown a map displaying the locations of all Macs and iOS devices 
currently logged into the same iCloud account. A green dot next to 
the device shows it’s currently online and locatable. Tap the ‘i’ in the 
bottom-right corner and you can switch to a hybrid or satellite map.
Step 4
On this screen, tap the word ‘Action’ at the bottom and you’re 
offered a choice of options. Play Sound makes that device go 
‘ping‘, just the thing if you’ve dropped your iPhone down the back 
of a sofa and can’t find it. Lock (Macs) stops a thief or finder using 
the device, and Erase Device wipes it clean of personal data. 
Step 5
Finding Your Apple Devices
Taking Action
Desktop Setup
For peace of mind we would advise you to set up Find My iPhone on your desktop computer, thus enabling you to track any of 
your devices should you find yourself unable to access your iPad. It’s easy, and can be done from any web browser.
After entering your Apple ID and password, you’re taken to the 
iCloud hub screen as shown. Click on the Find My iPhone icon, 
which is exactly the same as the iOS app’s home screen icon. You’re 
invited to enter your Apple ID’s password again. Do so.
Step 2
Again, you’re taken to a map screen. Green dots on the map 
indicate where your devices can be found. They only appear here, 
of course, if they’re locatable - that is, they’re signed into the same 
iCloud account and are currently‚ or have recently been‚ online. 
Click on one of the dots to get an information window about that 
particular device.
Click on All Devices in the top-centre of the window, and a pop-up 
lists all the Macs and iOS devices currently signed into your iCloud 
account. Choose one to be shown the information window, from 
where you can make it play a sound, erase it of personal information, 
or enter it into Lost Mode (see over the page for details).
Step 3
Step 4
From your desktop  
computer access 
the Internet and visit:  
www.icloud.com.
You can use any 
computer that’s 
connected to the 
Internet, and any  
web browser. It doesn’t 
have to be a Mac. 
Windows or Linux PCs 
are fine.
Step 1
Access iCloud from  
Your Computer
Enter Your Apple ID
Finding Your Devices
Using the Map Screen
Getting More from Your iPad
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
124

Using the iPad’s Lost Mode
Lost Mode allows you to immediately lock a lost iDevice using a code, and then display a message on the lock screen that contains a 
contact phone number. You can also use iCloud to track the location of a 3G iPad.
If one of your iOS devices is lost or stolen, you can 
locate it using your iPad or the iCloud website on a 
regular computer. On a desktop or notebook, open the web 
browser and log onto www.icloud.com, then open Find My iPhone. 
On your iPad, open the Find My iPhone app. If you’re not already 
signed in, enter your Apple ID and password.
Step 2
Click/tap on your missing device, listed either on the 
sidebar of your iPad or by clicking on All Devices at 
the top of the website and selecting it from the pop-up menu. If 
you’re on your iPad, tap Actions at the foot of the screen. Now 
tap/click on Lost Mode, which is found at the foot of your iPad 
screen or on the website, in the device window that popped up 
when you clicked on your device.
Step 3
The missing iOS device is now locked and can only 
be opened with the passcode. As long as its Wi-Fi 
or 3/4G internet connection remains active, you can continue to 
trace it using Find My iPhone. You can also make it play a sound, 
in case it’s not yet been found, or even erase it completely. An 
erased iOS device cannot be tracked, so only use this option if 
you’ve given up trying to get it back.
Step 6
You’re now asked to write a short message, which 
will also be displayed on your missing iOS device’s 
screen. There’s a short message pre-entered, saying, ‘This iPad has 
been lost. Please call me’. You can delete this and replace it with 
your own message if you wish, add to it or simply go with the 
default message. The choice is yours.
Step 5
On an iPad, tap Turn On Lost Mode on the next 
screen. On the iPad version you must next enter a 
memorable four-digit code that lets you unlock your device when 
you find it again. The browser version uses your current lock code. 
Then you must add a telephone number on which a finder can 
contact you. As we’ll see later, this number is displayed on your 
iPad’s screen.
Step 4
Remember, to be found using iCloud, your iPad 
must be signed into the service. See the section on 
Using Find My iPhone on page 129 for more details on how to set 
up and use it. Make sure all your iOS devices have this service set 
up, as you never know when one of them will be lost or stolen. It 
certainly pays to plan ahead.
Step 1
125
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
Making Your iPad Secure
www.ebook3000.com

Increasing Your 
iPad’s Battery Life
Because the battery of your iPad is not easily replaceable, it is essential that you follow 
certain steps to make sure that the battery has the longest possible usable life. 
Increase Your iPad Battery Life Tips
One of the easiest ways to increase the battery life is to make sure 
the Wi-Fi service is turned off when you don’t need it. In a perfect 
world you could have all your connections open all the time and not 
have to worry about them draining the battery. In the real world, 
however, things like Wi-Fi run the power down pretty quickly. 
Bluetooth is another connective service you should switch off if 
you’re not using it and you need to preserve battery power. Both 
Wi-Fi and Bluetooth can be switched off in Settings, but it’s easier 
to swipe up from the bottom of the screen to access Control 
Center, and tap their icons to switch them off.
Charging the iPad Battery
You can see the current battery power level by looking at the 
battery icon at the top-right corner of the screen. You will also get 
a warning message when the battery power goes below a certain 
point. The mains power adaptor charges the iPad faster than using 
the USB to plug into your PC. As with anything that uses a 
rechargeable battery, it is a good idea to perform a full charge 
whenever possible, rather than performing lots of small charges. 
Replacing the iPad Battery
As with every Apple portable device (iPhone, iPod, etc.), the iPad 
features an inaccessible battery. This means that you cannot just 
whip the back off and swap the battery for a replacement yourself. 
When the battery needs replacing (and all rechargeable batteries 
have a finite lifespan), you will need to send the iPad to an 
Authorised Apple Sevice Provider to have the work done. Unless 
you are an electronics whizz, trying to replace the battery yourself 
is a very bad idea, even if you can find a replacement battery pack.   
Getting More from Your iPad
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
126

What is your iPad’s Battery Life?
Depending on the model, your iPad is good for 
up to ten hours of web surfing on a Wi-Fi 
network or nine hours on 3G/4G.
Reducing Screen Brightness
Reducing the screen brightness can help to conserve battery life. 
Open the Settings app, and tap on Display & Brightness in the 
left-hand column. Here you can switch off Auto-Brightness 
(advisable, if battery life is an issue), and use the slider to dim the 
screen, conserving power. And if you’re listening to music, for 
example, why do you need a bright screen?
Disabling Location Services
Location Services gives your apps access to the iPad’s GPS tools. 
This is a drain on the battery, so if you’re not using it, switch it off. 
Go to Settings > Privacy > Location Services and swipe the switch 
marked Location Services. You can always switch it on again when 
you next need a GPS-aware app like Maps or Find Friends.
Manually Fetching Email
You can set your iPad to automatically collect your new email at  
pre-set times via the Settings menu. To do this your iPad will 
connect to your data provider, which uses battery power. To avoid 
this, go to Settings > Mail, Contacts, Calendars, tap Fetch New 
Data and turn off Push.
Disabling Push Notifications
Numerous applications on the iPad, from pre-installed apps such as 
Mail to countless downloads from the App Store, give you the 
option to receive their push notifications. These do require an 
Internet connection to work, so take care to only enable access to 
key apps. Go to Settings > Notifications and switch off those you 
don’t need.
Closing All Background Apps
Although some argue against this, we have found that having 
apps that run in the background can be a drain on the battery. 
Double-tap the Home button, swipe left and right to cycle through 
open apps and then swipe upwards to close one.
Enabling a Shorter Auto-Lock Time
Your iPad will automatically lock itself if it has been left idle after a 
set period of time. We would advise you to set your iPad to 
automatically lock itself after two minutes. Go to Settings > 
General > AutoLock to make the change.
127
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
Increasing Your iPad’s Battery Life
www.ebook3000.com

Keeping your iPad updated with the latest version of the iOS operating system helps 
to keep your data safe and your tablet running smoothly.
Updating iOS  
on Your iPad
If a new update is ready to download you will 
instantly see the iOS details window shown here. To 
download the update tap the link at the bottom of the screen. If 
no update is available your iPad will confirm your iOS is up to date. 
If your iPad is running low on power, simply plug it 
into a power source, whether a mains outlet or your 
computer. The option to update your iOS becomes available again. 
Don’t unplug the iPad while it’s updating.
First of all, open the Settings application. Scroll the 
right-hand side of the screen all the way to the top 
and tap the second option from the top, Software Update.
Step 1 
Step 2
Step 4
If your iPad has less than 50% battery power, you 
won’t be able to update unless it’s also connected 
to a power source. Instead you see the message as shown, and the 
Install option is greyed.
Step 3
Getting More from Your iPad
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
128

What is iOS?
iOS is the operating system used in 
iPhones, iPads and the iPod touch. It’s the 
iPad’s equivalent of Windows or Mac OS X.
Software Update Failed
When a new version of iOS is released, Apple’s servers can 
be overloaded with people trying to download it. If you see 
this message, saying the new software cannot be 
downloaded, try again later.
The iPad will verify the complete download and 
then the installation process will begin. When this 
install is complete the iPad will automatically restart.
Having restarted, your new iPad is fully updated and 
ready for use.
Before updating your iOS you need to enter your 
passcode and then agree to Apple’s terms and 
conditions by pressing the “Accept” link on the bottom-right of 
this pop-up.
Once the download begins an on-screen progress 
bar will appear, giving you an estimated length of 
time required before the download is complete. 
When the update has been downloaded, this box 
appears. Tap Install to install the new update and 
restart the iPad immediately, or Later if you’re busy and want to 
install it later. If you do nothing, it will automatically install after 
ten seconds.
Step 5 
Step 7
Step 6
Step 8
Step 9
129
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
Updating iOS on Your iPad
www.ebook3000.com

Integrating  
Social Media
You can integrate your favourite social networking accounts with your iPad, by adding 
your account details for Facebook, Twitter, Vimeo and Flickr. Here’s how it’s done.
First of all, open the Settings app and scroll down 
the left-hand sidebar until you see four social 
networking services listed in a group, just below Apple’s apps. 
These are Twitter, Facebook, Flickr and Vimeo.
Tap on the social networking service you wish to 
integrate with your iPad, and enter your user name 
and password for that site as instructed. You can also download its 
dedicated app if you wish.
If don’t have an account set up for the social media 
service in question, go to the service’s website using 
the Safari app and set one up. Make a note of your user name and 
password, and then enter them in Settings.
After integrating a social network with your iPad, 
you can access its services directly from some apps. 
For example, you can share a photo to your Facebook timeline, or 
Tweet a website directly from Safari.
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
Getting More from Your iPad
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
130

If you want to rename a folder, open it, tap and hold 
one of the apps until they wobble again, and then 
tap the name of the folder. A keyboard appears, and you can edit 
the name of the folder in the usual way. Call it anything you like.
To move an app out of a folder, open the folder and 
hold an app until it wobbles. Now drag the app you 
want to remove outside the folder box as shown. It returns to the 
home screen and the folder closes. Remove the last app and the 
folder disappears. You can also drag an app to the right-hand side 
of the folder box to place it on the next screen in that folder, 
which works the same way as the home page’s multiple screens.
To create a folder of apps, on the home screen tap 
and hold an app until they all start to wobble and 
an X appears in the top-left corner. Drag one app onto another 
and they’re grouped into a folder. Tap outside the folder box to 
return to the home screen, and drag all the other apps you wish to 
store there onto that folder. 
As you can see, we’ve put four separate apps in this 
folder here. As they’re all audio apps, it’s 
automatically named Music. Tap it to open the folder, then tap one 
of the apps to use it in the usual way. It’s a great means of 
grouping similar apps, keeping your home screen tidy and making 
things easier to find. Tap the Home button to stop the apps 
wobbling and return to normal use.
Step 1 
Step 2 
Step 3 
Step 4 
You can create folders to contain your applications on your iPad and help to keep 
your home screen tidy. Here is a quick guide to creating and managing folders.
Creating and  
Editing Folders
131
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
Social Media and Folders
www.ebook3000.com

Open the Springboard and find the app you want to 
delete. You can delete any app you wish from this 
screen, just make sure you really want to be rid of it. 
Touch and hold the app icon for a few seconds until 
it starts to shake. In the corner of the app icon an X 
will also appear.
Touch the X and you will be asked if you want to 
delete the app, or cancel the action. Select Delete if 
you are sure. You can install it again later if you wish.
The app, including all its data, is now removed from 
your iPad. If iTunes is set to sync to your iPad 
automatically, and if the app is also stored in your iTunes account, 
you remove it from there also. If you don’t, iTunes reinstalls it next 
time you connect. If you want to keep the app in iTunes in case 
you want it again at a later date, you can always just set iTunes not 
to auto-sync. The option for doing this is in Edit > Preferences 
found at the top of the main iTunes screen. Reinstalling previously 
bought apps does not incur a second charge – you only pay for the 
app once.
Permanently Delete 
Unwanted Apps
Keeping your iPad clutter free and running smoothly is important. Here’s how to delete 
unwanted apps to free up home screen space and storage.
Step 1 
Step 2 
Step 4 
Step 3 
Getting More from Your iPad
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
132

Apps in the app dock remain visible whichever page you’re on. Customising the app 
dock is a great way to keep the apps you use most often at your fingertips.
Managing the  
iPad’s Dock
Your chosen app is now attached to the dock. You 
can add up to six apps to the iPad dock at one time. 
To remove an app from the dock, even one of the default ones, 
just hold your finger on it until it shakes and then drag it up onto 
the main home screen. Keeping your favourite apps in the dock 
means that they are always close to hand when you need them. 
With your finger still held on the app icon, drag it 
down the screen to the dock and position it where 
you want it. When you’re happy with where it is, let go.
Step 2
Step 3
Choose any of the apps on your home screens that 
you want to move to the dock and select it by 
touching and holding the icon until it starts to shake and a small X 
appears on the corner. 
Step 1 
133
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
Unwanted Apps and the iPad’s Dock
www.ebook3000.com

Open the main settings screen on your iPad and 
then click on General Settings on the left-hand side 
of the screen. From General Settings, click on Restrictions. 
If you‚ or someone else‚ tries to make an in-app 
purchase while this restriction is on, a box appears 
saying in-app purchases are not allowed. To remove the restriction, 
go back to Settings > General, tap Restrictions, enter the code you 
created earlier and switch In-App Purchases on again.
The Restrictions screen is protected by a passcode, 
separate from the main passcode you use on the Lock 
screen. If this is the first time you’ve opened it, you’re invited to 
create one. If not, you must type it to access the Restrictions options.
Go to the Allowed Content section and turn off 
In-App Purchases. In-app purchasing is now disabled 
on your iPad and cannot be turned on again unless someone 
knows your four-digit pin.
Some apps have the ability to add features from within the app itself, via in-app purchasing. 
If you’re concerned someone might make purchases accidentally, you can turn this off.
How to Turn Off  
In-App Purchases
Step 1 
Step 3 
Step 2 
Step 4 
Getting More from Your iPad
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
134

This is the Share icon. It can be found in many of your 
iPad’s native apps, such as Safari, Maps, Notes, 
Photos, Music, App Store, iTunes Store, Podcasts and more. It’s used 
to share information with others, and also for functions like printing.
What sharing does depends on the application you 
choose to use. Here, for example, we’re sharing a 
Maps location with Messages. A window appears in which we can 
add a recipient and a message before sending.
Tap on the Share icon to get a pop-up showing the 
applications and services you can share with. Which 
ones are available depends on what you’re sharing. Typical options 
include Facebook, Twitter, Messages, Mail and more.
You can usually scroll the options in the pop-up 
right and left so more are revealed. Tap the three 
dots at the extreme right of the options for a window that allows 
you to switch off apps from the Share options, or to reorder them.
The Share button is present in a lot of iOS applications. It allows you to send information 
or images using Messages, Mail or AirDrop, create a new Note and more.
The iOS   
Sharing Button
Step 1 
Step 3 
Step 2 
Step 4 
135
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
In-App Purchases and the Sharing Button
www.ebook3000.com

iOS and Mac OS 
Continuity
Continuity further integrates your iPad, iPhone and Mac. The key features are phone calls, 
SMS text messaging and Wi-Fi sharing. Here’s how to set it up and get the most from it.
Using Continuity, it’s possible to make and receive 
calls on your iPad. Your iPhone needs to be running 
iOS 8 or later, and both your iPhone and your iPad (or iPod touch) 
need to be on the same Wi-Fi network. On both devices, open 
Settings, and tap Wi-Fi to check network compatibility.
Step 1
You also need to make sure both devices are signed 
in to FaceTime using the same Apple ID. Check this 
under Settings > FaceTime. If your mobile phone service provider 
offers Wi-Fi calls, this must be off; see Settings > Phone > Wi-Fi 
Calls. If it isn’t there, you don’t need to worry.
You can now make phone calls from your iPad by 
tapping on the number in Contacts, Calendar or 
Safari. You can also swipe right from the Home screen and tap one 
of the recent contacts listed at the top of the screen.
You can also receive calls on your iPad or Mac. 
When someone calls you on your iPhone, your other 
Apple devices ring too. To answer the call on the iPad, use the 
Slide to Answer slider that appears. On the Mac, click on a 
notification in the top-right corner.
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
Phone Calls
Getting More from Your iPad
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
136

What is Continuity?
The iPad’s Continuity feature integrates the iPad 
with your iPhone and Mac. You can then use your 
iPad to carry out tasks that rely on your iPhone. 
Wi-Fi Instant Hotspot
Text Message Forwarding
We’ve been able to share our iPhone’s 3G/4G 
Internet connection using Personal Hotspot since 
iOS 5, but with Wi-Fi Instant Hotspot it becomes a persistent 
connection. On your iPad, go to Settings > Wi-Fi and your iPhone 
is listed as a Personal Hotspot. No setting up is required at all.
Macs on Yosemite or later and iPads on iOS 8 or 
later can send and receive SMS messages (not just 
Apple iMessages) through your iPhone using Continuity. They must 
be on the same network and signed in to the same iCloud account.
iMessages – those that appear in your iPhone’s 
Messages app as blue bubbles – have synced with 
Macs and iPads for some time. But now regular SMS messages, 
sent by non-Apple devices and appearing in green bubbles, are 
also synced. All of your messages appear on all of your devices.
On a Mac, Text Message Forwarding is achieved 
through the Messages app. As long as you’re on the 
same network and signed in to the same iCloud account, and your 
iPhone is within range, regular text messages can be sent and 
received using your Mac too.
Tap the iPhone in your Wi-Fi list and a connection is 
made. You are now on the Internet using your 
phone’s 3G or 4G service. If you had Personal Hotspot turned off 
on the iPhone, making this connection using Continuity 
automatically turns it on.
Using Continuity, you can send messages using your 
iPad or Mac as well as receiving them. This makes 
typing much easier, but as the message is physically transmitted by 
your iPhone, it must be within range for the message to send.
Step 1
Step 1
Step 2
Step 4
Step 2
Step 3
137
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
iOS and Mac OS Continuity
www.ebook3000.com

Changing Your  
iPad’s Wallpaper
You can set a custom wallpaper on your iPad from one of your own pictures or from a 
website gallery you’ve found using Safari. It’s a way of giving your iPad a fresh, new look.
When you have found an image using Safari  
press and hold on the screen to get the ‘Save Image’ 
option to appear. Or you can use an image from your photo Library.
Go back to your home screen, then go to Settings 
> Wallpaper. Tap Choose a New Wallpaper, and 
then select Recently Added under Photos. It’s here you’ll find  
your saved image.
Set the image how you want it to look on your screen, 
remembering to try it in both landscape and portrait 
mode. When you’re done, tap Set Lock Screen, Set Home Screen or 
Set Both to replace the screens in question with your new one.
Also found in Settings > Wallpapers are some great 
purpose-made backgrounds from Apple. Take a look 
at them; you’re sure to find one you like. 
Step 1
Step 3
Step 2
Step 4
Getting More from Your iPad
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
138

Changing Your  
iPad’s Sounds
To further customise your iPad, you can change the sounds produced by various alerts, 
tones and notifications. They’re another great way to personalise your Apple iPad.
First of all, from the iPad’s home screen, open the 
Settings app, and in the left-hand column, scroll 
down and tap the Sounds link. It’s in the third collection of 
settings, the one with the General settings at the top.
If you want the volume of the iPad’s alerts to be 
independent of the sound set by the volume 
buttons, flick the Change with Buttons switch. Change the volume 
of alerts using the slider above it. You get a preview sound.
In the Sounds section, each alert offered by your 
iPad is listed. To change one of them, tap on it and 
on the next screen, tap the sound you wish to set it as. You get a 
preview of that particular sound, so you can try it first.
At the foot of the Sounds settings are two buttons. 
Lock Sounds switches on or off the sound the iPad 
makes when you lock and unlock it. Keyboard Clicks does the 
same for the keyboard sound effects.
Step 1
Step 3
Step 2
Step 4
139
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
The iPad’s Wallpaper and Sounds
www.ebook3000.com

The iPad gained some big features with iOS 9, but also a lot of smaller ones, of 
which you might not be aware. The latest release iOS 9.3, added even more features. 
Let’s look at what your iPad has gained with these impressive iOS updates.
What’s New  
in iOS 9.3?
Improved News App
Password-Protect Notes
The News app, introduced with iOS 9.0, gets a polish with the new 
update. For example the For You section includes trending topics 
and picks from Apple’s editors. It’s even more tailored to your needs.
In the Notes app, when using iOS 9.3 you can password-protect 
your notes, or use your fingerprint to unlock them. It’s achieved 
through the Share menu, and you can do it on a note-by-note basis.
The app also benefits from an overall performance improvement 
too. You’ll now find your news articles and selections load much 
faster, making it much smother in operation and more comfortable 
to use. 
You can organise your notes in different ways too. Go to Settings > 
Notes > Sort Notes By, and you can choose between ordering them 
according to Date Edited (the default option), Date Created or Title.
What Arrived with the iOS 9.3 Update?
While minor iOS updates usually just fix bugs and make tweaks, upgrading to iOS 9.3 brings a handful of new features 
and improvements too. Let’s take a look at what’s on offer and what it can do for you and your iPad.
Getting More from Your iPad
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
140

Night Shift
iPad in Education
The blue light emitted from tablets and smartphones can interfere 
with your natural sleep patterns. So if you read or play games on 
your iPhone before going to bed, it can make sleep that much 
harder to come by.
The new Shared iPad feature means students can share a tablet, 
logging on to any of the school’s iPads with their personal details 
and then use the iPad as if it were his or her own, with content 
already in place.
In iOS 9.3 there’s a solution. Go to Settings > Display & Brightness 
> Night Shift. This reduces the amount of blue light your screen 
outputs, so it doesn’t disturb your sleep. You can switch it on or 
schedule it.
The new Classroom App gives teachers a degree of control over 
their students’ iPads. The pupils’ iPads can be made to launch an 
app at the same time and Screen View allows the teacher to check 
what they’re looking at.
You can also switch it on and off and also schedule it from the 
Control Panel. Swipe up from the bottom of the screen to get the 
Control Panel, then tap the lampshade icon on its right for the menu 
seen here.
Pupils’ iPads can be managed from a Mac or a PC using an ordinary 
web browser. The teacher can create accounts for students, teachers 
and admins, find devices, build lessons for iPads and more.
141
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
What’s New in iOS 9.3?
www.ebook3000.com

Troubleshooting  
& Problem Solving
Restarting  
the iPad
If you notice minor 
problems with your iPad 
such as apps closing for 
no reason or button lag, 
restart it. Hold down the 
Sleep/Wake button until 
the red slider appears and 
then use this to turn the 
tablet off. Wait for 30 
seconds and then press 
and hold the Sleep/Wake 
button to turn it back on.
iPads are solid and reliable but every piece of technology has its minor problems and 
annoyances. Few iPad problems are terminal and most can be solved by the average user.
Troubleshooting Hardware
While the iPad is robust and sturdy, occasionally a hardware 
problem can occur. Thankfully, most are easy to diagnose and 
also easy to fix. In this section, we take you through some of 
the more common iPad issues and how to solve them.
Resetting the iPad
If the problem continues, 
try resetting the iPad. Press 
and hold the Sleep/Wake 
button and the Home 
button at the same time. 
Keep them both held for at 
least ten seconds; then the 
Apple logo appears and 
the iPad resets. In some 
circumstances this can 
cause data to be lost, so 
use it with care.
Fix Button Lag
If your buttons aren’t as responsive as they should be, there 
are a number of tricks you can try instead of sending it away 
for repair.
Sleep/Wake Button 
If the Sleep/Wake button isn’t working as it should, first try resetting 
the iPad. Press and hold the Sleep/ Wake button for a few seconds 
until a red slider appears and then slide the slider. Now press and 
hold the Sleep/Wake button until the Apple logo appears.
Home Button 
If the Home button is lagging, first try rebooting the device (see 
Restarting the iPad). Another tip for fixing lag is going to Settings > 
General and switching off Background App Refresh. You can switch 
it on again later if you wish.
Getting More from Your iPad
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
142

Troubleshooting Internet Connections
Having trouble connecting to the Internet? Here is a step-by-step guide to troubleshooting connection issues. The tips referring to 
mobile data, carriers or SIM cards only apply to iPads with 3G/4G capabilities.
Double-click the Home button to take you to the multitasking screen 
as shown. This shows all apps that are currently open on your iPad. 
Find the app you want to close by swiping left and right, and when it’s 
in the centre of the screen, swipe upwards, pushing the app off the 
top of the screen to close it.
The second way to force an app to close, which is often useful if the 
app has frozen the screen, is to press and hold the Sleep/Wake button 
until the red slider appears. Then press and hold the Home button 
until the app closes.
Fix Button Lag
If a particular app is playing up, you can force it to close, and hopefully reset itself, in a couple of different ways.
Check Your Signal
Check the status bar on your iPad to make sure you have a strong 
signal. If not try changing your location or going outside. Make 
sure the iPad isn’t in Airplane Mode; see Control Panel for more 
details. If you’re not using Wi-Fi and you’re trying to access the 
Internet, make sure you have a cellular data connection by 
checking next to the carrier name at the top of the screen; you 
should see 3G/4G, E or O.
Remove the SIM card by inserting the end of the 
SIM eject tool or a small paper clip, into the hole on 
the SIM tray. Press firmly and push it straight in until the tray pops 
out. Gently remove the SIM card from the tray, make sure it is 
clean and then reposition the SIM card back in the tray. Return the 
SIM tray to your iPad, then push firmly to fully reinsert.
To restore your iPad, first make sure your Mac or PC 
has the latest version of iTunes. Open it. Next 
connect the iPad to your computer. Click on the iPad icon under 
the music controls in the top left corner as shown. Click Summary, 
then click the Restore iPad button; be patient while the process 
completes and don’t be tempted to disconnect the iPad before 
being told it’s safe to do so. This erases all settings, media and 
data, so back up before restoring.
If none of the previous suggestions solve the 
problem, you can try resetting your network 
settings. To do so tap Settings > General > Reset, then scroll down 
and tap Reset Network Settings. Be aware that this will clear your 
current cellular and Wi-Fi network settings, including saved 
networks, Wi-Fi passwords and VPN settings.
Step 1
Step 2
Step 4
Step 3
143
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
Troubleshooting & Problem Solving
www.ebook3000.com

3G: The third
generation of 
mobile data
networking used by both the 
iPhone and iPad, this connection is 
slower than Wi-Fi, but is more 
readily available and is used to 
transfer data from your iPad when 
you are on the go. It uses the 
mobile phone network.
4G: The fourth generation of
mobile data networking offers
increased speed when
transferring data on the go, but
it is still in its early stages of
adoption by mobile
phone networks.  
A 
Accessibility: A series of 
tools and features 
designed to make an 
Apple device such as the iPad 
easier to use by those with 
disabilities. You can find the iPad’s 
Accessibility features in Settings. 
Airplane Mode: All airlines warn 
you to turn off mobile electronic 
devices when on board an aircraft, 
so this iPad setting turns off all  
incoming and outgoing signals to 
your device, including data, 
Bluetooth, and Wi-Fi.
Glossary of iPad Terms
We’ve tried to keep this guide as jargon free as possible, but inevitably there are some 
words and phrases that might still seem mysterious to the newcomer. If you’re puzzled  
by anything you’ve read, we trust you’ll find this glossary helpful.
0-9
AirPlay: A protocol for streaming 
sounds and video from an Apple 
device to a set of compatible 
speakers, or a device such as an 
Apple TV. It’s wireless, and easy  
to use.
AirPrint: This is a feature of iOS 
and can be used to print from any 
iOS device that has been linked to 
an AirPrint-compatible printer over 
your home Wi-Fi network. 
App: Short for “application”, 
another name for a computer 
program. An app is a program that 
has been preloaded onto your iPad 
or can be downloaded from the 
Apple App Store. 
App Store: The App Store is 
where you can download free and 
paid programs to your device using 
your Apple ID. You can access it 
through the application found on 
your iPad’s home screen.
Apple ID: This is the email address 
and password that you have 
registered with Apple. It will be 
required to access most online 
applications on your iPad, including 
iTunes, App Store and iBooks.  
B 
Bluetooth: Bluetooth is a 
wireless technology used to 
link and exchange data with 
another compatible device. It has a 
range of approximately 8 metres 
(25ft). The iPad supports many 
Bluetooth devices, including  
headphones, keyboards and 
hands-free kits.  
Browser: An app used to access 
websites found on the worldwide 
web. The iPad comes with Apple’s 
Safari browser preinstalled, but 
others are available in the  
App Store.
C 
Calendar: This is one of 
Apple’s preloaded apps. Use 
it to keep track of events, 
invitations, and reminders on 
iPhone, iPod touch, and iPad.
Camera: This built-in Apple app 
 is used when taking photos  
and videos on iPhone and iPod 
touch 4.
D 
Dock: The opaque strip at 
the bottom of the home 
screen. Apps in the dock 
remain in a special row of icons (or 
Folders post-iOS 4) along the 
bottom of iPhone, iPod touch and 
iPad screens, which do not change 
when you swipe between  
home screens.
E 
Emoticon: A small drawing 
used to augment a 
message or text. Typically, 
these are yellow faces showing a 
variety of expressions.
F 
Facebook: Currently the 
most popular social 
networking site on the 
Internet, Facebook currently has 
over 835 million registered users. 
FaceTime Apple’s video calling 
service. Requires a Wi-Fi 
connection and is currently only 
supported via a phone number on 
iPhone and Apple ID email address 
on iPod touch 4 and Mac.
Force Quit: In the Fast App 
Switcher, tapping and holding an 
app will put it in Jiggly Mode and 
tapping the X badge will force it to 
quit. Built-in apps like Mail and 
Messages will automatically restart 
while third-party apps will restart 
the next time you launch them.
Folder: An icon representing a 
container for a group of apps. 
Getting More from Your iPad
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
144

Introduced in iOS 4, they are 
created by dragging an app on top 
of the other in Jiggly Mode, and 
deleted by removing all the apps. 
iPhone and iPod touch can 
currently hold 12 apps per Folder. 
iPad can hold 20.
G 
Game Center: Apple’s 
gaming service, where you 
can discover new games 
and share your game experiences 
with friends from around the world.
Gestures: Actions performed with 
your fingers on the iPad’s 
touchscreen, which the iPad then 
uses in apps. These include swiping, 
pinching, dragging and more.
H 
Home Button: The 
physical hardware button 
on the front of the iPhone, 
iPod touch, and iPad, located just 
below the screen. It’s used to wake 
the device, return to the Home 
Screen, cycle between the Home 
Screen and Spotlight Search 
screen, open the Fast App 
Switcher, and optionally enable 
Accessibility features.
Home Screen: The front end of 
Apple’s Springboard app launcher 
that consists of eleven screens that 
hold app icons, Folders, the Dock, 
the Fast App Switcher, and the 
Spotlight Search screen.
I 
iBooks: Apple’s eBook reader, 
available from the App Store. It 
handles the standard electronic 
publishing formats protected by 
FairPlay DRM, and PDF. It was 
introduced in 2010 along with 
the iPad.
iCloud: The collective name for 
Apple’s online services, it replaced 
MobileMe and integrates with  
all iOS devices and OS X  
Mac computers.
iMessage: A text message that’s 
sent from one Apple device to 
another. iMessages use the 
Internet rather than the mobile 
phone network, so they’re sent 
free of charge.
iOS: Apple mobile operating 
system and the software that 
powers the iPhone, iPod touch, 
iPad, and Apple TV.
iTunes: Mac and Windows music 
playing software, also used to 
activate and sync iPhone, iPod 
touch, and iPad. It is also used to 
purchase and manage music, 
movies, TV shows, apps, books, 
and other media.
iTunes app: iPhone, iPod touch, 
and iPad app used to access the 
iTunes Store.
L 
Landscape Mode: This 
describes the iPad when you 
hold it horizontally; that is, so 
it’s wider than it is tall and the 
Home button is on the right or left 
of the screen.
Lightning: The cable connection 
used by modern iPads and iPhones. 
It replaces the old 30-pin dock 
connectors.
Link: A piece of text or a graphic 
that, when tapped, takes you to 
another screen.
Location Services: Features and 
software on your iPad that pinpoint 
and use your current location, e.g. 
the Maps app.
M 
Mail: Built-in Apple app 
for handling POP3, 
IMAP, MobileMe, and 
Exchange/ActiveSync  
email accounts.
Messages: One of Apple’s built-in 
iPhone apps that handles SMS  
text messages and MMS 
multimedia messages.
MMS: (Multimedia Messages), 
introduced in iOS 3, MMS supports 
images, videos, sound, contact 
cards, and location data. Sent and 
received via the Messages app on 
iPhone to other mobile cell phones.
N 
News App: A recently 
introduced application that 
collates news sources from 
across the web. It can be 
customised to focus on news that 
interests you personally.
Notification Centre: A pull-down 
list of recent notifications, accessible 
from any iOS Home Screen or from 
within any iOS app.
P 
Photos: Built-in Apple  
app that handles your photo 
albums on your iPhone and 
iPod touch 4, and synced photos 
and videos for iPhone and all 
generations of iPad and  
iPod touch.
Photo Stream: Part of iCloud, 
Photo Stream stores your last thirty 
days or 1000 photos online and on 
your iOS devices, and all your 
photos on your Mac.
Portrait Mode: This describes the 
iPad when you hold it vertically; 
that is, so it’s taller than it is wide 
and the Home button is at the top 
or bottom of the screen.
Q 
QuickTime: Apple’s 2D 
video and graphics player, 
used to play movies and 
other video on iOS.
R 
Retina Display: 960x640, 
326ppi display available on 
iPhone 4 and iPod touch 4.
S 
Safari: Apple’s web browser, 
both for Mac OS X and iOS 
(sometimes called Mobile 
Safari). Based on KHTML/WebKit 
renderer and the Nitro  
JavaScript engine.
Settings: An app on your iPad 
that gives access to configurable 
features. There’s an entry in 
Settings for every app on your 
iPad, whether a default app or one 
you’ve added yourself.
SIM card: Subscriber Identity 
Module. The little card used in 
mobile phones that connects the 
phone to the network.
Siri: Apple’s intelligent virtual 
assistant, which replaces 
VoiceControl on the iPhone 4S.
Sleep/Wake Button: Physical 
hardware button on top of the 
iPhone, iPod touch, and iPad.  
Used to power on, wake from 
sleep, put to sleep, and power 
down iOS devices.
SMS: (Short Message Service) Text 
messages sent from the Messages 
app on iPhone to other cell
mobile phones.
T 
Text Field: Any area where 
you can add text. For 
example, the search field is 
where you type something you’re 
looking for. Tap on a text field to 
bring up the virtual keyboard.
Twitter: One of the most popular 
social networks built around a 
follower/following system rather 
than friends, with messages limited 
to 140 characters.
U 
URL: Uniform Resource 
Locator, the address used 
to access a web page. For 
example, Apple’s URL is www.
apple.com.
V   
VPN: (Virtual Private 
Network) provides secure 
access over the Internet  
to private networks, such as the 
network at your company  
or school.
W 
Wi-Fi: A trademark of 
the Wi-Fi Alliance, 
commonly used to 
refer to 802.11g (pre-2010 iOS 
devices) or 802.11n (post-2010 iOS 
devices) wireless networking.
XYZ 
YouTube: 
Google’s 
web-based 
streaming video service. Accessible 
from iPhone or iPod touch via the 
YouTube app, or iPad either online 
or via the YouTube app.
145
BDM’s: The iOS 9 iPad Manual
Glossary of iPad Terms
www.ebook3000.com

Don’t miss these other great 
BDM publications
Available now at your local retailer
Follow us on Facebook: BDM Publications
Follow us on Twitter: @BDMpubs
Visit us at: www.bdmpublications.com | www.ultimatephotoshop.com

www.ebook3000.com

If you’re new to the iPad, this is the book for you. Our crystal clear tutorials and 
easy-to-follow guides take you through the initial setup, show you how to use the 
Internet and email and give you the inside story on the iPad’s bundled apps and 
features. You’ll soon be using your Apple tablet like a pro!
  Setting Up Made Easy
We show you how to set up your iPad right 
out of the box, including getting onto the 
Internet, setting up your Apple ID and iCloud 
email and conﬁguring your Mail app to work 
with your email accounts. It’s an invaluable 
guide for new or inexperienced iPad users.
  iPad Apps Explained
Are you getting the most from the iPad’s 
built-in apps like Safari, Mail, Messages, Maps, 
Calendar, Contacts, Notes and more? Our expert 
tutorials show you exactly what these apps can 
do. We break down and explain features like 
Notiﬁcations and Family Sharing too.
  For Work or For Play
Whether you use your iPad for productivity 
or to have fun, we have everything you need. 
Enjoy your media with Music and Videos, 
organise your life with Calendar, Contacts and 
reminders; even make video phone calls over 
the Internet with FaceTime.
  Build Your Conﬁdence
Our tutorials won’t blind you with science or 
confuse you with jargon. Instead we take you 
through each app and feature step-by-step, 
with clear explanations and eye-catching 
illustrations designed to help you get the most 
from your iPad, whatever you use it for.
Includes the 
new iOS 9.3 
update and the 
new iPad Pro
The Easy Way to Master Your iPad
 
How to Use 
Your iPad’s 
Apps
Now you have your iPad up and running, you’ll want to 
make the most of its amazing apps. Browse the Internet with 
Safari, send and receive email with Mail, organise your life 
with Calendar, Contacts and Reminders, enjoy your music and 
movies with Videos and Music and more. Here we bring you 
crystal clear tutorials on how to use the apps that came with 
your iPad. It’s a fascinating journey!
CONTENTS
32 
All About the Messages App
36 
All About the Mail App
40 
All About the Safari App
44 
Clear Cache and Cookies  
 
in the Safari App
45 
Third-Party Browsers
46 
All About the News App
48 
All About the Contacts App
50 
All About the Notes App
52 
Notes’ New iOS 9 Features
54 
All About the Calendar App
57 
Inviting Contacts to an Event
58 
All About the iPad’s Cameras
59 
Opening the Camera App  
 
from the Lock Screen
62 
All About the Photos App
64 
Editing Techniques  
 
Made Easy
66 
All About the iCloud  
 
Photo Library
68 
All About the Maps App
70 
Using the Turn-by-Turn  
 
Navigation Feature
72 
The New Public  
 
Transport Feature
74 
The Music App and  
 
Apple Music
78 
All About the FaceTime App
78 
Making a FaceTime Call
80 
All About the Podcasts App
82 
All About the iBooks App
84 
All About the Clock App
86 
All About the Game  
 
Center App
88 
All About the  
 
Photo Booth App
90 
All About the Videos App
91 
Renting Movies
92 
All About the App Store App
94 
All About the iTunes  
 
Store App
BDM’s Ultimate Series • Volume 22
30
31
Beginners’ Guide to iPad
7
Beginners’ Guide to iPad
First Steps  
with  
Your iPad 
This is where you take your first steps with your iPad. If 
you’ve not yet bought one, our guide to the current 
range helps you to choose one. Our outline of the key 
features on your iPad will familiarise you with the 
buttons and controls and our setup guide shows how to 
get up and running with your amazing iPad.
08 
The Current iPad Range
10 
What’s Where on  
 
Your iPad?
12 
Setting Up Your iPad  
 
for the First Time
12 
Activating Your iPad
12 
VoiceOver Options
13 
Connecting to Wi-Fi
13 
Using Location Services
15 
Setting Up Your iPad  
 
on Your Computer
15 
Syncing Options
16 
Using Your iPad’s  
 
Touch ID Button
16 
Setting Up Your Touch ID
17 
How to Use Your Touch ID
18 
Using Your iPad’s  
 
Touchscreen
20 
Using Your iPad’s Keyboard
20 
Finding Accented Letters
20 
Using Emojis
21 
Auto Punctuation
21 
Quick Punctuation
21 
Keyboard as a Trackpad
22 
Setting Up and Using  
 
Your Apple ID
24 
Your iPad’s Control Centre
24 
Accessing the  
 
Control Centre
24 
Airplane Mode
25 
Do Not Disturb
25 
Screen Orientation Lock
26 
Get on the Internet  
 
with Your iPad
26 
Joining a Wi-Fi Network
27 
Joining a Mobile 4G or  
 
3G Network
28 
Setting Up Email on  
 
Your iPad
CONTENTS
7
Beginners’ Guide to iPad
BDM’s Ultimate Series • Volume 22
6
Getting  
More from  
Your iPad
Now you’ve mastered the iPad’s amazing range of apps, it’s 
time to take a closer look at its built-in features. In this 
section we learn about services such as Family Sharing, 
whereby you can share media and apps with family members; 
also Siri, the iPad’s personal digital assistant and Notifications, 
which let you know what’s going on with your iPad. It’s all 
great fun and extremely useful.
98 
Using the iPad’s  
 
Notiﬁcation Centre
102 
Using Your iPad’s New  
 
Multitasking Options
104 
Using the iPad’s   
 
Siri Assistant
106 
12 Ways to Use Siri
108 
Using Apple’s iCloud  
 
on Your iPad
111 
Sharing Photos with iCloud
112 
Using iCloud Drive  
 
on Your iPad
113 
Upgrading Your Subscription
113 
The iCloud Drive App
114 
Using the Family  
 
Sharing Service
118 
The Spotlight Search and  
 
Shortcut Menu
120 
Using AirDrop to Share Files
121 
Using Bluetooth on Your iPad
122 
Making Your iPad Secure
122 
Using Passcode Lock
123 
Using Find My iPhone
125 
Using the iPad’s Lost Mode
126 
Increasing Your iPad’s  
 
Battery Life
128 
Updating iOS on Your iPad
130 
Integrating Social Media
131 
Creating and Editing Folders
132 
Permanently Delete  
 
Unwanted Apps
133 
Managing the iPad’s Dock
134 
How to Turn Oﬀ  
 
In-App Purchases
135 
The iOS Sharing Button
136 
iOS and Mac OS Continuity
138 
Changing Your  
 
iPad’s Wallpaper
139 
Changing Your iPad Sounds
140 
What’s New in iOS 9.3?
142 
Troubleshooting &  
 
Problem Solving
144 
Glossary of iPad Terms
CONTENTS
BDM’s Ultimate Series • Volume 22
96
97
Beginners’ Guide to iPad
iPad
The iOS 9
Manual
BDM’s

