THE
UNITED NATIONS SYSTEM
A Reference Handbook

Other Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY 
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Courts and Trials, Christopher E. Smith
Dating and Sexuality, Jeffrey Scott Turner
Drug Use, Richard Isralowitz
Environmental Activism, Jacqueline Vaughn Switzer
Families in America, Jeffrey Scott Turner
Gay and Lesbian Issues, Chuck Stewart
Healthcare Reform in America, Jennie Jacobs Kronenfeld and
Michael R. Kronenfeld
Media and American Courts, S. L. Alexander
Media and Politics in America, Guido H. Stempel III
Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation, Sarah J. Diehl and
James Clay Moltz
Police Misconduct in America, Dean J. Champion
Proﬁling and Criminal Justice in America, Jeffrey B. Bumgarner
Racial and Ethnic Diversity in America, Adalberto Aguirre, Jr.
Racial Justice in America, David B. Mustard
Reproductive Issues in America, Janna C. Merrick and 
Robert H. Blank
U.S. Homeland Security, Howard Ball
U.S. Immigration, Michael C. LeMay
Voting in America, Robert E. DiClerico
Women and Equality in the Workplace, Janet Z. Giele and 
Leslie F. Stebbins
Women in Prison, Cyndi Banks

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up to date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series 
will ﬁnd the information they need in order to have a better
understanding of the social, political, environmental, and
economic issues facing the world today.


THE
UNITED NATIONS SYSTEM
A Reference Handbook
Chadwick F. Alger
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California 
Denver, Colorado 
Oxford, England

Copyright 2006 by Chadwick F. Alger
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Alger, Chadwick F., 1924–
The United Nations system : a reference handbook / Chadwick F. 
Alger.
p.
cm. — (Contemporary world issues)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 1-85109-805-4 (hardcover : alk. paper) — ISBN 1-85109-806-2
(ebook)
1. United Nations--History.
I. Title.
II. Series. 
JZ4986.A44 2005
341.23—dc22
2005025406
09
08
07
06
/ 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook. Visit
abc-clio.com for details.
Production Team
Acquisitions Editor: Mim Vasan
Submissions Editor: Peter Westwick
Production Editor: Anna R. Kaltenbach
Editorial Assistant: Alisha Martinez
Production Manager: Don Schmidt
Manufacturing Coordinator: George Smyser
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper
.
Manufactured in the United States of America.

For my wife, Elinor,
with deep respect for her devoted efforts
to develop social justice in local communities,
where seeds essential for global social justice
must be planted.


Contents
Preface, xiii
1
Background and History, 1
The UN System in Historical Perspective, 5
Emergence of New Tools for Peace Building, 9
Organization of the UN System, 15
Financing the UN System, 23
The Political Process in the UN System, 25
Conclusion, 26
Notes, 27
2
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 29
Varied Deﬁnitions of Global Values, 30
The Challenge of Global Complexity, 32
The Functions of Social Conﬂict, 33
The Need for Long-Term Peace Building, 33
The Need for a UN Standby Peacekeeping Force, 35
Are Changes in Security Council and General Assembly
Voting and Security Council Membership Needed?, 36
Alternative Modes for Financing the UN System, 39
Expanding Participation in Global Governance, 40
What Are Your Involvements and Responsibilities?, 45
References, 46
3
The Ambivalent Participation of the United States 
in the UN System, 49
Historic Roots of U.S. Ambivalence, 49
Factors Contributing to U.S. Government 
Unilateralism, 51
ix

Public Opinion on the United Nations, 53
Public Knowledge about the United Nations, 57
Seven Factors Contributing to U.S. Government
Unilateralism, 59
Emerging Opportunities for Public Education and
Participation, 60
Conclusion, 63
References, 64
4
Chronology of the Emergence and Development 
of the UN System, 67
Historic Roots of the UN System, 67
Principal Organizations of the United Nations, 72
Organizations Created by the General Assembly, 82
UN Specialized Agencies, 87
UN World Conferences, 106
Coordination of the UN System, 107
References, 109
5
Facts and Data, 113
Table of Contents, 114
League of Nations Covenant, 116
UN Charter, 126
Member States (191) of the United Nations with 
Dates on which They Joined, 152
International Bill of Human Rights, 156
Monitoring Bodies for Core Human Rights Treaties, 196
UN Electoral Assistance, 197
Examples of Human Rights Activities of 
Other UN Agencies, 200
UN Peacekeeping Operations, 209
UN Peacemaking and Peace-Building Missions, 214
International Criminal Tribunals, 215
UN System Counterterrorism Efforts, 217
Financing the UN System, 224
Secretaries-General of the United Nations, 230
Presidents of the UN General Assembly, 231
UN System Nobel Peace Prizes, 231
UN Conferences 1994–2004, 234
Former UN Trust Territories, 237
Remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories, 238
x
Contents

Public Links to the UN System, 238
Nineteenth-Century Roots of Organizations in the 
UN System, 246
References, 248
6
Alternative Futures for the UN System, 251
Table of Contents, 252
The Millennium Project, 252
Secretary General’s High-Level Panel on Threats, Challenges
and Change, 254
Cardoso Panel: United Nations–Civil Society Relations, 257
Panel on UN Peace Operations (Brahimi Report on
Peacekeeping), 259
Security Council Reform, 261
Reform of the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC), 268
UN Parliamentary Assembly, 271
Asian Civil Society Forum (ACSF) Statement on UN–Civil
Society Relations, 273
There Are Tasks for Everybody, 279
References, 286
7
Directory of Organizations, Associations, 
and Agencies, 289
Table of Contents, 290
UN System Acronyms, 290
UN Peacekeeping Operations Acronyms, 294
Organizations of States Outside the UN System, Both Global
and Regional, 295
Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU), 297
International Organizations of Local Authorities with
Worldwide Members, 300
Regional Organizations of Local Authorities in Global
Regions Outside of Europe, 302
Organizations of Local Authorities in the European Region,
303
Nongovernmental Organizations/Civil Society, 303
8
Biographical Sketches of Present Heads of UN System
Organizations, 313
UN Secretary-General, 314
Contents
xi

Heads of Eleven UN Programs, Funds, and Other Entities,
315
Heads of Eleven UN Specialized Agencies, 323
9
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
331
Table of Contents, 332
Books, 332
Articles and Chapters, 337
Future of the UN System References, 339
The UN Intellectual History Project, 341
Other Recent Publications about UN System History, 343
Bibliographies, 344
Encyclopedias, 345
Yearbook, 345
Journals, 345
Educational Materials on the UN System, 346
Web Access to Full Text of UN Documents, 349
Twenty-Five Most Central UN Treaties, 349
Websites, 350
Index, 353
About the Author, 375
xii
Contents

Preface
T
his overview of the United Nations System includes not only
the United Nations, with its 191 members and headquarters
in New York City, but also many subsidiary organizations of
the UN, Specialized Agencies and Related Organizations with
headquarters in many cities around the world. This is a system of
some fifty organizations. The UN System has emerged in re-
sponse to the ever more rapid, and ever more distant, linkages
among people across all political borders, through trade, migra-
tion, communication, and pursuit of natural resources. In addi-
tion, military weapons have been developed that have ever
greater destructiveness and have ever more distant range. As a
result, most signiﬁcant public policy problems ﬂow across all po-
litical borders. Therefore, most of the departments of the U.S.
government in Washington, and those of all other countries,
have counterparts in the UN System. Of course, coping with a
growing array of problems that circle the globe is much more
challenging than those confronting the governments of single
countries. Indeed, the UN System can be viewed as a “labora-
tory” in which procedures are being developed for coping with
this new type of agenda—a global agenda.
Many readers who confront the organization chart of the
UN System for the ﬁrst time will ﬁnd it to be very confusing. It is
the purpose of Chapter 1, “Background and History,” to provide
you with a basic understanding of the system. Media coverage of
the UN System tends to be focused on occasions where violence
requires the attention of the Security Council and the need for a
peacekeeping force. But it is the remainder of the system that is
engaged in long-term peace building that frequently prevents vi-
olence. At the same time, other parts of the system are facilitating
orderly worldwide travel, communications, and trade that make
xiii

signiﬁcant contributions to the daily lives of all people. Of course,
many of the organizations and activities of organizations in the
UN System have limited inﬂuence because of their limited ﬁnan-
cial resources and limited support from member countries. But
because of our ever more connected world the need for enhanc-
ing their contributions is growing signiﬁcantly. Therefore, it is es-
sential that we be aware of this potential.
Because of continual development of new technologies for
worldwide trade, travel, communications, and armaments, the
UN System is continually facing new challenges. Chapter 2,
“Problems, Controversies, and Solutions,” offers a brief
overview of some of the current ones. Of course, all govern-
ments of member countries are also having difficulties in coping
with the challenges of a changing world. In the case of the
United States, the government of the richest country with the
most powerful military often finds it preferable to avoid work-
ing through the UN System. Chapter 3 discusses “The Ambiva-
lent Participation of the United states in the UN System” and
the consequences of this ambivalence for both the United States
and the UN System. After presenting this background, Chapter
4 takes on the difficult challenge of presenting a “Chronology of
the Emergence and Development of the UN System.” Our very
brief descriptions of the historic roots of each organization in
the UN System reveals that each has its distinctive history. Some
have evolved out of conferences held as early as the eighteenth
century, and a few have evolved out of organizations founded
in the nineteenth century. Many more have been responsive to
new challenges in the twentieth century, with a majority of
them created after the founding of the United Nations in 1945.
Thus the history of the UN System can be traced back to a num-
ber of occasions in human history when efforts were made to
cope with a diversity of international problems. Although the
UN Conference in San Francisco in 1945 was one of the most
significant, the UN System has many other significant historic
roots. Knowledge about the historic background of efforts to
cope with global problems such as violence, poverty, poor
health, environmental pollution, and human rights violations
enables us to appreciate how much has been achieved. It also il-
luminates potential for making future progress and offers in-
sights, based on past experience, on how this potential might be
most effectively utilized.
xiv
Preface

Chapter 5 provides “Facts and Data” that will answer many
questions that arise in the reading of other chapters. These in-
clude the names of the 191 members of the United Nations, the
League of Nations Covenant, the UN Charter, the UN Declara-
tion on Human Rights, human rights monitoring bodies, UN
peacekeeping operations, international criminal tribunals, UN
System counterterror efforts, financing the UN System, public
links to the UN System, and many other items.
Chapter 6 offers an array of proposals for “Alternative Fu-
tures for the UN System.” This chapter is essential because the
UN System has constantly undergone changes ever since its
founding in response to the dynamic world in which it operates.
This will continue into the future. Thus it is necessary for those
involved in UN affairs to have visions of preferred future
changes. This chapter includes proposals for changing the Eco-
nomic and Social Council (ECOSOC), the Security Council, rela-
tions with private organizations and social movements, peace-
keeping operations, and other aspects of the UN System.
Chapter 7 provides a “Directory of Organizations, Associa-
tions, and Agencies” that are involved in activities related to the
UN System. This includes organizations such as the UN Associa-
tion of the United States of America, the Business Council for the
UN, the American NGO Coalition for the International Criminal
Court (ICC), and the Academic Council on the UN system
(ACUNS).
Chapter 8 offers “Biographical Sketches” of twenty-three
people who now serve as heads of UN System organizations. Re-
cruited from twenty member states around the world, they no
longer serve these states, but now preside over secretariats oblig-
ated to serve a worldwide membership. Many have already
served as members of secretariats before becoming the head of an
agency.
Chapter 9, the ﬁnal chapter, offers “Selected Print and Non-
print Resources.” The print resources include books, encyclope-
dias, yearbooks, and journals. The nonprint resources include
many websites. The UN website, www.un.org, offers access to
the websites of all organizations in the UN System. Among the
other websites are a number of UN issue sites and a number
organized by Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs).
It is our hope that this volume will offer useful information
with respect to the questions that motivated you to open its
Preface
xv

pages. At the same time, we hope that it enhances your aware-
ness of the relevance of organizations in the UN System to activi-
ties in which you are involved throughout your daily life. As a re-
sult we believe that questions will begin to emerge with respect
to whether, and how, you might become involved in shaping the
future directions of the UN System.
xvi
Preface

1
Background and History
R
eaders of this volume are probably most acquainted with UN
activities located at UN Headquarters in New York City, par-
ticularly the General Assembly (composed of all 191 UN
member states); the Security Council (15 members); the Eco-
nomic and Social Council (54 members); and the Secretariat,
composed of international civil servants from around the world
that support the work of these three bodies. These three repre-
sentative bodies, the Secretariat, and the International Court of
Justice, located in The Hague, are known as the Principal Organs
of the United Nations. But the goals and activities of these bod-
ies, created by the UN Charter, are deeply intertwined with a
number of other organizations that together form the UN Sys-
tem. This system of some forty organizations is portrayed in the
diagram in Figure 1.1.
The organizations that are linked with the main organiza-
tions by a solid line are all part of the United Nations. When we
use the term United Nations in this volume we are referring to
this array of organizations. In addition, there are Specialized
Agencies and Related Organizations that are linked to main or-
gans by dashes. These organizations were created by separate
treaties. When we use the term UN System in this volume it is in-
clusive of all of the organizations in Figure 1.1.
Organizations in the UN System are located at headquarters
around the world, as portrayed in Figure 1.2. All of the organiza-
tions located in New York City, the headquarters of the UN Sys-
tem, are part of the United Nations. Geneva, formerly the head-
quarters of League of Nations, is also a city with extensive UN
System activity, as headquarters of ﬁve Specialized Agencies, one
1

    The United N
Subsidiary Bodies
Military Staff Committee
Standing Committee and ad hoc bodies
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former 
Yugoslavia
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
UN Monitoring, Veriﬁcation and Inspection 
Commission (Iraq)
United Nations Compensation Commission
Peacekeeping Operations and Missions
UNCTAD   United Nations 
Conference on Trade and 
Development
 
ITC  International Trade Centre 
(UNCTAD/WTO)
UNDCP   United Nations Drug
 
Control Programme1
UNEP   United Nations  
Environment Programme
UNICEF   United Nations 
Children’s Fund
UNDP  United Nations 
Development Programme
UNIFEM    United Nations 
Development Fund for Women
UNV   United Nations 
Volunteers
UN CDF    United Nations 
Capital Development Fund 
UNFPA   United Nations  
Population Fund
UNHCR   Ofﬁce of the United 
Nations High Commissioner for 
Refugees
WFP   World Food Programme
UNRWA
2  
United Nations Relief 
and Works Agency for Palestine 
Refugees in the Near East
UN-HABITAT  
United 
Nations Human Settlements 
Programme (UNHSP)
O
Subsidiary Bodies
Main committees
Other sessional committees
Standing committees and
 
ad hoc bodies
Other subsidiary organs
Programmes and Funds
Research and Training Institutes
UNICRI   United Nations 
Interregional Crime and Justice 
Research Institute
UNITAR   United Nations 
Institute for Training and 
Research
UNRISD  
United Nations 
Research Institute for Social 
Development
UNIDIR 2  United Nations 
Institute for Disarmament 
Research
INSTRAW
  International 
Research and Training Institute 
for the Advancement of Women
Other UN Entities
OHCHR   Ofﬁce of the 
United Nations High 
Commissioner for  
Human Rights
UNOPS   United 
Nations Ofﬁce for 
Project Services
 
UNU   United Nations 
University
UNSSC  
United 
Nations System Staff 
College
UNAIDS  
Joint United 
Nations Programme on 
HIV/AIDS
P r i n c i p a l  O r g
 
Security Council
Trusteeship Council
General Assembly
Notes: Solid lines from a Principal Organ indicate a direct reporting relationship; dashes indicate a non-subsidiary relationship.   
1The UN Drug Control Programme is part of the UN Ofﬁce on Drugs and Crime.  2UNRWA and UNIDIR report only to the GA.   
3The World Trade Organization and World Tourism Organization use the same acronym.   4IAEA reports to the Security Council and 
the General Assembly (GA).    5The CTBTO Prep.Com and OPCW report to the GA. 6Specialized agencies are autonomous 
organizations working with the UN and each other through the coordinating machinery of the ECOSOC at the intergovernmental 
level, and through the Chief Executives Board for coordination (CEB) at the inter-secretariat level.      
Figure 1.1

 
 
 
d Nations   system
Related Organizations
WTO3   World Trade 
Organization
IAEA 4  
International Atomic 
Energy Agency
CTBTO Prep.com 5
 
PrepCom for the 
Nuclear-Test-Ban-Treaty 
Organization
OPCW 5   Organization for the 
Prohibition of Chemical 
Weapons
Departments and
 
 Ofﬁces
OSG 
Ofﬁce of the Secretary-
General
OIOS 
Ofﬁce of Internal 
Oversight Services
OLA 
Ofﬁce of Legal Affairs
DPA 
Department of Political 
Affairs
DDA 
Department for 
Disarmament Affairs
 
O
K
P
D 
Department of Peace- 
keeping Operations
OCHA 
Ofﬁce for the 
Coordination of 
Humanitarian Affairs
DESA 
Department of Economic 
and Social Affairs
 
M
C
A
G
D 
Department for 
General Assembly 
and Conference 
Management
DPI 
Department of Public 
Information
DM 
Department of 
Management
OHRLLS Ofﬁce of the High 
Representative for 
the Least Developed 
Countries, Landlocked 
Developing Countries 
and Small Island 
Developing States
UNSECOORD 
 
Ofﬁce of the United 
Nations Security 
Coordinator
UNODC United Nations Ofﬁce 
on Drugs and Crime
UNOG 
UN Ofﬁce at Geneva
UNOV 
UN Ofﬁce at Vienna 
UNON 
UN Ofﬁce at Nairobi
 
Specialized Agencies6
ILO  
International Labour  
Organization
FAO  
Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the 
United Nations
UNESCO  United Nations 
Educational, 
Scientiﬁc and Cultural 
Organization
WHO  
World Health 
Organization
World Bank Group
 IBRD  International Bank for 
Reconstruction and 
Development
 
IDA  International 
Development Association
 
IFC  International Finance 
Corporation
 MIGA  Multilateral Investment 
Guarantee Agency
 ICSID  International Centre for 
Settlement of Investment 
Disputes
IMF  
International Monetary 
Fund
ICAO  
International Civil 
Aviation Organization
IMO  
International Maritime 
Organization
ITU  
International
 Tele- 
communication Union
UPU  
Universal Postal Union
WMO  World Meterological 
Organization
WIPO  World Intellectual 
Property Organization
IFAD  
International Fund 
for Agricultural 
Development
UNIDO  United Nations 
Industrial Development 
Organization
WTO 3  World Tourism 
Organization
Functional Commissions
Commissions on:
 Human Rights
 Narcotic Drugs
 Crime Prevention and Criminal  
 Justice
 Science and Technology for  
 Development
 Sustainable Development
 Status of Women
 Population and Development
Commission for Social 
Development
Statistical Commission
Regional Commissions
Economic Commission for Africa 
(ECA)
Economic Commission 
for Europe (ECE)
Economic Commission for Latin 
America and the Caribbean 
(ECLAC)
Economic and Social Commission 
for Asia and the Paciﬁc (ESCAP)
Economic and  Social Commission 
for Western Asia (ESCWA)
Other Bodies
Permanent Forum on Indigenous
 Issues (PFII)
United Nations Forum on Forests
Sessional and standing 
committees
Expert, ad hoc and related bodies
 O r g a n s
 
Economic and  
Social Council
International Court  
of Justice
Secretariat
Published by the UN Department of Public Information  
DPI/2342—March 2004

Related Organization, and four UN agencies. Other agency
headquarters are located on all continents.
The UN System has arisen in response to two primary fac-
tors. First, new technologies for travel, communication, manu-
facturing, shipping, and investment are linking people around
the world ever more rapidly across ever greater distances. As a
result, a growing array of public policy problems are emerging
that ﬂow across all political borders. In response, organizations
for coping with these problems are being created that reach to
the borders of these problems. Second is growing understanding
of the causes of seriously disruptive conflict and realization of
the need to cope with these causes through long-term peace
building. The roots of these conﬂicts are often found in an array
of social problems that are on the agendas of organizations
throughout the UN System.
Those viewing these two ﬁgures for the ﬁrst time will ﬁnd
them exceedingly difﬁcult to understand. It is the purpose of this
4
Background and History
Paris
UNESCO
Montreal
ICAO
New York
UN(HQ)
OHRLLS
UNDP
UNFPA
UNICEF
Madrid
WTO
(Tourism)
London
IMO
The Hague
ICJ
Bem
UPU
Vienna
IAEA
UNIDO
UNODC
Beirut
ESCWA
Tokyo
UNU
Geneva
ECE
ILO
ITU
OHCHR
UNCTAD
UNHCR
WHO
WIPO
WMO
TWO (Trade)
Santo
Domingo
INSTRAW
Washington
IMF
World Bank Group
Santiago
ECLAC
Rome
FAO
IFAD
WFP
Addis Ababa
ECA
Nairobi
UNEP
UN-HABITAT
Gaza / Amman
UNRWA
Bangkok
ESCAP
•••
•
•
•
•
••
•
•
••
•
•••••
PRINCIPAL OFFICES OF THE UNITED NATIONS
Figure 1.2

volume to enable you to comprehend the usefulness of these dia-
grams for understanding the functioning of the UN System. Of
course, upon reflection, we should not be too surprised at the
growing scope of the UN System agenda. We are all linked
throughout the world in our daily lives, as a result of the origins
of clothes that we wear, the automobiles and electronic equip-
ment that we use, the resources that we consume, foods that we
eat, our e-mail and Internet linkages, and in many other ways. As
a result, as you read this volume, we urge you to ponder which
UN agencies have relevance to you in your daily life and to pon-
der what your response to this awareness should be. Table 1.1 of-
fers you an alphabetical list of issues and functions that appear in
the titles of organizations that appear in Figure 1.1. The purpose
of this list is to provide a brief overview of the breadth and diver-
sity of the titles of UN System agencies. It does not list all of the is-
sues on the agendas of organizations in the UN System. As you
read the list, ponder which subjects are most important to you in
your daily life. Then, as you read this volume you will learn that
the UN System is relevant to you in unexpected ways.
The UN System in Historical Perspective1
The foundation on which the drafters constructed the UN Char-
ter in San Francisco in 1945 was built during a long historical
process through which human inquisitiveness, restlessness, and
acquisitiveness produced ever-increasing contacts among hu-
man settlements, across ever longer distances. If we look back in
time from San Francisco, we readily see that the United Nations
is a child of the League of Nations, founded in 1920. It incorpo-
rates important institutional developments of the League, such
as the General Assembly, Security Council, a Secretariat, and the
growth in importance of economic and social activities during
the relatively brief history of the League.
The League, too, was not wholly a product of its founding
conference, the Paris Peace conference of 1919. Inis L. Claude
considers the century bounded by the Congress of Vienna (1815)
and the outbreak of World War I (1914) as the “era of preparation
for international organization.”2 He discerns three prime sources
of the Leagues of Nations. First, the League Council evolved out
of the Concert of Europe created by the Congress of Vienna
The UN System in Historical Perspective
5

(1815), convoked to create a new Europe out of the ruins of the
Napoleonic Wars. Through the Concert of Europe, the great
powers made themselves the self-appointed guardians of the Eu-
ropean system of states. The Concert of Europe met sporadically,
some thirty times before World War I, to deal with pressing polit-
ical issues. While smaller states were sometimes present at Con-
cert meetings, the Concert was dominated by the powerful. The
League Covenant provided for a council with explicit authority,
with the continuity of regular meetings, and with membership of
both large and small states.
6
Background and History
TABLE 1.1
Functions Appearing in Names of UN System Agencies in Figure 1
1. Agriculture (sa)
2. Atomic energy (ro)
3. Banking (sa)
4. Civil aviation (sa)
5. Children (ga)
6. Chemical weapons (ro)
7. Climate change
8. Crime prevention (fc)
9. Criminal tribunal (sc)
10. Culture (sa)
11. Development (ga) (fc)
12. Disarmament (ga)
13. Drug control (ga)
14. Education (sa)
15. Environment (ga)
16. Finance (sa)
17. Food (sa) (ga)
18. Forests (ecosoc)
19. Health (sa)
20. High technology
21. HIV/AIDS (ga)
22. Human rights (fc)
23. Human settlements (ga)
24. Industrial dev. (sa)
25. Investment guarantee (sa)
26. Indigenous issues(ecosoc)
27. Intellectual property (sa)
28. Labor (sa)
29. Maritime (sa)
30. Monetary fund (sa)
31. Meteorology (sa)
32. Monetary (sa)
33. Narcotic drugs (fc)
34. Nuclear test-ban (ro)
35. Peacekeeping (sc)
36. Population (fc) (ga)
37. Postal (sa)
38. Reconstruction (sa)
39. Refugees (ga)
40. Science (sa) (fc)
41. Settle invest. disputes (sa)
42. Social development (ga)
43. Staff college (ga)
45. Statistics (fc)
45. Sustainable dev. (fc)
46. Telecommunications (sa)
47. Tourism (sa)
48. Trade (ga)
49. Trade & dev. (ga)
50. Training & research (ga)
51. University (ga)
52. Volunteers (ga)
53. Women (fc) (ga)
54. World trade (ro)
sa Specialized Agency; ga Under General Assembly; fc Functional Commission under
ECOSOC; ecosoc Other Bodies under ECOCOC; sc Under Security Council; ro Related
Organization

Second, the League also evolved out of the Hague System,
instituted by conferences in 1899 and 1907. The League bor-
rowed extensively from procedures for the peaceful settlement of
conﬂicts codiﬁed by the Hague System. And the League reﬂected
the Hague System’s response to growing demands for universal-
ity, that is, that all states take part in international conferences. In
the words of the president of the 1907 Hague Conference, “This
is the ﬁrst time that the representatives of all constituted States
have been gathered together to discuss interests which they have
in common and which contemplate the good of mankind.”3 The
notion of universality meant not only the inclusion of smaller
states but also participation by states outside Europe.
Third, the League also evolved out of international bodies
founded in the nineteenth century, often referred to as public in-
ternational unions, to deal with common problems that tran-
scend the boundaries of states. These include the Rhine Commis-
sion, established by the Congress of Vienna in 1815, and the
Danube Commission, established in 1848. Other examples are
the International Telegraphic Union (1865); the Universal Postal
Union (1874); and similar organizations dealing with health,
agriculture, tariffs, railroads, standards of weight and measure-
ment, patents and copyrights, narcotic drugs, and prison condi-
tions. Through these organizations states acknowledged that
problems were emerging that required periodic conferences
where collaborative decisions would be made, to be imple-
mented by secretariats on a day-to-day basis. The League bor-
rowed extensively from this practice.
If we probe deeper into the past we ﬁnd, of course, that the
forces that fostered the antecedents of the League also had more
distant beginnings. It is important to take note of these because
we sometimes tend to forget them when we emphasize more re-
cent forms of “globalization.” The Industrial Revolution in the
eighteenth century dramatically changed the technology of
transportation, communication, and manufacturing. This in turn
fostered the need for international organizations to deal with
problems created by more rapid transportation and communica-
tion and by growth in international marketing, in importing of
raw materials, and in the international interdependence of labor.
Some would say that humanity was placed on an irre-
versible path toward the League and the United Nations even
earlier, in the late ﬁfteenth century, when Europeans began a pat-
tern of worldwide exploration that eventually led to extensive
The UN System in Historical Perspective
7

empires in Africa, Asia, and Latin America, and to Western dom-
ination of the world. William McNeill, in his “History of the Hu-
man Community,” dates the “closure of global ecumene” as from
1500 to 1650: The result was to link the Atlantic face of Europe
with the shores of most of the earth.
What had always before been the extreme fringe of
Eurasia became, within little more than a generation, a
focus of the world’s sea lanes, inﬂuencing and being in-
ﬂuenced by every human society within easy reach of
the sea.4
European-based empires eventually led to the creation of a
worldwide system of states. In its early years, the United Nations
was deeply involved in the creation of independent states out of
former colonial empires. Much early twenty-ﬁrst-century activ-
ity in the United Nations is concerned with the efforts of these
new states to transcend their economic dependence on the West.
In a fundamental sense, the conditions that fomented demands
for a New International Economic Order (NIEO) in the 1970s,
and for a New International Information and Communications
Order (NIICO) in the 1980s, have their roots in the “closure of
global ecumene” between 1500 and 1650. At the same time, the
problems in what we now call “failed states” have roots in the
fact that many of these states were created by European empire
builders, not by people living in these areas.
In developing a historical perspective, it is worth remember-
ing Claude’s depiction of the century between 1815 and 1914 as
the “era of preparation for international organization.” How
should we characterize the period between the founding of the
League of Nations (1920) and the present? Very apt would be the
“era of preparation for global governance.” By “global gover-
nance” we do not mean a “world government” that is modeled
after individual states that now make up the state system. In-
stead, we see “global governance” as something that is emerging
out of experience in a UN System that is grappling with a contin-
ually expanding agenda of global problems. In other words, a
form of governance that is relevant for an exceedingly diverse
polity that reaches around the globe will emerge out of the “UN
System laboratory.”
What have the pioneers in this ﬁrst era of global organizations
left as their heritage for those now working on global governance?
8
Background and History

First, they have achieved universality.
Second, they have created a network of global organizations
responsive to a growing agenda of global problems.
Third, they have established a continuous, worldwide
presence of this system of organizations, in some 134 cities
on all continents but Antarctica.
Fourth, they have made multilateral decision making
commonplace and have developed new procedures for
achieving consensus.
Fifth, they have greatly increased the number of tools
available for peace building.
Sixth, they have identiﬁed, and have made substantial
progress in multilateral deﬁnition of, a set of fundamental
global values, such as peace, human rights, development,
and ecological balance.
Seventh, they have made some progress in breaking down
barriers between the people of the world and global
governmental organizations.
Emergence of New Tools for Peace Building
During the fourscore and four years prior to 2005, the League of
Nations and the United Nations have demonstrated remarkable
creativity in expanding the array of available tools for diminish-
ing violence and peace building, and in experimenting with ap-
plication of these tools. Figure 1.3 is an extremely simplified
summary of the emergence of these peace tools.
Before the League was founded diplomacy (1) and balance of
power (2) were the primary available tools. Because of the ten-
dency of balance of power to result in arms races that ended in
wars, the League Covenant attempted to replace it with collective
security (3), through which military aggression would be pre-
vented by the threat of response with overwhelming military
force by members of the League. The Covenant made an effort to
strengthen diplomacy by adding procedures for peaceful settle-
ment (4) of disputes (through mediation, conciliation, and the
World Court). The League also created procedures for disarma-
ment and arms control (5). These approaches emphasized the use
of, and control of, violence in the pursuit of peace, sometime re-
ferred to as “negative peace.”
Emergence of New Tools for Peace Building
9

Figure 1.3 Emergence of PeaceTools in the League of Nations and the UN System
N
E
G
A
T
I
V
E
P
E
A
C
E
19th Century
1919
1945
1950–1989
1990–
Diplomacy (1)
Balance of Power (2)
I
League Covenant
UN Charter
UN Practice
UN Practice
NGO/People
’s 
Movements
Collective Security (3)
Collective Security 
Collective Security 
Collective Security 
Peacekeeping (9)
Peacekeeping
Peaceful Settlement (4)
Peaceful Settlement 
Peaceful Settlement 
Peaceful Settlement 
Track II Diplomacy (17)
Disarmament / 
Arms Control (5)
Disarmament / 
Arms Control 
Disarmament / 
Arms Control 
Disarmament / 
Arms Control 
Conversion (18)
II
Humanitarian
Intervention (15)
Defensive Defense (19)
Preventive Diplomacy 
(16)
Non-Violence (20)
P
O
S
I
T
I
V
E
P
E
A
C
E
Functionalism (6)
Functionalism
Functionalism
Citizen Defense (21)
Self-Determination (7)
Self-Determination
Self-Determination
Human Rights (8)
Human Rights 
Human Rights 
Self Reliance (22)
III
Economic Development 
(10)
Economic Development 
Feminist Perspective 
(23)
Economic Equity 
(NIEO) (11)
Economic Equity (NIEO) 
Peace Education (24)
Communication Equity 
(12)
Communication Equity 
VI
Ecological Balance (13)
Ecological Balance 
Governance for 
Global Commons (14) 
Governance for Global
Commons
IV
V

Practice under the League and some of the lessons of World
War I, contributed to the drafting of the UN Charter in 1945. Sig-
niﬁcantly, these three approaches were again incorporated into
the UN Charter in 1945, although with some changes—particu-
larly the strengthening of collective security. The UN Charter au-
thorizes nine of ﬁfteen members of the Security Council to “take
such action by air, sea, or land forces as may be necessary to
maintain or restore international peace and security,” so long as
none of the permanent members (China, France, Russia, the
United States, and the United Kingdom) vote against the resolu-
tion. The League of Nations required unanimity. Perhaps the
greatest difference between the Covenant and the Charter are
three peace strategies added to the latter by those assembled at
San Francisco: “functional” cooperation (6) on economic and social
issues, self-determination (7), and human rights (8). These ap-
proaches, in contrast to the earlier three, emphasize the creation
of peaceful economic, social, and political relationships—some-
times referred to as “positive peace.” The new Economic and So-
cial Council (ECOSOC) was based on growth in functional activ-
ities of the League during its brief history. The Trusteeship
Council continued League supervision over the treatment of
colonies seized by the victors in war, but it was the Declaration
Regarding Non-Self-Governing Territories (Chapter XI) that
opened the way for future self-determination advances under
the Charter. And the mention of human rights seven times in the
Charter, including the second sentence of the preamble, was a
dramatic departure from the League Covenant.
At the start of the twenty-ﬁrst century the United Nations
has existed three times as long as the League. As our most signif-
icant peace laboratory, the present UN System of organizations
reflects very significant learning since its founding. We have
learned that collective security—actually a form of deterrence—
is as dangerous as any other deterrence strategy if it fails. The ap-
plication of collective security in the Korean War, in which we
tottered on the edge of World War III, taught us this. On the other
hand, peacekeeping (7) forces are a useful new invention. With the
UN Emergency Forces positioned between Egypt and Israel as
prototypes (UNEF I, 1956–1967; UNEF II, 1973–1979), peacekeep-
ing forces initially patrolled a neutral zone along a ceaseﬁre line,
employing only small arms in self-defense. More recent peace-
keeping forces have been plunged into much more complicated
situations involving civil war and ethnic strife. Thus, as the
Emergence of New Tools for Peace Building
11

United Nations faces new challenges, it is groping toward the
development of a new peace tool that lies somewhere between
peacekeeping and collective security.
Functional collaboration has ﬂowered as the UN System has
developed agencies that cope with a broad array of global issues,
such as health, refugees, labor, education, clean water, communi-
cations, balance of payments, and housing. Self-determination
has been one of the United Nations’ greatest success stories, as it
has assisted a multitude of states in Africa, Asia, and the
Caribbean to independence and immediate UN membership.
With respect to human rights, under UN auspices the states
assembled have drafted standards for human life on the planet
through the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and
covenants on civil and political rights and economic, social, and
cultural rights, and an array of other treaties on genocide,
women’s rights, elimination of racial discrimination, rights of
children, rights of labor, environment, hunger and malnutrition,
religious discrimination, and many others. Fortunately, the exis-
tence of these standards has now raised our expectations for ful-
ﬁllment; unfortunately, progress in implementation of these stan-
dards has been very slow. But this should not prevent us from
celebrating the tremendous achievements of the drafters of these
new norms for human aspiration.
With the attainment of self-determination by states created
by colonialism, the number of member states in the United Na-
tions with widespread poverty grew rapidly. Difficulties in
achieving successful functional cooperation in a United Nations
in which wealth and resources are so unequally distributed
among members soon became apparent. Thus began the effort to
narrow the gap through development (10) programs in the poorer
countries. Despite significant successes in some locations, the
gap between the rich and the poor of the world has continued to
grow, at the same time that the world economy has become in-
creasingly interdependent.
As worldwide systems for exploitation of resources, produc-
tion, marketing, and communications reached ever more intru-
sively into the most distant human settlements and rural areas,
the peacelessness of population explosion in urban shantytowns
in cities in the poorer countries provoked a searching dialogue
on the meaning of development. This debate shifted the focus
from development projects in the poorer countries to the in-
equities in the international economic system. A debate that be-
12
Background and History

gan in the General Assembly grew into a UN Conference on
Trade and Development (UNCTAD), to an UNCTAD organiza-
tion, to a demand for a new international economic order (NIEO).
In 1974 this campaign for international economic equity (11) pro-
duced a declaration for a NIEO, a plan of action for a NIEO, and a
Charter of the Economic Rights and Duties of States.
Frustration over the unwillingness of the industrialized
countries to conduct global negotiations over a NIEO con-
tributed to demands for international communications equity (12)
and emergence in the 1980s of the demand, centered in UN-
ESCO, for a new international information and communications
order (NIICO). The domination and control of worldwide com-
munications by media corporations based in cities in the indus-
trialized countries mirrors that of transnational corporations for
resource exploitation, production, and marketing. As a conse-
quence, leaders in the poorer countries complain that control of
worldwide communications by corporations in Europe and
North America prevent the people in the industrialized countries
from learning about the actual condition of people in the poorer
countries and the reasonableness of demands for a NIEO.
One could say that demands for a NIEO and a NIICO of-
fered not only fuller understanding of the meaning of develop-
ment, but that they in turn illuminated the full meaning of self-
determination. Without changes in an international economic
and communication system whose roots reach back into the days
of colonial empires, the self-determination process will not be
completed.
At the same time, the global dialogue on the meaning of de-
velopment has challenged assumptions about the conditions un-
der which functional cooperation could contribute to peace. It
had been assumed that functional organizations such as UN-
ESCO could provide arenas for collaboration among technical
experts who would be isolated from political controversy. Bring-
ing issues such as the NIICO into UNESCO has been viewed by
some industrialized countries as “politicization” of agencies that
should remain apolitical. But to many in the poorer countries,
continued collaboration among technicians was intolerable so
long as worldwide economic and communications structures
were inequitable. From their perspective, this structure, and its
impact on the outcome of functional cooperation, is an appropri-
ate concern for agencies such as UNESCO. This dialogue has
caused us to think in a more penetrating way about the relevance
Emergence of New Tools for Peace Building
13

of equitable economic and communications relationships to
fruitful functional collaboration in dealing with global problems.
Questions of ecological balance (13), too, can be seen as
evolving out of global debate on the meaning of development.
Ecological problems became a prominent issue on the agenda
of the UN System beginning with the UN Environment Confer-
ence in Stockholm in 1972. The initiative came from the indus-
trialized countries, and at first the environment was perceived
to be their issue. Initially, many in the poorer countries even
suspected that environmental initiatives from the industrial-
ized countries were a covert strategy for preventing their devel-
opment. But by the time of the UN Conference on Environment
and Development (UNCED) in Rio de Janeiro in 1992, environ-
mental issues were perceived to be a concern of people from all
parts of the world. A new UN Commission on Sustainable De-
velopment (CSD) is leading the search in the early twenty-first
century for meanings of development that can include ecologi-
cal balance. At the same time, the squalor, disease, and death
that result from destruction of the human habitat are increas-
ingly judged to have the moral equivalence of similar peace-
lessness produced by weapons of war.
As new technology has enabled humankind to exploit more
extensively the depth and the breadth of the commons (atmos-
phere, space, oceans, and the two polar regions), this activity be-
comes an ever greater threat to peace—threatening war, environ-
mental disaster, inequitable sharing of resources of the
commons, and inequitable access to the transportation and com-
munications potential of the commons. Thus governance for the
global commons (14) has emerged as a significant dimension of
peace. Some consider the drafting of the United Nations Conven-
tion on Law of the Sea (1982) to be the most signiﬁcant event in
the struggle to develop peaceful governance for the commons.
The convention sets territorial limits and provides regulations
for ocean transit, for sharing of resources in and under the
oceans, for control of pollution, and for scientiﬁc research. This
was followed by the creation in 1994 of the International Seabed
Authority, with its headquarters in Kingston, Jamaica, and the
International Tribunal for Law of the Sea in Hamburg, Germany.
Both have 145 member states.
The more recent emergence of humanitarian intervention (15)
offers a striking example of how the emergence of new peace
tools gradually reinterprets the UN Charter. Article 2.7 states:
14
Background and History

“Nothing contained in the present Charter shall authorize the
United Nations to intervene in matters which are essentially
within the domestic jurisdiction of any state.” Nevertheless,
emerging human rights standards have been used to justify UN
intervention in places such as Kosovo and Somalia. At the same
time, interventions in the “failed states” of former colonies reveal
how the achievements attained under one tool, in this case self-
determinism (7) may lead to conditions that require the creation of
another tool, such as humanitarian intervention.
At the same time, the recent emergence of preventive diplo-
macy (16) reveals a striking demand from many quarters for pre-
ventive measures that take a long-term perspective and thereby
overcome the tendency to respond to threats of violence too late
to prevent it. This has been accompanied by a remarkably rapid
development of academic works that offer relevant insight.5 The
efforts of these researchers and others to make their work useful
for policymakers are striking.
Our brief overview has revealed remarkable progress in
fashioning tools that are now available for enhancing peace and
well-being in the twenty-ﬁrst century. Not only have functional-
ism, self-determination, and human rights been supplemented
by economic development, economic and communications eq-
uity, ecological balance, and governance for the commons, but
these new themes have deepened our insight on neglected di-
mensions of earlier approaches. We now understand better the
full meaning of self-determination, as we have learned about its
economic and communications dimensions. We now have in-
sights on the ecological aspect of human rights. At the same time,
new conflict resolution institutions, such as the International
Seabed Authority and the International Tribunal for Law of the
Sea, have been created.6
Organization of the UN System7
This brief overview of the historical roots of the UN System and
the emergence of a growing array of peace tools has revealed the
daily relevance of the entire system to the prevention of disrup-
tive conﬂict and long-term peace building. We will now brieﬂy
describe signiﬁcant aspects of the diagram of the UN System, Fig-
ure 1.1, beginning with the Principal Organs listed across the top.
Organization of the UN System
15

General Assembly
The General Assembly consists of all member states, numbering
191 in 2005, listed in Chapter 5 on pages 153–155. It may consider
any issue “within the scope of the present Charter or relating to
the powers and functions of any organs,” except for issues on the
agenda of the Security Council. Voting procedures permit those
present to vote “yes” or “no,” or to abstain. Passage of substan-
tive issues requires a two-thirds vote of those present and voting
for or against the resolution. Votes on procedural issues require a
simple majority of those voting for or against the resolution. The
General Assembly begins its annual sessions on the second Tues-
day in September of each year with a general debate in which
heads of state and other high officials often participate. Those
participating in the general debate may make comments on any
issue.
Proposals of items for the General Assembly agenda are
made to the General Committee, composed of the president of
the General Assembly, twenty-one vice presidents, and the chairs
of the six General Assembly main committees. The General Com-
mittee assigns accepted items to one of the six main committees.
They are referred to both by a descriptive title and a number: (1)
the Disarmament and International Security Committee, First;
(2) the Economic and Financial Committee, Second; (3) the Social,
Humanitarian, and Cultural Committee, Third; (4) the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee, Fourth; (5) the Admin-
istrative and Budgetary Committee, Fifth; and (6) the Legal
Committee, Sixth. Only rarely are issues sent directly to a ple-
nary session of the Assembly.
In contrast to the practice of most legislative bodies, General
Assembly committees are all committees of the whole, with rep-
resentatives of all 191 member states. This challenges member
states to have representation on six committees that often meet at
the same time. Passage of resolutions in committees requires
only a simple majority vote. As committees pass resolutions
there are occasional meetings of the plenary to give ﬁnal consid-
eration to resolutions passed by committees. Those resolutions
receiving only a simple majority in committee are the focus of
much political activity before they reach the plenary, as efforts
are made to attain a two-thirds majority.
Resolutions passed by the General Assembly are recommen-
dations and do not have the force of law. On the other hand, they
16
Background and History

do have impact because of the legitimacy created by their pas-
sage. One example is the UN Declaration on Human Rights,
which is treated as common law by courts in many countries. To
give its provisions the explicit force of law, the Assembly drafted
two conventions, one on civil and political rights and one on eco-
nomic, social, and cultural rights. Individual states are not
legally required to meet the standards deﬁned in these conven-
tions until they are ratified by their governments. Of course,
General Assembly resolutions on the budgets and activities of
UN agencies under General Assembly authority do have the
force of law.
The General Assembly has more than a hundred issues on its
agenda each year. Most require follow-up action by the Secre-
tariat (the far right column in Figure 1.1) with ofﬁces that focus on
a diversity of issues that include political matters, disarmament,
peacekeeping, humanitarian concerns, economic and social prob-
lems, security, and drugs and crime. Particularly notable is the of-
fice created in 2001, Office of the High Representative for the
Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries,
and Small Island Developing States (OHRLLS). Also included are
ofﬁces of the Secetariat in Geneva, Vienna, and Nairobi.
The General Assembly has also found it necessary to estab-
lish the twenty-one units that are portrayed in the large box ap-
pearing in the bottom left-hand side of Figure 1.1. The names of
these twenty-one units usefully reflect the growing breadth of
the challenges confronted by the Assembly. We will make an ef-
fort to provide an overview by crudely classifying these ofﬁces,
based on the three categories in the table, but it will be obvious
to readers that the issues covered by them have a diversity of
linkages.
The fourteen agencies classified as programs and funds
could be divided into seven categories: (1) development (UNDP,
UNIFEM, UNV, UNCDF, UNFPA, WFP); (2) refugees (UNHCR,
UNRWA); (3) trade (UNCTAD, ITC); (4) environment (UNEP);
(5) children (UNICEF); (6) drugs (UNDCP); and (7) human set-
tlements (UN-HABITAT).
Of the ﬁve organizations classiﬁed as research and training
institutes, one has a broad concern with training and research
(UNITAR). The others are more speciﬁcally focused on (1) crime
and justice (UNICRI), (2) social development (UNIDIR), (3) dis-
armament (UNUDIR), and (4) the advancement of women (IN-
STRAW).
Organization of the UN System
17

The ﬁve other UN entities have a broad range of concerns:
human rights (UNHCHR), HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), UN Staff Col-
lege (UNSSC), the UN University (UNU), and the UN Ofﬁce for
Project Services (UNOPS).
These fourteen agencies have seven locations in addition to
those located where there are branches of the UN Secretariat
(New York, Geneva, Vienna, and Nairobi). There are offices in
Germany (Bonn), Italy (Rome, Turin), the Dominican Republic
(Santo Domingo), Japan (Tokyo), Jordan (Amman), and Gaza.
Security Council
According to the Charter, the Security Council has “primary re-
sponsibility for the maintenance of international peace and secu-
rity” (Article 24). It is organized to be able to function continu-
ously, so a representative of each of its members must be present
at all times at UN Headquarters. The Council has ﬁfteen mem-
bers: ﬁve permanent members (China, France, Russia, the United
Kingdom, and the United States) and ten elected by the General
Assembly for two-year terms. The presidency of the Council ro-
tates monthly, according to the English alphabetical listing of its
member states.
Each Council member has one vote. Decisions on procedural
matters are made by an afﬁrmative vote of at least nine of the ﬁf-
teen members. Decisions on substantive matters also require
nine votes, but no resolution passes if any permanent member
votes against it. This power of permanent members is often re-
ferred to as the “veto” power.
Under the Charter, the functions and powers of the Security
Council are: (1) to maintain international peace and security in
accordance with the principles and purposes of the United Na-
tions; (2) to investigate any dispute or situation that might lead
to international friction; (3) to recommend methods of adjusting
such disputes or the terms of settlement; (4) to formulate plans
for the establishment of a system to regulate armaments; (5) to
determine the existence of a threat to the peace or act of aggres-
sion and to recommend what action should be taken; (6) to call
on members to apply economic sanctions and other measures
not involving the use of force to prevent or stop aggression; (7) to
take military action against an aggressor; (8) to recommend the
admission of new members; (9) to exercise the trusteeship func-
18
Background and History

tions of the United Nations in “strategic areas”; (10) to recom-
mend to the General Assembly the appointment of the secretary-
general; and (11) together with the Assembly, to elect the judges
of the International Court of Justice.
When a complaint concerning a threat to peace is brought
before it, the Council’s ﬁrst action is usually to recommend that
the parties try to reach agreement by peaceful means. In some
cases, the Council itself undertakes investigation and mediation.
It may appoint special representatives or request the secretary-
general to do so or to use his or her good ofﬁces. It may set forth
principles for a peaceful settlement.
A state that is a member of the United Nations, but not of
the Security Council, may participate, without a vote, in the
Council’s discussions when the Council considers that that coun-
try’s interests are affected. Both members of the United Nations
and nonmembers if they are parties to a dispute being consid-
ered by the Council, are invited to take part, without a vote, in
the Council’s discussions; the Council sets the conditions for par-
ticipation by a nonmember state.
On 18 May 2004 thirteen peacekeeping operations autho-
rized by the Security Council were in the ﬁeld, the highest num-
ber since l995: three in Europe (Cyprus, Georgia, and Kosovo),
six in Africa (the Ivory Coast, Liberia, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Ethiopia/Eritrea, Sierra Leone, and Western Sahara),
two in Asia (Eastern Timor and India/Pakistan), and two in the
Middle East (the Golan Heights and Lebanon). These operations
involved 53,000 peacekeepers (soldiers and police). Secretary
General KoﬁAnnan observed on this day: “Many of these mis-
sions are large and complex. Most go beyond the limited military
functions that have marked traditional peacekeeping missions.”8
There is also a UN truce supervision organization in the Middle
East that performs observer functions in the area, serves as a go-
between for hostile parties, and maintains ofﬁces in Beirut and
Damascus.
Economic and Social Council
The Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) consists of fifty-
four representatives of member states that are elected by the
General Assembly for three-year terms. Under the UN Charter,
ECOSOC is responsible for: (1) promoting higher standards of
Organization of the UN System
19

living, full employment, and economic and social progress; (2)
identifying solutions to international economic, social, and
health problems; (3) facilitating international cultural and edu-
cational cooperation; and (4) encouraging universal respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms. ECOSOC’s purview
extends to over 70 percent of the human and ﬁnancial resources
of the entire UN System. Toward this end ECOSOC coordinates
the work of the fourteen UN specialized agencies, nine func-
tional commissions, and five regional commissions. It receives
reports from eleven UN funds and programs and issues policy
recommendations to the UN System and to member states. It is
important to note that members of the coordinating bodies es-
tablished by ECOSOC are representatives of member states.
There is also a signiﬁcant parallel effort at coordination carried
out by representatives of the secretariats, the UN System Chief
Executives Board (CEB).
As we provide a very brief inventory of the array of UN
System agencies coordinated by ECOSOC, readers are urged to
ponder which agencies are attempting to cope with activities in
their personal daily lives that have global reach. A few obvious
examples could be those with names that include these words:
postal, telecommunications, civil aviation, intellectual property,
tourism, environment, HIV/AIDS, trade, and the status of
women. Each reader will no doubt identify others.
The fifteen Specialized Agencies (Figure 1.1) have a very
special status. Each has been created by a separate treaty and has
its own members, which tend to include most of the members of
the organization created by the UN Charter. Each has its own as-
sembly, council, and secretariat. The fact that they are largely au-
tonomous makes efforts by ECOSOC to coordinate their activi-
ties of great importance. As we pointed out in our historical
background, the roots of the Universal Postal Union (UPU), the
International Telecommunications Union (ITU), and the World
Health Organization (WHO) reach back into the nineteenth cen-
tury. The International Labor Organization was founded in 1919.
Headquarters of the specialized agencies are all located in Eu-
rope or North America: Geneva (ILO, WHO, ITU, WMO, WIPO),
Vienna (UNIDO), Rome (FAO, IFAD), Paris (UNESCO), Wash-
ington (World Bank Group, IMF), Montreal (ICAO), London
(IMO), and Bern (UPU).
The nine functional commissions (Figure 1.1) have a varying
number of members, all representatives of member states. They
20
Background and History

focus on an array of issues that are on the agendas of the UN Sec-
retariat and of separate units established by the General Assem-
bly: human rights, narcotic drugs, crime prevention and criminal
justice, science and technology for development, sustainable de-
velopment, status of women, population and development, and
social development. All of these issues are intertwined with is-
sues on the agendas of a number of agencies in the UN System.
Finally, the Statistical Commission responds to the need to
achieve an integrated system in the collection, processing, and
dissemination of statistics by a diversity of agencies within states
and agencies throughout the UN System.
The ﬁve regional commissions (Figure 1.1), each with repre-
sentatives from member states in a speciﬁc region of the world,
were established to cope with issues that are regional in scope.
Their headquarters are located in Addis Ababa, Bangkok, Beirut,
Geneva, and Santiago (Chile).
Coordination of the work of the organizations in the UN
System is also the responsibility of the UN System Chief Execu-
tives Board for Coordination (CEB), earlier called the Adminis-
trative Committee on Coordination (ACC). The CEB brings to-
gether the executive heads of twenty-four agencies to further
coordination and cooperation on the whole range of substantive
and management issues facing the UN System.
Chaired by the secretary-general of the United Nations, the
CEB meets twice annually. It has two high-level committees of
senior executives who are authorized to take decisions on behalf
of their executive heads. The main function of the the High-Level
Committee on Programs (HLCP) is to advise the CEB on policy
and program and operational matters of systemwide importance
and to foster interagency cooperation and coordination on these
matters. The High-Level Committee on Management (HLCM) is
the principal interagency body for coordination in the adminis-
tration and management areas, particularly regarding ﬁnancial
and budgetary issues, human resources-related issues, informa-
tion and communication technology (ICT) issues, and staff secu-
rity within the UN System.
Trusteeship Council
In setting up an international trusteeship system, the Charter es-
tablished the Trusteeship Council as one of the main organs of
Organization of the UN System
21

the United Nations and assigned to it the task of supervising the
administration of trust territories placed under the trusteeship
system. The major goals of the system were to promote the ad-
vancement of the inhabitants of trust territories and their pro-
gressive development toward self-government or independence.
The aims of the trusteeship system have been fulﬁlled to such an
extent that all trust territories have attained self-government or
independence, either as separate states or by joining neighboring
independent states. The Trusteeship Council suspended opera-
tion on 1 November 1994 with the independence of Palau, the
last remaining UN trust territory, on 1 October 1994. By a resolu-
tion adopted on 25 May 1994, the council amended its rules of
procedure to drop the obligation to meet annually and agreed to
meet as occasion required—by its decision or the decision of its
president, or at the request of a majority of its members or the
General Assembly or the Security Council.
Secretariat
Our brief comments on the Secretariat will be limited to the Secre-
tariat of the United Nations with headquarters in New York City.
There are, of course, also secretariats at the headquarters of the
fourteen autonomous Specialized Agencies with headquarters in
other cities. The UN Secretariat, an international staff working in
duty stations around the world, carries out the diverse day-to-
day work of the organization. It services the other principal or-
gans of the United Nations and administers the programs and
policies laid down by them. At its head is the secretary-general,
who is appointed by the General Assembly on the recommenda-
tion of the Security Council for a ﬁve-year renewable term.
The duties carried out by the Secretariat are as varied as the
problems dealt with by the United Nations. These range from
administering peacekeeping operations to mediating interna-
tional disputes, from surveying economic and social trends and
problems to preparing studies on human rights and sustainable
development. Secretariat staff members also inform the world’s
communications media about the work of the United Nations,
organize international conferences on issues of worldwide con-
cern, and interpret speeches and translate documents into the or-
ganization’s ofﬁcial languages.
22
Background and History

The Secretariat has a staff of about 8,900 under the regular
budget drawn from some 170 countries. As international civil ser-
vants, staff members and the secretary-general answer to the
United Nations alone for their activities and take an oath not to
seek or receive instructions from any government or outside au-
thority. Under the Charter, each member state undertakes to re-
spect the exclusively international character of the responsibilities
of the secretary-general and the staff and to refrain from seeking
to inﬂuence them improperly in the discharge of their duties.
Although headquartered in New York, the United Nations
maintains a significant presence in Addis Ababa, Bangkok,
Beirut, Geneva, Nairobi, Santiago, and Vienna, and has addi-
tional ofﬁces all over the world.
International Court of Justice
Chapter XIV of the UN Charter states that “[t]he International
Court of Justice shall be the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations.” Its seat is at the Peace Palace in The Hague (Nether-
lands). It began work in 1946, when it replaced the Permanent
Court of International Justice, which had functioned in the Peace
Palace since 1922. The court has a dual role: to settle in accor-
dance with international law the legal disputes submitted to it by
states and to give advisory opinions on legal questions referred
to it by duly authorized international organs and agencies.
The Court is composed of ﬁfteen judges elected to nine-year
terms of ofﬁce by the UN General Assembly and Security Coun-
cil sitting independently of each other. It may not include more
than one judge of any nationality. Elections are held every three
years for one-third of the seats, and retiring judges may be re-
elected. The members of the court do not represent their govern-
ments but are independent magistrates.
Financing the UN System
The UN System is ﬁnanced from two sources: the assessment of
member states and voluntary contributions. Assessments are
based on the wealth of each state. The United Nations has two
forms of assessment, one for the regular budget and one for
Financing the UN System
23

peacekeeping operations. Voluntary contributions are made to
specific UN System agencies and activities. The Specialized
Agencies have separate scales of assessment and also receive vol-
untary contributions. For the last year in which totals for the sys-
tem were available, 2001, they were approximately US$ 12 bil-
lion. Of this total, 53 percent came from voluntary contributions.
With respect to UN assessments, it is notable that since 1992
the peacekeeping budget has surpassed the UN regular budget.
In 2003 the peacekeeping budget equaled 67 percent of the as-
sessments available to the United Nations. In 2004 the largest
contributor, the United States, was assessed 24.5 percent, fol-
lowed by Japan, Germany, the United Kingdom, France, Italy,
Canada, and Spain. At the insistence of the U.S. Congress, the
U.S. percentage was recently reduced to 21 percent. Were the
United States to pay in accordance with its percentage of mem-
bership gross national product (GNP), it would be paying at a
rate of 27 percent. The highest per capita contributors to the UN
regular budget in rank order are: Luxembourg, Liechtenstein, Ja-
pan, Norway, Denmark, Monaco, Iceland, Germany, Austria, and
Sweden. Their contributions range from $1.30 to $2.15 per capita.
The U.S. per capita assessment is $0.98.
The very slow growth of the UN regular budget has not
been responsive to its growing agenda. Particularly challenging
for most agencies has been their signiﬁcant dependence on vol-
untary contributions. For example, the Ofﬁce of the High Com-
missioner for Human Rights (HCHR) depends on voluntary con-
tributions for 67 percent of its budget. As a result, only 88 of its
155 personnel are financed by the regular budget. This depen-
dence on voluntary contributions makes long-range planning
difﬁcult and prevents the OHCHR from making future commit-
ments to valued personnel.
The challenges confronted by the UN System as a result of
its limited financial resources is vividly demonstrated by com-
paring the UN System’s US$ 12 billion-per-year budget with
yearly world military expenditures of US$ 800 billion. This
amount would finance the present UN System for sixty-five
years. In 2005 the UN System’s yearly budget is only 3 percent of
that of the member state with the largest military budget. This
imbalance challenges the UN System in two ways. First, it makes
widespread tools of violence available to states for coping with
conflict situations. Second, it withholds resources, from both
states and the UN System, for the development of nonviolent
24
Background and History

procedures for coping with conflict and for long-term peace
building.
The Political Process in the UN System
The emergence of organizations with universal membership has
radically changed relations among states. In traditional diplo-
matic practice, it is only the large and wealthy states that have
permanent representatives in most capitals of the world. The
smaller and poorer states tend to accredit some of their ambas-
sadors to a number of countries. But all member states tend to
have permanent representatives at the main headquarters in the
UN System. Another difference is that in capitals of states diplo-
mats have no “common home,” but at various UN System head-
quarters representatives of 191 states frequent the public and pri-
vate meeting rooms, the lounges, hallways, dining facilities, bars,
snack bars, libraries, and parking garages. In other words, when
you wish to meet a representative of another state in a state capi-
tal, you plan it. In contrast, when you wish to avoid meeting a
representative of a speciﬁc state at a UN System headquarters,
you must plan it. These opportunities for apparently unplanned
discussion can be particularly significant for representatives of
states that are having unfriendly relationships or may not even
have formal diplomatic relations.
Spending time at the headquarters of a UN agency offers
representatives of states with a learning experience that is quite
different from that acquired in the capital of a state. At a UN
agency headquarters they are required to cope with an agenda of
issues that has been developed by a political process in which
states from around the world have been involved. At the same
time, they must listen to public debate in which a vast array of
different positions are taken on these issues. As they sit in alpha-
betical order in plenary and committee meetings, they ﬁnd it dif-
ficult to avoid more private exchanges with nearby colleagues
from other countries. In addition, small groups of delegates
spend many hours in small meeting rooms attempting to de-
velop a consensus on difficult issues that can be presented for
consideration in public sessions. Thus, the atmosphere at the
headquarters of many UN agencies is more akin to that of a par-
liament than that of traditional diplomacy. Indeed, Philip Jessup,
The Political Process in the UN System
25

who represented the United States in the UN in many capacities
in the early days of the UN, gave the name “parliamentary diplo-
macy” to this process in the mid-1950s.9 Members of UN secre-
tariats are, of course, also important participants in the UN polit-
ical process. They work with the elected officers of UN
decision-making bodies in preparing the agenda. They often
have a longer background of experience on issues being debated
than do these ofﬁcers. During public meetings they sit alongside
the chairs of meetings and assist them as they attempt to cope
with the dynamic political process by helping them to decide
when to call a vote, when to adjourn, and when to make substan-
tive or procedural recommendations to the participants.
In addition, in most of the places where representatives of
states meet in parliamentary diplomacy, representatives of non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) may be present. Building
on the Charter provision Article 71, providing for NGO consulta-
tion with ECOSOC, more than 2,400 NGOs have consultative sta-
tus with ECOSOC in 2005. Access by some of these organizations
has been extended to the General Assembly, the Security Coun-
cil, and secretariats and decision-making bodies throughout the
UN System. Finally, the media, too, have easy access to most of
the places where representatives of states and secretariats are en-
gaged in parliamentary diplomacy.
Conclusion
This opening chapter has emphasized that the UN System is an
array of organizations that have emerged in response to two
main factors. First, a growing number of global issues are emerg-
ing because of the impact of new technologies on travel, trade,
communication, manufacturing, and investment. Second, there
is growing understanding that overcoming violence and seri-
ously disruptive conflict requires not only the capacity to re-
spond when threats emerge, but also sustained efforts to cope
with economic, social, cultural, and political issues at the roots of
these conflicts—that is, long-term peace building. As a result,
representatives of 191 states meet simultaneously every day in a
number of headquarters, and members of secretariats work
every day in some forty headquarters, in efforts to cope with
these issues.
26
Background and History

Because of these developments, we have termed this period
of dynamic growth in the UN System to be the “era of prepara-
tion for global governance.” We perceive the UN System to be a
vast “laboratory” where representatives of states and members
of secretariats are attempting to devise a form of governance rel-
evant for people from a great diversity of cultures, religions,
economies, and natural environments around the world.
Although a vast array of public policy issues now flow
across all borders, as we ponder their global dimension it is im-
portant that we bear in mind that each has dimensions that must
be attended to by local governments, regional governments
within states, governments of states, and regional organizations
of states, as well as organizations in the UN System. For exam-
ple, coping with air pollution, human rights, health, and drug
problems requires simultaneous efforts that reach from local to
global governance. Of course, this also greatly complicates the
challenges confronted by people who aspire to be responsible cit-
izens. They must be informed of their responsibilities with re-
spect to governments that represent them from the local to the
global. It is our hope that the material that follows in this volume
will challenge you to become more self-consciously aware of the
world relations of your daily life and enhance your ability to be-
come responsibly involved in emerging global governance.
Notes
1. This brief historical summary is based on Chadwick F. Alger, 1995,
“The United Nations in Historical Perspective,” in Chadwick F. Alger,
Gene M. Lyons, and John E. Trent, eds., The United Nations Systems: The
Policies of Member States. Tokyo: United Nations University, 3–40.
2. Inis Claude, Jr., 1971, Swords into Ploughshares: The Problems and
Progress of International Organizations, 4th ed., New York: Random
House, 41.
3. J. S. Scott., ed., 1971, The Reports to the Hague Conference of 1899 and
1907. Oxford: Humphren Milford, 201; cited by Claude, 29.
4. William McNeill, 1963, The Rise of the West: A History of the Human
Community. Chicago: University of Chicago, 565.
5. Several titles of these works vividly illuminate this trend: Preventive
Measures: Building Risk Assessment and Crisis Early Warning, 1998, by
John L. Davies and Ted Robert Gurr; Preventing Violent Conﬂicts: A Strat-
egy for Preventive Diplomacy, 1996, by Michael S. Lund; and Preventing
Notes
27

Deadly Conflict, 1998, by the Carnegie Commission on Preventing
Deadly Conﬂict.
6. For a more comprehensive overview of the historical roots of the UN
System see Chadwick F. Alger, “The Expanding Tool Chest for Peace-
builders,” 1999, in Ho-Won Jeong, ed., The New Agenda for Peace Research.
Aldershot, UK, and Brookﬁeld, USA: Ashgate, 13–42.
7. This brief overview of the UN System has drawn substantially on in-
formation available at the UN website at www.un.org.
8. www.UNWire.org, 18 May 2004.
9. Philip Jessup, 1956, Parliamentary Diplomacy: An Examination of the Le-
gal Quality of the Rules of Procedure of Organs of the United Nations. Ley-
den, Netherlands: A. W. Sijhoff.
28
Background and History

2
Problems, Controversies, 
and Solutions
E
fforts of the UN System to cope with a growing array of
global challenges are encountering problems that are result-
ing in many controversies and debates over what would be
the most effective solutions. This is to be expected because orga-
nizations in the UN System are attempting to cope with a dy-
namically changing social and natural global environment by de-
veloping procedures for what is increasingly called global
governance. This term is preferred in order to distinguish this pro-
cess from world government, earlier associated with proposals for
a world government that tended to be modeled after existing
states. Instead, global governance is perceived to be emerging
out of learning acquired in efforts to cope with problems that
range across the borders of 191 states around the world.
Certainly, response to this challenge requires a form of gov-
ernance that is quite different from that employed in single
states. Of course, this does not mean that what we have learned,
and are continually learning, from governing experience within
states will not be useful. But it does suggest that governance pro-
cedures in no single state will be a model for global governance.
Thus, for the most part, a useful model for global governance
must emerge primarily out of learning through practice. Cer-
tainly, practice in the UN System, or what could be called “the
UN System laboratory,” will be exceedingly important.
A key challenge arises from the fact that people around the
world are increasingly linked in their daily lives as a result of fac-
tors such as the origins of the clothes they wear, the cars they
29

drive, the gas they consume, the fact that their employers may
reside in distant states, the distant sources of pollutants in the air
they breathe, and the distant sources of guns on their streets. But
these linked people live in very different kinds of societies, cul-
tures, and climates. Thus, attaining acceptable solutions to a di-
versity of global issues is certainly very challenging. For exam-
ple, people everywhere aspire to acquire peace, human rights,
development, and security. But people living in different circum-
stances tend to deﬁne these terms differently because their peace,
human rights, development, and security are challenged by dif-
ferent factors.
Varied Deﬁnitions of Global Values
Peace is deﬁned by many as the absence of violence, because it is
the fear of war and other forms of violence that are perceived to
be the greatest threat to a peaceful life. On the other hand, people
in other circumstances may not see violence as the greatest threat
to their peaceful existence. Because of their social and economic
environment, the greatest threat may be lack of health care, lack
of adequate housing, and lack of food. Indeed, many more
people die around the world every year from the lack of these
necessities than from violence. As a result of dialogue across cul-
tures, some deﬁne the lack of violence as negative peace—that is,
peace achieved by not doing something. Positive peace is deﬁned
as that which is achieved through availability of those things
(such as health care, housing, and food) that remove the threats
that prevent the fulﬁllment of a normal daily life. Availability of
these human needs is inhibited by the ways societies are orga-
nized, or what is termed structural violence. On the other hand,
the term direct violence is applied to wars and other forms of vio-
lence in which the perpetrator is more obvious.
Human rights are sought by all peoples. For some this term
means what are often called civil and political rights, such as the
rights to free speech, assembly, voting for governmental ofﬁcials,
equal legal protection for all, and the right to be presumed inno-
cent until proven guilty. But people living in different circum-
stances assert that these rights cannot be enjoyed and protected
without the underpinning of certain economic and social rights,
30
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

such as the right to work, the right to education, the right to rest
and leisure, and the right to a standard of living adequate for
health and well-being. As a result, an increasing number of
people believe that simultaneous attainment of civil/political
and economic/social rights is necessary for either to be fulﬁlled.
Development is another human goal that has acquired differ-
ent definitions as people living in different circumstances be-
come involved in its deﬁnition. In the early days of UN develop-
ment programs, many tended to define development as
synonymous with industrialization. Thus, development pro-
grams emphasized the building of factories and the roads and
airports needed to supply their production needs. But, sensing
that this kind of development was not serving the needs of most
of the people, some began to deﬁne development as meeting the
basic needs of the people. Later, dissatisﬁed with the deﬁnition
of basic needs imposed by external agencies, others began to as-
sert that development must permit people to be self-reliant in
deﬁning their needs. Then, more recently, those concerned about
the ecological consequences of development policies adopted the
term sustainable development, meaning that long-term develop-
ment can only be sustainable if it takes into account the ecologi-
cal impact of development programs.
Until quite recently, in discourse on international issues, the
term security tended to mean primarily security of the state from
external aggression. But recently there has been an expansion of
the deﬁnition of the beneﬁciaries of security. In 2005 the term hu-
man security was widely used, meaning that the goal of security
is to protect the well-being of all people. It is obvious that the
emergence of the human security concern has been affected by
the broadened meanings of peace, human rights, and develop-
ment. Each of these values, when defined in ways that are re-
sponsive to human needs around the world, tends to incorporate
the factors contained in the other three values. In effect, this
means that the goals of global governance—whether they be
peace, human rights, development, or security—must be respon-
sive to deﬁnitions espoused by people in different circumstances
around the world. For example, an effort to achieve global peace
cannot succeed if it is guided by a deﬁnition of peace adopted by
one state or region of the world. Achievement of peace requires
strategies that incorporate aspects of the deﬁnitions of peace that
are emerging around the world.
Varied Deﬁnitions of Global Values
31

In a similar way, organizations throughout the UN System
are confronted by the need to contend with the links between
global issues. For example, the lead UN agency for human rights
is the High Commissioner for Human Rights. Nevertheless, pro-
grams of the UN Development Program (UNDP), the UN Devel-
opment Fund for Women (UNIFEM), the UN High Commis-
sioner for Refugees (UNHCR), and many other UN agencies
affect the human rights of the people involved in their programs.
This linkage between global issues makes challenging demands
for widespread cooperation among UN agencies.
The Challenge of Global Complexity
The members of the United Nations, Specialized Agencies, and
other Related Organizations are states, those institutions pic-
tured so clearly in different colors on maps of the world. But the
UN System must contend with the fact that the organization of
humankind is much more complicated than suggested by the po-
litical map. This false simplicity has also been suggested by care-
less use of the terms nation and nation-state. Some groups with a
strong national identity, such as the Kurds, ﬂow across the bor-
ders of several states. Within some states—for example, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo—there are nations that have
never accepted their incorporation into a state whose borders
were drawn by invaders from Europe. Thus, it would be more
accurate to call some states multination states. A number of these
states, now referred to as failed states, have recently been present-
ing the UN System with serious challenges.
The boundaries in the political map of the world also do
not illuminate other boundaries, such as those of climate, re-
sources, ecology, terrain, and concentrated locations of popula-
tions. These boundaries may reflect the existence of problems
that can only be resolved by the collaboration of governments
that reach to the borders of the problem. Some states involved
in a specific problem area may give it high priority and others
may consider it to be insignificant. For example, UN agencies
may encounter great difficulty in attaining collaboration from
representatives of a state when this problem area is distant
from the capital of that state.
32
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

The Functions of Social Conﬂict
All political institutions, from those in small towns to global or-
ganizations, confront an array of problems in dealing with con-
flict among human beings. One challenge was revealed to me
when sitting in the press gallery of the General Assembly one
day when a strenuous debate between representatives of the So-
viet Union and the United States took place. A member of the
press said to me: “There they go again. This is supposed to be the
United Nations, but they are ﬁghting again.” But vitally impor-
tant was the fact that they were not ﬁghting! They were waging
conﬂict with words in a parliamentary body in which discussion
followed agreed rules. Louis Coser, a sociologist who wrote in
1956 a classic in social theory, The Functions of Social Conﬂict, cre-
atively argued that human beings live in an imperfect and dy-
namically changing world in which they are challenged by many
problems. Conflict among those with different approaches to
these problems is both inevitable and useful. The challenge is
how to enable this conflict to take place in ways that attain
widely accepted solutions. Too frequently people assume that it
is the role of the UN System to end conﬂict. Instead, it is the role
of the UN System to create institutions where conﬂict can be con-
ducted without violence and serious disruption in ways that lead
to widely accepted solutions.
The Need for 
Long-Term Peace Building
As we have emphasized in Chapter 1, experience in the League
of Nations and the UN System has demonstrated that long-term
peace building is required for preventing violence, instead of the
tendency to employ short-term policies responsive to violence
and threats of violence when it is too late to prevent them. Expe-
rience has also made it clear that the most effective approaches to
avoidance of violence require efforts in local communities by
governments of states and sometimes by regional organizations.
On the other hand, it seems inevitable that, on some occasions,
these efforts will fail and seriously disruptive conflicts will be
placed on UN System agendas.
The Functions of Social Conﬂict
33

It is essential that we be aware of the challenges confronted
by the UN System in its efforts to develop global governance
procedures for long-term peace building. This requires monitor-
ing potential areas of disruptive conﬂict, devising strategies that
can overcome this potential, mobilizing people in the conflict
area and UN member states to accept these strategies, and attain-
ing the collaboration of UN agencies in implementing these
strategies. Of course, there is no single formula for handling all
cases of disruptive conﬂict because the roots of different conﬂicts
may vary signiﬁcantly, ranging across issues such as ethnic con-
ﬂict, authoritarian rule, poverty, poor health, and environmental
pollution, and often involve different combinations of these is-
sues. Thus, different cases of disruptive conﬂict may require the
involvement of different agencies in the UN System.
This approach to long-term peace building offers severe
challenges when we ponder the need for collaboration among
agencies of the UN System. In Chapter 1 we indicated that efforts
are made to coordinate the system both by a body composed of
heads of all agencies (the UN System Chief Executive Board for
Coordination, CEB) and by representatives of states (ECOSOC)
whose efforts are facilitated by nine functional commissions and
ﬁve regional commissions. When we consider the entire UN Sys-
tem to be involved in long-term peace building, this offers an ad-
ditional perspective on coordination among agencies. This
means that all agencies in the UN System, as they develop their
approach to speciﬁc global problems, must be aware of how their
efforts could both contribute to and diminish long-term peace-
building efforts. For example, efforts to cope with poverty by a
certain form of economic assistance might come at severe ecolog-
ical costs that will form the roots of another disruptive conﬂict.
One reason why we are emphasizing this approach to coor-
dination in the UN System is in response to proposals that have
been made for coping with coordination problems by developing
a more centralized system. Some proposals would severely cur-
tail the considerable autonomy of the specialized agencies and
would even create a system primarily based in one place. On the
other hand, we are inclined to see the decentralized system of
global governance that is emerging out of experience to be more
responsive to global needs. Certainly, the efforts of the CEB and
ECOSOC are important and can be improved. But also vitally
important is that peace builders throughout the system must be
34
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

cognizant of the ways in which the success of their efforts re-
quires a UN System perspective.
The Need for a 
UN Standby Peacekeeping Force
In mid-2004 the UN’s Department of Peacekeeping Operations
was managing sixteen peacekeeping operations. Although the
development of more effective long-term peace-building capac-
ity in the UN System would decrease the need for peacekeeping
operations, certainly there would still be need for peacekeeping
forces. A serious challenge to the effectiveness of UN peacekeep-
ing forces has been the lack of capacity for a rapid response.
Over many years this has led to many proposals for the estab-
lishment of standby forces that would be prepared for quick de-
ployment (Johansen 1998). Although no such force has been cre-
ated, there are slowly moving efforts to meet this need.
One development has been the Standby Arrangements Sys-
tem (UNSAS) through which the UN Department of Peacekeep-
ing Operations reports that nearly 70 countries have identified
88,000 potentially available troops. The UNSAS is based on con-
ditional commitments by member states of specified resources
within agreed response times for UN peacekeeping operations.
These resources can be military formations, specialized person-
nel (civilian and military) services, as well as material and equip-
ment. The resources agreed upon remain on “stand-by” in their
home countries, where necessary preparation, including train-
ing, is conducted to prepare them to fulfill specified tasks or
functions in accordance with UN guidelines. These stand-by
forces and resources would be used exclusively for peacekeeping
operations mandated by the Security Council. When specific
needs arise, stand-by resources are requested by the Secretary-
General and, if approved by participating member states, are
rapidly deployed to set up new peacekeeping missions or to re-
inforce existing ones.
A multilateral effort in support of UNSAS has been created
by fourteen European states (Austria, Denmark, Finland, Italy,
Ireland, Lithuania, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, Slovenia, Spain, and Sweden) and Canada: the Steering
The Need for a UN Standby Peacekeeping Force
35

Committee of the Multinational Stand-by High Readiness
Brigade for UN Operations (SHIRBRIG). With headquarters nine-
teen miles from Copenhagen, SHIRBRIG declared itself available
to the United Nations in January 2000 (www.shirbrig.dk). It con-
tributed to the UN Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) in
November of that year and helped the United Nations to estab-
lish the mission there. In 2003 it helped to establish an interim
headquarters in Liberia. The SHIRBRIG has been working with
the African Union and the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) toward developing a similar initiative on the
African continent.
An effort to attain U.S. government support for the develop-
ment of a UN rapid deployment force has been initiated by Con-
gressman James P. McGovern from Massachusetts, the McGov-
ern-Porter UN Rapid Deployment Police and Security Force Act
of 2000. Cosponsored by 25 members of Congress, it calls for a
military force under the command and control of the UN Secu-
rity Council. This force of 6,000 would consist only of volunteers
employed directly by the United Nations. It would be rapidly
deployed as a “vanguard” unit sent to “contain conﬂict and sta-
bilize the political situation, while giving regular peacekeeping
units from member nations sufficient time to deploy” (www.
unwatch.com). This resolution has been submitted to the House
of Representatives International Relations Committee. At the
time of the writing of this chapter, there was no indication that
this bill would be accepted by the committee.
Are Changes in Security Council and 
General Assembly Voting and 
Security Council Membership Needed?
The Security Council has overwhelming power to take measures,
including armed force, “with respect to threats to the peace,
breaches of the peace, and acts of aggression” (Chapter VII, UN
Charter). Some see the membership and voting procedures of the
Security Council as a limitation on Council effectiveness. The Se-
curity Council is composed of ﬁve permanent members (China,
France, Russia, the United Kingdom, and the United States) and
ten rotating members serving two-year terms. But many claim
36
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

that the legitimacy of the Council is limited by the fact that the
permanent members, victorious powers in World War II, no
longer have the legitimacy required for carrying out this task.
Therefore, it is advocated that the permanent members should
include member states from other regions, such as Brazil, Nigeria
and India. It is also argued that the defeated states in World War
II, Germany and Japan, now deserve to be permanent members.
To pass a substantive resolution, the Council requires nine
votes and the absence of a negative vote from any of the perma-
nent members, usually referred to as a “veto.” Some proposing
the addition of new permanent members would not give them
the “veto” power. Others would limit the veto for existing per-
manent members to only those issues that have a direct bearing
on the security of the state employing the veto.
Unlike the Security Council, resolutions of the General As-
sembly are only recommendations, although under certain cir-
cumstances these resolutions can have very signiﬁcant inﬂuence.
Each of the 191 members has one vote, with two-thirds of those
casting “yes” or “no” votes required to pass a substantive resolu-
tion. As the membership of the United Nations has become uni-
versal, many states very small in area and population have be-
come members. As a result, in 2005 there are more than thirty
members with populations of less than 1,000.
Some believe that General Assembly resolutions would
more accurately reflect the views of the people of the world if
each state had a proportion of votes that reﬂected the size of its
population. But this procedure would give the combined votes
of only two states, China and India, one-third of all the votes.
Others say that the votes of states should be weighted in confor-
mity with the size of their assessed financial contributions. (In
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund member
states have votes proportional to their ﬁnancial assessments. In
the case of the IMF, the ﬁve states with the largest votes have 40
percent of the votes: the United States, 17.4 percent; Japan, 6.15
percent; Germany, 6.01 percent; France, 4.96 percent; and the
United Kingdom, 4.96 percent). If voting in the General Assem-
bly were based on financial assessments, the United States
would have 22 percent and Japan 19 percent of the votes, a total
of 41 percent. Many would see either of these procedures giving
too many votes to only two states.
Joseph E. Schwartzberg (Professor of Geography at the Uni-
versity of Minnesota), in Revitalizing the United Nations: Reform
Are Changes Needed?
37

through Weighted Voting, has proposed combining the present
General Assembly voting system with these two factors in order
to develop a weighted voting (WV) proposal. The vote awarded
to each state would be the average of its percentage of the UN
membership (M), now 1/191, its percentage of total population
(P) of UN members, and the percentage of its assessed ﬁnancial
contributions (C). Stated brieﬂy this would be:
WV= P + C + M
3
Using this formula, sixteen states would receive at least 1
percent of the votes: the United States, 9.1 percent; China 7.7 per-
cent, Japan, 7.3 percent; India, 6.0 percent; Germany, 3.8 percent;
Italy, 2.2 percent; Canada, 1.2 percent; France, 2.6 percent; the
United Kingdom, 2.3 percent; Brazil, 1.9 percent; Indonesia, 1.4
percent; Russia, 1.3 percent; Spain, 1.2 percent; Mexico, 1.1 per-
cent; the Republic of Korea, 1.0 percent; and Pakistan, 1.0 percent.
Notable when this formula is applied is the fact that seven of
the states receiving at least 1 percent of the votes would be from
North America and Europe. There is no state from Africa, where
Nigeria led the continent with 0.9 percent. Some would argue that
this result indicates that population should have more weight
than wealth. On the other hand, others would argue that the for-
mula is more reﬂective of population than one vote for each state.
Schwartzberg has proposed applying this same formula in
revising Security Council membership. His approach would ﬁrst
eliminate permanent members. Then he would make a funda-
mental change by permitting individual states to form like-
minded blocs that are not necessarily contiguous. Then these
blocs could be eligible for Security Council membership, which
would be increased from ﬁfteen to eighteen. Seats would ﬁrst be
awarded to all states with a WV exceeding 4 percent. Then blocs
exceeding 4 percent WV, as well as with a total population in ex-
cess of 1 percent of all UN members, would be awarded Security
Council seats. This formula would be applied up to a permissible
total of seventeen seats. The remaining seat(s) would be reserved
for one or more states not otherwise represented, and these seats
would be filled by the General Assembly through an at-large
election list composed of states not otherwise represented.
38
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Schwartzberg’s plan has two creative innovations. His WV
formula for the ﬁrst assignment of Security Council membership
replaces the outmoded “victors in World War II” method of
choosing permanent members. Also, his encouragement of the
creation of like-minded blocs as candidates for Council member-
ship offers a new method for states with a small WV percent to
band together and attain seats that represent their key interests.
It would seem that this formula would ensure Council member-
ship that is more representative of all the people of the world
than is the present system.
Alternative Modes for 
Financing the UN System
As we have indicated in Chapter 1, the annual UN System ﬁnan-
cial support of US$12 billion is only 3 percent of the military ex-
penditures of one member state, the United States, a sum that is
far short of that required for effectively fulfilling the organiza-
tion’s escalating responsibilities. In response, there have been a
number of proposals for alternative means for ﬁnancing the UN
System by taxing activities that link people and enterprises in-
volved in worldwide linkages. Included are currency transaction
taxes, e-mail taxes, energy taxes, and aviation fuel taxes
(www.globalpolicy.org).
Currency and e-mail taxes would tax those involved in in-
ternational transactions that are dependent on UN System activi-
ties that help to make them possible. Global currency trade
amounts to approximately $1.3 trillion per day. At least 80 per-
cent of this is exchange-rate speculation, either short- or long-
term profit-seeking transactions. Cross-border purchases of
goods and services requiring foreign exchange account for only 
2 percent. About 17 percent of foreign exchange trading takes
place as a result of hedging against future exchange-rate ﬂuctua-
tions. A tax of only 0.25 percent would generate about $300 bil-
lion, twenty-ﬁve times the 2001 UN System budget of $12 billion.
An e-mail or Internet tax would tax the amount of data sent
through the Internet. A person sending 100 e-mails a day, each
containing a 10-kilobyte document, would pay a tax of just one
cent. The UNDP Development Report 1999 reported that such a
tax would have yielded $70 billion in 1996, almost six times the
Alternative Modes for Financing the UN System
39

2001 UN System budget. No doubt in 2005 this inﬁnitesimal tax
would bring in much more than this 1999 ﬁgure.
Aviation fuel and energy taxes would tax those who are re-
sponsible for global carbon emissions that are imposing environ-
mental challenges on the UN System. Although airplane travel
accounts for only 3 percent of global carbon emissions in 2005, it
is expected to account for 15 percent by 2050. The European Par-
liament’s Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee has urged
the European Commission to pursue negotiations with the Inter-
national Civil Aviation Organization toward the end of amend-
ing a 1944 Chicago convention allowing an exemption from taxes
on air fuel. Although the United States and Australia oppose a
worldwide levy on aviation fuel, many other countries have ex-
pressed interest. At the same time, some NGOs are pushing for
increases in sales taxes on airline tickets and landing fees that
could be devoted to ﬁnancial support of the UN System.
There are also proposals for taxing more broadly carbon
dioxide emissions resulting from combustion of fossil fuels that
impose costs and challenges on governance that range from local
to global. These proposals would tax carbon emissions from the
burning of coal, oil, and natural gas. There is active debate on
this issue now in the European Union. Some are proposing that
at least a portion of such a tax be applied to UN ﬁnancial needs.
Expanding Participation 
in Global Governance
Although the members of all organizations in the UN System are
states, the broad array of global issues in which these organiza-
tions are involved are inevitably of concern to a diversity of other
kinds of organizations. We will brieﬂy examine the escalating in-
volvement of nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), busi-
nesses, and local authorities in the UN System.
Non-governmental Organizations/
Civil Society
In addressing the Conference of NGOs at UN headquarters in
1994, Secretary-General Boutros Boutros Ghali began in this way:
40
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Madame President, ladies and gentlemen, dear friends,
on behalf of the United Nations and for myself, I wel-
come you. I want you to consider this your home.
The secretary-general’s cordial greeting reﬂected the fact that the
number, roles, and importance of NGOs involved in the United
Nations had grown signiﬁcantly since its founding almost ﬁfty
years earlier. We have already indicated in Chapter 1 that Article
71 of the UN Charter provides the opportunity for NGOs to con-
sult with ECOSOC and that this has led to NGO involvement
throughout the UN System. The NGOs involved in the UN Sys-
tem are nonprofit organizations that have as their mission the
achievement of speciﬁc goals on social issues. Although these or-
ganizations are referred to as NGOs in the UN System, others
tend to refer to them as “civil society.” Building on consultation
with ECOSOC, NGOs have extended their involvement at UN
headquarters to relations with the General Assembly and the Se-
curity Council. In addition, NGOs also have wide-ranging in-
volvement with members of the Secretariat. Furthermore, secre-
tariats of organizations throughout the UN System have
established offices for facilitating collaboration with NGOs.
Thus, NGOs are making efforts to inﬂuence decision making in
organizations throughout the UN System (Alger 2003).
The practice of holding UN conferences focused on speciﬁc
global issues—such as environment, food, human rights, and
women’s issues—at various sites around the world has had a sig-
niﬁcant impact on the development of NGO involvement in the
UN System in at least three respects. First, NGOs have held con-
ferences that run parallel to the governmental conferences. These
parallel conferences have spurred the development of NGO col-
laboration in the development of policies on speciﬁc issues and
in presenting them to meetings composed of government repre-
sentatives. Second, NGOs have become increasingly involved in
the preparatory phases of these UN conferences. This has offered
NGOs experience in wider involvement in the prepublic phases
of parliamentary diplomacy. Third, the fact that the sites of these
conferences have been scattered around the world has made
them accessible to a growing number of NGOs, particularly
those in the “less developed world” who have not had access to
meetings at various UN headquarters.
It is obvious that NGO involvement in UN conferences
away from headquarters and new relationships provided by the
Expanding Participation in Global Governance
41

Internet are having a feedback impact on the numbers and qual-
ity of NGO participation at various UN headquarters. They have
tended to greatly increase not only the number of NGOs in-
volved, but also to broaden geographic representation and the
array of policy issues on the agendas of headquarters NGOs. At
the same time, rules for NGO participation have often been more
flexible away from headquarters, leading to demands for the
same opportunities at headquarters. Finally, NGOs have also be-
come important “laboratories” in which some NGO leaders have
begun to envisage greatly enhanced roles for NGOs in global
governance.
For example, one proposal advanced by NGOs would create
a subsidiary organ of the General Assembly, a UN Commission
on Peace and Crisis Prevention (UNCOPAC). It would be com-
posed of “highly respected individuals from public life” from
ﬁve regions of the world that would advise the General Assem-
bly on strategies for preventing violent conﬂict. The proposal is
motivated by the belief that many NGOs have had wide experi-
ence in coping with conditions that lead to violence and thereby
have the experience needed to offer useful advice on violence
prevention. Potential members of this commission would be
nominated by UN-accredited NGOs, and the General Assembly
would choose the members. The UNCOPAC would make recom-
mendations to the General Assembly. “When there are signs that
political developments could lead to violent conﬂict, genocide or
crimes against humanity,” UNCOPAC would “draw up detailed
proposals for non-military measures appropriate to reverse the
trend in this direction” (www.pro-uncopac.info).
For several decades there have been more ambitious pro-
posals that call for a second general assembly composed either
of representatives of nongovernmental organizations or of di-
rectly elected members. Some advocates of a second assembly
see it as something that could evolve from an ad hoc annual
event into a permanent organization that is eventually formally
established by an amendment to the UN Charter (Childers and
Urquhart 1994).
Those with this view saw an opportunity when plans were
made to hold the Millennium Assembly of the UN General As-
sembly in 2000. Secretary-General Kofi Annan, in midsummer
1997, joined the call for a companion Peoples Millennium As-
sembly (PMA) in his reform report. This proposed assembly met
on 22–26 May 2000 under the name Peoples Millennium Forum
42
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

rather than “Assembly,” no doubt a result of an effort by member
states to clearly distinguish its role from that associated with the
General Assembly. Participating in the Forum were 1,350 repre-
sentatives of over 1,000 NGOs from more than 100 countries. The
Forum issued a declaration with the title “We the Peoples Millen-
nium Forum Declaration and Agenda for Action: Strengthening
the United Nations for the Twenty-First Century.” It declared the
intent to build on UN world conferences and civil society confer-
ences of the 1990s toward the goal of drawing “the attention of
governments to the urgency of implementing the commitments
they have made and to channel our collective energies by re-
claiming globalization for and by the people.” This was followed
by a broad agenda for action in pursuit of a “vision of the world
that is human-centered and genuinely democratic, where all hu-
man beings are full participants and determine their own des-
tinies” (UN General Assembly A/54/959, 8 August 2000).
It is interesting that there seems to be no interest in applying
the tripartite representation system of the International Labor
Organization (ILO) to the General Assembly and Security Coun-
cil of the United Nations, or the assemblies and councils of other
Specialized Agencies. In the ILO assembly (Labor Conference)
and council (Governing Body) each state is represented by two
government delegates, one employers’ delegate, and one labor
delegate. Instead of proposing that member states add NGO rep-
resentatives to their delegations there is a preference for adding a
second assembly, either directly elected or composed of repre-
sentatives of NGOs.
Businesses
The UN website (www.un.org) introduces UN relationships with
businesses, that is, for-proﬁt enterprises, in this way:
The relationship with the business community has be-
come more important as the role of business in generat-
ing employment and wealth through trade, investment
and ﬁnance has grown and as UN member states have
increasingly stressed the importance of private invest-
ment in development.
The business community is increasingly appreciative
of the role of the United Nations: Promoting peace and
Expanding Participation in Global Governance
43

security, providing norms and standards in such diverse
areas as trade laws, shipping, aviation, telecommunica-
tion, postal services and statistics; addressing issues of
vulnerability, poverty, environmental degradation and
social conflict. All of this is seen as helping provide a
stable and favorable framework for business and devel-
opment.
In an address to the World Economic Forum on 31 January
1999, UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan challenged business
leaders to join an international initiative—the Global Compact—
that would bring companies together with UN agencies, labor,
and civil society in support of ten principles in the areas of hu-
man rights, labor, and the environment. The ten principles are
derived from: (1) the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
(2) the International Labor Organization’s Declaration on Funda-
mental Principles and Rights at Work, (3) the Rio Declaration on
Environment and Development, and (4) the UN Convention
Against Corruption. The Global Compact’s operational phase
was launched at UN Headquarters in New York on 26 July 2000.
Through the power of collective action, the Global Compact
seeks to advance responsible corporate citizenship so that busi-
ness can be part of the solution to the challenges of globaliza-
tion. In this way, the private sector—in partnership with other
social actors—can help realize the secretary-general’s vision: a
more sustainable and inclusive global economy. In 2005 hun-
dreds of companies from all regions of the world, international
labor, and civil society organizations are engaged in the Global
Compact.
Local Authorities
For many years local authorities in towns, cities, and local re-
gions have become increasingly aware of the involvement of
people and organizations in their communities in activities that
reach around the world. In response, many have seen a need to
become more directly involved in developing policies that affect
these relationships. As a result, there are a number of global or-
ganizations of local authorities that began with the creation of
the International Union of Local Authorities (IULA) in 1913. It
merged in 2004 with the World Federation of United Cities
(FMCU-UTO) and Metropolis, an association of 81 cities with
44
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

more than a million inhabitants, to form the United Cities and
Local Government Organization (UCLG). There are also global
organizations of local authorities focusing on environment,
peace, poverty, children, and those sharing a common language.
There are also regional organizations of local authorities com-
posed of Asian, Latin American, African, and Arab participants.
In 1996 these organizations collaborated in establishing a Federa-
tion of Global Organizations of Local Authorities (WACLAC).
The WACLAC is asking for participation of cities and local au-
thorities in the proceedings of the UNCHS (Habitat) and for
membership on its Commission on Human Settlements (Alger
2003A, 96–103).
Cities are even on the agenda of Secretary-General KoﬁAn-
nan, who said that local governments should be given more au-
thority to deal with problems that come with explosive growth
as the world enters the “urban millennium.” In January 2000 a
UN Advisory Committee of Local Authorities was established in
Venice at a meeting called by the head of the UNCHS (Habitat)
and attended by mayors from all over the world and presidents
of international associations of local authorities (UNCHS 2001).
The UNCHS (Habitat) has been a signiﬁcant focus of local
authority activity in the UN System. Before the Second UN Con-
ference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), held in Istanbul in
1996, there was a World Assembly of Cities and Local Authorities
(WACLA) that led to the formation of WACLAC (UNCHS 2000).
Other examples of local concerns in the UN System include the
Municipal Development Program (World Bank), World Alliance
of Cities Against Poverty (UNDP), Mayors Defenders of Chil-
dren Initiative (UNICEF), Environmental Management Systems
for Local Authorities (UNEP), Alliance of Mayors Initiative for
Community Action on AIDS at the Local Level (UNAIDS and
UNESCO), Cities for Peace Network, and the Global Campaign
on Urban Governance (UNCHS).
What Are Your Involvements
and Responsibilities?
We have presented these brief accounts of the escalating involve-
ment of NGOs, businesses, and local authorities in the UN Sys-
tem for two reasons. One is to underline three signiﬁcant indica-
What Are Your Involvements and Responsibilities?
45

tors of the dynamic expansion of actors involved in global gover-
nance in the UN System. The other is to illuminate for all readers
the fact that they are personally involved in organizations and ac-
tivities that are perceiving the need for wider involvement in
global governance that is emerging in the UN System.
Our brief presentation of expanding participation in global
governance by NGOs/civil society, businesses, and local author-
ities possibly challenged some readers to ponder their personal
linkage to global governance. Probably most readers are mem-
bers of NGO/civil society organizations that have representation
at one or more UN organizations. Some may have investments in
business organizations that are involved in the Global Compact.
No doubt we all have dealings with business organizations that
are either adhering to or violating UN human rights standards.
Some readers are certainly living in cities that have membership
in world organizations of local authorities. Some readers may
wish to ﬁnd out the degree to which they approve of the policies
of those NGO/civil society organizations, business organiza-
tions, and local authorities that are representing them.
References
Alger, Chadwick F., 2003, “Escalating Roles of NGOs in Member State
Decision-Making in the UN System,” Journal of Human Rights, Vol. 2, No.
3, 407–424.
———, 2003A, “Searching for Democratic Potential in Emerging Global
Governance,” in Bruce Morrison, ed., Transnational Democracy in Critical
and Comparative Perspective: Democracy’s Range Considered. Aldershot,
UK: Ashgate, 88–105.
Childers, Erskine, and Brian Urquhart, 1994, Renewing the United Nations
System. Uppsala, Sweden: Dag Hammarskjold Foundation.
Coser, Louis, 1956, The Functions of Social Conflict. Glencoe, IL: Free
Press.
Global Policy Forum, www.globalpolicy.org/ﬁnance.
Johansen, Robert, 1998, “Enhancing United Nations Peace-Keeping,” in
Chadwick F. Alger, ed., The Future of the United Nations System: Potential
for the Twenty-ﬁrst Century. Tokyo: UN University, 89–126.
Luck, Edward C., 2003, Reforming the United Nations: Lessons from a His-
tory in Progress. New Haven, CT: Academic Council on the UN Occa-
sional Papers.
46
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Schwartzberg, Joseph E., 2004, Revitalizing the United Nations: Reform
through Weighted Voting. New York and The Hague: Institute for Global
Policy, World Federalist Movement.
Multinational Stand-by High Readiness Brigade for United Nations Op-
erations (SHIRBRIG), www.shirbrig.dk.
UN Commission on Peace and Conflict Prevention (UNCOPAC),
www.pro-uncopac.info.
UN Watch, www.unwatch.com.
UNCHS (Habitat), 2000, “Mayors Support the World Charter for Local
Self-Government and the Istanbul+5 Process,” Press release CHS/00/
14, Nairobi: 9 May 2000. www.unhabitat.org/committee/chs14.htm.
UNCHS (Habitat), 2001, “Third Meeting of the UN Advisory Committee
of Local Authorities.” Nairobi, 17 February 2001, www.unhabitat.org/
committee/unacla3.pdf.
UN General Assembly, “UN reform measures and proposals: the Millen-
nium Assembly of the United Nations, Fifty-Fourth Session, A/54/959,
8 August 2000, www.un.org/millennium/declaration.htm.
United Nations, www.un.org.
References
47


3
The Ambivalent Participation 
of the United States
in the UN System
Historic Roots of U.S. Ambivalence
The participation of the United States in the UN System is
fraught with contradictions that spring from deep historic roots.
The settling of Europeans in North America was a prominent
step in an irreversible globalization process. But at the same
time, after an ocean separated them from Europe, many settlers
aspired to be detached from involvement in Europe. Their senti-
ments were expressed by George Washington’s desire to “steer
clear of permanent alliances,” and Thomas Jefferson’s warning
against “entangling alliances.”
The spirit of these warnings endured as the United States
long avoided entry into World Wars I and II. Nevertheless, exten-
sive U.S. involvements in Europe and Asia eventually resulted in
the United States sending many thousands of its young people
into combat far across the Atlantic to the east and the Paciﬁc to
the west. In response to the World War I disaster, President Wil-
son pressed for the creation of a League of Nations that would
unite the states of the world in the pursuit of peace. In response
to the even more extensive World War II disaster, Presidents Roo-
sevelt and Truman strongly supported U.S. leadership in found-
ing the United Nations after the war’s end. Despite the leader-
ship of President Wilson in the creation of the League of Nations,
49

the United States never joined the League. Because of the leader-
ship of Presidents Roosevelt and Truman, and extensive mobi-
lization of public support, the United States did join the United
Nations (Schlesinger 2003). Nevertheless, U.S. enthusiasm that
arose out of the ashes of World War II has been replaced by am-
bivalence often reminiscent of the days of the League.
The sentiments of George Washington and Thomas Jefferson
are still cited today, despite the fact that the organization of the
world has undergone fundamental changes in the last two hun-
dred years. The emergence of the United States and the Soviet
Union as contending world powers after World War II led to U.S.
leadership in the creation of the North Atlantic Treaty Organiza-
tion (NATO), a quite “permanent” and “entangling” alliance. Af-
ter the end of the Cold War, the United States has become the
world’s only superpower. At the same time, as we have illumi-
nated in Chapter 1, new technologies for transportation and com-
munication quickly bridge the Atlantic and the Pacific in ways
that immerse all who live in the United States in world relations
throughout their daily lives.
When thinking about U.S. participation in the UN System, it
is important that certain concepts be used carefully. The League
of Nations and organizations in the UN System are not alliances.
Washington’s and Jefferson’s use of this term referred to agree-
ments among one or several states to cooperate with each other
to resist possible aggression from other states. NATO is certainly
an alliance. But the development of an organization open to all
states that has the purpose of creating a peaceful world is a quite
different kind of enterprise.
The term sovereignty also requires careful usage. The adher-
ence of the United States to treaties is often challenged because it
is asserted that they infringe on U.S. sovereignty. But if we mean
by sovereignty the capacity to control one’s own fate, international
treaties can be required to attain sovereignty. For example, there
are problems that range across all state borders, including pol-
luted air, certain diseases, and some crimes. Even a state with the
greatest economic and military power cannot alone attain sover-
eignty over these problems. Thus, sovereignty over these prob-
lems can only be attained by creating an organization that
reaches to the borders of the problem.
Widespread criticism today from governments and people in
many countries, including traditional allies, of the unilateralist
spirit of the foreign policies of the U.S. government is primarily
50
The Ambivalent Participation of the United States in the UN System

focused on the waging of “preventive war” in Iraq without Secu-
rity Council approval. But these criticisms have roots in U.S. gov-
ernment unwillingness to ratify a host of widely supported
treaties aimed at building a world ruled by law, including:
1. International Criminal Court (94 member states)
2. Convention on the prohibition of the use, stockpiling,
production and transfer of antipersonnel mines and on
their destruction (143 ratiﬁcations)
3. Convention on rights of the child (ratiﬁed by all states but
the United States and Somalia)
4. Covenant on economic, social and cultural rights 
(146 ratiﬁcations)
5. Convention on the elimination of all forms of
discrimination against women (177 ratiﬁcations)
6. The UN framework convention on climate change: Kyoto
Protocol (124 ratiﬁcations)
7. International Seabed Authority (143 member states)
8. International Tribunal for Law of the Sea (143 member
states)
9. Prohibition of nuclear testing (115 ratiﬁcations)
Puzzling to many is the fact that most of the states with whom
the United States shares values on law and governance, in Eu-
rope and beyond, have ratiﬁed all of these treaties.
Factors Contributing to 
U.S. Government Unilateralism
Certainly, the fact that the United States in the early twenty-ﬁrst
century has overwhelming economic and military power is a
contributing factor to the present unilateralist spirit. The mobi-
lization of Security Council support for a military operation is a
political process that usually takes much time and involves many
frustrations. If you have the economic and military power that
enables you to undertake an action alone, or with the support of a
few like-minded states, this makes unilateral action very feasible.
Supportive of unilateral action is also the frequently cited be-
lief by political leaders in United States of “exceptionalism.” This
spirit is rooted in understandable pride in the fact that this de-
Factors Contributing to U.S. Government Unilateralism
51

mocracy is over 200 years old and has made progressive im-
provements in broadening political participation during this long
history. Therefore, when it comes to making decisions on issues
such as spurring the development of democracy in other parts of
the world, some believe that the United States has an exceptional
capacity to determine what would be the appropriate kind of in-
terventions.
Senator J. William Fulbright, while chairman of the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee, vividly evaluated the impact of
overwhelming power combined with belief in U.S. exceptional-
ism on U.S. foreign policy in a 1966 volume, The Arrogance of
Power:
Power confuses itself with virtue and tends to take itself
for omnipotence. Once imbued with the idea of a mis-
sion, a great nation easily assumes that it has the means
as well as the duty to do God’s work. The Lord, after all,
surely would not chose you as His agent and then deny
you the sword with which to work His will. . . . What I
do fear is that [America] may be drifting into commit-
ments which, though generous and benevolent in intent,
are so far-reaching as to exceed even America’s great ca-
pacities. (Fulbright 1966, 2–3) 
When multilateral cooperation by the U.S. government re-
quires Senate ratification of a treaty, U.S. constitutional treaty
ratifying procedures are also a great restraint on U.S. multilateral
capacity. The fact that approval by two-thirds of the 100 mem-
bers of the U.S. Senate is required to ratify a treaty has prevented
U.S. ratiﬁcation of many treaties. In explaining recent U.S. policy
in negotiations over climate treaties, Shardul Agrawala and
Steinar Andresen believe this “explains why the United States
has consistently set more modest negotiating goals than its Euro-
pean counterparts within the climate regime” (Agrawala and
Andresen 1999, 466). Agrawala is at the Climate Applications Di-
vision of the International Research Institute for Climate Predic-
tion at Columbia University. Andresen is a senior research fellow
at the Fridtjof Nansen Institute in Lysaker, Norway. Further-
more, because of the demands of ratiﬁcation procedures, many
treaties supported by the president, State Department, and other
executive departments are never submitted to the Senate be-
52
The Ambivalent Participation of the United States in the UN System

cause the time and effort that passage of a treaty would require
must be carefully evaluated and ranked with other priorities.
Public Opinion 
on the United Nations
In our discussion of public opinion we shall usually use the term
United Nations, rather than UN System, because this is the term
normally used in this literature. It appears that some using this
term are referring only to the United Nations based in New York,
some are including UN activities based in Geneva and other
places, and some are referring to the UN System. Perhaps poll-
sters justify this lack of precision because they realize that most of
their respondents are not able to make these distinctions. But it is
important that those attempting to interpret polling results be
aware of it.
Often members of Congress who are not supportive of the
United Nations claim that they are reﬂecting the wishes of their
constituents, but a penetrating study by Steven Kull and I. M.
Destler, Misreading the Public: The Myth of a New Isolationism
(1999), challenges this view. Both Kull and Destler are at the Uni-
versity of Maryland, where Kull is Director of the Center for the
Study of Policy Attitudes and Destler is Director of the Center for
International and Security Studies. Kull and Destler interviewed
and conducted workshops with eighty-three practitioners, con-
sisting of executive branch ofﬁcials, congressional staff, members
of the press, and leaders of nongovernmental organizations. They
also did a comprehensive analysis of all relevant polling data and
held focus group discussions with representative samples of
people in four cities. Based on this study they conclude:
[O]n no topic do policy practitioners misread the U.S.
public more than on the subject of the United Nations.
The dominant view, especially among congressional in-
terviewees was that most Americans have a negative at-
titude toward the UN, would oppose strengthening it,
oppose paying UN dues, and resist using force as part of
a UN military operation. Polls, however, paint a quite
different picture of a majority that strongly supports the
Public Opinion on the United Nations
53

UN and U.S. participation in it, would favor strengthen-
ing the UN, supports paying UN dues, and strongly
prefers using military force through the UN over acting
alone. (Kull and Destler 1999, 59)
Gene Lyons, a professor at Dartmouth College who has done ex-
tensive research on the UN, explains the fundamental difference
between actual public opinion on the United Nations and con-
trary assertions by members of Congress in this way: “Members
of Congress are thus more sensitive to the highly vocal and con-
servative lobbies that are anti-UN than to broad trends in public
opinion that favor engagement, including active participation in
the UN” (Lyons 1999, 505). Over many years public opinion polls
have indicated that the public is quite supportive of the United
Nations. Table 3.1 shows that from 1990 to 1998 only a small per-
centage of respondents, from 11 percent to 13 percent, thought
that strengthening the UN was not important.
Very informative are responses to questions asking for com-
parison of UN performance with other political institutions. When
asked in June 1995, “How much of the time do you think you can
trust the UN to do what is right?” respondents averaged 47 per-
cent for the United Nations and 24 percent for the U.S. govern-
ment (ATIF June 1995, retrieved from www.americans-world.org).
In June 1999, when asked whether several political institutions
were “doing a good job or a poor job in trying to solve problems it
has had to face” those responding very or mostly favorable gave a
total of these percentages: United Nations, 70 percent; Congress,
56 percent; and the CIA, 49 percent (Times Mirror, June 1999, re-
trieved from www.americans-world.org). When asked how much
of each year’s budget is lost to waste, fraud, and abuse, for the
United Nations the median response was 30 percent, and for the
U.S. government the median was 40 percent (PIPA, June 1996, re-
trieved from www.americans-world.org).
Although the U.S. public has been consistently strong in its
support of the United Nations over many years, support can di-
minish in response to the current domestic political context. A
poll on 25–26 April 2004, in the midst of U.S. engagement in a
war in Iraq, produced this result: favorable view of the United
Nations, 28 percent; unfavorable, 44 percent; not sure, 19 percent.
These results were closely tied to domestic political identities.
Self-identiﬁed liberal voters had a 60 percent favorable view of
54
The Ambivalent Participation of the United States in the UN System

the United Nations, and self-identiﬁed conservative voters were
20 percent favorable. Those who intended to vote for President
Bush in November 2004 were 18 percent favorable and those 
who planned to vote for John Kerry were 59 percent favorable
(Rasmussen Reports, 25–26 April 2004, retrieved from www.
americans-world.org).
Polls measuring public opinion on speciﬁc kinds of UN ac-
tivities have a tendency to attain results that diverge signiﬁcantly
from the unilateral tendencies of their government. With respect
to use of military force, 89 percent of the respondents agreed with
this statement in April 1995: “When there is a problem in the
world that requires the use of military force, it is generally best
for the U.S. to address the problem together with other nations
working through the UN, rather than going it alone.” When the
same question was posed in this reverse fashion, 66 percent re-
jected it: “When there is a problem in the world that requires the
use of military force, it is better for the U.S. to act on its own
rather than working through the UN because the U.S. can move
more quickly and probably more successfully” (PIPA, April 1995,
retrieved from www.americans-world.org).
In a July 2000 poll, respondents favored U.S. participation in
UN military forces to NATO and going it alone when asked: “As
a general rule, when it becomes necessary for the U.S. to use mili-
tary force, do you think it is best to act as part of a United Nations
operation, part of a NATO operation, or act on its own?” The re-
sults were: UN, 53 percent; NATO, 28 percent; on its own, 18 per-
cent (PIPA, July 2000, retrieved from Americans and the World,
www.americans-world.org).
Despite the fact that the U.S. government has shown no in-
terest in strengthening UN readiness to dispatch peacekeeping
Public Opinion on the United Nations
55
TABLE 3.1
Importance of Strengthening the UN
Year
Very 
Somewhat 
Not 
important
important
important
1990
46%
43%
11%
1994
53%
34%
13%
1998
47%
41%
12%
(Chicago Council on Foreign Relations, retrieved from www.americans-world.org)

forces, public opinion polls take a different view on four means
for moving in this direction:
1. Having UN members commit 1,000 troops to a rapid
deployment force that the UN Security Council can call
up on short notice, 79 percent favor.
2. Allowing the United Nations to possess permanent
stocks of military equipment stored in different locations
around the world, 68 percent favor.
3. Improving UN communication and command facilities,
69 percent favor.
4. “For the U.S. to move away from its role as world
policeman and reduce the burden of its large defense
budget, the U.S. should invest in efforts to strengthen the
UN’s ability to deal with potential conﬂicts in the world,”
73 percent agreed. (PIPA, November 1995, retrieved from
www.americans-world.org)
Likewise, although the U.S. government has taken a very
negative position on the now established International Criminal
Court, 66 percent of respondents agree with this statement: “The
U.S. should support such a court because the world needs a
better way to prosecute war criminals, many of whom go un-
punished today” (PIPA, October 1999, retrieved from www.
americans-world.org).
The U.S. government has for years used its inﬂuence to pro-
mote no-growth budgets for the United Nations. The conse-
quences of this approach have led some to propose that the
United Nations acquire the authority to tax speciﬁc international
transactions in order to cope with its expanding responsibilities.
The U.S. government opposes these efforts, but polls in 1995 and
1996 reveal that people in the United States would support this
approach. Their response to questions about six different forms
of taxation are as follows:
1. “on international arms sales with the money going to
famine relief and humanitarian aid,” 72 percent favor
(ATIF, June 1995, retrieved from www.americans-
world.org)
2. “on international oil sales dedicated to programs to . . .
protect the world’s environment,” 72 percent favor
56
The Ambivalent Participation of the United States in the UN System

3. “on international sales of tobacco dedicated to programs
to . . . improve health care,” 71 percent favor
4. “on international arms sales dedicated to keeping peace
in regional conﬂicts,” 67 percent favor
5. “on international currency transactions dedicated to UN
activities generally,” 51 percent favor
6. “on international airline tickets,” 33 percent favor
(Wirthlin Group, 1996, retrieved from www.americans-
world.org)
The divergence between public opinion on the United Na-
tions and government policies in a democratic system leads to
puzzling questions. Given the substantial public support for the
United Nations revealed in public opinion polls, we are chal-
lenged to ponder why these views are rarely cited by govern-
ment ofﬁcials and why they are not signiﬁcantly reﬂected in po-
litical campaigns and other aspects of the political process. Gene
Lyons directs our attention to the fact that the overwhelming
majority of those who have positive responses to questions
about the United Nations in polls seem to be less active in advo-
cating their views than opponents of the United Nations may be.
He has concluded that “[t]he public favors the UN and the
United States’ active participation in an interdependent world.
But, by and large, international issues are not high on their
agenda” (Lyons 1999, 504).
Public Knowledge
about the United Nations
Another reason for the discrepancy between public opinion polls
on the United Nations and U.S. government policy could be be-
cause public opinions in the United States on the United Nations
are based on very little knowledge about the United Nations. As
a result, the public may not have the background knowledge re-
quired to place these questions on the public political agenda. For
example, in response to questions about the UN budget in Sep-
tember 1996, 75 percent believed that the UN budget is four or
more times larger than the actual budget of the UN System (PIPA
poll, September 1996, retrieved from www.americans-world.org).
Public Knowledge about the United Nations
57

Table 3.2 offers modest insight on the knowledge of people
in the United States about the United Nations compared to
people in other countries. From 1989 to 1992 the United Nations
sponsored public opinion polls on knowledge about the United
Nations in thirty-six countries around the world. The survey
shows that 92 percent of U.S. people have heard of the United
Nations. Because the range of responses was from 32 percent to
99 percent, the United States ranks near the top. This is not sur-
prising because of other poll results revealing widespread sup-
port of the United Nations by U.S. people. On the other hand, in
responses to two other questions in the UN polls, U.S. people
rank near the bottom of the thirty-six countries with respect to
even minimal knowledge about the United Nations. From a list
of five UN secretaries-general since 1945, respondents were
asked to identify the current secretary-general. With only 15 per-
cent of U.S. respondents able to select the right person, they
ranked thirty-ﬁfth. The mean correct response rate for all thirty-
six countries was 45 percent. Respondents were also asked to
name at least one UN agency. Only 16 percent of U.S. respon-
dents were able to do so, giving them a rank of thirty-one.
It is indeed puzzling that U.S. people know so very little
about the United Nations more than ﬁfty years after its founding,
and after its membership, component organizations, and agenda
have expanded so greatly. It would seem that this public igno-
rance is deeply intertwined with attributes of the government,
the media, and educational institutions in the United States. We
say “deeply intertwined” because lack of attention to, and igno-
rance of, the United Nations by each of the four components—
people, government, media, and educational institutions—affects
the others. We have already discussed the fact that the United
Nations is not high on the agenda of most relevant government
ofﬁcials in Washington. This contributes to, but is not entirely re-
sponsible for, the neglect of the United Nations by the media. Ex-
cept for front-page attention given to occasional UN involvement
in crises, particularly when peacekeeping forces are required, UN
issues are rarely covered by U.S. media. Even press interest in
long-term peacekeeping operations is very short-lived. We be-
lieve that educational institutions also contribute to lack of
knowledge about the United Nations, and the larger UN System.
Government ofﬁcials, members of the media, and the public have
learned very little about the United Nations in either precolle-
giate or collegiate education.
58
The Ambivalent Participation of the United States in the UN System

But even if the public does not bring their pro-UN and multi-
lateral preference opinions into the political arena, why are they
not a more signiﬁcant part of the political agenda in Washington?
Why are there not more ofﬁcials in the executive branch and Con-
gress who see the existence of substantial multilateral tendencies
and pro-UN perspectives of the public as an opportunity to pur-
sue similar views. Perhaps another factor is the inevitable compe-
tition between geographic domains of governance, as reﬂected in
the competition between local authorities and governments of
U.S. states, and between these state governments and the federal
government in Washington. Is resistance to more creative partici-
pation in the UN System a result of the reluctance of Washington
to support a more signiﬁcant role in governance for UN agencies?
Do they see this as a challenge to their control?
Seven Factors Contributing 
to U.S. Government Unilateralism
This analysis leaves us to conclude that the unilateralist tenden-
cies of the U.S. government are a result of a number of inter-
twined factors, including: (1) the fear of foreign entanglements
dating back to the Founders of the Republic, (2) belief in U.S. “ex-
ceptionalism,” (3) fear by ofﬁcials in Washington that enhanced
UN authority will weaken their governing power, (4) over-
whelming U.S. military and economic power, (5) the treaty ratiﬁ-
cation process required by the U.S. Constitution, (6) very limited
coverage of the UN System by the media, and (7) limited public
Seven Factors Contributing to U.S. Government Unilateralism
59
TABLE 3.2
US Response in Thirty-Six-Country Survey of Knowledge about UN
Know
Can name
Heard of UN
name of SG
a UN agency
U.S.
92%
15%
16%
U.S. Rank
9
35
31
Range of Responses
32%–99%
7%–75%
7%–72%
Mean
82%
45%
34%
(UN Department of Public Information, Public Opinion Surveys, 1989–1992)

knowledge about the UN System that is a result of very limited
education available in precollegiate and collegiate schools. This
limited knowledge appears to prevent the public from bringing
their pro-UN and multilateral opinions to bear in the political
process.
Emerging Opportunities for 
Public Education and Participation
Nevertheless, significant opportunities have emerged through
which the public can overcome the limited knowledge gained
through educational institutions and the media. Very informative
websites are easily accessible to many people. For example, UN-
WIRE (un.wire@smartbrief.com) “is a free service sponsored by
the United Nations Foundation which is dedicated to supporting
the United Nations’ efforts to address the most pressing humani-
tarian, socioeconomic and environmental challenges facing the
world today.” It provides the equivalent of a daily newspaper on
the UN System. The foundation states its purpose as promoting
“a more peaceful, prosperous, and just world through the sup-
port of the United Nations and its Charter. Through our grant-
making and by building new and innovative public-private part-
nerships, the Foundation acts to meet the most pressing health,
humanitarian, socioeconomic, and environmental challenges of
the 21st century” (www.unfoundation.org).
The United Nations website (www.un.org) also provides
daily news from the UN News Service at www.un.org/News. For
those who have interest in specific agencies in the UN System,
this website is a route to the latest news on agencies throughout
the UN System. The websites of all organizations in the system
can be accessed by pulling up the UN System organization chart
and clicking on the name of a speciﬁc agency.
This site also offers quick access to those interested in UN
System links with NGOs (civil society) and business organiza-
tions. It is necessary only to click on “Civil Society/Business” and
then choose either “The United Nations & Civil Society” or “The
United Nations & Business.” The “United Nations & Civil Soci-
ety” page “links to ways that the United Nations System works
in partnership with civil society on issues of global concern.”
Available are the names of the 2,531 NGOs in consultative status
60
The Ambivalent Participation of the United States in the UN System

with ECOSOC. “The United Nations & Business site provides in-
formation on partnerships and alliances between the UN and the
private sector and foundations in furtherance of the UN Millen-
nium Development Goals,” as well as information on the Busi-
ness Council for the United Nations (www.bcun.org).
A number of civil society websites are informative on activi-
ties of civil society organizations that are actively involved in is-
sues on UN System agendas. We have space to mention only a
few, but they offer links to many others.
Global Policy Forum (www.globalpolicy.org). “monitors pol-
icy making at the United Nations, promotes accountability of UN
decisions, educates and mobilizes for global citizen participation,
and advocates on vital issues of international peace and justice.”
European Platform for Conflict Prevention and Transformation
(www.conﬂict-prevention.net). “On this site you ﬁnd information
regarding: Conflicts, conflict prevention and peace building . . .
efforts by people to prevent or resolve conﬂicts . . . details of in-
ternational and local organisations working to prevent or resolve
conﬂicts.”
Global Partnership for the Prevention of Armed Conflict
(www.gppac.net). “In 2003, in response to the UN Secretary-Gen-
eral’s Recommendation 27 from his Report on the Prevention of
Armed Conflict, the worldwide conflict prevention community
joined to form a Global Partnership for the Prevention of Armed
Conﬂict. . . . The Global Partnership is held together by a series of
parallel regional processes and is in progress in fifteen regions
worldwide.”
Center for Defense Information (www.cdi.org). “The Center for
Defense Information is dedicated to strengthening security
through: international cooperation; reduced reliance on unilateral
military power to resolve conflict; reduced reliance on nuclear
weapons; a transformed and reformed military establishment;
and, prudent oversight of, and spending on, defense programs.”
Americans and the World (www.americans-world.org). This
organization is “a source of comprehensive information on U.S.
public opinion on international issues. The site includes The Di-
gest, which provides comprehensive analyses of polling on vari-
ous international topics.”
Two organizations attempting to overcome lack of citizen
knowledge about the UN System and their very limited partici-
pation in political efforts to implement their support for the UN
deserve our attention. The United Nations Association of the
Emerging Opportunities for Public Education and Participation
61

United States of America (UNA-USA) offers opportunities for
those interested in becoming involved in efforts to strengthen
U.S. participation in the UN system. It is a “not-for-proﬁt, non-
partisan organization that supports the work of the United Na-
tions and encourages active civic participation in the most impor-
tant social and economic issues facing the world today. . . .
UNA-USA offers Americans the opportunity to connect with is-
sues confronted by the U.N.—from global health and human
rights to the spread of democracy, equitable development and in-
ternational justice. Through its work, UNA-USA educates Ameri-
cans about the work of the United Nations, and encourages pub-
lic support for strong U.S. leadership in the United Nations”
(www.unausa.org). The UNA-USA consists of a network of over
175 community-based chapters and divisions and a council of or-
ganizations with more than 100 members.
The UNA-USA is part of the World Federation of United Na-
tions Associations (WFUNA), a network of UN associations
around the world that comprises hundreds of thousands of
people linked together in over 100 member states of the United
Nations (www.wfuna.org).
The Academic Council on the United Nations System
(ACUNS) is an organization of “scholars, teachers, practition-
ers, and others who are active in the work and study of the
United Nations system and international organizations in gen-
eral.” Formed in 1987 at Dartmouth College, it has members
from around the world. It is headquartered at Wilfrid Laurier
University in Canada. The ACUNS is making important contri-
butions in strengthening teaching and research on the UN Sys-
tem at universities and colleges in the United States through
linking relevant scholars and graduate students. “The members
share an interest in encouraging and supporting education,
writing and research which contribute to the understanding of
international issues and promote global cooperation. ACUNS
has a number of ongoing projects, including research and policy
workshops, an annual meeting which focuses on UN and inter-
national issues, a two-week summer workshop for younger
scholars and practitioners organized in cooperation with the
American Society for International Law (ASIL), and a disserta-
tion awards program. The 900-member organization also co-
sponsors an e-mail discussion listserver with Wilfrid Laurier
University” ( www.acuns.wlu.ca).
62
The Ambivalent Participation of the United States in the UN System

Conclusion
A dynamically changing world is presenting an escalating need
for global governance. This is clearly illuminated in the growing
demands placed on the UN System and in its efforts to cope with
these demands. We have just presented an analysis of the chal-
lenges that this presents to the world’s oldest democracy. It seems
obvious that creative U.S. participation is the only option avail-
able to the U.S. government and the U.S. people. Toward this end,
much is to be learned from the development of this democracy
over two centuries. Essential is the fact that this democracy
emerged out of a process that was founded on democratic local
governments, then democratic state governments, and eventually
a democratic central government that gradually reached to the
boundary of the country on a growing agenda of issues. Virtually
all national government issues in the United States must also be
on the agendas of governments of U.S. states and local authorities.
Emerging regional governance and global governance are
now adding larger territorial dimensions to this governing pro-
cess as the boundaries of more and more policy problems reach
around the world. It is essential that the United States creatively
project its knowledge and democratic values into this process.
The long-term security of the people in the United States, and
people in the entire world, is dependent on this involvement. At
the same time, long-term U.S. security depends on what will be
learned from participation in this “laboratory for global gover-
nance” by people in the U.S. government, in U.S. civil society,
and in U.S. businesses.
Our analysis suggests that foreign policy making may be the
weakest aspect of this democracy because of the great gap be-
tween public opinion on the United Nations and the policies of
their government. Creative involvement of the United States in
the UN System will be dependent on greatly enhancing the
knowledge of all the people in the United States about the UN
System and about global governance issues. This is an essential
step toward making it possible for signiﬁcant growth in their par-
ticipation in foreign policy making.
At the same time, we have learned about a great discrepancy
between what government ofﬁcials and other foreign policy elites
believe about public opinion on UN issues and their actual be-
liefs. This must be overcome. This democracy may be able to gain
Conclusion
63

insights on how this can be achieved by examining practices in
other democracies where public involvement in foreign policy
making is more dynamic. Obvious possibilities are the Scandina-
vian countries and the Benelux countries. They have been spared
the unilateral temptations offered by overwhelming economic
and military power. Use of this power unilaterally can lead to
short-term advantages, but not to long-term security in an inter-
dependent world in which each individual lives his or her daily
life immersed in global connections.
References
Academic Council on the UN System (ACUNS), www.acuns.wlu.ca.
Agrawala, Shardul, and Steinar Andresen, 1999, “Indispensability and
Indefensibility? The United States in the Climate Treaty Negotiations,”
Global Governance, Vol. 5, No. 4, 457–482.
Americans and the World, www.americans-world.org.
Business Council for the United Nations, www.un.org/partners/business.
Center for Defense Information (CDI), www.cdi.org.
Chicago Council on Foreign Relations, www.ccfr.org.
Debiel, Tobias, 2000, “Strengthening the UN as an Effective World Au-
thority: Cooperative Security versus Hegemonic Crisis Management,”
Global Governance, Vol. 6, No. 1, 2000, 25–42.
European Platform for Conflict Prevention and Transformation,
www.conﬂict-prevention.net.
Fulbright, J. William, 1966, The Arrogance of Power. New York: Vintage.
Global Partnership for the Prevention of Armed Conflict (GPPAC),
www.gppac.net.
Global Policy Forum, www.globalpolicy.org.
Kull, Steven, and I. M. Destler, 1999, Misreading the Public: The Myth of a
New Isolationism. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
Luck, Edward C., 1999, Mixed Messages: American Politics and International
Organization. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
Lyons, Gene, 1999, “The UN and American Politics,” Global Governance,
Vol. 5, No. 4, 1999, 497–512.
Program on International Policy Attitudes (PIPA), University of Mary-
land, www.pipa.org.
64
The Ambivalent Participation of the United States in the UN System

Schlesinger, Stephen C., 2003, Act of Creation: The Founding of the United
Nations: A Story of Superpowers, Secret Agents, Wartime Allies and Enemies,
and Their Quest for a Peaceful World. Boulder, CO: Westview.
United Nations, www.un.org.
United Nations Association of the United States of America, www.
unausa.org.
United Nations Department of Public Information, Public Opinion Sur-
veys, 1989–1992.
United Nations System, www.unsystem.org.
UNWIRE, www.un.wire.com.
World Federation of UN Associations (WFUNA), www.wfuna.org.
References
65


4
Chronology of the
Emergence and Development
of the UN System
Historic Roots of the UN System
Deep Historic Roots
In the introduction to Chapter 1 we emphasized the importance
of placing the UN System in a historical context in order to un-
derstand that it arose out of, and is continually evolving in re-
sponse to, changing world conditions. Humankind has long had
tendencies to travel, migrate, communicate, exchange, borrow,
and dominate, and to invent ever new technologies that permit
broadening the geographic scope of these activities. Brief exami-
nation of four dimensions of escalating human linkages, (1)
travel, (2) industrialization, (3) communications, and (4) arma-
ments, illustrates the challenges they present to governance of
territorial units.
William McNeill, in The Rise of the West: A History of the Hu-
man Community (1963), has provided a very succinct summary of
the impact of changing technology for travel on human connect-
edness. His chart of “The Shrinking World” (McNeill 1963,
766–767) is divided into four ecumenes. He uses the term “ec-
umene” to refer to an area in which there are contacts among hu-
man beings that reach across the entire area. First, there were
land-centered ecumenes separated by oceans before 1500 A.D.
Second, intercontinental ocean travel brought a closure of a
67

global ecumene between 1500 and 1650. Third, the development
of steam ships and trains, and later automobiles, brought a me-
chanical, land, and sea transport ecumene from 1850 to 1950 in
which travel was much faster. Fourth, the development of air
transport, permitting travel over the poles, brought a polar cen-
tered ecumene after 1950. From the first to the fourth ecumene
people traveled ever farther and ever faster.
Industrialization has long played a key role in the emergence
of the global and polar ecumenes. William McNeill writes that
the “technical aspect of the ﬁrst phase of modern industrializa-
tion, in England in the mid-nineteenth century, can be summed
up in two words: coal and iron” (McNeill 1953, 732). These re-
sources were employed in the development of railroads, cotton
mills, and hundreds of other machines. There was then a slow
spread to the United States, northwest and central Europe, Rus-
sia, Japan, and the rest of the world. Industrial production
spurred a need for raw materials from distant countries and the
exporting of industrial products around the world. At the same
time, the growing incomes of industrial workers spurred migra-
tion from other parts of the world to areas of industrialization.
In the nineteenth century new forms of communication
emerged that added signiﬁcant new dimensions to human link-
ages in the Global Ecumene. In 1844 Samuel Morse sent his ﬁrst
public message over a telegraph. The telephone was patented in
1876. Sound broadcasting began in 1920. In 1963 the ﬁrst geosta-
tionary communications satellite permitted space radio commu-
nication. In the early twenty-ﬁrst century, people in ofﬁces and
homes throughout the world are in instantaneous contact by e-
mail and have immediate access to websites around the world
(Alleyne 1995).
In From Crossbow to H-Bomb (1973) Bernard and Fawn Brodie
extensively illuminate the impact of scientiﬁc developments on the
destructiveness and territorial reach of armaments. Bernard Brodie
was an American military strategist and the author of books on
naval power, nuclear strategy, and nuclear deterrence. His wife,
Fawn Brodie, was a biographer of Richard Nixon, Joseph Smith,
Thomas Jefferson and others. They emphasize how, as a result of
the Industrial Revolution, “the civilian was now responsible for
providing the industrial means of war, and the workshop became
as vital a part of the struggle as the battleﬁeld” (Brodie and Brodie
1973, 125). The global reach of sea power and air power, combined
68
Chronology of the Emergence and Development of the UN System

with weapons of ever more powerful and ever more distant reach,
made world wars possible.
Ever more extensive human linkage driven by travel, indus-
trialization, communication, and armaments has developed a
need for enhanced forms for linkage among territorial govern-
ments. The dispatching of diplomatic envoys by the governments
of one territorial political authority to another reaches deep into
history. In the fifteenth century the first recorded permanent
diplomatic mission was established by the duke of Milan at
Genoa, beginning a practice that spread rapidly to the rest of Eu-
rope and beyond. It is important to note that a two-pronged sys-
tem of representation developed and still exists. One is run by
diplomats concerned with the public policy of their governments.
The other is represented by the consular service, designed to ex-
pedite foreign trade and commerce. As global human linkage es-
calated, organizations were formed where representatives from a
number of states could gather permanently to cope with speciﬁc
topics. Then the need emerged for more general-purpose interna-
tional organizations.
Nineteenth-Century Roots
Inis Claude, in a widely used textbook on international organiza-
tions, points to the Congress of Vienna in 1815 as an initiation of a
“nineteenth-century conference system without precedent in the
modern world” (Claude 1971, 25). At this conference the leaders
of the major states of Europe constituted themselves as the Con-
cert of Europe that held a series of conferences to deal with chal-
lenging political issues. These conferences were sporadic and
conﬁned to European states, but they began the development of
new procedures for facilitating multilateral collaboration. Claude
believes “the Concert of Europe produced the prototype of a ma-
jor organ of modern international organization—the executive
council of the great powers” (Claude 1971, 28). In other words,
here we can see the roots of the UN Security Council.
In the nineteenth century more limited conferences also
emerged that focused on speciﬁc issues concerned with the con-
sequences of escalating linkages among people across political
borders, such as telecommunications, trade, and health. Meetings
held to cope with these problems became permanent conferences
that were called permanent international unions. By World War I
Historic Roots of the UN System
69

there were thirty public international unions with permanent ad-
ministrative ofﬁces. In a book ﬁrst published in 1911, Paul Rein-
sch, a University of Wisconsin–Madison political scientist, di-
vides these unions into five categories: (1) communications, (2)
economic interests, (3) sanitation and prison reform, (4) police
powers, and (5) scientific purposes. A few of their titles offer a
quick overview of the kinds of issues arising in the border-cross-
ing activity of the evolving Global Ecumene: International Bu-
reau of Weights and Measures, Wireless Telegraph Union, Inter-
national Sugar Union, International Institute of Agriculture,
Union for the Publication of Customs Tariffs, International Ofﬁce
of Public Health, Union for the Suppression of the African Slave
Trade, International Opium Commission, and Central Bureau for
the International Map of the World (Reinsch 1916). A number of
these organizations created the roots for the Specialized Agencies
of the UN System.
Gerard Mangone eloquently describes the nineteenth-cen-
tury roots of international organizations:
The [nineteenth-century] international agencies were
only harbingers of a day in which hundreds of interna-
tional organizations, employing thousands of people,
should span the earth, touching in one guise or another
the purse and prayer of every national citizen and
prompting, pushing, or threatening every state toward
some new task. . . . every one of the organizations had to
wait through dreary arguments and often many years
before its basic convention was signed and ratified.
Only looking back from the twentieth century with its
multitude of international ofﬁces, does the procession of
organizations seem so steady in its gait, so certain of its
future. (Mangone 1954, 90)
Initiated by Czar Nicholas II of Russia, “International Peace
Conferences” held in the Hague in 1899 and 1907 began the
movement toward universality in conferences focusing on politi-
cal issues by including both small European states and many
outside of Europe. The 1899 conference was attended by twenty-
six states, mostly from Europe, but the 1907 conference involved
forty-four states, including many from Latin America. Claude
concludes: “Thus, the world achieved in 1907 its first General
Assembly” (Claude 1971, 29). A signiﬁcant item on the agenda of
70
Chronology of the Emergence and Development of the UN System

statesmen involved in the Hague Conferences was the creation
of international judicial institutions. These efforts were precur-
sors of the World Court of the League of Nations and the Inter-
national Court of Justice of the United Nations. Participants in
the Hague Conferences were moving toward the development of
a permanent organization for the maintenance of world peace in
a permanent home that had been promised by Andrew
Carnegie, but World War I intruded before their next scheduled
meeting in 1915.
League of Nations Roots
The overwhelming destructiveness of World War I spurred more
rapid continuation of efforts by the Hague Conferences to create
a permanent organization for the maintenance of world peace lo-
cated in Geneva, Switzerland. The League of Nations was
founded in 1920 and grew from thirty-two to forty-ﬁve members.
Evolving out of nineteenth-century roots, the League had a Secu-
rity Council that eventually included ten members and a General
Assembly that grew from twenty-eight to forty-five members.
The Secretariat, civil servants who would carry out the decisions
of these two bodies, was largely built upon experience in the per-
manent ofﬁces of the nineteenth-century permanent international
unions.
The League had very limited success when challenged by vi-
olent conflicts between Greece and Bulgaria and Bolivia and
Paraguay, the Japanese invasion of Manchuria, and the Italian in-
vasion of Ethiopia, and eventually was overwhelmed by World
War II in 1939. On the other hand, Gerard Mangone concluded
that “the League’s international economic and social programs
ﬂowered in the ﬁelds of commerce, health, communications, and
protection of helpless peoples. The Permanent Court sponsored
by the League gained the respect of the world, and no reticulation
of international law had ever spread so rapidly” (Mangone 1954,
153). Indeed, the League had begun to create the roots for an im-
portant second council of the United Nations, an economic and
social council. In addition, the work of the Permanent Mandates
Commission of the League of Nations was the forerunner of a
third UN council, the Trusteeship Council. Both of these councils
were established to provide oversight of those states who were
entrusted with authority over colonies taken from defeated colo-
nial powers in World Wars I and II.
Historic Roots of the UN System
71

(For a chronology of the League of Nations see www.unog.ch/
library/archives/lon/library/chrnlogy.htm).
Principal Organizations 
of the United Nations
Because the UN Charter emerged out of experience with the ﬁrst
general purpose world governmental organization, the League of
Nations, the UN Charter is three times longer than the League
Covenant. Charter provisions for the main organizations of the
United Nations are more detailed than those provided in the
League Covenant. Most of the League Covenant is devoted to
dispute settlement activities, while the UN Charter devotes much
attention to economic and social cooperation. In addition, the
Charter devotes much more attention to colonial issues and rec-
ognizes the significance of regional organizations in the settle-
ment of disputes.
General Assembly (UN Charter, Chapter V)
As the body in which all member states are represented, each with
one vote, the General Assembly’s membership has grown from 
51 in 1945 to 191 sixty years later. Most issues on the General As-
sembly agenda are ﬁrst discussed in one of the six main commit-
tees of the Assembly. The broad range of issues considered is
revealed by the names of the committees: First Committee—
Disarmament and International Security; Second Committee—
Economic and Financial; Third Committee—Social, Humanitarian
and Cultural; Fourth Committee—Special Political and Decolo-
nization; Fifth Committee—Administrative and Budgetary; Sixth
Committee—Legal.
Voting in the UN General Assembly, when compared to the
League Assembly, reflects a significant trend toward majority
rule. In the League Assembly agreement of all states voting was
required for passage of a resolution, but procedural matters re-
quired only a majority. But in the UN General Assembly, only
two-thirds are required on “important questions.” Procedural is-
sues require only a simple majority. Furthermore, voting on all is-
sues in committees of the UN General Assembly require only a
simple majority. But after passage by a committee, resolutions
72
Chronology of the Emergence and Development of the UN System

must be submitted to a plenary session of the General Assembly.
In plenary meetings, resolutions may be adopted by acclamation,
that is, without objection or without a vote. A vote may be taken
by roll call. In contrast with the Security Council, decisions of the
General Assembly are only recommendations. On the other hand,
they do carry the support of those voting for them and tend to
have significant support of world opinion and have moral au-
thority. Furthermore, General Assembly resolutions do determine
the budgets, structure, and activities of the Secretariat and many
subsidiary bodies established by the authority of the General As-
sembly.
Security Council 
(UN Charter, Chapters V, VI, VII)
The Security Council has primary responsibility, under the Char-
ter, for the maintenance of international peace and security, with
its membership increased from eleven to fifteen members by
Charter amendment. The functioning of the Security Council as
provided for in the Charter is different from the League Covenant
in three important respects. First, in order for the UN Security
Council “to be able to function continuously” each member shall
“be represented at all times at the seat of the Organization.” The
League Security Council was only required “to meet from time to
time as occasion may require, and at least once a year.” Second,
reﬂecting a gradual movement away from required unanimous
voting in international governmental organizations, nine votes
are required in the UN Security Council for passing resolutions.
Of course, a remaining limitation is the fact that a “no” vote from
one of the ﬁve permanent members will defeat a resolution, ex-
cept for procedural matters. Third, in contrast with the League
Covenant, the UN Charter asserts that “while the Security Coun-
cil is exercising in respect of any dispute or situation,” the Gen-
eral Assembly may not make “any recommendations with re-
spect to a dispute or situation unless the Security Council so
requests” (Article 12).
In Chapter VI the Charter authorizes the Security Council to
undertake “[p]acific settlement of disputes.” When these mea-
sures are inadequate, Chapter VII authorizes the Council to take
“[a]ction with respect to threats to the peace, breaches of the
peace, and acts of aggression” that includes “such action by air,
sea or land forces as may be necessary.” While responding to
Principal Organizations of the United Nations
73

challenges, the Council has developed a third approach not fore-
seen by the drafters of the Charter—peacekeeping. Initially,
peacekeeping forces were deployed after parties to a conflict
agreed to a cease-fire and approved the presence of UN troops
that patrolled the cease-ﬁre line. Often referred to as Chapter 6 1⁄2,
peacekeeping forces were intended to provide an environment
facilitating diplomatic efforts to address the underlying causes of
conﬂict. Between 1948 and August 2004 there were ﬁfty-nine UN
peacekeeping operations.
At the end of the Cold War, the Security Council established
larger and more complex UN peacekeeping missions, often to
help implement comprehensive peace agreements between pro-
tagonists in conﬂicts within states. As a result, peacekeeping has
acquired more and more nonmilitary elements. United Nations
Civilian Police now play a crucial role in UN peacekeeping oper-
ations and other UN ﬁeld missions. In 2004 they participated in
thirteen different missions around the globe. More than 7,000 po-
lice ofﬁcers from eighty countries were on patrol, providing train-
ing, advising local police services, and helping to ensure compli-
ance with human rights standards.
Economic and Social Council 
(UN Charter, Chapters IX, X) 
Chapters IX (Economic and Social Cooperation) and X (The Eco-
nomic and Social Council) represent a fundamental difference be-
tween the UN Charter and the League of Nations Covenant,
which had only seven sentences (Article 23) on “Social and other
activities.” Nevertheless, this brief article did mention fair and
humane conditions of labor for men, women, and children; trafﬁc
in women and children; drug trafﬁc; freedom of communication;
and equitable treatment of commerce. And League practice was
leading toward the creation of an economic and social council be-
fore World War II.
Originally having eighteen members, in 2005 the Economic
and Social Council (ECOSOC) has ﬁfty-four members elected by
the General Assembly for overlapping three-year terms. Seats are
allotted based on geographical representation, with fourteen allo-
cated to African states, eleven to Asian states, six to Eastern Euro-
pean states, ten to Latin American and Caribbean states, and thir-
teen to Western European and other states.
74
Chronology of the Emergence and Development of the UN System

The Economic and Social Council attempts to coordinate the
work of the nineteen UN specialized agencies, the nine functional
commissions, and the ﬁve regional commissions (Table 4.1). It re-
ceives reports from eleven UN funds and programs and issues
policy recommendations to the UN System and to member states.
The UN Charter provides ECOSOC with a wide mandate of re-
sponsibilities that include promoting higher standards of living,
full employment, and economic and social progress; identifying
solutions to international economic, social, and health problems;
facilitating international cultural and educational cooperation;
and encouraging universal respect for human rights and funda-
mental freedoms. ECOSOC’s purview extends to over 70 percent
of the human and ﬁnancial resources of the entire UN System.
Since the founding of the United Nations, the challenge pro-
vided by this broad agenda has been intensiﬁed by the growing
linkages among the economies of states and almost fourfold ex-
panded UN membership that has consisted primarily of economi-
cally poorer countries. In addition, growing concern about the im-
pact of economic development on the environment has placed
“sustainable development” on the ECOSOC agenda. Some insight
on the range of economic and social issues confronted by ECOSOC
can be attained by noting the names of its nine functional commis-
sions: (1) crime prevention and criminal justice, (2) narcotic drugs,
(3) population and development, (4) social development, (5) sci-
ence and technology for development, (6) statistical support, (7)
the status of women, (8) sustainable development, and (9) human
rights. An ECOSOC panel of the chairpersons of functional com-
missions attempts to cope with issues that transcend each of these
topics. One issue on their agenda has been “gender mainstreaming
in the functional commissions of ECOSOC.”
The great array of working groups created by the Human
Rights Commission reﬂects the signiﬁcant progress being made
in placing human rights on the world political agenda since the
days of the League of Nations, when the term human rights did
not even appear in the League Covenant. The drafters of the UN
Charter mentioned human rights seven times, including in the
second sentence of the preamble and the instruction that
ECOSOC establish a human rights commission (Article 68). This
was quickly followed by the General Assembly’s Universal Dec-
laration of Human Rights (1948), a Covenant on Civil and Politi-
cal Rights (entered into force in 1976), a Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights (entered into force in 1976), and nu-
Principal Organizations of the United Nations
75

TABLE 4.1
Subsidiary Bodies of the Economic and Social Council
Functional Commissions
1
Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
2
Narcotic Drugs
(1) Subcommission on Illicit Drug Trafﬁc and Related Matters in the Near and
Middle East
(2) Meeting of Heads of National Drug Law Enforcement Agencies
3
Population and Development
4
Social Development
5
Science and Technology for Development
6
Statistical
7
Status of Women
8
Sustainable Development
9
Human Rights
(1) The Group of Three established under the International Convention on the 
Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid
(2) Working Group on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances
(3) Working Group on Situations (which appear to reveal a consistent pattern 
of gross violations of human rights)
(4) Working Group on Arbitrary Detention
(5) Open-ended Working Group on the Right to Development
(6) Open-ended Working Group on a Draft Optional Protocol to the 
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment
(7) Open-ended Working Group on the Draft Declaration on the Rights of 
Indigenous Peoples
(8) Open-ended Working Group established to elaborate policy guidelines on 
structural adjustments programs and economic, social and cultural 
rights
(9) Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights
(10) Working Group on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, 
Religious and Linguistic Minorities
(11) Working Group on Contemporary Forms of Slavery
(12) Working Group on Indigenous Populations
(13) Sessional Working Group on the methods of work of the Subcommission
(14) Sessional Working Group on the Administration of Justice
(15) Sessional Working Group on the working methods and activities of 
transnational corporations
(16) Working Group on Communications
Regional Commissions
1
Economic Commission for Africa (ECA)
2
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Paciﬁc (ESCAP)
3
Economic Commission for Europe (ECE)
4
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)
5
Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA)
Standing Committees
1
Committee for Programme and Coordination
2
Commission on Human Settlements
3
Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations
4
Committee on Negotiations with Intergovernmental Agencies

merous other treaties focusing on genocide, torture, racial dis-
crimination, the rights of women, the rights of children, and
other issues. Then in 1997 the UN Center for Human Rights be-
came the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human
Rights. The array of working groups created by the Human
Rights Commission (Table 4.1) reﬂects the growing range of hu-
man rights concerns, including involuntary disappearances, arbi-
trary detention, the rights of indigenous peoples, the rights of
ethnic and religious minorities, working methods of transna-
tional corporations, and the right to development.
One of the most dynamic aspects of developments in the UN
System has been growth in involvement of what the UN Charter
refers to as nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and many
now refer to as civil society. Article 71 of the Charter states that
ECOSOC:
may make suitable arrangements for consultation with
nongovernmental organizations which are concerned
with matters within its competence. Such arrangements
may be made with international organizations and,
where appropriate, with national organizations after
consultation with the Member of the United Nations
concerned.
In response, ECOSOC created a Committee on Non-Govern-
mental Organizations. In 2005 there are 2,531 NGOs in consulta-
tive status with ECOSOC and some 400 NGOs accredited to the
Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD), a subsidiary
body of ECOSOC. To qualify for consultative status, an NGO
must have a democratic decision-making mechanism; be offi-
cially registered with the appropriate government authorities as
nonproﬁt; and its basic resources must be derived primarily from
contributions of the national affiliates, individual members, or
other nongovernmental components.
Nongovernmental organizations that enjoy consultative sta-
tus with ECOSOC with strong public information programs are
also granted association with the UN Department of Public Infor-
mation (DPI) upon written request to the DPI/NGO Section.
NGOs can be associated with DPI without having consultative
status with ECOSOC.
In order to strengthen their inﬂuence and competence at UN
Headquarters in New York City, NGOs have created the Confer-
Principal Organizations of the United Nations
77

ence of NGOs in Consultative Relationship with the United Na-
tions (CONGO). It “provides a forum for nongovernmental orga-
nizations with common interests to come together to study, plan,
support, and act in relation to the principles and programs of the
United Nations” (www.ngocongo.org).
Nongovernmental organization consultative status has
spread to organizations throughout the UN System. In re-
sponse, a small interagency program has been created, the
United Nations Non-Governmental Liaison Service (NGLS)
with offices in Geneva and New York. “The Non-Governmental
Liaison Service (NGLS) promotes dynamic partnerships be-
tween the United Nations and non-governmental organizations.
By providing information, advice, expertise and support ser-
vices, NGLS is part of the UN’s effort to strengthen dialogue
and win public support for economic and social development”
(www.un-ngls.org). In 2005 the NGLS is supported by seven-
teen UN System organizations.
Trusteeship Council (Chap. XII) 
Non-Self-governing Territories Declaration
(Chap. XI) 
The fact that the Trusteeship Council suspended operation in
1994 with the independence of Palau, the last remaining UN trust
territory, reﬂects signiﬁcant developments in the struggle for self-
determination of peoples since the founding of the United Na-
tions. The roots for these developments reach back to the found-
ing of the League of Nations. The victorious states in World War I
held on to their colonies. The fifteen colonies of the defeated
states were placed in the hands of seven of the victorious states,
but the mandatory system called for in the League Covenant
placed some limitations on their authority. The seven states were
required to report to the Permanent Mandates Commission each
year “in reference to the territory committed to its charge.”
Building on the experiences of the Permanent Mandates
Commission, the UN Charter established a Trusteeship Council
to oversee the mandated territories and the colonies of defeated
states in World War II. The functions of the Trustee System were
extended to include promotion of “the political, economic, social,
and educational advancement of the inhabitants of the trust terri-
tories, and their progressive development towards self-govern-
78
Chronology of the Emergence and Development of the UN System

ment or independence as may be appropriate to the particular
circumstances of each territory and its peoples” (Article 76).
A more signiﬁcant indication of enhanced support for self-
determination of peoples was Chapter XI of the Charter: “Decla-
ration Regarding Non-Self-governing Territories.” This declara-
tion called on administrators of colonial territories “to develop
self-government, to take due account of the political aspirations
of the peoples, and to assist them in the progressive development
of their free political institutions” (Article 73). This was only a
“declaration” and did not deﬁne legal obligations of colonial ad-
ministrations. But its spirit was again voiced by the General As-
sembly in December 1960 in an even stronger “Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.” It
declared that all peoples have the right to self-determination, that
foreign rule is contrary to international law, and that the granting
of independence to colonial peoples is to be initiated as soon as
possible. This resolution received a positive vote of eighty-nine to
zero in the General Assembly, with nine abstentions, including
the United States. “There is no doubt that adoption of this decla-
ration is a landmark in development of the United Nations’ colo-
nial policy. It is now clear that there is no moderating the pres-
sure for UN action to see the last remnants of colonialism
disappear” (Jacob et al. 1972, 543). In the same session, the Gen-
eral Assembly voted to admit seventeen new members, the
largest number ever admitted in one year. All were former
colonies, sixteen from Africa, along with Cyprus.
Signiﬁcant UN success in advancing the self-determination
of colonies has, unfortunately, placed new challenges on UN
agendas with an escalating array of seriously disruptive conﬂicts
and violence within former colonies, often referred to as “failed
states.” The borders of colonies now independent were estab-
lished by colonial administrators, not by the people themselves.
As a result, many newly independent states are actually multina-
tion states whose borders are not accepted by nations within their
borders. Thus, the consequences of overseas colonialism remain
as signiﬁcant problems on the agendas of organizations through-
out the UN System.
Secretariat (UN Charter, Chapter XV) 
Differences between provisions in the League of Nations
Covenant and the UN Charter with respect to secretariats reveal
Principal Organizations of the United Nations
79

the signiﬁcant progress that has been made in the development
of an international civil service. The League Covenant had this
very limited provision:
The permanent Secretariat shall be established at the
Seat of the League. The Secretariat shall comprise a Sec-
retary-General and such secretaries and staff as may be
required. (Article 6)
In contrast, the UN Charter includes these requirements for
members of the Secretariat:
In the performance of their duties the Secretary General
and the staff shall not seek or receive instruction from
any government or from any other authority external to
the organization. They shall refrain from any action
which might reﬂect on their position as international of-
ﬁcials responsible only to the Organization.
Each member of the United Nations undertakes to re-
spect the exclusively international character of the re-
sponsibilities of the Secretary-General and the staff and
not to seek to inﬂuence them in the discharge of their re-
sponsibilities. (Article 100)
The paramount consideration in the employment of
the staff and in the determination of the conditions of
service shall be the necessity of securing the highest
standards of efficiency, competence, and integrity. Due
regard shall be paid to the importance of recruiting the
staff on as wide a geographical basis as possible. (Arti-
cle 101)
This is another example of how experience in the League
“laboratory” provided insights useful to those writing the UN
Charter. Although all members of the Secretariat come from
member states, while working in the Secretariat they are expected
to put aside any feelings of identity with that state and serve the
United Nations. At the same time, the primary consideration
when recruiting members of the Secretariat is to be their “effi-
ciency, competence, and integrity.” On the other hand, recruit-
ment is to provide the Secretariat with “as wide a geographical
basis as possible.” Obviously, in some respects these two provi-
sions are contradictory, but they can also be complementary. Ex-
80
Chronology of the Emergence and Development of the UN System

perience has demonstrated that “competence” can include the ca-
pacity to understand how decisions affect widely different social,
cultural, political, and geographic contexts. Thus, wide geo-
graphic representation in the secretariat can contribute to the
ability of the Secretariat to take into consideration the worldwide
impact of its actions. At the same time, wide geographic repre-
sentation in the Secretariat also helps to strengthen the perceived
legitimacy of its actions by member states and populations of
member states. In fulﬁllment of this provision, the Secretariat in-
cludes people from some 170 countries.
The Secretariat administers the programs and policies laid
down by the General Assembly, Security Council, and ECOSOC.
Its responsibilities “range from administering peacekeeping op-
erations to mediating international disputes, from surveying eco-
nomic and social trends and problems to preparing studies on
human rights and sustainable development. Secretariat staff also
inform the world’s communications media about the work of the
United Nations; organize international conferences on issues of
worldwide concern; and interpret speeches and translate docu-
ments into the Organization’s ofﬁcial languages”(www.un.org).
These programs and policies are carried out by some twenty-four
organizations created by the General Assembly, with offices in
New York and Geneva, a significant presence in Addis Ababa
(Ethiopia), Bangkok, Beirut, Geneva, Nairobi (Kenya), Santiago
(Chile), and Vienna, and other ofﬁces all over the world.
International Court of Justice 
(UN Charter, Chapter XIV)
The International Court of Justice (ICJ) was built on experience
with the Permanent Court of International Justice (PCIJ) founded
in 1920, the ﬁrst international court with a worldwide reach. Un-
like the ICJ, the PCIJ was not an organization of the League, al-
though Article 14 of the League Covenant called on the League
Council to formulate plans for the establishment of the PCIJ, and
it was linked to the League through the election of its judges and
its expenses. Similar to the PCIJ, the ICJ can settle, in accordance
with international law, legal disputes submitted to it by states
and give advisory opinions on legal questions referred to it by the
General Assembly or Security Council. This has now been ex-
tended to include the twenty Specialized Agencies.
Principal Organizations of the United Nations
81

The ICJ is composed of fifteen judges elected to nine-year
terms of ofﬁce by both the General Assembly and Security Coun-
cil. It may not include more than one judge of any nationality.
Elections are held every three years for one-third of the seats, and
retiring judges may be reelected. Of course, judges do not repre-
sent their governments but are independent magistrates. But
when the court does not include a judge possessing the national-
ity of a state party to a case, that state may appoint a person to sit
as an ad hoc judge for the purpose of the case. Only states may
apply to and appear before the ICJ.
A serious limitation of the ICJ’s jurisdiction is the fact that it
is competent to entertain a dispute only if the states concerned
have accepted its jurisdiction. Although all 191 members of the
UN have ratified the statute of the court, only sixty-five accept
the compulsory jurisdiction of the ICJ, not including the United
States. But the number of cases before the ICJ has grown in recent
decades. In the 1970s the ICJ had before it only one or two cases
at any one time. Between 1990 and 1997 there were nine to thir-
teen. On 30 July 2004 there were twenty cases before the ICJ. Sig-
niﬁcantly, these cases had attained a global scope; four were from
Africa, one from Asia, eleven from Europe, two from Latin Amer-
ica, and two were intercontinental (www.icj-cij.org).
Organizations Created by 
the General Assembly
We shall now help readers to acquire an understanding of the
emergence of the complicated system of forty-seven organizations
in the UN System. As we begin this task Table 4.2 provides a brief
overview that reveals that twenty-three of these organizations
were created by the General Assembly and twenty-four by sepa-
rate treaties (twenty classiﬁed as Specialized Agencies and four as
Related Organizations). To help the reader comprehend the activi-
ties of this array of organizations we have divided them into six
categories. We recognize that these divisions are somewhat arbi-
trary and that other divisions are possible, but believe that these
smaller categories enhance comprehension. As we present each
group of organizations, we will indicate the year of their founding
and often refer to their historic roots. This will underline the fact
82
Chronology of the Emergence and Development of the UN System

that emerging global governance is a dynamic process and that the
UN System is constantly required to respond to new challenges.
We have divided the organizations created by the General
Assembly into three categories. Fourteen are programs and
funds, eight are research and training institutes, and the third
consists only of the Ofﬁce for Project Services (UNOPS). We have
placed the ﬁve organizations categorized as “other UN entities”
in the UN System organization chart in these categories.
Programs and Funds
The programs and funds (Table 4.3) began with four activities
that can be broadly categorized as focused on human rights: the
founding of UNICEF in 1946 and a human rights ofﬁce in 1949
(now OHCHR) and the founding of two refugee organizations,
one for Palestine refugees (UNRWA) in 1949 and the High Com-
missioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in 1950.
Between 1963 and 1964 four organizations emerged that
were spurred by expansion of UN membership to include many
states that placed development issues high on their agendas—the
so-called underdeveloped states. These included the World Food
Program (WFP) in 1963, the UN Conference on Trade and Devel-
opment (UNCTAD) in 1964, the International Trade Center (ITC)
in 1964, and the UN Development Program (UNDP) in 1965. Two
more followed in 1970: the UN Population Fund (UNFPA) and
the UN Volunteers (UNV).
Organizations Created by the General Assembly
83
TABLE 4.2
Overview of 47 Organizations in the UN System
Organizations Created by the General Assembly (23)
Table 4.3
Programs and Funds (14)
Table 4.4
Research and Training Institutes (8)
Ofﬁce for Project Services (UNOPS) (1)
Specialized Agencies (20)
Table 4.5
Focus on Speciﬁc Economic and Social Issues (6)
Table 4.6
Technical Organizations (8)
Table 4.7
Financial and Monetary Organizations (6)
Related Organizations (4)
Table 4.8
Related Organizations (4)

The founding of the UN Environment Program (UNEP) in
1972 reﬂects the emergence of a signiﬁcant issue in the UN Sys-
tem that did not appear in the UN Charter. In that year the Decla-
ration of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environ-
ment, held in Stockholm, recognized “the need for a common
outlook and common principles to inspire and guide peoples of
the world in the preservation and enhancement of the human en-
vironment.” Gradually, the environment issue merged with the
development issue and presented “sustainable development” as
a signiﬁcant UN System issue.
84
Chronology of the Emergence and Development of the UN System
TABLE 4.3
Programs and Funds (in order of founding date)
1946
UN Children’s Fund (UNICEF), New York
Founded as UN Children’s Emergency Fund
1953 name changed to United Nations Children’s Fund 
with same acronym
1949
Ofﬁce of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), Geneva
(HC for HR created in 1993, combined with the Center for HR in 1997)
(Under “Other UN Entities” in UN Organization Chart)
1949
UN Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East 
(UNRWA), Gaza/Amman
1950
UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), Geneva
1963
World Food Program (WFP), Rome
1964
UN Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), Geneva
1964
International Trade Center (ITC) (Joint activity of UNCTAD & WTO), Geneva
1965
UN Development Program (UNDP), New York
1967
UN Population Fund (UNFPA), New York
1970
UN Volunteers (UNV), New York
1972
UN Environment Program (UNEP), Nairobi
1978
UN Human Settlements Program (UNHSP) (also called UN-Habitat), Nairobi
1985
UN Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), New York
Emerged from Voluntary Fund for the UN Decade for
Women (VFDW) 1976
1995
Joint UN Program on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), Geneva
(Founded by UNICEF, UNDP, UNFPA, UNESCO, WHO. Later UNODOC
[1999], ILO [2001],WFP [2003])
(Under “Other UN Entities” in UN Organization Chart)

The creation of the UN Human Settlements Program
(UNHSP) in 1978 was in response to recognition of the growing
impact of urbanization on human life on the planet at a UN con-
ference in Vancouver, Canada, in that year known as Habitat I.
But support for UNHSP developed very slowly, and Habitat II
was not held until 1996. Only after six more years, in 2002, was
the agency’s mandate strengthened and its status elevated to that
of a fully ﬂedged program of the UN System by a UN General
Assembly resolution (A/56/206). In this way the Assembly rec-
ognized that when the UN was founded, two-thirds of humanity
was still rural, but by 2002 half the world had become urban.
The emergence of the UN Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) in 1976 indicates the rising signiﬁcance of women’s is-
sues on UN System agendas. It was also in response to the UN
World Conference on Women held in Mexico City in 1975, which
was attended by many women’s organizations around the world.
In the same year, as will be indicated in our next category, an In-
ternational Research and Training Institute for the Advancement
of Women (INSTRAW) was created.
In 1995 another new global issue achieved prominence in the
UN System: acquired immuno-deficiency syndrome, or AIDS.
The epidemic spurred the creation of the Joint UN Program on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS). The UNAIDS secretariat operates as a cat-
alyst and coordinator of action on AIDS in the UN System, rather
than as a direct funding or implementing agency. Toward this
end, it is an example of remarkable cooperation among agencies
in the UN System. It was founded by five agencies: UNICEF,
UNDP, UNFPA, UNESCO, and WHO. This group has been
joined by ﬁve more: UNHCR, the World Bank, UNODOC, ILO,
and WFP.
Research and Training Institutes
The emergence of eight organizations involved in research and
training (Table 4.4) reﬂects the need of the UN System to support
its programs with expertise on approaching policy issues with a
global perspective. Those focused on speciﬁc topics range across
a broad range of UN System issues, including social develop-
ment, crime and justice, advancement of women, disarmament,
and drugs and crime. Three organizations that tend to empha-
size research are focused on social development (UN Research
Institute for Social Development, UNRISD), crime and justice
Organizations Created by the General Assembly
85

(UN Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute, UNICRI),
and disarmament (UN Institute for Disarmament Research, UNI-
DIR). A fourth, the UN University (UNU), has a research agenda
that reaches across the UN System. Two organizations range
across training and research. One is focused on women, the Inter-
national Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women (INSTRAW). The other is the UN Institute for Training
and Research (UNITAR), with a broad issue agenda. One organi-
zation emphasizes only training, the UN System Staff College
(UNSSC).
Two types of training that are offered deserve special atten-
tion. The UN Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR) con-
ducts “training programs in multilateral diplomacy and interna-
tional cooperation for diplomats accredited to the United
Nations and national ofﬁcials involved in work related to United
Nations activities” (www.unitar.org). The UN System Staff Col-
lege (UNSSC) focuses on these ﬁve tasks: (1) providing training
and learning services to UN staff members, (2) delivering man-
agement solutions to UN organizations, (3) supporting intera-
gency collaboration within the UN System, (4) encouraging co-
operation with the private sector and civil society, and (5)
promoting good management practices throughout the UN Sys-
tem (www.unssc.org).
86
Chronology of the Emergence and Development of the UN System
TABLE 4.4
Research and Training Institutes (in order of founding date)
1963
UN Research Institute for Social Development (UNRISD), Geneva
1965
UN Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR), Geneva
1968
UN Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute (UNICRI), Turin
(established as UN Social Defense Research Institute, in Rome; became
UNICRI, 2000, in Turin)
1973
UN University (UNU), Tokyo 
(Under “Other UN entities” in UN Organization Chart)
1976
International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of 
Women (INSTRAW), Santo Domingo
1980
UN Institute for Disarmament Research (UNIDIR), Geneva
1997
United Nations Ofﬁce on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Vienna
2002
UN System Staff College (UNSSC), Turin
(Under “Other UN Entities” in UN Organization Chart)

UN Ofﬁce for Project Services (UNOPS), 
New York 
The evolving functions of the UN Ofﬁce for Project Services (UN-
OPS) offer useful insight on the progressive development of link-
age among organizations in the UN System. In 1973 the UN De-
velopment Program (UNDP) established a Projects Execution
Division (PED), responsible for managing programs and projects
of UNDP. In 1988 it became UNOPS, to reflect the service-ori-
ented nature of its activities. By this time it had evolved from a
small division executing UNDP-funded projects to a provider of
services on behalf of UNDP and a dozen other clients, including
the World Bank and individual donor states. In 1995 the General
Assembly made UNOPS an instrument of the UN System at large
“for high-quality, cost-effective management of projects.” By this
time UNOPS had a diversiﬁed portfolio valued at more than $3
billion. In 1996 UNOPS began decentralizing by establishing of-
fices in Geneva and Copenhagen. In 2004 it also had offices in
Dakar (Senegal), Nairobi, Rome, Tokyo, San Salvador (El Sal-
vador), Asela (Ethiopia), Guatemala City, Vienna, Dili (Indone-
sia), Kinshasa (Democratic Republic of the Congo), Lima, and
Buenos Aires. The broad scope of UNOPS services range “from
land mine awareness to public sector reform, from informatics
solutions to eradicating poverty. These services include selecting
and hiring project personnel, procuring goods, organizing train-
ing, managing ﬁnancial resources and administering loans. In the
field of development, UNOPS is the largest service provider in
the United Nations System, working on behalf of more than
thirty UN departments and organizations. But UNOPS also offers
services to bilateral donors, international financial institutions,
developing country governments and others, at their request”
(www.unops.org).
UN Specialized Agencies
At the same time that the UN General Assembly has been estab-
lishing new organizations under its authority to cope with new
problems on its ever broader agenda, the United Nations has
been developing relationships with “various specialized agen-
cies, established by intergovernmental agreement and having
UN Specialized Agencies
87

wide international responsibilities, as defined in their basic in-
struments, in economic, social, cultural, educational, health, and
related fields” (UN Charter, Article 57). The Charter also states
that ECOSOC “may co-ordinate the activities of the specialized
agencies” and “may take appropriate steps to obtain regular re-
ports from the specialized agencies” (UN Charter, Article 63).
These Specialized Agencies total twenty in 2005, sometimes re-
ported as ﬁfteen when the six agencies of the World Bank group
are counted as one organization. To develop a more easily com-
prehended overview of this complicated array of organizations,
we have arbitrarily divided them into three groups: (1) six focus
on speciﬁc economic and social ﬁelds; (2) eight are technical orga-
nizations; and (3) six are ﬁnancial and monetary organizations.
Focus on Speciﬁc Economic and Social Fields
The six specialized agencies that focus on speciﬁc economic and
social ﬁelds range across agriculture, culture, education, food, la-
bor, health, industrial development, and science. The dates of
their founding range from 1919 to 1977, all with headquarters in
Europe (Table 4.5).
The International Labor Organization (ILO), created in
1919 at the end of the First World War, became the ﬁrst special-
ized agency of the UN System in 1946. The need for such an orga-
nization had been advocated in the nineteenth century by two in-
dustrialists, Robert Owen (1771–1853) of Wales and Daniel
Legrand (1783–1859) of France. The International Association for
Labor Legislation, founded in Basel in 1901, contributed ideas
that were included in the constitution of the International Labor
Organization.
It is indeed remarkable that almost a century ago the pream-
ble of the ILO constitution expressed ideas that were a motiva-
tion for many of the creative innovations in the development of
the UN System in 2005. The constitution expresses humanitarian
concern that “conditions of labour exist involving . . . injustice,
hardship and privation to large numbers of people” (www.
ilo.org/public/english/about/iloconst.htm). Then the preamble
recognizes that an industry or country may resist adopting social
reform because it may result in disadvantage vis-à-vis its com-
petitors by stating that: “the failure of any nation to adopt hu-
mane conditions of labour is an obstacle in the way of other na-
tions which desire to improve the conditions in their own
88
Chronology of the Emergence and Development of the UN System

countries.” These concerns are then placed in a remarkably
broad social context by noting that injustice produces “unrest so
great that the peace and harmony of the world are imperiled”
and that “universal and lasting peace can be established only if it
is based upon social justice” (www.ilo.org).
The ILO has an unusual tripartite form of representation that
extends beyond governmental representation. In the Interna-
tional Labor Conference, where all 177 members are represented,
each state is represented by two government members and one
each from labor and business organizations. The Governing Body
(similar to UN councils) consists of ﬁfty-six persons, twenty-eight
representing governments, fourteen representing employers, and
fourteen representing workers.
The ILO was an early innovator in the development of laws
with respect to universal human rights. At the ﬁrst International
Labor Conference in 1919, six conventions were adopted that
dealt with hours of work in industry, unemployment, maternity
protection, night work for women, minimum age, and night
work for young persons in industry. In 1926 the International La-
bor Conference set up a Committee of Experts on the Applica-
tion of Conventions and Recommendations, independent of
member states, to supervise adherence to these conventions.
Each year they examine reports made by states that have ratiﬁed
ILO conventions and make a report to the ILO Conference. There
are 180 ILO labor conventions as of 2005. The United States has
ratiﬁed seventeen. The ILO considers eight of them to be “funda-
UN Specialized Agencies
89
TABLE 4.5
Specialized Agencies:
Focus on Speciﬁc Economic and Social Fields
1919
International Labor Organization (ILO), Geneva (UN Spec Ag 1946)
1945
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), Rome (UN Spec Ag 1946)
1946
UN Educational, Science and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), 
Paris (UN spec Ag 1946)
1948
World Health Organization (WHO), Geneva (UN Spec Ag 1948)
1966
UN Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), 
Vienna (UN Spec Ag 1985)
1977
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), 
Rome (UN Spec Ag 1977)

mental” conventions: two dealing with freedom of association,
two with abolition of forced labor, two with equality, and two
with elimination of child labor. The United States has ratified
one dealing with forced labor and one with the elimination of
child labor.
The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) was
founded in Rome in 1945 and became a UN Specialized Agency
in 1946. It replaced the Institute of Agriculture, founded in Rome
in 1905 by the International Congress of Agriculture, composed
of forty-one states. An unofﬁcial International Agricultural Con-
gress had been held in Budapest in 1896. A key ﬁgure in the de-
velopment of the Institute of Agriculture had been David Lubin,
son of a Polish immigrant on the West Coast of the United States.
Regarded as a “crank” by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, he
“secured an audience with the King of Italy in 1904” that led to
the 1905 conference (Mangone 1954, 88).
With 187 member states FAO declares: “We help developing
countries and countries in transition modernize and improve
agriculture, forestry and ﬁsheries practices and ensure good nu-
trition for all. Since our founding in 1945, we have focused spe-
cial attention on developing rural areas, home to 70 percent of the
world’s poor and hungry people” (www.fao.org/UNFAO/
about/index_en.html). The FAO’s activities comprise four main
areas: (1) putting information within reach, (2) sharing policy
expertise, (3) providing a meeting place for nations, and (4)
bringing knowledge to the ﬁeld. Restructuring of FAO since 1994
reflects some of the recent trends in the UN System: increased
emphasis on food security, transferring more staff from head-
quarters to the ﬁeld, increasing use of experts from developing
countries, broadening links with the private sector and NGOs,
and greater electronic access to FAO statistical databases and
documents (www.fao.org).
The UN System agricultural activity was extended in 1977 as
a result of the 1974 World Food Conference, organized in re-
sponse to the food crises of the early 1970s that primarily affected
the Sahelian countries of Africa. One of the most important in-
sights emerging from the conference was that food insecurity and
famine were not primarily a result of food production failures,
but were caused by structural problems relating to poverty and
to the concentration of the developing world’s poor populations
in rural areas. The conference decided that an International Fund
for Agricultural Development (IFAD) should be established im-
90
Chronology of the Emergence and Development of the UN System

mediately for the purpose of ﬁnancing the development of food
production projects in the developing countries.” The Interna-
tional Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) became a spe-
cialized agency of the United Nations in 1977. Its target groups
“are the poorest of the world’s people: small farmers, the rural
landless, nomadic pastoralists, artisanal fisherfolk, indigenous
people and rural poor women” (www.ifad.org).
The UN Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO), with 190 member states in 2005, had three main pre-
decessors: (1) the International Committee of Intellectual Co-
operation (CICI), Geneva 1922–1946; (2) its executing agency, the
International Institute of Intellectual Co-operation (IICI), Paris,
1925–1946; and (3) the International Bureau of Education (IBE),
Geneva, 1925–1968. The IBE was founded in Geneva as a private,
nongovernmental organization in 1925. In 1929, under new
statutes, the IBE extended membership to governments and
eventually became the first intergovernmental organization in
the field of education. In 1969 the IBE became part of the UN-
ESCO secretariat under its own statutes.
The preamble of the UNESCO constitution declares: “Since
wars begin in the minds of men, it is in the minds of men that the
defences of peace must be constructed.” Since its founding UN-
ESCO has followed an ever more broad range of topics that shape
“the minds of men.” It very brieﬂy summarizes its interests into
ﬁve thematic areas: (1) education, (2) natural sciences, (3) social
and human sciences, (4) culture, and (5) communication and in-
formation. In addition, it lists a number of special focus issues
that range as broadly as the culture of peace, HIV/AIDS, indige-
nous people, and world heritage.
UNESCO espouses “a single unifying theme—contributing
to peace and human development in an era of globalization
through education, the sciences, culture and communication.”
Toward this end it has three main strategic thrusts: 
1. Developing and promoting universal principles and
norms, based on shared values, in order to meet
emerging challenges in education, science, culture and
communication and to protect and strengthen the
“common public good” ; 
2. Promoting pluralism, through recognition and
safeguarding of diversity together with the observance of
human rights; 
UN Specialized Agencies
91

3. Promoting empowerment and participation in the
emerging knowledge society through equitable access,
capacity-building and sharing of knowledge.
(www.unesco.org)
In working toward these ends, UNESCO has become increas-
ingly decentralized. In 2005 it had twenty-four national ofﬁces (fo-
cused on one state), twenty-seven cluster ofﬁces (which cover var-
ious domains for a cluster of states), twelve regional bureaus, and
twelve institutes and centers (for example, theoretical physics,
water, and capacity building in Africa) (www.unesco.com).
One root of the World Health Organization (WHO) can be
traced to the outbreak of cholera in Europe in 1830, which
claimed the lives of thousands of people in different countries.
This was followed by several health conferences: the First Inter-
national Sanitary Conference in Paris (1851), the International
Sanitary Conference for Repression of Epidemic Disease in Dres-
den (1883), and the Sanitary Conference against Plague in Venice
(1898). Soon two international health organizations were formed:
the International Sanitary Bureau in Washington (1902), and the
Ofﬁce International d’Hygiene Public (OIP) in Paris. Then in 1919
the Health Organization of the League of Nations was estab-
lished in Paris.
The WHO constitution proclaims that “the enjoyment of the
highest attainable standard of health” is “one of the fundamental
human rights of every human being without distinction for race,
religion, political belief, economic or social condition” and that
“the health of all peoples is fundamental in the attainment of
peace and security and is dependent upon the fullest cooperation
of individuals and states.” It defines health very broadly as a
state of complete physical, mental, and social well-being and not
merely the absence of disease or infirmity. With 192 member
states, WHO has assistant director-generals for HIV/AIDS, tu-
berculosis and malaria, communicable diseases, noncommunica-
ble diseases and mental health, sustainable development and
health environment, health technology and pharmaceuticals, and
family and community health (www.who.int).
Disappointed with its inability to fulﬁll the goals of its con-
stitution, in 1978 WHO launched a Health for All program that
recognized that large numbers of people, and even whole coun-
tries, were not enjoying an acceptable standard of health. WHO
has also become significantly decentralized by establishing re-
92
Chronology of the Emergence and Development of the UN System

gional offices for Africa, the Americas, Southeast Asia, Europe,
the Eastern Mediterranean, and the Western Pacific. Of course,
concern for health is not confined to WHO. For example, the
World Bank has taken note of health conditions in the poor
countries and urged their health ministries to pool their re-
sources and target the delivery of health services to their needi-
est populations.
The emergence of the United Nations Industrial Develop-
ment Organization (UNIDO) as a Specialized Agency is a result
of the large expansion of the number of UN member states with
very limited industrialization. In response to their demands, the
name of the UN Center for Industrial Development, then a part
of the UN Secretariat, was changed to the UN Industrial Devel-
opment Organization in 1966. It was made an autonomous orga-
nization, although the desire that it be a Specialized Agency was
rejected. But in 1985 UNIDO became a Specialized Agency and in
2005 had 171 member states, although the United States was not a
member.
UNIDO’s mandate is to support the industrial competence
and capacity of the poorer countries. It has been active in practi-
cally all fields of industry, frequently through programs of ex-
change and training. Carlos Magariños, the director-general of
UNIDO who is from Argentina, believes that the “ultimate task
of UNIDO is to contribute to a better future for those people
presently excluded from globalization. This can be done most ef-
fectively by decentralizing, ensuring transparency and concen-
trating our efforts on a selected set of development goals in order
to achieve concrete results” (www.unido.org/doc/3358).
UNIDO has an active presence in the poorer member states,
including representatives in thirty states and a number of ofﬁces
in these states focused on specific topics: seventeen investment
and technology promotion ofﬁces (ITPOs) and ten international
technology centers. Jointly with the UN Environment Program
(UNEP), it has established thirty national cleaner production cen-
ters (NCPCs) (www.unido.org).
Technical Organizations
The eight specialized agencies that we have classiﬁed as technical
organizations in Table 4.6 have founding years that range from
1878, sixty-seven years before the founding of the United Na-
tions, to 2003. This list of their foci reﬂects the growing dimen-
UN Specialized Agencies
93

sions of human linkage between 1865 and 2003: postal services,
telecommunications, civil aviation, meteorology, atomic energy,
maritime shipping, copyrights and patents, and tourism.
The Universal Postal Union (UPU), established in 1874 in
the Swiss capital of Bern, has 190 members. During the seven-
teenth and eighteenth centuries, the exchange of mail between
countries was largely governed by bilateral postal agreements,
but by the nineteenth century, these complex arrangements be-
gan to impede rapidly developing trade and commercial sectors.
In 1863 U.S. Postmaster General Montgomery Blair called a con-
ference in Paris, where delegates from fifteen European and
American countries met, but they were not able to reach an inter-
national postal agreement. The Swiss government convened an
international conference in Bern in 1874, attended by representa-
tives from twenty-two states. On 9 October of the same year—a
day now celebrated throughout the world as World Post Day—
the Treaty of Bern established the General Postal Union. Member-
ship in the union grew so quickly that its name was changed to
the Universal Postal Union in 1878. The barriers and frontiers
that had impeded the free ﬂow and growth of international mail
had ﬁnally been removed.
The postal service forms part of the daily life of people
all over the world. Even in the digital age, the Post re-
mains, for millions of people, the most accessible
means of communication and message delivery avail-
94
Chronology of the Emergence and Development of the UN System
TABLE 4.6
Specialized Agencies: Technical Organizations
1878
Universal Postal Union (UPU), Bern (UN Spec Ag 1948)
1934
International Telecommunication Union (ITU), Geneva (UN Spec Ag 1947)
1944
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), 
Montreal (UN Spec Ag 1947)
1950
World Meteorological Organization (WMO), Geneva (UN Spec Ag 1951)
1946
United Nations Atomic Energy Commission, Vienna (Dissolved in 1952)
1958
International Maritime Organization (IMO), London (UN Spec Ag 1959)
1970
World Industrial Property Organization (WIPO), 
Geneva (UN Spec Ag 1974)
2003
World Tourism Organization (WTO), Madrid

able. The postal services of the Universal Postal
Union’s 190 member countries form the largest physi-
cal distribution network in the world. More than six
million postal employees work in over 700,000 postal
outlets to ensure that some 430 billion mail items are
processed and delivered each year to all corners of the
world. (www.upu.int/about_us)
Services provided by the UPU include annual statistical data
that provide an overview of postal development in over 200
countries and territories and includes approximately 100 indica-
tors of postal development. The UPU Technical Standards publi-
cation gives an overview of all technical standards that have been
adopted through the UPU’s standards approval process. In order
to strengthen the quality of postal service to the poorer countries,
the UPU has established the Quality of Service Fund (QSF) that is
funded by increases in dues payments made by industrialized
member states. The QSF is used to support speciﬁc quality-of-ser-
vice improvement projects (www.upu.int).
The roots of the International Telecommunication Union
(ITU) emerged on 24 May 1844, when Samuel Morse sent his ﬁrst
public message over a telegraph line between Washington, D.C.,
and Baltimore, Maryland, thereby initiating a telecommunication
age that would be followed by the telephone, radio, television,
and the Internet. In 1865 the International Telegraphic Union was
established in Paris, followed by the creation of the International
Radiotelegraph Conference in Berlin in 1906. These two organiza-
tions merged into the International Telecommunication Union in
1934, following a 1932 conference in Madrid. In 1947 the ITU be-
came a specialized agency of the UN.
When the ﬁrst geostationary communications satellite (Syn-
com–1) was put into orbit in 1963, a new age of challenges con-
fronted the ITU. In 1992 allocations were made for the ﬁrst time
to serve the needs of a new kind of space service using nongeo-
stationary satellites, known as global mobile personal communi-
cations by satellite (GMPCS). In this year the ITU also developed
global standards for digital mobile telephony. It is expected that
commercial implementation early in this new millennium will
harmonize the incompatible mobile systems now in use around
the world and provide high-speed wireless devices capable of
handling voice, data, and connection to online services such as
the Internet.
UN Specialized Agencies
95

The Kyoto Plenipotentiary Conference in 1994 established
the World Telecommunication Policy Forum (WTPF), an ad hoc
meeting that encourages the free exchange of ideas and informa-
tion on emerging policy issues arising from the changing
telecommunication environment. The first WTPF was held in
Geneva in 1996 on the theme of global mobile personal communi-
cations by satellite; the second in Geneva in 1998 on trade in
telecommunication services; and the third in 2001, also in
Geneva, on Internet protocol (IP). “As the world becomes ever
more reliant on telecommunication technologies for commerce,
communication and access to information, ITU’s role in standard-
izing emerging new systems and fostering common global poli-
cies will be more vital than ever before” (www.itu.int).
The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), es-
tablished at a Chicago conference in 1944, became a UN Special-
ized Agency in 1947 and has 187 members as of 2005. “Safe and
efﬁcient air transport is in the interest of all states, but it can only
be achieved in cooperation, since most destinations of the na-
tional airlines are located in foreign countries and often third
states have to be overﬂown to reach the destination. This might
account for the astonishing fact that ICAO was able to function
relatively undisturbed throughout the Cold War” (Volger 2002,
275). Because operational and technical problems vary greatly in
different parts of the world, the ICAO has established eight re-
gional ofﬁces.
The ICAO’s services include aviation security (AVSEC),
which “develops AVSEC principles, communicates and promotes
such principles worldwide and assists ICAO in contracting States
in implementing them” (www.icao.org/atb/avsec/index). A
TRAINAIR program serves “to improve safety and efﬁciency of
air transport through the establishment and maintenance of high
standards of training and competency for aviation personnel on a
worldwide basis and in a cost effective manner” (www.icao.org).
There are also units on the environment, aviation medicine, navi-
gation, air transport, legal affairs, and technical cooperation.
The World Meteorological Organization (WMO), with 187
members as of 2005, is “the UN system’s authoritative voice on
the state and behavior of the Earth’s atmosphere, its interaction
with the oceans, the climate it produces and the resulting distribu-
tion of water resources (www.wmo.int). In 1853 the ﬁrst Interna-
tional Meteorological Conference was held in Brussels, followed
by the founding of the semigovernmental International Meteoro-
96
Chronology of the Emergence and Development of the UN System

logical Organization in 1873. It was succeeded in 1950 by the cre-
ation of the WMO that in 1951 became a UN Specialized Agency.
In addition to its headquarters in Geneva, the WMO secre-
tariat has regional ofﬁces for Africa (Burundi), for Asia and the
Southwest Paciﬁc (Switzerland), and for the Americas (Paraguay);
and subregional offices in West Africa (Nigeria), eastern and
southern Africa (Kenya), the Southwest Paciﬁc (Samoa), and for
North and Central America and the Caribbean (Costa Rica).
Six regional associations (Africa, Asia, South America, North
America, Central America and the Caribbean, the Southwest Pa-
ciﬁc, and Europe), composed of member states, coordinate mete-
orological and related activities within their respective regions.
Eight technical commissions, composed of experts within
their speciﬁc areas of competence, have been established for (1)
basic systems, (2) instruments and methods of observation, (3) at-
mospheric sciences, (4) aeronautical meteorology, (5) agricultural
meteorology, (6) hydrology, (7) climatology, (8) oceanography,
and (9) marine meteorology. The last is a joint effort with the In-
ternational Oceanographic Commission (IOC) of UNESCO.
The International Maritime Organization (IMO) was
founded in 1948 by an international conference in Geneva. The
original name was the Inter-Governmental Maritime Consulta-
tive Organization (IMCO), but the name was changed in 1982 to
the International Maritime Organization. The convention en-
tered into force in 1958 and the new organization met for the ﬁrst
time the following year. The purposes of the organization, as
summarized by the convention, are “to provide machinery for
cooperation among Governments in the field of governmental
regulation and practices relating to technical matters of all kinds
affecting shipping engaged in international trade; to encourage
and facilitate the general adoption of the highest practicable
standards in matters concerning maritime safety, efficiency of
navigation and prevention and control of marine pollution from
ships”(www.imo.org/home.asp).
Recent technological innovations have presented new op-
portunities to the IMO. These include a Global Maritime Distress
and Safety System (GMDSS) and an International Mobile Satellite
Organization (IMSO) that improves communication with ships.
New challenges include growth in the amount of oil being trans-
ported by sea and in the size of oil tankers. “The most important
convention regulating and preventing marine pollution by ships
is the IMO International Convention for the Prevention of Pollu-
UN Specialized Agencies
97

tion from Ships, 1973, as modiﬁed by the Protocol of 1978 relating
thereto (MARPOL 73/78). It covers accidental and operational oil
pollution as well as pollution by chemicals, goods in packaged
form, sewage, garbage and air pollution” (www.imo.org).
“The IMO’s International Convention on Standards of
Training, Certiﬁcation and Watchkeeping for Seafarers (STCW),
1978, was the ﬁrst internationally agreed-upon convention to ad-
dress the issue of minimum standards of competence for seafar-
ers. The World Maritime University (WMU), established in Swe-
den in 1983, operates under the auspices of the International
Maritime Organization. The IMO’s Technical Co-operation Pro-
gram helps “developing countries improve their ability to com-
ply with international rules and standards relating to maritime
safety and the prevention and control of maritime pollution, giv-
ing priority to technical assistance programs that focus on hu-
man resources development and institutional capacity-building”
(www.imo.org).
The roots of the World Intellectual Property Organization
(WIPO) are in the Paris Convention for the Protection of Indus-
trial Property of 1883 and the Berne Convention for the Protec-
tion of Literary and Artistic Works of 1886. Each had an interna-
tional bureau to carry out their administrative tasks. In 1893 these
two small bureaus united to form an international organization
called the United International Bureaux for the Protection of In-
tellectual Property (best known by its French acronym BIRPI),
based in Berne, Switzerland. In 1970 BIRPI became the World In-
dustrial Property Organization (WIPO). In 1974 WIPO became a
Specialized Agency of the UN System, having 181 member states
as of 2005. It administers twenty-three international treaties deal-
ing with different aspects of intellectual property protection.
WIPO’s activities and services include establishing interna-
tional standards for intellectual property laws and practices and
providing registration services that allow patents, trademarks,
and designs to be protected in many countries. WIPO also offers
assistance to developing countries in facilitating resolution of in-
tellectual property disputes. As a result of rapid development of
new communications technologies, WIPO is facing many new
challenges in the twenty-ﬁrst century. One of the most urgent is
the need for both the organization and its member states to adapt
to and beneﬁt from rapid change in the ﬁeld of information tech-
nology and the Internet (www.wipo.int).
98
Chronology of the Emergence and Development of the UN System

The emergence of the World Tourism Organization (WTO)
offers deep insight into the ways in which human activities that
cross state borders eventually emerge as organizations in the UN
System. It was founded as a nongovernmental organization, the
International Congress of Ofﬁcial Tourist Trafﬁc Associations, in
1925 in The Hague. It was renamed the International Union of
Official Travel Organizations (IUOTO) after World War II and
moved to Geneva. In 1967 IUOTO became an intergovernmental
body and in 1975 it became the WTO. In 1976 it became an exe-
cuting agency of the UN Development Program (UNDP). In 2003
the WTO became a UN Specialized Agency. Its membership is
comprised of member states, seven territories, and more than 300
afﬁliate members representing the private sector, educational in-
stitutions, tourism associations, and local tourism authorities.
The United States is not a member.
“At the start of the new millennium, tourism is ﬁrmly estab-
lished as the number one industry in many countries and the
fastest-growing economic sector in terms of foreign exchange
earnings and job creation. International tourism is the world’s
largest export earner and an important factor in the balance of
payments of most nations. Tourism has become one of the
world’s most important sources of employment.” The WTO pro-
motes “the development of responsible, sustainable and univer-
sally accessible tourism, with the aim of contributing to economic
development, international understanding, peace, prosperity and
universal respect for, and observance of, human rights and fun-
damental freedoms” (www.world-tourism.org). The WTO pays
particular attention to the interests of developing countries, pro-
motes technology transfers, and stimulates the development of
public-private sector partnerships. It encourages the implementa-
tion of the Global Code of Ethics for Tourism, “with a view to en-
suring that member countries, tourist destinations and busi-
nesses maximize the positive economic, social and cultural effects
of tourism.” Regional representatives, based at the Madrid head-
quarters, “hold regional conferences on problems that are shared
by many countries so that members can exchange experiences
and work towards common goals” (www.world-tourism.org).
Conferences have included these topics: the challenge of global-
ization in the Middle East, human resource development in East
Asia and the Paciﬁc, the Euro and tourism in Europe, and quality
standards in the Americas region.
UN Specialized Agencies
99

Financial and Monetary Organizations
In July 1944 the UN Monetary and Financial Conference was con-
vened at Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, in response to the
need for international cooperation in dealing with monetary and
financial problems that affect financial stability. The conference
created articles of agreement that were ratified by forty-four
states and went into force in December 1945. Two organizations
emerged out of this conference, the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Devel-
opment (IBRD) (Table 4.7).
The roots of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) go back
as early as 1867 when the Monetary Conference was held in Paris,
followed by the 1878 Monetary Diplomatic Conference that es-
tablished a permanent bureau in Berne. Then the forty-ﬁve states
represented at the Bretton Woods Conference in 1944 developed
the IMF primarily to establish a means to avoid repetition of the
economic policies that had contributed to the Great Depression of
the 1930s. Toward this end the IMF was “established to promote
international monetary cooperation, exchange stability, and or-
derly exchange arrangements; to foster economic growth and
high levels of employment; and to provide temporary ﬁnancial
assistance to countries to help ease balance of payments adjust-
ment” (www.imf.org). The IMF had 184 members by 2005.
“More generally, the IMF is responsible for ensuring the sta-
bility of the international monetary and financial system—the
system of international payments and exchange rates among na-
tional currencies that enables trade to take place between coun-
tries. The Fund seeks to promote economic stability and prevent
crises; to help resolve crises when they do occur; and to promote
growth and alleviate poverty.” It employs three main functions.
The ﬁrst is surveillance, deﬁned by the IMF thus: “A core respon-
sibility of the IMF is to promote a dialogue among its member
countries on the national and international consequences of their
economic and ﬁnancial policies. This process of monitoring and
consultation, normally referred to as ‘surveillance,’ has evolved
rapidly as the world economy has changed. IMF surveillance has
also become increasingly open and transparent in recent years.”
The second function is technical assistance, and the third is lend-
ing (www.imf.org).
Financial resources for pursuing these goals are acquired
from member states, with each contributing according to a quota
100
Chronology of the Emergence and Development of the UN System

that reﬂects their wealth. A member’s quota determines both its
ﬁnancial assessment and its voting power. The United States has
the largest quota, 17.1 percent and Palau has the smallest, .013
percent.
The International Bank for Reconstruction and Develop-
ment (IBRD) began operating in 1946 to help reconstruct the
war-ravaged economies of Western Europe. After this had been
achieved, the bank turned its attention to the developing coun-
tries, which led to its primary purpose of promoting poverty re-
duction and sustainable development by lending to the govern-
ments of developing countries. In 2004 the World Bank provided
$20.1 billion for 245 projects in developing countries worldwide,
with its ﬁnance and/or technical expertise aimed at helping these
countries reduce poverty. The IBRD is ﬁnanced through the sale
of World Bank bonds. In ﬁscal 2004 it raised $13 billion in ﬁnan-
cial markets. The IBRD now has 184 member states in 2005 and
more than 100 ofﬁces in these states (www.worldbank.org).
Members of the IBRD are represented on a Board of Gover-
nors. The number of shares each county has is based roughly on
the size of its economy. The United States is the largest single
shareholder, with 16.41 percent of votes, followed by Japan (7.87
percent), Germany (4.49 percent), the United Kingdom (4.31 per-
cent), and France (4.31 percent). The rest of the shares are divided
among the other member countries.
To cope with emerging ﬁnancial challenges, four additional
organizations were created alongside the IBRD that form the
World Bank Group. These include the International Finance Cor-
UN Specialized Agencies
101
TABLE 4.7
Specialized Agencies:
Financial and Monetary Organizations
1945
International Monetary Fund (IMF) Washington (UN Spec Ag 1947)
World Bank Group,Washington
1945
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), 
(UN Spec Ag 1947)
1956
International Finance Corporation (IFC)
1960
International Development Association (IDA), (UN Spec Ag 1961)
1966
International Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID)
1988
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)

poration (IFC), the International Development Association (IDA),
the International Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes (IC-
SID), and the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA).
The International Finance Corporation (IFC) was estab-
lished in 1956 to promote sustainable private-sector investment
in developing countries as a way to reduce poverty and improve
people’s lives. To join IFC, a country must ﬁrst be a member of
the IBRD. The IFC is the largest multilateral source of loan and
equity financing for private-sector projects in the developing
world. It promotes sustainable private-sector development pri-
marily by ﬁnancing private-sector projects, helping private com-
panies in the developing world mobilize financing in interna-
tional financial markets, and providing advice and technical
assistance to businesses and governments. The IFC has 178 mem-
ber states (www.ifc.org).
By the 1950s it became clear that the poorest countries
needed softer ﬁnancial terms than those offered by the IBRD. To
provide special attention to challenges confronted in lending to
the poorest countries, the International Development Associa-
tion (IDA) was formed in 1960. The IBRD and the IDA share the
same staff and headquarters and report to the same president,
but draw on different resources for their lending. The IDA is pri-
marily funded by contributions from the wealthier countries in
loans that mature in thirty-five to forty years and begin with a
ten-year grace period during which there is a service charge of
only 0.75 percent. In ﬁscal year 2004 the IDA provided $9 billion
in financing for 158 projects in sixty-two low-income countries
(www.worldbank.org/ida). Some forty rich countries provide the
money for this funding by making contributions every four
years. The IDA had 165 member states in 2005. All members of
IDA are members of the IBRD.
In 1966 the International Center for Settlement of Invest-
ment Disputes (ICSID) was created to cope with investment dis-
putes. It facilitates international ﬁnancial settlements by provid-
ing conciliation and arbitration of investment disputes between
nationals of different member countries. Recourse to ICSID con-
ciliation and arbitration is entirely voluntary. However, once the
parties have consented to arbitration under the ICSID conven-
tion, neither can unilaterally withdraw its consent.
“The creation of the International Center for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (ICSID) in 1966 was in part intended to re-
lieve the President and the staff [of the IBRD] of the burden of be-
coming involved in such disputes. But the Bank’s overriding con-
102
Chronology of the Emergence and Development of the UN System

sideration in creating ICSID was the belief that an institution
specially designed to facilitate the settlement of investment dis-
putes between governments and foreign investors could help to
promote increased flows of international investment” (www.
worldbank.org/icsid). One hundred and ﬁfty-ﬁve states had rati-
ﬁed the ICSID convention in May 2005.
In 1988 the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
(MIGA) was founded to help developing countries attract pri-
vate and public foreign investments. MIGA membership is open
to all IBRD members. The MIGA provides guarantees against
commercial risk such as expropriation and war, and consultative
and advisory services to improve the climate for foreign invest-
ment in member states. The MIGA has 164 member states that it
divides into twenty-two industrialized and forty-two developing
states (www.miga.org).
Related Organizations
Four organizations in the UN System that were established be-
tween 1957 and 1997 and created by separate treaties among
member states are not classiﬁed as Specialized Agencies, but as
Related Organizations. Three are concerned with military
weapons, including atomic energy, nuclear test bans, and chemi-
cal weapons. The fourth focuses on world trade (Table 4.8).
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) was cre-
ated in 1957 in response to the overwhelming challenges pre-
sented to the world by the development of nuclear weapons. “By
1958 it had become politically impracticable for the IAEA to be-
gin work on some of the main tasks foreseen in its Statute. But in
the aftermath of the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, the USA and the
USSR began seeking common ground in nuclear arms control”
(www.iaea.org).
The IAEA states that “three main pillars underpin IAEA’s
mission: 1. Safety and security: “The IAEA helps countries to up-
grade nuclear safety and to prepare for and respond to emergen-
cies. Work is keyed to international conventions, standards, and
guidance. The main aim is to protect people and the environ-
ment from harmful radiation exposure.” 2. Science and technol-
ogy: “The IAEA is the world’s focal point for scientiﬁc and tech-
nical cooperation in nuclear fields. The work contributes to
ﬁghting poverty, sickness, and pollution of the earth’s environ-
ment, and to other global ‘Millennium Goals’ for a safer and bet-
ter future.” 3. Safeguards and verification: “The IAEA is the
UN Specialized Agencies
103

world’s nuclear inspectorate, with more than four decades of
verification experience. Inspectors work to verify that safe-
guarded nuclear material and activities are not used for military
purposes. The Agency is additionally responsible for the nuclear
ﬁle in Iraq” (www.iaea.org).
As of 2005 the IAEA had 137 member states with a staff from
more than 90 countries. It reports to both the Security Council
and the General Assembly. In addition to headquarters in Vienna,
the IAEA has ofﬁces in Geneva, New York, Toronto, and Tokyo.
The IAEA runs or supports research centers and scientiﬁc labora-
tories in Vienna and Seibersdorf (Austria), Monaco, and Trieste
(Italy).
An example of the IAEA’s involvement in peaceful uses of
atomic energy occurred in 1988 when the IAEA and the UN
Food and Agricultural Organization joined with other agencies
to eradicate the New World screwworm—which spreads a
deadly livestock disease. The radiation-based technology to
eradicate the worm was developed at the agency’s Seibersdorf
laboratory. A more recent challenge confronting the IAEA is the
need to develop countermeasures against the threat of nuclear
terrorism.
The World Trade Organization (WTO), like the IMF, has
roots in efforts to prevent a repetition of the world economic
chaos of the 1930s. ECOSOC wished to create an organization
similar to the IMF for trade and convened a UN conference on
trade and employment in Havana, Cuba, which drew up the Ha-
vana Charter in 1948 that called for the creation of an Interna-
tional Trade Organization (ITO). This charter “established a com-
prehensive institutional and substantial order for international
economic relations, which is of unparalleled density and almost
104
Chronology of the Emergence and Development of the UN System
TABLE 4.8
Related Organizations
1957
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Vienna
1995
World Trade Organization (WTO), Geneva
1996
The Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty 
Organization (CTBTO Preparatory Commission), Vienna
1997
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), The Hague

prophetic foresight. In addition to tariffs and trade, it addressed
questions of economic development, trade in natural resources
and even questions of anti-trust relations” (Stoll 2000, 691). In or-
der to hasten the lowering of customs duties a special agreement
was concluded: the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(GATT). The Havana Charter never came into force but the world
trade order developed on the basis of GATT. Thus the future in-
ternational trading system was developed through a series of
trade negotiations, or rounds, held under GATT. The ﬁrst rounds
dealt mainly with tariff reductions, but later negotiations in-
cluded other areas, such as antidumping and nontariff measures.
The last round—the 1986–1994 Uruguay Round—led to the cre-
ation of the WTO, having 148 members in 2005.
The WTO’s “overriding objective is to help trade flow
smoothly, freely, fairly and predictably. It does this by: acting as a
forum for trade negotiations, administering trade agreements,
settling trade disputes, reviewing national trade policies, assist-
ing developing countries in trade policy issues, through technical
assistance and training programs, and cooperating with other in-
ternational organizations” (www.wto.org).
The WTO’s multilateral trading agreements are negotiated
and signed by a large majority of the world’s trading nations and
ratified in their parliaments. These agreements cover a wide
range of activities, including agriculture, textiles and clothing,
banking, telecommunications, government purchases, industrial
standards and product safety, food sanitation regulations, and in-
tellectual property. They provide the legal ground rules for inter-
national commerce (www.wto.org).
The Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nu-
clear Test-Ban Treaty Organization (CTBTO) is carrying out the
necessary preparations for the implementation of the Nuclear
Test-Ban Treaty that was adopted by the General Assembly in
1996. The treaty will enter into force after it has been ratiﬁed by
forty-four states that possess nuclear power or research reactors,
as listed in a treaty Annex. By 2005, 175 states have signed the
treaty, of which 121 have also ratiﬁed it. The United States signed
the treaty in 1996, but has not ratiﬁed it. The CTBTO reports to
the General Assembly.
All states that have signed the treaty are members of the
Preparatory Commission and fund its activities. The commis-
sion’s main tasks are the establishment of a 337-facility interna-
tional monitoring system and the International Data Center and
UN Specialized Agencies
105

the development of operational manuals, including those for on-
site inspections (www.ctbto.org).
Roots of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) can be found in the 1899 international confer-
ence held in The Hague that led to an agreement prohibiting the
use of projectiles ﬁlled with poison gas. But this was followed by
an overwhelming setback in World War I, when toxic chemicals
accounted for the deaths of 90,000 soldiers and more than a mil-
lion casualties. The 1925 Geneva Protocol banned the use of
chemical weapons in war, but did not prohibit the development,
production, or possession of such weapons. Finally, in 1992 nego-
tiators in Geneva agreed on the text of the Convention on the Pro-
hibition of Development, Production, Stockpiling, and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction.
The OPCW entered into force in 1997 and has 168 member
states in 2005. It reports to the General Assembly. OPCW pro-
grams “have four broad aims: to ensure a credible, transparent
regime to verify the destruction of chemical weapons and pre-
vent their reemergence in any Member State, while also protect-
ing legitimate national security and proprietary interests; to pro-
vide protection and assistance against chemical weapons; to
encourage international cooperation in the peaceful uses of
chemistry; and to bring about universal membership of the
OPCW by facilitating international cooperation and national ca-
pacity building” (www.opcw.org). Inspections to verify that
treaty obligations are being honored by member states are carried
out at military sites and at industrial and research sites by 181 in-
spectors from 53 countries.
UN World Conferences
World conferences under UN auspices that are focused on spe-
cific global problems have emerged as a significant means for
drawing widespread attention to issues such as the environment,
women, human rights, human settlements, and peaceful use of
outer space. A signiﬁcant aspect of these gatherings is not only a
formal conference of representatives of states, but also the pres-
ence of international and local NGOs and many other interested
parties. Also significant is the fact that these conferences have
106
Chronology of the Emergence and Development of the UN System

been held in many cities around the world, thereby making them
accessible to people worldwide.
Some 30,000 people were in Istanbul, Turkey, to seek solu-
tions to urban problems at the Habitat II Conference (1996);
nearly 50,000 were in Beijing for the Fourth World Conference on
Women (1995); and some 47,000 were in Rio de Janeiro to ﬁnd a
better balance between environmental protection and economic
development at the Earth Summit (1992). Some believe these
large-scale United Nations conferences are wasteful, but a Ger-
man scholar has concluded that they have these ﬁve “functions
and impacts”: (1) they provide fora for international communica-
tions exchange for a diversity of people concerned with a speciﬁc
issue; (2) they make possible important learning opportunities,
particularly across the poor and industrialized state divide; (3)
they perform an important educational and information function
as a result of media attention; (4) many of their nonbinding deci-
sions eventually acquire normative force; and (5) many states do
voluntarily comply with the decisions reached (Nuscheler 2002,
687–688).
Coordination of the UN System
Coordination of the UN System—an array of organizations with
a global agenda and members from around the globe—has never
been easy, and growth in the UN System in response to a dramat-
ically changing world has made the task ever more challenging.
A brief outline of the UN Millennium Declaration of the General
Assembly (A/55/L.2) in September 2000 offers a useful snapshot
of the agenda of the system in the early twenty-ﬁrst century:
I. We consider certain fundamental values to be es-
sential in the twenty-ﬁrst century. These include:
freedom, equality, solidarity, tolerance, respect for
nature, shared responsibility.
In order to translate these shared values into ac-
tions, we have identiﬁed key objectives to which
we assign special signiﬁcance.
II. Peace, security and disarmament,
III. Development and poverty eradication,
Coordination of the UN System
107

IV. Protecting our common environment,
V. Human rights, democracy and good governance,
VI. Protecting the vulnerable,
VII. Meeting the special needs of Africa,
VIII. Strengthening the United Nations.
Obviously, efforts to achieve any one of these values, such as
poverty eradication, depends on the activities of several agencies
in the UN System. At the same time, efforts that focus on one
value, such as development, can signiﬁcantly affect efforts to pro-
tect other values, such as the environment, health, and human
rights.
In the UN System coordination requires efforts both by rep-
resentatives of states in various decision-making bodies and by
members of secretariats. Very important with respect to the ﬁrst
are the efforts of the Economic and Social Council to coordinate
the work of the nineteen UN specialized agencies, nine functional
commissions, and eleven UN funds and programs. At the same
time, while the regional commissions (for Africa, Latin America
and the Caribbean, Asia and the Paciﬁc, Western Asia, and Eu-
rope) are coping with different regional conditions, ECOSOC
must coordinate their efforts. Of course, the General Assembly
has the main responsibility for coordinating the efforts of the
eleven funds and programs that it has created.
In 1946, at the request of ECOSOC, the Administrative Com-
mittee on Coordination (ACC) was formed to bring together the
executive heads of UN organizations for the purpose of coordinat-
ing their activities. The main purpose of the committee was to su-
pervise the implementation of the agreements between the United
Nations and the Specialized Agencies. Since then, its mandate has
grown and it has been replaced by the UN System Chief Execu-
tives Board (CEB) for Coordination to further coordination and
cooperation on the whole range of substantive and management
issues facing the UN System. Expanded from ACC’s original four
members (UN, ILO, FAO, and UNESCO), the CEB in 2005 com-
prises twenty-eight member organizations, including UN funds
and programs, as well as Specialized Agencies and the WTO.
Chaired by the secretary-general of the United Nations, the board
meets twice annually. It is composed of the executive heads of the
member organizations and is assisted by two high-level commit-
tees, the High-Level Committee on Programs (HLCP) and the
High-Level Committee on Management (HLCM).
108
Chronology of the Emergence and Development of the UN System

In conclusion, this chapter has illuminated that the roots of
the UN System are to be found not only in the UN Charter and
treaties creating the Specialized Agencies and Related Organiza-
tions, but also in the diversity of historical roots of human linkage
that transcend all political borders. In the world in which we now
live, new technologies are making these linkages ever more rapid
and ever more far-reaching. As a result, the demands placed on
local governments, local regions, UN member states, and the UN
System are constantly changing. This governmental fluidity is
continually confronting officials in these political institutions
with new challenges.
Of course, the same is true for all people, particularly those
living in democracies who aspire to control their own fate. We
hope that we have illuminated where in the UN System potential
exists for coping with problems on UN System agendas that are
most signiﬁcant to you, and why these problems are on UN Sys-
tem agendas. What is your evaluation of how the UN System is
trying to cope with these problems? What is your evaluation of
how your federal and state governments and the governing bod-
ies in your local region and community are contributing to the so-
lution of these problems? When you ﬁnd there are shortcomings,
we hope that we have enabled you to begin to ﬁnd ways in which
you can become involved in efforts to overcome these deﬁciencies.
References
Alger, Chadwick F., 1995, “The United Nations in Historical Perspec-
tive,” in Chadwick F. Alger, Gene M. Lyons, and John E. Trent, eds., The
UN System: The Policies of Member States. Tokyo: UN University, 3–40.
Alger, Chadwick F., and Steven J. Brams, 1967, “Patterns of Representa-
tion in National Capitals and Intergovernmental Organizations,” World
Politics, Vol. 19, No. 4, 646–663.
Alleyne, Mark D., 1995, International Power and International Communica-
tion. New York: St. Martin’s. 
Brodie, Bernard, and Fawn Brodie, 1973, From Crossbow to H-Bomb, re-
vised and enlarged ed. Bloomington: Indiana University.
Claude, Inis L., Jr., 1971, Swords into Ploughshares: The Problems and
Progress of International Organization, 4th ed. New York: Random House.
Conference of NGOs in Consultative Relationship with the United Na-
tions (CONGO), www.ngocongo.org.
References
109

Food and Agriculture Organization, www.fao.org.
International Atomic Energy Agency, www.iaea.org.
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, www.
worldbank.org.
International Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes, www.
worldbank.org/icsid.
International Civil Aviation Organization, www.icao.org.
International Court of Justice, www.icj-cij.org.
International Development Association, www.worldbank.org/ida.
International Finance Corporation, www.ifc.org.
International Fund for Agricultural Development, www.ifad.org.
International Labor Organization, www.ilo.org.
International Maritime Organization, www.imo.org.
International Monetary Fund, www.imf.org.
International Telecommunications Organization, www.itu.int.
Jacob, Philip E., Alexine L. Atherton, and Arthur M. Wallenstein, 1972,
The Dynamics of International Organization, revised ed. Homewood, IL:
Dorsey.
Leonard, L. Larry, 1951, International Organization. New York: McGraw-
Hill.
Mangone, Gerard J., 1954, A Short History of International Organization.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
McNeill, William, 1963, The Rise of the West: A History of the Human Com-
munity. Chicago: University of Chicago. 
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency, www.miga.org.
Nuscheler, Franz, 2002, “World Conferences,” in Helmut Vogler, ed., A
Concise Encyclopedia of the United Nations, 684–688.
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. www.opcw.org.
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban
Treaty Organization, www.ctbto.org.
Reinsch, Paul S., 1916, Public International Unions, 2d ed. Boston: World
Peace Foundation.
Stoll, Peter Tobias, 2002, “WTO—World Trade Organization, GATT—
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade,” in Helmut Vogler, ed., A Con-
cise Encyclopedia of the United Nations, 691–697.
United Nations, www.un.org.
UN Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization, www.unesco.org.
110
Chronology of the Emergence and Development of the UN System

UN Industrial Development Organization, www.unido.org.
UN Institute for Training and Research, www.unitar.org.
United Nations Non-Governmental Liaison Service (NGLS), www.
un-ngls.org.
United Nations Ofﬁce for Project Services, www.unops.org.
Universal Postal Union, www.org.int.
Vogler, Helmut, ed., 2002, A Concise Encyclopedia of the United Nations.
The Hague: Kluwer Law International.
World Health Organization, www.who.int.
World Industrial Property Organization, www.wipo.int.
World Meterological Organization, www.wmo.ch.
World Tourism Organization, www.world-tourism.org.
World Trade Organization, www.wto.org.
To quickly access other UN System Websites, go to www.unorg, then “wel-
come,” then “about the UN,” then “organization chart of the UN system,” then
click on an organization’s name to access its Website.
Chronology
111


5
Facts and Data
I
t is a very challenging task to select the most useful facts and
data about the network of organizations and their extensive
overlapping functions that make up the UN System. The com-
pilation that follows was chosen after consideration of many op-
tions. Presented first are the League of Nations Covenant, the
UN Charter, and a list of the member states of the UN.
This is followed by broad coverage of human rights, an ac-
tivity that is deﬁning recognized global values that guide the ac-
tivities of the entire UN System. Included are values relevant to
civil, political, economic, social, cultural, labor, educational, nu-
tritional, health, environmental, refugees, poverty, and other is-
sues. Facts and data in this section reveal the growing under-
standing that agencies throughout the UN System have
regarding human rights responsibilities.
Presented next are facts and data on UN peacekeeping,
peacemaking, peace building, and international criminal tri-
bunals. This section reveals organizational developments in re-
sponse to learning about ways to cope with violence and severe
violations of human rights.
A section on UN System efforts to counter terrorism follows.
It is included because of widespread public and governmental
concern about this issue. Here it is revealed that terrorism has
long been a UN issue and that organizations throughout the sys-
tem have important roles to play.
The following section on UN ﬁnancing illuminates the chal-
lenges that the UN System confronts in attempting to cope with
an ever widening array of responsibilities, while working with
limited ﬁnancial resources and uncertainty based on dependence
113

on voluntary contributions and late payment of member state as-
sessments. A response has been proposals for alternative sources
of ﬁnancing.
Next come an array of basic facts and data on secretaries-
general, presidents of the General Assembly, UN System Nobel
Peace Prizes, the extensive array of UN conferences, former trust
territories and remaining non-self-governing territories.
Following this, information provided on public links to the
UN System reveal the growing efforts by the UN System to reach
out to civil society and efforts by civil society to become involved
in the UN System. This includes not only nongovernmental orga-
nizations, but also businesses. In addition, local government au-
thorities are growing in their awareness of the relevance of the
UN System to local governance.
The last two sections are useful in placing the evolving UN
System in the context of its historical roots and possible futures.
Proposals for strengthening the UN System are followed by a
concluding section on the nineteenth-century roots of organiza-
tions in the UN System.
Table of Contents
I. League of Nations Covenant
II. UN Charter
III. Member States of the (191) United Nations: With Dates on
which They Joined
IV. International Bill of Human Rights
1. Universal Declaration on Human Rights
2. International Covenant on Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights
3. International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
• Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights
• Second Optional Protocol to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the
abolition of the death penalty
V. Monitoring Bodies for Core Human Rights Treaties
VI. UN Electoral Assistance
114
Facts and Data

VII. Examples of Human Rights Activities of Other 
UN Agencies
1. International Labor Organization (ILO), Labor Standard
Conventions
2. UN Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO), Promotion of Education as a Fundamental
Human Right
3. Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), Guidelines
on the Right to Food
4. World Health Organization (WHO), the Right to the
Highest Attainable Health Quality
5. UN Environment Program (UNEP), the Right to a
Pollution-Free Environment
6. UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
Protection of Human Rights
7. Habitat (UNHSP), a Rights-Based Approach to Urban
Poverty Reduction
VIII. UN Peacekeeping Operations
1. Current Peacekeeping Operations
2. Past Peacekeeping Operations
3. Civilian Police
4. UN Peacekeeping Fatalities
5. UN Mine Action Service (UNMAS)
IX. UN Peacemaking and Peace-Building Missions
X. International Criminal Tribunals
1. International Criminal Court (ICC)
2. International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY)
3. International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
XI. UN System Counterterrorism Efforts
1. Twelve Key UN Antiterrorism Conventions That
Predate 11 September 2001
2. Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) of the Security
Council
3. Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED)
4. General Assembly Ad Hoc Committee on Terrorism
5. Activities of the Most Relevant UN Agencies and
Programs that Postdate September 2001
6. Other Counterterrorism Activities of ILO, IMO, OPCW,
UPU, and WHO
Table of Contents
115

XII. Financing the UN System
1. Total UN System Expenditures: 1986–2004
2. Assessments of the Largest Contributors
3. Alternative Sources of Financing
XIII. Secretaries-general of the United Nations
XIV. Presidents of the UN General Assembly
XV. UN System Nobel Peace Prizes
XVI. UN Conferences, 1994–2004
XVII. Former UN Trust Territories
XVIII. Remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories
XIX. Public Links to the UN System
1. Network of UN Information Centers
2. Nongovernmental Organization (NGO) Section, UN
Department of Public Information (DPI)
3. Cyberschoolbus
4. Business and the United Nations
5. UN Non-Governmental Liaison Service (NGLS)
6. World Federation of UN Associations (WFUNA)
7. United Nations Association of the United States of
America (UNAUSA)
8. Local Authority Links to the UN System
XX. Nineteenth-Century Roots of Organizations in the UN
System
League of Nations Covenant
Following World War I, the Covenant of the League of Nations
was adopted in the ﬁrst phase of the Paris Peace Conference on
28 April 1919. On 10 January 1920 the League formally came into
existence. The League was dissolved on 19 April 1946, one year
after the founding of the United Nations.
Covenant of the League of Nations
(Including Amendments adopted to 
December 1924)
THE HIGH CONTRACTING PARTIES,
In order to promote international co-operation and to achieve
international peace and security by the acceptance of obligations not to
116
Facts and Data

resort to war, by the prescription of open, just and honourable relations
between nations, by the ﬁrm establishment of the understandings of
international law as the actual rule of conduct among Governments,
and by the maintenance of justice and a scrupulous respect for all treaty
obligations in the dealings of organised peoples with one another, Agree
to this Covenant of the League of Nations.
ARTICLE 1
The original Members of the League of Nations shall be
those of the Signatories which are named in the Annex to this Covenant
and also such of those other States named in the Annex as shall accede
without reservation to this Covenant. Such accession shall be effected by
a Declaration deposited with the Secretariat within two months of the
coming into force of the Covenant. Notice thereof shall be sent to all
other Members of the League.
Any fully self-governing State, Dominion or Colony not named in
the Annex may become a Member of the League if its admission is
agreed to by two-thirds of the Assembly, provided that it shall give
effective guarantees of its sincere intention to observe its international
obligations, and shall accept such regulations as may be prescribed by
the League in regard to its military, naval and air forces and armaments.
Any Member of the League may, after two years’ notice of its
intention so to do, withdraw from the League, provided that all its
international obligations and all its obligations under this Covenant
shall have been fulﬁlled at the time of its withdrawal.
ARTICLE 2
The action of the League under this Covenant shall be
effected through the instrumentality of an Assembly and of a Council,
with a permanent Secretariat.
ARTICLE 3
The Assembly shall consist of Representatives of the
Members of the League.
The Assembly shall meet at stated intervals and from time to time
as occasion may require at the Seat of the League or at such other place
as may be decided upon.
The Assembly may deal at its meetings with any matter within the
sphere of action of the League or affecting the peace of the world. At
meetings of the Assembly each Member of the League shall have one
vote, and may have not more than three Representatives.
ARTICLE 4
The Council shall consist of Representatives of the
Principal Allied and Associated Powers, together with Representatives
of four other Members of the League. These four Members of the
League shall be selected by the Assembly from time to time in its
discretion. Until the appointment of the Representatives of the four
League of Nations Covenant
117

Members of the League ﬁrst selected by the Assembly, Representatives
of Belgium, Brazil, Spain and Greece shall be members of the Council.
With the approval of the majority of the Assembly, the Council
may name additional Members of the League whose Representatives
shall always be members of the Council; the Council, with like approval
may increase the number of Members of the League to be selected by
the Assembly for representation on the Council.
The Council shall meet from time to time as occasion may require,
and at least once a year, at the Seat of the League, or at such other place
as may be decided upon.
The Council may deal at its meetings with any matter within the
sphere of action of the League or affecting the peace of the world.
Any Member of the League not represented on the Council shall be
invited to send a Representative to sit as a member at any meeting of
the Council during the consideration of matters specially affecting the
interests of that Member of the League.
At meetings of the Council, each Member of the League
represented on the Council shall have one vote, and may have not more
than one Representative.
ARTICLE 5
Except where otherwise expressly provided in this
Covenant or by the terms of the present Treaty, decisions at any meeting
of the Assembly or of the Council shall require the agreement of all the
Members of the League represented at the meeting.
All matters of procedure at meetings of the Assembly or of the
Council, including the appointment of Committees to investigate
particular matters, shall be regulated by the Assembly or by the Council
and may be decided by a majority of the Members of the League
represented at the meeting.
The ﬁrst meeting of the Assembly and the ﬁrst meeting of the
Council shall be summoned by the President of the United States of
America.
ARTICLE 6
The permanent Secretariat shall be established at the Seat
of the League. The Secretariat shall comprise a Secretary General and
such secretaries and staff as may be required.
The ﬁrst Secretary General shall be the person named in the Annex;
thereafter the Secretary General shall be appointed by the Council with
the approval of the majority of the Assembly.
The secretaries and staff of the Secretariat shall be appointed by the
Secretary General with the approval of the Council.
The Secretary General shall act in that capacity at all meetings of
the Assembly and of the Council.
The expenses of the League shall be borne by the Members of the
League in the proportion decided by the Assembly.
118
Facts and Data

ARTICLE 7
The Seat of the League is established at Geneva.
The Council may at any time decide that the Seat of the League
shall be established elsewhere.
All positions under or in connection with the League, including the
Secretariat, shall be open equally to men and women.
Representatives of the Members of the League and ofﬁcials of the
League when engaged on the business of the League shall enjoy
diplomatic privileges and immunities.
The buildings and other property occupied by the League or its
ofﬁcials or by Representatives attending its meetings shall be inviolable.
ARTICLE 8
The Members of the League recognise that the maintenance
of peace requires the reduction of national armaments to the lowest
point consistent with national safety and the enforcement by common
action of international obligations.
The Council, taking account of the geographical situation and
circumstances of each State, shall formulate plans for such reduction for
the consideration and action of the several Governments. Such plans
shall be subject to reconsideration and revision at least every ten years.
After these plans shall have been adopted by the several
Governments, the limits of armaments therein ﬁxed shall not be
exceeded without the concurrence of the Council.
The Members of the League agree that the manufacture by private
enterprise of munitions and implements of war is open to grave
objections. The Council shall advise how the evil effects attendant upon
such manufacture can be prevented, due regard being had to the
necessities of those Members of the League which are not able to
manufacture the munitions and implements of war necessary for their
safety.
The Members of the League undertake to interchange full and
frank information as to the scale of their armaments, their military,
naval and air programmes and the condition of such of their industries
as are adaptable to war-like purposes.
ARTICLE 9
A permanent Commission shall be constituted to advise
the Council on the execution of the provisions of Articles 1 and 8 and on
military, naval and air questions generally.
ARTICLE 10
The Members of the League undertake to respect and
preserve as against external aggression the territorial integrity and
existing political independence of all Members of the League. In case of
any such aggression or in case of any threat or danger of such
aggression the Council shall advise upon the means by which this
obligation shall be fulﬁlled.
League of Nations Covenant
119

ARTICLE 11
Any war or threat of war, whether immediately affecting
any of the Members of the League or not, is hereby declared a matter of
concern to the whole League, and the League shall take any action that
may be deemed wise and effectual to safeguard the peace of nations. In
case any such emergency should arise the Secretary General shall on the
request of any Member of the League forthwith summon a meeting of
the Council.
It is also declared to be the friendly right of each Member of the
League to bring to the attention of the Assembly or of the Council any
circumstance whatever affecting international relations which threatens
to disturb international peace or the good understanding between
nations upon which peace depends.
ARTICLE 12
The Members of the League agree that, if there should
arise between them any dispute likely to lead to a rupture they will
submit the matter either to arbitration or judicial settlement or to
enquiry by the Council, and they agree in no case to resort to war until
three months after the award by the arbitrators or the judicial decision,
or the report by the Council. In any case under this Article the award of
the arbitrators or the judicial decision shall be made within a reasonable
time, and the report of the Council shall be made within six months
after the submission of the dispute.
ARTICLE 13
The Members of the League agree that whenever any
dispute shall arise between them which they recognise to be suitable for
submission to arbitration or judicial settlement and which cannot be
satisfactorily settled by diplomacy, they will submit the whole subject-
matter to arbitration or judicial settlement.
Disputes as to the interpretation of a treaty, as to any question of
international law, as to the existence of any fact which if established
would constitute a breach of any international obligation, or as to the
extent and nature of the reparation to be made for any such breach, are
declared to be among those which are generally suitable for submission
to arbitration or judicial settlement.
For the consideration of any such dispute, the court to which the
case is referred shall be the Permanent Court of International Justice,
established in accordance with Article 14, or any tribunal agreed on by
the parties to the dispute or stipulated in any convention existing
between them.
The Members of the League agree that they will carry out in full
good faith any award or decision that may be rendered, and that they
will not resort to war against a Member of the League which complies
therewith. In the event of any failure to carry out such an award or
decision, the Council shall propose what steps should be taken to give
effect thereto.
120
Facts and Data

ARTICLE 14
The Council shall formulate and submit to the Members
of the League for adoption plans for the establishment of a Permanent
Court of International Justice. The Court shall be competent to hear and
determine any dispute of an international character which the parties
thereto submit to it. The Court may also give an advisory opinion upon
any dispute or question referred to it by the Council or by the Assembly.
ARTICLE 15
If there should arise between Members of the League any
dispute likely to lead to a rupture, which is not submitted to arbitration
or judicial settlement in accordance with Article 13, the Members of the
League agree that they will submit the matter to the Council. Any party
to the dispute may effect such submission by giving notice of the
existence of the dispute to the Secretary General, who will make all
necessary arrangements for a full investigation and consideration
thereof.
For this purpose the parties to the dispute will communicate to the
Secretary General, as promptly as possible, statements of their case with
all the relevant facts and papers, and the Council may forthwith direct
the publication thereof.
The Council shall endeavour to effect a settlement of the dispute,
and if such efforts are successful, a statement shall be made public
giving such facts and explanations regarding the dispute and the terms
of settlement thereof as the Council may deem appropriate.
If the dispute is not thus settled, the Council either unanimously or
by a majority vote shall make and publish a report containing a
statement of the facts of the dispute and the recommendations which
are deemed just and proper in regard thereto.
Any Member of the League represented on the Council may make
public a statement of the facts of the dispute and of its conclusions
regarding the same.
If a report by the Council is unanimously agreed to by the
members thereof other than the Representatives of one or more of the
parties to the dispute, the Members of the League agree that they will
not go to war with any party to the dispute which complies with the
recommendations of the report.
If the Council fails to reach a report which is unanimously agreed
to by the members thereof, other than the Representatives of one or
more of the parties to the dispute, the Members of the League reserve to
themselves the right to take such action as they shall consider necessary
for the maintenance of right and justice.
If the dispute between the parties is claimed by one of them, and is
found by the Council, to arise out of a matter which by international
law is solely within the domestic jurisdiction of that party, the Council
shall so report, and shall make no recommendation as to its settlement.
League of Nations Covenant
121

The Council may in any case under this Article refer the dispute to
the Assembly. The dispute shall be so referred at the request of either
party to the dispute, provided that such request be made within
fourteen days after the submission of the dispute to the Council.
In any case referred to the Assembly, all the provisions of this
Article and of Article 12 relating to the action and powers of the Council
shall apply to the action and powers of the Assembly, provided that a
report made by the Assembly, if concurred in by the Representatives of
those Members of the League represented on the Council and of a
majority of the other Members of the League, exclusive in each case of
the Representatives of the parties to the dispute, shall have the same
force as a report by the Council concurred in by all the members thereof
other than the Representatives of one or more of the parties to the
dispute.
ARTICLE 16
Should any Member of the League resort to war in
disregard of its covenants under Articles 12, 13 or 15, it shall ipso facto
be deemed to have committed an act of war against all other Members
of the League, which hereby undertake immediately to subject it to the
severance of all trade or ﬁnancial relations, the prohibition of all
intercourse between their nationals and the nationals of the covenant-
breaking State, and the prevention of all ﬁnancial, commercial or
personal intercourse between the nationals of the covenant-breaking
State and the nationals of any other State, whether a Member of the
League or not. It shall be the duty of the Council in such case to
recommend to the several Governments concerned what effective
military, naval or air force the Members of the League shall severally
contribute to the armed forces to be used to protect the covenants of the
League.
The Members of the League agree, further, that they will mutually
support one another in the ﬁnancial and economic measures which are
taken under this Article, in order to minimise the loss and
inconvenience resulting from the above measures, and that they will
mutually support one another in resisting any special measures aimed
at one of their number by the covenant-breaking State, and that they
will take the necessary steps to afford passage through their territory to
the forces of any of the Members of the League which are co-operating
to protect the covenants of the League.
Any Member of the League which has violated any covenant of the
League may be declared to be no longer a Member of the League by a
vote of the Council concurred in by the Representatives of all the other
Members of the League represented thereon.
ARTICLE 17
In the event of a dispute between a Member of the League
and a State which is not a Member of the League, or between States not
122
Facts and Data

Members of the League, the State or States not Members of the League
shall be invited to accept the obligations of membership in the League
for the purposes of such dispute, upon such conditions as the Council
may deem just. If such invitation is accepted, the provisions of Articles
12 to 16 inclusive shall be applied with such modiﬁcations as may be
deemed necessary by the Council.
Upon such invitation being given the Council shall immediately
institute an inquiry into the circumstances of the dispute and
recommend such action as may seem best and most effectual in the
circumstances.
If a State so invited shall refuse to accept the obligations of
membership in the League for the purposes of such dispute, and shall
resort to war against a Member of the League, the provisions of Article
16 shall be applicable as against the State taking such action.
If both parties to the dispute when so invited refuse to accept the
obligations of membership in the League for the purposes of such
dispute, the Council may take such measures and make such
recommendations as will prevent hostilities and will result in the
settlement of the dispute.
ARTICLE 18
Every treaty or international engagement entered into
hereafter by any Member of the League shall be forthwith registered
with the Secretariat and shall as soon as possible be published by it. No
such treaty or international engagement shall be binding until so
registered.
ARTICLE 19
The Assembly may from time to time advise the
reconsideration by Members of the League of treaties which have
become inapplicable and the consideration of international conditions
whose continuance might endanger the peace of the world.
ARTICLE 20
The Members of the League severally agree that this
Covenant is accepted as abrogating all obligations or understandings
inter se which are inconsistent with the terms thereof, and solemnly
undertake that they will not hereafter enter into any engagements
inconsistent with the terms thereof.
In case any Member of the League shall, before becoming a
Member of the League, have undertaken any obligations inconsistent
with the terms of this Covenant, it shall be the duty of such Member to
take immediate steps to procure its release from such obligations.
ARTICLE 21
Nothing in this Covenant shall be deemed to affect the
validity of international engagements, such as treaties of arbitration or
regional understandings like the Monroe doctrine, for securing the
maintenance of peace.
League of Nations Covenant
123

ARTICLE 22
To those colonies and territories which as a consequence
of the late war have ceased to be under the sovereignty of the States
which formerly governed them and which are inhabited by peoples not
yet able to stand by themselves under the strenuous conditions of the
modern world, there should be applied the principle that the well-being
and development of such peoples form a sacred trust of civilisation and
that securities for the performance of this trust should be embodied in
this Covenant.
The best method of giving practical effect to this principle is that
the tutelage of such peoples should be entrusted to advanced nations
who by reason of their resources, their experience or their geographical
position can best undertake this responsibility, and who are willing to
accept it, and that this tutelage should be exercised by them as
Mandatories on behalf of the League.
The character of the mandate must differ according to the stage of
the development of the people, the geographical situation of the
territory, its economic conditions and other similar circumstances.
Certain communities formerly belonging to the Turkish Empire
have reached a stage of development where their existence as
independent nations can be provisionally recognized subject to the
rendering of administrative advice and assistance by a Mandatory until
such time as they are able to stand alone. The wishes of these
communities must be a principal consideration in the selection of the
Mandatory.
Other peoples, especially those of Central Africa, are at such a
stage that the Mandatory must be responsible for the administration of
the territory under conditions which will guarantee freedom of
conscience and religion, subject only to the maintenance of public order
and morals, the prohibition of abuses such as the slave trade, the arms
trafﬁc and the liquor trafﬁc, and the prevention of the establishment of
fortiﬁcations or military and naval bases and of military training of the
natives for other than police purposes and the defence of territory, and
will also secure equal opportunities for the trade and commerce of other
Members of the League.
There are territories, such as South-West Africa and certain of the
South Paciﬁc Islands, which, owing to the sparseness of their
population, or their small size, or their remoteness from the centres of
civilisation, or their geographical contiguity to the territory of the
Mandatory, and other circumstances, can be best administered under
the laws of the Mandatory as integral portions of its territory, subject to
the safeguards above mentioned in the interests of the indigenous
population.
In every case of mandate, the Mandatory shall render to the
Council an annual report in reference to the territory committed to its
charge.
124
Facts and Data

The degree of authority, control, or administration to be exercised
by the Mandatory shall, if not previously agreed upon by the Members
of the League, be explicitly deﬁned in each case by the Council.
A permanent Commission shall be constituted to receive and
examine the annual reports of the Mandatories and to advise the
Council on all matters relating to the observance of the mandates.
ARTICLE 23
Subject to and in accordance with the provisions of
international conventions existing or hereafter to be agreed upon, the
Members of the League:
(a) will endeavour to secure and maintain fair and humane
conditions of labour for men, women, and children, both in their own
countries and in all countries to which their commercial and industrial
relations extend, and for that purpose will establish and maintain the
necessary international organisations;
(b) undertake to secure just treatment of the native inhabitants of
territories under their control;
(c) will entrust the League with the general supervision over the
execution of agreements with regard to the trafﬁc in women and
children, and the trafﬁc in opium and other dangerous drugs;
(d) will entrust the League with the general supervision of the
trade in arms and ammunition with the countries in which the control
of this trafﬁc is necessary in the common interest;
(e) will make provision to secure and maintain freedom of
communications and of transit and equitable treatment for the
commerce of all Members of the League. In this connection, the special
necessities of the regions devastated during the war of 1914–1918 shall
be borne in mind;
(f) will endeavour to take steps in matters of international concern
for the prevention and control of disease.
ARTICLE 24
There shall be placed under the direction of the League all
international bureaux already established by general treaties if the
parties to such treaties consent. All such international bureaux and all
commissions for the regulation of matters of international interest
hereafter constituted shall be placed under the direction of the League.
In all matters of international interest which are regulated by
general convention but which are not placed under the control of
international bureaux or commissions, the Secretariat of the League
shall, subject to the consent of the Council and if desired by the parties,
collect and distribute all relevant information and shall render any other
assistance which may be necessary or desirable.
The Council may include as part of the expenses of the Secretariat
the expenses of any bureau or commission which is placed under the
direction of the League.
League of Nations Covenant
125

ARTICLE 25
The Members of the League agree to encourage and
promote the establishment and co-operation of duly authorised
voluntary national Red Cross organisations having as purposes the
improvement of health, the prevention of disease and the mitigation of
suffering throughout the world.
ARTICLE 26
Amendments to this Covenant will take effect when
ratiﬁed by the Members of the League whose Representatives compose
the Council and by a majority of the Members of the League whose
Representatives compose the Assembly.
No such amendments shall bind any Member of the League which
signiﬁes its dissent therefrom, but in that case it shall cease to be a
Member of the League.
(Available at www.ola.bc.ca/online/cf/documents/
1924LeagueNations.html)
UN Charter
The Charter of the United Nations was drafted in a conference
that began on 25 April 1945 in San Francisco. On 21 June repre-
sentatives of all ﬁfty participating states signed the Charter. The
United Nations ofﬁcially came into existence on 24 October 1945,
when the Charter had been ratiﬁed by China, France, the Soviet
Union, the United Kingdom, the United States, and a majority of
other participating states. The General Assembly met for its ﬁrst
session on 10 January 1946.
Charter of the United Nations
We the peoples of the United Nations determined to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime has
brought untold sorrow to mankind, and to reafﬁrm faith in fundamental
human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the
equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small, and to
establish conditions under which justice and respect for the obligations
arising from treaties and other sources of international law can be
maintained, and to promote social progress and better standards of life
in larger freedom,
And for these ends to practice tolerance and live together in peace
with one another as good neighbours, and to unite our strength to
maintain international peace and security, and to ensure, by the
acceptance of principles and the institution of methods, that armed force
126
Facts and Data

shall not be used, save in the common interest, and to employ
international machinery for the promotion of the economic and social
advancement of all peoples,
Have resolved to combine our efforts to accomplish these aims
Accordingly, our respective Governments, through representatives
assembled in the city of San Francisco, who have exhibited their full
powers found to be in good and due form, have agreed to the present
Charter of the United Nations and do hereby establish an international
organization to be known as the United Nations.
Chapter I: Purposes and Principles
Article 1
The Purposes of the United Nations are:
1. To maintain international peace and security, and to that end: to
take effective collective measures for the prevention and removal of
threats to the peace, and for the suppression of acts of aggression or
other breaches of the peace, and to bring about by peaceful means, and
in conformity with the principles of justice and international law,
adjustment or settlement of international disputes or situations which
might lead to a breach of the peace;
2. To develop friendly relations among nations based on respect for
the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples, and to
take other appropriate measures to strengthen universal peace;
3. To achieve international cooperation in solving international
problems of an economic, social, cultural, or humanitarian character,
and in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and for
fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex,
language, or religion; and
4. To be a center for harmonizing the actions of nations in the
attainment of these common ends.
Article 2
The Organization and its Members, in pursuit of the
Purposes stated in Article 1, shall act in accordance with the following
Principles.
1. The Organization is based on the principle of the sovereign
equality of all its Members.
2. All Members, in order to ensure to all of them the rights and
beneﬁts resulting from membership, shall fulﬁll in good faith the
obligations assumed by them in accordance with the present Charter.
3. All Members shall settle their international disputes by peaceful
means in such a manner that international peace and security, and
justice, are not endangered.
4. All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any state, or in any other manner inconsistent with the
Purposes of the United Nations.
UN Charter
127

5. All Members shall give the United Nations every assistance in
any action it takes in accordance with the present Charter, and shall
refrain from giving assistance to any state against which the United
Nations is taking preventive or enforcement action.
The Organization shall ensure that states which are not Members
of the United Nations act in accordance with these Principles so far as
may be necessary for the maintenance of international peace and
security.
6. Nothing contained in the present Charter shall authorize the
United Nations to intervene in matters which are essentially within the
domestic jurisdiction of any state or shall require the Members to
submit such matters to settlement under the present Charter; but this
principle shall not prejudice the application of enforcement measures
under Chapter VII.
Chapter II: Membership
Article 3
The original Members of the United Nations shall be the
states which, having participated in the United Nations Conference on
International Organization at San Francisco, or having previously
signed the Declaration by United Nations of January 1, 1942, sign the
present Charter and ratify it in accordance with Article 110.
Article 4
1. Membership in the United Nations is open to all other peace-
loving states which accept the obligations contained in the present
Charter and, in the judgment of the Organization, are able and willing
to carry out these obligations.
2. The admission of any such state to membership in the United
Nations will be effected by a decision of the General Assembly upon the
recommendation of the Security Council.
Article 5
A member of the United Nations against which preventive or
enforcement action has been taken by the Security Council may be
suspended from the exercise of the rights and privileges of membership
by the General Assembly upon the recommendation of the Security
Council. The exercise of these rights and privileges may be restored by
the Security Council.
Article 6
A Member of the United Nations which has persistently
violated the Principles contained in the present Charter may be expelled
from the Organization by the General Assembly upon the
recommendation of the Security Council.
128
Facts and Data

Chapter III: Organs
Article 7
1. There are established as the principal organs of the United
Nations: a General Assembly, a Security Council, an Economic and
Social Council, a Trusteeship Council, an International Court of Justice,
and a Secretariat.
2. Such subsidiary organs as may be found necessary may be
established in accordance with the present Charter.
Article 8
The United Nations shall place no restrictions on the
eligibility of men and women to participate in any capacity and under
conditions of equality in its principal and subsidiary organs.
Chapter IV: The General Assembly
Composition
Article 9
1. The General Assembly shall consist of all the Members of the
United Nations.
2. Each member shall have not more than ﬁve representatives in
the General Assembly.
Functions and Powers
Article 10
The General Assembly may discuss any questions or any
matters within the scope of the present Charter or relating to the powers
and functions of any organs provided for in the present Charter, and,
except as provided in Article 12, may make recommendations to the
Members of the United Nations or to the Security Council or to both on
any such questions or matters.
Article 11
1. The General Assembly may consider the general principles of
cooperation in the maintenance of international peace and security,
including the principles governing disarmament and the regulation of
armaments, and may make recommendations with regard to such
principles to the Members or to the Security Council or to both.
2. The General Assembly may discuss any questions relating to the
maintenance of international peace and security brought before it by
any Member of the United Nations, or by the Security Council, or by a
state which is not a Member of the United Nations in accordance with
Article 35, paragraph 2, and, except as provided in Article 12, may make
recommendations with regard to any such questions to the state or
states concerned or to the Security Council or to both. Any such
UN Charter
129

question on which action is necessary shall be referred to the Security
Council by the General Assembly either before or after discussion.
3. The General Assembly may call the attention of the Security
Council to situations which are likely to endanger international peace
and security.
4. The powers of the General Assembly set forth in this Article shall
not limit the general scope of Article 10.
Article 12
While the Security Council is exercising in respect of any
dispute or situation the functions assigned to it in the present Charter,
the General Assembly shall not make any recommendation with regard
to that dispute or situation unless the Security Council so requests.
The Secretary-General, with the consent of the Security Council,
shall notify the General Assembly at each session of any matters relative
to the maintenance of international peace and security which are being
dealt with by the Security Council and shall similarly notify the General
Assembly, or the Members of the United Nations if the General
Assembly is not in session, immediately the Security Council ceases to
deal with such matters.
Article 13
1. The General Assembly shall initiate studies and make
recommendations for the purpose of:
a. promoting international cooperation in the political ﬁeld and
encouraging the progressive development of international law and its
codiﬁcation;
b. promoting international cooperation in the economic, social,
cultural, educational, and health ﬁelds, and assisting in the realization
of human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction
as to race, sex, language, or religion.
2. The further responsibilities, functions and powers of the General
Assembly with respect to matters mentioned in paragraph 1(b) above
are set forth in Chapters IX and X.
Article 14
Subject to the provisions of Article 12, the General
Assembly may recommend measures for the peaceful adjustment of any
situation, regardless of origin, which it deems likely to impair the
general welfare or friendly relations among nations, including situations
resulting from a violation of the provisions of the present Charter
setting forth the Purposes and Principles of the United Nations.
Article 15
1. The General Assembly shall receive and consider annual and
special reports from the Security Council; these reports shall include an
130
Facts and Data

account of the measures that the Security Council has decided upon or
taken to maintain international peace and security.
2. The General Assembly shall receive and consider reports from
the other organs of the United Nations.
Article 16
The General Assembly shall perform such functions with
respect to the international trusteeship system as are assigned to it
under Chapters XII and XIII, including the approval of the trusteeship
agreements for areas not designated as strategic.
Article 17
1. The General Assembly shall consider and approve the budget of
the Organization.
2. The expenses of the Organization shall be borne by the Members
as apportioned by the General Assembly.
3. The General Assembly shall consider and approve any ﬁnancial
and budgetary arrangements with specialized agencies referred to in
Article 57 and shall examine the administrative budgets of such
specialized agencies with a view to making recommendations to the
agencies concerned.
Voting
Article 18
1. Each member of the General Assembly shall have one vote.
2. Decisions of the General Assembly on important questions shall
be made by a two-thirds majority of the members present and voting.
These questions shall include: recommendations with respect to the
maintenance of international peace and security, the election of the non-
permanent members of the Security Council, the election of the
members of the Economic and Social Council, the election of members
of the Trusteeship Council in accordance with paragraph 1(c) of Article
86, the admission of new Members to the United Nations, the
suspension of the rights and privileges of membership, the expulsion of
Members, questions relating to the operation of the trusteeship system,
and budgetary questions.
3. Decisions on other questions, including the determination of
additional categories of questions to be decided by a two-thirds
majority, shall be made by a majority of the members present and
voting.
Article 19
A Member of the United Nations which is in arrears in the
payment of its ﬁnancial contributions to the Organization shall have no
vote in the General Assembly if the amount of its arrears equals or
exceeds the amount of the contributions due from it for the preceding
UN Charter
131

two full years. The General Assembly may, nevertheless, permit such a
Member to vote if it is satisﬁed that the failure to pay is due to
conditions beyond the control of the Member.
Procedure
Article 20
The General Assembly shall meet in regular annual
sessions and in such special sessions as occasion may require. Special
sessions shall be convoked by the Secretary-General at the request of the
Security Council or of a majority of the Members of the United Nations.
Article 21
The General Assembly shall adopt its own rules of
procedure. It shall elect its President for each session.
Article 22
The General Assembly may establish such subsidiary
organs as it deems necessary for the performance of its functions.
Chapter V: The Security Council
Article 23
1. The Security Council shall consist of ﬁfteen Members of the
United Nations. The Republic of China, France, the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, and the United States of America shall be permanent members
of the Security Council. The General Assembly shall elect ten other
Members of the United Nations to be non-permanent members of the
Security Council, due regard being specially paid, in the ﬁrst instance to
the contribution of Members of the United Nations to the maintenance
of international peace and security and to the other purposes of the
Organization, and also to equitable geographical distribution.
2. The non-permanent members of the Security Council shall be
elected for a term of two years. In the ﬁrst election of the non-
permanent members after the increase of the membership of the
Security Council from eleven to ﬁfteen, two of the four additional
members shall be chosen for a term of one year. A retiring member shall
not be eligible for immediate re-election.
3. Each member of the Security Council shall have one
representative.
Functions and Powers
Article 24
1. In order to ensure prompt and effective action by the United
Nations, its Members confer on the Security Council primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security,
132
Facts and Data

and agree that in carrying out its duties under this responsibility the
Security Council acts on their behalf.
2. In discharging these duties the Security Council shall act in
accordance with the Purposes and Principles of the United Nations. The
speciﬁc powers granted to the Security Council for the discharge of
these duties are laid down in Chapters VI, VII, VIII, and XII.
3. The Security Council shall submit annual and, when necessary,
special reports to the General Assembly for its consideration.
Article 25
The Members of the United Nations agree to accept and
carry out the decisions of the Security Council in accordance with the
present Charter.
Article 26
In order to promote the establishment and maintenance of
international peace and security with the least diversion for armaments
of the world’s human and economic resources, the Security Council
shall be responsible for formulating, with the assistance of the Military
Staff Committee referred to in Article 47, plans to be submitted to the
Members of the United Nations for the establishment of a system for the
regulation of armaments.
Voting
Article 27
1. Each member of the Security Council shall have one vote.
2. Decisions of the Security Council on procedural matters shall be
made by an afﬁrmative vote of nine members.
3. Decisions of the Security Council on all other matters shall be
made by an afﬁrmative vote of nine members including the concurring
votes of the permanent members; provided that, in decisions under
Chapter VI, and under paragraph 3 of Article 52, a party to a dispute
shall abstain from voting.
Procedure
Article 28
1. The Security Council shall be so organized as to be able to
function continuously. Each member of the Security Council shall for
this purpose be represented at all times at the seat of the Organization.
2. The Security Council shall hold periodic meetings at which each
of its members may, if it so desires, be represented by a member of the
government or by some other specially designated representative.
3. The Security Council may hold meetings at such places other than
the seat of the Organization as in its judgment will best facilitate its work.
UN Charter
133

Article 29
The Security Council may establish such subsidiary organs
as it deems necessary for the performance of its functions.
Article 30
The Security Council shall adopt its own rules of
procedure, including the method of selecting its President.
Article 31
Any Member of the United Nations which is not a member
of the Security Council may participate, without vote, in the discussion
of any question brought before the Security Council whenever the latter
considers that the interests of that Member are specially affected.
Article 32
Any Member of the United Nations which is not a member
of the Security Council or any state which is not a Member of the United
Nations, if it is a party to a dispute under consideration by the Security
Council, shall be invited to participate, without vote, in the discussion
relating to the dispute. The Security Council shall lay down such
conditions as it deems just for the participation of a state which is not a
Member of the United Nations.
Chapter VI: Paciﬁc Settlement of Disputes
Article 33
1. The parties to any dispute, the continuance of which is likely to
endanger the maintenance of international peace and security, shall, ﬁrst
of all, seek a solution by negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation,
arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to regional agencies or
arrangements, or other peaceful means of their own choice.
2. The Security Council shall, when it deems necessary, call upon
the parties to settle their dispute by such means.
Article 34
The Security Council may investigate any dispute, or any
situation which might lead to international friction or give rise to a
dispute, in order to determine whether the continuance of the dispute or
situation is likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Article 35
1. Any Member of the United Nations may bring any dispute, or
any situation of the nature referred to in Article 34, to the attention of
the Security Council or of the General Assembly.
2. A state which is not a Member of the United Nations may bring
to the attention of the Security Council or of the General Assembly any
dispute to which it is a party if it accepts in advance, for the purposes of
the dispute, the obligations of paciﬁc settlement provided in the present
Charter.
134
Facts and Data

3. The proceedings of the General Assembly in respect of matters
brought to its attention under this Article will be subject to the
provisions of Articles 11 and 12.
Article 36
1. The Security Council may, at any stage of a dispute of the nature
referred to in Article 33 or of a situation of like nature, recommend
appropriate procedures or methods of adjustment.
2. The Security Council should take into consideration any
procedures for the settlement of the dispute which have already been
adopted by the parties.
3. In making recommendations under this Article the Security
Council should also take into consideration that legal disputes should as
a general rule be referred by the parties to the International Court of
Justice in accordance with the provisions of the Statute of the Court.
Article 37
1. Should the parties to a dispute of the nature referred to in Article
33 fail to settle it by the means indicated in that Article, they shall refer
it to the Security Council.
2. If the Security Council deems that the continuance of the dispute
is in fact likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and
security, it shall decide whether to take action under Article 36 or to
recommend such terms of settlement as it may consider appropriate.
Article 38
Without prejudice to the provisions of Articles 33 to 37, the
Security Council may, if all the parties to any dispute so request, make
recommendations to the parties with a view to a paciﬁc settlement of
the dispute.
Chapter VII: Action with Respect to Threats to the Peace, 
Breaches of the Peace, and Acts of Aggression
Article 39
The Security Council shall determine the existence of any
threat to the peace, breach of the peace, or act of aggression and shall
make recommendations, or decide what measures shall be taken in
accordance with Articles 41 and 42, to maintain or restore international
peace and security.
Article 40
In order to prevent an aggravation of the situation, the
Security Council may, before making the recommendations or deciding
upon the measures provided for in Article 39, call upon the parties
concerned to comply with such provisional measures as it deems
necessary or desirable. Such provisional measures shall be without
UN Charter
135

prejudice to the rights, claims, or position of the parties concerned. The
Security Council shall duly take account of failure to comply with such
provisional measures.
Article 41
The Security Council may decide what measures not
involving the use of armed force are to be employed to give effect to its
decisions, and it may call upon the Members of the United Nations to
apply such measures. These may include complete or partial
interruption of economic relations and of rail, sea, air, postal,
telegraphic, radio, and other means of communication, and the
severance of diplomatic relations.
Article 42
Should the Security Council consider that measures
provided for in Article 41 would be inadequate or have proved to be
inadequate, it may take such action by air, sea, or land forces as may be
necessary to maintain or restore international peace and security. Such
action may include demonstrations, blockade, and other operations by
air, sea, or land forces of Members of the United Nations.
Article 43
1. All Members of the United Nations, in order to contribute to the
maintenance of international peace and security, undertake to make
available to the Security Council, on its call and in accordance with a
special agreement or agreements, armed forces, assistance, and facilities,
including rights of passage, necessary for the purpose of maintaining
international peace and security.
2. Such agreement or agreements shall govern the numbers and
types of forces, their degree of readiness and general location, and the
nature of the facilities and assistance to be provided.
3. The agreement or agreements shall be negotiated as soon as
possible on the initiative of the Security Council. They shall be
concluded between the Security Council and Members or between the
Security Council and groups of Members and shall be subject to
ratiﬁcation by the signatory states in accordance with their respective
constitutional processes.
Article 44
When the Security Council has decided to use force it shall,
before calling upon a Member not represented on it to provide armed
forces in fulﬁllment of the obligations assumed under Article 43, invite
that Member, if the Member so desires, to participate in the decisions of
the Security Council concerning the employment of contingents of that
Member’s armed forces.
Article 45
In order to enable the United Nations to take urgent
military measures Members shall hold immediately available national
136
Facts and Data

air-force contingents for combined international enforcement action.
The strength and degree of readiness of these contingents and plans for
their combined action shall be determined, within the limits laid down
in the special agreement or agreements referred to in Article 43, by the
Security Council with the assistance of the Military Staff Committee.
Article 46
Plans for the application of armed force shall be made by
the Security Council with the assistance of the Military Staff Committee.
Article 47
1. There shall be established a Military Staff Committee to advise
and assist the Security Council on all questions relating to the Security
Council’s military requirements for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the employment and command of forces placed at
its disposal, the regulation of armaments, and possible disarmament.
2. The Military Staff Committee shall consist of the Chiefs of Staff
of the permanent members of the Security Council or their
representatives. Any Member of the United Nations not permanently
represented on the Committee shall be invited by the Committee to be
associated with it when the efﬁcient discharge of the Committee’s
responsibilities requires the participation of that Member in its work.
3. The Military Staff Committee shall be responsible under the
Security Council for the strategic direction of any armed forces placed at
the disposal of the Security Council. Questions relating to the command
of such forces shall be worked out subsequently.
4. The Military Staff Committee, with the authorization of the
Security Council and after consultation with appropriate regional
agencies, may establish regional subcommittees.
Article 48
1. The action required to carry out the decisions of the Security
Council for the maintenance of international peace and security shall be
taken by all the Members of the United Nations or by some of them, as
the Security Council may determine.
2. Such decisions shall be carried out by the Members of the United
Nations directly and through their action in the appropriate
international agencies of which they are members.
Article 49
The Members of the United Nations shall join in affording
mutual assistance in carrying out the measures decided upon by the
Security Council.
Article 50
If preventive or enforcement measures against any state are
taken by the Security Council, any other state, whether a Member of the
United Nations or not, which ﬁnds itself confronted with special
UN Charter
137

economic problems arising from the carrying out of those measures
shall have the right to consult the Security Council with regard to a
solution of those problems.
Article 51
Nothing in the present Charter shall impair the inherent
right of individual or collective self-defense if an armed attack occurs
against a Member of the United Nations, until the Security Council has
taken measures necessary to maintain international peace and security.
Measures taken by Members in the exercise of this right of self-defense
shall be immediately reported to the Security Council and shall not in
any way affect the authority and responsibility of the Security Council
under the present Charter to take at any time such action as it deems
necessary in order to maintain or restore international peace and
security.
Chapter VIII: Regional Arrangements
Article 52
1. Nothing in the present Charter precludes the existence of
regional arrangements or agencies for dealing with such matters
relating to the maintenance of international peace and security as are
appropriate for regional action, provided that such arrangements or
agencies and their activities are consistent with the Purposes and
Principles of the United Nations.
2. The Members of the United Nations entering into such
arrangements or constituting such agencies shall make every effort to
achieve paciﬁc settlement of local disputes through such regional
arrangements or by such regional agencies before referring them to the
Security Council.
3. The Security Council shall encourage the development of paciﬁc
settlement of local disputes through such regional arrangements or by
such regional agencies either on the initiative of the states concerned or
by reference from the Security Council.
4. This Article in no way impairs the application of Articles 34 and 35.
Article 53
1. The Security Council shall, where appropriate, utilize such
regional arrangements or agencies for enforcement action under its
authority. But no enforcement action shall be taken under regional
arrangements or by regional agencies without the authorization of the
Security Council, with the exception of measures against any enemy
state, as deﬁned in paragraph 2 of this Article, provided for pursuant to
Article 107 or in regional arrangements directed against renewal of
aggressive policy on the part of any such state, until such time as the
Organization may, on request of the Governments concerned, be
138
Facts and Data

charged with the responsibility for preventing further aggression by
such a state.
2. The term enemy state as used in paragraph 1 of this Article
applies to any state which during the Second World War has been an
enemy of any signatory of the present Charter.
Article 54
The Security Council shall at all times be kept fully
informed of activities undertaken or in contemplation under regional
arrangements or by regional agencies for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Chapter IX: International Economic and Social Co-operation
Article 55
With a view to the creation of conditions of stability and
well-being which are necessary for peaceful and friendly relations
among nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights and
self-determination of peoples, the United Nations shall promote:
1. higher standards of living, full employment, and conditions of
economic and social progress and development;
2. solutions of international economic, social, health, and related
problems; and international cultural and educational co-operation; and
3. universal respect for, and observance of, human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex,
language, or religion.
Article 56
All Members pledge themselves to take joint and separate
action in cooperation with the Organization for the achievement of the
purposes set forth in Article 55.
Article 57
1. The various specialized agencies, established by
intergovernmental agreement and having wide international
responsibilities, as deﬁned in their basic instruments, in economic,
social, cultural, educational, health, and related ﬁelds, shall be brought
into relationship with the United Nations in accordance with the
provisions of Article 63.
2. Such agencies thus brought into relationship with the United
Nations are hereinafter referred to as specialized agencies.
Article 58
The Organization shall make recommendations for the
coordination of the policies and activities of the specialized agencies.
Article 59
The Organization shall, where appropriate, initiate
negotiations among the states concerned for the creation of any new
specialized agencies required for the accomplishment of the purposes
set forth in Article 55.
UN Charter
139

Article 60
Responsibility for the discharge of the functions of the
Organization set forth in this Chapter shall be vested in the General
Assembly and, under the authority of the General Assembly, in the
Economic and Social Council, which shall have for this purpose the
powers set forth in Chapter X.
Chapter X: The Economic and Social Council
Composition
Article 61
1. The Economic and Social Council shall consist of ﬁfty-four
Members of the United Nations elected by the General Assembly.
2. Subject to the provisions of paragraph 3, eighteen members of
the Economic and Social Council shall be elected each year for a term of
three years. A retiring member shall be eligible for immediate re-
election.
3. At the ﬁrst election after the increase in the membership of the
Economic and Social Council from twenty-seven to ﬁfty-four members,
in addition to the members elected in place of the nine members whose
term of ofﬁce expires at the end of that year, twenty-seven additional
members shall be elected. Of these twenty-seven additional members,
the term of ofﬁce of nine members so elected shall expire at the end of
one year, and of nine other members at the end of two years, in
accordance with arrangements made by the General Assembly.
4. Each member of the Economic and Social Council shall have one
representative.
Functions and Powers
Article 62
1. The Economic and Social Council may make or initiate studies
and reports with respect to international economic, social, cultural,
educational, health, and related matters and may make
recommendations with respect to any such matters to the General
Assembly, to the Members of the United Nations, and to the specialized
agencies concerned.
2. It may make recommendations for the purpose of promoting
respect for, and observance of, human rights and fundamental freedoms
for all.
3. It may prepare draft conventions for submission to the General
Assembly, with respect to matters falling within its competence.
4. It may call, in accordance with the rules prescribed by the United
Nations, international conferences on matters falling within its
competence.
140
Facts and Data

Article 63
1. The Economic and Social Council may enter into agreements
with any of the agencies referred to in Article 57, deﬁning the terms on
which the agency concerned shall be brought into relationship with the
United Nations. Such agreements shall be subject to approval by the
General Assembly.
2. It may coordinate the activities of the specialized agencies
through consultation with and recommendations to such agencies and
through recommendations to the General Assembly and to the Members
of the United Nations.
Article 64
1. The Economic and Social Council may take appropriate steps to
obtain regular reports from the specialized agencies. It may make
arrangements with the Members of the United Nations and with the
specialized agencies to obtain reports on the steps taken to give effect to
its own recommendations and to recommendations on matters falling
within its competence made by the General Assembly.
2. It may communicate its observations on these reports to the
General Assembly.
Article 65
The Economic and Social Council may furnish information
to the Security Council and shall assist the Security Council upon its
request.
Article 66
1. The Economic and Social Council shall perform such functions
as fall within its competence in connection with the carrying out of the
recommendations of the General Assembly.
2. It may, with the approval of the General Assembly, perform
services at the request of Members of the United Nations and at the
request of specialized agencies.
3. It shall perform such other functions as are speciﬁed elsewhere
in the present Charter or as may be assigned to it by the General
Assembly.
Article 67
1. Each member of the Economic and Social Council shall have
one vote.
2. Decisions of the Economic and Social Council shall be made by a
majority of the members present and voting.
UN Charter
141

Procedure
Article 68
The Economic and Social Council shall set up commissions
in economic and social ﬁelds and for the promotion of human rights,
and such other commissions as may be required for the performance of
its functions.
Article 69
The Economic and Social Council shall invite any Member
of the United Nations to participate, without vote, in its deliberations on
any matter of particular concern to that Member.
Article 70
The Economic and Social Council may make arrangements
for representatives of the specialized agencies to participate, without
vote, in its deliberations and in those of the commissions established by
it, and for its representatives to participate in the deliberations of the
specialized agencies.
Article 71
The Economic and Social Council may make suitable
arrangements for consultation with non-governmental organizations
which are concerned with matters within its competence. Such
arrangements may be made with international organizations and, where
appropriate, with national organizations after consultation with the
Member of the United Nations concerned.
Article 72
1. The Economic and Social Council shall adopt its own rules of
procedure, including the method of selecting its President.
2. The Economic and Social Council shall meet as required in
accordance with its rules, which shall include provision for the
convening of meetings on the request of a majority of its members.
Chapter XI: Declaration Regarding 
Non-Self-Governing Territories
Article 73
Members of the United Nations which have or assume
responsibilities for the administration of territories whose peoples have
not yet attained a full measure of self-government recognize the
principle that the interests of the inhabitants of these territories are
paramount, and accept as a sacred trust the obligation to promote to the
utmost, within the system of international peace and security
established by the present Charter, the well-being of the inhabitants of
these territories, and, to this end:
1. to ensure, with due respect for the culture of the peoples
concerned, their political, economic, social, and educational
advancement, their just treatment, and their protection against abuses;
142
Facts and Data

2. to develop self-government, to take due account of the political
aspirations of the peoples, and to assist them in the progressive
development of their free political institutions, according to the
particular circumstances of each territory and its peoples and their
varying stages of advancement;
3. to further international peace and security;
4. to promote constructive measures of development, to encourage
research, and to cooperate with one another and, when and where
appropriate, with specialized international bodies with a view to the
practical achievement of the social, economic, and scientiﬁc purposes set
forth in this Article; and
5. to transmit regularly to the Secretary-General for information
purposes, subject to such limitation as security and constitutional
considerations may require, statistical and other information of a
technical nature relating to economic, social, and educational conditions
in the territories for which they are respectively responsible other than
those territories to which Chapters XII and XIII apply.
Article 74
Members of the United Nations also agree that their policy
in respect of the territories to which this Chapter applies, no less than in
respect of their metropolitan areas, must be based on the general
principle of good-neighborliness, due account being taken of the
interests and well-being of the rest of the world, in social, economic, and
commercial matters.
Chapter XII: International Trusteeship System
Article 75
The United Nations shall establish under its authority an
international trusteeship system for the administration and supervision
of such territories as may be placed thereunder by subsequent
individual agreements. These territories are hereinafter referred to as
trust territories.
Article 76
The basic objectives of the trusteeship system, in
accordance with the Purposes of the United Nations laid down in
Article 1 of the present Charter, shall be:
1. to further international peace and security;
2. to promote the political, economic, social, and educational
advancement of the inhabitants of the trust territories, and their
progressive development towards self-government or independence as
may be appropriate to the particular circumstances of each territory and
its peoples and the freely expressed wishes of the peoples concerned,
and as may be provided by the terms of each trusteeship agreement;
3. to encourage respect for human rights and for fundamental
freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language, or religion,
UN Charter
143

and to encourage recognition of the interdependence of the peoples of
the world; and
4. to ensure equal treatment in social, economic, and commercial
matters for all Members of the United Nations and their nationals and
also equal treatment for the latter in the administration of justice
without prejudice to the attainment of the foregoing objectives and
subject to the provisions of Article 80.
Article 77
1. The trusteeship system shall apply to such territories in the
following categories as may be placed thereunder by means of
trusteeship agreements:
a. territories now held under mandate;
b. territories which may be detached from enemy states as a
result of the Second World War; and
c. territories voluntarily placed under the system by states
responsible for their administration.
2. It will be a matter for subsequent agreement as to which
territories in the foregoing categories will be brought under the
trusteeship system and upon what terms.
Article 78
The trusteeship system shall not apply to territories which
have become Members of the United Nations, relationship among
which shall be based on respect for the principle of sovereign equality.
Article 79
The terms of trusteeship for each territory to be placed
under the trusteeship system, including any alteration or amendment,
shall be agreed upon by the states directly concerned, including the
mandatory power in the case of territories held under mandate by a
Member of the United Nations, and shall be approved as provided for
in Articles 83 and 85.
Article 80
1. Except as may be agreed upon in individual trusteeship
agreements, made under Articles 77, 79, and 81, placing each territory
under the trusteeship system, and until such agreements have been
concluded, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed in or of itself to
alter in any manner the rights whatsoever of any states or any peoples
or the terms of existing international instruments to which Members of
the United Nations may respectively be parties.
2. Paragraph 1 of this Article shall not be interpreted as giving
grounds for delay or postponement of the negotiation and conclusion of
agreements for placing mandated and other territories under the
trusteeship system as provided for in Article 77.
144
Facts and Data

Article 81
The trusteeship agreement shall in each case include the
terms under which the trust territory will be administered and
designate the authority which will exercise the administration of the
trust territory. Such authority, hereinafter called the administering
authority, may be one or more states or the Organization itself.
Article 82
There may be designated, in any trusteeship agreement, a
strategic area or areas which may include part or all of the trust territory
to which the agreement applies, without prejudice to any special
agreement or agreements made under Article 43.
Article 83
1. All functions of the United Nations relating to strategic areas,
including the approval of the terms of the trusteeship agreements and of
their alteration or amendment, shall be exercised by the Security
Council.
2. The basic objectives set forth in Article 76 shall be applicable to
the people of each strategic area.
3. The Security Council shall, subject to the provisions of the
trusteeship agreements and without prejudice to security
considerations, avail itself of the assistance of the Trusteeship Council to
perform those functions of the United Nations under the trusteeship
system relating to political, economic, social, and educational matters in
the strategic areas.
Article 84
It shall be the duty of the administering authority to ensure
that the trust territory shall play its part in the maintenance of
international peace and security. To this end the administering authority
may make use of volunteer forces, facilities, and assistance from the
trust territory in carrying out the obligations towards the Security
Council undertaken in this regard by the administering authority, as
well as for local defense and the maintenance of law and order within
the trust territory.
Article 85
1. The functions of the United Nations with regard to trusteeship
agreements for all areas not designated as strategic, including the
approval of the terms of the trusteeship agreements and of their
alteration or amendment, shall be exercised by the General Assembly.
2. The Trusteeship Council, operating under the authority of the
General Assembly, shall assist the General Assembly in carrying out
these functions.
UN Charter
145

Chapter XIII: The Trusteeship Council
Composition
Article 86
1. The Trusteeship Council shall consist of the following Members
of the United Nations:
a.
those Members administering trust territories;
b.
such of those Members mentioned by name in Article 23 as
are not administering trust territories; and
c.
as many other Members elected for three-year terms by the
General Assembly as may be necessary to ensure that the total number
of members of the Trusteeship Council is equally divided between those
Members of the United Nations which administer trust territories and
those which do not.
2. Each member of the Trusteeship Council shall designate one
specially qualiﬁed person to represent it therein.
Functions and Powers
Article 87
The General Assembly and, under its authority, the
Trusteeship Council, in carrying out their functions, may:
1. consider reports submitted by the administering authority;
2. accept petitions and examine them in consultation with the
administering authority;
3. provide for periodic visits to the respective trust territories at
times agreed upon with the administering authority; and
4. take these and other actions in conformity with the terms of the
trusteeship agreements.
Article 88
The Trusteeship Council shall formulate a questionnaire on
the political, economic, social, and educational advancement of the
inhabitants of each trust territory, and the administering authority for
each trust territory within the competence of the General Assembly
shall make an annual report to the General Assembly upon the basis of
such questionnaire.
Voting
Article 89
1. Each member of the Trusteeship Council shall have one vote.
2. Decisions of the Trusteeship Council shall be made by a majority
of the members present and voting.
146
Facts and Data

Procedure
Article 90
1. The Trusteeship Council shall adopt its own rules of procedure,
including the method of selecting its President.
2. The Trusteeship Council shall meet as required in accordance
with its rules, which shall include provision for the convening of
meetings on the request of a majority of its members.
Article 91
The Trusteeship Council shall, when appropriate, avail
itself of the assistance of the Economic and Social Council and of the
specialized agencies in regard to matters with which they are
respectively concerned.
Chapter XIV: The International Court of Justice
Article 92
The International Court of Justice shall be the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations. It shall function in accordance with
the annexed Statute which is based upon the Statute of the Permanent
Court of International Justice and forms an integral part of the present
Charter.
Article 93
1. All Members of the United Nations are ipso facto parties to the
Statute of the International Court of Justice.
2. A state which is not a Member of the United Nations may
become a party to the Statute of the International Court of Justice on
conditions to be determined in each case by the General Assembly upon
the recommendation of the Security Council.
Article 94
1. Each Member of the United Nations undertakes to comply with
the decision of the International Court of Justice in any case to which it
is a party.
2. If any party to a case fails to perform the obligations incumbent
upon it under a judgment rendered by the Court, the other party may
have recourse to the Security Council, which may, if it deems necessary,
make recommendations or decide upon measures to be taken to give
effect to the judgment.
Article 95
Nothing in the present Charter shall prevent Members of
the United Nations from entrusting the solution of their differences to
other tribunals by virtue of agreements already in existence or which
may be concluded in the future.
UN Charter
147

Article 96
1. The General Assembly or the Security Council may request the
International Court of Justice to give an advisory opinion on any legal
question.
2. Other organs of the United Nations and specialized agencies,
which may at any time be so authorized by the General Assembly, may
also request advisory opinions of the Court on legal questions arising
within the scope of their activities.
Chapter XV: The Secretariat
Article 97
The Secretariat shall comprise a Secretary-General and such
staff as the Organization may require. The Secretary-General shall be
appointed by the General Assembly upon the recommendation of the
Security Council. He shall be the chief administrative ofﬁcer of the
Organization.
Article 98
The Secretary-General shall act in that capacity in all
meetings of the General Assembly, of the Security Council, of the
Economic and Social Council, and of the Trusteeship Council, and shall
perform such other functions as are entrusted to him by these organs.
The Secretary-General shall make an annual report to the General
Assembly on the work of the Organization.
Article 99
The Secretary-General may bring to the attention of the
Security Council any matter which in his opinion may threaten the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Article 100
1. In the performance of their duties the Secretary-General and the
staff shall not seek or receive instructions from any government or from
any other authority external to the Organization. They shall refrain from
any action which might reﬂect on their position as international ofﬁcials
responsible only to the Organization.
2. Each Member of the United Nations undertakes to respect the
exclusively international character of the responsibilities of the
Secretary-General and the staff and not to seek to inﬂuence them in the
discharge of their responsibilities.
Article 101
1. The staff shall be appointed by the Secretary-General under
regulations established by the General Assembly.
2. Appropriate staffs shall be permanently assigned to the
Economic and Social Council, the Trusteeship Council, and, as required,
148
Facts and Data

to other organs of the United Nations. These staffs shall form a part of
the Secretariat.
3. The paramount consideration in the employment of the staff and
in the determination of the conditions of service shall be the necessity of
securing the highest standards of efﬁciency, competence, and integrity.
Due regard shall be paid to the importance of recruiting the staff on as
wide a geographical basis as possible.
Chapter XVI: Miscellaneous Provisions
Article 102
1. Every treaty and every international agreement entered into by
any Member of the United Nations after the present Charter comes into
force shall as soon as possible be registered with the Secretariat and
published by it.
2. No party to any such treaty or international agreement which
has not been registered in accordance with the provisions of paragraph I
of this Article may invoke that treaty or agreement before any organ of
the United Nations.
Article 103
In the event of a conﬂict between the obligations of the
Members of the United Nations under the present Charter and their
obligations under any other international agreement, their obligations
under the present Charter shall prevail.
Article 104
The Organization shall enjoy in the territory of each of its
Members such legal capacity as may be necessary for the exercise of its
functions and the fulﬁllment of its purposes.
Article 105
1. The Organization shall enjoy in the territory of each of its
Members such privileges and immunities as are necessary for the
fulﬁllment of its purposes.
2. Representatives of the Members of the United Nations and
ofﬁcials of the Organization shall similarly enjoy such privileges and
immunities as are necessary for the independent exercise of their
functions in connection with the Organization.
3. The General Assembly may make recommendations with a view
to determining the details of the application of paragraphs 1 and 2 of
this Article or may propose conventions to the Members of the United
Nations for this purpose.
UN Charter
149

Chapter XVII: Transitional Security Arrangements
Article 106
Pending the coming into force of such special agreements
referred to in Article 43 as in the opinion of the Security Council enable
it to begin the exercise of its responsibilities under Article 42, the parties
to the Four-Nation Declaration, signed at Moscow October 30, 1943, and
France, shall, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 5 of that
Declaration, consult with one another and as occasion requires with
other Members of the United Nations with a view to such joint action on
behalf of the Organization as may be necessary for the purpose of
maintaining international peace and security.
Article 107
Nothing in the present Charter shall invalidate or
preclude action, in relation to any state which during the Second World
War has been an enemy of any signatory to the present Charter, taken or
authorized as a result of that war by the Governments having
responsibility for such action.
Chapter XVIII: Amendments
Article 108 Amendments to the present Charter shall come into force
for all Members of the United Nations when they have been adopted by
a vote of two-thirds of the members of the General Assembly and
ratiﬁed in accordance with their respective constitutional processes by
two-thirds of the Members of the United Nations, including all the
permanent members of the Security Council.
Article 109
1. A General Conference of the Members of the United Nations for
the purpose of reviewing the present Charter may be held at a date and
place to be ﬁxed by a two-thirds vote of the members of the General
Assembly and by a vote of any seven members of the Security Council.
Each Member of the United Nations shall have one vote in the
conference.
2. Any alteration of the present Charter recommended by a two-
thirds vote of the conference shall take effect when ratiﬁed in
accordance with their respective constitutional processes by two thirds
of the Members of the United Nations including all the permanent
members of the Security Council.
3. If such a conference has not been held before the tenth annual
session of the General Assembly following the coming into force of the
present Charter, the proposal to call such a conference shall be placed on
the agenda of that session of the General Assembly, and the conference
shall be held if so decided by a majority vote of the members of the
General Assembly and by a vote of any seven members of the Security
Council.
150
Facts and Data

Chapter XIX: Ratiﬁcation and Signature
Article 110
1. The present Charter shall be ratiﬁed by the signatory states in
accordance with their respective constitutional processes.
2. The ratiﬁcations shall be deposited with the Government of the
United States of America, which shall notify all the signatory states of
each deposit as well as the Secretary-General of the Organization when
he has been appointed.
3. The present Charter shall come into force upon the deposit of
ratiﬁcations by the Republic of China, France, the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, and the United States of America, and by a majority of the other
signatory states. A protocol of the ratiﬁcations deposited shall
thereupon be drawn up by the Government of the United States of
America which shall communicate copies thereof to all the signatory
states.
4. The states signatory to the present Charter which ratify it after it
has come into force will become original Members of the United
Nations on the date of the deposit of their respective ratiﬁcations.
Article 111
The present Charter, of which the Chinese, French,
Russian, English, and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall remain
deposited in the archives of the Government of the United States of
America. Duly certiﬁed copies thereof shall be transmitted by that
Government to the Governments of the other signatory states.
IN FAITH WHEREOF the representatives of the Governments of
the United Nations have signed the present Charter.
DONE at the city of San Francisco the twenty-sixth day of June,
one thousand nine hundred and forty-ﬁve.
The UN Charter is available at www.un.org/aboutun/charter.
Additional Information
The Statute of the International Court of Justice is an integral 
part of the Charter. It is available at www.icj-cij.org/icjwww/
ibasicdocuments/Basetext/istatute.htm.
Amendments to Articles 23, 27, and 61 of the Charter were
adopted by the General Assembly on 17 December 1963 and
came into force on 31 August 1965. A further amendment to Arti-
cle 61 was adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December
1971, and came into force on 24 September 1973. An amendment
to Article 109, adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December
1965, came into force on 12 June 1968.
UN Charter
151

The amendment to Article 23 enlarges the membership of the
Security Council from eleven to ﬁfteen. The amended Article 27
provides that decisions of the Security Council on procedural
matters shall be made by an affirmative vote of nine members
(formerly seven) and on all other matters by an afﬁrmative vote
of nine members (formerly seven), including the concurring
votes of the ﬁve permanent members of the Security Council.
The amendment to Article 61, which entered into force on 31
August 1965, enlarged the membership of the Economic and So-
cial Council from eighteen to twenty-seven. The subsequent
amendment to that Article, which entered into force on 24 Sep-
tember 1973, further increased the membership of the Council
from twenty-seven to ﬁfty-four.
The amendment to Article 109, which relates to the first
paragraph of that Article, provides that a General Conference of
Member States for the purpose of reviewing the Charter may be
held at a date and place to be ﬁxed by a two-thirds vote of the
members of the General Assembly and by a vote of any nine
members (formerly seven) of the Security Council. Paragraph 3
of Article 109, which deals with the consideration of a possible
review conference during the tenth regular session of the
General Assembly, has been retained in its original form in its
reference to a “vote, of any seven members of the Security Coun-
cil,” the paragraph having been acted upon in 1955 by the Gen-
eral Assembly, at its tenth regular session, and by the Security
Council. (Available at www.hnmun.org/2005/websys.exe?file=
refdesk/uncharter.html.)
Member States (191)
of the United Nations
with Dates on which They Joined
UN membership grew from fifty-one in 1946, to ninety-nine in
1960, 127 in 1970, 154 in 1980, and 159 in 1990. Having 191 mem-
bers in 2005, the UN achieved universal membership.
Because the twenty Specialized Agencies and the four Re-
lated Organizations were created by separate treaties, their mem-
bership is slightly different from that of the United Nations.
152
Facts and Data

Afghanistan (19 November 1946)
Albania (14 December 1955)
Algeria (8 October 1962)
Andorra (28 July 1993)
Angola (1 December 1976)
Antigua and Barbuda 
(11 November 1981)
Argentina (24 October 1945)
Armenia (2 March 1992)
Australia (1 November 1945)
Austria (14 December 1955)
Azerbaijan (2 March 1992)
Bahamas (18 September 1973)
Bahrain (21 September 1971)
Bangladesh (17 September 1974)
Barbados (9 December 1966)
Belarus (24 October 1945)
Belgium (27 December 1945)
Belize (25 September 1981)
Benin (20 September 1960)
Bhutan (21 September 1971)
Bolivia (14 November 1945)
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
(22 May 1992)
Botswana (17 October 1966)
Brazil (24 October 1945)
Brunei Darussalam (21 September
1984)
Bulgaria (14 December 1955)
Burkina Faso (20 September 1960)
Burundi (18 September 1962)
Cambodia (14 December 1955)
Cameroon (20 September 1960)
Canada (9 November 1945)
Cape Verde (16 September 1975)
Central African Republic (20
September 1960)
Chad (20 September 1960)
Chile (24 October 1945)
China (24 October 1945)
Colombia (5 November 1945)
Comoros (12 November 1975)
Congo (20 September 1960)
Costa Rica (2 November 1945)
Côte d’Ivoire (20 September 1960)
Croatia (22 May 1992)
Cuba (24 October 1945)
Cyprus (20 September 1960)
Czech Republic (19 January 1993)
Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea (17 September 1991)
Democratic Republic of the Congo
(20 September 1960)
Denmark (24 October 1945)
Djibouti (20 September 1977)
Dominica (18 December 1978)
Dominican Republic (24 October
1945)
Ecuador (21 December 1945)
Egypt (24 October 1945)
El Salvador (24 October 1945)
Equatorial Guinea (12 November
1968)
Eritrea (28 May 1993)
Estonia (17 September 1991)
Ethiopia (13 November 1945)
Fiji (13 October 1970)
Finland (14 December 1955)
France (24 October 1945)
Gabon (20 September 1960)
Gambia (21 September 1965)
Georgia (31 July 1992)
Germany (18 September 1973, the
Federal Republic of Germany and
the German Democratic Republic
were admitted. On 3 October 1990
they formed one state.)
Ghana (8 March 1957)
Member States of the UN with Dates on which They Joined
153

Greece (25 October 1945)
Grenada (17 September 1974)
Guatemala (21 November 1945)
Guinea (12 December 1958)
Guinea-Bissau (17 September 1974)
Guyana (20 September 1966)
Haiti (24 October 1945)
Honduras (17 December 1945)
Hungary (14 December 1955)
Iceland (19 November 1946)
India (30 October 1945)
Indonesia (28 September 1950)
Iran (Islamic Republic of) 
(24 October 1945)
Iraq (21 December 1945)
Ireland (14 December 1955)
Israel (11 May 1949)
Italy (14 December 1955)
Jamaica (18 September 1962)
Japan (18 December 1956)
Jordan (14 December 1955)
Kazakhstan (2 March 1992)
Kenya (16 December 1963)
Kiribati (14 September 1999)
Kuwait (14 May 1963)
Kyrgyzstan (2 March 1992)
Lao People’s Democratic Republic
(14 December 1955)
Latvia (17 September 1991)
Lebanon (24 October 1945)
Lesotho (17 October 1966)
Liberia (2 November 1945)
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 
(14 December 1955)
Liechtenstein (18 September 1990)
Lithuania (17 September 1991)
Luxembourg (24 October 1945)
The former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia (8 April 1993)
Madagascar (20 September 1960)
Malawi (1 December 1964)
Malaysia (17 September 1957)
Maldives (21 September 1965)
Mali (28 September 1960)
Malta (1 December 1964)
Marshall Islands (17 September
1991)
Mauritania (27 October 1961)
Mauritius (24 April 1968)
Mexico (7 November 1945)
Micronesia (Federated States of)
(17 September 1991)
Monaco (28 May 1993)
Mongolia (27 October 1961)
Morocco (12 November 1956)
Mozambique (16 September 
1975)
Myanmar (19 April 1948)
Namibia (23 April 1990)
Nauru (14 September 1999)
Nepal (14 December 1955)
Netherlands (10 December 1945)
New Zealand (24 October 1945)
Nicaragua (24 October 1945)
Niger (20 September 1960)
Nigeria (7 October 1960)
Norway (27 November 1945)
Oman (7 October 1971)
Pakistan (30 September 1947)
Palau (15 December 1994)
Panama (13 November 1945)
Papua New Guinea (10 October
1975)
Paraguay (24 October 1945)
Peru (31 October 1945)
Philippines (24 October 1945)
154
Facts and Data

Poland (24 October 1945)
Portugal (14 December 1955)
Qatar (21 September 1971)
Republic of Korea (17 September
1991)
Republic of Moldova (2 March
1992)
Romania (14 December 1955)
Russian Federation (24 October
1945)
Rwanda (18 September 1962)
Saint Kitts and Nevis 
(23 September 1983)
Saint Lucia (18 September 1979)
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
(16 September 1980)
Samoa (15 December 1976)
San Marino (2 March 1992)
Sao Tome and Principe (16
September 1975)
Saudi Arabia (24 October 1945)
Senegal (28 September 1960)
Serbia and Montenegro (1
November 2000)
Seychelles (21 September 1976)
Sierra Leone (27 September 1961)
Singapore (21 September 1965)
Slovakia (19 January 1993)
Slovenia (22 May 1992)
Solomon Islands (19 September
1978)
Somalia (20 September 1960)
South Africa (7 November 1945)
Spain (14 December 1955)
Sri Lanka (14 December 1955)
Sudan (12 November 1956)
Suriname (4 December 1975)
Swaziland (24 September 1968)
Sweden (19 November 1946)
Switzerland (10 September 2002)
Syrian Arab Republic (24 October
1945)
Tajikistan (2 March 1992)
Thailand (16 December 1946)
Timor-Leste (27 September 2002)
Togo (20 September 1960)
Tonga (14 September 1999)
Trinidad and Tobago 
(18 September 1962)
Tunisia (12 November 1956)
Turkey (24 October 1945)
Turkmenistan (2 March 1992)
Tuvalu (5 September 2000)
Uganda (25 October 1962)
Ukraine (24 October 1945)
United Arab Emirates (9 December
1971)
United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland 
(24 October 1945)
United Republic of Tanzania 
(14 December 1961)
United States of America (24
October 1945)
Uruguay (18 December 1945)
Uzbekistan (2 March 1992)
Vanuatu (15 September 1981)
Venezuela (15 November 1945)
Viet Nam (20 September 1977)
Yemen (30 September 1947)
Zambia (1 December 1964)
Zimbabwe (25 August 1980)
Member States of the UN with Dates on which They Joined
155
(Source: www.un.org/Overview/unmember.html)

International Bill of Human Rights
The International Bill of Human Rights consists of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights; the International Covenant on Eco-
nomic, Social and Cultural Rights; and the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights and its two optional protocols.
“Human rights” is mentioned seven times in the UN Charter,
the ﬁrst appearing in the third phrase of the preamble. Building
on these references in the Charter, on 10 December 1948 the Gen-
eral Assembly passed the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
The rights expressed in the declaration were placed in treaty form
by the General Assembly in two covenants. The Covenant on Eco-
nomic, Social and Cultural Rights was adopted by the General As-
sembly on 16 December 1966 and entered into force on 3 January
1976. The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and
its first optional protocol, which allows individuals to submit
complaints to the Human Rights Committee, were adopted by the
General Assembly on 16 December 1966 and entered into force on
23 March 1976. The second optional protocol to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which aims at the aboli-
tion of the death penalty, was adopted on 15 December 1989 and
entered into force on 11 July 1991. (All components of the Interna-
tional Bill of Human Rights are available at www.ohchr.org/
english/about/publications/docs/fs2.htm)
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
On December 10, 1948 the General Assembly of the United Na-
tions adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
called upon all member countries to publicize the text of the Dec-
laration and “to cause it to be disseminated, displayed, read and
expounded principally in schools and other educational institu-
tions, without distinction based on the political status of coun-
tries or territories.”
THE UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS
Preamble
Whereas recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and
inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation
of freedom, justice and peace in the world,
156
Facts and Data

Whereas disregard and contempt for human rights have resulted in
barbarous acts which have outraged the conscience of mankind, and the
advent of a world in which human beings shall enjoy freedom of speech
and belief and freedom from fear and want has been proclaimed as the
highest aspiration of the common people,
Whereas it is essential, if man is not to be compelled to have
recourse, as a last resort, to rebellion against tyranny and oppression,
that human rights should be protected by the rule of law,
Whereas it is essential to promote the development of friendly
relations between nations,
Whereas the peoples of the United Nations have in the Charter
reafﬁrmed their faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and
worth of the human person and in the equal rights of men and women
and have determined to promote social progress and better standards of
life in larger freedom,
Whereas Member States have pledged themselves to achieve, in co-
operation with the United Nations, the promotion of universal respect
for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Whereas a common understanding of these rights and freedoms is
of the greatest importance for the full realization of this pledge,
Now, Therefore THE GENERAL ASSEMBY proclaims THIS
UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS as a common
standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations, to the end that
every individual and every organ of society, keeping this Declaration
constantly in mind, shall strive by teaching and education to promote
respect for these rights and freedoms and by progressive measures,
national and international, to secure their universal and effective
recognition and observance, both among the peoples of Member States
themselves and among the peoples of territories under their
jurisdiction.
Article 1
All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and
rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act
towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.
Article 2
Everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set forth
in this Declaration, without distinction of any kind, such as race, colour,
sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social
origin, property, birth or other status. Furthermore, no distinction shall
be made on the basis of the political, jurisdictional or international
status of the country or territory to which a person belongs, whether it
be independent, trust, non-self-governing or under any other limitation
of sovereignty.
Article 3
Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of person.
International Bill of Human Rights
157

Article 4
No one shall be held in slavery or servitude; slavery and the
slave trade shall be prohibited in all their forms.
Article 5
No one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment.
Article 6
Everyone has the right to recognition everywhere as a person
before the law.
Article 7
All are equal before the law and are entitled without any
discrimination to equal protection of the law. All are entitled to equal
protection against any discrimination in violation of this Declaration
and against any incitement to such discrimination.
Article 8
Everyone has the right to an effective remedy by the
competent national tribunals for acts violating the fundamental rights
granted him by the constitution or by law.
Article 9
No one shall be subjected to arbitrary arrest, detention or exile.
Article 10
Everyone is entitled in full equality to a fair and public
hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal, in the determination
of his rights and obligations and of any criminal charge against him.
Article 11
(1) Everyone charged with a penal offence has the right to be
presumed innocent until proved guilty according to law in a public trial
at which he has had all the guarantees necessary for his defence.
(2) No one shall be held guilty of any penal offence on account of
any act or omission which did not constitute a penal offence, under
national or international law, at the time when it was committed. Nor
shall a heavier penalty be imposed than the one that was applicable at
the time the penal offence was committed.
Article 12
No one shall be subjected to arbitrary interference with his
privacy, family, home or correspondence, nor to attacks upon his honour
and reputation. Everyone has the right to the protection of the law
against such interference or attacks.
Article 13
(1) Everyone has the right to freedom of movement and residence
within the borders of each state.
(2) Everyone has the right to leave any country, including his own,
and to return to his country.
158
Facts and Data

Article 14
(1) Everyone has the right to seek and to enjoy in other countries
asylum from persecution.
(2) This right may not be invoked in the case of prosecutions
genuinely arising from non-political crimes or from acts contrary to the
purposes and principles of the United Nations.
Article 15
(1) Everyone has the right to a nationality.
(2) No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his nationality nor
denied the right to change his nationality.
Article 16
(1) Men and women of full age, without any limitation due to race,
nationality or religion, have the right to marry and to found a family.
They are entitled to equal rights as to marriage, during marriage and at
its dissolution.
(2) Marriage shall be entered into only with the free and full
consent of the intending spouses.
(3) The family is the natural and fundamental group unit of society
and is entitled to protection by society and the State.
Article 17
(1) Everyone has the right to own property alone as well as in
association with others.
(2) No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his property.
Article 18
Everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience
and religion; this right includes freedom to change his religion or belief,
and freedom, either alone or in community with others and in public or
private, to manifest his religion or belief in teaching, practice, worship
and observance.
Article 19
Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and
expression; this right includes freedom to hold opinions without
interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas
through any media and regardless of frontiers.
Article 20
(1) Everyone has the right to freedom of peaceful assembly and
association.
(2) No one may be compelled to belong to an association.
International Bill of Human Rights
159

Article 21
(1) Everyone has the right to take part in the government of his
country, directly or through freely chosen representatives.
(2) Everyone has the right of equal access to public service in his
country.
(3) The will of the people shall be the basis of the authority of
government; this will shall be expressed in periodic and genuine
elections which shall be by universal and equal suffrage and shall be
held by secret vote or by equivalent free voting procedures.
Article 22
Everyone, as a member of society, has the right to social
security and is entitled to realization, through national effort and
international co-operation and in accordance with the organization and
resources of each State, of the economic, social and cultural rights
indispensable for his dignity and the free development of his
personality.
Article 23
(1) Everyone has the right to work, to free choice of employment,
to just and favourable conditions of work and to protection against
unemployment.
(2) Everyone, without any discrimination, has the right to equal
pay for equal work.
(3) Everyone who works has the right to just and favourable
remuneration ensuring for himself and his family an existence worthy
of human dignity, and supplemented, if necessary, by other means of
social protection.
(4) Everyone has the right to form and to join trade unions for the
protection of his interests.
Article 24
Everyone has the right to rest and leisure, including
reasonable limitation of working hours and periodic holidays with pay.
Article 25
(1) Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the
health and well-being of himself and of his family, including food,
clothing, housing and medical care and necessary social services, and
the right to security in the event of unemployment, sickness, disability,
widowhood, old age or other lack of livelihood in circumstances beyond
his control.
(2) Motherhood and childhood are entitled to special care and
assistance. All children, whether born in or out of wedlock, shall enjoy
the same social protection.
160
Facts and Data

Article 26
(1) Everyone has the right to education. Education shall be free, at
least in the elementary and fundamental stages. Elementary education
shall be compulsory. Technical and professional education shall be made
generally available and higher education shall be equally accessible to
all on the basis of merit.
(2) Education shall be directed to the full development of the
human personality and to the strengthening of respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms. It shall promote understanding,
tolerance and friendship among all nations, racial or religious groups,
and shall further the activities of the United Nations for the
maintenance of peace.
(3) Parents have a prior right to choose the kind of education that
shall be given to their children.
Article 27
(1) Everyone has the right freely to participate in the cultural life of
the community, to enjoy the arts and to share in scientiﬁc advancement
and its beneﬁts.
(2) Everyone has the right to the protection of the moral and
material interests resulting from any scientiﬁc, literary or artistic
production of which he is the author.
Article 28
Everyone is entitled to a social and international order in
which the rights and freedoms set forth in this Declaration can be fully
realized.
Article 29
(1) Everyone has duties to the community in which alone the free
and full development of his personality is possible.
(2) In the exercise of his rights and freedoms, everyone shall be
subject only to such limitations as are determined by law solely for the
purpose of securing due recognition and respect for the rights and
freedoms of others and of meeting the just requirements of morality,
public order and the general welfare in a democratic society.
(3) These rights and freedoms may in no case be exercised contrary
to the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
Article 30
Nothing in this Declaration may be interpreted as implying
for any State, group or person any right to engage in any activity or to
perform any act aimed at the destruction of any of the rights and
freedoms set forth herein.
International Bill of Human Rights
161

International Covenant on 
Economic Social and Cultural Rights
Adopted and opened for signature, ratiﬁcation, and accession by
General Assembly resolution 2200A (XXI) of 16 December 1966,
this covenant entered into force 3 January 1976, in accordance
with article 27.
Preamble
The States Parties to the present Covenant,
Considering that, in accordance with the principles proclaimed in
the Charter of the United Nations, recognition of the inherent dignity
and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human
family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world,
Recognizing that these rights derive from the inherent dignity of
the human person,
Recognizing that, in accordance with the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, the ideal of free human beings enjoying freedom from
fear and want can only be achieved if conditions are created whereby
everyone may enjoy his economic, social and cultural rights, as well as
his civil and political rights,
Considering the obligation of States under the Charter of the
United Nations to promote universal respect for, and observance of,
human rights and freedoms,
Realizing that the individual, having duties to other individuals
and to the community to which he belongs, is under a responsibility to
strive for the promotion and observance of the rights recognized in the
present Covenant,
Agree upon the following articles:
PART I
Article 1
1. All peoples have the right of self-determination. By virtue of that
right they freely determine their political status and freely pursue their
economic, social and cultural development.
2. All peoples may, for their own ends, freely dispose of their
natural wealth and resources without prejudice to any obligations
arising out of international economic co-operation, based upon the
principle of mutual beneﬁt, and international law. In no case may a
people be deprived of its own means of subsistence.
3. The States Parties to the present Covenant, including those
having responsibility for the administration of Non-Self-Governing and
Trust Territories, shall promote the realization of the right of self-
162
Facts and Data

determination, and shall respect that right, in conformity with the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
PART II
Article 2
1. Each State Party to the present Covenant undertakes to take
steps, individually and through international assistance and co-
operation, especially economic and technical, to the maximum of its
available resources, with a view to achieving progressively the full
realization of the rights recognized in the present Covenant by all
appropriate means, including particularly the adoption of legislative
measures.
2. The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake to
guarantee that the rights enunciated in the present Covenant will be
exercised without discrimination of any kind as to race, colour, sex,
language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin,
property, birth or other status.
3. Developing countries, with due regard to human rights and their
national economy, may determine to what extent they would guarantee
the economic rights recognized in the present Covenant to non-
nationals.
Article 3
The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake to
ensure the equal right of men and women to the enjoyment of all
economic, social and cultural rights set forth in the present Covenant.
Article 4
The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize that, in
the enjoyment of those rights provided by the State in conformity with
the present Covenant, the State may subject such rights only to such
limitations as are determined by law only in so far as this may be
compatible with the nature of these rights and solely for the purpose of
promoting the general welfare in a democratic society.
Article 5
1. Nothing in the present Covenant may be interpreted as implying
for any State, group or person any right to engage in any activity or to
perform any act aimed at the destruction of any of the rights or
freedoms recognized herein, or at their limitation to a greater extent
than is provided for in the present Covenant.
2. No restriction upon or derogation from any of the fundamental
human rights recognized or existing in any country in virtue of law,
conventions, regulations or custom shall be admitted on the pretext that
the present Covenant does not recognize such rights or that it
recognizes them to a lesser extent.
International Bill of Human Rights
163

PART III
Article 6
1. The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize the right to
work, which includes the right of everyone to the opportunity to gain
his living by work which he freely chooses or accepts, and will take
appropriate steps to safeguard this right.
2. The steps to be taken by a State Party to the present Covenant to
achieve the full realization of this right shall include technical and
vocational guidance and training programmes, policies and techniques
to achieve steady economic, social and cultural development and full
and productive employment under conditions safeguarding
fundamental political and economic freedoms to the individual.
Article 7
The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize the
right of everyone to the enjoyment of just and favourable conditions of
work which ensure, in particular:
(a) Remuneration which provides all workers, as a 
minimum, with:
(i) Fair wages and equal remuneration for work of equal
value without distinction of any kind, in particular women being
guaranteed conditions of work not inferior to those enjoyed by men,
with equal pay for equal work;
(ii) A decent living for themselves and their families in
accordance with the provisions of the present Covenant;
(b) Safe and healthy working conditions;
(c) Equal opportunity for everyone to be promoted in his
employment to an appropriate higher level, subject to no considerations
other than those of seniority and competence;
(d) Rest, leisure and reasonable limitation of working hours and
periodic holidays with pay, as well as remuneration for public holidays.
Article 8
1. The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake to ensure:
(a) The right of everyone to form trade unions and join the
trade union of his choice, subject only to the rules of the organization
concerned, for the promotion and protection of his economic and social
interests. No restrictions may be placed on the exercise of this right
other than those prescribed by law and which are necessary in a
democratic society in the interests of national security or public order or
for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others;
(b) The right of trade unions to establish national federations or
confederations and the right of the latter to form or join international
trade-union organizations;
(c) The right of trade unions to function freely subject to no
limitations other than those prescribed by law and which are necessary
164
Facts and Data

in a democratic society in the interests of national security or public
order or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others;
(d) The right to strike, provided that it is exercised in
conformity with the laws of the particular country.
2. This article shall not prevent the imposition of lawful
restrictions on the exercise of these rights by members of the armed
forces or of the police or of the administration of the State.
3. Nothing in this article shall authorize States Parties to the
International Labour Organisation Convention of 1948 concerning
Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organize to take
legislative measures which would prejudice, or apply the law in such a
manner as would prejudice, the guarantees provided for in that
Convention.
Article 9
The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize the
right of everyone to social security, including social insurance.
Article 10
The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize that:
1. The widest possible protection and assistance should be
accorded to the family, which is the natural and fundamental group unit
of society, particularly for its establishment and while it is responsible
for the care and education of dependent children. Marriage must be
entered into with the free consent of the intending spouses.
2. Special protection should be accorded to mothers during a
reasonable period before and after childbirth. During such period
working mothers should be accorded paid leave or leave with adequate
social security beneﬁts.
3.
Special measures of protection and assistance should be taken
on behalf of all children and young persons without any discrimination
for reasons of parentage or other conditions. Children and young
persons should be protected from economic and social exploitation.
Their employment in work harmful to their morals or health or
dangerous to life or likely to hamper their normal development should
be punishable by law. States should also set age limits below which the
paid employment of child labour should be prohibited and punishable
by law.
Article 11
1. The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize the right of
everyone to an adequate standard of living for himself and his family,
including adequate food, clothing and housing, and to the continuous
improvement of living conditions. The States Parties will take
appropriate steps to ensure the realization of this right, recognizing to
this effect the essential importance of international co-operation based
on free consent.
International Bill of Human Rights
165

2. The States Parties to the present Covenant, recognizing the
fundamental right of everyone to be free from hunger, shall take,
individually and through international co-operation, the measures,
including speciﬁc programmes, which are needed:
(a) To improve methods of production, conservation and
distribution of food by making full use of technical and scientiﬁc
knowledge, by disseminating knowledge of the principles of nutrition
and by developing or reforming agrarian systems in such a way as to
achieve the most efﬁcient development and utilization of natural
resources;
(b) Taking into account the problems of both food-importing
and food-exporting countries, to ensure an equitable distribution of
world food supplies in relation to need.
Article 12
1. The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize the right of
everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical
and mental health.
2. The steps to be taken by the States Parties to the present
Covenant to achieve the full realization of this right shall include those
necessary for:
(a) The provision for the reduction of the stillbirth-rate and of
infant mortality and for the healthy development of the child;
(b) The improvement of all aspects of environmental and
industrial hygiene;
(c) The prevention, treatment and control of epidemic,
endemic, occupational and other diseases;
(d) The creation of conditions which would assure to all
medical service and medical attention in the event of sickness.
Article 13
1. The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize the right of
everyone to education. They agree that education shall be directed to
the full development of the human personality and the sense of its
dignity, and shall strengthen the respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms. They further agree that education shall enable
all persons to participate effectively in a free society, promote
understanding, tolerance and friendship among all nations and all
racial, ethnic or religious groups, and further the activities of the United
Nations for the maintenance of peace.
2. The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize that, with a
view to achieving the full realization of this right:
(a) Primary education shall be compulsory and available free
to all;
166
Facts and Data

(b) Secondary education in its different forms, including
technical and vocational secondary education, shall be made generally
available and accessible to all by every appropriate means, and in
particular by the progressive introduction of free education;
(c) Higher education shall be made equally accessible to all, on
the basis of capacity, by every appropriate means, and in particular by
the progressive introduction of free education;
(d) Fundamental education shall be encouraged or intensiﬁed as
far as possible for those persons who have not received or completed
the whole period of their primary education;
(e) The development of a system of schools at all levels shall be
actively pursued, an adequate fellowship system shall be established,
and the material conditions of teaching staff shall be continuously
improved.
3. The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake to have
respect for the liberty of parents and, when applicable, legal guardians
to choose for their children schools, other than those established by the
public authorities, which conform to such minimum educational
standards as may be laid down or approved by the State and to ensure
the religious and moral education of their children in conformity with
their own convictions.
4. No part of this article shall be construed so as to interfere with
the liberty of individuals and bodies to establish and direct educational
institutions, subject always to the observance of the principles set forth
in paragraph 1 of this article and to the requirement that the education
given in such institutions shall conform to such minimum standards as
may be laid down by the State.
Article 14
Each State Party to the present Covenant which, at the time
of becoming a Party, has not been able to secure in its metropolitan
territory or other territories under its jurisdiction compulsory primary
education, free of charge, undertakes, within two years, to work out and
adopt a detailed plan of action for the progressive implementation,
within a reasonable number of years, to be ﬁxed in the plan, of the
principle of compulsory education free of charge for all.
Article 15
1. The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize the right of
everyone:
(a) To take part in cultural life;
(b) To enjoy the beneﬁts of scientiﬁc progress and its
applications;
(c) To beneﬁt from the protection of the moral and material
interests resulting from any scientiﬁc, literary or artistic production of
which he is the author.
International Bill of Human Rights
167

2. The steps to be taken by the States Parties to the present
Covenant to achieve the full realization of this right shall include those
necessary for the conservation, the development and the diffusion of
science and culture.
3. The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake to respect
the freedom indispensable for scientiﬁc research and creative activity.
4. The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize the beneﬁts
to be derived from the encouragement and development of
international contacts and co-operation in the scientiﬁc and cultural
ﬁelds.
PART IV
Article 16
1. The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake to submit
in conformity with this part of the Covenant reports on the measures
which they have adopted and the progress made in achieving the
observance of the rights recognized herein.
2. (a) All reports shall be submitted to the Secretary-General of
the United Nations, who shall transmit copies to the Economic and
Social Council for consideration in accordance with the provisions of the
present Covenant;
(b) The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall also
transmit to the specialized agencies copies of the reports, or any
relevant parts therefrom, from States Parties to the present Covenant
which are also members of these specialized agencies in so far as these
reports, or parts therefrom, relate to any matters which fall within the
responsibilities of the said agencies in accordance with their
constitutional instruments.
Article 17
1. The States Parties to the present Covenant shall furnish their
reports in stages, in accordance with a programme to be established by
the Economic and Social Council within one year of the entry into force
of the present Covenant after consultation with the States Parties and
the specialized agencies concerned.
2. Reports may indicate factors and difﬁculties affecting the degree
of fulﬁlment of obligations under the present Covenant.
3. Where relevant information has previously been furnished to
the United Nations or to any specialized agency by any State Party to
the present Covenant, it will not be necessary to reproduce that
information, but a precise reference to the information so furnished will
sufﬁce.
168
Facts and Data

Article 18
Pursuant to its responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations in the ﬁeld of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
the Economic and Social Council may make arrangements with the
specialized agencies in respect of their reporting to it on the progress
made in achieving the observance of the provisions of the present
Covenant falling within the scope of their activities. These reports may
include particulars of decisions and recommendations on such
implementation adopted by their competent organs.
Article 19
The Economic and Social Council may transmit to the
Commission on Human Rights for study and general recommendation
or, as appropriate, for information the reports concerning human rights
submitted by States in accordance with articles 16 and 17, and those
concerning human rights submitted by the specialized agencies in
accordance with article 18.
Article 20
The States Parties to the present Covenant and the
specialized agencies concerned may submit comments to the Economic
and Social Council on any general recommendation under article 19 or
reference to such general recommendation in any report of the
Commission on Human Rights or any documentation referred to
therein.
Article 21
The Economic and Social Council may submit from time to
time to the General Assembly reports with recommendations of a
general nature and a summary of the information received from the
States Parties to the present Covenant and the specialized agencies on
the measures taken and the progress made in achieving general
observance of the rights recognized in the present Covenant.
Article 22
The Economic and Social Council may bring to the
attention of other organs of the United Nations, their subsidiary organs
and specialized agencies concerned with furnishing technical assistance
any matters arising out of the reports referred to in this part of the
present Covenant which may assist such bodies in deciding, each within
its ﬁeld of competence, on the advisability of international measures
likely to contribute to the effective progressive implementation of the
present Covenant.
Article 23
The States Parties to the present Covenant agree that
international action for the achievement of the rights recognized in the
present Covenant includes such methods as the conclusion of
conventions, the adoption of recommendations, the furnishing of
technical assistance and the holding of regional meetings and technical
International Bill of Human Rights
169

meetings for the purpose of consultation and study organized in
conjunction with the Governments concerned.
Article 24
Nothing in the present Covenant shall be interpreted as
impairing the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and of the
constitutions of the specialized agencies which deﬁne the respective
responsibilities of the various organs of the United Nations and of the
specialized agencies in regard to the matters dealt with in the present
Covenant.
Article 25
Nothing in the present Covenant shall be interpreted as
impairing the inherent right of all peoples to enjoy and utilize fully and
freely their natural wealth and resources.
PART V
Article 26
1. The present Covenant is open for signature by any State Member
of the United Nations or member of any of its specialized agencies, by
any State Party to the Statute of the International Court of Justice, and
by any other State which has been invited by the General Assembly of
the United Nations to become a party to the present Covenant.
2. The present Covenant is subject to ratiﬁcation. Instruments of
ratiﬁcation shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the United
Nations.
3. The present Covenant shall be open to accession by any State
referred to in paragraph 1 of this article.
4. Accession shall be effected by the deposit of an instrument of
accession with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
5. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall inform all
States which have signed the present Covenant or acceded to it of the
deposit of each instrument of ratiﬁcation or accession.
Article 27
1. The present Covenant shall enter into force three months after
the date of the deposit with the Secretary-General of the United Nations
of the thirty-ﬁfth instrument of ratiﬁcation or instrument of accession.
2. For each State ratifying the present Covenant or acceding to it
after the deposit of the thirty-ﬁfth instrument of ratiﬁcation or
instrument of accession, the present Covenant shall enter into force
three months after the date of the deposit of its own instrument of
ratiﬁcation or instrument of accession.
Article 28
The provisions of the present Covenant shall extend to all
parts of federal States without any limitations or exceptions.
170
Facts and Data

Article 29
1. Any State Party to the present Covenant may propose an
amendment and ﬁle it with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
The Secretary-General shall thereupon communicate any proposed
amendments to the States Parties to the present Covenant with a request
that they notify him whether they favour a conference of States Parties
for the purpose of considering and voting upon the proposals. In the
event that at least one third of the States Parties favours such a
conference, the Secretary-General shall convene the conference under
the auspices of the United Nations. Any amendment adopted by a
majority of the States Parties present and voting at the conference shall
be submitted to the General Assembly of the United Nations for
approval.
2. Amendments shall come into force when they have been
approved by the General Assembly of the United Nations and accepted
by a two-thirds majority of the States Parties to the present Covenant in
accordance with their respective constitutional processes.
3. When amendments come into force they shall be binding on
those States Parties which have accepted them, other States Parties still
being bound by the provisions of the present Covenant and any earlier
amendment which they have accepted.
Article 30
Irrespective of the notiﬁcations made under article 26,
paragraph 5, the Secretary-General of the United Nations shall inform
all States referred to in paragraph 1 of the same article of the following
particulars:
(a) Signatures, ratiﬁcations and accessions under article 26;
(b) The date of the entry into force of the present Covenant
under article 27 and the date of the entry into force of any amendments
under article 29.
Article 31
1. The present Covenant, of which the Chinese, English, French,
Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited in
the archives of the United Nations.
2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall transmit
certiﬁed copies of the present Covenant to all States referred to in
article 26.
(Available at www.ohchr.org/english/law/cescr.htm)
International Bill of Human Rights
171

International Covenant on 
Civil and Political Rights
Adopted and opened for signature, ratiﬁcation, and accession by
General Assembly resolution 2200A (XXI) of 16 December 1966,
this covenant entered into force 23 March 1976, in accordance
with Article 49.
Preamble
The States Parties to the present Covenant,
Considering that, in accordance with the principles proclaimed in
the Charter of the United Nations, recognition of the inherent dignity
and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human
family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world,
Recognizing that these rights derive from the inherent dignity of
the human person,
Recognizing that, in accordance with the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, the ideal of free human beings enjoying civil and
political freedom and freedom from fear and want can only be achieved
if conditions are created whereby everyone may enjoy his civil and
political rights, as well as his economic, social and cultural rights,
Considering the obligation of States under the Charter of the
United Nations to promote universal respect for, and observance of,
human rights and freedoms,
Realizing that the individual, having duties to other individuals
and to the community to which he belongs, is under a responsibility to
strive for the promotion and observance of the rights recognized in the
present Covenant,
Agree upon the following articles:
PART I
Article 1
1. All peoples have the right of self-determination. By virtue of that
right they freely determine their political status and freely pursue their
economic, social and cultural development.
2. All peoples may, for their own ends, freely dispose of their
natural wealth and resources without prejudice to any obligations
arising out of international economic co-operation, based upon the
principle of mutual beneﬁt, and international law. In no case may a
people be deprived of its own means of subsistence.
3. The States Parties to the present Covenant, including those
having responsibility for the administration of Non-Self-Governing and
Trust Territories, shall promote the realization of the right of self-
172
Facts and Data

determination, and shall respect that right, in conformity with the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
PART II
Article 2
1. Each State Party to the present Covenant undertakes to respect
and to ensure to all individuals within its territory and subject to its
jurisdiction the rights recognized in the present Covenant, without
distinction of any kind, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion,
political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or
other status.
2. Where not already provided for by existing legislative or other
measures, each State Party to the present Covenant undertakes to take
the necessary steps, in accordance with its constitutional processes and
with the provisions of the present Covenant, to adopt such laws or other
measures as may be necessary to give effect to the rights recognized in
the present Covenant.
3. Each State Party to the present Covenant undertakes:
(a) To ensure that any person whose rights or freedoms as
herein recognized are violated shall have an effective remedy,
notwithstanding that the violation has been committed by persons
acting in an ofﬁcial capacity;
(b) To ensure that any person claiming such a remedy shall
have his right thereto determined by competent judicial, administrative
or legislative authorities, or by any other competent authority provided
for by the legal system of the State, and to develop the possibilities of
judicial remedy;
(c) To ensure that the competent authorities shall enforce such
remedies when granted.
Article 3
The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake to
ensure the equal right of men and women to the enjoyment of all civil
and political rights set forth in the present Covenant.
Article 4
1. In time of public emergency which threatens the life of the
nation and the existence of which is ofﬁcially proclaimed, the States
Parties to the present Covenant may take measures derogating from
their obligations under the present Covenant to the extent strictly
required by the exigencies of the situation, provided that such measures
are not inconsistent with their other obligations under international law
and do not involve discrimination solely on the ground of race, colour,
sex, language, religion or social origin.
International Bill of Human Rights
173

2. No derogation from articles 6, 7, 8 (paragraphs 1 and 2), 11, 15,
16 and 18 may be made under this provision.
3. Any State Party to the present Covenant availing itself of the
right of derogation shall immediately inform the other States Parties to
the present Covenant, through the intermediary of the Secretary-
General of the United Nations, of the provisions from which it has
derogated and of the reasons by which it was actuated. A further
communication shall be made, through the same intermediary, on the
date on which it terminates such derogation.
Article 5
1. Nothing in the present Covenant may be interpreted as
implying for any State, group or person any right to engage in any
activity or perform any act aimed at the destruction of any of the rights
and freedoms recognized herein or at their limitation to a greater extent
than is provided for in the present Covenant.
2. There shall be no restriction upon or derogation from any of the
fundamental human rights recognized or existing in any State Party to
the present Covenant pursuant to law, conventions, regulations or
custom on the pretext that the present Covenant does not recognize
such rights or that it recognizes them to a lesser extent.
PART III
Article 6
1. Every human being has the inherent right to life. This right shall
be protected by law. No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his life.
2. In countries which have not abolished the death penalty,
sentence of death may be imposed only for the most serious crimes in
accordance with the law in force at the time of the commission of the
crime and not contrary to the provisions of the present Covenant and to
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide. This penalty can only be carried out pursuant to a ﬁnal
judgment rendered by a competent court.
3. When deprivation of life constitutes the crime of genocide, it is
understood that nothing in this article shall authorize any State Party to
the present Covenant to derogate in any way from any obligation
assumed under the provisions of the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.
4. Anyone sentenced to death shall have the right to seek pardon or
commutation of the sentence. Amnesty, pardon or commutation of the
sentence of death may be granted in all cases.
5. Sentence of death shall not be imposed for crimes committed by
persons below eighteen years of age and shall not be carried out on
pregnant women.
174
Facts and Data

6. Nothing in this article shall be invoked to delay or to prevent
the abolition of capital punishment by any State Party to the present
Covenant.
Article 7
No one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment. In particular, no one shall be
subjected without his free consent to medical or scientiﬁc
experimentation.
Article 8
1. No one shall be held in slavery; slavery and the slave-trade in
all their forms shall be prohibited.
2. No one shall be held in servitude.
3. (a) No one shall be required to perform forced or compulsory
labour;
(b) Paragraph 3 (a) shall not be held to preclude, in countries
where imprisonment with hard labour may be imposed as a
punishment for a crime, the performance of hard labour in pursuance of
a sentence to such punishment by a competent court;
(c) For the purpose of this paragraph the term “forced or
compulsory labour” shall not include:
(i) Any work or service, not referred to in subparagraph
(b), normally required of a person who is under detention in
consequence of a lawful order of a court, or of a person during
conditional release from such detention;
(ii) Any service of a military character and, in countries
where conscientious objection is recognized, any national service
required by law of conscientious objectors;
(iii) Any service exacted in cases of emergency or calamity
threatening the life or well-being of the community;
(iv) Any work or service which forms part of normal civil
obligations.
Article 9
1. Everyone has the right to liberty and security of person. No one
shall be subjected to arbitrary arrest or detention. No one shall be
deprived of his liberty except on such grounds and in accordance with
such procedure as are established by law.
2. Anyone who is arrested shall be informed, at the time of arrest,
of the reasons for his arrest and shall be promptly informed of any
charges against him.
3. Anyone arrested or detained on a criminal charge shall be
brought promptly before a judge or other ofﬁcer authorized by law to
exercise judicial power and shall be entitled to trial within a reasonable
time or to release. It shall not be the general rule that persons awaiting
International Bill of Human Rights
175

trial shall be detained in custody, but release may be subject to
guarantees to appear for trial, at any other stage of the judicial
proceedings, and, should occasion arise, for execution of the judgment.
4. Anyone who is deprived of his liberty by arrest or detention
shall be entitled to take proceedings before a court, in order that that
court may decide without delay on the lawfulness of his detention and
order his release if the detention is not lawful.
5. Anyone who has been the victim of unlawful arrest or detention
shall have an enforceable right to compensation.
Article 10
1. All persons deprived of their liberty shall be treated with
humanity and with respect for the inherent dignity of the human
person.
2. (a) Accused persons shall, save in exceptional circumstances, be
segregated from convicted persons and shall be subject to separate
treatment appropriate to their status as unconvicted persons;
(b) Accused juvenile persons shall be separated from adults
and brought as speedily as possible for adjudication.
3. The penitentiary system shall comprise treatment of prisoners
the essential aim of which shall be their reformation and social
rehabilitation. Juvenile offenders shall be segregated from adults and be
accorded treatment appropriate to their age and legal status.
Article 11
No one shall be imprisoned merely on the ground of
inability to fulﬁl a contractual obligation.
Article 12
1. Everyone lawfully within the territory of a State shall, within
that territory, have the right to liberty of movement and freedom to
choose his residence.
2. Everyone shall be free to leave any country, including his own.
3. The above-mentioned rights shall not be subject to any
restrictions except those which are provided by law, are necessary to
protect national security, public order (ordre public), public health or
morals or the rights and freedoms of others, and are consistent with the
other rights recognized in the present Covenant.
4. No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of the right to enter his own
country.
Article 13
An alien lawfully in the territory of a State Party to the
present Covenant may be expelled therefrom only in pursuance of a
decision reached in accordance with law and shall, except where
compelling reasons of national security otherwise require, be allowed to
submit the reasons against his expulsion and to have his case reviewed
176
Facts and Data

by, and be represented for the purpose before, the competent authority
or a person or persons especially designated by the competent authority.
Article 14
1. All persons shall be equal before the courts and tribunals. In the
determination of any criminal charge against him, or of his rights and
obligations in a suit at law, everyone shall be entitled to a fair and public
hearing by a competent, independent and impartial tribunal established
by law. The press and the public may be excluded from all or part of a
trial for reasons of morals, public order (ordre public) or national
security in a democratic society, or when the interest of the private lives
of the parties so requires, or to the extent strictly necessary in the
opinion of the court in special circumstances where publicity would
prejudice the interests of justice; but any judgement rendered in a
criminal case or in a suit at law shall be made public except where the
interest of juvenile persons otherwise requires or the proceedings
concern matrimonial disputes or the guardianship of children.
2. Everyone charged with a criminal offence shall have the right to
be presumed innocent until proved guilty according to law.
3. In the determination of any criminal charge against him,
everyone shall be entitled to the following minimum guarantees, in full
equality:
(a) To be informed promptly and in detail in a language which
he understands of the nature and cause of the charge against him;
(b) To have adequate time and facilities for the preparation of
his defence and to communicate with counsel of his own choosing;
(c) To be tried without undue delay;
(d) To be tried in his presence, and to defend himself in person
or through legal assistance of his own choosing; to be informed, if he
does not have legal assistance, of this right; and to have legal assistance
assigned to him, in any case where the interests of justice so require, and
without payment by him in any such case if he does not have sufﬁcient
means to pay for it;
(e) To examine, or have examined, the witnesses against him
and to obtain the attendance and examination of witnesses on his behalf
under the same conditions as witnesses against him;
(f) To have the free assistance of an interpreter if he cannot
understand or speak the language used in court;
(g) Not to be compelled to testify against himself or to confess
guilt.
4. In the case of juvenile persons, the procedure shall be such as
will take account of their age and the desirability of promoting their
rehabilitation.
International Bill of Human Rights
177

5. Everyone convicted of a crime shall have the right to his
conviction and sentence being reviewed by a higher tribunal according
to law.
6. When a person has by a ﬁnal decision been convicted of a
criminal offence and when subsequently his conviction has been
reversed or he has been pardoned on the ground that a new or newly
discovered fact shows conclusively that there has been a miscarriage of
justice, the person who has suffered punishment as a result of such
conviction shall be compensated according to law, unless it is proved
that the non-disclosure of the unknown fact in time is wholly or partly
attributable to him.
7. No one shall be liable to be tried or punished again for an
offence for which he has already been ﬁnally convicted or acquitted in
accordance with the law and penal procedure of each country.
Article 15
1. No one shall be held guilty of any criminal offence on account
of any act or omission which did not constitute a criminal offence,
under national or international law, at the time when it was committed.
Nor shall a heavier penalty be imposed than the one that was applicable
at the time when the criminal offence was committed. If, subsequent to
the commission of the offence, provision is made by law for the
imposition of the lighter penalty, the offender shall beneﬁt thereby.
2. Nothing in this article shall prejudice the trial and punishment
of any person for any act or omission which, at the time when it was
committed, was criminal according to the general principles of law
recognized by the community of nations.
Article 16
Everyone shall have the right to recognition everywhere as
a person before the law.
Article 17
1. No one shall be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference
with his privacy, family, home or correspondence, nor to unlawful
attacks on his honour and reputation.
2. Everyone has the right to the protection of the law against such
interference or attacks.
Article 18
1. Everyone shall have the right to freedom of thought, conscience
and religion. This right shall include freedom to have or to adopt a
religion or belief of his choice, and freedom, either individually or in
community with others and in public or private, to manifest his religion
or belief in worship, observance, practice and teaching.
178
Facts and Data

2. No one shall be subject to coercion which would impair his
freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief of his choice.
3. Freedom to manifest one’s religion or beliefs may be subject
only to such limitations as are prescribed by law and are necessary to
protect public safety, order, health, or morals or the fundamental rights
and freedoms of others.
4. The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake to have
respect for the liberty of parents and, when applicable, legal guardians
to ensure the religious and moral education of their children in
conformity with their own convictions.
Article 19
1. Everyone shall have the right to hold opinions without
interference.
2. Everyone shall have the right to freedom of expression; this
right shall include freedom to seek, receive and impart information and
ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing or in
print, in the form of art, or through any other media of his choice.
3. The exercise of the rights provided for in paragraph 2 of this
article carries with it special duties and responsibilities. It may therefore
be subject to certain restrictions, but these shall only be such as are
provided by law and are necessary:
(a) For respect of the rights or reputations of others;
(b) For the protection of national security or of public order
(ordre public), or of public health or morals.
Article 20
1. Any propaganda for war shall be prohibited by law.
2. Any advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that
constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence shall be
prohibited by law.
Article 21
The right of peaceful assembly shall be recognized. No
restrictions may be placed on the exercise of this right other than those
imposed in conformity with the law and which are necessary in a
democratic society in the interests of national security or public safety,
public order (ordre public), the protection of public health or morals or
the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.
Article 22
1. Everyone shall have the right to freedom of association with
others, including the right to form and join trade unions for the
protection of his interests.
2. No restrictions may be placed on the exercise of this right other
than those which are prescribed by law and which are necessary in a
International Bill of Human Rights
179

democratic society in the interests of national security or public safety,
public order (ordre public), the protection of public health or morals or
the protection of the rights and freedoms of others. This article shall not
prevent the imposition of lawful restrictions on members of the armed
forces and of the police in their exercise of this right.
3. Nothing in this article shall authorize States Parties to the
International Labour Organisation Convention of 1948 concerning
Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organize to take
legislative measures which would prejudice, or to apply the law in such
a manner as to prejudice, the guarantees provided for in that
Convention.
Article 23
1. The family is the natural and fundamental group unit of society
and is entitled to protection by society and the State.
2. The right of men and women of marriageable age to marry and
to found a family shall be recognized.
3. No marriage shall be entered into without the free and full
consent of the intending spouses.
4. States Parties to the present Covenant shall take appropriate
steps to ensure equality of rights and responsibilities of spouses as to
marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution. In the case of
dissolution, provision shall be made for the necessary protection of any
children.
Article 24
1. Every child shall have, without any discrimination as to race,
colour, sex, language, religion, national or social origin, property or
birth, the right to such measures of protection as are required by his
status as a minor, on the part of his family, society and the State.
2. Every child shall be registered immediately after birth and shall
have a name.
3. Every child has the right to acquire a nationality.
Article 25
Every citizen shall have the right and the opportunity,
without any of the distinctions mentioned in article 2 and without
unreasonable restrictions:
(a) To take part in the conduct of public affairs, directly or
through freely chosen representatives;
(b) To vote and to be elected at genuine periodic elections
which shall be by universal and equal suffrage and shall be held by
secret ballot, guaranteeing the free expression of the will of the electors;
(c) To have access, on general terms of equality, to public
service in his country.
180
Facts and Data

Article 26
All persons are equal before the law and are entitled
without any discrimination to the equal protection of the law. In this
respect, the law shall prohibit any discrimination and guarantee to all
persons equal and effective protection against discrimination on any
ground such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other
opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status.
Article 27
In those States in which ethnic, religious or linguistic
minorities exist, persons belonging to such minorities shall not be
denied the right, in community with the other members of their group,
to enjoy their own culture, to profess and practise their own religion, or
to use their own language.
PART IV
Article 28
1. There shall be established a Human Rights Committee
(hereafter referred to in the present Covenant as the Committee). It shall
consist of eighteen members and shall carry out the functions
hereinafter provided.
2. The Committee shall be composed of nationals of the States
Parties to the present Covenant who shall be persons of high moral
character and recognized competence in the ﬁeld of human rights,
consideration being given to the usefulness of the participation of some
persons having legal experience.
3. The members of the Committee shall be elected and shall serve
in their personal capacity.
Article 29
1. The members of the Committee shall be elected by secret ballot
from a list of persons possessing the qualiﬁcations prescribed in article
28 and nominated for the purpose by the States Parties to the present
Covenant.
2. Each State Party to the present Covenant may nominate not
more than two persons. These persons shall be nationals of the
nominating State.
3. A person shall be eligible for renomination.
Article 30
1. The initial election shall be held no later than six months after
the date of the entry into force of the present Covenant.
2. At least four months before the date of each election to the
Committee, other than an election to ﬁll a vacancy declared in
accordance with article 34, the Secretary-General of the United Nations
shall address a written invitation to the States Parties to the present
International Bill of Human Rights
181

Covenant to submit their nominations for membership of the
Committee within three months.
3. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall prepare a list
in alphabetical order of all the persons thus nominated, with an
indication of the States Parties which have nominated them, and shall
submit it to the States Parties to the present Covenant no later than one
month before the date of each election.
4. Elections of the members of the Committee shall be held at a
meeting of the States Parties to the present Covenant convened by the
Secretary-General of the United Nations at the Headquarters of the
United Nations. At that meeting, for which two-thirds of the States
Parties to the present Covenant shall constitute a quorum, the persons
elected to the Committee shall be those nominees who obtain the largest
number of votes and an absolute majority of the votes of the
representatives of States Parties present and voting.
Article 31
1. The Committee may not include more than one national of the
same State.
2. In the election of the Committee, consideration shall be given to
equitable geographical distribution of membership and to the
representation of the different forms of civilization and of the principal
legal systems.
Article 32
1. The members of the Committee shall be elected for a term of
four years. They shall be eligible for re-election if renominated.
However, the terms of nine of the members elected at the ﬁrst election
shall expire at the end of two years; immediately after the ﬁrst election,
the names of these nine members shall be chosen by lot by the
Chairman of the meeting referred to in article 30, paragraph 4.
2. Elections at the expiry of ofﬁce shall be held in accordance with
the preceding articles of this part of the present Covenant.
Article 33
1. If, in the unanimous opinion of the other members, a member of
the Committee has ceased to carry out his functions for any cause other
than absence of a temporary character, the Chairman of the Committee
shall notify the Secretary-General of the United Nations, who shall then
declare the seat of that member to be vacant.
2. In the event of the death or the resignation of a member of the
Committee, the Chairman shall immediately notify the Secretary-
General of the United Nations, who shall declare the seat vacant from
the date of death or the date on which the resignation takes effect.
182
Facts and Data

Article 34
1. When a vacancy is declared in accordance with article 33 and if
the term of ofﬁce of the member to be replaced does not expire within
six months of the declaration of the vacancy, the Secretary-General of
the United Nations shall notify each of the States Parties to the present
Covenant, which may within two months submit nominations in
accordance with article 29 for the purpose of ﬁlling the vacancy.
2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall prepare a list
in alphabetical order of the persons thus nominated and shall submit it
to the States Parties to the present Covenant. The election to ﬁll the
vacancy shall then take place in accordance with the relevant provisions
of this part of the present Covenant.
3. A member of the Committee elected to ﬁll a vacancy declared in
accordance with article 33 shall hold ofﬁce for the remainder of the term
of the member who vacated the seat on the Committee under the
provisions of that article.
Article 35
The members of the Committee shall, with the approval of
the General Assembly of the United Nations, receive emoluments from
United Nations resources on such terms and conditions as the General
Assembly may decide, having regard to the importance of the
Committee’s responsibilities.
Article 36
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall provide
the necessary staff and facilities for the effective performance of the
functions of the Committee under the present Covenant.
Article 37
1. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall convene the
initial meeting of the Committee at the Headquarters of the United
Nations.
2. After its initial meeting, the Committee shall meet at such times
as shall be provided in its rules of procedure.
3. The Committee shall normally meet at the Headquarters of the
United Nations or at the United Nations Ofﬁce at Geneva.
Article 38
Every member of the Committee shall, before taking up his
duties, make a solemn declaration in open committee that he will
perform his functions impartially and conscientiously.
Article 39
1. The Committee shall elect its ofﬁcers for a term of two years.
They may be re-elected.
2. The Committee shall establish its own rules of procedure, but
these rules shall provide, inter alia, that:
International Bill of Human Rights
183

(a) Twelve members shall constitute a quorum;
(b) Decisions of the Committee shall be made by a majority
vote of the members present.
Article 40
1. The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake to submit
reports on the measures they have adopted which give effect to the
rights recognized herein and on the progress made in the enjoyment of
those rights:
(a) Within one year of the entry into force of the present
Covenant for the States Parties concerned;
(b) Thereafter whenever the Committee so requests.
2. All reports shall be submitted to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, who shall transmit them to the Committee for
consideration. Reports shall indicate the factors and difﬁculties, if any,
affecting the implementation of the present Covenant.
3. The Secretary-General of the United Nations may, after
consultation with the Committee, transmit to the specialized agencies
concerned copies of such parts of the reports as may fall within their
ﬁeld of competence.
4. The Committee shall study the reports submitted by the States
Parties to the present Covenant. It shall transmit its reports, and such
general comments as it may consider appropriate, to the States Parties.
The Committee may also transmit to the Economic and Social Council
these comments along with the copies of the reports it has received from
States Parties to the present Covenant.
5. The States Parties to the present Covenant may submit to the
Committee observations on any comments that may be made in
accordance with paragraph 4 of this article.
Article 41
1. A State Party to the present Covenant may at any time declare
under this article that it recognizes the competence of the Committee to
receive and consider communications to the effect that a State Party
claims that another State Party is not fulﬁlling its obligations under the
present Covenant. Communications under this article may be received
and considered only if submitted by a State Party which has made a
declaration recognizing in regard to itself the competence of the
Committee. No communication shall be received by the Committee if it
concerns a State Party which has not made such a declaration.
Communications received under this article shall be dealt with in
accordance with the following procedure:
(a) If a State Party to the present Covenant considers that
another State Party is not giving effect to the provisions of the present
Covenant, it may, by written communication, bring the matter to the
184
Facts and Data

attention of that State Party. Within three months after the receipt of the
communication the receiving State shall afford the State which sent the
communication an explanation, or any other statement in writing
clarifying the matter which should include, to the extent possible and
pertinent, reference to domestic procedures and remedies taken,
pending, or available in the matter;
(b) If the matter is not adjusted to the satisfaction of both States
Parties concerned within six months after the receipt by the receiving
State of the initial communication, either State shall have the right to
refer the matter to the Committee, by notice given to the Committee and
to the other State;
(c) The Committee shall deal with a matter referred to it only
after it has ascertained that all available domestic remedies have been
invoked and exhausted in the matter, in conformity with the generally
recognized principles of international law. This shall not be the rule
where the application of the remedies is unreasonably prolonged;
(d) The Committee shall hold closed meetings when examining
communications under this article;
(e) Subject to the provisions of subparagraph (c), the
Committee shall make available its good ofﬁces to the States Parties
concerned with a view to a friendly solution of the matter on the basis
of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms as recognized in
the present Covenant;
(f) In any matter referred to it, the Committee may call upon
the States Parties concerned, referred to in subparagraph (b), to supply
any relevant information;
(g) The States Parties concerned, referred to in subparagraph
(b), shall have the right to be represented when the matter is being
considered in the Committee and to make submissions orally and/or in
writing;
(h) The Committee shall, within twelve months after the date of
receipt of notice under subparagraph (b), submit a report:
(i) If a solution within the terms of subparagraph (e) is
reached, the Committee shall conﬁne its report to a brief statement of
the facts and of the solution reached;
(ii) If a solution within the terms of subparagraph (e) is not
reached, the Committee shall conﬁne its report to a brief statement of
the facts; the written submissions and record of the oral submissions
made by the States Parties concerned shall be attached to the report. In
every matter, the report shall be communicated to the States Parties
concerned.
2. The provisions of this article shall come into force when ten
States Parties to the present Covenant have made declarations under
paragraph 1 of this article. Such declarations shall be deposited by the
States Parties with the Secretary-General of the United Nations, who
shall transmit copies thereof to the other States Parties. A declaration
International Bill of Human Rights
185

may be withdrawn at any time by notiﬁcation to the Secretary-General.
Such a withdrawal shall not prejudice the consideration of any matter
which is the subject of a communication already transmitted under this
article; no further communication by any State Party shall be received
after the notiﬁcation of withdrawal of the declaration has been received
by the Secretary-General, unless the State Party concerned has made a
new declaration.
Article 42
1. (a) If a matter referred to the Committee in accordance with
article 41 is not resolved to the satisfaction of the States Parties
concerned, the Committee may, with the prior consent of the States
Parties concerned, appoint an ad hoc Conciliation Commission
(hereinafter referred to as the Commission). The good ofﬁces of the
Commission shall be made available to the States Parties concerned
with a view to an amicable solution of the matter on the basis of respect
for the present Covenant;
(b) The Commission shall consist of ﬁve persons acceptable to
the States Parties concerned. If the States Parties concerned fail to reach
agreement within three months on all or part of the composition of the
Commission, the members of the Commission concerning whom no
agreement has been reached shall be elected by secret ballot by a two-
thirds majority vote of the Committee from among its members.
2. The members of the Commission shall serve in their personal
capacity. They shall not be nationals of the States Parties concerned, or
of a State not Party to the present Covenant, or of a State Party which
has not made a declaration under article 41.
3. The Commission shall elect its own Chairman and adopt its
own rules of procedure.
4. The meetings of the Commission shall normally be held at the
Headquarters of the United Nations or at the United Nations Ofﬁce at
Geneva. However, they may be held at such other convenient places as
the Commission may determine in consultation with the Secretary-
General of the United Nations and the States Parties concerned.
5. The secretariat provided in accordance with article 36 shall also
service the commissions appointed under this article.
6. The information received and collated by the Committee shall
be made available to the Commission and the Commission may call
upon the States Parties concerned to supply any other relevant
information.
7. When the Commission has fully considered the matter, but in
any event not later than twelve months after having been seized of the
matter, it shall submit to the Chairman of the Committee a report for
communication to the States Parties concerned:
186
Facts and Data

(a) If the Commission is unable to complete its consideration
of the matter within twelve months, it shall conﬁne its report to a brief
statement of the status of its consideration of the matter;
(b) If an amicable solution to the matter on the basis of respect
for human rights as recognized in the present Covenant is reached, the
Commission shall conﬁne its report to a brief statement of the facts and
of the solution reached;
(c) If a solution within the terms of subparagraph (b) is not
reached, the Commission’s report shall embody its ﬁndings on all
questions of fact relevant to the issues between the States Parties
concerned, and its views on the possibilities of an amicable solution of
the matter. This report shall also contain the written submissions and a
record of the oral submissions made by the States Parties concerned;
(d) If the Commission’s report is submitted under
subparagraph (c), the States Parties concerned shall, within three
months of the receipt of the report, notify the Chairman of the
Committee whether or not they accept the contents of the report of the
Commission.
8. The provisions of this article are without prejudice to the
responsibilities of the Committee under article 41.
9. The States Parties concerned shall share equally all the
expenses of the members of the Commission in accordance with
estimates to be provided by the Secretary-General of the United
Nations.
10. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall be
empowered to pay the expenses of the members of the Commission, if
necessary, before reimbursement by the States Parties concerned, in
accordance with paragraph 9 of this article.
Article 43
The members of the Committee, and of the ad hoc
conciliation commissions which may be appointed under article 42,
shall be entitled to the facilities, privileges and immunities of experts on
mission for the United Nations as laid down in the relevant sections of
the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations.
Article 44
The provisions for the implementation of the present
Covenant shall apply without prejudice to the procedures prescribed in
the ﬁeld of human rights by or under the constituent instruments and
the conventions of the United Nations and of the specialized agencies
and shall not prevent the States Parties to the present Covenant from
having recourse to other procedures for settling a dispute in accordance
with general or special international agreements in force between them.
International Bill of Human Rights
187

Article 45
The Committee shall submit to the General Assembly of the
United Nations, through the Economic and Social Council, an annual
report on its activities.
PART V
Article 46
Nothing in the present Covenant shall be interpreted as
impairing the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and of the
constitutions of the specialized agencies which deﬁne the respective
responsibilities of the various organs of the United Nations and of the
specialized agencies in regard to the matters dealt with in the present
Covenant.
Article 47
Nothing in the present Covenant shall be interpreted as
impairing the inherent right of all peoples to enjoy and utilize fully and
freely their natural wealth and resources.
PART VI
Article 48
1. The present Covenant is open for signature by any State Member
of the United Nations or member of any of its specialized agencies, by
any State Party to the Statute of the International Court of Justice, and
by any other State which has been invited by the General Assembly of
the United Nations to become a Party to the present Covenant.
2. The present Covenant is subject to ratiﬁcation. Instruments of
ratiﬁcation shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the United
Nations.
3. The present Covenant shall be open to accession by any State
referred to in paragraph 1 of this article.
4. Accession shall be effected by the deposit of an instrument of
accession with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
5. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall inform all
States which have signed this Covenant or acceded to it of the deposit of
each instrument of ratiﬁcation or accession.
Article 49
1. The present Covenant shall enter into force three months after
the date of the deposit with the Secretary-General of the United Nations
of the thirty-ﬁfth instrument of ratiﬁcation or instrument of accession.
2. For each State ratifying the present Covenant or acceding to it
after the deposit of the thirty-ﬁfth instrument of ratiﬁcation or
instrument of accession, the present Covenant shall enter into force
three months after the date of the deposit of its own instrument of
ratiﬁcation or instrument of accession.
188
Facts and Data

Article 50
The provisions of the present Covenant shall extend to all
parts of federal States without any limitations or exceptions.
Article 51
1. Any State Party to the present Covenant may propose an
amendment and ﬁle it with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall thereupon
communicate any proposed amendments to the States Parties to the
present Covenant with a request that they notify him whether they
favour a conference of States Parties for the purpose of considering and
voting upon the proposals. In the event that at least one-third of the
States Parties favours such a conference, the Secretary-General shall
convene the conference under the auspices of the United Nations. Any
amendment adopted by a majority of the States Parties present and
voting at the conference shall be submitted to the General Assembly of
the United Nations for approval.
2. Amendments shall come into force when they have been
approved by the General Assembly of the United Nations and accepted
by a two-thirds majority of the States Parties to the present Covenant in
accordance with their respective constitutional processes.
3. When amendments come into force, they shall be binding on
those States Parties which have accepted them, other States Parties still
being bound by the provisions of the present Covenant and any earlier
amendment which they have accepted.
Article 52
1. Irrespective of the notiﬁcations made under article 48,
paragraph 5, the Secretary-General of the United Nations shall inform
all States referred to in paragraph 1 of the same article of the following
particulars:
(a) Signatures, ratiﬁcations and accessions under article 48;
(b) The date of the entry into force of the present Covenant
under article 49 and the date of the entry into force of any amendments
under article 51.
Article 53
1. The present Covenant, of which the Chinese, English, French,
Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited in
the archives of the United Nations.
2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall transmit
certiﬁed copies of the present Covenant to all States referred to in
article 48.
(Available at www.ohchr.org/english/law/ccpr.htm)
International Bill of Human Rights
189

Optional Protocol to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
Adopted and opened for signature, ratiﬁcation, and accession by
General Assembly resolution 2200A (XXI) of 16 December 1966,
the protocol entered into force 23 March 1976, in accordance with
Article 9.
The States Parties to the present Protocol,
Considering that in order further to achieve the purposes of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (hereinafter
referred to as the Covenant) and the implementation of its provisions it
would be appropriate to enable the Human Rights Committee set up in
part IV of the Covenant (hereinafter referred to as the Committee) to
receive and consider, as provided in the present Protocol,
communications from individuals claiming to be victims of violations of
any of the rights set forth in the Covenant.
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
A State Party to the Covenant that becomes a Party to the
present Protocol recognizes the competence of the Committee to receive
and consider communications from individuals subject to its
jurisdiction who claim to be victims of a violation by that State Party of
any of the rights set forth in the Covenant. No communication shall be
received by the Committee if it concerns a State Party to the Covenant
which is not a Party to the present Protocol.
Article 2
Subject to the provisions of article 1, individuals who claim
that any of their rights enumerated in the Covenant have been violated
and who have exhausted all available domestic remedies may submit a
written communication to the Committee for consideration.
Article 3
The Committee shall consider inadmissible any
communication under the present Protocol which is anonymous, or
which it considers to be an abuse of the right of submission of such
communications or to be incompatible with the provisions of the
Covenant.
Article 4
1. Subject to the provisions of article 3, the Committee shall bring
any communications submitted to it under the present Protocol to the
attention of the State Party to the present Protocol alleged to be
violating any provision of the Covenant.
190
Facts and Data

2. Within six months, the receiving State shall submit to the
Committee written explanations or statements clarifying the matter and
the remedy, if any, that may have been taken by that State.
Article 5
1. The Committee shall consider communications received under
the present Protocol in the light of all written information made
available to it by the individual and by the State Party concerned.
2. The Committee shall not consider any communication from an
individual unless it has ascertained that:
(a) The same matter is not being examined under another
procedure of international investigation or settlement;
(b) The individual has exhausted all available domestic
remedies. This shall not be the rule where the application of the
remedies is unreasonably prolonged.
3. The Committee shall hold closed meetings when examining
communications under the present Protocol.
4. The Committee shall forward its views to the State Party
concerned and to the individual.
Article 6
The Committee shall include in its annual report under
article 45 of the Covenant a summary of its activities under the present
Protocol.
Article 7
Pending the achievement of the objectives of resolution 1514
(XV) adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on 14
December 1960 concerning the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the provisions of the
present Protocol shall in no way limit the right of petition granted to
these peoples by the Charter of the United Nations and other
international conventions and instruments under the United Nations
and its specialized agencies.
Article 8
1. The present Protocol is open for signature by any State which
has signed the Covenant.
2. The present Protocol is subject to ratiﬁcation by any State which
has ratiﬁed or acceded to the Covenant. Instruments of ratiﬁcation shall
be deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
3. The present Protocol shall be open to accession by any State
which has ratiﬁed or acceded to the Covenant.
4. Accession shall be effected by the deposit of an instrument of
accession with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
International Bill of Human Rights
191

5. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall inform all
States which have signed the present Protocol or acceded to it of the
deposit of each instrument of ratiﬁcation or accession.
Article 9
1. Subject to the entry into force of the Covenant, the present
Protocol shall enter into force three months after the date of the deposit
with the Secretary-General of the United Nations of the tenth
instrument of ratiﬁcation or instrument of accession.
2. For each State ratifying the present Protocol or acceding to it
after the deposit of the tenth instrument of ratiﬁcation or instrument of
accession, the present Protocol shall enter into force three months after
the date of the deposit of its own instrument of ratiﬁcation or
instrument of accession.
Article 10
The provisions of the present Protocol shall extend to all
parts of federal States without any limitations or exceptions.
Article 11
1. Any State Party to the present Protocol may propose an
amendment and ﬁle it with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
The Secretary-General shall thereupon communicate any proposed
amendments to the States Parties to the present Protocol with a request
that they notify him whether they favour a conference of States Parties
for the purpose of considering and voting upon the proposal. In the
event that at least one-third of the States Parties favours such a
conference, the Secretary-General shall convene the conference under
the auspices of the United Nations. Any amendment adopted by a
majority of the States Parties present and voting at the conference shall
be submitted to the General Assembly of the United Nations for
approval.
2. Amendments shall come into force when they have been
approved by the General Assembly of the United Nations and accepted
by a two-thirds majority of the States Parties to the present Protocol in
accordance with their respective constitutional processes.
3. When amendments come into force, they shall be binding on
those States Parties which have accepted them, other States Parties still
being bound by the provisions of the present Protocol and any earlier
amendment which they have accepted.
Article 12
1. Any State Party may denounce the present Protocol at any time
by written notiﬁcation addressed to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations. Denunciation shall take effect three months after the date of
receipt of the notiﬁcation by the Secretary-General.
192
Facts and Data

2. Denunciation shall be without prejudice to the continued
application of the provisions of the present Protocol to any
communication submitted under article 2 before the effective date of
denunciation.
Article 13
Irrespective of the notiﬁcations made under article 8,
paragraph 5, of the present Protocol, the Secretary-General of the United
Nations shall inform all States referred to in article 48, paragraph I, of
the Covenant of the following particulars:
(a) Signatures, ratiﬁcations and accessions under article 8;
(b) The date of the entry into force of the present Protocol under
article 9 and the date of the entry into force of any amendments under
article 11;
(c) Denunciations under article 12.
Article 14
1. The present Protocol, of which the Chinese, English, French,
Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited in
the archives of the United Nations.
2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall transmit
certiﬁed copies of the present Protocol to all States referred to in article
48 of the Covenant.
Second Optional Protocol to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 
Aiming at the Abolition of the Death Penalty 
This protocol was adopted and proclaimed by General Assembly
resolution 44/128 of 15 December 1989.
The States Parties to the present Protocol,
Believing that abolition of the death penalty contributes to
enhancement of human dignity and progressive development of human
rights,
Recalling article 3 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
adopted on 10 December 1948, and article 6 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, adopted on 16 December 1966,
Noting that article 6 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights refers to abolition of the death penalty in terms that
strongly suggest that abolition is desirable,
Convinced that all measures of abolition of the death penalty
should be considered as progress in the enjoyment of the right to life,
International Bill of Human Rights
193

Desirous to undertake hereby an international commitment to
abolish the death penalty,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
1. No one within the jurisdiction of a State Party to the present
Protocol shall be executed.
2. Each State Party shall take all necessary measures to abolish the
death penalty within its jurisdiction.
Article 2
1. No reservation is admissible to the present Protocol, except for a
reservation made at the time of ratiﬁcation or accession that provides
for the application of the death penalty in time of war pursuant to a
conviction for a most serious crime of a military nature committed
during wartime.
2. The State Party making such a reservation shall at the time of
ratiﬁcation or accession communicate to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations the relevant provisions of its national legislation
applicable during wartime.
3. The State Party having made such a reservation shall notify the
Secretary-General of the United Nations of any beginning or ending of a
state of war applicable to its territory.
Article 3
The States Parties to the present Protocol shall include in the
reports they submit to the Human Rights Committee, in accordance
with article 40 of the Covenant, information on the measures that they
have adopted to give effect to the present Protocol.
Article 4
With respect to the States Parties to the Covenant that have
made a declaration under article 41, the competence of the Human
Rights Committee to receive and consider communications when a State
Party claims that another State Party is not fulﬁlling its obligations shall
extend to the provisions of the present Protocol, unless the State Party
concerned has made a statement to the contrary at the moment of
ratiﬁcation or accession.
Article 5
With respect to the States Parties to the ﬁrst Optional
Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
adopted on 16 December 1966, the competence of the Human Rights
Committee to receive and consider communications from individuals
subject to its jurisdiction shall extend to the provisions of the present
Protocol, unless the State Party concerned has made a statement to the
contrary at the moment of ratiﬁcation or accession.
194
Facts and Data

Article 6
1. The provisions of the present Protocol shall apply as additional
provisions to the Covenant.
2. Without prejudice to the possibility of a reservation under
article 2 of the present Protocol, the right guaranteed in article 1,
paragraph 1, of the present Protocol shall not be subject to any
derogation under article 4 of the Covenant.
Article 7
1. The present Protocol is open for signature by any State that has
signed the Covenant.
2. The present Protocol is subject to ratiﬁcation by any State that
has ratiﬁed the Covenant or acceded to it. Instruments of ratiﬁcation
shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
3. The present Protocol shall be open to accession by any State that
has ratiﬁed the Covenant or acceded to it.
4. Accession shall be effected by the deposit of an instrument of
accession with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
5. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall inform all
States that have signed the present Protocol or acceded to it of the
deposit of each instrument of ratiﬁcation or accession.
Article 8
1. The present Protocol shall enter into force three months after the
date of the deposit with the Secretary-General of the United Nations of
the tenth instrument of ratiﬁcation or accession.
2. For each State ratifying the present Protocol or acceding to it
after the deposit of the tenth instrument of ratiﬁcation or accession, the
present Protocol shall enter into force three months after the date of the
deposit of its own instrument of ratiﬁcation or accession.
Article 9
The provisions of the present Protocol shall extend to all
parts of federal States without any limitations or exceptions.
Article 10
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall inform
all States referred to in article 48, paragraph 1, of the Covenant of the
following particulars:
(a) Reservations, communications and notiﬁcations under
article 2 of the present Protocol;
(b) Statements made under articles 4 or 5 of the present
Protocol;
(c) Signatures, ratiﬁcations and accessions under article 7 of the
present Protocol:
(d) The date of the entry into force of the present Protocol under
article 8 thereof.
International Bill of Human Rights
195

Article 11
1. The present Protocol, of which the Arabic, Chinese, English,
French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be
deposited in the archives of the United Nations.
2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall transmit
certiﬁed copies of the present Protocol to all States referred to in article
48 of the Covenant.
Monitoring Bodies for 
Core Human Rights Treaties
The seven treaties considered to be the core human rights
treaties, along with optional protocols, are listed below. The im-
plementation of these treaties is monitored by committees, or
treaty monitoring bodies, that were established by the treaties.
The names of each of these seven bodies are presented below be-
fore the names of the treaties that created them. These “treaty
monitoring bodies” are composed of independent experts of rec-
ognized competence in the ﬁeld of human rights who are elected
by states that are parties to the treaty. All treaty bodies are ser-
viced by the Ofﬁce of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
in Geneva, with the exception of the Committee on the Elimina-
tion of Discrimination against Women, which is serviced by the
Division for the Advancement of Women in New York.
Committee on Economic, Social 
and Cultural Rights (CESCR)
Convention on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 1966.
Human Rights Committee (HRC)
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1966.
Committee on the Elimination 
of Racial Discrimination (CERD)
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination, 1965.
196
Facts and Data

Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW)
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
Against Women, 1979.
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 1999.
Committee Against Torture (CAT)
Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or De-
grading Treatment or Punishment, 1984.
Committee on the Rights of the Child (CRC)
Convention on the Rights of the Child, 1989.
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on the Involvement of Children in Armed Conﬂict, 2000.
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child
Pornography, 2000.
Committee on Migrant Workers (CMW)
International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, 1990.
UN Electoral Assistance
UN electoral assistance is responsive to the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights assertion that “[t]he will of the people shall be
the basis of the authority of government; this shall be expressed
in periodic and genuine elections which shall be by universal and
equal suffrage and shall be held by secret vote.” The UN Electoral
Assistance Division, established in April 1992 in accordance with
General Assembly resolution A/RES/46/137, is responsible for
the coordination of the activities of the UN System in the ﬁeld of
electoral assistance. The division advises and assists the under-
secretary-general for political affairs who serves as the focal point
UN Electoral Assistance
197

for UN electoral assistance activities. By the end of 2004, 101
states had requested assistance and 91 had been assisted.
There are two main categories of United Nations electoral as-
sistance: standard electoral assistance activities and major elec-
toral missions, which are normally conducted within the context
of comprehensive peacekeeping operations.
Standard Electoral Assistance Activities are of four types:
1. Coordination and support of international observers.
Although considerable international attention has been
given to the role of the United Nations in supporting
election components of peacekeeping operations, most
electoral assistance provided by the United Nations is
relatively small-scale assistance that does not require a
mandate from the General Assembly or the Security
Council. This type of assistance was ﬁrst provided in
Ethiopia and Kenya in 1992 and later provided to support
the international observation of elections in Niger (1993),
Lesotho (1993), Malawi (1993 and 1994), Tanzania (1995),
Armenia (1995), Azerbaijan (1995), Sierra Leone (1996),
Mali (1997), and Algeria (1997), among others.
2. Technical assistance. Technical assistance, the most
frequently requested type of electoral assistance, involves
a broad range of short- and long-term assistance to
national election authorities responsible for administering
elections in their countries. Various subsidiary bodies of
the United Nations regularly provide advice and
assistance to local electoral authorities for electoral
administration and planning, voter registration, election
budgeting, review of electoral laws and regulations,
training of election ofﬁcials, logistics, voter and civic
education, procurement of election materials,
coordination of international donor assistance, electoral
dispute resolution, computerization of electoral rolls, and
boundary delimitation. The range of technical assistance
provided by the United Nations has expanded as its
experience has grown.
3. Support for national election monitors. This form of
assistance underscores the importance of building the
domestic observation capacity of member states by
supporting the activities of civil society to monitor
elections on a nonpartisan basis. Following a government
198
Facts and Data

request, technical assistance (e.g., training, advisory
assistance) may be provided to a national network of
domestic monitoring groups sponsored by local,
nonpartisan civic organizations. This type of assistance is
best utilized in countries that are relatively well
developed and pluralistic and possess a viable
community of civic organizations interested in
undertaking national election observation activities.
Support for national election observers was provided in
Mexico in 1994 and 1997.
4. Limited observation. In special cases, a small United
Nations observer team, usually composed of UN political
affairs ofﬁcers, may be sent to a country to follow the
ﬁnal phase of an electoral process and issue an internal
report to the secretary-general on its conduct.
Major electoral missions are exceptional and require a man-
date from the General Assembly or the Security Council. They are
normally a central element of comprehensive peacekeeping oper-
ations. When the United Nations is mandated to organize and
conduct an election or referendum, it assumes a role normally
fulﬁlled by national electoral authorities. This requires the estab-
lishment of a system of laws, procedures, and administrative
measures necessary for the holding of free and fair elections, as
well as the actual administration of the electoral process, that is,
the establishment of a legal framework, the registration of voters,
and the proper conduct of elections in accordance with interna-
tional norms. Due to the cost, scope, and lead time required, this
type of assistance operation is undertaken only in special post-
conﬂict situations in which there is insufﬁcient national institu-
tional capacity to organize elections. Examples of major electoral
missions are (1) the United Nations Transitional Authority in
Cambodia (UNTAC) that was responsible for the organization
and execution of national elections in Cambodia in May 1993 as
part of a comprehensive peace plan and (2) the United Nations
Transitional Authority in Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western
Sirmium (UNTAES) that was requested to organize elections for
all local government bodies in April 1997 in cooperation with
Croatian authorities (www.un.org/Depts/dpa/ead/ea).
UN Electoral Assistance
199

Examples of Human Rights 
Activities of Other UN Agencies
The activities and policies of organizations throughout the UN
System affect a diversity of economic, social, cultural, civil, and
political rights. As a result there has been a growing effort by
those concerned with human rights to ensure that these activities
and policies are consistent with human rights standards in the In-
ternational Bill of Rights and other human rights treaties. Exam-
ples of this trend are offered below by the human rights involve-
ments of four Specialized Agencies followed by those of three
UN programs.
International Labor Organization (ILO); 
Labor Standard Conventions
The ILO labor standards take the form of international labor con-
ventions and recommendations. They set standards for freedom
of association, the right to organize, collective bargaining, aboli-
tion of forced labor, equality of opportunity and treatment, and
other standards regulating conditions across the entire spectrum
of work-related issues. The conventions are international treaties,
subject to ratiﬁcation by ILO member states. Recommendations
are nonbinding instruments that set out guidelines that can orient
national policy and action.
The two key elements of regular ILO supervision are the
submission of government reports and their examination. Con-
cerning the ﬁrst, the ILO constitution contains provisions under
which governments have to report to the ILO on measures taken
to give effect to conventions they have voluntarily ratiﬁed. These
reports are forwarded to a Committee of Experts on the Applica-
tion of Conventions and Recommendations. Subsequently re-
ports of the committee of experts are submitted to the annual ses-
sion of the International Labor Conference where each is
examined by a special tripartite conference committee made up
of representatives of governments, labor organizations, and busi-
nesses.
The ILO considers eight conventions to be fundamental. The
date provided is the date of adoption.
200
Facts and Data

Freedom of association
1. Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right
to Organize Convention, 1948 (No. 87).
2. Right to Organize and Collective Bargaining
Convention, 1949 (No. 98).
The abolition of forced labor
3. Forced Labor Convention, 1930 (No. 29).
4. Abolition of Forced Labor Convention, 1957 (No.
105). United States ratiﬁed, 1991.
Equality
5. Discrimination (Employment and Occupation)
Convention, 1958 (No. 111).
6. Equal Remuneration Convention, 1951 (No. 100).
The elimination of child labor
7. Minimum Age Convention, 1973 (No. 138).
8. Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention, 1999 (No.
182). United States ratiﬁed, 1999.
UN Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO); Promotion of 
Education as a Fundamental Human Right
UNESCO views its mission as the promotion of education as a
fundamental right.
The core purpose of UNESCO’s education program is to
achieve education for all (EFA) seen in its broadest sense: educa-
tion for all, at all levels, throughout life. Education is the founda-
tion of personal fulﬁllment, of economic growth, and of social co-
hesion. It is a critical factor in overcoming poverty and ensuring
sustainable development. At the World Education Forum, held in
Dakar, Senegal, in 2003, the 1,100 participants adopted the Dakar
Framework for Action, a commitment to achieving education for
all by the year 2015. The World Education Forum set an agenda
for progress towards this aim expressed as six goals: (1) expand-
ing and improving comprehensive early childhood care and edu-
cation, especially for the most vulnerable and disadvantaged
children; (2) ensuring that by 2015 all children, particularly girls,
children in difﬁcult circumstances, and those belonging to ethnic
minorities, have access to and complete free and compulsory pri-
Examples of Human Rights Activities of Other UN Agencies
201

mary education of good quality; (3) ensuring that the learning
needs of all young people and adults are met through equitable
access to appropriate learning and life-skills programs; (4)
achieving a 50 percent improvement in levels of adult literacy by
2015, especially for women, and equitable access to basic and
continuing education for all adults; (5) eliminating gender dis-
parities in primary and secondary education by 2005, and achiev-
ing gender equality in education by 2015, with a focus on ensur-
ing girls’ full and equal access to and achievement in basic
education of good quality; and (6) improving all aspects of the
quality of education and ensuring excellence of all so that recog-
nized and measurable learning outcomes are achieved by all.
The five principal functions of UNESCO provide a useful
context for its promotion of education. These functions are to be
(1) a laboratory of ideas, (2) a standard setter, (3) a clearing house,
(4) a capacity builder, and (5) a catalyst for international coopera-
tion. The function of catalyst for international cooperation is par-
ticularly salient for the education program because UNESCO has
the responsibility for coordinating the global movement to
achieve education for all (EFA). Since 2000 it has developed links
with four key stakeholder groups, namely governments of devel-
oping countries, multinational agencies, civil society, and bilat-
eral development agencies. This has enabled UNESCO and the
other agencies to develop their work in a complementary fashion
so that each plays to its areas of strength and comparative advan-
tage (www.unesco.org).
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO);
Guidelines on the Right to Food
The attention of the reader is drawn to the extensive connection
between FAO’s concern with the right to food and WHO’s con-
cern with the right to health that follows.
The Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
which came into force in 1976, declares that “[t]he States Parties
to the present covenant recognize the right of everyone to an ade-
quate standard of living for himself and his family, including ad-
equate food, clothing, and housing” (article 11). The right to food
has been repeated in three subsequent international instruments:
202
Facts and Data

1. Two articles in the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
which came into force in 1990, address the issue of
nutrition. Article 24 asserts: “States Parties recognize the
right of the child to enjoyment of the highest attainable
standard of health . . .” and shall take appropriate
measures “to combat disease and malnutrition” through
the provision of adequate nutritious foods, clean drinking
water, and health care. Article 27 says: “States Parties
shall in case of need provide material assistance and
support programs, particularly with regard to nutrition,
clothing, and housing.”
2. The World Declaration on Nutrition, adopted at the Joint
FAO/WHO International Conference on Nutrition
(Rome, 1992), afﬁrmed that “access to nutritionally
adequate and safe food is a right of each individual”
(www.fao.org/docrep/U9920t/u9920t0a.htm).
3. In the Rome Declaration on World Food Security (World
Food Summit, 1996) heads of state and government
reafﬁrmed “the right of everyone to have access to safe
and nutritious food, consistent with the right to adequate
food and the fundamental right of everyone to be free
from hunger” (www.fao.org/DOCREP/003/W3613E/
W3613E00.HTM).
In September 2004 the FAO Committee on World Food Se-
curity (CFS) adopted voluntary guidelines to “support the pro-
gressive realization of the right to adequate food in the context
of national food security.” According to the FAO, various non-
governmental and intergovernmental organizations contributed
signiﬁcantly to the preparation of the guidelines. These included
the Ofﬁce of the High Commissioner for Human Rights; the UN
Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food; and the Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights; and the North-South Al-
liance, which is a coalition of a large number of NGOs. The FAO
says the guidelines are a “human rights-based practical tool ad-
dressed to all states.” They cover the full range of actions that
need to be taken at the national level to build an environment
enabling people to feed themselves and to establish safety nets
for those who are unable to do so. “The adoption of these Volun-
tary Guidelines constitutes a major breakthrough. This is the
first time that an intergovernmental body agrees on what the
Examples of Human Rights Activities of Other UN Agencies
203

right to food really means,” said Giuliano Pucci, FAO legal coun-
sel (www.fao.org/newsroom/en/news/2004/50821).
World Health Organization (WHO) and the
Right to the Highest Attainable Health Quality
The preamble to the WHO constitution states that “[t]he enjoy-
ment of the highest attainable standard of health is one of the
fundamental rights of every human being.” The WHO has re-
ported that “every country in the world is now party to at least
one human rights treaty that addresses health-related rights, in-
cluding the right to health and a number of rights related to con-
ditions necessary for health. UN Secretary General Kofi Annan
has stated: ‘It is my aspiration that health will ﬁnally be seen not
as a blessing to be wished for; but as a human right to be fought
for’” (www.who.int/hhr/en).
The WHO cites these international instruments as a basis for
its human rights obligations:
1. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948)
asserted that “everyone has the right to a standard of
living adequate for health and well-being of himself and
his family, including food” (article 25 (1)).
2. This position is echoed in the constitution of the World
Health Organization (1948), which afﬁrms that promoting
the improvement of nutrition (article 2) is among the
speciﬁc ways that WHO can achieve its objective, “the
attainment by all peoples of the highest possible level of
health” (article 1).
3. In 1981, the World Health Assembly adopted the
International Code of Marketing of Breast-milk
Substitutes that emphasizes providing “safe and
adequate nutrition for infants” (article 1). On this
occasion, the member states of the World Health
Organization afﬁrmed “the right of every child and every
pregnant and lactating woman to be adequately
nourished as a means of attaining and maintaining
health” (Code preamble, paragraph 1).
4. In the Convention on the Rights of the Child, which came
into force in 1990, two articles address the issue of
204
Facts and Data

nutrition. According to article 24, “States Parties
recognize the right of the child to enjoyment of the
highest attainable standard of health” and shall take
appropriate measures “to combat disease and
malnutrition” through the provision of adequate
nutritious foods, clean drinking water, and health care.
The WHO website lists three main objectives in the ﬁeld of
health and human rights:
1. To strengthen WHO’s capacity to integrate a human
rights-based approach in its work
2. To support governments to integrate a human rights-
based approach in health development
3. To advance the right to health in international law and
international development processes.
It makes these points as evidence that protecting health and
fulﬁlling human rights are inextricably linked:
1. Violations or lack of attention to human rights can have
serious health consequences, for example, slavery,
torture, and inhuman and degrading treatment.
2. Health policies and programs can promote or violate
human rights in their design or implementation, for
example, freedom from discrimination, individual
autonomy, and rights to participation.
3. Vulnerability to ill health can be reduced by taking steps
to respect, protect, and fulﬁll human rights, for example,
ensuring freedom from discrimination on account of race,
sex, and gender roles and establishing rights to health,
food, and nutrition and to education and housing.
(www.who.int)
UN Environment Program (UNEP) and 
the Right to a Pollution-Free Environment
On 27 April 2001 the UN Commission on Human Rights de-
clared that everyone has the right to live in a world free from
Examples of Human Rights Activities of Other UN Agencies
205

toxic pollution and environmental degradation. This was the
first time the commission addressed the links between the envi-
ronment and human rights. The UN high commissioner for hu-
man rights, and the executive director of the UN Environment
Program (UNEP) were invited to organize an international sem-
inar to explore how environmental and human rights principles
can be strengthened. Klaus Toepfer, executive director of UNEP,
welcomed the historic move by saying: “Many of the funda-
mental rights enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights have significant environmental dimensions.” (The infor-
mation and quotes in this section were acquired from UNEP In-
formation Note 2003/05 at www.unep.org/Documents.Multi-
lingual/Default. It is now available through a search of www.
unep.org.)
On 25 April 2003 the UN Commission on Human Rights
passed a resolution on Human Rights and the Environment as
Part of Sustainable Development. This resolution was wel-
comed by the UNEP executive director with these words:
“People can only achieve their full human potential when their
natural environment is robust and respected. . . . The existence
of clean air, clean water, a stable climate, thriving wildlife and
well-managed natural resources determines the extent to which
people can enjoy their basic rights to life, health, food, housing,
livelihood and culture. . . . Today’s decision on ‘Human Rights
and the Environment as Part of Sustainable Development’ states
that the ‘protection of the environment and sustainable devel-
opment can also contribute to human well-being and poten-
tially to the enjoyment of human rights. Respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms are essential for achieving
sustainable development. . . . Environmental damage can have
potentially negative effects on the enjoyment of some human
rights’.”
This decision of the Human Rights Commission emphasizes
the importance for states, in their environmental policies, to take
into account the impact of environmental degradation on disad-
vantaged members of society. The UNEP website states that
“[t]he Commission’s decision provides a good basis for further
cooperation between UNEP and the Ofﬁce of the High Commis-
sioner for Human Rights on promoting the linkages between hu-
man rights and the environment, including efforts to strengthen
the role of the judiciary in supporting the goals of sustainable de-
velopment.”
206
Facts and Data

UN High Commissioner for Refugees 
(UNHCR); Protection of Human Rights
In more than ﬁve decades the UNHCR has helped an estimated 50
million people restart their lives. In 2005 a staff of more than 6,000
people in more than 116 countries strove to help some 17 million
displaced persons (www.unhcr.ch/cgi-bin/texis/vtx/basics).
In June 1994 Sadako Ogata, UN high commissioner for
refugees, accepted the Human Rights Award from the Interna-
tional Human Rights Law Group. The edited excerpts from her
acceptance speech that follow clearly illuminate the human rights
dimension of the problems confronted by refugees:
The Award is a tribute to the tireless efforts of more than
4,000 UNHCR staff members, many of whom are risk-
ing their lives daily to defend the human rights of those
who are forced to ﬂee their homes. Above all, the Award
is an acknowledgment that the plight of refugees and
the displaced is as much a human rights problem as it is
a humanitarian one.
There is growing support today for a comprehensive
strategy which addresses the entire continuum of
refugee flows from causes through emergency re-
sponse, protection and eventual solution. This means
not only responding to refugee situations in countries
of asylum, but also focusing on the situation in the
country of origin.
How does such a strategy retain its human rights fo-
cus? Let me outline three areas. Firstly, it does so by en-
suring that refugees continue to be protected, even on a
temporary basis. All states parties to the 1951 United
Nations Refugee Convention and its 1967 Protocol must
apply these instruments fully and liberally. At the same
time, I would also advocate a more temporary form of
protection through which victims of war and general-
ized violence who are not covered by the Refugee Con-
vention Protocol can ﬁnd the sanctuary they badly need,
while host governments can afford to be more generous
in the expectation that they need to provide protection
only for as long as it is needed.
The second way in which the human rights aspect is
upheld is through the protection of the internally dis-
Examples of Human Rights Activities of Other UN Agencies
207

placed. It should be perceived not as an alternative to
asylum, but as an important complement, easing the
protection of refugees, rather than undermining it. Al-
though UNHCR does not have a general mandate for
the internally displaced, we have assisted in specific
cases, at the request of the Secretary-General, in north-
ern Iraq, Sri Lanka, Ethiopia, Afghanistan, Central
America, Bosnia-Herzegovina, and now in Georgia.
The third and final aspect of the human rights ap-
proach to refuge problems is the promotion of human
rights so that people are not forced to ﬂee, and those who
have left home can safely return. We must prevent
refugee ﬂows, not by building barriers or border controls
but by defending the right of people to remain in peace in
their own homes and their own countries. When people
have to leave their homes to escape persecution or armed
conﬂict, a whole range of human rights are violated, in-
cluding the right to life, liberty and security of person, the
right not to be subjected to torture or other degrading
treatment, the right to privacy and family life, the right to
freedom of movement and residence, and the right not to
be subjected to arbitrary exile. How do we secure
people’s right to remain at home, how can we promote
tolerance and defend the human rights of all those who
live among us: these are urgent questions facing the inter-
national community, to which, I regret to say, we have yet
to ﬁnd an adequate response. (www.unhcr.ch)
Habitat (UNHSP) and a Rights-Based 
Approach to Urban Poverty Reduction
At its seventeenth session in 1999, the Governing Council of
Habitat (UN Human Settlements Program) adopted a new vision
statement for Habitat. It charts a new course for Habitat by es-
pousing a rights-based approach to urban poverty reduction. The
vision statement endorsed three new initiatives with the goal of
reducing urban poverty: the Global Campaign for Secure Tenure,
the Global Campaign for Urban Governance, and the Cities Al-
liance (launched in partnership with the World Bank).
The Global Campaign for Secure Tenure promotes the secu-
rity of tenure of the urban poor. The absence of the threat of evic-
208
Facts and Data

tion offers incentives for investment by slum dwellers, public au-
thorities, and private individuals and corporations. Security of
tenure improves the access of slum dwellers to urban basic ser-
vices and credit. It can formalize governmental recognition of the
right of slum dwellers to organize and make claims on and nego-
tiate the use of public resources. The Global Campaign recog-
nizes that, in many cases, the urban poor are not passively wait-
ing for solutions from the government, the private sector, or
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs). They are ﬁnding their
own solutions that the Global Campaign seeks to learn from and
support.
Grounded in human rights, the Global Campaign for Urban
Governance promotes the right to development and the civil and
political right of participation. Inclusive processes of decision
making are recognized as the best means for the effective use of
scarce development resources, for the equitable distribution of
the beneﬁts of development, and for ensuring the sustainability
of hard-won benefits. The Global Campaign is committed to
working with local governments and their associations to explore
mechanisms for involving the urban poor, particularly women, in
the decisions that affect their lives and their cities.
The Cities Alliance aims to improve the impact of interna-
tional development cooperation efforts to reduce urban poverty.
Admitting that there is not enough to show for money already in-
vested in urban development, it recognizes the need for engaging
and learning from the urban poor and from their partnerships
with government at all levels. The Cities Alliance regards such en-
gagement as necessary for improving the quality of living and
working conditions of the urban poor. Focus is being placed on
two approaches: slum upgrading and city development strategies,
which are linked to the Global Campaigns and to the twin man-
dates of Habitat: “Shelter for All” and “Sustainable Urban Devel-
opment” (www.unhabitat.org/HD/hdv6n4/advocacy.htm).
UN Peacekeeping Operations
The UN Charter stipulates that, to assist in maintaining peace
and security around the world, all member states should make
available to the Security Council necessary armed forces and fa-
cilities. From 1948 to 2005, close to 130 states have contributed
Examples of Human Rights Activities of Other UN Agencies
209

military and civilian police personnel to peace operations. It is es-
timated that up to 1 million soldiers, police ofﬁcers, and civilians
have served the United Nations in the last 56 years. As of June
2004, 97 countries were contributing a total of more than 56,000
uniformed personnel—the highest number since 1995.
The initial peacekeeping missions tended to consist primarily
of small units, lightly armed, patrolling cease-ﬁre lines. More re-
cently, after the end of the Cold War, peacekeeping missions have
become larger and more complex. In addition, they now increas-
ingly involve nonmilitary elements to ensure sustainability. The
UN Department of Peacekeeping Operations was created in 1992
to support this increased demand for complex peacekeeping.
In 1993 annual UN peacekeeping costs peaked at some $3.6
billion, reflecting the expense of operations in the former Yu-
goslavia and Somalia. Compared to the costs of national police
and military expenditures, peacekeeping costs very little. The
United Nations spends less per year on peacekeeping worldwide
than the City of New York spends on the annual budgets of its
fire and police departments. UN peacekeeping cost about $2.6
billion in 2002. In the same year, governments worldwide spent
more than $794 billion on arms. The approved UN peacekeeping
budget for the year 2004–2005 is $2.80 billion (www.un.org/
Depts/dpko/dpko/faq/q6.htm).
In 2005 there were eighteen peacekeeping operations; in the
Middle East (three), Asia (three), the Americas (one), Africa
(eight), and Europe (three). In the past there have been forty-four
completed peacekeeping operations, in the Middle East (six), Eu-
rope (seven), Asia (eight), the Americas (eight), and Africa (fif-
teen) (www.un.org/Depts/dpko/dpko/index.asp).
UN Peacekeeping Operations in 2005
Middle East (3):
UN Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) (Golan Heights)
UN Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) (Lebanon)
UN Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO)
(Golan Heights, Lebanon, Sinai)
Asia (3):
UN Ofﬁce in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL)
UN Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan
(UNMOGIP)
210
Facts and Data

UN Assistance Mission in Afghanistan 
(UNAMA)
Americas (1):
UN Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
Africa (8):
UN Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS)
UN Operation in Burundi (ONUB)
UN Operation in Côte d’ Ivoire (UNOCI) (Ivory Coast)
UN Observer Mission in Liberia (UNMIL)
UN Organization Mission in Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC)
UN Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE)
UN Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)
UN Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara(MINURSO)
Europe (3):
UN Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG)
UN Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
UN Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP)
Past Peacekeeping Operations
Middle East (6):
UN Iran-Iraq Military Observer Group (UNIIMOG)
UN Observation Group in Lebanon (UNOGIL)
UN Emergency Force I (UNEF I) (Suez Canal, Sinai, Gaza)
UN Emergency Force II (UNEF II) (Egypt-Israel Border)
UN Yemen Observation Mission (UNYOM)
UN Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission (UNIKOM)
Europe (7):
UN Conﬁdence Restoration Operation in Croatia (UNCRO)
UN Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja,
and Western Sirmium (UNTAES) (Croatia)
UN Civilian Police Support Group (UNPSG) (Croatia)
UN Protection Force (UNPROFOR) Croatia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and Republicc of Macedonia
UN Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP) (former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia)
UN Mission of Observers in Prevlaka (UNMOP) (Area 
disputed by Croatia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia)
UN Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH)
UN Peacekeeping Operations
211

Asia (8):
UN Good Ofﬁces Mission in Afghanistan and Pakistan
(UNGOMAP)
UN Advance Mission in Cambodia (UNAMIC)
UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC)
UN Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
UN Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
UN India-Pakistan Observer Mission (UNIPOM)
UN Mission of Observers in Tajikistan Civil War (UNMOT)
UN Security Force in Western New Guinea (UNSF)
Americas (8):
UN Observer Group in Central America (ONUCA) 
(Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and
Nicaragua)
Mission of the Representative of the Secretary-General in the
Dominican Republic (DOMREP)
UN Observer Mission in El Salvador (ONUSAL)
UN Veriﬁcation Mission in Guatemala (MINUGUA)
UN Mission in Haiti (UNMIH)
UN Support Mission in Haiti (UNSMIH)
UN Transition Mission in Haiti (UNTMIH)
UN Civilian Peace Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH)
Africa (15):
UN Angola Veriﬁcation Mission I (UNAVEM I)
UN Angola Veriﬁcation Mission II (UNAVEM II)
UN Angola Veriﬁcation Mission III (UNAVEM III)
UN Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA)
UN Mission in the Central African Republic (MINURCA)
UN Aouzou Strip Observer Group (UNASOG) (Chad/Libya)
UN Operation in the Congo (ONUC)
UN Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL)
UN Operation in Mozambique (ONUMOZ)
UN Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) (Namibia)
UN Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR)
UN Observer Mission Uganda-Rwanda (UNOMUR)
UN Observer Mission in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL)
UN Operation in Somalia I (UNOSOM I)
UN Operation in Somalia II (UNOSOM II)
212
Facts and Data

Civilian Police
United Nations civilian police ofﬁcers were deployed for the ﬁrst
time in the 1960s in the UN peacekeeping operation in the Congo.
They have been part of the UN force in Cyprus for more than
thirty years. Beginning with the UN mission in Namibia in 1988,
UN civilian police have become an increasingly important ele-
ment of UN peacekeeping by helping war-torn societies restore
social, economic, and political stability. The UN Civilian Police
Division was set up in October 2000 as part of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations with a staff of experienced police ofﬁ-
cers from contributing countries. Goals of the Division are to: (1)
support civilian police components of UN peacekeeping opera-
tions; (2) enhance planning capacity for police components of UN
operations; (3) assist in strengthening the performance, effective-
ness, and efficiency of local criminal justice systems, including
police and corrections; and (4) enhance the ability to deploy
rapidly a functional police force. More than 7,000 police ofﬁcers
from 80 countries were participating in 18 missions near the end
of 2004 (www.un.org/Depts/dpko/dpko/civpol/4.htm).
UN Peacekeeping Fatalities
As of 31 October 2004, there were 1,945 peacekeeping fatalities
from 106 member states. Fifteen member states had 40 or more fa-
talities (www.un.org/Depts/dpko/fatalities):
Bangladesh 53
Norway 41
Canada 106
Pakistan 82
France 95
Poland 45
Ghana 103
Sweden 64
India 109
United Kingdom 92
Ireland 85
United States 57
Nepal 50
Zambia 54
Nigeria 63
UN Mine Action Service (UNMAS)
The UNMAS is part of the UN Department of Peacekeeping Op-
erations, established in 1997 to serve as the UN focal point for
mine action. The UNMAS chairs the UN Inter-Agency Coordina-
tion Group (IAGC), which includes representatives from the UN
UN Peacekeeping Operations
213

Development Program, UNICEF, the UN Department for Disar-
mament Affairs, the UN Food and Agriculture Organization, the
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, the UN High Com-
missioner for Refugees, the UN Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the UN Office for Project Services, the
World Bank, the World Food Program, and the World Health Or-
ganization. It also chairs a Steering Committee on Mine Action
(SCMA), which includes IACG members as well as representa-
tives from the International Campaign to Ban Landmines (ICBL),
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), the Geneva
International Centre for Humanitarian Demining (GICHD), and a
number of operational nongovernmental organizations (NGOs).
In partnership with the GICHD, the UNMAS also organizes an
annual meeting of mine-action program directors and advisers
from around the world (www.mineaction.org).
UN Peacemaking and 
Peace-Building Missions 
Peacemaking refers to the use of diplomatic means to persuade
parties in conﬂict to cease hostilities and to negotiate a peaceful
settlement of their dispute. Peacemaking excludes the use of
force against one of the parties to enforce an end to hostilities, an
activity that in UN parlance is referred to as “peace enforce-
ment.” Peace building is employed by the United Nations to refer
to external efforts to assist countries and regions in their transi-
tions from war to peace and includes all activities and programs
designed to support and strengthen these transitions. The United
Nations’ role is often focused on facilitating the implementation
of a peace agreement. Effective peace building requires concur-
rent and integrated action of many different types: military,
diplomatic, political, economic, social, and humanitarian. The
UN Department of Political Affairs, under the secretary-general’s
direction, provides a broad political and policy framework for the
UN System’s response to postconﬂict situations in an effort to ac-
quire participation of each of the components of the UN System
that has a part to play.
The United Nations provides various means through which
conﬂicts may be contained and resolved and their root causes ad-
dressed. The Security Council may recommend ways to resolve a
214
Facts and Data

dispute or request the secretary-general’s mediation. The secre-
tary-general may participate personally and by dispatching spe-
cial envoys or missions for speciﬁc tasks, such as negotiation or
fact ﬁnding.
In late 2004 there were fourteen UN peacemaking and peace-
building missions:
UN Observer Mission in Bougainville (UNOMB)
UN Ofﬁce in Burundi (UNOB)
UN Ofﬁce in the Central African Republic (BONUCA)
Ofﬁce of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Great Lakes Region (Burundi)
UN Veriﬁcation Mission in Guatemala (MINUGUA)
UN Peace-building Support Ofﬁce in Guinea-Bissau
(UNOGBIS)
Ofﬁce of the UN Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process (UNSCO)
UN Political Ofﬁce for Somalia (UNPOS)
UN Tajikistan Ofﬁce of Peace-building (UNTOP)
Ofﬁce of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
West Africa (UNOWA)
UN Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
UN Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
Special Envoy for Mynamar
Special Political Mission in Sudan
(Further information is available at: www.un.org/Depts/
dpa/prev_dip/fst_prev_dip.htm)
International Criminal Tribunals 
In 2005 there are two UN international criminal tribunals, the In-
ternational Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), estab-
lished in 1993 and 1994. Creation of these criminal tribunals con-
tinued the practice of establishing ad hoc tribunals to bring to jus-
tice exceedingly serious violations of international law, as in the
case of the Nuremberg trials of German Nazi leaders after World
War II. A permanent tribunal, the International Criminal Court
(ICC), was approved on 17 July 1998 by 120 states participating in
International Criminial Tribunals
215

the United Nations Diplomatic Conference of Plenipotentiaries on
the Establishment of an International Criminal Court.
International Criminal Court (ICC) 
The ICC statute entered into force on 1 July 2002. When this was
followed by the establishment of the Permanent Secretariat of the
ICC in The Hague, the UN Secretariat ceased to serve as the Sec-
retariat of the ICC on 31 December 2003. The International Crimi-
nal Court (ICC) is the ﬁrst permanent, treaty-based international
criminal court established to promote the rule of law and ensure
that the gravest international crimes are punished. In February
2003 the Assembly of States Parties elected the eighteen judges of
the court for a term of ofﬁce of three, six, and nine years. Ninety-
seven states had ratiﬁed the ICC Treaty by October 2004. By late
2004 two states, the Republic of Uganda and the Democratic Re-
public of the Congo, had referred situations to the chief prosecu-
tor of the court. The prosecutor decided to open investigations
into both situations (www.icc-cpi.int).
The U.S. government opposed the creation of the ICC. In De-
cember 2004 President Bush approved the Nethercutt Amend-
ment, passed by the U.S. Congress, which suspends Economic
Support Fund assistance to countries that have ratiﬁed the Rome
Statute of the ICC and have not signed bilateral immunity agree-
ments with the United States. Such agreements prohibit U.S. citi-
zens and U.S. contractors from transfer to the ICC for investiga-
tion or prosecution.
International Criminal Tribunal 
for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) was established by Security Council resolution 827,
passed on 25 May 1993 in the face of the serious violations of in-
ternational humanitarian law committed in the territory of the
former Yugoslavia since 1991. The ICTY is located in The Hague,
The Netherlands. The ICTY’s mission is fourfold: (1) to bring to
justice persons allegedly responsible for serious violations of in-
ternational humanitarian law, (2) to render justice to the victims,
(3) to deter further crimes, and (4) to contribute to the restoration
of peace by promoting reconciliation in the former Yugoslavia.
216
Facts and Data

The chambers consist of sixteen permanent judges and a maxi-
mum at any one time of nine ad litem judges. The sixteen perma-
nent judges are elected by the General Assembly of the United
Nations for a term of four years. They can be reelected. The
judges are divided between three trial chambers and one appeals
chamber. The judges represent the main legal systems in the
world and bring to the tribunal a variety of legal expertise
(www.un.org/icty).
International Criminal Tribunal 
for Rwanda (ICTR)
In response to the serious violations of humanitarian law commit-
ted in Rwanda, and acting under Chapter VII of the United Na-
tions Charter, the Security Council created the International Crim-
inal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) by Resolution 955 of 8 November
1994. The purpose of the ICTR is to contribute to the process of na-
tional reconciliation in Rwanda and to the maintenance of peace
in the region. The tribunal was established for the prosecution of
persons responsible for genocide and other serious violations 
of international humanitarian law committed in the territory of
Rwanda between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994. It may
also deal with the prosecution of Rwandan citizens responsible for
genocide and other such violations of international law commit-
ted in the territory of neighboring states during the same period.
The tribunal consists of three trial chambers and an appeals cham-
ber, composed of sixteen judges. The Ofﬁce of the Prosecutor is di-
vided into an investigation Section and a prosecution Section.
The Registry is responsible for the overall administration
and management of the tribunal.
By resolution 977 of 22 February 1995, the Security Council
decided that the seat of the tribunal would be located in Arusha,
United Republic of Tanzania (www.un.org/ictr).
UN System Counterterrorism Efforts 
Counterterrorism has long been on agendas of the UN System. In
this section what the UN considers to be the twelve key UN anti-
terrorism conventions that predate 11 September 2001 (9/11) are
UN System Counterterrorism Efforts
217

presented ﬁrst. The Security Council, General Assembly, and Sec-
retariat bodies that were established in response to 9/11 are then
described. The last two sections provide information on the coun-
terterrorism efforts of the IAEA, IMO, ICAO, ILO, OPCW, UPU,
and WHO.
Twelve Key UN Antiterrorism Conventions 
That Predate 11 September 2001 
1. Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of
Crimes against Internationally Protected Persons,
including Diplomatic Agents, adopted by the General
Assembly of the United Nations on 14 December
1973.
2. International Convention against the Taking of
Hostages, adopted by the General Assembly of the
United Nations on 17 December 1979.
3. International Convention for the Suppression of
Terrorist Bombings, adopted by the General
Assembly of the United Nations on 15 December
1997.
4. International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism, adopted by the General
Assembly of the United Nations on 9 December 1999.
5. Convention on Offences and Certain Other Acts
Committed on Board Aircraft, signed at Tokyo on 
14 September 1963. (Deposited with the secretary-
general of the International Civil Aviation
Organization)
6. Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure
of Aircraft, signed at the Hague on 16 December 1970.
(Deposited with the governments of the Russian
Federation, the United Kingdom, and the United
States of America)
7. Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts
against the Safety of Civil Aviation, signed at
Montreal on 23 September 1971. (Deposited with the
governments of the Russian Federation, the United
Kingdom and the United States of America)
8. Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material, signed at Vienna on 3 March 1980.
218
Facts and Data

(Deposited with the director-general of the
International Atomic Energy Agency)
9. Protocol on the Suppression of Unlawful Acts of
Violence at Airports Serving International Civil
Aviation, supplementary to the Convention for the
Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of
Civil Aviation, signed at Montreal on 24 February
1988. (Deposited with the governments of the Russian
Federation, the United Kingdom, and the United
States of America and with the secretary-general of
the International Civil Aviation Organization)
10. Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts
against the Safety of Maritime Navigation, done at
Rome on 10 March 1988. (Deposited with the
secretary-general of the International Maritime
Organization)
11. Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against
the Safety of Fixed Platforms Located on the
Continental Shelf, done at Rome on 10 March 1988.
(Deposited with the secretary-general of the
International Maritime Organization)
12. Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives for
the Purpose of Detection, signed at Montreal on 1
March 1991. (Deposited with the secretary-general of
the International Civil Aviation Organization.)
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) 
of the Security Council 
On 28 September 2001, acting under Chapter VII of the UN Char-
ter (concerning threats to international peace and security), the
Security Council adopted Resolution 1373 (2001), reafﬁrming its
unequivocal condemnation of the terrorist attacks which took
place in New York, Washington, D.C., and Pennsylvania on 11
September 2001, and expressing its determination to prevent all
such acts.
Resolution 1373 also established the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (known by its acronym, the CTC), made up of all ﬁf-
teen members of the Security Council. The CTC monitors the im-
plementation of Resolution 1373 by all states and tries to increase
the capability of states to ﬁght terrorism.
UN System Counterterrorism Efforts
219

Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED)
Security Council resolution 1535 (2004) of 26 March 2004 estab-
lished the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) in the UN Secretariat to enhance the committee’s ability
to monitor the implementation of Resolution 1373 (2001) and ef-
fectively continue the capacity-building work in which it is en-
gaged. The CTED is headed by its executive director, Javier
Rupérez, at the assistant secretary-general level.
General Assembly Ad Hoc Committee 
on Terrorism
The General Assembly Ad Hoc Committee on Terrorism in 2005
is drafting a comprehensive antiterrorism convention aimed at
ﬁlling the gaps left by the twelve sectoral treaties listed below. It
has been reported that committee members have agreed on the
bulk of twenty-seven of the draft treaty’s articles, leaving only
three key articles and the preamble to be completed. The focus of
ongoing discussions is agreement on exclusions to the treaty and
its applicability to armed forces and to foreign occupation.
Most Relevant Activities of UN Agencies and
Programs That Postdate September 2001
A report following this heading that appears at the UN web-
site is fully quoted below (www.un.org/News/dh/infocus/
overview.htm).
1. International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). IAEA
considers the ﬁrst line of defence against nuclear terror-
ism to be strong physical protection of nuclear facilities
and materials. In March this year its Board of Governors
approved an action plan designed to upgrade worldwide
protection against acts of terrorism involving nuclear and
other radioactive materials. “National measures for pro-
tecting nuclear material and facilities are uneven in their
substance and application,” the IAEA says. “There is
wide recognition that the international physical protec-
220
Facts and Data

tion regime needs to be strengthened.” A number of
States have subsequently pledged funds and resources to
support the plan.
2. International Maritime Organization (IMO) regula-
tions aimed at improving the security of ships on the
high seas entered into force on 1 July 2002. These in-
clude a requirement that all new passenger ships and
large non-passenger craft carry data recorders—black
boxes similar to those used on aircraft—on all voyages.
The black box recorders will allow investigators to re-
view procedures undertaken and instructions given in
the moments before any incident, and thereby better
identify the cause of incidents at sea. In addition, ships
will be obliged to carry automatic identification sys-
tems, so they can be identiﬁed and tracked. The manda-
tory regulations are among many amendments de-
signed to further strengthen the 1974 International
Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea.
3. International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)
adopted strengthened in-flight security standards in
March 2002 that require reinforced cockpit doors on civil
aircraft, as well as other in-ﬂight security measures. The
reinforced doors are intended to prevent unauthorized
persons from forcibly gaining access to the cockpit. They
must be closed and locked from the time an aircraft’s ex-
ternal doors are closed until the ﬂight reaches its destina-
tion. The standards also require the installation of a sys-
tem that allows pilots to monitor the area immediately
outside their cockpits, and a system to enable ﬂight at-
tendants to discreetly notify pilots of suspicious activity
or potential threats in the passenger cabins.
4. United Nations Ofﬁce of Drug Control and Crime
Prevention (ODCCP) has undertaken a series of “closed
door” meetings of experts to develop new strategies to
counter terrorism. The most recent, held in Turin (Italy),
focused on the prevention of terrorism at major interna-
tional events, such as the 2006 Turin Winter Olympics.
Amongst those attending were high-level ofﬁcials from
Interpol, Europol, the United States Federal Bureau of In-
vestigation (FBI), the U.S. Department of Justice Ofﬁce
for Domestic Preparedness, and HQ Allied Forces South-
ern Europe.
UN System Counterterrorism Efforts
221

Other Counterterrorism Activities of 
ILO, IMO, OPCW, UPU, and WHO
The UN website also provides additional information on the anti-
terrorism activities of these organizations and others in the UN
System. We have extracted and edited information on five of
these agencies and present it below (www.un.org/News/dh/
latest/un-agencies.shtml).
1. International Labor Organization (ILO). The attacks of 11
September had severe consequences for the tourism industry, af-
fecting its workers and particularly those holding temporary con-
tracts. In response, the ILO organized a meeting of government,
employer, and worker representatives to exchange information
on ways to ease the social impact of this downturn. It also orga-
nized a think-tank meeting on the impact of 11 September for
civil aviation because the strong fall in passenger demand led to
airlines announcing 200,000 job reductions in the weeks immedi-
ately following the attacks. The meeting was attended by avia-
tion industry experts, as well as industry and employee represen-
tatives.
2. International Maritime Organization (IMO). Twelve pro-
posals to improve maritime safety and security have been devel-
oped by an IMO working group on maritime security, aimed at
decreasing the likelihood of maritime terrorism and improving
the ability of seafarers and others to respond to any crises that do
arise. They include acceleration of the timetable for installing
mandatory automatic identiﬁcation systems on all ships over 500
tons working in international waters and changed regulations
that would require such ships to have ship security plans and
ship security ofﬁcers. Development of guidelines and criteria for
port vulnerability assessments have also been proposed, as has
urgent action on an up-to-date seafarer identiﬁcation document.
New arrangements for cooperation with customs authorities and
the prospect of secret antiterrorist alarm systems on ships were
also raised. These proposals will be ﬂeshed out by the IMO Mar-
itime Safety Committee and then presented to member states for
approval. The IMO is also seeking ways to strengthen the UN
Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the
Safety of Maritime Navigation and its Protocol for the Suppres-
sion of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Fixed Platforms Lo-
cated on the Continental Shelf. The convention entered into force
in 1992.
222
Facts and Data

3. Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW). A meeting of experts on mobilizing and coordinating
international responses to chemical terrorism was hosted by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. The
OPCW also provides answers to questions like “How can chemi-
cal weapons be detected?” and “How can we protect ourselves
from chemical attack?” on a special web page it maintains at the
address www.opcw.nl/resp/index.html. The OPCW provides re-
search and information on the use and potential use of chemical
weapons, including by terrorists. It also tracks the movement of
chemicals that can be used to make such weapons globally. If
asked by a state that has signed the Chemical Weapons Conven-
tion, it can carry out expert “challenge inspections” to ensure that
other states parties are not breaking their commitment not to de-
velop, stockpile, or use such weapons.
4. Universal Postal Union (UPU). Following the United
States’ anthrax-by-mail terrorism experience in 2001, the UPU
arranged for a special presentation on security to representatives
of 189 postal services from around the world by the United States
Postal Service. As the U.S. Post Ofﬁce is the service with the most
experience of bioterrorism, the UPU drew the attention of all
other postal services to the updated U.S. guidelines, and a link to
those guidelines is now on the UPU website (www.upu.int/
about/en/postal_security_25.html). In 1989 the UPU established
a Postal Security Action Group to raise awareness about security
issues and the mail. It has established a world postal security net-
work in partnership with regional and international authorities.
Through this network it offers advice and training on ways to en-
sure not only that dangerous materials are not transmitted
through the mail, but also on ways to eliminate the use of mail
systems for drug trafﬁcking, money laundering, fraud, and child
pornography.
5. World Health Organization (WHO). In October 2001 the
WHO identiﬁed three lessons from the outbreaks of anthrax: (1)
public health systems have to respond promptly to the suspicion
of deliberate infections, (2) these systems must continue to be vig-
ilant, and (3) an informed and responsible public is a critical part
of the response. On the same day, it released revised guidance for
states on how to respond to suspected anthrax infections. Fact
sheets on anthrax and other communicable diseases that could be
used by bioterrorists, such as smallpox, are available to the public
on the WHO’s website (www.who.int/inf-fs/en/index.html).
UN System Counterterrorism Efforts
223

Financing the UN System
Total UN System Expenditures: 1986–2004
The brief overview of UN System financing in Chapter 1 was
based on information provided in Table 5.1. It indicates that the
overall yearly budget in 2001 was US$ 11.9 billion, as compared
to US$ 800 billion devoted to world military expenditures of UN
member states. Less than half of the UN System budget, US$ 5.5
billion, came from assessments of member states, with the re-
mainder coming from voluntary contributions. Approximately 49
percent of assessments, US$ 2.7 billion, was for peacekeeping op-
erations.
Assessed expenditures are funded by payments assessed of
all UN member states based on their capacity to pay. Voluntary
contributions are made to speciﬁc UN agencies and Specialized
Agencies.
The data presented does not include assessments for interna-
tional tribunals, which are a separate but relatively small item.
Nor do they include the Bretton Woods institutions (the World
Bank Group and IMF), which are in practice quite distinct and
rarely included in UN System data, because both their gover-
nance and their source of funds are very different.
Peacekeeping operation expenses rose rapidly from 1992 to 
a peak in 1994 of about $13.4 billion. System expenses declined by
1997 to about $10.4 billion, as peacekeeping dropped to $1.2 billion
and other funding shrank. Nonpeacekeeping growth throughout
the period is mostly accounted for by inﬂation and, after 1990, by
emergencies, including spending for humanitarian relief. Spend-
ing for programs long in existence actually declined in this period,
while new mandates for issues such as human rights, the environ-
ment, and women’s rights, drew upon a fairly static pool of re-
sources (adapted from Klaus Hüfner, www.globalpolicy.org).
The column in Table 5.1 labeled “UN Agncies” refers to Spe-
cialized Agncies. The major specialized agencies include the In-
ternational Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the International La-
bor Organisation (ILO), the Food and Agriculture Organisation
(FAO), the UN Educational, Scientiﬁc, and Cultural Organisation
(UNESCO), the World Health Organisation (WHO), the Univer-
sal Postal Union (UPO), the International Telecommunication
Union (ITU), the International Maritime Organisation (IMO), and
the UN Industrial Development Organisation (UNIDO). The col-
umn labeled “UN Organs” includes the UN Conference on Trade
224
Facts and Data

Table 5.1
Total UN System Expenditures, 1986–2004
Prep ared by the Global Policy Forum from data provided by the United Nations.
Revised March 2004
Table created by Feisal Lakha, January 2004. Data compiled by Klaus Hüfner. 
The following tables offer a summary of the total UN system expenditures. Assessed
contributions expenditures are funded by payments assessed to all UN member states.
Voluntary contributions are payments made to specialized UN organs and agencies not
included in the assessed contributions of member states.
The data presented does not include assessed contribution expenditures for international
tribunals, which are a separate but relatively small item. Nor do they include the Bretton
Woods Institutions, which are in practice quite distinct and rarely included in UN system data,
since both their governance and their source of funds are very different.
Of note, peacekeeping operations drove a rapid runup in system costs from 1992 to a peak
in 1994 at about $13.4 billion. System costs declined by 1997 to about $10.4 billion, as
peacekeeping dropped to $1.2 billion and other funding shrank. The non-peacekeeping growth
throughout the period is mostly accounted for by inﬂation and, after 1990, by emergencies,
including spending for humanitarian relief. Real program spending (for programs long in
existence) actually declined in this period, while new mandates for issues such as human rights,
the environment, and women’s rights, drew upon a fairly static pool of resources.
Assessed Contributions Expenditures
Voluntary Contributions Expenditures
UN Peace-
Total
UN 
keeping 
Assess-
Total
Regular Operations
UN
ment
UN
UN
Voluntary
Grand
Year
Budget
Budget
Agencies
Spending
Organs Agencies Spending
Total
1986
725
242
1,142
2,109
3,075
951
4,026
6,135
1987
725
240
1,178
2,143
3,266
931
4,197
6,340
1988
752
266
1,349
2,367
3,868
1,129
4,997
7,364
1989
765
635
1,359
2,759
4,078
1,182
5,260
8,019
1990
838
379
1,495
2,712
4,436
1,346
5,782
8,494
1991
999
449
1,509
2,957
5,401
1,360
6,761
9,718
1992
1,008
1,697
1,731
4,436
5,888
1,271
7,159
11,595
1993
1,031
3,005
1,713
5,749
6,091
1,216
7,307
13,056
1994
1,087
3,357
1,826
6,270
5,967
1,126
7,093
13,363
1995
1,181
3,281
1,847
6,309
5,778
1,159
6,937
13,246
1996
1,112
1,522
2,057
4,691
5,009
1,045
6,054
10,745
1997
1,112
1,226
2,033
4,371
4,936
1,057
5,993
10,364
1998
1,086
995
1,792
3,873
4,260
1,151
5,411
9,284
1999
1,217
1,321
1,787
4,325
4,300
1,123
5,423
9,748
2000
1,090
2,139
1,766
4,995
4,023
955
4,978
9,973
2001
1,074
2,700
1,772
5,546
5,282
1,092
6,374
11,920
2002
1,149
2,284
–
–
–
–
–
–
2003
1,409
2,260
–
–
–
–
–
–
2004
1,483
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
Notes: 
1. Sums in $US millions, rounded to the nearest million. 
2. Totals since 2002 are not included as some data is not yet available.
(http://www.globalpolicy.org/ﬁnance/tables/tabsyst.htm)

and Development (UNCTAD), the UN Development Program
(UNDP), the UN Environment Program (UNEP), the UN Popula-
tion Fund (UNFPA), the Ofﬁce of the UN High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), the UN Children’s Fund UNICEF), the UN
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), and the United Na-
tions University (UNU).
Assessments of the Fifteen Largest
Contributors to the UN Regular Budget,
2003–2004
Table 5.2 presents 2003 through 2004 assessments to the UN regu-
lar budget of the fifteen largest contributors. Therefore, peace-
keeping expenditures and voluntary contributions are not in-
cluded. Assessments are based on the capacity to pay, measured
by gross national product, with the exception of the United
States, whose assessment has been lowered in response to a uni-
lateral decision by the U.S. Congress. The United States and Ja-
pan have the largest assessments, followed by seven European
countries (Germany, the United Kingdom, France, Italy, Spain,
the Netherlands, and Switzerland), two from South America
(Mexico and Brazil), two from East Asia (China and Korea),
Canada, and Australia. Notable is the fact that the percentage of
the budget paid by Switzerland, the ﬁfteenth ranked, is slightly
over 1 percent. This means that the other 176 members of the
United Nations are assessed less than this amount. This is a dra-
matic indicator of the skewed distribution of the wealth of the
world.
Alternative Sources of Financing
There are a growing number of proposals for alternative sources
for ﬁnancing the UN System through “global taxes” because of
the extremely limited financial resources provided by member
states. Here we can provide only a brief overview. (For a much
more extensive discussion see Paul and Wahlberg 2002.) Despite
the expanding demands placed on the UN System, recent growth
in ﬁnancial resources has been mostly attributed to inﬂation. In
addition, the fact that more than half of this financial support
comes from voluntary contributions inhibits effective long-term
226
Facts and Data

planning. Furthermore, many states do not pay their assessments
on time.
In addition to proposing global taxes as a source of revenue,
some favor them as policy instruments that can steer a variety of
international activities and transactions in directions that prevent
undesirable and costly consequences. These proposals concen-
trate on two policy goals, taxation as a means to regulate carbon
emissions into the atmosphere (carbon tax/energy tax) and taxa-
tion to reduce currency speculation (Tobin tax/currency transac-
tion tax).
Proposals for global taxes as both revenue sources and pol-
icy instruments include taxes on (1) international monetary trans-
actions, (2) e-mail or Internet activity, (3) arms sales, (4) extraction
Financing the UN System
227
TABLE 5.2
Assessed Contributions to the UN Regular Budget
of the 15 Largest Assessed Contributors 2004–2005
The following table lists the contributions of the 15 largest assessed contributors to the UN
regular budget. The table also illustrates the percentage of the assessed contributions by these
countries and compares the assessments from the previous year. The countries are listed in
order of rank, from the high to low.
Country
Total 
Percentage
Total of 
Percentage
Change
Assessment 
Assessment 
Assessment 
Assessment
in Position
2005
2005
2004
2004
(previous rank)
United States
440
24%
363
24%
1 (1)
Japan
346
19%
280
19%
2 (2)
Germany
154
8%
124
8%
3 (3)
United Kingdom
109
6%
88
6%
4 (4)
France
107
6%
87
6%
5 (5)
Italy
87
5%
70
5%
6 (6)
Canada
50
3%
40
3%
7 (7)
Spain
45
2%
36
2%
8 (8)
China
37
2%
29
2%
9 (9)
Mexico
34
2%
27
2%
10 (10)
Republic of Korea
32
2%
26
2%
11 (11)
Netherlands
30
2%
24
2%
12 (12)
Australia
28
2%
23
2%
13 (13)
Brazil
27
1%
22
1%
14 (14)
Switzerland
21
1%
18
1%
15(15)
Notes: Sums in $US millions, rounded to the nearest million.
Prepared by the Global Policy Forum from data provided by the United Nations (UN Documents)

of natural resources, (5) carbon/energy use, (6) aviation fuel, and
(7) airline tickets. Much of the information on these taxes that
follows has been extracted from the Global Policy Forum web-
site. For additional information go to www.globalpolicy.org/
socecon/glotax/index.htm.
1. International Monetary Transaction Tax
James Tobin, a Nobel prizewinner in economics has pro-
posed what is referred to as the “Tobin tax,” which calls for levy-
ing a charge on international monetary transactions. A very lim-
ited 0.25 percent tax would generate over $300 billion per year
(the total UN annual budget is about $12 billion). A global cur-
rency trade tax has been proposed primarily as a means for limit-
ing disruptive speculation, but it would also bring in large ﬁnan-
cial resources. Global currency trade amounts to approximately
US$ 1.3 trillion per day. Of this amount, cross-border purchases
of goods and services that require foreign exchange account for
only 2 percent ($5 trillion per year) of the total trading. Another
$50 trillion per year (about 17 percent) of foreign-exchange trad-
ing takes place with futures options and derivatives to hedge
against future exchange rate ﬂuctuations. Exchange rate specula-
tion—short- or long-term profit-seeking transactions—accounts
for the remaining transactions, at least 80 percent. These specula-
tive movements, which can take place rapidly and unpredictably,
threaten to empty central banks’ currency reserves. Ruby van der
Wekken of the Helsinki-based Network Institute for Global De-
mocratization (NIGD) has said that the proposal for a tax on cur-
rency transactions (CTT) is by far the most viable suggestion of
all global tax initiatives (www.nigd.org/wsf/1103575739/
index_html).
2. E-mail or Internet Tax
An e-mail or Internet tax, sometimes known as a “bit tax,”
would tax the amount of data sent through the Internet. A person
sending 100 e-mails a day, each containing a 10-kilobyte docu-
ment, would pay a tax of just 1 cent, according to one proposal.
This tax does not seek to discourage use of e-mail but could raise
funds that would be spent to make e-mail and web access avail-
able in poor communities and low-income countries.
The UN Development Report, 1999, estimated that such a tax
would have yielded $70 billion (http://hdr.undp.org/reports/
global/1999/en). Since then the number of Internet users has
grown enormously. A very small tax could produce a large rev-
228
Facts and Data

enue. In 1998 the United States persuaded the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), an organiza-
tion of the thirty wealthiest states, to impose a moratorium on In-
ternet taxation, but on 12 February 2002, European Union ﬁnance
ministers approved sales taxes on Internet transactions.
3. Arms Sales Tax
A 1 percent arms sales tax each year paid into a global fund
administered by the United Nations would raise hundreds of
millions of dollars. Part of that money could then be used for
postconflict rehabilitation and government building in less-
developed countries (LDCs). Civil wars and related conﬂicts are
some of the greatest causes of poverty and underdevelopment in
LDCs.
4. Extraction of Natural Resources Tax
Daphne Davies of the Brussels-based LDC Watch, a non-
governmental organization (NGO) that monitors the world’s ﬁfty
poorest states, has proposed a “polluter pays” tax for extracting
natural resources. She has proposed that procedures be created
under the auspices of the United Nations, and overseen by the
U.N. Environment Program (UNEP). Companies that extract nat-
ural resources would pay a percentage of the value of the wealth
they earn into a fund whose money would then be used to im-
prove or to restore the environment in LDCs (www.un.org/
esa/ffd/media-ipsnews-0704.htm).
5. Carbon/Energy Use Tax
There is a large body of literature advocating the economic
and environmental virtues of carbon/energy use taxes. These ar-
guments rest on the assumption that economic activity, such as
the combustion of fossil fuels, imposes costs on society, including
damage to the climate system from carbon dioxide emissions.
The goal of a carbon tax, and all environmental tax policies, is to
enable the price of goods and services to reflect their environ-
mental costs. Coal generates the greatest amount of carbon emis-
sions (0.3 tons/million Btu) and would therefore be taxed in
greater proportion than oil and natural gas, which have lower
carbon concentrations (0.24 and 0.16 tons of carbon/million Btu
respectively).
6. Aviation Fuel Tax
Although airplane travel accounts for only 3 percent of
global carbon emissions, it is the fastest-growing source of emis-
sions. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC),
Financing the UN System
229

a joint activity of the World Meterological Organization (WMO)
and the UN Environment Program (UNEP), expects airplane
travel to account for 15 percent of all carbon emissions in 2050
(www.ipcc.ch). In 2005 airline fuel is the cheapest in the world
because the industry is exempted from fuel taxes. The European
Union has actively discussed an aviation fuel tax, beginning
with the Dutch presidency of 1997. The Dutch transport minis-
ter has suggested that the European Union introduce an avia-
tion fuel tax unilaterally. In December 2000 the European Parlia-
ment’s Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee confirmed
its support for a recommendation to allow the member states to
impose a tax on domestic and intra E.U. flights. The committee
also urged the commission to pursue negotiations through the
International Civil Aviation Organization with a view to
amending the 1944 ILO Convention, which allows an exemp-
tion from taxes on air fuel. Australia and the United States op-
pose a worldwide levy on aviation fuel, but many other coun-
tries have expressed interest.
7. Airline Ticket Tax
Nongovernmental organizations are also pushing for in-
creases in the VAT (value added or sales tax) levied on airline
tickets and increases in landing fees. The main purpose of this tax
would be to prevent climate change. According to some calcula-
tions, a 1 percent charge on all air passenger tickets issued in 1989
would have generated about $1 billion, 75 percent of this sum
would have been contributed by airlines from the seven major in-
dustrialized countries. A large number of countries, especially in
the developing world, are already using departure taxes as sig-
niﬁcant revenue raisers and might be reluctant to see this source
of finance preempted by an international charge or tax (Dean
2004; Wahlberg and Wahlberg 2002.
Secretaries-General 
of the United Nations
The secretary-general of the United Nations is appointed by the
Security Council and then must receive the approval of the Gen-
eral Assembly. The secretary-general serves for five years with
230
Facts and Data

the possibility of being appointed for a second term. There have
been seven secretaries-general of the United Nations, three from
small European states, and one each from Myanmar, Peru, Egypt,
and Ghana. They are:
Trygve Lie
1946–1952
Norway
Dag Hammarskjöld
1953–1961
Sweden
U thant
1961–1971
Myanmar
Kurt Waldheim
1972–1981
Austria
Perez de Cuellar
1982–1991
Peru
Boutros Boutros-Ghali
1992–1996
Egypt
KoﬁAnnan
1997–
Ghana
(Biographies available at www.un.org)
Presidents of the 
UN General Assembly
The General Assembly elects a new president of the General As-
sembly when its annual meeting convenes each September. The
president presides over one of the annual sessions and over spe-
cial sessions that may be convened during that year. In rotating
the ofﬁce among member states, special concern is given to en-
suring that the ofﬁce rotates across all regions of the world.
Each session of the General Assembly also has twenty-one
vice presidents. These vice presidents, and the chairs of the six
main committees of the General Assembly, are members of the
general committee that is chaired by the president. After receiv-
ing a draft agenda from the Secretary General, this committee
submits its draft agenda to the General Assembly plenary.
UN System
Nobel Peace Prizes
Eight Nobel Peace Prizes have been awarded to a diversity of ac-
tivities of the UN System across fifty-one years, from 1950 to
UN System Nobel Peace Prizes
231

TABLE 5.3
Presidents of the United Nations General Assembly
Session
Year
Name
Country
First
1946
Mr. Paul-Henri Spaak
Belgium
First special
1947
Mr. Oswaldo Aranha
Brazil
Second
1947
Mr. Oswaldo Aranha
Brazil
Second special
1948
Mr. José Arce
Argentina
Third
1948
Mr. H. V. Evatt
Australia
Fourth
1949
Mr. Carlos P. Rómulo
Philippines
Fifth
1950
Mr. Nasrollah Entezam
Iran
Sixth
1951
Mr. Luis Padilla Nervo
Mexico
Seventh
1952
Mr. Lester B. Pearson
Canada
Eighth
1953
Mrs. Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit
India
Ninth
1954
Mr. Eelco N. van Kleffens
Netherlands
Tenth
1955
Mr. José Maza
Chile
First emergency special
1956
Mr. Rudecindo Ortega
Chile
Second emergency special
1956
Mr. Rudecindo Ortega
Chile
Eleventh
1956
Prince Wan Waithayakon
Thailand
Twelfth
1957
Sir Leslie Munro
New Zealand
Third emergency special
1958
Sir Leslie Munro
New Zealand
Thirteenth
1958
Mr. Charles Malik
Lebanon
Fourteenth
1959
Mr. Víctor Andrés Belaúnde
Peru
Fourth emergency special
1960
Mr. Víctor Andrés Belaúnde
Peru
Fifteenth
1960
Mr. Fblueerick H. Boland
Ireland
Third special
1961
Mr. Fblueerick H. Boland
Ireland
Sixteenth
1961
Mr. Mongi Slim
Tunisia
Seventeenth
1962
Sir Muhammad Zafrulla Khan Pakistan
Fourth special
1963
Sir Muhammad Zafrulla Khan Pakistan
Eighteenth
1963
Mr. Carlos Sosa Rodríguez
Venezuela
Nineteenth
1964
Mr. Alex Quaison-Sackey
Ghana
Twentieth
1965
Mr. Amintore Fanfani
Italy
Twenty-ﬁrst
1966
Mr. Abdul Rahman Pazhwak
Afghanistan
Fifth special
1967
Mr. Abdul Rahman Pazhwak
Afghanistan
Fifth emergency special
1967
Mr. Abdul Rahman Pazhwak
Afghanistan
Twenty-second
1967
Mr. Corneliu Manescu
Romania
Twenty-third
1968
Mr. Emilio Arenales Catalán
Guatemala
Twenty-fourth
1969
Miss Angie E. Brooks
Liberia
Twenty-ﬁfth
1970
Mr. Edvard Hambro
Norway
Twenty-sixth
1971
Mr. Adam Malik
Indonesia
Twenty-seventh
1972
Mr. Stanislaw Trepczynski
Poland
Twenty-eighth
1973
Mr. Leopoldo Benítes
Ecuador
Sixth special
1974
Mr. Leopoldo Benítes
Ecuador
Twenty-ninth
1974
Mr. Abdelaziz Bouteﬂika
Algeria
Seventh special
1975
Mr. Abdelaziz Bouteﬂika
Algeria
Thirtieth
1975
Mr. Gaston Thorn
Luxembourg
Thirty-ﬁrst
1976
Mr. H. S. Amerasinghe
Sri Lanka
Thirty-second
1977
Mr. Lazar Mojsov
Yugoslavia
Eighth special
1978
Mr. Lazar Mojsov
Yugoslavia
Ninth special
1978
Mr. Lazar Mojsov
Yugoslavia
Tenth special
1978
Mr. Lazar Mojsov
Yugoslavia

Thirty-third
1978
Mr. Indalecio Liévano
Colombia
Thirty-fourth
1979
Mr. Salim A. Salim
United Rep. of  Tanzania
Sixth emergency special
1980
Mr. Salim A. Salim
United Rep. of  Tanzania
Seventh emergency special
1980
Mr. Salim A. Salim
United Rep. of Tanzania
Eleventh special
1980
Mr. Salim A. Salim
United Rep. of Tanzania
Thirty-ﬁfth
1980
Mr. Rüdiger von Wechmar
Fed. Rep. of Germany
Eighth emergency special
1981
Mr. Rüdiger von Wechmar
Fed. Rep. of Germany
Thirty-sixth
1981
Mr. Ismat T. Kittani
Iraq
Seventh emergency special* 1982
Mr. Ismat T. Kittani
Iraq
Ninth emergency special
1982
Mr. Ismat T. Kittani
Iraq
Twelfth special
1982
Mr. Ismat T. Kittani
Iraq
Thirty-seventh
1982
Mr. Imre Hollai
Hungary
Thirty-eighth
1983
Mr. Jorge E. Illueca
Panama
Thirty-ninth
1984
Mr. Paul J. F. Lusaka
Zambia
Fortieth
1985
Mr. Jaime de Piniés
Spain
Thirteenth special
1986
Mr. Jaime de Piniés
Spain
Forty-ﬁrst
1986
Mr. Humayun R. Choudhury
Bangladesh
Fourteenth special
1986
Mr. Humayun R.Choudhury
Bangladesh
Forty-second
1987
Mr. Peter Florin
German Dem. Rep.
Fifteenth special
1988
Mr. Peter Florin
German Dem. Rep.
Forty-third
1988
Mr. Dante M. Caputo
Argentina
Forty-fourth
1989
Mr. Joseph Nanven Garba
Nigeria
Sixteenth special
1989
Mr. Joseph Nanven Garba
Nigeria
Seventeenth special
1990
Mr. Joseph Nanven Garba
Nigeria
Eighteenth special
1990
Mr. Joseph Nanven Garba
Nigeria
Forty-ﬁfth
1990
Mr. Guido de Marco
Malta
Forty-sixth
1991
Mr. Samir S. Shihabi
Saudi Arabia
Forty-seventh
1992
Mr. Stoyan Ganev
Bulgaria
Forty-eighth
1993
Mr. Samuel R. Insanally
Guyana
Forty-ninth
1994
Mr. Amara Essy
Ivory Coast
Fiftieth
1995
Mr. Diogo Freitas do Amaral
Portugal
Fifty-ﬁrst
1996
Mr. Razali Ismail
Malaysia
Tenth emergency special*
1997
Mr. Razali Ismail
Malaysia
Ninteenth special
1997
Mr. Razali Ismail
Malaysia
Fifty-second
1997
Mr. Hennadiy Udovenko
Ukraine
Tenth emergency special*
1998
Mr. Hennadiy Udovenko
Ukraine
Twentieth special
1998
Mr. Hennadiy Udovenko
Ukraine
Fifty-third
1998
Mr. Didier Opertti
Uruguay
Tenth emergency special*
1999
Mr. Didier Opertti
Uruguay
Twenty-ﬁrst special
1999
Mr. Didier Opertti
Uruguay
Fifty-fourth
1999
Mr. Theo- Ben Gurirab
Namibia
Twenty-second special
1999
Mr. Theo- Ben Gurirab
Namibia
Twenty-third special
2000
Mr. Theo- Ben Gurirab
Namibia
Twenty-fourth special
2000
Mr. Theo- Ben Gurirab
Namibia
Fifty-ﬁfth
2000
Mr. Harri Holkeri
Finland
Fifty-sixth
2001
Mr. Han Seung-soo
Korea
Fifty-seventh
2002
Mr. Jan Kavan
Czech Republic
Fifty-eighth
2003
Mr. Julian Robert Hunte
Saint Lucia
Fifty-ninth
2004
Mr. Jean Ping
Gabon
*Resumed
(Adapted from www.un.org/ga/55/session/prdts)

2001. Ralph Bunche was the first to receive the award for his
work as mediator in Palestine while a member of the Secretariat
in 1950. One prize was awarded to a specialized agency, the In-
ternational Labor Organization, in 1969. Three were awarded to
UN programs, with the UN Children’s Fund (UNICEF) receiving
it in 1965, and the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UN-
HCR) receiving it twice—in 1955 and 1981. Two secretaries-gen-
eral received the award, Dag Hammarskjold in 1961 and Kofi
Annan in 2001. UN peacekeeping forces were awarded the No-
bel Prize in 1988.
UN Conferences
1994–2004
The UN has held many global conferences, including over thirty
between 1994 and 2004. These conferences have focused on a very
broad array of global issues and have been held at many sites
around the world. The United Nations says that these “confer-
ences have made a long-term impact by: (1) mobilizing national
and local governments and non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) to take action on a major global problem, (2) establish-
ing international standards and guidelines for national policy; 
(3) serving as a forum where new proposals can be debated and
consensus sought, and (4) setting in motion a process whereby
governments make commitments and report back regularly to the
United Nations” (www.un.org/News/facts/confercs.htm).
In addition, the UN website asserts: “By involving Presi-
dents, Prime Ministers and other heads of State—as pioneered at
the 1990 World Summit for Children—these events have put long-
term, difﬁcult problems like poverty and environmental degrada-
tion at the top of the global agenda. These problems otherwise
would not have the political urgency to grab front-page headlines
and command the attention of world leaders. The participation of
thousands of NGOs, citizens, academics and businesspeople, in
both the ofﬁcial and unofﬁcial meetings, has turned these confer-
ences into true ‘global forums.’ The UN has encouraged this,
knowing that the support of a wide spectrum of society is needed
to implement the policies being discussed.” (www.un.org).
234
Facts and Data

Many of these conferences had one or more follow-up ses-
sions. Some have been followed by special sessions of the UN
General Assembly that are not included in the list below. In order
to highlight the focus of each conference for the reader, it has
been placed in italics.
2004:
Global Forum on Internet Governance (New York, 25–27
March)
International Conference on the Reconstruction of Liberia
(New York, 5–6 February)
2003:
The World Summit on the Information Society (Geneva,
Switzerland, 10–12 December)
World Electronic Media Forum (Geneva, Switzerland, 9–12
December)
High Level Political Conference for the Signature of the
United Nations Convention against Corruption (Mérida,
Mexico 9–11 December)
High-Level Dialogue on Financing for Development (New
York, 8–10 September)
International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and
Transit Developing Countries and Donor Countries and
International Financial and Development Institutions on
Transit Transport Cooperation (Almaty, Kazakhstan, 28–29
August)
2002:
The World Summit on Sustainable Development
(Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September)
World Food Summit: ﬁve years later (Rome, Italy, 10–13
June)
Second World Assembly on Ageing (Madrid, Spain, 8–12
April)
International Conference on Financing for Development
(Monterrey, N.L., Mexico, 18–22 March)
2001:
Conference on Facilitating the Entry into Force of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (New York, 
11–13 November)
UN Conferences 1994–2004
235

World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance (Durban, South
Africa, 31 August–7 September)
United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects (New York, 9–20 July)
Third United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries (Brussels, Belgium, 14–20 May)
2000:
United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime (Palermo, Italy, 12–15 December)
World Summit for Social Development and Beyond:
Achieving Social Development for All in a Globalized World
(Special Session of the General Assembly, Geneva,
Switzerland, 26–30 June)
Crime and Justice: Meeting the Challenges of the Twenty-ﬁrst
Century (Vienna, Austria, 10–17 April)
1999:
Third United Nations Conference on the Exploration and
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (UNISPACE III) (Vienna,
Austria, 19–30 July)
Fighting Landmines: First Meeting of States Parties (Maputo,
Mozambique, 3–7 May)
1998:
World Conference of Ministers Responsible for Youth (Lisbon,
Portugal, 8–12 August)
UN Conference on the Establishment of an International
Criminal Court (Rome, Italy, 15 June–17 July)
1997:
Earth Summit +5 (New York, 23–27 June)
1996:
Second United Nations Conference on Human Settlements
(HABITAT II) (Istanbul, Turkey, 3–14 June)
1995:
Fourth World Conference on Women (Beijing, China, 4–15
September)
World Summit for Social Development (Copenhagen, Denmark,
6–12 March)
Conference on Straddling and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks
(New York, March–April and August)
236
Facts and Data

1994:
Global Conference on Sustainable Development of Small
Island Developing States (Barbados, 25 April–6 May)
International Conference on Population and Development
(ICPD) (Cairo, Egypt, September)
World Conference on Natural Disaster Reduction (Yokohama,
Japan, 23–27 May)
World Summit on Trade Efﬁciency (Columbus, Ohio, 17–21
October, www.un.org/events/conferences.htm)
Former UN
Trust Territories
The Trusteeship Council suspended operation on 1 November
1994, with the independence of Palau, the last remaining United
Nations trust territory on 1 October 1994. On 25 May 1994, the
council suspended its obligation to meet annually and agreed to
meet as occasion required—by its decision or the decision of its
president, or at the request of a majority of its members or the
General Assembly or the Security Council. The former UN trust
territories are listed below.
Togoland (United Kingdom) united with the Gold Coast (colony
and protectorate), a non-self-governing territory administered
by the United Kingdom, in 1957 to form Ghana.
Somaliland (Italy) united with British Somaliland protectorate in
1960 to form Somalia.
Togoland (France) became independent as Togo in 1960.
Cameroons (France) became independent as Cameroon in 1960.
Cameroons (United Kingdom) northern territory joined Nigeria
and southern territory joined Cameroon (1961).
Tanganyika (United Kingdom) became independent in 1961. (In
1964 Tanganyika and the former protectorate of Zanzibar, which
had become independent in 1963, united as a single state under
the name of the United Republic of Tanzania).
Ruanda-Urundi (Belgium) voted to divide into the two states of
Rwanda and Burundi in 1962.
Western Samoa (New Zealand) became independent as Samoa in
1962.
Farmer UN Trust Territories
237

Nauru (administered by Australia on behalf of Australia, New
Zealand, and the United Kingdom) became independent in
1968.
New Guinea (Australia) united with the non-self-governing
territory of Papua, also administered by Australia, to become
the independent state of Papua New Guinea in 1975.
Trust Territory of the Paciﬁc Islands (United States):
(a) Federated States of Micronesia became fully self-governing
in free association with the United States in 1990.
(b) Republic of the Marshall Islands became fully self-governing
in free association with the United States in 1990.
(c) Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands became
fully self-governing as a commonwealth of the United States
in 1990.
(d) Palau became fully self-governing in free association with
the United States in 1994.
Remaining 
Non-Self-Governing Territories
Only sixteen non-self-governing territories outside the borders of
member states of the United Nations remained in 2005 (Table
5.4). This growth in the number of independent states is largely
responsible for the growth in UN membership from fifty-one
original members to 191 in 2004. All remaining non-self-govern-
ing territories, except Western Sahara and Gibraltar, are small is-
lands—nine in the Atlantic and Caribbean and ﬁve in the Paciﬁc
and Indian Oceans. Of course, it must always be remembered
that many of the borders of former colonies that are now member
states of the United Nations were drawn by colonial powers.
Therefore, there are areas within many of these states in which
the inhabitants are demanding self-government.
Public Links to the UN System
Public links to the UN System have escalated as a result of ex-
panding membership, the broadening UN System agenda, and
238
Facts and Data

the development of new methods for global communication. In-
creased linkage is a result of both outreach efforts by UN agencies
and efforts by public organizations to attain contact and inﬂuence
in the UN System. Eight types of public links to the UN System
are brieﬂy described below:
Public Links to the UN System
239
TABLE 5.4
Remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories in 2005
Territory
Administration
Area (sq.km.)
Population (1)
Africa
Western Sahara
(2)
266,000
(3)
Atlantic and Caribbean
Anguilla
United Kingdom
96
11,960
Bermuda
United Kingdom
53
6,997
British Virgin Is.
United Kingdom
153
23,000
Cayman Islands
United Kingdom
260
39,410
Falkland Islands (Malvinas)
United Kingdom
11,961
2,391
Montserrat
United Kingdom
98
5,000
St. Helena
United Kingdom
122
6,000
Turks & Caicos Is.
United Kingdom
430
24,000
US Virgin Is.
United States
340
108,612
Europe
Gibraltar
United Kingdom
6
26,703
Paciﬁc and Indian Oceans
American Samoa
United States
197
57,291
Guam
United States
549
154,805
New Caledonia (4)
France
35,853
215,904
Pitcairn
United Kingdom
5
46
Tokelau
New Zealand
10
1,518
(1)  From estimates or censuses cited in United Nations documents issued in 2002.
(2)  On 26 February 1976, Spain informed the Secretary-General that as of that date it had
terminated its presence in the Territory of the Sahara and deemed it necessary to place on
record that Spain considered itself thenceforth exempt from any responsibility of any
international nature in connection with the administration of the Territory, in view of the
cessation of its participation in the temporary administration established for the Territory. In
1990, the General Assembly reafﬁrmed that the question of Western Sahara was a question
of decolonization which remained to be completed by the people of Western Sahara.
(3)  Not available.
(4)  On 2 December 1986, the General Assembly determined that New Caledonia was a Non-
Self-Governing Territory
(www.un.org/Depts/dpi/decolonization/trust3.htm)

1. The UN Department of Public Information has a
network of public information ofﬁces in seventy-
seven countries around the world.
2. The UN Department of Public Information also has
an NGO section that provides a number of
information services to NGOs at UN Headquarters.
3. The Cyberschoolbus project of the UN Global
Teaching and Learning Project is an online service
that provides a wide range of information on
current activities of UN agencies for young people
and teachers.
4. Efforts have emerged, with involvement of the
secretary-general, to inﬂuence the norms and
standards of international business.
5. The Non-Governmental Organization Liaison
Service (NGLS), supported by several UN agencies,
attempts to strengthen UN-NGO dialogue and
cooperation.
6. The World Federation of UN Associations has
chapters around the world whose goal is to enhance
public knowledge about, and involvement in, issues
on UN System agendas.
7. One chapter of the World Federation of UN
Associations, the UN Association USA, is of
particular relevance to people living in the United
States.
8. As all local communities have developed growing
linkages to the world, local authorities have begun
to seek links to the UN System.
Network of UN Information Centers
The network of UN Information Centers (UNICs), UN Informa-
tion Services (UNIS), and UN Offices (UNOs) links the head-
quarters with people around the world. Located in seventy-
seven countries, these field offices of the Department of Public
Information help local communities to obtain up-to-date in-
formation on the United Nations and its activities. Eleven of-
fices are in the Americas, including Washington, D.C., and Mex-
ico City.
240
Facts and Data

The Non-Governmental Organization (NGO)
Section of the Department of Public
Information (DPI)
The Non-Governmental Organization Section of the Department
of Public Information at UN Headquarters serves as the liaison
between the department and close to 1,400 NGOs from all re-
gions of the world that are associated with the DPI. The goal of
this effort is to enable NGOs to disseminate information about
the United Nations to their constituencies around the world and
thereby enhance support for the United Nations at the grassroots.
Among the services it provides to associated NGOs, the
DPI/NGO Section:
1. Organizes, in collaboration with the NGO/DPI Executive
Committee, the annual DPI/NGO conference
2. Organizes weekly brieﬁngs on UN-related issues
3. Conducts an annual orientation program for newly
accredited NGO representatives
4. Organizes quarterly communications workshops
5. Maintains the NGO Resource Center, which offers access
to current UN documents, press releases, DPI and UN
System publications, and a video-lending library with a
collection of UN System videos
6. Provides monthly mailings of UN information materials
to associated NGOs
7. Processes UN passes for NGO representatives
8. Processes NGO applications for associative status with DPI
9. Publishes the Directory of NGOs associated with DPI.
(www.un.org/dpi/ngosection)
Cyberschoolbus
The United Nations Cyberschoolbus was created in 1996 as the
online education component of the Global Teaching and Learning
Project, whose mission is to promote education about interna-
tional issues and the United Nations. The Global Teaching and
Learning Project produces teaching materials and activities de-
signed for educational use (at primary, intermediate, and sec-
ondary school levels) and for training teachers. The vision of this
Public Links to the UN System
241

project is to provide educational resources (both online and in
print) to students growing up in a world undergoing increased
globalization.
The UN Cyberschoolbus disseminates information and re-
sources about international affairs and brings together diverse
communities of students and educators from around the world.
The Cyberschoolbus site makes available a number of interactive
activities and projects that teach students about global issues. The
specific aims of the Cyberschoolbus are: (1) to create an online
global education community, (2) to create educational action pro-
jects to show students that they have a role in ﬁnding solutions to
global problems, (3) to give students a voice in global issues, and
(4) to provide high-quality teaching resources to a wide range 
of educators in a cost-effective manner (www.un.org/Pubs/
CyberSchoolBus/index.htm).
Business and the United Nations
The UN relationship with the business community has become
more important as the role of business in generating employment
and wealth through international trade, investment, and ﬁnance
has grown and as UN member states have increasingly stressed
the importance of private investment in development. At the
same time, the business community is dependent on UN efforts
to provide norms and standards in such diverse areas as trade
laws, shipping, aviation, telecommunications, postal services,
and statistics for addressing issues of vulnerability, poverty, envi-
ronmental degradation, and social conﬂict.
In an address to the World Economic Forum in January 1999,
UN Secretary-General KoﬁAnnan challenged business leaders to
join an international initiative—the Global Compact—that would
bring companies together with UN agencies, labor, and civil soci-
ety to support compact principles in the areas of human rights,
labor, the environment, and anticorruption. Global Compact ac-
tivities were launched at UN Headquarters in New York in July
2000. Global Compact leaders held a summit in June 2004 at UN
Headquarters in New York.
The Global Compact seeks to advance responsible corporate
citizenship so that business can be part of the solution to the chal-
lenges of globalization.
242
Facts and Data

Established by Secretary-General KoﬁAnnan in March 1998,
the UN Fund for International Partnerships (UNFIP) was set up
as an autonomous trust fund, headed by an executive director
and operating under the leadership of the UN deputy secretary-
general. The UNFIP brings together representatives of corpora-
tions, foundations, civil society, and academia to work together
with the United Nations for the common purpose of assisting
those less fortunate around the world. With a $1 million ﬁfteen-
year contribution, Ted Turner established the UN Foundation
(UNF). The UN Fund for International Partnerships (UNFIP), in
partnership with the UNF, serves as an autonomous trust fund
that encourages greater private-sector investment in high-impact
initiatives.
Of particular relevance in the United States is the Business
Council for the United Nations (BCUN), an activity of the UN As-
sociation-USA. The BCUN took the lead in organizing business
for the 2002 Monterrey International Conference on Financing for
Development, organized by the United Nations, IMF, World
Bank, and WTO. A goal of the conference was to facilitate rela-
tionships between the United Nations and businesses in order 
to develop “business solutions for a better world” and private-
sector leverage for the United Nations’ Millennium Development
Goals. A series of ongoing conferences and working groups
brings the United Nations and UN specialized agencies together
with investment banks, ratings agencies, pension and mutual
fund managers, insurance companies, and other corporations to
work on innovative means of mobilizing private-sector capital
for development (www.un.org/partners/business/index.asp).
United Nations Non-Governmental 
Liaison Service (NGLS)
The United Nations Non-Governmental Liaison Service (NGLS)
is a small interagency program with ofﬁces in Geneva and New
York and a combined staff of ten. It was established in Geneva
and New York in 1975 and 1976 respectively, with the aim of
strengthening UN-NGO dialogue and cooperation. The NGLS is
concerned with the entire UN development agenda, including
economic and social development, sustainable development, hu-
manitarian emergencies, human rights (including women’s
Public Links to the UN System
243

rights), and related issues such as disarmament and democratiza-
tion. Reﬂecting its systemwide character, the NGLS is currently
supported by seventeen UN System organizations and reports
annually to its program and coordination meeting (PCM), held
every spring and attended by representatives of those organiza-
tions. The coordinator of the NGLS reports to the UN Communi-
cations Group (UNCG), its governing body, and through the
UNCG to the UN Chief Executives Board (CEB), the highest ad-
ministrative committee of the UN System, chaired by the secre-
tary-general (www.un-ngls.org).
World Federation of 
UN Associations (WFUNA)
The World Federation of UN Associations was created in 1946—
one year after the establishment of the United Nations. Through
UN associations in over 100 member states, it is now a global
network of hundreds of thousands of people. The WFUNA en-
ables people around the world to connect with each other on
critical global issues that reach from peace and human rights to
the spread of democracy, equitable development, and interna-
tional justice. The WFUNA lists its goals as: (1) seeking to ensure
that the United Nations is relevant to the lives of the peoples it
exists to serve; (2) campaigning in support of the United Na-
tions, particularly through priorities such as the Millennium De-
velopment Goals, human rights, peace and conflict prevention,
and bridging the digital divide; (3) educating for global citizen-
ship through research and publications, educational resources,
and organizing Model UN events; and (4) partnering and build-
ing alliances with other organizations whose objectives include
support for the United Nations and its development. The
WFUNA has ofﬁces at UN Headquarters in New York City and
Geneva (www.wfuna.org).
United Nations Association 
of the USA (UNA-USA)
The United Nations Association of the USA is a member of
WFUNA. It has 175 community-based chapters and divisions,
244
Facts and Data

with more than 20,000 members nationwide. It also has a council of
organizations, with over 100 organizations as members. The pro-
grams of UNA-USA include: (1) the Adopt-A-Mineﬁeld Campaign
that aims to empower people everywhere to take action against the
global landmine crisis—one of the world’s most pervasive prob-
lems; (2) the American NGO Coalition for the International Crimi-
nal Court (AMICC), a coalition of nongovernmental organizations
committed to achieving full U.S. support for the International
Criminal Court; (3) the Business Council for the United Nations, a
network of partnerships in economic development, health, educa-
tion, and technology that advances the common interest of the
United Nations and business in a more prosperous and peaceful
world; (4) the Global Health Initiative to inform Americans about
the United Nations’ ongoing efforts to improve children’s health;
and (5) the Model United Nations, which has been broadened by
the UNA-USA’s Global Classrooms Program to bring the simula-
tion into the classroom (www.unausa.org).
Local Authority Links 
to the UN System
Because of increasing awareness of their direct linkage to other
cities around the world and the common interests they share with
them, local authorities have developed a number of global and
regional organizations. Representatives of some of these organi-
zations have banded together to place their concerns on agendas
of organizations of the UN System. At the same time, both mem-
bers of secretariats of UN organizations and representatives of
states have become increasingly aware that successful implemen-
tation of UN programs on issues such as development, environ-
ment, and human rights require cooperative involvement of city
authorities, as well as governments of member states. Below are
listed an array of efforts to place issues confronted by local au-
thorities on UN System agendas. Of course, UN-Habitat, the UN
Settlements Program (UNHSP), plays a key role because of its
mandate from the UN General Assembly to promote socially and
environmentally sustainable towns. But the list of programs be-
low also reveals involvement of local authorities with the World
Bank, UNDP, UNICEF, WHO, UNEP, UNESCO, UNAIDS,
UNDP, UNFPA, and UNDCP (Alger 2003, 96–103).
Public Links to the UN System
245

Nineteenth-Century Roots of 
Organizations in the UN System
In 1954 Gerard Mangone republished a list of nineteenth-century
conferences (Mangone 1954, 93–97) taken from a 1907 issue of the
American Journal of International Law (Vol. 1, Part II, 1907,
808–829). The conferences listed below were chosen from this list
with the aim of offering concrete evidence of the nineteenth-
246
Facts and Data
TABLE 5.5
Local Authority Links to the UN System
UN Advisory Committee on Local Authorities, www.unchs.org/committee
UN Habitat (UNHSP), www.unhsp,org
World Urban Forum (1st session, April–May 2002), www.unhabitat.org/uf.htm  
(Merger of Urban Environmental Forum and International Forum on 
Urban Poverty)
Urban Managements Program (UMP)
Sustainable Cities Program (SCP)
Municipal Development Program (MDP)
Global Campaign on Urban Governance
Urban Sanitation and Solid Waste Management
World Bank/UN Habitat (UNHSP) Collaboration
Cities Alliance, www.cities alliance.org
World Bank, Municipal Development Program, www.worldbank.org
Local Economic Development Specialists (LED) in Urban Development Sector
UNDP Urban Mangement Program, www.undp.org
World Alliance of Cities Against Poverty, http://mirror.undp.org/switzerland/wacap
Initiative Facility for Urban Environment (LIFE)
Colloquium of Mayors, 1995 (New York, before Copenhagen Social Summit)
UNICEF Mayors Defenders of Children Initiative, periodical meetings of mayors, 
www.unicef.org
International Child Friendly Cities, www.childfriendlycities.org
WHO: Regional Ofﬁce for Europe
Healthy Cities network
Urban Governance Programme, Copenhagen
UNEP Environmental Management Systems (EMS) for Local Authorities
UNAIDS Alliance of Mayors Initiative for Community Action on AIDS 
at the Local Level, www.amicaall.or
UN Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
UNESCO Cities for Peace Network
World Summit on Sustainable Development, 2002, Local Government Session

century roots of the present UN System. A few conferences have
been added from other sources.
1851
First International Sanitary Conference, Paris
1853
General Conference as to Statistics, Brussels
Maritime Conference for the Adoption of a Uniform 
System of Meteorological Observation at Sea, Brussels
1863
Conference of Paris on a Postal Union, led to Berne 
conference 1874
1864
First International Conference on Weights and Measures,
Berlin
Conference of London on Marine Signaling
1865
Conference of Paris on Marine Signaling
Conference of Paris on Telegraphic Correspondence
1866
Conference of Paris as to Navigation of the Danube
1867
Monetary Conference of Paris
1870
International Commission on the Metric System, set up 
an International Bureau of Weights and Measures in
Paris in 1875
1872
International Telegraph Commission Conference, Rome, 
convention signed by twenty-one states
1874
Conference on Postal Union, Berne. Permanent bureau at 
Berne since 1875
1875
Conference on International Telegraphy, St. Petersburg
1878
Conference on Industrial Property, Paris. Reconvened in 
1883 and formed an International Union for the
Protection of Industrial Property with a headquarters
in Berne.
Monetary Diplomatic Conference, Paris, initiated by the 
United States. Set up permanent international bureau
in Berne
1879
London conference on International Telegraphy 
Convention, signed by nineteen states.
1880
International Penitentiary Commission
1883
London Conference on Navigation of the Danube
1884
Washington conference adopted Greenwich, England, as 
Prime Meridian.
1890
International Bureau for the Publication of Customs Tariff
1892
Berne Conference on Literary and Artistic Property, with 
a bureau in Berne, consolidated with that for protection
of industrial property
1889
Conference on International Telegraphy, St. Petersburg
Nineteenth-Century Roots of Organizations in the UN System
247

Berne Conference to promote the well-being of the 
working classes
International Marine Congress on Uniform Rules to 
Secure Life and Property at Sea, Washington on the call
of the United States. Pronounced against a permanent
international maritime commission.
1893
International Sanitary Conference for Repression of 
Epidemic Disease, Dresden
1896
International Maritime Committee formed, Hamburg
Conference on Protection of Artistic and Literary 
Property, Berne.
1898
Sanitary Conference against Plague, Venice
1899 Permanent Council for the Exploration of the Sea
References
Alger, Chadwick F., 2003, “Searching for Democratic Potential in Emerg-
ing Global Governance,” in Bruce Morrison, ed., Transnational Democracy
in Critical and Comparative Perspective: Democracy’s Range Reconsidered.
Ashgate, UK: Aldershot, 87–105.
American Journal of International Law, “Selected List of International Con-
ferences 1850 to 1905,” Vol. 1, Part II, 1907, 808–829.
Business Council for the United Nations (BCUN), www.un.org/
partners/business/index.asp.
Citizens for Global Solutions, www.globalsolutions.org.
Cyber School Bus, www.un.org/Pubs/CyberSchoolBus/index.htm.
Dean, Thalif, 2004, “UN Global Taxes Centre Stage,” Inter Press Service,
July 8, 2004 (available at www.ips.org).
Global Policy Forum, www.globalpolicyforum.org.
International Bill of Human Rights, www.ohchr.org/english/about/
publications/docs/fs2.htm.
International Court of Justice Statute, www.icj-cij.org/icjwww/
ibasicdocuments/Basetext/istatute.htm.
International Criminal Court, www.icc-cpi.int.
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), www.un.org/ictr.
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY),
www.un.org/icty.
League of Nations Covenant, www.ola.bc.ca/online/cf/documents/
1924LeagueNations.html.
248
Facts and Data

Mangone, Gerald J., 1954, A Short History of International Organizations.
New York: McGraw Hill.
Non-Self-Governing Territories in 2005, www.un.org/Depts/dpi/
decolonization/trust3.htm.
Paul, James A., and Katarina Wahlberg, 2002, “Global Taxes for Global
Priorities,” published by Global Policy Forum, WEED, and the Heinrich
Böll Foundation. (Available at www.globalpolicyforum.org). UN Action
Against Terrorism, www.un.org/terrorism/.
United Nations Association of the USA, www.unausa.org.
UN Charter, www.un.org/aboutun/charter.
UN Civilian Peace, www.un.org/Depts/dpko/dpko/civpol/4.htm.
UN Dept. of Information, NGO Section, www.un.org/dpi/ngosection.
UN Financing, Alternative Sources, globalpolicy.org/socecon/glotax/
index.htm.
UN Global Conferences, www.un.org/News/facts/confercs.htm.
UN General Assembly Presidents, www.un.org/ga/55/session/prdts.
UN Information Centers Worldwide Directory, www.un.org/
aroundworld/unics/english/directory.htm.
UN Member States, www.un.org/Overview/unmember.html.
UN Peacekeeping, Overview http://www.un.org/Depts/dpko/dpko/
index.asp.
UN Peacekeeping, Present and Past Operations www.un.org/Depts/
dpko/dpko/text.htm.
UN Peacemaking and Peacebuilding Missions, www.un.org/Depts/
dpa/prev_dip/fst_prev_dip.htm.
World Federation of UN Associations, www.wfuna.org.
Websites for all Agencies in the UN System: Go to un.org, click on “about the
United Nations,” then click on “Organization Chart of the UN System,”
then click on the name of the agency that you wish to access.
References
249


6
Alternative Futures
for the UN System
E
arlier chapters in this volume have emphasized ways in
which ever-changing technology has made human linkage
ever more rapid and distant. As a result of efforts to cope with
these changes, the UN System has slowly undergone fundamen-
tal changes since its founding. In recent years there have been
many proposals for changes in the UN System that are intended
to enable it to more effectively cope with present challenges, as
well as those that are foreseen in the future. Some of these pro-
posals are focused on speciﬁc issues, such as development, and
others are focused on speciﬁc organizations, such as the Security
Council, but more recently several proposals, such as the Secre-
tary-General’s High-Level Panel on Threats, Challenges and
Change, take a UN System view.
This chapter is essential in the light of the fact that continu-
ing change in the UN System is inevitable and that efforts to cope
with this change require a vision of a preferred UN System to-
ward which this change should be guided. Earlier chapters have
indicated that this vision must be focused on the entire UN Sys-
tem because experience has demonstrated that organizations
throughout the system have roles to play in long-term peace
building.
The proposals that follow quickly indicate that this is a very
challenging task because, as earlier chapters have revealed, the
actors in emerging global governance range from the local to the
global. But they will acquaint readers with a feast of options and
challenge them to begin defining their preferred future for the
251

UN System, one that will inevitably undergo constant change as
their knowledge about the UN System and world linkages con-
tinues to grow. Despite the difﬁculty of this task it is one that re-
sponsible citizens in a democracy must undertake.
“Democracy is on trial in the world, on a more colossal scale
than ever before,” Charles Fletcher Dole, an American clergyman
and author, wrote in his book, The Spirit of Democracy, in 1906.
They are still very relevant in the present world.
The proposals that follow have been deliberately selected
from many possibilities so that they reﬂect the thoughts of a di-
versity of sources. They come from a Millennium Summit of all
UN member states, panels appointed by the UN secretary-gen-
eral, ofﬁcials of individual states, regional organizations of states,
global and national NGOs, and from scholars from around the
world. They also have been chosen to indicate that people in-
volved in a great diversity of governmental and civil society ac-
tivities can play roles in shaping the future of the UN System.
This point is clearly made in the title of the last section of this
chapter: “There Are Tasks for Everybody.”
Table of Contents
The Millennium Project
Secretary General’s High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and
Change
Cardoso Panel: United Nations–Civil Society Relations
Panel on UN Peace Operations (Brahimi Report on
Peacekeeping)
Security Council Reform
Reform of the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC)
UN Parliamentary Assembly
Asian Civil Society Statement on UN–Civil Society Relations
There Are Tasks for Everybody
The Millennium Project
At the UN Millennium Summit in September 2000, a high-level
plenary meeting of the sixtieth session of the General Assembly,
252
Alternative Futures for the UN System

world leaders adopted the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs). They set targets for reducing poverty, hunger, disease,
illiteracy, environmental degradation, and discrimination against
women by 2015. In support of these goals, UN Secretary-General
KoﬁAnnan and the administrator of the UN Development Pro-
gram (UNDP), Mark Malloch Brown, launched the Millennium
Project to recommend the best strategies for achieving the MDGs.
The Millennium Project will develop a plan for enabling develop-
ing countries to meet the MDGs by 2015.
The Millennium Project’s research focuses on identifying the
operational priorities, organizational means of implementation,
and ﬁnancing structures necessary to achieve the MDGs. Ten the-
matically orientated task forces are comprised of representatives
from academia, the public and private sectors, civil society orga-
nizations, and UN agencies, with the majority of participants
coming from outside the UN System. The ﬁfteen to twenty mem-
bers of each task force are global leaders in their areas, selected
on the basis of their technical expertise and practical experience.
The Millennium Project will report its ﬁndings directly to the UN
secretary-general and the administrator of the UNDP. The ten
task forces focus on:
1. Poverty and economic development
2. Hunger
3. Education and gender equality
4. Child health and maternal health
5. HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis, and access to
essential medicines
6. Environmental sustainability
7. Water and sanitation 
8. Improving the lives of slum dwellers
9. Open, rule-based trading systems
10. Science, technology, and innovation
The Millennium Project is directed by Professor Jeffrey Sachs
of Columbia University, who serves as special advisor to the sec-
retary-general on the Millennium Development Goals. Through
his involvement, some of the project’s research is conducted at
the Earth Institute of Columbia University, which Sachs directs. A
UN experts group oversees UN participation in the project. This
group consists of senior representatives from UN agencies,
whose role is to ensure that the ten task forces of the Millennium
The Millennium Project
253

Project have access to and make full use of the knowledge, expe-
rience, and capacities of the UN System.
The Millennium Project is part of the broader UN strategy
for implementing the Millennium Declaration. This strategy con-
sists of four elements:
1. The Millennium Project, which analyzes policy options
and will develop a plan of implementation for achieving
the Millennium Development Goals.
2. The Millennium Campaign, which mobilizes political
support for the Millennium Declaration among
developed and developing countries. This is led by
Eveline Herfkens, the secretary-general’s executive
coordinator for the MDG campaign.
3. Country-level monitoring of progress towards achieving
the Millennium Development Goals, led by the UN
Development Group.
4. Operational country-level activities, coordinated across
agencies through the UN Development Group, which
help individual countries implement policies necessary
for achieving the Millennium Development Goals.
(www.unmillenniumproject.org)
Secretary General’s High-Level Panel on
Threats, Challenges and Change
In a speech to the General Assembly in September 2003 Secretary-
General KoﬁAnnan warned member states that the United Na-
tions had reached a fork in the road and must now choose be-
tween rising to the challenge to meet new threats or risk erosion
in the face of mounting discord between states and unilateral ac-
tion by them. He asserted that “[t]his may be a moment no less
decisive than 1945 itself, when the United Nations was founded”
(www.un.org/News/Press/docs/2003/sgsm8891.doc.htm). In
order to facilitate the development of UN capacity to cope with
new threats the Secretary General appointed a High-Level Panel
on Threats, Challenges and Change with sixteen members from
Thailand (chair), China, Japan, Pakistan, India, Australia, Egypt,
Ghana, Tanzania, France, Norway, the United Kingdom, Russia,
254
Alternative Futures for the UN System

Brazil, Uruguay, and the United States. A text of the report “A
More Secure World: Our Shared Responsibility” and an executive
summary are available at www.un.org/secureworld.
The panel report “A More Secure World: Our Shared Re-
sponsibility” recommends 101 steps that are responsive to six
“clusters” of threats:
1. Economic and social threats, including poverty, infectious
diseases and environmental degradation
2. Interstate conﬂict
3. Internal conﬂict, including civil war, genocide, and other
large-scale atrocities
4. Nuclear, radiological, chemical, and biological weapons
5. Terrorism
6. Transnational organized crime
Citizens for Global Solutions, which identifies itself as “a
grassroots membership organization,” with headquarters in
Washington, D.C., has chosen these ﬁfteen items as “some of the
main recommendations of the report”:
1. Deﬁne terrorism as actions “intended to cause death or
serious bodily harm to civilians or non-combatants, when
the purpose . . . is to intimidate a population or to compel
a Government or an international organization to do or to
abstain from doing any act.”
2. Reform the membership in the Commission on Human
Rights to be universal with prominent human rights
ﬁgures as the heads of national delegations.
3. Establish a Peacebuilding Commission to identify and
assist countries that risk sliding towards collapse and
“marshal and sustain the efforts of the international
community in post-conﬂict peacebuilding over whatever
period may be necessary.”
4. Endorsement of the emerging norm of a responsibility to
protect civilians from large-scale violence. When a state
fails to protect its civilians, the international community
then has a responsibility to act to protect civilians as
necessary and use force as a last resort.
5. Sets out ﬁve basic criteria for the Security Council to
consider to legitimize the authorization of the use of 
Secretary General’s High-Level Panel
255

force: the seriousness of threat, the purpose for using
force, if it is the last resort, proportional means, and
what is the balance of consequences.
6. Create at the UN a small corps of senior police ofﬁcers
(50–100) to plan and organize the international
civilian police operations.
7. Allow the UN to fund regional peacekeeping
operations authorized by the Security Council with
assessed contributions.
8. Re-engage on the problem of global warming and
begin new negotiations on a new long-term strategy
to reduce global warming beyond the period covered
by the Kyoto Protocol.
9. UN Security Council should refer cases of suspected
war crimes and crimes against humanity to the
International Criminal Court.
10. UN Security Council should slow the spread of
weapons using an explicit pledge of “collective
action” against any state or group that launches a
nuclear attack or even threatens such an attack on a
non-nuclear-weapon state.
11. All states should “pledge a commitment to non-
proliferation and disarmament,” ratify the
comprehensive test-ban treaty and support talks on a
Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty.
12. A State’s notice of withdrawal from the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons should prompt
immediate veriﬁcation of its compliance with the
Treaty.
13. Reform the sanctions system to include routine
monitoring mechanisms, develop improved
guidelines and reporting procedures to assist states in
sanctions implementation, and ensure an auditing
mechanism is in place.
14. Two proposals to increase the size of the Security
Council from  ﬁfteen to twenty-four members and a
review of the composition of the Security Council in
2020.
15. Amend the UN Charter by deleting all references in
the Charter to the World War II era concept of “enemy
States” and eliminate the UN’s outdated Trusteeship
Council and the Military Staff committee.
256
Alternative Futures for the UN System

(This summary is available at the website of Citizens for
Global Solutions, www.globalsolutions.org/programs/intl_
instit/UN_ref/HLP_analysis.html, and is reprinted with their
permission.)
Cardoso Panel: 
United Nations–Civil Society Relations
The Cardoso Panel of Eminent Persons was established in Febru-
ary 2003 by Secretary-General KoﬁAnnan to review past and cur-
rent practices in UN-civil society relations and make recommen-
dations on how the United Nations’ relationship with civil
society, as well as the private sector (i.e., business) and parlia-
ments, could be improved. The creation of this panel was respon-
sive to signiﬁcant growth in the number of civil society organiza-
tions now involved at headquarters of UN organizations, as well
as the fact that UN conferences on women, racism, and the envi-
ronment, for example, have encouraged a new type of interaction
between the United Nations and civil society. Fernando Henrique
Cardoso, a former Brazilian president, chaired a panel of eleven
additional members affiliated with governments, nongovern-
mental organizations, academia, and the private sector: Bagher
Asadi (Iran), Manuel Castells (Spain), Birgitta Dahl (Sweden),
Peggy Dulany (United States), André Erdös (Hungary), Juan
Mayr (Colombia), Malini Mehra (India), Kumi Naidoo (South
Africa), Mary Racelis (Philippines), Prakash Ratilal (Mozam-
bique), and Aminata Traoré (Mali). The panel issued its report in
June 2004.
The report, “We the Peoples: Civil Society, the United Na-
tions and Global Governance,” advocates a shift in how the
United Nations organizes its work, from a traditional approach in
which governments of states develop agreements on global is-
sues that are then transmitted to these governments for imple-
mentation, to a process that includes additional actors. It ob-
serves that the shift is already underway, with the traditional
procedure for policy analysis and action being supplemented by
“global policy networks” that bring together constituencies that
include local governments, civil society, business, and parliamen-
tarians with the traditional representatives of the executive
branches of states.
Cardoso Panel: United Nations–Civil Society Relations
257

Former Brazilian President Fernando Cardoso told corre-
spondents at a headquarters briefing on June 21, 2004: “The
world has changed, and the United Nations must change, too.”
He stressed that “[c]onstructively engaging with civil society is
no longer an option for the United Nations, but a necessity.”
(www.un.org/News/briefings/docs/2004/Cardoso062104.doc.
htm). He emphasized the need to expand the idea of multilateral-
ism to include multiple actors, including civil society and busi-
ness, as well as central and local governments. He advocated
stronger links between the local and global levels that he believed
would help overcome democratic deﬁcits in global governance.
The panel proposed that the General Assembly, rather than
the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC), become the entry
point for nongovernmental organizations to the United Nations,
in an accreditation process that depends less on politics and more
on skills and expertise. In addition, it suggested ways of reducing
the imbalance in access to UN organizations between civil society
groups in the “northern” and “southern” states, including recom-
mending that a fund be created to assist southern NGOs in at-
tending UN activities.
The panel states that priority should be placed on engage-
ment at the country level, mentioning both civil society organiza-
tions and involvement with elected representatives, including
both national parliaments and local authorities. It recommends
broadening from representative to participatory democracy by
asserting that traditional democracy aggregates citizens by com-
munities of neighborhood (their electoral districts), but in partici-
patory democracy citizens aggregate in communities of interest.
Modern information and communication technologies make it
possible for these communities of interest to be global as readily
as local. In his press brieﬁng Cardoso observed that traditionally
governments came together to discuss a new issue, reach consen-
sus, and then spur action by governments of states and interstate
organizations. But he noted that today it is increasingly likely
that a civil society movement and public opinion will bring a new
issue to global attention and that initial action will be taken by
coalitions of governments, civil society and others.
The report proposes increased involvement in the General
Assembly by civil society organizations. A correspondent asked
whether this could lead to tension between representatives of
state governments and NGOs in cases such as the invasion of
Iraq. Cardoso responded that the Security Council had already
258
Alternative Futures for the UN System

established successful contact with civil society, especially in im-
plementing humanitarian decisions following conflicts. He ex-
plained that civil society organizations would have no seat or
vote in the General Assembly, but would simply be allowed a
voice.
The report has brought a variety of responses. Not surpris-
ingly the report has been endorsed by local authorities, who are
pleased to be newly recognized as participants in UN politics. For
example, the presidents of United Cities and Local Governments
(UCLG)—the mayor of Paris, Bertrand Delanoë; the mayor of
Pretoria (South Africa), Smangaliso Mkhatshwa; and the mayor
of São Paulo (Brazil), Marta Suplicy—have endorsed the propos-
als of the Cardoso Report. The report singles out United Cities
and Local Governments (UCLG) as an important means whereby
people at the local level are represented in global governance. It
proposes that the UN regard the UCLG as an advisory body on
all governance matters. It proposes the adoption of a resolution
afﬁrming and respecting local autonomy as a universal principle.
The presidents of the UCLG have called on governments to adopt
these recommendations when they are debated in the UN Gen-
eral Assembly and have pledged to work closely with the United
Nations to implement them.
On the other hand, broadening the recommended array of
participants, including local authorities and the private sector
(defined as profit-making activities) is seen by some NGOs as
weakening the role of NGOs. A number of NGOs issued sharply
critical statements over the summer of 2004, and some UN gov-
ernmental delegations expressed strong displeasure too. Criti-
cism was sharpened by rumors that the Non-Governmental Liai-
son Service (NGLS) might fall victim to the Cardoso process
(www.un.org/reform/panel.htm).
Panel on UN Peace Operations
(Brahimi Report on Peacekeeping)
Chaired by Lakhdar Brahimi, an Algerian former foreign minis-
ter, the UN Peace Operations Panel, with ten members from all
six continents, issued its report in August 2000. This group of ten
experts on UN peace operations was appointed by Secretary-
General KoﬁAnnan to respond to peacekeeping challenges con-
Panel on UN Peace Operations
259

fronted by the UN. The first paragraph of the Executive Sum-
mary of the Brahimi Report includes this statement: “Without re-
newed commitment on the part of Member States, signiﬁcant in-
stitutional change and increased financial support, the United
Nations will not be capable of executing the critical peacekeeping
and peace-building tasks that the Member States assign to it in
coming months and years” (www.un.org/peace/reports/peace_
operations).
Space permits only a brief summary of some of the main
points of this “far-reaching report by an independent panel.” A
UN press release, 23 August 2000, issued the following brief sum-
mary of main points in the lengthy report. This summary is
reprinted below. It is available at www.un.org/peace/reports/
peace_operations, along with the full report.
1. Doctrine and Strategy: The Panel calls for more effective
conﬂict prevention strategies, pointing out that
prevention is “far preferable for those who would
otherwise suffer the consequences of war, and a less
costly option for the international community than
military action, emergency humanitarian relief, or
reconstruction after a war has run its course.” It says
peacekeepers must be able to defend themselves and
their mandate, with “robust rules of engagement,”
against those who renege on commitments or seek to
undermine peace accords by violence. And it urges the
Secretariat to draw up a plan for developing better peace-
building strategies. Peacekeepers and peace-builders, it
says, are “inseparable partners,” since only a self-
sustaining peace “offers a ready exit to peacekeeping
forces.”
2. Mandates. The Secretariat “must tell the Security Council
what it needs to know, not what it wants to hear, when
formulating or changing mission mandates.”
3. Transitional civil administration. A panel of international
legal experts should explore the idea of an interim
criminal code for use in places where the United Nations
is given temporary executive powers (as currently in
Kosovo and East Timor), pending the re-establishment of
local rule of law and law enforcement capacity.
4. Timelines: “Traditional” United Nations peacekeeping
operations (sent to monitor ceaseﬁres and separations of
260
Alternative Futures for the UN System

forces after inter-State wars) should be fully deployed
within 30 days; more complex peace operations, sent to
help end intra-State conﬂicts, within 90 days.
5. Personnel: Member States should work together to form
“coherent, multinational, brigade-sized forces,” ready
for effective deployment within these timelines; and
should each establish a national pool of civilian police
officers. The Panel does not call for a standing United
Nations army, but says the Secretariat should establish
“on-call” lists of about 100 military and 100 police
officers and experts, from national armies and police
forces, who would be available on seven days’ notice to
establish new mission headquarters. Conditions of
service for civilian specialists should also be revised so
that the United Nations can attract more qualified
personnel, and reward good performance with better
career prospects.
6. Speed and efﬁciency: The Secretary-General should be
allowed funds to start planning a mission before the
Security Council approves it, so that when approved it
can be deployed quickly. Field missions should be given
greater freedom to manage their own budgets. Additional
ready-made mission “start-up kits” should be maintained
at the UN Logistics Base in Brindisi, Italy.
7. Funding for peacekeeping support: The Panel remarks that,
after 52 years, it is time to treat peacekeeping as a “core
activity” of the United Nations rather than a “temporary
responsibility.” Headquarters support for it should
therefore be funded mainly through the regular United
Nations budget, instead of the current “Support Account”
which has to be justiﬁed year by year and post by post.
Security Council Reform
It is widely recognized that the Security Council requires reforms
that reﬂect changes in the world during the sixty years that have
passed since its founding. These changes include a fourfold in-
crease in UN membership. In 1965 the UN Charter was amended
to increase Security Council membership from eleven to ﬁfteen,
but the Council still offers permanent membership with a veto
Security Council Reform
261

only to the ﬁve major victors in World War II. Despite the geo-
graphical representation of all global regions in the ten elected
members, overall Security Council membership remains unbal-
anced in favor of the industrialized North. The ongoing Security
Council reform debate includes many reform proposals. An effort
has been made here to acquaint the reader with a range of per-
spectives in different parts of the world. They offer insight on
why, despite many proposals and many debates, no agreement
has yet been reached.
Expanding the Council from ﬁfteen to twenty-four members
is one of the main reform recommendations. There are two com-
peting models. The ﬁrst one would add six new permanent mem-
bers without veto powers—two from Africa, two from Asia, and
one each from the Americas and Europe. It would also add three
nonpermanent members with a two-year term like the ones cur-
rently elected to sit on the body. The second option would add
eight new seats for semipermanent members, which would be
elected for four years and could have their terms extended. Africa,
Asia, Europe, and the Americas would each get two of these seats
and one additional nonpermanent member would also be added.
The ﬁrst model is supported by Germany, with hopes that it
would secure one of the new permanent seats. Japan, Brazil, and
India also support this plan and hope for permanent seats for
themselves. While Britain, France, and Russia have indicated
support for the aspirations of these four countries, the United
States has so far refused to give Germany a nod of approval. The
Bush administration in Washington has, however, voiced its sup-
port for Japan. It is reported that Nigeria, South Africa, and Egypt
would compete for the African seats.
Support for the second version includes Italy, a strong oppo-
nent of handing a permanent seat to Germany. Italy is concerned
that giving a Security Council seat to Germany, in addition to the
two permanent seats already occupied by France and Britain,
would weaken its role in the European Union. Others favoring
the plan to introduce eight semipermanent seats include Pak-
istan—which rejects India’s place on the Council—and Mexico
and Argentina, which oppose Brazil’s claims.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan has stated its posi-
tion on Security Council enlargement with points that are quoted
below.
1. It is absolutely necessary to expand the permanent
membership with the addition of both developed and
262
Alternative Futures for the UN System

developing countries which possess the ability and will
to assume global responsibility for international peace
and security. Japan is prepared to assume greater
responsibilities as a permanent member of the reformed
Security Council.
2. Considering the tremendous increase in the number of
United Nations Member States, it is also essential to
expand the non-permanent membership.
3. In order to maintain both effectiveness and
representativeness, the appropriate size of the expanded
Security Council should be twenty-four members, with
the addition of two developed and three developing
countries to the permanent membership and four non-
permanent members.
4. When allotting the expanded Council a new permanent
member and non-permanent seats to regional groups, it
should be up to each group to decide how to elect the
permanent member(s) from that group.
5. Concerning the veto, as a matter of principle, there
should be no differentiation between new and old
permanent members. In Japan’s view, the resolution of
this issue will require the political judgement of all
nations at the ﬁnal stages of negotiation.
6. The Security Council’s work methods should be
improved to increase transparency and accountability
(www.mofa.go.jp/policy/un/reform/role21.html#2).
Africa’s Position
The Institute for Global Dialogue (IGD), a South African non-
governmental organization, has circulated a much more detailed
proposal in its policy brief series Global Insight, published by the In-
stitute. The extract that appears here is printed with the approval
of the IGD. Information on IGD is available at www.igd.org.za.
Following the launch of the High-Level Panel Report,
African Heads of State decided at the end of the 4th Ordi-
nary Session of the Assembly of the African Union to set
up a 15 member committee to hammer out a common
stance for the continent on UN reforms. The committee,
whose members were drawn from the continent’s main
regions, was to consider two main options that take into
account the African common position. These are con-
Security Council Reform
263

tained in the Harare Assembly Declaration of 1997, and
include developments on the international scene since the
adoption of the Harare Declaration and the essence of the
debate in the AU Executive Council in Abuja on 28 Janu-
ary 2005. The AU committee met in Mbabane, Swaziland
from 20–22 February 2005 to hammer out what has be-
come the “Ezulwini Consensus.” While side-stepping the
issue of which African countries would represent the con-
tinent in a future reformed UN Security Council, the com-
mittee resolved that Africa would insist on getting two
veto-wielding permanent seats in a reformed UN Secu-
rity council. In principle, the AU is opposed to the notion
of exclusive veto power, as it is undemocratic. However,
the organization also argues that if other Security Council
members have veto power, then as long as it exists, all
members, old and new, should have it.
Aside from African governments’ case for at least two
permanent veto-wielding seats and ﬁve non-permanent,
rotational seats, they have also insisted that in the event
of approval of the proposed reform of the Security
Council, it should be the exclusive prerogative of the
African continent—the African Union more precisely—
to decide on which African states should represent the
continent in this august body. More importantly, African
leaders have argued strongly against any attempt to dis-
criminate between old and future (new) permanent
members of the Security Council. Their position is that
either the veto power is scrapped completely or it must
be extended to all permanent members of a broadened
Security Council, within the ambit of the UN Charters’
emphasis on the equality of member states.
Prospects for Africa’s Candidates
Egypt, Nigeria, and South Africa have emerged as three
main contenders for the continent’s two seats on the
UN-SC. Underneath this spirit of entente between
Africa’s major role players lies the reality of interstate
power politics—national interest—with one particularly
aspiring candidate, Nigeria, intent on out-manoeuvring
other rather muted aspirants, South Africa and Egypt.
The attractiveness of securing a permanent seat (even
264
Alternative Futures for the UN System

one devoid of the undemocratic but strategic veto
power privilege) might be sufﬁcient incentive to bring
about a divorce between Africa’s leading states, particu-
larly Nigeria and South Africa.
However, even a casual reading of the High Panel’s re-
form proposals, reveals that the panelists were expressly
against any broadening of the veto power to new mem-
bers. In fact, in the proposed models (“A” and “B”) they
have made no allowance for the extension of the veto
power to potential new permanent or/and non-perma-
nent members of the Security Council. As a matter of
fact, they seem to have placed an injunction on the exten-
sion of the veto power by declaring: “we recommend
that under any reform proposal, there should be no ex-
pansion of the veto.” The ofﬁcial argument against an ex-
tension of the veto is that it would blunt the instrument
and weaken the Security Council. It would seem, how-
ever, that this position was forced into the reform agenda
by the traditional veto-wielding powers, in a bid to pro-
tect and preserve their post-war privileges. From this
perspective, it would seem that the High-Level Panel
made attempts to pander to the interests of the powerful.
Conclusion
The momentum for the reform of the UN has come from
a global consensus over the need to align the organisa-
tion with new global realities and power conﬁgurations.
There is no denying the fact that the scope of the ongo-
ing reform agenda is unprecedented in the history of the
institution. However, while the proposed reforms ap-
pear to be ground-breaking in areas such as broadening
the deﬁnition of “collective security” and shifting from
unilateralism to broad-based multilateralism, they
painfully fall short in meeting the yearning for the de-
mocratisation of the Security Council. Overall, the High-
level Panel report’s recommendations are based on po-
litical realism. Its recommendations are anchored
largely in the fear of alienating the interests of the
world’s most powerful nations.
Signiﬁcantly though, the report calls for donor coun-
tries to live up to the commitments they have already
Security Council Reform
265

made to developing countries. Irrespective of how one
views these reform proposals, they have set in motion
underlying centripetal and centrifugal forces amongst
regions and regional “actors.” While the veto-wielding
nations are determined to retain their privileges, emerg-
ing global and regional actors are bent on wresting them
away or at the very least, sharing them.
In Africa, the struggle to inﬂuence the reform process
has created a potentially destructive rift that has
brought into sharp relief how the continent’s lead states
view each other. If this rift becomes manifest, a lot of
work will be needed to rebuild destroyed diplomatic
fences when the dust finally settles. Whichever state
gets the nomination it will be representing Africa not its
flag. Both candidates should be states accepted by
Africans as their representatives rather than those cho-
sen for them by outside forces and interests.
Policy considerations
(1) For the champions of the UN reform agenda:
Although there is little beyond an advisory opinion
that Annan and his reform team can express, they
would need to shed the fear of provoking the wrath of
the great powers by insisting on genuine reforms. This
will help boost the legitimacy of the UN and render it
more effective and efficient. More precisely, they must
adroitly address the issue of the anachronism of the veto
power if the proposed reforms are to be taken seriously.
Any reform agenda that shies away from this thorny is-
sue will be cosmetic and would do little to reverse the
perceptions of illegitimacy and effectiveness of the insti-
tution.
(2) For the African Union:
Without necessarily being constrained by the wishes
of the more powerful current veto-wielding states, the
AU must state its case in a manner that is not overtly
confrontational to the interests and wishes of the P–5.
And while Africa’s claim is legitimate and not necessar-
ily overly ambitious, the AU must be psychologically
prepared to settle for non-veto wielding Security Coun-
cil membership. One suggestion would be that more ef-
266
Alternative Futures for the UN System

fort be put into building stronger multilateral groupings
from the Global South to counter the effects of the rapa-
cious power of the US and its allies.
(3) For African contenders:
While contending African states have a right to pro-
mote their respective national interests, they have an
obligation to conduct themselves responsibly and in a
manner that would not compromise the broader
African agenda. They need to present a unified, com-
mon position as embodied in the “Ezulwini Consensu.”
Potentially disastrous rifts will open the continent to
the divide and rule tactics by the North. Nigeria, South
Africa and Egypt must, therefore, avoid all strategies
that consist of undermining and backstabbing each
other. Practices like labelling each other as being less
African or being too corrupt to qualify for a seat at the
UN must, as a matter of urgency, be avoided. For South
Africa in particular, the foreign ministry must be aware
that the odds do not appear to be totally in its favour.
Therefore, there is need to double diplomatic efforts to
engage the continent on the negative perceptions that
haunt it.
(4) To Africa’s potential spoilers:
To the extent that it remains their legitimate aspiration
to strive for a democratic reform agenda that avails all
African states equal opportunity to inﬂuence UN Secu-
rity Council decisions, they must realise that the Secu-
rity Council represents the pinnacle of global power pol-
itics, in which only stronger countries will hold sway.
Their efforts must therefore be directed at supporting
stronger African candidates for seats on the Security
Council.
(5) To current veto-wielding states:
Although current veto-wielding states will try to
maintain the status quo, they must not lose sight of the
fact that the failure to democratise the UN in line with
new global power realities will act as a real obstacle to
multilateralism. They must, therefore, make a conscious
effort to create space for new comers to the Security
Council to share in the privileges that go with the huge
responsibility of keeping global peace and preventing
war (Ikome and Samasuwo, 2005).
Security Council Reform
267

Reform of the 
Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC)
On 6 May 2004, the UN Association-USA (UNA-USA) and the
World Federation of UN Associations (WFUNA) convened a
workshop to discuss the current challenges and opportunities
facing ECOSOC under the title “How Can ECOSOC Reform Help
Achieve the Millennium Development Goals?” The report on the
meeting is available at the UNAUSA website (www.unausa.org).
Part of the report is printed here with the permission of the UN
Association of the USA, copyright 2004.
The proposals of the workshop focused on four broad
goals: (1) Deﬁne ECOSOC’s role and streamline its pro-
gram of work, (2) Clarify and strengthen ECOSOC’s re-
lationships with other U.N. and related institutions, (3)
Enhance ECOSOC’s institutional capacity, and (4)
Widen participation in ECOSOC’s activities.
1. Define ECOSOC’s Role and Streamline its Pro-
gram of Work
Increase ECOSOC’s status as a political forum for re-
viewing and evaluating the U.N.’s system-wide efforts
to achieve the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
This process should take into account the normative
standards already set on human rights and sustainable
development.
Make ECOSOC’s program of work and annual
agenda more ﬂexible. Instead of concentrating most of
the work of ECOSOC in July of each year, efforts should
be made to make ECOSOC’s response to current crises
or opportunities more timely and free-ﬂowing. For ex-
ample, ECOSOC could hold more ad hoc focused ses-
sions on critical issues.
Focus ECOSOC’s activities on providing policy guid-
ance to its subsidiary bodies. This would return
ECOSOC to its original role as an overarching policy
body for the numerous programs and commissions it
oversees.
ECOSOC should create a segment on global macro-
economic strategy and management which includes a
debate on the adequacy of funds for ﬁnancing develop-
268
Alternative Futures for the UN System

ment and implementation of the MDGs. This type of de-
bate is critical since the central challenge to achieving
the Millennium Development Goals is the inadequacy
of mechanisms for ﬁnancing for development.
ECOSOC should actively promote the urgent need for
all OECD governments to dedicate 0.7% of their GNP to
development assistance.
2. Clarify and Strengthen ECOSOC’s Relationships
with other U.N. and Related Organizations
ECOSOC should establish a more meaningful rela-
tionship with the functional commissions, funds and
programs that it oversees. It should pay more attention
to the role ECOSOC could play in dealing with the prob-
lem of “mission creep” among the bodies that it nomi-
nally supervises. The program of work for each of the
functional commissions in particular, should come from
ECOSOC, and not the other way around.
ECOSOC should request that the World Bank, Inter-
national Monetary Fund, World Trade Organization, etc.
present their annual reports for comment and evalua-
tion by ECOSOC. As a result, each organization’s politi-
cal accountability would be strengthened, and the role
of ECOSOC as a coordinating body would be cemented.
ECOSOC should expand its coordination with the Se-
curity Council on speciﬁc economic security situations.
ECOSOC should act in concert with the Security Coun-
cil, as it has done in reference to Guinea Bissau and Bu-
rundi, both countries in post-conﬂict situations.
ECOSOC should seek to build partnerships with re-
lated institutions. Since ECOSOC cannot dictate or im-
pose its will on other institutions, it should seek to build
strong partnerships toward realizing common goals.
The meetings ECOSOC convenes jointly with the Bret-
ton Woods institutions illustrate the beginning of this
kind of partnership.
3. Enhance ECOSOC’s Institutional Capabilities
Each member-state that belongs to ECOSOC should
be encouraged to appoint a representative whose port-
folio includes direct responsibility for his/her govern-
ment’s ECOSOC participation. This representative
should possess the experience, skills and networks key
to enhancing the leadership role of ECOSOC.
Reform of the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC)
269

ECOSOC should request governments to channel a
portion of their development funds through ECOSOC to
enhance its capacity to give vitality to the “global part-
nership for development.”
ECOSOC should develop small working groups on
speciﬁc substantive issues.
4. Widen Participation in ECOSOC Activities
ECOSOC should convene meetings with a diverse
group of government ministers to promote cross-sectoral
dialogue. As opposed to other intergovernmental bodies
(e.g., World Health Organization, World Bank, etc.)
ECOSOC does not have a natural constituency in national
governments. On the surface, this might be perceived as
an acute challenge for ECOSOC. However, it could also
serve to better position ECOSOC as a body that brings to-
gether Ministers from various relevant portfolios and
makes the inherent linkages between ﬁnance and health
or other cross-sectoral economic and social development
issues. In addition to a cross-section of governmental rep-
resentatives, ECOSOC can strengthen its ability to engage
both civil society and the private sector by identifying ar-
eas in which each can contribute to the policy debate.
ECOSOC should engage civil society and business
leaders to draw on their knowledge, expertise, and ca-
pacity to promote development on the ground.
ECOSOC should use consultative arrangements with
civil society groups to bring expertise, local knowledge
and the perspectives of otherwise neglected constituen-
cies (particularly people living in poverty) to substan-
tive discussions. ECOSOC should partner with the pri-
vate sector as a source of innovation, ideas and capital.
In particular, it should promote public/private partner-
ships. If civil society and private sector groups are in-
cluded principally in deliberations, not decision-making
per se, governments should welcome expanded partici-
pation.
ECOSOC should convene meetings of the financial
and economic editors from leading news agencies dur-
ing high level sessions of ECOSOC to expand media
coverage of ECOSOC.
ECOSOC should improve its use of the internet to
promote awareness of ECOSOC’s activities and engage
270
Alternative Futures for the UN System

local actors in developing countries. (Reprinted with the
permission of the United Nations Association of the
USA, Copyright, 2004)
UN Parliamentary Assembly
In September 2004 the Committee for a Democratic United Na-
tions, a German nongovernmental organization, released a strat-
egy paper to mobilize support for the establishment of a UN Par-
liamentary Assembly (UNPA). The group’s goal is to raise
support for a global parliamentary body by the German Bun-
destag, the European Parliament, and the German public. The
creation of a “parliamentary dimension” of the United Nations
has been proposed by resolutions of the German Bundestag, the
European Parliament, the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) and
the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe. The com-
mittee has noted that this proposal is being made in light of the
growing cooperation of the United Nations and the Inter-Parlia-
mentary Union (IPU) (www.uno-komitee.de/en).
This proposal is building on numerous earlier proposals for
the creation of a second general assembly directly elected by the
people in UN member states. Daniele Archibugi, Director at the
Italian National Research Council (CNR), asserts that “the most
elaborate and realistic proposal . . . and one which has gained the
widest support was put forward back in 1982 by Jeffrey Segall
and the International Network for a UN Second Assembly (IN-
FUSA).” Assuming an evolutionary perspective, the proposal
asks the General Assembly, using its authority to establish “sub-
sidiary organs “ (Article 22 of the Charter), to establish such an
assembly. Its membership would be directly elected, with repre-
sentation from each country based on population. This proposal
was supported by ninety-four nongovernmental organizations in
1993 (Archibugi 1993, 308).
In the past, proposals for a second general assembly tended
to be quickly rejected by many as unrealistic. But a changing cli-
mate was revealed in 1994 by the fact that two former members
of the UN Secretariat with long experience proposed a UN Parlia-
mentary Assembly (UNPA) because of their belief “that NGOs
cannot fully and adequately represent ‘We, the peoples of the
United Nations.’” In making their recommendation, Erskine
UN Parliamentary Assembly
271

Childers and Brian Urquhart quote a statement by Ernest Bevin,
foreign secretary of the United Kingdom, to the House of Com-
mons in 1945: “We need a new study for the purpose of creating a
world assembly elected directly from the people of the world as a
whole, to whom the governments who form the United Nations
are responsible” (Childers and Urquhart 1994, 176).
The Childers/Urquhart proposal calls for an assembly
elected by universal adult franchise “for complementing the
knowledge and perspectives brought to intergovernmental or-
gans by government delegations.” It would not limit its agenda
to intergovernmental business “but include its own original ac-
tivities to develop policy and programme proposals for the UN”
(Childers and Urquhart 1994, 177). It would issue its own reports
and communications as UN documents. “While recognizing the
challenge in creating a UNPA for 6 billion people, the authors
note the precedent of the Indian Parliament representing 850 mil-
lion people from a diversity of cultures and nations and the Euro-
pean Parliament representing 345 million. In February 1994 the
European Parliament endorsed the proposed UNPA, and the
Canadian House of Commons has offered to host an exploratory
meeting focused on the creation of a UNPA” (Alger, 1996, 347).
In the Childers/Urquhart proposal, the process for establish-
ing the parliament would also be originated by the General As-
sembly under its authority to establish subsidiary bodies. Parlia-
ments of member states would select representatives to the ﬁrst
UNPA based on population. Initially, the UNPA would meet once
a year after the General Assembly (GA) and debate and comment
on the GA session. Eventually it would develop detailed propos-
als for its conversion into a directly elected assembly. This would
require a Charter amendment. Childers and Urquhart foresee
UNPA functions to be: (1) consultation by the General Assembly
and ECOSOC; (2) discussion of major decisions before ECOSOC;
(3) conveying opinions to the GA and ECOSOC; (4) holding
“question times” with the secretary-general and the presidents of
the GA, ECOSOC, and the Security Council; (5) requesting that
policies adopted by the GA be extended or amended; and (6) pro-
posal of new policies. It is believed that budgetary power would
be unlikely but that the UNPA would convey its views on the
budget to the GA.
As concrete examples of the expected contributions of a
UNPA, Childers and Urquhart give early priority to “examining
and selecting the best means of additional ﬁnancing of the UN.
272
Alternative Futures for the UN System

Parliamentarians would do this without the built-in resistance of
executive government, and with a more sure touch regarding cit-
izen involvement and support for any needed national legisla-
tion.” And they note that “diplomats are not particularly well-
suited to oversee and improve the UN’s public information and
education activities. A Parliamentary Assembly could co-opt
communication specialists to help its members apply their own
well-attuned insights into these extremely important activities
which have suffered serious neglect for many years” (Childers
and Urquhart 1994, 180).
“Obviously, the UNPA would not be expected to replace the
multiple routes through which NGOs can link people in a diver-
sity of territorial entities to the UN system. Instead, NGOs and a
UNPA would be complementary. Indeed, even if the UNPA were
an assembly of 1,000, each member would have a constituency of
more than 6,000,000 people. Thus, while its members would no
doubt bring to UNPA perspectives different from those of repre-
sentatives of states, they would still tend to be a cosmopolitan
elite. But they would have more local ties than professional
diplomats. Certainly the proposal for a UNPA, combined with
suggestions that NGOs develop a more self-conscious strategy
for their multiple roles, reveals the emergence of images of the
kind of global political process required if UN potential is to be
liberated. Very important is the fact that these visions have been
provoked by the real behavior of NGOs in many venues
throughout the UN system, and the fact that they are perceived
to be realistic by international civil servants with long experi-
ence” (Alger 1996, 348).
Asian Civil Society Forum (ACSF)
Statement on UN–Civil Society Relations
The ﬁrst Asian Civil Society Forum (ACSF) was held in Bangkok,
Thailand, in December 2002 under the theme “UN-NGO Partner-
ships for Democratic Governance in Asia: Building Capacities
and Networks for Human Rights and Sustainable Development.”
It was a pilot project of an organization of NGOs at UN Head-
quarters in New York City, the Conference of NGOs in Consulta-
tive Relationship with the United Nations (CONGO), in its effort
to reach out to NGOs in the South, particularly in Asia, toward
Asian Civil Society Forum Statement on UN–Civil Society Relations
273

the end of furthering partnerships with the United Nations for
common goals. This was followed by the Asian Civil Society Fo-
rum 2004, held in Bangkok in November 2004. This forum issued
an “ACSF Statement on UN-Civil Society Relations.” This state-
ment offers a very informative overview of issues on the agenda
of NGOs attempting to strengthen their capacity to have an im-
pact on decisions made in agencies in the UN System. So that the
information that follows accurately reflects the views of those
from Asian civil society organizations, the report that follows is
complete and unedited. It is printed here with the permission of
the ACSF and is available at www.acsf.info.
Introduction.
1. We, more than 300 participants of the 2nd Asian
Civil Society Forum (ACSF) 2004, representing over 100
local, national, regional and international NGOs and
civil society organizations from more than 30 countries
of the Asian region and the rest of the world gathered in
Bangkok, Thailand from Nov. 21 to 25, 2004 to discuss
the theme “Building UN/NGOs Partnerships for Demo-
cratic Governance through MDGs.” The ACSF was facil-
itated by the Conference of NGOs in consultative rela-
tionship with the UN (CONGO) Working Group on
Asia in cooperation with many regional civil society or-
ganizations and networks in Asia.
2. On the ﬁrst day of the Forum, we discussed the re-
port of the High-level Panel of Eminent Persons on UN-
Civil Society Relations (Cardoso Panel) as well as on the
Report of the UN Secretary General (SG) on the imple-
mentation of the Report (A/59/354) in the context of
Asian civil society’s effort towards, “building UN/NGOs
partnerships for democratic governance.” The day-long
discussion consisted of some major presentations includ-
ing one by Ms Mary Racelis, member of the Cardoso
Panel, and three sub-regional group discussions (North-
east Asia, Southeast Asia and South Asia) and a conclud-
ing plenary.
3. The discussion on UN-CS relations was a follow-up
to the Asian consultation of the Cardoso Panel held in
Bangkok in October, 2003. The meeting formed part of
the Panel’s regional consultation process. The second
consultation, held in Bangkok on Aug. 13, 2004, two
274
Alternative Futures for the UN System

months after the release of the Report, was on the 30 pro-
posals contained in the report of the Panel. Some partici-
pants of ACSF 2004 had attended all of these meetings.
4. During the deliberations, as participants, we ex-
pressed interest regarding the prospect of enhanced re-
lations with the UN. Recalling the first three words of
the UN Charter, “We the Peoples,” we welcomed the
spirit of the Cardoso Report in calling for greater access
to inter-governmental processes for all peoples. Some of
the proposals in the Panel’s Report offer substantial po-
tential for enhancing interaction at all levels between the
UN system and civil society. Both the Panel’s recom-
mendations and the SG’s Report to the UN General As-
sembly on its implementation provide opportunities for
discussion and debate on democratic global governance.
Issues, Concerns and Recommendations.
Increasing Participation of NGOs in Intergovern-
mental Bodies
5. We acknowledge the nature of the UN as an inter-
governmental organization and the role of member na-
tions in it.
6. We, as members of civil society, positively respond
to the SG’s call to organize around broad networks to en-
hance civil society participation following recommenda-
tions in Proposal 23. However, given the diversity and
logistical peculiarities in Asia, such networking should
take place voluntarily, and with full respect for the diver-
sity and speciﬁcity of civil society organizations.
7. We note the failure in both the reports of the Panel
and the SG, to include our recommendations to enhance
civil society’s participation in the work of the UN with
particular regard to the regional level. We also note that
both the Panel’s recommendations and the SG’s Report
failed to encompass the diversity of civil society’s en-
gagement in human rights issues within the UN inter-
governmental processes.
8. We, therefore, recommend that UN Economic and
Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP)
take on a more proactive role in facilitating the develop-
ment of regional models/frameworks for enhancing co-
operation. We noted an overall lack of enthusiasm and
Asian Civil Society Forum Statement on UN–Civil Society Relations
275

absence of strategies at regional level for engaging civil
society. Therefore, we call upon the UN ESCAP and
other UN agencies in Asia to:
Review their existing mechanisms of engagement
with civil society in line with the recommendations
contained in the report of the UN SG with a view
to enhancing interaction between governments, in-
ter-governmental organizations and civil society
towards the full implementation of the spirit and
values embodied in the Millennium Declaration;
Encourage more sub-regional and regional inter-
action and facilitate more internet-based fora to
allow greater access to a broader range of CSOs
to be involved and informed;
Consider holding more international meetings
outside New York and Geneva, perhaps holding
meetings rotationally in regional venues.
9. We look forward to the regular civil society hear-
ings to be initiated by the UN Secretary General before
and during the UN General Assembly beginning with
the 60th session of UN GA in 2005 to review the imple-
mentation of the UN Millennium Declaration. As civil
society organizations we afﬁrm our right to be involved
in these deliberations and are prepared to play our part
and bring local concerns to the UN agenda.
Establishing a Trust Fund to Increase the Participa-
tion of Representatives of Non-governmental Organi-
zations from Developing Countries
10. We welcome the SG’s commitment to the creation
of a trust fund to rectify current imbalances in participa-
tion of civil society from developing countries. How-
ever, we remain concerned that the proposed fund
would not undermine or eliminate existing trust funds
that are operating well. We enjoin governments to con-
tribute generously and consistently to this fund so that
civil society participation is secured well into the future.
Improving Accreditation
11. The streamlining and simpliﬁcation of accreditation
is very welcome. We hope that the single process makes
276
Alternative Futures for the UN System

NGO access to inter-governmental deliberations much
easier. However, we are conﬁdent that the single process
will not be used to exclude bona ﬁde civil society repre-
sentation. In this regard, we urge the SG to ensure that
the principles of openness, transparency and accountabil-
ity be put into practice to ensure effective and meaningful
participation. In particular, we urge the SG to create a
“complaints mechanism” with a transparent process
within which representatives of NGOs such as the Con-
ference of NGOs in consultative relationship with the UN
(CONGO) has an active presence. This is imperative as a
modality for redress of grievances of NGOs who may be
denied access due to political considerations.
12. We hope that security considerations and space
limitations are not used to deny access to legitimate civil
society organizations, including those working in areas
of conflict resolution, de-colonization and the right to
self-determination, as this will further undermine par-
ticipation.
Rights and Responsibilities Pertaining to Participa-
tion
13. We reiterate our ﬁrm commitment to the aims of
the UN Charter. We acknowledge the need for appropri-
ate correspondence with the rules of procedure and
decorum of the UN.
Improving the UN Secretariat’s Dialogue with NGOs
14. Among the steps to improve internal in-house
measures, civil society appreciates the provision of free
access to the Official Documentation System (ODS). It
also welcomes the moves to establish a central database
of NGOs and to develop best practices relating to NGO
involvement in UN activities.
Enhancing Country Level Engagement with NGOs
15. The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) are
not likely to be met without active and effective CSO in-
volvement at grassroots and local levels. In this regard,
we urge the Resident Coordinators of UNDP to engage
in a systematic, sustained and meaningful manner with
CSOs with a view to mutually enhancing the capacities
of all stakeholders.
Asian Civil Society Forum Statement on UN–Civil Society Relations
277

Exploring the Enlargement of the Partnerships Ofﬁce
16. We welcome the fact that the Non-Governmental
Liaison Service (NGLS) will be upgraded within the in-
stitutional standing and funding stability of the UN. We
hope that this process will make the NGLS stronger and
enhance its capacity for it’s [sic] independent function-
ing in order for it better to fulﬁll its role in supporting
civil society participation from the developing coun-
tries. In particular, we warn against any attempt to di-
vert funds, energies and other resources from NGLS to
other activities. The process of upgrading should also
not become an entry point for corporate funding of un-
related activities.
17. We ﬁrmly believe that the Global Compact Ofﬁce
should not be a part of the Partnership Ofﬁce structure.
18. We particularly welcome the decision of the SG
not to incorporate the Secretariat of the Permanent Fo-
rum on Indigenous Peoples into the Partnerships Ofﬁce.
We ﬁnd it appropriate that it remain under the purview
of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs
(DESA).
Way Forward
19. We commit ourselves to the challenges identiﬁed
in the Report:
To engage in a constructive and proactive dialogue
with our respective national governments and UN bod-
ies to seek their support for our recommendations,
while always maintaining our critical and independent
engagement with these issues from the perspective of
the communities and sectors that we represent.
To monitor the ongoing development in the UN Gen-
eral Assembly as well as the UN Secretariat and to lobby
inter-governmental processes to make sure that our con-
cerns are taken into consideration.
To network strategically with civil society organiza-
tions at national, regional and global levels to advance
the concerns of Asian people regarding peace and disar-
mament, human rights and social justice, sustainable
development and livelihoods and to strengthen Asian
civil society’s participation in inter-governmental
processes. 
278
Alternative Futures for the UN System

There Are Tasks for Everybody
In a volume entitled The Future of the UN System: Potential for the
Twenty-First Century (1998), edited by Chadwick F. Alger, twenty-
two scholars from all continents have written twelve chapters in
their search for feasible opportunities for strengthening the capa-
bilities of the UN System. They cover a broad array of subjects
that range across controlling weapons, peacekeeping, human
rights, economic development, refugees, advancement of
women, ecological security, communication about the United Na-
tions, peace education, roles for NGOs, and other issues. They il-
luminate the fact that there are many opportunities for strength-
ening the UN System. They are scattered throughout the system,
many regarding issues that are signiﬁcant for global governance
that rarely command headiness. The authors have creatively re-
vealed that strengthening of global governance can involve
“tasks for everybody,” a phrase used by Johan Galtung, a Norwe-
gian scholar widely recognized as one of the founders of peace
research, in his proposals for “individual activation” in the pur-
suit of preferred worlds (Galtung 1980). What is needed are
people of vision in a wide array of occupations, institutions, and
activities around the world devoted to employing multilateral
processes in solving global problems.
Of fundamental importance is creative involvement not only
of representatives of states and members of international secre-
tariats, but also people in NGOs directly linked to the UN Sys-
tem, as well as a multitude of other NGOs, citizen groups, and
provincial, urban, and rural governments. Global problems reach
from towns and cities—in their smokestacks, economic deprav-
ity, torture and death squads, etc.—across state borders to re-
gional organizations and eventually to the field offices, head-
quarters, councils, and assemblies of the UN System. Effective
global governance must link local people who have knowledge
about the UN System with people in the United Nations who are
in touch with their local roots. We believe that somewhere in the
recommendations of these twenty-two scholars there are possibil-
ities for the involvement of all readers of this volume in enhanc-
ing the effectiveness of the UN System.
The recommendations of the twenty-two authors can be
briefly summarized under five headings: (1) strengthen UN re-
sponse capacity, (2) broaden the participating community, (3)
There Are Tasks for Everybody
279

strengthen institutional competence, (4) enhance knowledge, and
(5) widen UN outreach.
I. Strengthen UN response capacity
1. Long-range planning
2. Early warning
3. Rapid reaction
4. Extension of nonmilitary options
II. Broaden the participating community
5. Widen participation of nongovernmental
organizations
6. Widen participation of local governments and
organizations
III. Strengthen institutional competence
7. Strengthen institutional infrastructure
8. Enhance institutional memory
9. New ﬁnancing sources
IV. Enhance knowledge
10. Research
11. Education and training
V. Widen UN outreach
12. Extend UN information collection and dissemination
13. Extend publicity about UN activities and
achievements
14. Offer rewards for fulﬁlling UN standards
15. Visions of the future
In the summary that follows, we have chosen only a few of
the items suggested by the authors. They have been selected in
order to illustrate the broad array of opportunities available for
strengthening the UN System.
I. Strengthen UN Response Capacity
1. Long-range Planning
Pervasive in this volume are explicit and implied appeals for
planning that would cope with underlying causes of endemic vi-
olence, the squalor of refugee camps, violations of human rights
standards, and ecological disasters. For example, it is proposed
that UNESCO collaborate with NGOs in helping national min-
istries of education to provide teacher training for peace educa-
tion (Osseiran and Reardon 1998, 393–396).
280
Alternative Futures for the UN System

2. Early Warning
An array of proposals would signiﬁcantly extend the capacity of
the United Nations to monitor world events, both through tech-
nological devices and human eyes and ears. It is proposed that
the secretary-general employ more roving ambassadors, who
would meet with those involved in festering conﬂicts. Their work
would be supported by an international monitoring agency em-
ploying satellite high-altitude aircraft (Johansen 1998, 102–104). It
is also proposed that early-warning capacity could be enhanced
through conﬂict monitoring by NGOs (Boulding and Oberg 1998,
146–147).
3. Rapid Reaction
Enhanced long-range planning and early warning would enable
reaction to extend into preventive modes. One suggestion is the
creation of conﬂict resolution committees in each major world re-
gion and the preventive deployment of peacekeeping forces. Both
would be supported by a UN institute for mediation and dispute
resolution that would provide seasoned mediators (Johansen
1998, 102–104). These efforts could be complemented by a multi-
faceted rapid-response force, including military, police, civilian,
and technical personnel.
4. Extension of Nonmilitary Options
Civilians have tended to play increasing roles in UN peacekeep-
ing operations as observers, as unarmed police, and as deliverers
of humanitarian services. This volume includes suggestions for
extending and making some of these developments more formal.
It is proposed that the United Nations have a corps of “White
Helmets” to investigate gross human rights violations (Ru-
pesinghe 1998, 175–176). Another proposal is the creation of a
three-legged peacekeeping organization consisting of armed
“Blue Helmets,” unarmed peace teams, and humanitarian NGOs
(Boulding and Oberg 1998, 137–146).
II. Broaden the Participating Community
5. Widen Participation of Nongovernmental Organizations
All of the authors in the Alger volume advocate extension of the
participation of actors other than states as they search for solu-
tions to global issues. It is recommended that NGOs develop
rapid response teams composed of trained personnel who are
There Are Tasks for Everybody
281

available on a stand-by basis for quick dispatch to sites where se-
riously disruptive conﬂicts appear to be emerging (Boulding and
Oberg 1998, 147). It is recommended that the role of indigenous
NGOs, as well as a diversity of cultural and ethnic groups, be
more creatively involved in the formulation and implementation
of community development projects (Jeong 1998, 235). Others
would have NGOs work with UNESCO in assisting ministries of
education to provide teacher training for peace education (Os-
seiran and Reardon 1998, 404).
6. Widen Participation of Local Governments and Organizations
The array of perceived roles for local authorities is impressive.
One example is an emphasis on roles for cities and other local au-
thorities in efforts to cope with global ecological problems (Mische
and Ribiero 1998, 335–336). Another example is the need for both
national and local efforts by women if UN standards for women
are to be implemented (Pietila and Vickers 1998, 273–275).
III. Strengthen Institutional Competence
7. Strengthen UN Institutional Infrastructure
Some advocate new machinery for a coordinated system to ad-
dress major disarmament problems promptly, including an effec-
tive global conventional arms transfer regime that would include
a small arms register, and a UN conversion projects register
(Brauch, Mesjasz, and Moller 1998, 39–46). Another proposal is to
restructure the Trusteeship Council and thereby strengthen ca-
pacity for response to demands of aggrieved minorities. This
would include the possibility of establishing new UN trust terri-
tories (Rupesinghe 1998, 175). Others would have the UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights serve as an oversight agency to
direct and coordinate UN human rights machinery that would
include regional components. The advocacy of regional compo-
nents is based on “the belief that human rights have a cultural or
regional aspect to their interpretation and promotion.” Therefore,
“a regional regime would help ease the acceptance of the legiti-
mate enforcement of human rights” (Apodaca, Stohl, and Lopez
1998, 212–214).
8. Enhance Institutional Memory
Deep concern is expressed about the lack of “continuity and
learning from past experience” by both the UN and member
282
Alternative Futures for the UN System

states. “Because neither UN ofﬁcials nor the new generations of
diplomats are beneﬁting from the lessons of the past in relation
to development and economic issues, there is inevitably a great
deal of ‘reinventing the wheel’ within UN bodies. . . . The lack of
an ‘institutional memory’ within the UN system is catastrophic.
Because of it, UN bodies are doomed to learn the same lessons
over and over again. It is desperately necessary for a full, analyt-
ical view of UN activities since its inception in 1944 to be under-
taken, beginning even with the ﬁrst attempts at international ac-
tion under the League of Nations” (Pietila and Vickers 1998,
275–277).
9. New Financing Sources
Much concern is expressed about inadequate financing of the
United Nations. One proposed solution is a tax on the US$ 900
billion international currency exchanges each day (Johansen
1998, 104–105). Another proposal is to tax or ﬁne individuals, cor-
porations, and governments who engage in transboundary pollu-
tion (Mische and Ribeiro 1998, 344).
IV. Enhance Knowledge
10. Research
A number of the authors observe that limited knowledge is in-
hibiting full attainment of the potential of the UN System. A
need is seen for the people of the world to understand their per-
sonal linkages to the world and the significance of these link-
ages for global governance. In response, research is advocated
on press coverage of the United Nations; on the communica-
tions dimensions of global problems such as unemployment,
poverty, violence, discrimination, and drugs; on contradictions
raised by globalization of finance, the economy, and the media,
in contrast to individual quests for local identity and culture
and group pursuit of self-determination; and on the implica-
tions of technological change for lifelong learning in all parts of
the world (Varis 1998, 359, 367, 373, 377). Research is also advo-
cated on the impact of the empowerment of women and on the
relationship between women’s equal rights and the achieve-
ment of a just and peaceful world (Pietila and Vickers 1998,
278). A need is also expressed for research on the links between
environmental degradation and conflict (Mische and Ribeiro
1998, 351).
There Are Tasks for Everybody
283

11. Education and Training
Some see a need to educate UN staffs in order to liberate them
from the structure of competitive national visions to an interna-
tional, global one. They are concerned that the spirit of the United
Nations is not infused in the hearts and minds of all its staff. They
believe that it has become elitist, like the governments that dis-
patch their ofﬁcials to the United Nations. It is also asserted that
the United Nations must be an intentional peace learner and
peace educator, working to educate the peoples of the world to
participate in this inquiry, and be proactive in movements for
change. Toward this end reciprocal learning is advocated be-
tween NGOs and UN secretariats, based in the belief that NGOs
versed in various approaches to peace education could share
with UN staff how they have devised concrete resolutions to a
particular problem. At the same time, UN personnel could
deepen the insight of NGOs on practical problems that they con-
tinually confront (Osseiran and Reardon 1998, 405–406).
V. Widen Outreach
12. Extend UN Information Collection and Dissemination
A need is seen for gathering and disseminating information that
would provide a knowledge base for strengthening conversion
from armament production to production of civilian needs. It is
proposed that a conversion projects register be created that
would: (1) collect information provided by governments, corpo-
rations, and NGOs about conversion projects; (2) collect informa-
tion on experts in conversion; (3) collect data on possible sources
of assistance and investment for conversion; and (4) perform re-
search and training on conversion (Brauch, Mesjasz, and Moller
1998, 46). There is a proposal for the creation of human rights
ﬁeld ofﬁces. These ﬁeld ofﬁces would provide for more explicit
partnership between NGOs and the United Nations in the belief
that “NGOS enjoy the trust and respect of the common citizen
needed to gather and document cases of human rights abuses”
(Apodoca, Stohl, Lopez 1998, 209–212). It is advocated that the
United Nations and NGOs cooperate in disseminating informa-
tion on states that have not ratified, or have not adhered to,
treaties and declarations. The same authors also would have the
United Nations and NGOs collaborate in developing mecha-
nisms for engendering wider adherence to these standards (Os-
serian and Reardon 1998, 406).
284
Alternative Futures for the UN System

13. Extend Publicity about UN Activities and Achievements
It is impressive that two women conclude that “[t]he record of
the advancement of women during the 50 years since the UN was
established—and particularly during the past 25 years—is aston-
ishing. In all of this the UN System has taken the lead. On aver-
age it represents significantly more advanced norms and prac-
tices concerning women than those of its member states. . . . But
the normative impact of the UN in the advancement of women
could be vastly more efficient if its information and education
programs were better” (Pietila and Vickers 1998, 273). Therefore,
it is emphasized that it is essential that women be more widely
informed about the programs, provisions, and conventions of the
UN System on their behalf so that they can monitor their govern-
ments’ implementation of what they have agreed to in the United
Nations.
Two other women take an even more strident approach by
urging that the United Nations call attention to: “national legisla-
tion that contradicts the spirit and principles of the Charter. Al-
though the United Nations does not have the mandate or the
power to take action to rectify the contradictions, it can serve the
international community as an impartial teacher of universal
norms and values, and so affect the behavior of a country in con-
tradiction with those norms and values. . . . It has to be under-
lined here that the United Nations needs to attract the media
more, especially television networks, so as to bring attention to
its past achievements, the obstacles it needs to overcome, and ap-
pear to the public as capable of anticipating and responding to
crises and challenges in all parts of the world” (Osseiran and
Reardon 1998, 406).
14. Offer Rewards for Fulﬁlling UN Standards
Perhaps rewards for adherence to Charter goals and for imple-
mentation of UN standards for economic well-being, ecological
balance, social justice, and nonviolence could be a more effective
strategy than those that would be perceived as punishment by
member states. One proposal advocates that economic beneﬁts be
offered to those states that lower military expenditures and de-
militarize their societies (Johansen 1998, 116–117). It is also pro-
posed that the IMF and World Bank might provide assistance to
states that would facilitate conversion from military production
to that which serves public needs (Brauch, Mesjasz, and Moller
1998, 45–46).
There Are Tasks for Everybody
285

15. Visions of the Future
Every chapter of this book, The Future of the UN System: Potential
for the Twenty-First Century, has offered a vision of a preferred fu-
ture in the context of speciﬁc UN issue areas. Because these vi-
sions have emerged out of in-depth research and thought focus-
ing on speciﬁc aspects of UN activities, we believe that many of
these visions are realistic and plausible. On the other hand, dia-
logue is necessary between these partial visions and holistic pre-
ferred visions of the future. It is important that Reardon and Os-
seiran draw our attention to the need for holistic visions of the
future by quoting from the Yamoussoukro Declaration (UN-
ESCO, 1989):
Humans cannot work for a future they cannot imagine.
They ask the United Nations “to set out a vision of the future
for the peoples of the world that can inspire them with hope, that
can invigorate them with energy and pride about their cultures,
and awareness of the common humanity they share with others”
(Reardon and Osserian 1998, 407).
References
Alger, Chadwick F., 1994, “Citizens and the UN System in a Changing
World,” in Yoshikazu Sakomoto, ed., 1994, Global Transformation: Chal-
lenges to the State System. Tokyo: UN University.
———, 1996, “Thinking about the Future of the UN System,” Global Gov-
ernance, 2, 335–360.
———, 1998, “Conclusion: The Potential of the United Nations System,”
in Alger, ed., 1998, The Future of the UN System: Potential for the Twenty-
First Century. Tokyo: UN University, 409–423.
Alger, Chadwick F., ed., 1998, The Future of the UN System: Potential for the
Twenty-First Century. Tokyo: United Nations University.
Apodaca, Clair, Michael Stohl, and George Lopez, 1998, “Moving Norms
to Political Reality: Institutionalizing Human Rights Standards through
the UN System,” in Alger, ed., 1998, The Future of the UN System: Potential
for the Twenty-First Century. Tokyo: United Nations University, 185–220.
Archibugi, Daniele, 1993, “The Reform of the UN and Cosmopolitan De-
mocracy: A Critical Review,” Journal of Peace Research, 30, No. 3, 301–315.
Boulding, Elise, and Jan Oberg, 1998, “United Nations Peace-Keeping
and NGO Peace-Building: Towards Partnership,” in Alger, ed., 1998, The
286
Alternative Futures for the UN System

Future of the UN System: Potential for the Twenty-First Century. Tokyo:
United Nations University, 127–154.
Brahimi Report on Peacekeeping, www.un.org/peace/reports/peace_
operations.
Brauch, Hans Gunter, Czeslaw Mesjasz, and Bjorn Moller, 1998, “Con-
trolling Weapons in the Quest for Peace: Non-offensive Defence, Arms
Control, Disarmament, and Conversion,” in Alger, ed., 1998, The Future
of the UN System: Potential for the Twenty-First Century. Tokyo: United Na-
tions University, 15–53.
Cardoso Panel: United Nations–Civil Society Relations, www.un.org/
reform/panel.htm.
Childers, Erskine, and Brian Urquhart, 1994, Renewing the United Nations
System. Uppsala, Sweden: Dag Hammarskjold Foundation.
Citizens for Global Solutions, www.globalsolutions.org.
Committee for a Democratic UN, www.uno-komite.de/en.
Dole, Charles Fletcher, 1906, The Spirit of Democracy. New York: T. Y.
Crowell.
Field, Shannon L., 1998, “UN Security Council Reform: A Challenge for
the South,” Global Dialogue, Vol. 3.3, December (available at www.
igd.org.za/pub/g-dialogue/multilateral_analysis/security.html).
Galtung, Johan, 1980, The True Worlds: A Transnational Perspective. New
York: Free Press.
Ikome, Francis Nguendi, and Nhamo W. Samasuwo, 2005, “UN Reform:
Towards a More [In] Secure World?,” Global Insight, No. 48 (April).
Institute for Global Dialogue (IGD), www.igd.org.za.
Jeong, Ho-Won, 1998, “The struggle in the UN System for Wider Partici-
pation in Forming Global Economic Policies,” in Alger, ed., 1998, The Fu-
ture of the UN System: Potential for the Twenty-First Century. Tokyo: United
Nations University, 221–247.
Johansen, Robert C., 1998, “Enhancing United Nations Peace-Keeping,”
in Alger, ed., 1998, The Future of the UN System: Potential for the Twenty-
First Century. Tokyo: United Nations University, 89–126.
McSpadden, Lucia Ann, and Anthony Ayok Chol, 1998, “Generating the
Political Will for Protecting the Rights of Refugees,” in Alger, ed., 1998,
The Future of the UN System: Potential for the Twenty-First Century. Tokyo:
United Nations University, 282–314.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Japan, position on Security Council enlarge-
ment, www.mofa.go.jp/policy/un/reform/role21.html#2.
Mische, Patricia M., and Mauricio Andres Ribeiro, 1998, “Sharing and
Protecting the Commons: Ecological Security and the United Nations
References
287

System,” in Alger, ed., 1998, The Future of the UN System: Potential for the
Twenty-First Century. Tokyo: United Nations University, 315–356.
Osseiran, Sanaa, and Betty Reardon, 1998, “The United Nations’ role in
Peace Education,” in Alger, ed., 1998, The Future of the UN System: Poten-
tial for the Twenty-First Century. Tokyo: United Nations University,
385–408.
Pietila, Hilkka, and Jeanne Vickers, 1998, “The UN System in the Van-
guard of Advancement of Women: Equality, Development, and Peace,”
in Alger, ed., 1998, The Future of the UN System: Potential for the Twenty-
First Century. Tokyo: United Nations University, 248–281.
Rupesinghe, Kumar, 1998, “Coping with Internal Conﬂicts: Teaching the
Elephant to Dance,” in Alger, ed., 1998, The Future of the UN System: Po-
tential for the Twenty-First Century. Tokyo: United Nations University,
155–184.
UN Association-USA (UNA-USA), www.unausa.org.
UN Millennium Project, www.unmillennium project.org.
UNESCO, 1989, “Yamoussoukro Declaration on Peace in the Minds of
Men.” Paris: UNESCO.
Varis, Tapio, 1998, “Communications in the Future UN System,” in Al-
ger, ed., 1998, The Future of the UN System: Potential for the Twenty-First
Century. Tokyo: United Nations University, 357–384.
Vayrynen, Raimo, 1998, “Enforcement and Humanitarian Intervention:
Two Faces of Collective Action by the United Nations,” in Alger, ed.,
1998, The Future of the UN System: Potential for the Twenty-First Century.
Tokyo: United Nations University, 54–88.
World Federation of UN Associations (WFUNA), www.wfuna.org.
288
Alternative Futures for the UN System

7
Directory of Organizations,
Associations, and Agencies
B
ecause readers of UN literature are often frustrated by the
appearance of undeﬁned acronyms, this chapter begins with
the acronyms of UN System organizations and activities, fol-
lowed by acronyms of peacekeeping operations. Information on
most of these organizations and activities have been provided in
earlier chapters.
Readers of the earlier chapters have become quite aware
that the evolving UN System has become increasingly involved
with a growing number of other governmental and nongovern-
mental associations. The remainder of this chapter provides brief
information on many of these organizations, along with indica-
tion of where further information can be found. The sections that
follow move from global, to global region, to local associations.
The appearance of all three geographic ranges is required be-
cause all three are ﬁnding the need to play a direct role in global
governance. The basic intent of this section is to offer the reader
concrete evidence that all governments, from the local to the
global, are challenged with different dimensions of global policy
problems. The same is true of different nongovernmental/civil
society organizations whose focuses range from the local to the
global. As a result, citizens in democracies are challenged to un-
derstand the worldwide dimensions of their responsibilities for
the shaping of policies of governmental institutions that reach
from the local to the global.
289

Table of Contents
I. UN System Acronyms
II. UN Peacekeeping Operations Acronyms
III. Organizations of States Outside the UN System, Both
Global and Regional
IV. Inter-Parliamentary Union
V. International Organizations of Local Authorities with
Worldwide Members
VI. Regional Organizations of Local Authorities in Global
Regions Outside of Europe
VII. Organizations of Local Authorities in European Region
VIII. Nongovernmental Organizations/Civil Society
UN System Acronyms
Information in various resources and reports on organizations
and activities in the UN System frequently includes acronyms.
This list includes acronyms for organizations, programs, commis-
sions, committees, etc. The acronyms are listed in alphabetic or-
der. Basic information on these UN System activities can be
quickly obtained by going to www.un.org, choosing the search
option, and placing the acronym in the search box. Acronyms for
peacekeeping operations follow in the next section.
1. Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions (ACABQ)
2. UN Ofﬁce in Central African Republic (BONUCA)
3. Committee Against Torture (CAT)
4. Committee on Elimination of Discrimination Against Women
(CEDAW)
5. Committee on Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD)
6. Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural rights (CESCR)
7. Committee on Migrant Workers (CMW)
8. Commission on Narcotic Drugs (CND)
9. Committee on Rights of the Child (CRC)
10. PrepCom for the Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
(CTBTO PrepCom)
11. Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
12. Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
290
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

13. Department for Disarmament Affairs (DDA)
14. Department of Economic and Social Affairs (DESA)
15. Department of Political Affairs (DPA)
16. Department of Public Information (DPI)
17. Department of Peace-keeping Operations (DPKO)
18. Economic Commission for Africa (ECA)
19. Economic Commission for Europe (ECE)
20. Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
(ECLAC)
21. Executive Ofﬁce of the Secretary-General (EOSG)
22. Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Paciﬁc
(ESCAP)
23. Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA)
24. Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC)
25. Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)
26. Human Rights Committee (HCR)
27. International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
28. UN Inter-Agency Coordination Group on Mine Action
(IACG-MA)
29. Inter-Agency Standing Committee and Executive Committee
on Humanitarian Affairs (IASC/ECHA)
30. International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(IBRD)
31. International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)
32. International Criminal Court (ICC)
33. International Computing Center (ICC)
34. International Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(ICSID)
35. International Court of Justice (ICJ)
36. International Civil Service Commission (ICSC)
37. International Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(ICSID)
38. International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
39. International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY)
40. International Development Association (IDA)
41. International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)
42. International Finance Corporation (IFC)
43. International Labor Organization (ILO)
44. International Monetary Fund (IMF)
45. International Maritime Organization (IMO)
UN System Acronyms
291

46. International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women (INSTRAW)
47. International Telecommunication Union (ITU)
48. International Trade Center (ITC)
49. Joint Inspection Unit (JIU)
50. Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) 
51. UN Veriﬁcation Mission in Guatemala (MINUGUA)
52. Non-Governmental Liaison Service (NGLS)
53. Ofﬁce for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
54. Ofﬁce for Drug Control and Crime Prevention (ODCCP)
55. Ofﬁce of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR)
56. Ofﬁce of the High Representative for the Least Developed
Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small
Island Developing States (OHRLLS)
57. Ofﬁce of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS)
58. Ofﬁce of Legal Affairs (OLA)
59. Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW)
60. Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues (PFII)
61. Steering Committee on Mine Action (SCMA)
62. UN Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
63. UN Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
64. UN Compensation Commission (UNCC)
65. UN Capital Development Fund (UNCDF)
66. UN Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL)
67. UN Crime and Justice Information Network (UNCJIN)
68. UN Center for Regional Development (UNCRD)
69. UN Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD)
70. UN Drug Control Program (UNDCP)
71. UN Development Program (UNDP)
72. UN Environment Program (UNEP)
73. UN Educational, Scientiﬁc, and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO)
74. UN Fund for International Partnerships (UNFIP)
75. UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
76. UN Human Settlements Program—HABITAT (UNHSP)
77. UN Joint Staff Pension Fund (UNJSPF)
78. UN Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
79. UN Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute
(UNICRI)
80. UN Institute for Disarmament Research (UNIDIR)
292
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

81. UN Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO)
82. UN Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM)
83. UN Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR)
84. UN Mine Action Service (UNMAS)
85. UN Monitoring, Veriﬁcation and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC)
86. UN Ofﬁce in Burundi (UNOB)
87. UN Ofﬁce on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
88. United Nations Ofﬁce at Geneva (UNOG)
89. UN Peace-building Support Ofﬁce in Guinea-Bissau
(UNOGBIS)
90. UN Observer Mission in Bougainville (UNOMB)
91. United Nations Ofﬁce at Nairobi (UNON)
92. UN Ofﬁce for Outer Space Affairs (UNOOSA)
93. UN Ofﬁce for Project Services (UNOPS)
94. United Nations Ofﬁce at Vienna (UNOV)
95. Ofﬁce of the Special Representative of the Secretary General
for West Africa (UNOWA)
96. UN Political Ofﬁce for Somalia (UNPOS)
97. UN Research Institute for Social Development (UNRISD)
98. UN Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA)
99. Ofﬁce of the UN Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process (UNSCO)
100. Ofﬁce of the UN Security Coordinator (UNSECOORD)
101. UN System Staff College (UNSSC)
102. UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC)
103. UN Transitional Authority in Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium (UNTAES)
104. UN Tajikistan Ofﬁce of Peace-building (UNTOP)
105. UN University (UNU)
106. UN Volunteers (UNV)
107. World Food Program (WFP)
108. World Bank Group (WBG)
109. World Health Organization (WHO)
110. World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO)
111. World Trade Organization (WTO)
112. World Tourism Organization (WTO)
(The Alphabetic Index of Websites of the United Nations
System of Organizations,
www.undp.org/toppages/unsys/unsframe.htm, includes
only some of the entities listed above.)
UN System Acronyms
293

UN Peacekeeping 
Operations Acronyms
Included here are acronyms for both past and present peace-
keeping operations, listed in alphabetic order. Basic information on
these operations can be quickly obtained by going to www.un.org,
choosing the search option, and placing the acronym in the search
box. Overview information on all UN peacekeeping activity can be
acquired at www.un.org/Depts/dpko/dpko/index.asp.
294
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
DOMREP (Dominican Republic)
MINUSTAH (Haiti)
MONUC (Democratic Republic
of the Congo)
MINUGUA (Guatemala)
MINURCA (Central African Re-
public)
MINURSO (Western Sahara)
MIPONUH (Haiti)
MONUA (Angola)
ONUB (Burundi)
ONUC (Congo)
ONUCA (Central America)
ONUMOZ (Mozambique)
ONUSAL (El Salvador)
UNAMIC (Cambodia)
UNAMIR (Rwanda)
UNAMSIL (Sierra Leone)
UNASOG (Chad/Libya)
UNAVEM I (Angola)
UNAVEM II (Angola)
UNAVEM III (Angola)
UNCRO (Croatia)
UNDOF (Golan Heights)
UNEF I (Middle East)
UNEF II (Middle East)
UNFICYP (Cyprus)
UNGOMAP (Afghanistan/
Pakistan)
UNIFIL (Lebanon)
UNIIMOG (Iran/Iraq)
UNIKOM (Iraq/Kuwait)
UNIPOM (India/Pakistan)
UNMEE (Ethiopia and Eritrea)
UNMIBH (Bosnia and
Herzegovina)
UNMIH (Haiti)
UNMIK (Kosovo)
UNMIL (Liberia)
UNMISET (East Timor)
UNMOGIP (India-Pakistan)
UNMOP (Prevlaka Peninsula)
UNMOT (Tajikistan)
UNOCI (Ivory Coast)
UNOGIL (Lebanon)
UNOMIG (Georgia)
UNOMIL (Liberia)
UNOMSIL (Sierra Leone)
UNOMUR (Rwanda/Uganda)
UNOSOM I (Somalia)
UNOSOM II (Somalia)
UNPREDEP (Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia)
UNPROFOR (Former Yugoslavia)
UNPSG (Croatia)
UNSF (West New Guinea)
UNSMIH (Haiti)
UNTAC (Cambodia)
UNTAES (Croatia)
UNTAET (East Timor)
UNTAG (Namibia)
UNTMIH (Haiti)
UNTSO (Middle East)
UNYOM (Yemen)

Organizations of States 
Outside the UN System, 
Both Global and Regional
Listed below are seventy-five international organizations of
states, both global and regional, that are outside the UN System.
They are listed here because their agendas frequently require
them to collaborate with agencies in the UN System. Some of
these organizations are concerned with regional problems involv-
ing only a few states, such as the Andean Community. Some have
global membership with a rather limited agenda, as with the In-
ternational Institute of Refrigeration. On many occasions these
organizations are coping with the regional dimension of policy
problems that are also on agendas of UN agencies. Examples are
the Asian Development Bank and the European Civil Aviation
Conference.
Andean Community, www.Comunidadandina.Org
Asian and Paciﬁc Coconut Community (APCC),
www.Apcc.Org.Sg/Index.Htm
Asian Development Bank (ADB), www.Adb.Org/
Asian Productivity Organization (APO), www.Apo-tokyo.org/
Asia Paciﬁc Economic Cooperation (APEC), www.Apecsec.Org.Sg/
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), www.Asean.Or.Id/
Baltic Assembly (BA), www.Baltasam.org
Baltic Marine Environment Protection Commission (BMEPC),
www.Helcom.Fi/
Bank for International Settlements (BIS), www.Bis.Org
Cab International (CABI), www.Cabi.Org/
Caribbean Community (CARICOM), www.Caricom.Org/
The Columbo Plan for Co-Operative Economic and Social Development
in Asia and the Paciﬁc (Columbo Plan)
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS),
www.Cisstat.Com/Eng/Cis.Htm
Commonwealth Secretariat (COMSEC), www.Thecommonwealth.Org/
Council of Europe (CE), www.Coe.Int/Defaulten.Asp
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
www.ecowas.int
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD),
www.Ebrd.Com
European Civil Aviation Conference (ECAC), www.Ecac/Ceac.Org/
Organizations of States Outside the UN, Both Global and Regional
295

European Conference of Ministers of Transport (ECMT),
www.Oecd.Org/Cem/
European Free Trade Association (EFTA), http://Secretariat.Efta.Int/
European Laboratory for Particle Physics (CERN), www.Cern.Ch/
European Patent Ofﬁce (EPO), www.European/Patent/Ofﬁce.Org
European Space Agency (ESA), www.Esa.Int
European Union (EU), www.Eurunion.Org
Group of 77 (G77), www.G77.Org
Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), www.Gcc-Sg.org
Inter-American Development Bank (IABD, IDB), www.Iadb.Org
Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission (IATTC), www.Iattc.Org/
International Centre for the Study of the Preservation and the
Restoration of Cultural Property (ICCROM), www.Iccrom.Org/
International Civil Defense Organization (ICDO), www.Icdo.Org/
International Cocoa Organization (ICCO), www.Icco.Org
International Coffee Organization (ICO), www.Ico.Org/
International Committee Of Military Medicine (ICMM), 
www.Cimm-Cimm.Org
International Cotton Advisory Council (ICAC), www.Icac.Org/
International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES),
www.Ices.Dk
International Criminal Police Organization (Interpol; ICPO),
www.Interpol.Int/Default.Asp
International Energy Agency (IEA)
International Hydrographic Organization (IHO), www.Iho.Shom.Fr/
International Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture (IICA)
International Institute of Refrigeration www.Iiﬁir.Org
International Lead and Zinc Study Group www.Ilzsg.Org
International Maritime Satellite Organization (INMARS),
www.Inmarsat.Org/Index2.Html
International Natural Rubber Organization (INRO),
www3.Jaring.My/Inro
International Nickel Study Group www.Insg.Org/Index.Htm
International Ofﬁce of Epizootics (OIE/WHO/FAO), www.Oie.Int
International Olive Oil Council (IIOOC),
www.Internationaloliveoil.Org/
International Organization for Migration (IOM), www.Iom.Ch/
International Organization of Legal Metrology (IOLM),
www.Oiml.Org/
International Pepper Community (IPC), www.Ipcnet.Org/
International Rubber Study Group (IRSG), www.Rubberstudy.Com
International Sugar Organization (ISO), www.Sugaronline.Com/Iso/
International Telecommunication Satellite Organization (INTELSAT),
www.Itso.Int/
296
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

International Whaling Commission (IWC), www.Iwcofﬁce.Org/
Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU), www.Ipu.Org
Islamic Development Bank (IDB), www.Isdb.Org
Latin American Integration Association (ALADI), www.Aladi.Org
NATO Parliamentary Assembly (NATO PA), www.nato-pa.int
Nordic Council and Nordic Council of Ministers, www.Norden.Org
North Atlantic Assembly (NAA) [See Nato Parliamentary Assembly]
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), www.Nato.Int
Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization (NAFO), www.Nafo.Ca/
Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA) (Specialized Agency of the OECD),
www.Nea.fr
Organization of African Unity (OAU), www.africa-union.org
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD),
www.Oecd.Org
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE),
www.Osce.Org/
Organization of American States (OAS), www.Oas.Org/
Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC),
www.Oapecorg.Org/
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC),
www.Opec.Org
Oslo and Paris Commissions (OSCAM; PARCM), www.Ospar.Org
Pan American Institute of Geography and History 
Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA), www.pca-cpa.org
Secretariat of the Paciﬁc Community (SPC), www.Spc.Org.Nc/
Southeast Asian Ministers of Education Organization (SEAMEO),
www.Seameo.Org
Western European Union (WEU), www.Weu.Int
Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU)
Member states of the United Nations are primarily represented in
the United Nations by representatives of departments in their ex-
ecutive branches, although some do have members of parliament
on their delegations to the General Assembly and to the assem-
blies of the specialized agencies. In 1889 the parliaments of many
states established the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU), having
members from over 130 national parliaments in 2005. Five re-
Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU)
297

gional parliamentary assemblies are associate members of the
IPU with headquarters in Geneva. Recently the IPU has become
involved with UNESCO, UNCTAD, ILO, WTO, UNHCHR, the
UN General Assembly, and a number of UN conferences.
The IPU website describes its mission as follows:
The Union is the focal point for world-wide parliamen-
tary dialogue and works for peace and co-operation
among peoples and for the firm establishment of repre-
sentative democracy. To that end, it: Fosters contacts,
co-ordination, and the exchange of experience among
parliaments and parliamentarians of all countries;
Considers questions of international interest and con-
cern and expresses its views on such issues in order to
bring about action by parliaments and parliamentari-
ans; Contributes to the defense and promotion of hu-
man rights—an essential factor of parliamentary de-
mocracy and development; Contributes to better
knowledge of the working of representative institu-
tions and to the strengthening and development of
their means of action.
The IPU supports the efforts of the United Nations,
whose objectives it shares, and works in close co-oper-
ation with it. It also co-operates with regional inter-
parliamentary organizations, as well as with interna-
tional intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations which are motivated by the same ideals.
(www.ipu.org)
Here are a few examples of IPU involvements with the UN,
UNESCO, UNCTAD, and ILO: A cooperation agreement between
the IPA and the United Nations was signed in 1996. This has been
followed by numerous joint conferences. In 2002 the IPU was
granted observer status in the General Assembly and the right to
circulate its ofﬁcial documents in the General Assembly.
In 1997 a cooperation agreement was signed between UN-
ESCO and the IPU. At the signing, Ahmed Fathy Sorour, IPU
Council President, declared that the agreement would “provide
an institutional framework” for cooperation between the two or-
ganizations and “open up new possibilities for dialogue and in-
teraction on the international level between the two branches of
298
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

the State which are governments and parliaments.” Then he
added that it is now up to the two organizations to “make
progress and move down this path by constant interaction. We
have many projects to implement together—all of which will al-
low the Inter-Parliamentary Union to fulﬁll in practice its role of a
consultative parliamentary assembly to UNESCO” (www.ipu.
org/english/pressdoc/gen64.htm).
In October 2003 a joint UNESCO/IPU meeting was held at
UNESCO headquarters during the thirty-second session of the
UNESCO General Conference. The aim of the meeting was to
launch a cooperation network between parliaments that are
members of the IPU and national commissions for UNESCO.
In 2000 the Inter-Parliamentary Union organized a parlia-
mentary meeting on the occasion of UNCTAD X in Bangkok,
which indicated an effort by the IPU to attain active parliamen-
tary involvement in international trade issues, with particular fo-
cus on the WTO and UNCTAD. This was followed by a similar
meeting in 2004 at UNCTAD XI in São Paulo. The meeting was
open to all members of parliaments attending UNCTAD XI as
part of their national delegations, as well as to any other MPs del-
egated by IPU members to take part in the parliamentary event.
The IPU asserted that “[t]he objective of the Meeting in São Paulo
is to ensure that the voice of parliamentarians as legitimate repre-
sentatives of the people is heard loud and clear during the inter-
governmental forum. Participation in the Meeting will permit
them to obtain ﬁrst-hand information about the main issues and
thrusts of the intergovernmental Conference, to contribute to the
elaboration of parliamentary recommendations to UNCTAD XI,
and to lay foundations for concerted parliamentary follow-up ac-
tion at the national and international levels after UNCTAD XI”
(www.ipu.org/Splz-e/unctadxi.htm).
In March 2004 a special panel of delegates from the Inter-
Parliamentary Union (IPU) and the International Labor Organi-
zation (ILO) charged with helping mobilize international political
will to eliminate the worst forms of child labor met in Morocco.
The meeting coincided with the launch of a new booklet: “Elimi-
nating the Worst Forms of Child Labour: A practical guide to ILO
Convention No. 18.” Prepared jointly by the IPU and the ILO, the
guide aims at providing policymakers with the tools to translate
international child labor legislation into effective action in a
range of local contexts (www.ipu.org).
Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU)
299

International Organizations 
of Local Authorities
with Worldwide Members
As the connections between local communities and the world es-
calated, local authorities began meeting with their counterparts
around the world to discuss their common concerns. This was
followed by the creation of a number of international organiza-
tions of local authorities.
As early as 1913 the International Union of Local Authorities,
that eventually had worldwide membership, was created. These
organizations are now aware that there are many issues on the
agendas of organizations in the UN System that are of great local
importance. Therefore, they are becoming directly involved in ef-
forts to place their concerns on the agendas of UN organizations.
The broad range of their interests is indicated in the organiza-
tions listed below. Of particular interest is the fact that these orga-
nizations have established a coalition, the World Association of
Cities and Local Authorities (WACLAC), to coordinate their ef-
forts to make their concerns known to UN agencies.
World Association of Cities and 
Local Authorities (WACLAC)
WACLAC is the world alliance of international associations of
cities and local authorities “committed to responsible and effec-
tive local self-government for sustainable development. Its mis-
sion is to represent the local government sector in the interna-
tional arena and in particular with the United Nations”
(www.camval.org).
United Cities and Local Government
Organization (UCLG)
Formed in 2004 by a merger of the International Union of Local Au-
thorities (IULA) founded in 1913, and the Federation Mondial des
Cities Unies (FMCU) founded forty-ﬁve years ago, the UCLG has
members from over 100 countries. Its website states: “United Cities
300
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

and Local Governments is the global voice of cities and the main lo-
cal government partner of the United Nations.” UCLG has ﬁve re-
gional associations (www.cities-localgovernments.org/uclg).
Metropolis (World Association of the 
Major Metropolises) 
The organization Metropolis has become the metropolitan section
of UCLG. It has eighty-four member cities. “The main goal of the
association is to better control the development process of metro-
politan areas in order to enhance the well-being of their citizens.
To do this, Metropolis represents regions and metropolitan areas
at the worldwide level and is recognized as a major player by
large international organizations such as the UN, WHO, the
World Bank and others” (www.metropolis.org).
Local Governments for Sustainability (ICLEI)
The “ICLEI’s mission is to build and serve a worldwide move-
ment of local governments to achieve tangible improvements in
global sustainability with special focus on environmental condi-
tions through cumulative local actions. It was founded in 1990 by
local governments at the United Nations Headquarters in New
York as the International Council for Local Environmental Initia-
tives (ICLEI). ICLEI is a democratically governed membership
association of cities, towns, counties, metropolitan governments,
and local government associations” (www.iclei.org).
Mayors for Peace
“On June 24, 1982, at the 2nd UN Special Session on Disarma-
ment held at UN Headquarters in New York, then Mayor Takeshi
Araki of Hiroshima proposed a new Program to Promote the Sol-
idarity of Cities toward the Total Abolition of Nuclear Weapons.
This proposal offered cities a way to transcend national borders
and work together to press for nuclear abolition. Subsequently,
the mayors of Hiroshima and Nagasaki called on mayors around
the world to support this program.” In January 2005 membership
stood at 688 cities in 110 countries. The Mayors Conference is ofﬁ-
International Organizations of Local Authorities
301

cially registered as a UN NGO related to both the Department of
Public Information and the Economic and Social Council
(www.pcf.city.hiroshima.jp/mayors/english/index.html).
Association Internationales des 
Maires Francophones (AIMF)
The purpose of the International Association of French-Speaking
Mayors is to organize mayors and other responsible persons of
cities where French is the ofﬁcial language, the language of regu-
lar communication, or where it is frequently used. The AIMF was
founded in 1969 and has members from forty-six countries. The
headquarters is in Paris (www.aimf.asso.fr).
Regional Organizations of 
Local Authorities in Global Regions 
Outside of Europe
Regional organizations of local authorities have emerged in all re-
gions of the world, as well as an organization of cities in the Com-
monwealth, based in London, and one focused on HIV/AIDS in
Africa. All of these organizations tend to have a common desire
for stronger local governments.
Arab Towns Organization (ATO), Kaifan, Kuwaitwww.ato.net
Asia and Paciﬁc (CITYNET) Yokohama, Japanwww.citynet-ap.org
Commonwealth Local Government Forum (CLGF), London,
www.clgf.org.uk
Council of Cities and Regions of Africa (CCRA) Founded in May
2005 in Pretoria, South Africa
Federación Latinoamericana de Ciudades, Municipios y Asocia-
ciones (FLACMA), Quito, Ecuador, www.ﬂacma.org
Organization of Islamic Capitals and Cities (OICC) Makkah and
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, www.oicc.org
Union des Villes Africaines (UVA), Rabat, Morocco
The Alliance of Mayors and Municipal Leaders on HIV/AIDS in
Africa, Katutura, Windhoek, Namibia, www.amicaall.org
302
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Organizations of 
Local Authorities in 
the European Region
The most extensive array of organizations of local authorities that
cross state boundaries has been formed in Europe (Table 7.1).
Very signiﬁcant is the emergence of directly elected organizations
of local authorities that have become governmental units in the
Council of Europe and the European Union. Some, including
members of the Inter-Parliamentary Union described earlier in
this chapter, believe that this provides a model for a future role
for a directly elected assembly in the United Nations.
In addition, there are a wide range of other local authorities’
organizations in Europe. They offer illuminating insight on the
fact that there is a diversity of territorial borders, in addition to
those of states, that are important for different political issues.
Some have members from throughout Europe. In addition, there
are regional organizations with members from border regions,
mountain regions, and maritime regions. There are also organiza-
tions focused on speciﬁc issues, such as recycling, climate and en-
ergy. One organization even links European local authorities with
those in Latin America.
Nongovernmental Organizations/
Civil Society
Because of the very large, and growing number, of NGOs in-
volved in the UN System and in those providing information on
the UN System, the development of this section involved difﬁcult
choices. Diversity has been provided by choosing a few from
each of these categories: (1) NGOs associated with the United Na-
tions, (2) NGO organizations with broad agendas for furthering
NGO effectiveness, (3) NGO issue networks, (4) NGOs with re-
search and education focus, and (5) NGOs attempting to extend
informed participation of people in the United States. The web-
sites of each of those that appear below provide information on
many more NGO websites.
Organizations of Local Authorities in the European Region
303

TABLE 7.1
Organizations of Local Authorities in the European Region
Direct Participation of Cities and 
Local Regions in Governance in Europe
Council of Europe
Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of Europe (CLRAE), www.coe.int/cplre
Chamber of Local Authorities
Chamber of Regions
European Union
Committee of the Regions (COR), www.cor.eu.int
Created by the Maastricht Treaty of 1991, as a representative assembly with the
job of giving local and regional authorities a voice at the heart of the European
Union. Succeeded Assembly of European Regions (ARE).
Other Organizations of Local Authorities in European Region
1. General Membership, Broad Agenda
Assembly of European Regions (AER), Strasbourg, France, 
www.are-regions-europe.org
Council of European Municipalities and Regions (CEMR), www.ccre.org
Eurocities, Brussels (100 major cities in European Union),
www.eurocities.org
2. Membership from regions within Europe
(1) Border Regions in Europe
Asso. of Euro. Border Regions (AEBR) (1971), Gronau, Germany,
www.aebr-ageg.de
(2) Mountain Regions in Europe
Euro. Asso. of Local and Reg. Auth. of Mountain Regions (AEM), 
Strasbourg, Fr., www.sdv.fr/aem
Asso. of Working Communities of the Alpine Regions, Innsbruck, Aus.,
www.argealp.org
Working Community of the Adriatic Alps (ALPEN ADRIA),
www.alpeadria.org
Western-Alps Working Community (COTRAO), www.unil.ch/cotrao
Working Community of the Central Alps, www.argealp.org
Working Community of the Pyrenees (CTP), www.ctp.org
Jura Working Community (CTJ), www.cor.eu.int/document/activities/ctpen.pdf
(3) Maritime Regions in Europe
Conf. on Peripheral and Maritime Reg. of Euro. (CPMR), Rennes, Fr., 
www.cpmr.org
Atlantic Arc Commision, http://web8956.vs.netbeneﬁt.co.uk
Mediterranean Commission on Sustainable Development (MCSD), 
www.planbleu.org/vanglaise/1-3a.htm
Medcities Network of Mediterranean Coastal Cities, www.medcities.org
Union of Baltic Cities, Gdansk, Poland, www.ubc.net
Transmarche region (Straits of Dover)
3. Speciﬁc Issue Focus
Association of Cities and Regions for Recycling, www.acrr.org

Climate Alliance, of European Cities with Indigenous Rainforest Peoples, 
www.klimabuendnis.org
Energie-Cites, Besancon, France, www.energie-cites.org
Airport Regions Conference (ARC), www.airportregions.org
European Industrial Regions Association (EIRA), www.eira.org
Association European Wine-Growing Regions (AREV), www.arev.org
Assembly of Euro. Fruit and Vegetable Growing and Horticultural Regions
(AREFLH), http://areﬂh.com
Forum of Local Authorities for Social Inclusion, www.autoridadeslocais.com.br
Four Motors of Europe, Promoting R & D linkages among Catalonia (Spain), 
Baden-Württermberg (Germany), Rhône-Alpes (France), and Lombardy (Italy),
http://62.101.84.82/4motori.nsf/framesweb/index
4. State Capitals
Union of Central and South-Eastern European Capitals
Union of Capitals of the European Union,
www.cor.eu.int/document/activities/ucueen.pdf
5. Links outside Europe
European Commission
URB-AL Program for urban areas in Europe and Latin America, 
www.urb-al.com
Nongovernmental Organizations/Civil Society
305
NGOs Associated with the United Nations
The NGO Global Network (www.ngo.org) is the home page for
nongovernmental organizations associated with the United Na-
tions. It provides a listing of organizations focusing on these is-
sues, listed in alphabetic order. Its aim is to help promote collab-
orations between NGOs throughout the world, so that together
we can more effectively partner with the United Nations and
each other.
Children and youth 
Communications 
Conﬂict resolution 
Disarmament 
Disaster relief 
Drug abuse 
Education 
Environment 
Ethics and values 
Family 
Health and nutrition 
Human resources 
Human rights 
Law 
Natural resources
and energy 
Peace and security 
Population and
human settlements 
Refugees 
Religion 
Science and
technology
Sustainable
development
Status of women 
Trade, ﬁnance and
transport 
United Nations

NGO Organizations with 
Broad Agendas for Furthering 
NGO Effectiveness
Global Policy Forum
“Global Policy Forum monitors policy making at the United Na-
tions, promotes accountability of global decisions, educates and
mobilizes for citizen participation, and advocates on vital issues
of international peace and justice” (www.globalpolicy.org/ngos).
The Global Communication Center for Development Organizations
“Our aim is to facilitate collaborations between NGOs through-
out the world, so that we can effectively partner among ourselves
to create a more peaceful, just, equitable and sustainable world”
(http://ngos.cc).
InterAction, American Council for Voluntary International Action 
This is an alliance of U.S.-based international development and
humanitarian NGOs operating in developing countries to over-
come poverty, exclusion, and suffering by advancing social jus-
tice and basic dignity for all (www.interaction.org).
NGO Issue Networks
Alliance for International Conﬂict Prevention and Resolution
(www.aicpr.org)
“A not-for-profit network of private and public organizations
dedicated to increasing the effectiveness of the conﬂict manage-
ment field and maximizing its impact on international peace
building. Members are working in the Middle East, Asia, Africa,
Latin America, and Europe.”
Amnesty International (www.amnesty.org)
“Amnesty International (AI) is a worldwide movement of people
who campaign for internationally recognized human rights. . . .
In pursuit of this vision, AI’s mission is to undertake research and
action focused on preventing and ending grave abuses of the
rights to physical and mental integrity, freedom of conscience
and expression, and freedom from discrimination, within the
context of its work to promote all human rights.” 
306
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Citizens for Global Solutions (www.globalsolutions.org)
“Citizens for Global Solutions, a grassroots membership organi-
zation, envisions a future in which nations work together to abol-
ish war, protect our rights and freedoms, and solve the problems
facing humanity that no nation can solve alone. We invite you to
work with us on our campaigns to promote the International
Criminal Court, reform United Nations peace operations, and en-
courage a bipartisan national consensus on reforming the UN for
the 21st century that emphasizes cooperation with international
institutions and our allies.” Created by a merger of the World
Federalist Association and the Campaign for UN Reform.
Coalition for the International Criminal Court (www.iccnow.org) 
“The Coalition for the International Criminal Court is a network
of over 2,000 non-governmental organizations (NGOs) advocating
for a fair, effective and independent International Criminal Court
(ICC). . . . The Coalition for the ICC and its members have been
actively supporting the establishment of the Court for 10 years,
and are engaged in a range of activities—from participating in ex-
pert consultations on ICC-related matters to advocating for
broader national support for and cooperation with the Court.”
Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers (www.child-soldiers.org)
“The Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers works to prevent
the recruitment and use of children as soldiers, to secure their de-
mobilisation and to ensure their rehabilitation and reintegration
into society. . . . Formed in May 1998 by leading international hu-
man rights and humanitarian organizations. It has regional and
national networks in Africa, Asia, Europe, Latin America and the
Middle East. The International Coalition has its headquarters in
London.”
Human Rights Education Associates (www.hrea.org) 
“Human Rights Education Associates (HREA) is an international
non-governmental organisation that supports human rights
learning; the training of activists and professionals; the develop-
ment of educational materials and programming; and commu-
nity-building through on-line technologies. HREA is dedicated to
quality education and training to promote understanding, atti-
tudes and actions to protect human rights, and to foster the de-
velopment of peaceable, free and just communities.”
Nongovernmental Organizations/Civil Society
307

Human Rights Links (www.derechos.net/links/ngo)
Provides links to these categories: Issue-specific NGOs, Re-
gional NGOs, All NGOs, Directories of NGOs, Foundations,
NGO Networks, NGO Support Groups, Research Institutes, Re-
sources for NGOs.
International Action Network on Small Arms (www.iansa.org)
“The International Action Network on Small Arms is the global
network of civil society organisations working to stop the prolif-
eration and misuse of small arms and light weapons (SALW).
World attention is increasingly focused on the humanitarian im-
pact of these weapons, and IANSA brings together the voices
and activities of non-governmental organisations (NGOs) and
concerned individuals across the world to prevent their deadly
effects.”
International Campaign to Ban Landmines (ICBL) (www.icbl.org)
“The Campaign calls for an international ban on the use, produc-
tion, stockpiling, and transfer of antipersonnel landmines, and
for increased international resources for humanitarian mine
clearance and mine victim assistance program. . . . the campaign
was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1997, together with its
then coordinator, Jody Williams. . . . Since the adoption of the
Mine Ban Treaty, the ICBL has remained committed to capitaliz-
ing on the global political momentum that it helped to create. ‘We
will continue to work diligently . . . [towards] our goal of a world
free of mines where all survivors can live in dignity’ (Jody
Williams, September 2002).” 
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) (www.ﬁdh.org)
“FIDH’ s mandate is to contribute to the respect of all the rights
defined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. FIDH
aims at obtaining effective improvements in the protection of vic-
tims, the prevention of Human Rights violations and the sanction
of their perpetrators. Its priorities are set by the triennial World
Congress and the International Board (22 members), with the
support of the International Secretariat (30 staff members).”
Search for Common Ground (www.sfcg.org)
“Our mission is very ambitious: to transform the way the world
deals with conﬂict. We emphasize cooperative solutions, pursued
on a realistic scale and with practical means. Current problems—
308
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

whether ethnic, environmental, or economic—are simply too
complex and interconnected to be settled on an adversarial
basis. . . . Although some of the conﬂicts we are currently dealing
with may seem intractable, there are successful examples of coop-
erative conflict resolution that we can look to for inspiration—
such as in South Africa, where an unjust system was transformed
through negotiations and an inclusive peace process.” Has thir-
teen ﬁeld programs on four continents.
World Organization Against Torture (OMCT) (www.omct.org)
The World Organisation Against Torture is known also by its
French acronym, OMCT. [It] “is the world’s largest coalition of
non-governmental organisations ﬁghting against arbitrary deten-
tion, torture, summary and extrajudicial executions, forced disap-
pearances and other forms of violence. Its global network com-
prises nearly 300 local, national and regional organisations,
which share the common goal of eradicating such practices and
enabling the respect of human rights for all.” 
NGOs with Research and Education Focus
Academic Council on the UN System (ACUNS) (www.acuns.wlu.ca)
“A principal goal of ACUNS is to strengthen the study of interna-
tional organizations as they increase in number, activity, and
complexity and to create strong ties between the academic com-
munity and officials and diplomats within the UN system and
other international organizations. . . . Founded initially as a
North American organization . . . ACUNS now has individual
members as well as institutional sponsors from some 50 coun-
tries. . . . In 1995, ACUNS launched a new journal, Global Gover-
nance: A Review of Multilateralism and International Organizations.”
Carnegie Council on Ethics and International Affairs (http://cceia.org)
“We seek to engage the world’s best minds in attempting to clar-
ify the relationship between ethics and world affairs . . . provides
educational experiences in which participants from a variety of
backgrounds are encouraged to share their ideas and learn from
one another.”
Institute of World Affairs (www.iwa.org)
“Conducts a range of programs designed to prevent violent con-
flict and to advance post-conflict peace building,” including
Nongovernmental Organizations/Civil Society
309

training seminars, both in the United States and abroad. “Oper-
ates several long-term development and postconﬂict reconcilia-
tion projects in the Middle East, West Africa, and the Eastern
Mediterranean.”
International Forum on Globalization (www.ifg.org)
“The International Forum on Globalization (IFG) is an alliance of
sixty leading activists, scholars, economists, researchers and writ-
ers, representing over sixty organizations in twenty-five coun-
tries, formed to stimulate new thinking, joint activity, and public
education in response to economic globalization.”
The Population Council (www.popcouncil.org)
A research organization supporting a global network of regional
and country ofﬁces. Seeks to improve the well-being and repro-
ductive health of current and future generations around the
world and to help achieve a humane, equitable, and sustainable
balance between people and resources.
Union of International Associations (www.uia.org)
A clearinghouse for information on over 40,000 international or-
ganizations and constituencies. The site also includes informa-
tion on The Yearbook of International Organizations and The Encyclo-
pedia of World Problems and Human Potential (both now available
on CD-ROM).
NGOs Attempting to Extend Informed
Participation of People in UN Issues
Americans for UNESCO (www.amunesco.org)
Devoted to educating the American public about UNESCO and
to involving them in efforts to extend U.S. government support
for and involvement in UNESCO.
The Better World Campaign (BWC) (www.betterworldfund.org)
A project of the Better World Fund, created with support from
businessman and philanthropist R. E. (“Ted”) Turner as part of
his historic $1 billion gift to support UN causes. It is a bipartisan,
nonproﬁt national education and outreach effort dedicated to en-
hancing the awareness of and appreciation for the vital role the
United Nations plays around the world.
310
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

United Nations Association of the USA (UNA-USA) (www.unausa.org)
The UNA-USA “supports the work of the United Nations and en-
courages active civic participation in the most important social
and economic issues facing the world today. . . . UNA-USA offers
Americans the opportunity to connect with issues confronted by
the UN—from global health and human rights to the spread of
democracy, equitable development and international justice. . . .
UNA-USA educates Americans about the work of the UN, and
encourages public support for strong U.S. leadership in the UN.”
UNA-USA is a member of the World Federation of UN Associa-
tions (WFUNA), with members in over 100 countries.
The Committee for a Democratic United Nations (CDUN) 
(www.uno-komitee.de/en)
The Committee for a Democratic United Nations is located in
Germany. The committee and its member organizations support
the democratization and strengthening of the UN System and of
all global governance processes. The committee is mobilizing
support for the establishment of a parliamentary assembly at the
United Nations.
Nongovernmental Organizations/Civil Society
311


8
Biographical Sketches
of Present Heads of
UN System Organizations
T
his chapter provides biographical sketches of twenty-three
people who are now (2005) heads of UN System organiza-
tions. Included are the UN secretary-general; eleven heads of
UN Programs, Funds, and Other Entities; and eleven heads of
UN Specialized Agencies. These biographies provide an infor-
mative overview of twenty-three people recruited to move out of
roles in which they served a single state, or a lesser group, to
roles in which they preside over an organization of people oblig-
ated to serve a worldwide membership. They come from nine-
teen member states around the world: Argentina, Belgium,
Canada, Chile, France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Italy, Japan, Ko-
rea (South), Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Senegal, Spain, Sweden,
Tanzania, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Two
heads of agencies come from Germany and Japan, and three
come from the United States. Quite remarkable is the fact that six
of the eleven heads of UN organizations designated as Programs,
Funds and Other Entities are headed by women. They are from
member states that circle the globe: Canada, Saudi Arabia, Singa-
pore, Tanzania, and the United States. No women head a UN
Specialized Agency.
It is significant that twelve of these twenty-three heads of
UN agencies have had previous experience as members of UN
secretariats. This includes the secretary-general and seven from
UN Programs, Funds, and Other Entities, but only four from
313

Specialized Agencies. Of the remainder, four have been members
of permanent missions to UN agencies, and one has represented
a member state at meetings of decision-making bodies of the UN
agency that they now head. The other six have had a wide array
of backgrounds: member of a state supreme court, university pro-
fessor, member of a provincial legislature, member of a state for-
eign service, member of a state government, and an ofﬁcial in a
banking institution.
As you read through these biographies, you will quickly
learn that this brief introduction reflects only a few aspects of
these twenty-three UN System leaders. Most have had a wide ar-
ray of background experiences that include a signiﬁcant interna-
tional dimension. These very brief biographical sketches of heads
of UN agencies have been primarily drawn from information
available at the website of the organization that they lead. Addi-
tional information is available at these websites.
UN Secretary-General
KoﬁAnnan, Secretary-General 
of the United Nations
Secretary-general of the United Nations since 1997 with a term
running until 2006, Kofi Annan is the seventh secretary-general
of the United Nations and the first secretary-general from the
ranks of UN staff. He joined the UN System in 1962 as an ad-
ministrative and budget officer with the World Health Organi-
zation (WHO) in Geneva. Since then he has served with the UN
Economic Commission for Africa (ECA) in Addis Ababa; the
UN Emergency Force (UNEF II) in Ismailia, Egypt; the Office of
the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in Geneva;
and, at UN Headquarters in New York, as assistant secretary-
general for human resources management and security coordi-
nator for the UN System (1987–1990) and as assistant secretary-
general for program planning, budget and finance, and as
controller (1990–1992). In 1990, following the invasion of
Kuwait by Iraq, Mr. Annan was asked by the secretary-general
Perez de Cuellar as a special assignment to facilitate the repatri-
ation of more than 900 international staff and citizens of West-
ern countries from Iraq.
314
Biographical Sketches of Present Heads of UN System Organizations

Annan served as assistant secretary-general for peacekeeping
operations (March 1992–February 1993) and then as under secre-
tary-general (March 1993–December 1996). His tenure as under-
secretary-general coincided with unprecedented growth in the
size and scope of UN peacekeeping operations, with a total de-
ployment, at its peak in 1995, of almost 70,000 military and civil-
ian personnel from 77 countries. From November 1995 to March
1996, following the Dayton Peace Agreement that ended the war
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, he served as special representative of
the secretary-general to the former Yugoslavia, overseeing the
transition in Bosnia and Herzegovina from the UN Protection
Force (UNPROFOR) to the multinational Implementation Force
(IFOR) led by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).
Annan was born in Kumasi, Ghana, studied at the Univer-
sity of Science and Technology in Kumasi, and completed his un-
dergraduate work in economics at Macalester College in St. Paul,
Minnesota, in 1961. From 1961 to 1962, he undertook graduate
studies in economics at the Institut Universitaire des Hautes
Etudes Internationales in Geneva. In 1972 he received a master of
science degree in management from the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology.
Heads of Eleven UN Programs, 
Funds, and Other Entities
António Guterres, High Commissioner, 
UN Refugee Agency (UNHCR)
António Guterres joined the UN High Commissioner for
Refugees on June 15, 2005. “Before joining UNHCR, Mr. Guterres
spent more than 20 years in government and public service. He
served as the Portuguese prime minister from 1996 to 2002, dur-
ing which he spearheaded the international effort to stop the
atrocities in East Timor. As president of the European Council in
early 2000, he co-chaired the ﬁrst EU-Africa summit and led the
adoption of the so-called Lisbon Agenda. He also founded the
Portuguese Refugee Council in 1991, and was part of the Council
of State of Portugal from 1991 to 2002.
“From 1981 to 1983, Mr. Guterres was a member of the Par-
liamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, as well as chair-
Heads of Eleven UN Programs, Funds, and Other Entities
315

man of the Committee on Demography, Migrations and Refugees.
In addition, he has been active in Socialist International, acting as
the organisation’s vice-president from 1992 to 1999 before taking
over as its president till June 2005” (www.unhcr.ch/cgi-bin/
texis/vtx/admin?id=3bb311511a).
Louise Arbour, High Commissioner, 
Ofﬁce of the UN High Commissioner 
for Human Rights (OHCHR)
Louise Arbour assumed her ofﬁce in 2004 with the task of inte-
grating human rights thinking and standards throughout the
United Nations, including programs in peace and security, eco-
nomic and social affairs, development cooperation, and humani-
tarian affairs. In 1996 she was appointed by the Security Council
as chief prosecutor for the international criminal tribunals for the
former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda. Her professional experiences
include appointment to the Supreme Court of Canada (1999),
conducting an inquiry as a single commissioner into certain
events at the women’s prisons in Kingston (1995), service on the
Court of Appeals for Ontario (1990), service on the Supreme
Court of Ontario (1987), and work in the Legal Department, City
of Montreal (1970). Her academic positions include associate pro-
fessor and associate dean, Osgoode Hall Law School, York Uni-
versity (1987), associate professor, Osgoode Hall Law School,
York University (1977–1987), assistant professor, Osgoode Hall
Law School, York University (1975), lecturer in Criminal Proce-
dure, Osgoode Hall Law School, York University (1974), research
ofﬁcer, member of the Law Reform Commission, and member of
the Criminal Procedure Project (1972). Her other professional ac-
tivities include vice president, Canadian Civil Liberties Associa-
tion (until December 1987), member of the International Council,
and Institute for Global Legal Studies of Washington University
School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri (2001).
Klaus Toepfer, Executive Director, 
UN Environment Program (UNEP)
In addition to being the executive director of UNEP, Klaus
Toepfer has also served as UN under secretary-general, and di-
316
Biographical Sketches of Present Heads of UN System Organizations

rector-general of the UN Ofﬁce at Nairobi (UNON) since 1998. He
was also acting executive director of the UN Center for Human
Settlements (formerly UNCHS/Habitat, now UNHabitat) from
July 1998 to August 2000. Before joining the United Nations, he
was the federal minister of regional planning, building and urban
development in Germany (1994–1998); the federal minister of the
environment, nature conservation and nuclear safety (1987–
1994); the state minister of environment and health of the Ger-
man federal state of Rhineland-Palatinate (1985–1987); and state
secretary at the Ministry of Social Affairs, Health and Environ-
ment for the same state (1978–1985). He participated in the Earth
Summit in Rio de Janeiro in 1992, in the negotiations for the UN
Framework Convention on Climate Change and the establish-
ment of the Global Environment Facility (GEF). As executive di-
rector of UNEP, he has restructured the organization under ﬁve
priority areas (environmental assessment and early warning, de-
velopment of policy instruments, enhanced coordination with
environmental conventions, technology transfer and industry,
support to Africa). Before his political career he was a full profes-
sor at the University of Hannover, where he directed the Institute
of Regional Research and Development (1978–1979).
Ann M. Veneman, Executive Director, 
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
Ann M. Veneman assumed the leadership of UNICEF on May 1,
2005, becoming the ﬁfth Executive Director to lead UNICEF in its
sixty-year history. At UNICEF Veneman directs a global agency
of 10,000 staff and an annual budget of more than $2 billion,
funded entirely by the voluntary contributions of governments,
businesses, foundations, and individuals.
Prior to joining UNICEF, Veneman served as the 27th secre-
tary of the United States Department of Agriculture. From 1991
to 1993, she was USDA’s deputy secretary, the department’s sec-
ond-highest position. She also served as deputy undersecretary
of Agriculture for International Affairs and Commodity Pro-
grams from 1989 to 1991. Veneman joined the USDA’s Foreign
Agricultural Service in 1986 and eventually served as associate
administrator until 1989. From 1995 to 1999, she served as secre-
tary of the California Department of Food and Agriculture
(CDFA).
Heads of Eleven UN Programs, Funds, and Other Entities
317

She began her legal career as a staff attorney with the Gen-
eral Counsel’s office of the Bay Area Rapid Transit District in
Oakland, California, in 1976. In 1978, she returned to her home-
town of Modesto, where she served as a deputy public defender.
In 1980, she joined a Modesto law ﬁrm as an associate and later a
partner. She practiced law with a Washington, D.C., law firm
from 1993 to 1995 before returning to California to serve as the
state’s secretary of Food and Agriculture.
Veneman earned her bachelor’s degree in political science
from the University of California, Davis; a master’s degree in
public policy from the University of California, Berkeley; and a
juris doctorate degree from the University of California, Hastings
College of Law.
Mark Malloch Brown, Administrator, 
UN Development Program (UNDP)
Mark Malloch Brown has held his position as administrator of
UNDP since 1999, being elected to a second four-year term in
2003. He is also the chair of the UN Development Group, con-
sisting of the heads of all UN funds, programs, and departments
working on development issues. Earlier he served at the World
Bank as vice president for external affairs and vice president for
UN Affairs (1996–1999). He joined the World Bank as director of
external affairs in 1994. He is credited with having helped the
bank enhance its outreach and expand its partnership with the
United Nations and nongovernmental organizations. In 1997 he
chaired the UN secretary-general’s task force on the reform of
UN communications. Prior to joining the World Bank, Malloch
Brown was the lead international partner from 1986 to 1994 in a
strategic communications management firm, the Sawyer-Miller
Group, based in New York and Washington, where he worked
with corporations and governments. He worked for the UN
High Commissioner for Refugees (1979–1983) in Thailand,
where he was in charge of field operations for Cambodian
refugees, and as deputy chief of UNHCR’s Emergency Unit in
Geneva, undertaking extensive missions in the Horn of Africa
and Central America. A British citizen, he received a first-class
honors degree in History from Magdalene College, Cambridge
University, and a master’s degree in political science from the
University of Michigan.
318
Biographical Sketches of Present Heads of UN System Organizations

Anna Kajumulo Tibaijuka, Executive Director,
UN-Habitat (UN Human Settlements Program)
Since 2000 Anna Kajumolo Tibaijuka has held her post as execu-
tive director of UN-Habitat. She was elected to a four-year term
in 2002. A Tanzanian national, she is the highest-ranking African
woman in the UN System. From 1998 to 2000 she was the special
coordinator for least developed countries, landlocked, and small
island developing countries at UNCTAD. From 1993 to 1998 she
was associate professor of economics at the University of Dar-es-
Salaam. During these years she was a member of Tanzanian gov-
ernment delegations to the UN Conference on Human Settle-
ments (1996), the World Food Summit (1996), the Fourth World
Conference on Women (Beijing, 1995) and the World Summit for
Social Development (1995). At the World Food Summit in Rome,
she was elected coordinator for eastern Africa in the Network for
Food Security, Trade and Sustainable Development (COASAD).
Tibaijuka has also been a board member of UNESCO’s Interna-
tional Scientiﬁc Advisory Board since November 1997. She holds
a doctorate of science in agricultural economics from the Swedish
University of Agricultural Sciences in Uppsala. During her ﬁrst
two years in ofﬁce, Tibaijuka oversaw major reforms that led the
UN General Assembly to upgrade the UN Center for Human
Settlements to a full-fledged UN program, now called UN-
HABITAT—the UN Human Settlements Program.
Noeleen Heyzer, Executive Director, 
UN Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM)
Director of UNIFEM since 1994, Noeleen Heyzer is the first
executive director from the global South. She has served as
chair of the UN Interagency Task Force on Women’s Empower-
ment to implement the Cairo Plan of Action (1995–1996); chair
of the UN Operational Working Group on the implementation
of the Platform for Action of the Fourth World Conference 
on Women (1996–1997); cochair of the UN Council of the Micro-
Credit Summit to reach the 100 million poorest families
(1997–ongoing); chair of the UN Development Group on Gen-
der to create guidelines and indicators for the UN Development
Assistance Framework (1998–1999); head of the international
delegation to engender the peace process in the Middle East
Heads of Eleven UN Programs, Funds, and Other Entities
319

(2000); o-convener of the Round Table on Human Rights and
HIV/AIDS during the General Assembly Special Session on
HIV/AIDS (2001); and chair of the UN Interagency Task Force
on Gender Equality and HIV/AIDS (1999–ongoing). She also
served in the UN Economic and Social Commission of the Asia
and Pacific Region, and was director of the Gender Program of
the Asia and Pacific Development Center. She received her edu-
cation at the University of Singapore and holds a PhD in social
sciences from Cambridge University in the United Kingdom.
She worked as a banker in Singapore and tutored sociology at
the University of Singapore.
Hans J. A. Van Ginkel, Rector, 
United Nations University (UNU)
Rector of the UNU since 1997, Hans J. A. Van Ginkel became a
member of the governing council of the United Nations Univer-
sity in 1992, of UNESCO’s Advisory Group for Higher Educa-
tion in 1996, and member of the Steering Committee for UN-
ESCO’s World Conference on Higher Education in 1998. In this
last capacity he prepared and led, among others, the thematic
debate on “Higher Education and Sustainable Human Develop-
ment.” He has contributed to numerous international organiza-
tions, including the governing board of the International Insti-
tute for Geo-Information Science and Earth Observation at
Enschedé, the Netherlands (president 1990–1998); the board of
the European Association of Universities (CRE, vice president
1994–1998), and the board of the International Association of
Universities (IAU, vice president, 1995–2000; president,
2000–2004). From 1965 to 1968 he taught geography and history
at the Thomas à Kempis College, Arnhem, the Netherlands.
From 1968 to 1985 he was on the Utrecht University faculty of
geographical sciences. In l980 he was appointed full professor in
human geography and planning. He was dean of faculty
(1981–1985), became a member of the executive board of the Uni-
versity in 1985, and rector magniﬁcus in 1986. Born in Kota-Rad-
jah (Bandar Acheh, Indonesia), he received the M.Sc. in human
and physical geography, anthropology, and history, and a PhD in
social science.
320
Biographical Sketches of Present Heads of UN System Organizations

Peter Piot, Executive Director, UNAIDS 
(Joint UN Program on HIV/AIDS)
Peter Piot has served as executive director of UNAIDS since its
creation in 1995, and under secretary-general of the United Na-
tions. In 1992 Piot joined the Global Program on AIDS of the
World Health Organization, as associate director. Under his
leadership, UNAIDS has become the chief advocate for world-
wide action against AIDS. It has brought together nine organiza-
tions of the UN System around a common agenda on AIDS,
spearheading UN reform. In the 1980s Piot launched and ex-
panded a series of collaborative projects in Africa. Project SIDA
in Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo, was the ﬁrst in-
ternational project on AIDS in Africa and is widely acknowl-
edged as having provided the foundations for the understand-
ing of HIV infection in Africa. He was a professor of
microbiology and of public health at the Institute of Tropical
Medicine, in Antwerp and at the Universities of Nairobi, Brus-
sels, and Lausanne. Piot earned a medical degree from the Uni-
versity of Ghent, and a PhD in microbiology from the University
of Antwerp, Belgium. After graduating from medical school,
Piot codiscovered the ebola virus in Zaire in 1976. He is a mem-
ber of the Institute of Medicine of the National Academy of Sci-
ences of the United States.
Antonio Maria Costa, Executive Director, 
UN Ofﬁce on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
Appointed executive director of UNODC in 2002, Antonio Maria
Costa is also director-general of the UN Office in Vienna
(UNOV), holding the rank of under secretary-general of the
United Nations. From 1969 to 1983, he served as senior economist
in the UN Department of International Economics and Social Af-
fairs in New York. He was later appointed under secretary-gen-
eral at the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Develop-
ment (OECD) in Paris, where he served until 1987. He was a
member of the OECD Working Group for ﬁnancial transactions
(later called FATF), a member of the IMF/World Bank Interim
Heads of Eleven UN Programs, Funds, and Other Entities
321

Committee and of the G–10 group for the coordination of eco-
nomic policy. Between 1987 and 1992, he served at the Commis-
sion of the European Union as director-general for economics and
finance. He then joined the European Bank for Reconstruction
and Development (EBRD) in London as secretary-general, where
he oversaw political issues, institutional affairs, corporate gover-
nance, and questions relating to shareholders. He holds a degree
in political science from the University of Turin, Italy (1963), a de-
gree in mathematical economics from the Moscow State Univer-
sity (1967), and a PhD in economics from the University of Cali-
fornia at Berkeley (1971).
Thoraya Ahmed Obaid, Executive Director, 
UN Population Fund (UNFPA)
Appointed in 2001, Thoraya Ahmed Obaid is the first Saudi
Arabian to be named head of a UN agency. From 1998 to 2001,
she was director of the Division for Arab States and Europe of
UNFPA. Before joining UNFPA, she was deputy executive sec-
retary for the UN Economic and Social Commission for West-
ern Asia (ESCWA) (1993–1998); chief of the Social Development
and Population Division, ESCWA (1992–1993); and social af-
fairs officer, responsible for the advancement of women
(1975–1992). Working with governments to establish programs
to empower women and develop their capacities as citizens
with rights and responsibilities and with women’s nongovern-
mental organizations (NGOs) to advocate for equality for
women has been a central focus of her work. Obaid chaired the
UN Inter-Agency Task Force on Gender in Amman, Jordan, in
1996. In November 1997 she was a member of the UN Inter-
Agency Gender Mission to Afghanistan. Earlier that year, she
was a member of the UN Strategic Framework Mission to
Afghanistan. From 1984 to 1985 she was a member of the
League of Arab States Working Group for formulating the Arab
strategy for social development. She was the first Saudi Ara-
bian woman to receive a government scholarship to study at a
university in the United States, in 1963. She has a doctorate de-
gree in English literature and cultural anthropology from
Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan.
322
Biographical Sketches of Present Heads of UN System Organizations

Heads of Eleven UN Specialized Agencies
Juan Somavia, Director-General, 
International Labor Organization (ILO)
Juan Somavia is the ninth director-general of the ILO, reelected
for a second ﬁve-year term in March 2003. An attorney by profes-
sion, he has had a long career in business, civil organizations,
diplomacy, and as an academic. He was permanent representa-
tive of Chile to the United Nations in New York (1990–1999),
president of the UN Economic and Social Council (1993–94,
1998–99), and representative of Chile on the UN Security Council
(1996–1997). In 1999 he submitted his Decent Work Agenda to the
ILO Conference, which was subsequently endorsed by the gov-
erning body and the conference. The work of the ofﬁce has been
reorganized around four strategic objectives that make it possible
to establish targets and indicators to measure progress and pro-
vide the basis of accountability. He began his career as an acade-
mic. From 1967 to 1968, he was a lecturer on economic and social
issues for GATT’s trade policy courses in Geneva. In 1971 he was
appointed professor of international economic and social affairs
in the Department of Political Sciences at the Catholic University
of Chile. Mr. Somavia participated actively in the restoration of
democracy in Chile as president of the International Commission
of the Democratic Coalition in Chile and founder and secretary-
general of the South American Peace Commission (1986–1990).
For his contribution to peace and human rights, he was awarded
the Leonides Proano Peace Prize by the Latin American Human
Rights Association.
Jacques Diouf, Director-General, 
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)
Jacques Diouf took ofﬁce as director-general of the FAO in 1994
and was elected to a second six-year term in 2000. He had been
the permanent representative of Senegal to the United Nations,
New York (1991–1993); the special adviser to the governor of the
Central Bank for West African States, Dakar, Senegal (1990–1991);
the secretary-general of the Central Bank for West African States,
Dakar (1985–1990); adviser to the president and regional director
Heads of Eleven UN Specialized Agencies
323

of the International Development Research Center, Ottawa,
Canada (1984–1985); member of the Senegal Parliament
(1983–1984); Senegal’s secretary of state for science and technol-
ogy (1978–1983); secretary of the West Africa Rice Development
Association, Monrovia, Liberia (1971–1977); and the executive
secretary of the African Groundnut Council, Lagos, Nigeria
(1965–1971). He has also served as the representative for Africa to
the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research,
Washington, D.C.; as a member of the Council of African Advis-
ers of the World Bank; a member of the board of the UN Univer-
sity World Institute for Development Economics Research,
Helsinki, Finland; and as a member of the Council of African Ad-
visers of the World Bank. His education includes a PhD in social
sciences of the rural sector (agricultural economics) at the Faculté
de Droit et de Sciences économiques, Panthéon–Sorbonne; a mas-
ter of science in tropical agronomy from École nationale d’appli-
cation d’agronomie tropicale, Nogent-Paris, France; and a senior
program certiﬁcate in management from the American Manage-
ment Association, New York.
Koichiro Matsuura, 
Director-General UN Educational, 
Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)
Elected director-general of UNESCO for a six-year term in 1999,
Koichiro Matsuura also served as chairperson of the World Her-
itage Committee of UNESCO (1998–1999). Earlier he served in
the Japanese foreign service since 1961; as ambassador of Japan to
France and concurrently to Andorra and Djibouti (1994–1999); as
deputy minister for foreign affairs (MIF) (1992–1994); director-
general of the North American Affairs Bureau, MIF (1990–1992);
director-general of the Economic Cooperation Bureau, MIF
(1988–1990); consul-general of Japan in Hong Kong (1985–1988);
director of the General Affairs Division and deputy director-gen-
eral of the Foreign Minister’s Ofﬁce (1982–1985); director of the
Aid Policy Division, MIF (1980–1982); counselor of the Embassy
of Japan in Washington (1977–1980); director of the Development
Cooperation Division, MIF (1975–1977); director of the First
North American Division (Political Affairs), MIF (1974–1975);
various posts in the central administration, MIF (1972–1974); sec-
ond secretary, then first secretary of the Japanese delegation to
324
Biographical Sketches of Present Heads of UN System Organizations

the OECD, Paris (1968–1972); he assumed various posts at the
central administration, MIF (1963–1968); was third secretary of
the Embassy of Japan, Ghana, and also was accredited to other
countries in West Africa (1961–1963). Before entering the foreign
service, Koichiro Matsuura had two academic teaching posts, on
the faculty of economics at Haverford College, in Pennsylvania
(1959–1961) and the faculty of law at the University of Tokyo
(1956–1959).
LEE Jong-wook, Director-General, 
World Health Organization (WHO)
LEE Jong-wook took office as director-general of WHO for a
ﬁve-year term in 2003. He has worked at WHO for twenty years
at country, regional, and headquarters posts in technical, man-
agerial, and policy positions, notably leading the fight against
two of the greatest challenges to health and development: tuber-
culosis and vaccine-preventable diseases of children. After head-
ing the WHO Global Program for Vaccines and Immunizations
and serving as a senior policy advisor, in 2000 he became direc-
tor of Stop TB, a coalition of more than 250 international partners
including WHO member states, donors, nongovernmental orga-
nizations, industry, and foundations. He began his WHO career
in 1983 as a leprosy consultant in the South Paciﬁc, and a year
later was appointed team leader for leprosy control in the South
Paciﬁc. In 1986 he moved to the Western Paciﬁc Regional Ofﬁce
in Manila, initially in the Regional Leprosy Control Program and
later as regional adviser on chronic diseases. Prior to joining
WHO, LEE worked for two years at the LBJ Tropical Medical
Centre in American Samoa. Born in Seoul, Republic of Korea, he
received a medical doctor degree (MD) from Seoul National Uni-
versity and a master of public health degree from the University
of Hawaii.
Efthimios E. Mitropoulos, Secretary-General,
International Maritime Organization (IMO)
Mitropoulos began a four-year term as secretary-general at the
International Maritime Organization in 2004. He joined the IMO
in January 1979 as implementation ofﬁcer in the Maritime Safety
Heads of Eleven UN Specialized Agencies
325

Division and was appointed head of the Navigation Section
(1985), senior deputy director for navigation and related matters
(1989), director of the Maritime Safety Division and secretary of
the Maritime Safety Committee (1992). Between 1989 and 1998,
he led the IMO’s efforts to establish a global search and rescue
(SAR) plan. In 2000 he was appointed assistant secretary-general
while continuing as director of the Maritime Safety Division. Be-
tween 1966 and 1977 he participated, initially as a member and
later as head of the Greek delegation, in the Maritime Safety
Committee of the IMO. He also participated in the Council and
Assembly of the IMO as well as at the 1972 Collision Regulations
and 1974 Safety of Life at Sea Conferences convened by the IMO.
He attended the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of
the Sea (1975–1977) as the representative of the Greek Ministry of
Mercantile Marine in the multiministerial Greek delegation. In
2004 he was appointed chancellor of the World Maritime Univer-
sity (Malmo, Sweden) and chairman of the governing board of
the International Maritime Law Institute (Malta). He is the author
of several books on shipping economics and policy, types of mer-
chant vessels, safety of navigation, and other shipping-related
matters.
Yoshio UTSUMI, Secretary-General,
International Telecommunications Union (ITU)
Yoshio Utsumi has held his post as secretary-general of the ITU
since 1998, elected for a second term in 2002. In 1994 he was
elected chairman of the ITU plenipotentiary conference. Before
this he served as Japanese minister of posts and telecommunica-
tion (MPT). His involvement in the ITU began with three years in
the Japanese Permanent Mission in Geneva where he served as
ﬁrst secretary of ITU affairs. He has been in the telecommunica-
tions business for over thirty years. His roles in MPT included
professor of public administration at the MPT Postal College
(1972), head of Japan’s largest investment fund at the Postal Life
Insurance Bureau of the MPT (1986), head of the General Affairs
Division of MPT’s Broadcasting Bureau (1988). He is credited
with introducing a competition and liberalization policy at a time
when such ideas were not widely accepted. He undertook a ma-
jor restructuring of Japan’s postal services with a staff of 200,000.
He has played a very active role in many international negotia-
326
Biographical Sketches of Present Heads of UN System Organizations

tions, particularly those leading to the historic WTO agreement
on basic telecommunications. He has a bachelor of law degree
from the University of Tokyo and a master of arts degree in polit-
ical science from the University of Chicago.
Michel Jarraud, Secretary-General, 
World Meteorological Organization (WMO)
Michel Jarraud was appointed secretary-general of the WMO for a
four-year term in 2003, after serving as deputy secretary-general
from 1995 to 2003. He devoted part of his career to the European
Center for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF), where he
was appointed deputy director in 1991, after having been director
of the Operational Department since 1990. From September 1978
to December 1985 he was a researcher in numerical weather pre-
diction at the ECMWF. He started his career with Météo-France,
as a researcher (1976–1978). He joined the French National Meteo-
rological Service again in January 1986 as director of the Weather
Forecasting Department, and served there until December 1989.
He is a meteorologist with degrees from the French Ecole Poly-
technique and the Ecole de la Météorologie Nationale. For World
Meteorological Day on 23 March 2005, he chose “the theme
‘Weather, climate, water and sustainable development,’ in recog-
nition of the vital role and outstanding contribution of meteorol-
ogy, hydrology, and related geophysical sciences to human
progress, sustainable socioeconomic development, environmental
protection, and poverty alleviation. . . . A signiﬁcant threat to sus-
tainable development is the increased impact of extreme weather
and climate events. . . . In the longer term, sustainable develop-
ment requires that the climate system is better understood, with
the possibility to project future climate changes and their potential
impacts” (www.wmo.ch/index-en.htm).
Carlos Magariños, Director-General, 
UN Industrial Development Organization
(UNIDO)
Carlos Magariños has been director-general of UNIDO since
1997, reelected for a four-year term in 2000 and having concluded
a two-year chairmanship of the High-Level Committee on Pro-
Heads of Eleven UN Specialized Agencies
327

grams of the UN System Chief Executives Board for Coordina-
tion (CEB) in 2002. He was state secretary for industry and min-
ing of Argentina (1993–1996) and national director for foreign
trade (1991–1992). He also served as under-secretary of state for
industry (1992–1993) and economic and trade representative of
the Argentine government in Washington, D.C., with the rank of
ambassador and state secretary (1996). His earlier academic ca-
reer includes associate professor of microeconomics (1986), tech-
nical coordinator in research methodology of investigation
(1987), and assistant professor of foreign trade institutions (1989)
at the National University of Buenos Aires. He was also associate
professor for Argentine and Latin American economic issues at
Salvador University, Buenos Aires (1990), and taught on the sub-
ject of imports and exports by small- and medium-sized enter-
prises at the University of Belgrano, Buenos Aires (1990). He
studied in Italy at the International Development Law Institute in
Rome (1990) and at the Wharton School of the University of
Pennsylvania (1997).
“He has consistently advocated the cause of multilateralism,
and the need for a development agenda that better addresses the
threats and opportunities the developing countries face with
globalization” (www.unido.org/doc/3322).
Paul D. Wolfowitz, President, 
World Bank Group (WBG)
Wolfowitz became the tenth president of the World Bank Group
on 1 June 2005, after serving as U.S. deputy secretary of defense,
the Pentagon’s number two post, since March 2001. He was pre-
viously dean and professor of international relations at the Paul
H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies (SAIS) of
Johns Hopkins University. He has held a number of U.S. govern-
ment posts. In addition to U.S. deputy secretary of defense, he
served as under secretary of defense for policy, U.S. ambassador
to Indonesia, and as assistant secretary of state for East Asian and
Pacific affairs. He has also served as head of the U.S. State De-
partment’s Policy Planning Staff, as deputy assistant secretary of
defense for regional programs and in the Arms Control and Dis-
armament Agency, as well as in the U.S. Bureau of the Budget. He
also served on the 1998 Commission to Assess the Ballistic Mis-
sile Threat to the United States and the 1996 President’s Commis-
328
Biographical Sketches of Present Heads of UN System Organizations

sion on the Roles and Capabilities of the U.S. Intelligence Com-
munity. He taught previously at Yale (1970–1973) and John Hop-
kins (1981). He earned a bachelor’s degree in mathematics from
Cornell University in 1965 and a doctorate in political science
from the University of Chicago in 1972.
Rodrigo de Rato, Managing Director,
International Monetary Fund (IMF)
Rodrigo de Rato assumed ofﬁce as managing director of the IMF
in 2004. He was appointed vice president for economic affairs
and minister of economy for the government of Spain in 1996,
when he also served as governor for Spain on the boards of gov-
ernors of the IMF, the World Bank, the Inter-American Develop-
ment Bank, the European Investment Bank, and the European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development. He regularly at-
tended the European Union’s (EU) economics and ﬁnance minis-
ters’ meetings and represented the EU at the Group of Seven Fi-
nance Ministers. He was also in charge of foreign trade relations
for the government of Spain, and represented Spain at the World
Trade Organization’s ministerial meetings in 2001 and 2003. He
was a member of Spain’s parliament from 1982 to 2004. He has a
law degree from the Universidad Complutense in Madrid, a mas-
ter of business administration degree from the University of Cali-
fornia at Berkeley, and a PhD in economics from the Universidad
Complutense. In January 2005 he stated: “Surveillance will re-
main the centerpiece of our efforts. Over the past decade, there
has been signiﬁcant progress in strengthening our dialogue with
member countries that aims to improve their economic policies
and prevent financial crises” (www.imf.org/external/np/vc/
2005/010105.htm).
Lennart Båge, President, International Fund
for Agricultural Development (IFDA)
Lennart Båge has held his post as president of the IFDA since
2001. He had been involved in the activities of IFAD for ten years,
during which time he served as chairman of the Governing
Council of IFAD and cochairman of the High-Level Special Com-
mittee on IFAD’s Resource Requirements and Related Gover-
Heads of Eleven UN Specialized Agencies
329

nance Issues. He came to IFAD with nearly twenty-ﬁve years of
experience in international development, and active involvement
in the UN System and multilateral ﬁnance institutions. Prior to
IFAD, he served as head of the Department for International De-
velopment Co-operation in Sweden’s Ministry for Foreign Affairs
in charge of budget and policy development for Sweden’s US$
1.6 billion International Cooperation Program, as well as respon-
sibility for EU Affairs and international ﬁnancial institutions. He
has also served as Sweden’s deputy for the International Devel-
opment Association (IDA), vice chairman of the Development
Assistance Committee of the OECD and Sweden’s alternate gov-
ernor for the Asian, African and Inter-American Development
Banks. In December 2002 UN Secretary-General KoﬁAnnan des-
ignated Båge as chairman of the UN High-Level Committee on
Programs (HLCP). Throughout his career, Båge has focused on a
variety of issues central to IFAD’s mission for poverty reduction,
rural development, economic and social reform, capacity build-
ing, environmental management, and gender. He holds an MBA
from the Stockholm School of Economics.
330
Biographical Sketches of Present Heads of UN System Organizations

9
Selected Print and
Nonprint Resources
S
electing the print and nonprint resources to appear in this ﬁ-
nal chapter has been a very difﬁcult task because of the ex-
tensive array of available resources. On the other hand, the
choices that appear will provide information that can lead read-
ers to many more possibilities. The selections that follow begin
with “I. Books” and “II. Articles and Chapters.” We have chosen
to list separately references on the future and on the history of
the UN System. The future is covered in “III. Future of the UN
System.” United Nations history is covered by references and
books that compose “IV. The UN Intellectual History Project”
and “V. Other Recent Publications about UN System History.”
Following these items is a brief list of “VI. Bibliographies,” “VII.
Encyclopedias,” “VIII. Yearbooks,” and “IX. Journals.”
“X. Educational Materials on the UN System” contains refer-
ences to educational material provided by organizations in the
UN System for students ranging from grammar school through
high school and beyond. Many are available on UN websites and
some can be purchased. These educational materials are pro-
vided by the United Nations in New York, the International
Monetary Fund, the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, the
World Bank, the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, and
UNICEF.
In December 2004 the UN secretary-general announced that
its official document system (ODS) was now available to the
public. “XI. Web Access to Full Text of UN Documents” indicates
how access to this vast resource can be achieved.
331

On 15 May 2000, UN Secretary-General KoﬁAnnan sent the
leaders of the member states a letter identifying the twenty-ﬁve
treaties most central to the spirit and goals of the United Nations.
“XII. Twenty-Five Most Central UN Treaties” indicates how you
can gain quick access to an overview of each of these treaties.
Finally, “XIII. Websites” provides addresses of (1) UN sites,
(2) NGO organizations with broad agendas for furthering NGO
effectiveness, (3) NGO issue networks, and (4) other sources of
information.
Table of Contents
I. Books
II. Articles and Chapters
III. Future of the UN System References
IV. The UN Intellectual History Project
V. Other Recent Publications About UN System History
VI. Bibliographies
VII. Encyclopedias
VIII. Yearbook
IX. Journals
X. Educational Materials on the UN System
XI. Web Access to Full Text of UN Documents
XII. Twenty-Five Most Central UN Treaties
XIII. Websites
Books
Aksu, Esref, and Joseph Camilleri, eds., 2002, Democratizing
Global Governance. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Alger, Chadwick F., Gene Lyons, and John Trent, eds., 1995, The
United Nations: The Policies of Member States. Tokyo: United
Nations University.
Alleyne, Mark D., 1995, International Power and International
Communication. New York: St. Martin’s. 
Ariye, Akira, 2002, Global Community: The Role of International
Organizations in the Making of the Contemporary World. Berke-
ley: University of California.
332
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Armstrong, David, Lorna Lloyd, and John Redmond, 1996, From
Versailles to Maastricht: International Organizations in the
Twentieth Century. New York: St. Martin’s.
Bennett, A. LeRoy, and James K. Oliver, 2002, International Orga-
nizations: Principles and Issues, 7th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall.
Boulden, Jane, and Thomas G. Weiss, eds., 2004, Terrorism and
the UN: Before and after September 11. Bloomington: Indiana
University.
Brodie, Bernard, and Fawn Brodie, 1973, From Crossbow to 
H-Bomb, revised and enlarged ed. Bloomington: Indiana Uni-
versity. 
Childers, Erskine, and Brian Urquhart, 1994, Renewing the
United Nations System. Uppsala, Sweden: Dag Hammarskjold
Foundation.
Claude, Inis, 1971, Swords into Plowshares: The Problems and
Progress of International Organization, 4th ed. New York: Ran-
dom House.
Coate, Roger A., 1988, Unilateralism, Ideology, and US Foreign
Policy: The United States in and out of UNESCO. Boulder, CO:
Lynne Rienner.
Coicaud, Jean-Marc, Michael W. Doyle, and Anne-Marie Gardner,
eds., 2003, The Globalization of Human Rights: The United Na-
tions System in the Twenty-First Century. Tokyo: United Nations
University.
Commission on Global Governance, 1995, Our Global Neighbor-
hood. New York: Oxford University.
Cortright, David, and George A. Lopez, with Linda Gerber, 2002,
Sanctions and the Search for Security: Challenges to UN Action.
Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.
Coser, Louis, The Functions of Social Conﬂict, 1956, 1968. New
York: Free Press.
Books
333

Daws, Sam, and Paul Taylor, eds., 2000, The United Nations, Vol-
ume I: Systems and Structures; Volume II, The United Nations,
Functions and Futures. Dartmouth, UK: Ashgate.
Diehl, Paul F., ed., 2001, The Politics of Global Governance: Inter-
national Organizations in an Interdependent World. Boulder, CO:
Lynne Rienner.
Dole, Charles Fletcher, 1906, The Spirit of Democracy. New York:
T. Y. Crowell.
Fasulo, Linda, 2004, An Insider’s Guide to the UN. New Haven,
CT: Yale University. 
Fenton, Neil, 2004, Understanding the UN Security Council.
Aldershot, UK: Ashgate.
Fulbright, J. William, 1966, The Arrogance of Power. New York:
Vintage.
Galenson, Walter, 1981, The International Labor Organization:
An American View. Madison: University of Wisconsin.
Galtung, Johan, 1980, The True Worlds: A Transnational Perspec-
tive. New York: Free Press.
Gregg, Robert W., 1993, About Face? The United States and the
United Nations. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.
Jacob, Philip E., Alexine L. Atherton, and Arthur M. Wallenstein,
1972, The Dynamics of International Organization. Revised ed.
Homewood, IL: Dorsey.
Jessup, Philip, 1956, Parliamentary Diplomacy: An Examination
of the Legal Quality of the Rules of Procedure of Organs of the
United Nations. Leyden: A.W. Sijhoff.
Juda, Lawrence, ed., 1983, The United States without the Law of
the Sea Treaty: Opportunities and Costs. Wakeﬁeld, RI: Times.
Karns, Margaret P., and Karen A. Mingst, 2004, International Or-
ganizations: The Politics and Processes of Global Governance.
Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.
334
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Kirton, John J., and Radoslava N. Stefanova, 2003, The G8, the
United Nations, and Conflict Prevention. Aldershot, UK: Ash-
gate.
Krasno, Jean E., ed., 2004, The United Nations: Confronting the
Challenges of a Global Society. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.
Kull, Steven, and I. M. Destler, 1999, Misreading the Public: The
Myth of a New Isolationism. Washington, DC: Brookings Institu-
tion.
Landy, E. A., 1966, The Effectiveness of International Supervision:
Thirty Years of ILO Experience. London: Stevens and Sons.
Leonard, L. Larry, 1951, International Organization. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Luck, Edward, C., 1999, Mixed Messages: American Politics and
International Organization. Washington, DC: Brookings Institu-
tion.
———, 2003, Reforming the United Nations: Lessons from a His-
tory in Progress. New Haven, CT: Academic Council on the UN
Occasional Papers.
Malone, David M., ed., 2004, The UN Security Council: From the
Cold War to the 21st Century. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.
Mangone, Gerard J., 1954, A Short History of International Orga-
nization. New York: McGraw-Hill.
McNeill, William, 1963, The Rise of the West: A History of the Hu-
man Community. Chicago: University of Chicago.
Muldoon, James P., Jr., JoAnn Fagot Aviel, Earl Sullivan, and
Richard Reitano, 2005, Multilateral Diplomacy and the United
Nations Today, 2d ed. Boulder, CO: Westview.
Muller, Joachim, ed., 2001, Reforming the United Nations: The
Quiet Revolution. The Hague: Kluwer Law International.
Murphy, John F., 2004, The United States and the Rule of Law in
International Affairs. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University.
Books
335

Nye, Joseph, 2002, The Paradox of American Power: Why the
World’s Only Superpower Can’t Go It Alone. Oxford, UK: Univer-
sity of Oxford.
Pugh, Michael, and Waheguru Pal Singh Sidhu, eds., 2003, The
United Nations and Regional Security: Europe and Beyond. Boul-
der, CO: Lynne Rienner.
Reinsch, Paul S., 1916, Public International Unions. 2d ed. Boston:
World Peace Foundation.
Rittberger, Volker, ed., 2001, Global Governance and the United
Nations System: The United Nations System in the Twenty-ﬁrst
Century. Tokyo: United Nations University.
Rochester, J. Martin, 1993, Waiting for the Millennium: The United
Nations and the Future World Order. Columbia: University of
South Carolina.
Schlesinger, Stephen C., 2003, The Act of Creation: The Founding
of the United Nations: A Story of Superpowers, Secret Agents,
Wartime Allies and Enemies and Their Quest for a Peaceful
World. Boulder, CO: Westview.
Schwartzberg, Joseph E., 2004, Revitalizing the United Nations:
Reform through Weighted Voting. New York and The Hague: In-
stitute for Global Policy, World Federalist Movement.
Scott, J. S., ed., 1917, The Reports of the Hague Conferences of 1899
and 1907. Oxford, UK: Humphren Milford.
Siddiqi, Javel, 1995, World Health and World Politics: The World
Health Organization and the UN System. Columbia: University
of South Carolina.
Sriram, Chandra Lekha, and Kiarin Wermester, eds., From
Promise to Practice: Strengthening UN Capacities for the Preven-
tion of Violent Conﬂict. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.
Taylor, Paul, and A. J. R. Groom, eds., 2000, The United Nations at
the Millennium: the Principal Organs. London: Continuum.
336
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

United Nations, 2004, Basic Facts About the United Nations.
New York: United Nations.
United Nations, Department of Public Information, 1996, The Blue
Helmets: A Review of United Nations Peacekeeping. 3d ed. New
York: UN Department of Public Information.
United Nations Association of the USA, A Global Agenda: Issues
before the General Assembly of the UN (an annual publication).
New York: UNA-USA.
Urquhart, Brian, 1972, Hammarskjold. New York: Harper and
Row.
———, 1993, Ralph Bunche: An American Life. New York: W. W.
Norton.
White, Nigel D., 2003, The United Nations System: Toward Inter-
national Justice. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.
Whitsorth, Sandra, 2004, Men, Militarism, and UN Peacekeeping:
A Gendered Analysis. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.
Williams, Phil, and Ernesto U. Savona, 1996, The United Nations
and Transnational Organized Crime. London: Frank Cass.
Williams, Phil, and Dimitri Vlassis, 2001, Combating Transna-
tional Crime. London: Frank Cass.
Ziring, Lawrence, Robert Riggs, and Jack A. Plano, 2000, The
United Nations: International Organizations and World Politics.
3d ed. Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt College.
Articles and Chapters
Agrawala, Shardul, and Steinar Andresen, 1999, “Indispensability
and Indefensibility? The United States in the Climate Treaty Ne-
gotiations,” Global Governance, Vol. 5, No. 4, 457–482.
Articles and Chapters
337

Alger, Chadwick F., 2003, “Evolving Roles of NGOs in Member
State Decision-making in the UN System,” Journal of Human
Rights, Vol. 2., No. 3, 407–424.
———, 2003, “Searching for Democratic Potential in Emerging
Global Governance,” in Bruce Morrison, Transnational Democracy
in Critical and Comparative Perspective: Democracy’s Range Reconsid-
ered. Ashgate, UK: Aldershot, 87–106.
———, 1999, “Strengthening Relations between NGOs and the
UN System: Towards a Research Agenda,” Global Civil Society,
Vol. 13, No. 4, 393–410.
———, 1995, “The United Nations in Historical Perspective,” in
Chadwick F. Alger, Gene M. Lyons, and John E. Trent, eds., The
UN System: The Policies of Member States. Tokyo: UN University,
3–40.
———, 1994, “Citizens and the UN System in a Changing
World,” in Yoshikazu Sakomoto, ed., Global Transformation: Chal-
lenges to the State System. Tokyo: UN University.
Archibugi, Daniele, 1993, “The Reform of the UN and Cos-
mopolitan Democracy: A Critical Review,” Journal of Peace Re-
search, Vol. 30, No. 3, 301–316.
Debiel, Tobias, 2000, “Strengthening the UN as an Effective
World Authority: Security versus Hegemonic Crisis Manage-
ment,” Global Governance, Vol. 6, No. 1, 25–42.
Lyons, Gene, 1999, “The UN and American Politics,” Global Gov-
ernance, Vol. 5, No. 4, 497–512.
Nuscheler, Franz, 2002, “World Conferences,” in Helmut Vogler,
ed., A Concise Encyclopedia of the United Nations. The Hague:
Kluwer Law International, 684–688.
Ruggie, John Gerard, 2003, “The United Nations and Globaliza-
tion: Patterns and Limits of Institutional Adaptation,” Global
Governance, Vol. 9, No. 3, 301–321.
Stoll, Peter Tobias, 2002, “WTO—World Trade Organization,
GATT—General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade,” in Helmut
338
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Vogler, ed., A Concise Encyclopedia of the United Nations. The
Hague: Kluwer Law International, 691–697.
Future of the UN System References
Alger, Chadwick F., 1998, “Conclusion: The potential of the
United Nations system,” in Alger, 1998, 409–423.
———, 1996, “Thinking about the Future of the UN System,”
Global Governance, Vol. 2, 335–360.
———, 1998, The Future of the United Nations System: Potential
for the Twenty-First Century. Tokyo: United Nations University.
Apodaca, Clair, Michael Stohl, and George Lopez, 1998, “Moving
Norms to Political Reality: Institutionalizing Human Rights
Standards through the UN System,” in Alger, The Future of the
United Nations System: Potential for the Twenty-First Century. Tokyo:
United Nations University, 185–220.
Biermann, Frank, and Steffen Bauer, 2005, A World Environment
Organization: Solution of Threat for Effective International Envi-
ronmental Governance. Williston, VT: Ashgate.
Boulding, Elise, and Jan Oberg, 1998, “United Nations Peace-
keeping and NGO Peace Building: Towards Partnership,” in Al-
ger, The Future of the United Nations System: Potential for the Twenty-
First Century. Tokyo: United Nations University, 127–154.
Brauch, Hans Gunter, Czeslaw Mesjasz, and Bjorn Moller, 1998,
“Controlling Weapons in the Quest for Peace: Non-offensive
Defence, Arms Control, Disarmament, and Conversion,” in Al-
ger, The Future of the United Nations System: Potential for the Twenty-
First Century. Tokyo: United Nations University, 15–53.
Debiel, Tobias, 2000, “Strengthening the UN as an Effective
World Authority: Cooperative Security versus Hegemonic Crisis
Management,” Global Governance, Vol. 6, No. 1, 25–42.
Jeong, Ho-Won, 1998, “The struggle in the UN System for Wider
Participation in Forming Global Economic Policies,” in Alger,
Future of the UN System References
339

The Future of the United Nations System: Potential for the Twenty-First
Century. Tokyo: United Nations University, 221–247.
Johansen, Robert C., 1998, “Enhancing United Nations Peace-
keeping,” in Alger, The Future of the United Nations System: Poten-
tial for the Twenty-First Century. Tokyo: United Nations University,
89–126.
McSpadden, Lucia Ann, and Anthony Ayok Chol, 1998, “Generat-
ing the Political Will for Protecting the Rights of Refugees,” in
Alger, The Future of the United Nations System: Potential for the
Twenty-First Century. Tokyo: United Nations University, 282–314.
Mische, Patricia M., and Mauricio Andres Ribeiro, 1998, “Sharing
and Protecting the Commons: Ecological Security and the
United Nations System,” in Alger, The Future of the United Nations
System: Potential for the Twenty-First Century. Tokyo: United Na-
tions University, 315–356.
Osseiran, Sanaa, and Betty Reardon, 1998, “The United Nations’
Role in Peace Education,” in Alger, The Future of the United Na-
tions System: Potential for the Twenty-First Century. Tokyo: United
Nations University, 385–408.
Pietila, Hilkka, and Jeanne Vickers, 1998, “The UN System in the
Vanguard of Advancement of Women: Equality, Development,
and Peace,” in Alger, The Future of the United Nations System: Poten-
tial for the Twenty-First Century. Tokyo: United Nations University,
248–281.
Rupesinghe, Kumar, 1998, “Coping with Internal Conﬂict: Teach-
ing the Elephant to Dance” in Alger, The Future of the United Na-
tions System: Potential for the Twenty-First Century. Tokyo: United
Nations University, 155–184.
Varis, Tapio, 1998, “Communications in the Future UN System,”
in Alger, The Future of the United Nations System: Potential for the
Twenty-First Century. Tokyo: United Nations University, 357–384.
Vayrynen, Raimo, 1998, “ Enforcement and Humanitarian Inter-
vention: Two Faces of Collective Action by the United Nations,”
340
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

in Alger, The Future of the United Nations System: Potential for the
Twenty-First Century. Tokyo: United Nations University, 54–88.
The UN
Intellectual History Project
The project has two main components. One is a series of eigh-
teen books, each focused on well-defined economic or social ar-
eas of UN activity or on key ideas and norms linked to interna-
tional peace and security. The second main component of the
project is a series of oral history interviews. All seventy-three of
the interviews in the first phase have been completed. All of the
books are being published as a special series by Indiana Univer-
sity Press.
“The persistent cynicism about the UN’s record being a
‘blank slate’ is one of the principal arguments for this project, and
it underscores the importance of disseminating our research ﬁnd-
ings as widely as possible. As project research shows, the UN has
been the international incubator, advocate, and disseminator of
many key ideas emerging out of debates about economic and so-
cial issues over almost 60 years, ideas that we now take for
granted—human rights, full employment, sustainable develop-
ment, gender equality, basic needs, and human development and
human security, to name but a few. In short, the UN has greatly
contributed in shaping development discourse and practice glob-
ally albeit with varied results, while it has itself been shaped by
it” (www.unhistory.org).
Listed below are ﬁve volumes already published, seven to be
published in 2005, two in 2006, and three for which the authors
have not yet been commissioned. All are published by Indiana
University Press.
Berthelot, Yves, ed., with Adebayo Adedeji, Leelananda de Silva,
Paul Rayment, Gert Rosenthal, and Blandine Destremeau, 2003,
Unity and Diversity in Development Ideas: Perspectives from the
UN Regional Commissions.
Emmerij, Louis, Richard Jolly, and Thomas G. Weiss, 2003, Ahead
of the Curve? UN Ideas and Global Challenges.
The UN Intellectual History Project
341

Jolly, Richard, Louis Emmerij, Dharam Ghai, and Frederic
Lapeyre, 2004, UN Contributions to Development Thinking and
Practice.
Toye, John, and Richard Toye, 2004. The UN and Global Political
Economy: Trade, Finance, and Development.
Ward, Michael, 2004, Quantifying the World: UN Contributions
to Statistics.
Jain, Devaki, forthcoming 2005, Women, Development, and the
UN: Sixty Years in Quest of Equality and Justice. 
MacFarlane, S. Neil, and Yuen Foong-Khong, forthcoming 2005,
Human Security and the UN: A Critical History.
Normand, Roger, and Sarah Zaidi, forthcoming 2005, The UN and
Human Rights: The Unﬁnished Revolution. 
Sagaﬁ-nejad, Tagi, in collaboration with John Dunning, forthcom-
ing 2005, The UN and Transnational: From Code to Compact.
Schriver, Nico J., forthcoming 2005, The UN and the Global Com-
mons: Development without Destruction.
Stokk, Olav, forthcoming 2005, The UN and Development Cooper-
ation.
Weiss, Thomas G., Tatiana Carayannis, Louis Emmerij, and
Richard Jolly, forthcoming 2005, UN Voices: The Struggle for De-
velopment and Social Justice.
Jolly, Richard, Louis Emmerij, and Thomas G. Weiss, forthcoming
2006, The United Nations: A History of Ideas and Their Future.
Thakur, Ramesh, and Thomas G. Weiss, forthcoming 2006, The
UN and Global Governance: An Idea and Its Prospects.
Authors to be commissioned, Collective Security and Peacekeeping.
Authors to be commissioned, Conﬂict Prevention.
Authors to be commissioned, Humanitarian Intervention.
342
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Other Recent Publications
about UN System History
This copyrighted bibliography is available at the UN Intellectual
History Project website (www.unhistory.org) and is presented
here with the permission of the Ralph Bunche Institute for Inter-
national Studies, Graduate Center, City University of New York.
Anstee, Margaret Joan, Never Learn to Type: A Woman at the
United Nations. (London: John Wiley and Sons, 2003).
Batisse, Michel, Demain l’Unesco/Unesco and the Years Ahead.
(Paris: Millios Group 1999).
Blanchard, Francis, L’Organisation Internationale du Travail: de
la Guerre Froide au Nouvel Ordre Mondial. Preface de Philippe
Seguin. (Paris: Le Seuil 2004).
Bøås, Morten, “Governance as Multilateral Development Bank
Policy: The Cases of the African Development Bank and the Asian
Development Bank.” European Journal of Development Research,
vol. 10, no. 2 (1998): 117–134.
Chabbott, Colette, Constructing Education for Development: In-
ternational Organizations and Education for All. Reference
Books in International Education. Edward Beauchamp, editor.
(New York: Routledge Falmer 2003).
Emmerij, Louis, “An Intellectual History of the United Nations”
Development in Practice, vol. 12, no. 5 (November 2002): 653–655.
Dil, Anwar, ed., Hunger, Poverty and Development: The Life and
Work of Sartaj Aziz. (Lahore: Ferozsons 2000).
Jolly, Richard, ed., Jim Grant: UNICEF Visionary. (New York:
UNICEF 2001).
Lewin, André, L’ONU, pour quoi faire? (Paris: Gallimard, 1995).
Lewin, André, ed., La France et L’ONU depuis 1945, with fore-
word by Alain Juppé (Paris: Arleéa/Corlet/Le Seuil, 1995).
Other Recent Publications about UN System History
343

Mackenzie, Archie, Faith in Diplomacy. (St. Paul, MN: Grosvenor
Books, 2002).
Schlesinger, Stephen C., Act of Creation: The Founding of the
United Nations. (Boulder: Westview, 2003).
Shaw, D. John, The UN World Food Programme and the Develop-
ment of Food Aid. (Basingstoke: Palgrave 2001).
Shaw, D. John, Sir Hans Singer: The Life and Work of a Develop-
ment Economist. (Basingstoke: Palgrave 2002).
Singer, Hans, and D. John Shaw, International Development Co-
operation: Essays on Aid and the United Nations System. (Bas-
ingstoke: Palgrave, 2001).
Taniguchi, Makoto, North-South Issues in the 21st Century: A
Challenge in the Global Age. (Waseda University Press, 2001).
Tokman, Victor E., Una Voz en el Camino—Empleo y Equidad en
America Latina: 40 Anos de Busqueda. (Chile: Fondo de Cultura
Economica, 2004).
Toye, John, and Richard Toye, “The Origins and Interpretation of
the Prebisch-Singer Thesis,” History of Political Economy, vol.
35, no. 3 (Fall 2003): 347–367.
Weiss, Thomas G., and Tatiana Carayannis, “The Role of UN Eco-
nomic and Social Ideas,” Work in Progress: A Review of Research
Activities of the United Nations University, vol. 16, no. 3 (Sum-
mer 2002). United Nations University. 
Weiss, Thomas G., and Tatiana Carayannis, “Whither United Na-
tions Economic and Social Ideas? A Research Agenda,” Journal of
Global Social Policy, vol.1, no. 1 (April 2001): 25–47.
Bibliographies
Hajnal, Peter, “United Nations Reform: A Selected Bibliography.”
Revised 27 January 1997. (http://www.library.yale.edu/un/
un2a6a.htm)
344
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Spencer, Christopher, “Global Issues of the Twenty-First Century
and United Nations Challenges: An Annotated Bibliography.”
Updated 29 November 2004 (www.global-challenges.org). It is
recommended that users of this bibliography go first to “Why
This Bibliography, and How to Use It.”
Encyclopedias
Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS). Oxford, UK:
EOLSS, 2001.
Encyclopedia of World Problems and Human Potential. Vol. 1:
World Problems. Vol. 2: Human Potential, Transformation and
Values. Vol. 3: Actions, Strategies, Solutions. 4th ed. Brussels, Bel-
gium: Union of International Associations (UIA), 1994–1995.
Volger, Helmut, ed., A Concise Encyclopedia of the United Na-
tions. The Hague, Netherlands: Kluwer Law International, 2000.
Who’s Who in International Organizations. 3d ed. Brussels, Bel-
gium: Union of International Associations (UIA), 1999.
Yearbook
Yearbook of International Organizations. Brussels, Belgium:
Union of International Associations (UIA).
Journals
Global Governance
Global Networks
Global Society
Globalization
International Journal of Peace Studies
International Organization
Journals
345

International Peacekeeping
International Studies Quarterly
Journal of Human Rights
Journal of Peace Research
Millennium Journal of International Studies
Transnational Associations
United Nations Chronicle
World Politics
Educational Materials
on the UN System
The United Nations, the International Monetary Fund, the UN
High Commissioner for Refugees, the World Bank, the UN Envi-
ronment Program, and the UN High Commissioner for Human
Rights have made available educational materials on global is-
sues and on efforts of the UN System to cope with them. These
materials are available for primary, intermediate, and secondary
schools. Easy access to these materials can be attained on the In-
ternet.
1. UN Global Teaching and Learning Project, Cyberschoolbus
The UN Cyberschoolbus offers three kinds of materials:
brieﬁng papers, curriculum topics, and school kits on the United
Nations.
(1) The Brieﬁng Papers for students are based on the sec-
retary-general’s Millennium Report on the role of the United Na-
tions in the twenty-ﬁrst century. Each brieﬁng paper provides in-
formation about a current world problem and the UN System’s
efforts to cope with it. The topics include preventing conflict,
poverty, refugees, human rights, child soldiers, child labor, and a
number of others. (Available at www.un.org/cyberschoolbus/
brieﬁng/index.asp)
(2) Each Curriculum Topic focuses on an issue on the
agenda of organizations in the UN System. Examples are peace
education, poverty, human rights, cities of the world, world
hunger, indigenous peoples, rights at work, ethnic discrimina-
346
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

tion, racial discrimination, peace schools, women’s rights, saving
tomorrow’s world, cleaner oceans, the United Nations in space,
and health.
(Available at http://www.un.org/Pubs/CyberSchoolBus)
(3) School Kits on the United Nations are prepared by
teachers for three different levels: primary, intermediate, and sec-
ondary.
The Primary School Kit on the United Nations introduces
the work of the UN System to children seven to ten years old. An
effort is made to indicate how issues on the agendas of the UN
System have a connection to the lives of young children. Themes
covered are learning to resolve conﬂicts peacefully, human rights,
refugees, disarmament, disaster relief, the environment, and a
number of other issues.
The Intermediate School Kit on the United Nations is for
students between the ages of eleven and fourteen. Issues covered
include the environment, the rights of the child, health and sci-
ence, disaster relief, and refugees. The UN website states that
“teachers of all subjects, from history and language to math, sci-
ence and geography, will work easily with these units.” The kits
illuminate the fact that in courses on art, music, and mathematics
it is possible to focus on aspects of the broad agendas of organiza-
tions in the UN System that are often overlooked.
The Secondary School Kit on the United Nations has the
goal of presenting very complex global issues in a way that
makes them understandable to high school students. Efforts to
work for tolerance, development, and peace are illuminated
through units on child labor, the struggle against apartheid, equal
rights for women, cleaner oceans, and accessible health care,
among other topics.
School Kits are sold for $4.95 each, plus shipping and han-
dling. For further information and ordering go to http://
cyberschoolbus.un.org/bookstor/kits, or call 1–800 253–9646.
2. The International Monetary Fund “For Students” Infor-
mation and Online Learning Activities about the IMF opens
with information on the IMF, frequently asked questions about
the IMF, and criticism of the IMF and provides some photos.
There is also a section on “EconEd Online” that offers “educa-
tional activities and resources, including teaching guides, to help
students understand the history of money, macroeconomics, in-
ternational monetary cooperation, and global trade.” This is fol-
lowed by educational material prepared especially for high
Educational Materials on the UN System
347

school students and also for fifth- and sixth-grade students.
(www.imf.org/external/np/exr/st/eng/index.htm)
3. The UN High Commissioner on Refugees, “For Teachers”
Website, has a special area just for those interested in teaching
about refugee issues at the primary, intermediate, and secondary
levels. Good for many different subjects. (www.unhcr.ch/
children/index.html)
4. The World Bank website has a section, “Youthink,” de-
voted to offering students and teachers “information about
global issues that matter to young people today.” Among the is-
sues covered are conflict, corruption, development, education,
employment, environment, and globalization. An effort is made
to share the research, knowledge and experience gathered 
by World Bank experts on these issues. (http://youthink.
worldbank.org)
5. The UN Environment Program website offers the Children
and Youth Program that provides a variety of activities that en-
courage the involvement of children in environmental issues.
There is only space here to present three examples. One is a book,
Pachamama: Our Earth—Our Future, 1999. It has sections on
“Our Earth” (Atmosphere; Freshwater, Marine & Coastal Areas;
Land and Food; Forests; Biodiversity; Urbanization; and Polar
Regions); “Our Future” (What Scientists Say, What Others
Think), and concludes with “What You Can Do! How Green Are
You?” Second, since 1990 UNEP has sponsored an annual Inter-
national Children’s Painting Competition on the Environment. It
has received over 160,000 entries from children in over 100 coun-
tries. The competition in 2005 is the fourteenth and will focus on
the theme “Green Cities.” Third, UNEP is organizing the first
Children’s World Summit for the Environment in Japan from 26
to 29 July 2005 in conjunction with Expo 2005. The conference is
for children between the ages of ten and fourteen.
(www.unep.org/Documents.multilingual/Default.asp?
DocumentID=295)
6. The UN High Commissioner for Human Rights website
has an extensive “Database for Human Rights Education.” This
database includes bibliographies, curricula, educational games,
picture books, plans of action, and teaching/training guides.
Items in this last category have been prepared by human rights
organizations in various countries. A few examples of the titles
are: “Handbook for Teaching Human Rights and Peace”; “First
Steps: A Manual for Starting Human Rights Education”; “Fields
348
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

of Hope: Educational Activities on Child Labor”; “Teacher’s
Guide, Peace and War: A Resource for Teaching and Learning”;
and “Shopping List of Techniques in Teaching Human Rights.”
(www.unhchr.ch/hredu.nsf)
Web Access to
Full Text of UN Documents
In December 2004 the United Nations announced the availability
of its ofﬁcial document system (ODS), the full-text web resource
for official UN documentation to the general public via
http://documents.un.org. The ODS covers all types of official
UN documentation originating from duty stations worldwide,
including selective documents of the regional commissions: Eco-
nomic and Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA), Eco-
nomic and Social Commission for Asia and the Paciﬁc (ESCAP),
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
(ECLAC), and Economic Commission for Europe (ECE).
Comprehensive coverage starts in 1993. Older UN docu-
ments are added to the system on a daily basis. Selective cover-
age of General Assembly and Security Council documentation
currently reaches back to 1985. The ODS also provides access to
the resolutions of the General Assembly, Security Council, Eco-
nomic and Social Council, and the Trusteeship Council from 1946
onwards.
In December 2004 the ODS contained close to 800,000 files
and approximately 100,000 new documents are added each year.
Users may take advantage of ODS beneﬁts such as quick ac-
cess to valuable UN ofﬁcial documents, easy-to-use search func-
tionality, easy-to-print PDF documents, and user-friendly design.
An ODS Training Guide is posted at: http://www.un.org/
Depts/dhl/resguide/train.htm.
Twenty-Five Most Central UN Treaties
On 15 May 2000 UN Secretary-General KoﬁAnnan sent the lead-
ers of the member states a letter identifying the twenty-five
treaties most central to the spirit and goals of the UN Charter. He
invited these leaders to make use of the opportunity provided by
Twenty-Five Most Central UN Treaties
349

the Millennium Summit to rededicate themselves to the interna-
tional legal order by signing and ratifying those treaties. They in-
clude treaties on genocide, safety of UN personnel, human rights,
racial discrimination, torture, drought and desertification, nu-
clear test-ban, women’s rights, migrant workers and their fami-
lies, children’s rights, global warming, antipersonnel mines,
refugees, international criminal court, conventional weapons re-
strictions, chemical weapons, terrorist bombings, biodiversity,
and the environment. Key provisions of these twenty-ﬁve treaties
are available at: www.un.org/cyberschoolbus/treaties.
Websites
UN System
Quick routes of access to all organizations in UN System:
www.un.org, www.unsystem.org
UN On-line Tour: New York, www.un.org/Pubs/
CyberSchoolBus/untour/subgen
Geneva, www.unog.ch/frames/tour/tour.htm
Cyberschoolbus: Introduction to the UN,
www.cyberschoolbus.un.org/unintro/unintro.asp
Cyberschoolbus: www.un.org/Pubs/CyberSchoolBus/index.asp
Cyberschoolbus has curriculum on: Peace Education,
Poverty, Human Rights, World Hunger, Indigenous People,
Racial Discrimination, Ethnic Discrimination, Rights at Work,
Schools Demining Schools, and Cities of the World.
NGO Organizations with Broad Agendas 
for Furthering NGO Effectiveness
Global Communication Center for Development Organizations:
http://ngos.cc/
Global Policy Forum: www.globalpolicy.org/ngos
NGO Links: www.ngo.org/links
350
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

NGOs Network: www.ngos.net
United Nations Association of the United States of America
(UNA-USA): www.unausa.org
World Federation of UN Associations (WFUNA):
www.wfuna.org
NGO Issue Networks
Abolition 2000: www.abolition2000.org
Amnesty International: www.amnesty.org
Business Council for the UN: www.bcun.org
Coalition for the International Criminal Court: www.iccnow.org/
Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers: www.
child-soldiers.org
Doctors without Borders: www.doctorswithoutborders.org
European Platform for Conﬂict Prevention and Transformation:
www.euconﬂict.org
Global Partnership for the Prevention of Armed Conﬂict
(GPPAC): www.gppac.net
Global Peace Services USA: www.globalpeaceservices.org
Greenpeace: www.greenpeace.org
Human Rights Links: www.derechos.net/links/ngo
Human Rights Watch: www.hrw.org
International Action Network on Small Arms: www.iansa.org
International Alert: www.international-alert.org
International Campaign to Ban Landmines (ICBL): www.icbl.org
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH):
www.ﬁdh.org
Websites
351

Lawyers Committee on Nuclear Policy: www.lcnp.org
Nuclear Age Peace Foundation: www.wagingpeace.org
Oxfam: www.oxfam.org
Pugwash: www.pugwash.org
Safer World: www.saferworld.org
Search for Common Ground: www.sfcg.org
UN Watch: www.unwatch.org
World Organization Against Torture (OMCT): www.omct.org
Sources of Information
Americans and the World: www.americans-world.org
Americans Talk Issues Foundation (ATIF):
www.publicinterestpolling.com
Center for Defense Information (CDI): www.cdi.org
Program on International Policy Attitudes (PIPA), University of
Maryland: www.pipa.org
UNWIRE (Daily news on UN system issues): www.unwire.org
United States Government Websites
Bureau of International Organization Affairs (IO) Department of
State: www.state.gov/p/io
U.S. Mission to the United Nations, New York City:
www.un.int/usa
U.S. Mission to the United Nations, Geneva:
www.usmission.ch/index.html
U.S. Mission to the United Nations Agencies in Rome:
http://usunrome.usembassy.it/
U.S. Mission to International Organizations in Vienna:
www.usun-vienna.usia.co.at
352
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Index
353
A 
Academic Council on the United
Nations System (ACUNS), 62,
309
Acronyms
of UN peacekeeping operations,
294
of the UN System, 290–293
ACSF. See Asian Civil Society Forum
ACUNS. See Academic Council on
the United Nations System
Administrative Committee on
Coordination, 21, 108. See also
UN System Chief Executives
Board (CEB)
Adopt-A-Mineﬁeld Campaign,
245
Africa, Security Council reform and,
263–267
African Union (AU), 36, 263–264, 
266
Agrawala, Shardul, 52
Airline ticket tax, 230
Alger, Chadwick F., 279
Alliance for International Conﬂict
Prevention and Resolution, 306
American NGO Coalition for the
International Criminal Court,
245
American Society for International
Law, 62
Americans and the World
(www.americans-world.org), 61
Americans for UNESCO, 310
Amnesty International, 306
“A More Secure World: Our Shared
Responsibility,” 255–56
Andresen, Steinar, 52
Annan, Koﬁ
biographical sketch of, 314–315
business leaders challenged to
join the Global Compact by, 44,
242
Cardoso Panel of Eminent
Persons, establishment of, 257
on health as a human right, 204
High-Level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change,
appointment of, 254
local authorities, support for, 45
the Millennium Project,
launching of, 253
Nobel Peace Prize awarded to,
234
on peacekeeping operations in
the ﬁeld, 19
Peoples Millennium Assembly,
call for, 42
term as secretary-general, 231
treaties, identiﬁcation of the
twenty-ﬁve most central, 332,
349

Annan, Koﬁ, continued
UN Fund for International
Partnerships, establishment of,
243
UN Peace Operations Panel,
appointment of, 259
Araki, Takeshi, 301
Arbour, Louise, 316
Archibugi, Daniele, 271
Armaments and arms control
Convention on the Prohibition of
Development, Production,
Stockpiling, and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on
Their Destruction, 106
disarmament as a peace building
tool, 9–10
escalating human linkages
through, 67–69
International Atomic Energy
Agency, 103–104
Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty, 105
Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons, 106
Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear Test-
Ban Treaty Organization
(CTBTO), 105–106
Arms sales tax, 229
Articles/chapters on the UN
System, 337–338
Asadi, Bagher, 257
Asian Civil Society Forum (ACSF),
273–278
Association Internationales des
Maires Francophones (AIMF),
302
AU. See African Union
Aviation fuel tax, 229–230
B
Båge, Lennart, 329–330
Balance of power, as peace building
tool, 9–10
BCUN. See Business Council for the
United Nations
The Better World Campaign, 310
Bevin, Ernest, 272
Blair, Montgomery, 94
Books on the UN System, 332–337
Boutros-Ghali, Boutros, 40–41, 
231
Brahimi, Lakhdar, 259
Bretton Woods Conference (1944),
100
Brodie, Bernard, 68
Brodie, Fawn, 68
Bunche, Ralph, 234
Bush, George W., 216
Business
links to on the United Nations
website, 60–61
UN relationships with, 43–44,
242–243
Business Council for the United
Nations (BCUN), 243, 245
C
Cambodia, UN Transitional
Authority in, 199
Carbon/energy use tax, 229
Cardoso, Fernando Henrique,
257–259
Cardoso Panel, 257–259, 274–275
Carnegie, Andrew, 71
Carnegie Council on Ethics and
International Affairs, 309
Castells, Manuel, 257
CDUN. See The Committee for a
Democratic United Nations
CEB. See UN System Chief
Executives Board
Center for Defense Information
(www.cdi.org), 61
Childers, Erskine, 271–272
Cities Alliance, 208–209
Citizens for Global Solutions,
255–257, 307
354
Index

Civil society
Asian Civil Society Forum
statement, 273–278
Cardoso panel report, 257–259
See also Nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs)
Claude, Inis L., 5, 8, 69–70
Coalition for the International
Criminal Court, 307
Coalition to Stop the Use of Child
Soldiers, 307
Collective security, as peace
building tool, 9–11
Colonialism
Declaration Regarding Non-Self-
Governing Territories, 11,
142–143
former trust territories of the
United Nations, 237–238
historical roots of the United
Nations and, 7–8
international trusteeship system
outlined in the UN Charter,
143–145
League of Nations Covenant and,
124–125
self-determination, UN
promotion of, 10–13, 15
Trusteeship Council, 11, 21–22,
78–79, 146–147, 282
See also Self-determination
Columbia University, Earth
Institute, 253
Committee Against Torture, 197
The Committee for a Democratic
United Nations (CDUN), 271,
311
Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, 196, 203
Committee on Migrant Workers, 197
Committee on Non-Governmental
Organizations, 77
Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination Against
Women, 197
Committee on the Elimination 
of Racial Discrimination, 
196
Committee on the Rights of the
Child, 197
Communications
equity of as peace building tool,
10, 13
escalating human linkages
through, 67–69
Concert of Europe, 5–6, 69
Conference of NGOs in
Consultative Relationship with
the United Nations (CONGO),
78, 273–274, 277
Conferences
nineteenth century, 246–248
United Nations (1994–2004),
234–237
world sponsored by the United
Nations, development of,
106–107
See also names of conferences,
conventions, etc.
CONGO. See Conference of NGOs
in Consultative Relationship
with the United Nations
Congress of Vienna, 5–6, 69
Convention for the Suppression of
Unlawful Acts against the
Safety of Civil Aviation, 
218
Convention for the Suppression of
Unlawful Acts against the
Safety of Maritime Navigation,
219, 222
Convention for the Suppression of
Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft,
218
Convention on Offences and
Certain Other Acts Committed
on Board Aircraft, 218
Convention on the Marking of
Plastic Explosives for the
Purpose of Detection, 219
Index
355

Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material,
218
Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of Crimes against
Internationally Protected
Persons, including Diplomatic
Agents, 218
Convention on the Prohibition of
Development, Production,
Stockpiling, and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on
Their Destruction, 106
Convention on the Rights of the
Child, 203–205
Coser, Louis, 33
Costa, Antonio Maria, 321–322
Council of Europe, 303–304
Counter-Terrorism Committee, 219
Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, 220
Counterterrorism efforts, 217–223
Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights. See International
Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights
Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights. See
International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights
Croatia, UN Transitional Authority
in Eastern Slavonia, Baranja
and Western Sirmium
(UNTAES), 199
CSD. See UN Commission on
Sustainable Development
CTBTO. See Preparatory
Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear Test-
Ban Treaty Organization
D
Dahl, Birgitta, 257
Danube Commission, 7
Davies, Daphne, 229
Declaration of the United Nations
Conference on the Human
Environment, 84
Declaration on Fundamental
Principles and Rights at Work,
44
Delanoë, Bertrand, 259
Democratic Republic of the Congo,
32
Destler, I. M., 53
Development programs
development, varied deﬁnitions
of, 31
ecological balance and, 14
economic and communications
issues regarding, 12–14
as peace building tool, 10, 12
sustainable development and, 31,
84
See also UN Development
Program (UNDP); World Bank
Group
Diouf, Jacques, 323–324
Diplomacy, as peace building tool,
9–10
Disarmament. See Armaments and
arms control
Dole, Charles Fletcher, 252
DPI. See UN Department of Public
Information
Dulany, Peggy, 257
E
Earth Summit (Rio de Janeiro, 1992),
107
Ecological balance, as peace
building tool, 10, 14
Economic and Social Council
(ECOSOC)
Commission on Sustainable
Development (CSD), 14, 77
Committee on Non-
Governmental Organizations,
77
356
Index

coordination of efforts within the
UN System by, 34, 75, 108
establishment of, 19–21, 74–78,
140–142
human rights and, 75, 77, 140, 
169
League of Nations as precursor
for, 11
nongovernmental organizations,
consultation with, 26, 41, 
77–78
as Principal Organ of the United
Nations, 1, 3
reform of, 267–270
specialized agencies,
coordination of, 88
subsidiary bodies of, 76
Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), 36
Economic development and equity,
as peace building tools, 10,
12–13
ECOSOC. See Economic and Social
Council
Egypt, 264, 267
Electoral assistance, 197–199
“Eliminating the Worst Forms of
Child Labour: A Practical
Guide to ILO Convention 
No. 18,” 299
Environment, the
economic and peace concerns
relating to, 14
human rights, links to, 205–206
proposed taxes to ﬁnance the 
UN System and, 40, 229–230
sustainable development, 31, 75,
84, 206
Erdös, André, 257
European Parliament, Economic
and Monetary Affairs
Committee, 40
European Platform for Conﬂict
Prevention and
Transformation (www.
conﬂict-prevention.net), 61
European Union
aviation fuel tax, consideration
of, 230
organizations of local authorities
in, 303–304
Exceptionalism, American, 51–52
Extraction of natural resources tax,
229
F
Failed states, 32, 79
FAO. See Food and Agriculture
Organization
Federation Mondial des Cities
Unies, 300
Financing the UN System
alternatives for, 39–40, 226–230,
283
American public opinion
regarding, 56–57
assessments of ﬁfteen largest
contributors, 226–227
current system of, 23–25
expenditures for 1986–2004,
224–226
peacekeeping operations, cost of,
210, 224–225
Food, right to, 202–204
Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO)
Committee on World Food
Security, 203
development of, 90–91
director-general, biographical
sketch of, 323–324
headquarters in Rome, 20
New World screwworm,
eradication of, 104
organizational position of, 3
right to food, guidelines on,
202–204
Fourth World Conference on
Women (Beijing, 1995), 
107
Fulbright, J. William, 52
Index
357

Functional cooperation, as peace
building tool, 10–14
Future of the United Nations,
251–252
Africa and reform of the United
Nations, 263–267
Brahimi Report on peacekeeping,
259–261
broadening participation,
proposals for, 281–282
Economic and Social Council
(ECOSOC) reform, 267–270
enhancing knowledge, proposals
for, 283–284
The Future of the UN System: as
source of information, 
339–340
The Future of the UN System:
proposals for change, 
278–286
High-Level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change,
recommendations of, 254–256,
265
institutional competence,
proposals for strengthening,
282–283
the Millennium Project, 252–254
response capacity, proposals for
strengthening, 280–281
Security Council reform, 261–267
UN Parliamentary Assembly,
proposals for, 270–273
UN–Civil Society relations,
257–259, 273–278
widening outreach, proposals for,
284–286
The Future of the UN System:
Potential for the Twenty-First
Century, 278–286, 339–340
G
Galtung, Johan, 279
General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade (GATT), 105
General Assembly
Ad Hoc Committee on Terrorism,
220
coordinating funds and programs
created by, 108
establishment of, 16–17, 72–73,
129–132
Inter-Parliamentary Union and,
298
organization of the UN System,
position in, 1, 17–18
organizations created by, 
82–87
presidents of, 231–233
voting procedures of, 37–38,
131–132
General Postal Union, 94. See also
Universal Postal Union
Geneva International Centre for
Humanitarian Demining, 
214
Geneva Protocol (1925), 106
Global Campaign for Secure Tenure,
208–209
Global Campaign for Urban
Governance, 208–209
Global Code of Ethics for Tourism,
99
The Global Communication Center
for Development
Organizations, 306
Global Compact, 44, 242
Global governance
challenges of, 29–30
emerging of, 8–9
era of preparation for, 8, 27
expanding participation in, 40–46
global complexity, challenge of,
32
international organizations and
(see International
organizations)
local authorities and (see Local
authorities)
peace building, need for long-
term, 33–35
358
Index

reform of the UN System and,
279 (see also Future of the
United Nations)
values and goals, varied
understandings of, 30–32
world government, distinguished
from, 29
Global Health Initiative, 245
Global organizations outside the
UN System, 295–297, 
300–303
Global Partnership for the
Prevention of Armed Conﬂict
(www.gppac.net), 61
Global Policy Forum, 61, 306
Global Teaching and Learning
Project, 241–242
Global values, varied deﬁnitions of,
30–32
Globalization, historical antecedents
of, 7
Governance for the global
commons, as peace building
tool, 10, 14
Guterres, António, 315–316
H
Habitat II Conference (Istanbul,
1996), 107
Hague System, 7, 70–71
Hammarskjöld, Dag, 231, 234
Harare Assembly Declaration
(1997), 264
Havana Charter, 104–105
Heads of UN System organizations,
313–314
Health for All program, 92
Health quality, right to the highest
attainable, 204–205
Heyzer, Noeleen, 319–320
High-Level Committee on
Management (HLCM), 21, 
108
High-Level Committee on Programs
(HLCP), 21, 108
High-Level Panel of Eminent
Persons on UN–Civil Society
Relations (the Cardoso Panel),
257–259, 274–275
High-Level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change, 251,
254–256, 265
Historical context and development
of the UN System
coordination of the UN system,
development of, 107–109
ECOSOC, development of, 74–78
General Assembly, development
of, 72–73
global governance, legacy of the
ﬁrst era of, 8–9
historic roots: escalating human
linkages over time, 7–8, 67–69
historic roots: the League of
Nations, 5–7, 71
historic roots: the nineteenth
century, 5–6, 69–71, 246–248
International Court of Justice,
development of, 81–82
organizations created by the
General Assembly,
development of, 82–87
publications about, 341–344
related organizations,
development of, 103–106
Secretariat, development of,
79–81
Security Council, development
of, 73–74
specialized agencies,
development of, 87–103
Trusteeship Council,
development of, 78–79
the UN Charter, principal
organizations created by, 72–82
UN world conferences,
development of, 106–107
HLCM. See High-Level Committee
on Management
HLCP. See High-Level Committee
on Programs
Index
359

Human rights
activities and policies of UN
organizations regarding, 75,
77, 200–209
the environment, links to,
205–206
International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights (including
protocols), 75, 172–196
International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, 75, 162–171, 202
as peace building tool, 10–12
treaties addressing, 196–197
Universal Declaration of Human
Rights (see Universal
Declaration of Human Rights)
varied deﬁnitions of, 30–31
Human Rights and the
Environment as Part of
Sustainable Development, 206
Human Rights Commission. See UN
Commission on Human Rights
Human Rights Committee, 196
Human Rights Education
Associates, 307
Human Rights Links, 308
Humanitarian intervention, as
peace building tool, 10, 14–15
I
IAEA. See International Atomic
Energy Agency
IBRD. See International Bank for
Reconstruction and
Development
ICAO. See International Civil
Aviation Organization
ICBL. See International Campaign to
Ban Landmines
ICC. See International Criminal
Court
ICJ. See International Court of
Justice
IFAD. See International Fund for
Agricultural Development
ILO. See International Labor
Organization
IMF. See International Monetary
Fund
IMO. See International Maritime
Organization
Industrialization, escalating human
linkages through, 7, 67–69
Information, sources of. See Sources
of information
Institute of World Affairs, 
309–310
INSTRAW. See International
Research and Training
Institute for the Advancement
of Women
Intellectual property, 98
InterAction, American Council for
Voluntary International
Action, 306
Inter-Governmental Maritime
Consultative Organization, 97.
See also International Maritime
Organization (IMO)
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, 229–230
International Action Network on
Small Arms, 308
International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), 103–104,
220–221
International Bank for
Reconstruction and
Development (IBRD), 
101–102
International Bill of Human Rights
documents constituting, 156
International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights (including
protocols), 75, 172–196
International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, 75, 162–171, 202
360
Index

Universal Declaration of Human
Rights (see Universal
Declaration of Human Rights)
International Bureau of Education,
91
International Campaign to Ban
Landmines (ICBL), 214, 308
International Center for Settlement
of Investment Disputes,
101–103
International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO)
air fuel, taxation levied on, 40
counterterrorism efforts by, 
221
development of, 96
headquarters in Montreal, 20
organizational position of, 3
International Code of Marketing of
Breast-milk Substitutes, 204
International Committee of
Intellectual Co-operation, 91
International communications
equity, as peace building tool,
10, 13
International Convention against
the Taking of Hostages, 218
International Convention for the
Safety of Life at Sea, 221
International Convention for the
Suppression of Terrorist
Bombings, 218
International Convention for the
Suppression of the Financing
of Terrorism, 218
International Council for Local
Environment Initiatives, 301
International Court of Justice (ICJ)
election of judges to, 19
establishment of, 23, 81–82,
147–148
Hague Conferences as precursor
to, 71
as Principal Organ of the United
Nations, 1
International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights
full text of, 172–189
optional protocol to, 190–193
progress on human rights,
indication of, 75
second optional protocol to
aiming at the abolition of the
death penalty, 193–196
International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, 75, 162–171, 202
International Criminal Court (ICC)
American public opinion
regarding, 56
establishment of, 215–216
United States refusal to ratify, 51,
216
International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, 217
International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia, 216–217
International criminal tribunals,
215–217
International Development
Association, 101–102
International economic equity, as
peace building tool, 10, 12–13
International Federation for Human
Rights, 308
International Finance Corporation,
101–102
International Forum on
Globalization, 310
International Fund for Agricultural
Development (IFAD)
establishment of, 90–91
headquarters in Rome, 20
organizational position of, 3
president, biographical sketch of,
329–330
International Human Rights Law
Group, 207
International Institute of Intellectual
Co-operation, 91
Index
361

International Labor Organization
(ILO)
counterterrorism efforts of, 222
Declaration on Fundamental
Principles and Rights at Work,
44
development of, 88–90
director-general, biographical
sketch of, 323
founding of, 20
Inter-Parliamentary Union and,
298–299
Joint UN Program on HIV/AIDS,
cooperation in, 84–85
labor standard conventions,
200–201
organizational position of, 3
tripartite representation system
of, 43, 89
International Maritime
Organization (IMO)
counterterrorism efforts of,
221–222
development of, 97–98
headquarters in London, 20
organizational position of, 3
secretary-general, biographical
sketch of, 325–326
World Maritime University, 98
International Meteorological
Organization, 96–97
International Monetary Fund (IMF)
development of, 100–101
educational materials available
from, 346–347
headquarters in Washington,
D.C., 20
managing director, biographical
sketch of, 329
organizational position of, 3
voting procedures in, 37
International monetary transaction
tax (Tobin tax), 228
International organizations
the Inter-Parliamentary Union
(IPU), 271, 297–299
of local authorities, 295–297
outside the UN System, 295–297
the UN System (see UN System)
See also Regional organizations
International Radiotelegraph
Conference, 95
International Research and Training
Institute for the Advancement
of Women (INSTRAW), 2, 17,
84–86
International Seabed Authority,
14–15, 51
International Telecommunications
Union (ITU)
development of, 95–96
headquarters in Geneva, 20
organizational position of, 3
secretary-general, biographical
sketch of, 326–327
International Telegraphic Union, 7,
95
International Trade Centre (ITC), 2,
17, 83–84
International Tribunal for Law of
the Sea, 14–15, 51
International trusteeship system,
143–145. See also Trusteeship
Council
International Union of Local
Authorities (IULA), 44, 300
Internet tax, 228–229
Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU),
271, 297–299, 303
IPU. See Inter-Parliamentary Union
Iraq, waging of “preventive war” in,
51
ITC. See International Trade Centre
ITU. See International
Telecommunications Union
IULA. See International Union of
Local Authorities
J 
Japan, position regarding Security
Council enlargement, 262–263
362
Index

Jarraud, Michel, 327
Jefferson, Thomas, 49–50
Jessup, Philip, 25–26
Joint UN Program on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS)
Alliance of Mayors Initiative for
Community Action on AIDS at
the Local Level, 45
executive director, biographical
sketch of, 321
founding of, 84–85
organizational position/focus of,
2, 18
K
Korean War, 11
Kosovo, 15
Kull, Steven, 53
Kyoto Plenipotentiary Conference
(1994), 96
Kyoto Protocol, 51
L
Labor standards, 200–201
LDC Watch, 229
League of Nations
Covenant, full text of, 116–126
Covenant compared to the UN
Charter, 72–74, 78–81
as historical context for the UN
System, 5–7, 71
peace building tools used by,
9–11
United States and, 49–50
Lee Jong-wook, 325
Legrand, Daniel, 88
Lie, Trygve, 231
Local authorities
Cardoso report proposals,
reaction to, 259
increasing participation in global
efforts, 282
international organizations of,
300–303
regional organizations of,
302–305
UN activities and, 44–45, 245–246
Local Governments for
Sustainability, 301
Lubin, David, 90
Lyons, Gene, 54, 57
M
Magariños, Carlos, 93, 327–328
Malloch Brown, Mark, 253, 
318–319
Mangone, Gerard, 70–71, 246
Matsuura, Koichiro, 324–325
Mayors for Peace, 301–302
Mayr, Juan, 257
McGovern, James P., 36
McGovern-Porter UN Rapid
Deployment Police and
Security Force Act of 2000, 36
McNeill, William, 8, 67–68
Mehra, Malini, 257
Metropolis, 301
Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs), 253–254, 268, 277
Millennium Project, 252–254
Mitropoulos, Efthimios E., 325–326
Mkhatshwa, Smangaliso, 259
Model United Nations, 245
Morse, Samuel, 68, 95
Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency, 101–103
N 
Naidoo, Kumi, 257
Nation-states, 32
Negative peace, 9, 30
New International Economic Order
(NIEO), 8, 13
New International Information and
Communications Order
(NIICO), 8, 13
New World screwworm, eradication
of, 104
Index
363

NGLS. See UN Non-Governmental
Liaison Service
NGO Global Network
(www.ngo.org), 305
NGOs. See Nongovernmental
organizations
Nicholas II (Czar of Russia), 70
NIEO. See New International
Economic Order
Nigeria, 264, 267
NIICO. See New International
Information and
Communications Order
Nobel Peace Prizes, 234
Nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs)
Asian Civil Society Forum
statement regarding, 273–278
associated with the United
Nations, 305
with broad agendas, 306
Cardoso report proposals,
reaction to, 259
ECOSOC, consultative status
with, 26, 41, 77
ﬁnancing the UN System,
position regarding, 40
informed participation, focusing
on, 310–311
issue networks of, 306–309
North-South Alliance, 203
reform of the UN System and,
271–278, 280–282, 284
research and education, focusing
on, 309–310
selected examples of, 303,
305–311
UN activities, expanding
participation in, 26, 40–43,
77–78, 281–282
UN Department of Public
Information and, 241
UN Non-Governmental Liaison
Service (NGLS), 78, 243–244,
259, 278
UN Parliamentary Assembly,
impact of proposed, 
271–273
websites of, 60–61, 350–351
See also Civil society
Non-self-governing territories,
238–239
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), 50
North-South Alliance, 203
Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty, 105
O
Obaid, Thoraya Ahmed, 322
Ofﬁce of the High Representative
for the Least Developed
Countries, Landlocked
Developing Countries, and
Small Island Developing States
(OHRLLS), 3, 17
Ofﬁce of the UN High
Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR)
budget of, 24
creation of, 77
educational materials available
from, 346, 348
founding of, 83–84
global issues, linkage between
and the work of, 32
High Commissioner, biographical
sketch of, 316
human rights and the
environment, links between,
205–206
Inter-Parliamentary Union and,
298
monitoring bodies for core
human rights treaties,
servicing of, 196
organizational position of, 2, 
18
right to food, preparation of
guidelines on, 203
364
Index

Ofﬁce of the UN High
Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR)
educational materials available
from, 346–347
founding of, 83–84
High Commissioner, biographical
sketch of, 315–316
human rights and the work of,
32, 207–208
Joint UN Program on HIV/AIDS,
cooperation in, 85
Nobel Peace Prize awarded to,
234
organizational position of, 2, 17
Ogata, Sadako, 207
OHCHR. See Ofﬁce of the UN High
Commissioner for Human
Rights
OHRLLS. See Ofﬁce of the High
Representative for the Least
Developed Countries,
Landlocked Developing
Countries, and Small Island
Developing States (OHRLLS)
OPCW. See Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons
Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW),
106, 223
Osseiran, Sanaa, 286
Owen, Robert, 88
P 
Peace
security, varied deﬁnitions of, 31
varied deﬁnitions of, 30–31
Peace building/peacemaking
emergence of new tools for, 9–15
need for long-term, 33–35
peace building, deﬁnition of, 
214
peacemaking, deﬁnition of, 214
UN missions for, 214–215
UN System, development of to
promote, 4
Peacekeeping
Brahimi Report and proposals for
reform, 259–261
budget for, 24
fatalities incurred, 213
in the League of Nations
Covenant, 119–123
Nobel Peace Prize awarded to
UN forces, 234
operations, 19, 74, 209–212
operations, acronyms for, 294
as peace building tool, 10–12
response capacity, proposals for
strengthening, 280–281
by the Security Council, 18–19,
73–74, 134–138
standby force, need for, 35–36
UN Civilian Police, role of, 74,
213
Peoples Millennium Forum, 
42–43
Perez de Cuellar, Javier, 231, 
314
Permanent Court of International
Justice, 81, 121
Piot, Peter, 321
Politicization of UN agencies,
concerns of industrialized
countries regarding, 13
The Population Council, 310
Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear Test-
Ban Treaty Organization
(CTBTO), 105–106
Preventive diplomacy, as peace
building tool, 10, 15
Project SIDA, 321
Protocol for the Suppression of
Unlawful Acts against the
Safety of Fixed Platforms
Located on the Continental
Shelf, 219, 222
Index
365

Protocol on the Suppression of
Unlawful Acts of Violence at
Airports Serving International
Civil Aviation, 219
Public links to the UN System
business, relationships with,
242–243
the Department of Public
Information, 77, 240–241
escalation of, 238–240
local authorities, relationships
with, 44–45, 245–246
nongovernmental organizations,
relationships with, 243–245 
(see also Nongovernmental
organizations [NGOs])
the UN Cyberschoolbus, 241–242,
346–347
See also Sources of information
Pucci, Giuliano, 204
R 
Racelis, Mary, 257, 274
Ratilal, Prakash, 257
Rato, Rodrigo de, 329
Reardon, Betty, 286
Refugees, human rights of, 207–208
Regional organizations
of local authorities, 302–305
outside the UN System, 
295–297
See also International
organizations
Reinsch, Paul, 70
Rhine Commission, 7
Rights
to education, 201–202
electoral, 197–199
to food, 202–204
to health, 204–205
human (see Human rights)
labor, 200–201
to a pollution-free environment,
205–206
of refugees, 207–208
urban poverty reduction and,
208–209
Rio Declaration on Environment
and Development, 44
Rome Declaration on World Food
Security, 203
Roosevelt, Franklin Delano, 49–50
Rupérez, Javier, 220
Rwanda, international criminal
tribunal for, 217
S 
Sachs, Jeffrey, 253
Schwartzberg, Joseph E., 37–39
Search for Common Ground,
308–309
Secretariat
establishment of, 22–23, 79–81,
148–149
General Assembly, follow-up
required by actions of, 17
Ofﬁce of the High Representative
for the Least Developed
Countries, Landlocked
Developing Countries, and
Small Island Developing States
(OHRLLS), 3, 17
as Principal Organ of the United
Nations, 1
Secretaries-general, list of, 231
Security, varied deﬁnitions of, 31
Security Council
Africa and the reform of, 
263–267
Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), 219
Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED),
220
establishment of, 18–19, 73–74,
132–139
membership and voting
procedures, 36–39, 133–134
366
Index

peace building actions,
authorization to pursue, 11,
134–138
as Principal Organ of the United
Nations, 1
reform of, proposals for, 255–256,
261–267
terrorism, condemnation of, 219
veto power in, 18, 37, 263–267
Segall, Jeffrey, 271
Self-determination
development of United Nations
commitment to, 79
humanitarian intervention and,
15
as peace building tool, 10–13
right of, 162–163, 172–173
SHIRBRIG. See Steering Committee
of the Multinational Stand-by
High Readiness Brigade for
UN Operations
Somavia, Juan, 323
Sorour, Ahmed Fathy, 298–299
Sources of information, 331–332
articles and chapters, 337–338
bibliographies, 344
books, 332–337
educational materials on the UN
System, 346–348
encyclopedias, 345
The Future of the UN System,
references from, 339–340
journals, 345
ofﬁcial document system of the
UN, web access to, 348–349
proposals to enhance and extend,
283–285
the UN Intellectual History
Project, 341–342
UN System history, recent
publications about, 342–344
UN treaties, key provisions of the
twenty-ﬁve most central, 349
websites, 350–352
yearbook, 345
See also Public links to the UN
System
South Africa, 264, 266–267
Sovereignty, need for careful usage
of the term, 50
Specialized Agencies
development of, 87–103
special status of, 20
UN System, organizational
position in, 1
States
failed, 32, 79
growth in and the remaining
non-self-governing territories,
238–239
members of the United Nations,
152–155
nations and, 32
organizations of outside the UN
System, 295–297
Steering Committee of the
Multinational Stand-by High
Readiness Brigade for UN
Operations (SHIRBRIG), 35–36
Steering Committee on Mine
Action, 214
Structural violence, 30
Suplicy, Marta, 259
Sustainable development, 31, 75, 84,
206. See also Environment, the
T 
Terrorism, counterterrorism efforts,
217–223
Tibaijuka, Anna Kajumulo, 319
Tobin, James, 228
Toepfer, Klaus, 206, 316–317
Tourism, 99
Traoré, Aminata, 257
Travel, escalating human linkages
through, 67–69
Treaties. See names of treaties
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, 256
Index
367

Truman, Harry S., 49–50
Trust territories, 237–238
Trusteeship Council, 11, 21–22,
78–79, 146–147, 282
Turner, Ted, 243
U 
UCLG. See United Cities and Local
Government Organization
UN Advisory Committee of Local
Authorities, 45
UNAIDS. See Joint UN Program on
HIV/AIDS
UN Association-USA (UNA-USA),
61–62, 243–245, 267, 311
UNA-USA. See UN Association-
USA
UN Capital Development Fund
(UN CDF), 2, 17
UN CDF. See UN Capital
Development Fund
UN Center for Human Rights, 77
UN Charter
amendment of, proposals for, 256
amendments adopted, 151–152
Declaration Regarding Non-Self-
Governing Territories, 11,
142–143
Economic and Social Council,
establishment of, 19–20, 74–78,
140–142
full text of, 126–152
General Assembly, establishment
of, 16–18, 72–73, 129–132
historical foundation of, 5
human rights mentioned in, 11,
75, 156
International Court of Justice,
establishment of, 23, 81–82,
147–148
League Covenant, comparison to,
72–74, 78–81
nongovernmental organizations,
inclusion of, 26, 41, 77
peace building in the, 11,
126–127, 134–138
Principal Organs of the United
Nations, creation of, 1
reinterpretation of to support
humanitarian intervention,
14–15
Secretariat, establishment of, 23,
79–81, 148–149
Security Council, establishment
of, 18–19, 73–74, 132–139
Trusteeship Council,
establishment of, 21–22, 78–79,
146–147
UN Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
executive director, biographical
sketch of, 317–318
founding of, 83–84
Joint UN Program on HIV/AIDS,
founding of, 84–85
Mayors Defenders of Children
Initiative, 45
Nobel Peace Prize awarded to,
234
organizational position of, 2, 17
UN Civilian Police Division, 74, 213
UN Commission on Human Rights,
75, 77, 205–206, 255
UN Commission on Peace and
Crisis Prevention, 42
UN Commission on Sustainable
Development (CSD), 14, 77
UN Communications Group
(UNCG), 244
UN Conference on Environment
and Development, 14
UN Conference on Trade and
Development (UNCTAD)
founding of, 13, 83–84
Inter-Parliamentary Union and,
298–299
organizational position of, 2, 17
UN Convention Against
Corruption, 44
UN Covenant on Law of the Sea, 14
368
Index

UNCTAD. See UN Conference on
Trade and Development
UN Cyberschoolbus, 241–242,
346–347
UNDCP. See UN Drug Control
Programme
UN Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, 35, 210, 213–214
UN Department of Political Affairs,
214
UN Department of Public
Information (DPI), 77, 240–241
UN Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM)
executive director, biographical
sketch of, 319–320
founding of, 84–85
human rights and the work of, 32
organizational position of, 2, 17
UN Development Program (UNDP)
administrator, biographical
sketch of, 318
founding of, 83–84
human rights and the work of, 
32
Internet tax, potential yield from,
39
Joint UN Program on HIV/AIDS,
founding of, 84–85
organizational position of, 2, 17
Projects Execution Division, 87
(see also UN Ofﬁce for Project
Services)
World Alliance of Cities Against
Poverty, 45
World Tourism Organization, 99
UN Division for the Advancement
of Women, 196
UNDP. See UN Development
Program
UN Drug Control Program
(UNDCP), 2, 17
UN Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the
Paciﬁc, 275
UN Educational, Scientiﬁc and
Cultural Organization
(UNESCO)
Alliance of Mayors Initiative for
Community Action on AIDS at
the Local Level, 45
development of, 91–92
director-general, biographical
sketch of, 324–325
education as a human right,
promotion of, 201–202
headquarters in Paris, 20
International Oceanographic
Commission, 97
Inter-Parliamentary Union and,
298–299
Joint UN Program on HIV/AIDS,
founding of, 84–85
New International Economic
Order and, 13
organizational position in the UN
System, 3
UN Electoral Assistance Division,
197–199
UN Emergency Forces I & II, 11
UN Environment Conference, 14
UN Environment Program (UNEP)
educational materials available
from, 346, 348
Environmental Management
Systems for Local Authorities,
45
executive director, biographical
sketch of, 316–317
founding of, 84
national cleaner production
centers, establishment of, 93
organizational position of, 2, 17
pollution-free environment, right
to, 205–206
UNEP. See UN Environment
Program
UNESCO. See UN Educational,
Scientiﬁc and Cultural
Organization
Index
369

UN Foundation, 243
UNFPA. See UN Population Fund
UN Fund for International
Partnerships, 243
UN-HABITAT. See UN-HABITAT
UN Human Settlements
Program (UNHSP)
UN-HABITAT UN Human
Settlements Program
(UNHSP), 45
executive director, biographical
sketch of, 319
founding of, 84–85
Governing Council of Habitat,
208
local authorities, links to, 245–246
organizational position of, 2, 17
urban poverty reduction, a
rights-based approach to,
208–209
UNHCHR. See Ofﬁce of the UN
High Commissioner for
Human Rights
UNHCR. See Ofﬁce of the UN High
Commissioner for Refugees
UNHSP. See UN-HABITAT UN
Human Settlements Program
UN Human Settlements Program.
See UN-HABITAT UN Human
Settlements Program
UNICEF. See UN Children’s Fund
UNICRI. See UN Interregional
Crime and Justice Research
Institute
UNIDIR. See UN Institute for
Disarmament Research
UNIDO. See UN Industrial
Development Organization
UNIFEM. See UN Development
Fund for Women
UN Industrial Development
Organization (UNIDO)
development of, 93
director-general, biographical
sketch of, 327–328
headquarters in Vienna, 20
organizational position of, 3
UN Institute for Disarmament
Research (UNIDIR), 2, 17, 
86
UN Institute for Training and
Research (UNITAR)
founding of, 86
organizational position of, 2, 
17
training offered by, 86
UN Intellectual History Project,
341–342
UN Inter-Agency Coordination
Group, 213–214
UN Interregional Crime and Justice
Research Institute (UNICRI), 2,
17, 85–86
Union of International Associations,
310
UNITAR. See UN Institute for
Training and Research
United Cities and Local
Government Organization
(UCLG), 45, 259, 300–301
United International Bureaux for
the Protection of Intellectual
Property, 98
United Nations (UN)
conferences held by (1994-2004),
234–237
educational materials available
from, 346–347
Inter-Parliamentary Union and,
297–299
member states of, 152–155
organizational deﬁnition of
distinguished from UN
System, 1
secretary-general, biographical
sketch of, 314–315
trust territories, 237–238
United Nations Association of the
USA. See UN Association-USA
United Nations Foundation, 60
370
Index

United States
ambivalence toward the UN,
historic roots of, 49–51
bioterrorism through the mail,
experience with, 223
creative involvement in the UN
System, need for, 63–64
exceptionalism, belief in, 51–52
ﬁnancing of the United Nations,
24, 40, 56–57, 226–227, 229–230
government websites, 352
International Criminal Court,
opposition to, 51, 216
opportunities for public
education and participation,
60–62
public knowledge of the United
Nations in, 57–59
public opinion of the United
Nations in, 53–57
Security Council, permanent
member of, 18
Security Council enlargement,
position regarding, 262
unilateralism of, 50–51
unilateralism of, factors
contributing to, 51–53, 59–60
Universal Declaration of Human
Rights
force of law and, 17
full text of, 156–161
health, assertion of a right to, 204
principles of applied in the
Global Compact, 44
progress on human rights,
indicator of, 75
standards for human life, status
as, 12
Universal Postal Union (UPU)
counterterrorism efforts of, 223
development of, 94–95
headquarters in Bern, 20
League of Nations, precursor of
the, 7
organizational position of, 3
Postal Security Action Group, 223
Quality of Service Fund (QSF), 95
UN Millennium Declaration of the
General Assembly, 107–108
UN Mine Action Service (UNMAS),
213–214
UN Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea,
36
UN Monetary and Financial
Conference (Bretton Woods,
1944), 100
UN Non-Governmental Liaison
Service (NGLS), 78, 243–244,
259, 278
UNODC. See UN Ofﬁce on Drugs
and Crime
UN Ofﬁce for Project Services
(UNOPS), 2, 18, 87
UN Ofﬁce of Drug Control and
Crime Prevention, 221
UN Ofﬁce on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), 84–85, 321–322
UNOPS. See UN Ofﬁce for Project
Services
UNPA. See UN Parliamentary
Assembly
UN Parliamentary Assembly
(UNPA), 270–273
UN Peace Operations Panel,
259–261
UN Population Fund (UNFPA)
executive director, biographical
sketch of, 322
founding of, 83–84
Joint UN Program on HIV/AIDS,
founding of, 84–85
organizational position of, 2, 17
UN Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), 2, 17, 83–84
UN Research Institute for Social
Development (UNRISD), 2,
85–86
UNRISD. See UN Research Institute
for Social Development
Index
371

UNRWA. See UN Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East
UN Special Rapporteur on the Right
to Food, 203
UNSSC. See UN System Staff
College
UN Standby Arrangements System,
35
UN System
acronyms of, 290–293
challenges of global governance
(see Global governance)
coordination of, 107–109
counterterrorism efforts, 217–223
Economic and Social Council (see
Economic and Social Council)
factors responsible for the 
rise of, 4
facts and data on, 113–116
ﬁnancing of (see Financing the
UN System)
functions/issues appearing in
names of agencies, 5–6
the future of (see Future of the
United Nations)
General Assembly (see General
Assembly)
heads of organizations, 313–314
historical context and
development of (see Historical
context and development of
the UN System)
Nobel Peace Prizes awarded, 
234
organization of, 1–5, 15–23
peacekeeping efforts (see
Peacekeeping)
political process in, 25–26
“politicization” of agencies,
concerns regarding, 13
public links to (see Public links to
the UN System)
reform, proposals for (see Future
of the United Nations)
resources and bibliographic
materials regarding (see
Sources of information)
secretaries-general, list of, 231
Security Council (see Security
Council)
social conﬂict and, 33
United Nations, distinguished
from, 1
the United States’ ambivalence
regarding (see United States)
website of (www.un.org), 60, 
350
UN System Chief Executives Board
(CEB)
coordination within the UN
System by, 20–21, 34, 108
the UN Non-Governmental
Liaison Service and, 244
UN System Staff College (UNSSC)
founding of, 86
organizational position of, 2, 
18
training offered by, 86
UN Transitional Authority in
Cambodia, 199
UN Transitional Authority in
Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium, 199
UNU. See UN University
UN University (UNU)
founding of, 86
organizational position of, 2, 18
rector, biographical sketch of, 
320
UNV. See UN Volunteers
UN Volunteers (UNV), 2, 17, 83–84
UN World Conference on Women
(1975), 85
UPU. See Universal Postal Union
Urban poverty reduction, a rights-
based approach to, 208–209
Urquhart, Brian, 271–272
U Thant, 231
Utsumi, Yoshio, 326–327
372
Index

V 
Values, varied deﬁnitions of global,
30–32
van der Wekken, Ruby, 228
Van Ginkel, Hans J. A., 320
Veneman, Ann M., 317–318
Violence, structural and direct
distinguished, 30
W
WACLAC. See World Associations
of Cities and Local Authorities
Coordination
Waldheim, Kurt, 231
Washington, George, 49–50
“We the Peoples: Civil Society, the
United Nations and Global
Governance,” 257–259
Websites
of nongovernmental
organizations actively
involved in issues related to
the United Nations, 61–62
of the United Nations, 60–61
WFP. See World Food Program
WFUNA. See World Federation of
UN Associations
WHO. See World Health
Organization
Wilson, Woodrow, 49
WIPO. See World Intellectual
Property Organization
WMO. See World Meterological
Organization
Wolfowitz, Paul D., 328–329
World Assembly of Cities and 
Local Authorities (WACLA), 
45
World Associations of Cities and
Local Authorities
Coordination (WACLAC), 45,
300
World Bank
Cities Alliance, 208–209
educational materials available
from, 346–348
health conditions in poor
countries, concern regarding,
93
Joint UN Program on HIV/AIDS,
cooperation in, 84–85
Municipal Development
Program, 45
projects funded in developing
countries (2004), 101
voting procedures in, 37
World Bank Group
headquarters in Washington
D.C., 20
International Bank for
Reconstruction and
Development, 101–102
International Center for
Settlement of Investment
Disputes, 101–103
International Development
Association, 101–102
International Finance
Corporation, 101–102
Multilateral Investment
Guarantee Agency, 101–103
organizational position of, 3
president, biographical sketch of,
328–329
World Bank (see World Bank)
World conferences, 106–107. See also
Conferences; names of
conferences
World Declaration on Nutrition, 
203
World Education Forum (Dakar,
2003), 201–202
World Federation of UN
Associations (WFUNA), 62,
244, 268, 311
World Federation of United Cities,
44–45
World Food Conference (1974),
90–91
Index
373

World Food Program (WFP)
founding of, 83–84
Joint UN Program on HIV/AIDS,
cooperation in, 84–85
organizational position of, 2, 
17
World government, distinguished
from global governance, 29
World Health Organization (WHO)
counterterrorism efforts of, 
223
development of, 92–93
director-general, biographical
sketch of, 325
headquarters in Geneva, 20
health quality, right to the highest
attainable, 204–205
Joint UN Program on HIV/AIDS,
founding of, 84–85
organizational position of, 3
World Intellectual Property
Organization (WIPO), 3, 20, 
98
World Maritime University, 98
World Meterological Organization
(WMO)
development of, 96–97
headquarters in Geneva, 20
organizational position of, 3
secretary-general, biographical
sketch of, 327
World Organization Against
Torture, 309
World Summit for Children (1990),
234
World Telecommunication Policy
Forum, 96
World Tourism Organization, 99
World Trade Organization (WTO),
104–105, 298–299
WTO. See World Trade Organization
Y 
Yamoussoukro Declaration, 286
Yugoslavia, the former,
international criminal tribunal
for, 216–217
374
Index

About the Author
Chadwick F. Alger is Mershon Professor of Political Science and Public
Policy Emeritus at Ohio State University. His education includes a B.A.
from Ursinus College; an M.A. from the School of Advanced Interna-
tional Studies, Johns Hopkins University; and a Ph.D. from Princeton
University in Political Science. His personal experiences in world affairs
began very soon after he graduated from high school, with service for
three years in the U.S. Navy during World War II that included overseas
service that ranged across the Pacific Ocean. From 1950 to 1954 he
served as a civilian intelligence analyst in the Office of Naval Intelli-
gence in the Pentagon during the Korean War. While a political science
professor at Northwestern University, from 1957 to 1971, for many
years he has conducted extensive ﬁeld research at the UN Headquarters
in New York City and at the headquarters of the UN and UN Special-
ized Agencies in Geneva, Switzerland.
Professor Alger’s research and teaching has focused on three linked
themes: (1) the UN System of some thirty organizations, with special in-
terest in the roles of Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs); (2) the
development of long term strategies for peace building; and (3) the
world relations of people and organizations in local communities. He
believes that creative peace building requires the participation of people
in local communities everywhere who understand the “world relations
of daily life” and the opportunities that they offer for everybody to per-
sonally participate in peace building. He is editor of The Future of the UN
System: Potential for the Twenty-First Century, UN University Press, 1998.
He has served as president of the International Studies Association, and
as secretary general of the International Peace Research Association, an
organization of scholars located around the world who are engaged in
peace research.
375

