The Good 
Research Guide
For small-scale social research projects
Martyn Denscombe
5th
edition
• Equips you with the skills you 
 need for successful research
• New material on the use of  
 social media in research
• New material on surveys  
 and sampling
• Additional material on  
 research ethics
Open UP Study Skills
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

The Good Research Guide
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

The Good Research Guide
For small-scale social research projects
Fifth edition
Martyn Denscombe
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Open University Press
McGraw-Hill Education
McGraw-Hill House
Shoppenhangers Road
Maidenhead
Berkshire
England
SL6 2QL
email: enquiries@openup.co.uk
world wide web: www.openup.co.uk
and Two Penn Plaza, New York, NY 10121-2289, USA
First published 1998
Second edition published 2003
Third edition published 2007
Fourth edition published 2010
First published in this fifth edition 2014
Copyright © Martyn Denscombe, 2014
All rights reserved. Except for the quotation of short passages for the purposes 
of criticism and review, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the 
publisher or a licence from the Copyright Licensing Agency Limited. Details of such 
licences (for reprographic reproduction) may be obtained from the Copyright Licensing 
Agency Ltd of Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, London, EC1N 8TS.
A catalogue record of this book is available from the British Library
ISBN-13: 978-0-335-26470-4 
ISBN-10: 0-335-26470-0
eISBN: 978-0-335-26471-1
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
CIP data applied for
Typeset by Aptara, Inc.
Fictitious names of companies, products, people, characters and/or data that may be 
used herein (in case studies or in examples) are not intended to represent any real indi-
vidual, company, product or event.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Summary of contents
Introduction	
1
PART 1  STRATEGIES FOR SOCIAL RESEARCH	
3
  1	 Surveys 	
7
  2	 Sampling	
32
  3	 Case studies	
54
  4	 Experiments	
66
  5	 Ethnography	
80
  6	 Phenomenology	
94
  7	 Grounded theory	
106
  8	 Action research	
122
  9	 Systematic reviews	
132
10	 Mixed methods	
146
PART 2  Methods of Data Collection	
163
11	 Questionnaires	
166
12	 Interviews	
184
13	 Observation	
205
14	 Documents	
225
PART 3  Data Analysis	
243
15	 Quantitative data	
249
16	 Qualitative data	
276
PART 4  Context	
305
17	 Research ethics	
306
18	 Research reports	
326
References	
339
Index	
349
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Contents
List of tables and figures	
xv
Acknowledgements	
xvii
	
Introduction	
1 
PART 1  STRATEGIES FOR SOCIAL RESEARCH	
3 
What are research strategies?	
3
Which strategy to choose?	
3
Checklist for the choice of research strategy	
6
  1	 Surveys 	
7
What is a survey?	
7
Types of survey	
8
Which type of survey to choose?	
9
Postal surveys	
10
Face-to-face surveys	
11
Group-administered surveys	
11
Telephone surveys	
12
Internet surveys	
13
Web-based questionnaire surveys	
14
Social network sites	
18
Facebook surveys	
19
The research population	
20
Response rates	
22
How to achieve good response rates	
22
Non-response bias	
26
Advantages of surveys	
29
Disadvantages of surveys	
29
Further reading	
30
Checklist for the use of surveys	
31
  2	 Sampling	
32
Representative samples and exploratory samples	
32
Probability sampling and non-probability sampling	
33
Sampling frames	
34
Probability sampling techniques	
36
Non-probability sampling techniques	
40
Which sampling technique should be used?	
44
Size of the sample	
44
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

viii  Contents
Advantages of sampling	
51
Disadvantages of sampling	
52
Further reading	
52
Checklist for the use of sampling	
53
  3	 Case studies	
54
What is a ‘case’?	
54
The case study approach	
54
The purpose of a case study	
56
Selecting a case	
58
Can you generalize from a case study?	
61
Advantages of the case study approach	
63
Disadvantages of the case study approach	
64
Further reading	
64
Checklist for the use of case studies	
65
4	
Experiments	
66
What is an experiment?	
66
When to use an experiment	
67
Types of experiment	
68
Experiments involving people – the observer effect	
69
Causal relationships and variables	
71
The use of controls	
72
Control groups	
73
Blind trials	
74
True experiments and quasi-experiments	
75
Advantages of experiments	
76
Disadvantages of experiments	
77
Further reading	
78
Checklist for the experimental approach	
79
5	
Ethnography	
80
What is ethnography?	
80
The alien, the exotic and the routine	
81
Life on the Internet	
82
Life history	
82
Access to fieldwork settings	
84
Description and theory	
86
Reflexivity: ethnographers as part of the world they seek to describe	
88
Putting the researcher’s ‘self’ into ethnographic research	
89
Advantages of ethnography	
90
Disadvantages of ethnography	
91
Further reading	
92
Checklist for ethnographic research	
93
6	
Phenomenology	
94
What is the phenomenological approach?	
94
Experience	
95
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Contents  ix
The everyday world	
95
Seeing things through the eyes of others	
96
The social construction of reality	
96
Multiple realities	
97
Description	
98
The suspension of common-sense beliefs	
98
Members’ accounts	
99
Types of phenomenology: underlying essences or actual experiences	
100
Advantages of phenomenology	
102
Disadvantages of phenomenology	
103
Further reading	
104
Checklist for phenomenology	
105
  7	 Grounded theory	
106
What is the grounded theory approach?	
106
When is the grounded theory approach useful?	
108
Starting grounded theory research	
109
Theoretical sampling: the selection of sites for fieldwork	
110
Completing the research (theoretical saturation)	
112
Methods of data collection	
112
Analysing the data	
112
Displaying the process	
114
Theories and grounded research	
115
Developments in grounded theory	
116
Advantages of the grounded theory approach	
118
Disadvantages of the grounded theory approach	
119
Further reading	
120
Checklist for the grounded theory approach	
121
  8	 Action research	
122
What is action research?	
122
The practical nature of action research	
123
Change and professional self-development	
124
Action research as a cyclical process	
124
Participation in the research process	
125
Issues connected with the use of action research	
126
Advantages of action research	
129
Disadvantages of action research	
129
Further reading	
130
Checklist for action research	
131
  9	 Systematic reviews	
132
What is a systematic review?	
132
Benefits of a systematic review	
133
Kinds of research problem suitable for systematic review	
134
Qualitative research and systematic reviews	
134
How to conduct a systematic review	
135
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

x  Contents
Limitations to systematic reviews	
142
Advantages of systematic reviews	
143
Disadvantages of systematic reviews	
143
Further reading	
143
Checklist for the use of systematic reviews	
145
10	 Mixed methods	
146
What is the mixed methods approach?	
146
The benefits of using a mixed methods approach	
147
Resources and skills	
149
The design of mixed methods projects	
150
Triangulation in mixed methods research	
154
Non-corroboration of data	
157
Pragmatism and mixed methods	
158
A new research paradigm?	
159
Advantages of the mixed methods approach	
160
Disadvantages of the mixed methods approach	
161
Further reading	
161
Checklist for mixed methods research	
162
PART 2  Methods of Data Collection	
163
Selecting methods: a matter of ‘horses for courses’	
163
Authorization for the research	
164
Preparation, planning and project management	
164
Record keeping	
165
Pilot study	
165
11	 Questionnaires	
166
What is a questionnaire?	
166
When is it appropriate to use a questionnaire?	
166
Self-completion questionnaires	
167
Successful questionnaires	
167
Vital elements of a research questionnaire	
170
The length of the questionnaire	
171
Questionnaire fatigue	
172
Devising the questions	
173
Check questions	
176
‘Open’ and ‘closed’ questions	
176
Types of questions	
177
Web-based questionnaires	
178
Advantages of questionnaires	
180
Disadvantages of questionnaires	
181
Further reading	
182
Checklist for the use of questionnaires	
183
12	 Interviews	
184
What is a research interview?	
184
When is it appropriate to use interviews?	
185
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Contents  xi
The structure of interviews	
186
One-to-one interviews	
187
Group interviews	
187
Focus groups	
188
The interviewer effect	
189
Skills for face-to-face interviewing	
191
Conducting a face-to-face interview	
193
Recording the interview	
196
Online interviews	
197
How do you know the informant is telling the truth?	
200
Advantages of interviews	
201
Disadvantages of interviews	
202
Further reading	
203
Checklist for the use of interviews	
204
13	 Observation	
205
What is observational research?	
205
Perception and memory	
206
Systematic observation	
207
Observation schedules	
207
Sampling and observation	
209
Retaining the naturalness of the setting	
210
Example of an observation schedule	
210
Advantages of systematic observation	
212
Disadvantages of systematic observation	
212
Further reading	
213
Checklist for the use of observation schedules	
214
Participant observation	
215
Types of participation	
216
Fieldwork	
217
Research ethics	
218
Self, identity and participant observation	
218
Dangers of fieldwork	
220
Advantages of participant observation	
221
Disadvantages of participant observation	
222
Further reading	
223
Checklist for participant observation	
224
14	 Documents	
225
What is documentary research?	
225
Sources of documentary data	
226
Access to documentary sources	
228
The validity of documentary data	
230
The credibility of articles, journals and books	
231
The evaluation of Internet documents and web pages	
231
The credibility of official statistics	
232
The credibility of records of meetings	
234
Image-based research	
234
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

xii  Contents
The use of ‘created’ images	
235
The use of ‘found’ images	
237
Advantages of documentary research	
239
Disadvantages of documentary research	
240
Further reading	
240
Checklist for the use of documents (text and visual images) 	
241
PART 3  Data Analysis	
243
Description	
243
Explanation	
244
Interpretation	
244
Quantitative and qualitative research	
244
The process of data analysis	
247
15	 Quantitative data	
249
Sources of quantitative data	
250
Types of quantitative data	
250
Describing the mid-point or average	
253
Describing the spread of data	
255
Looking for patterns and relationships in the data	
257
Statistical tests for association and difference	
259
Presenting the data: tables and charts	
263
Reliability and validity: quantitative research	
271
Advantages of quantitative data analysis	
272
Disadvantages of quantitative data analysis	
273
Further reading	
274
Checklist for the use of quantitative data	
275
16	 Qualitative data	
276
Types of qualitative data (words and images)	
276
Preparing qualitative data for analysis	
276
Transcribing audio recordings of interviews	
277
Computer-assisted qualitative data analysis	
280
Analysis of talk and text	
281
Content analysis	
283
Grounded theory	
285
Discourse analysis	
288
Conversation analysis	
290
Narrative analysis	
291
Analysis of image-based data	
292
Presenting the data	
294
Reliability and validity: qualitative research	
297
Advantages of qualitative data analysis	
302
Disadvantages of qualitative data analysis	
303
Further reading	
303
Checklist for the analysis of qualitative data	
304
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Contents  xiii
PART 4  Context	
305
17	 Research ethics	
306
Ethics Committee approval 	
306
The kinds of research that need ethical approval	
307
Codes of research ethics	
309
Key principles of research ethics	
309
Written consent form 	
315
Data protection	
317
Ethics and Internet research	
320
Summary	
323
Further reading	
324
Checklist for research ethics	
325
18	 Research reports	
326
The structure of research reports	
326
Writing up qualitative research	
330
The research methods section	
330
Referencing	
331
Guidelines on style	
333
Guidelines on presentation	
334
Writing for an audience	
335
Producing accounts of research	
335
Further reading	
336
Checklist for writing research reports	
337
References	
339 
Index	
349
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

List of tables and figures
Table P1.1	
Research strategies and research purpose; some links 	
4
Table 1.1	
Main types of survey and associated methods	
9
Table 1.2	
Delivery options for web-based questionnaire surveys 	
15
Table 1.3	
Retrieval options for web-based questionnaires 	
16
Table 1.4	
Key things to consider when choosing your online  
survey company	
17
Table 2.1	
Approaches to sampling	
34
Table 2.2	
Illustration of four probability sampling techniques	
39
Table 2.3	
Sample size and population size (probability sampling)	
47
Table 3.1	
Types of cases	
55
Table 3.2	
The characteristics of case study research	
57
Table 3.3	
The purpose of a case study: six possibilities	
57
Table 9.1	
Data extraction form: some basic items for inclusion	
137
Table 10.1	
Sequence in mixed methods research designs	
151
Table 10.2	
Relative importance of components in mixed methods  
research designs	
152
Table 10.3	
Ten basic design options for mixed methods research	
153
Table 11.1	
Criteria for the production and evaluation of a research  
questionnaire	
169
Table 11.2	
Design options for web-based questionnaires 	
179
Table 14.1	
Access to documents for research	
229
Table 14.2	
Potential sources of image-based documentary data	
235
Table P3.1	
Five stages of data analysis	
247
Table 15.1	
Sources of quantitative data	
250
Table 15.2	
Chi-square and contingency tables: example	
259
Table 15.3	
Correlation coefficients range	
263
Table 15.4	
Table (example)	
265
Table 15.5	
Contingency table (example)	
265
Table 15.6	
The use of suitable charts or tables	
270
Table 16.1	
Types of qualitative data	
277
Table 16.2	
Analysis of text and talk: a comparison of five approaches	
282
Table 16.3	
Content analysis	
284
Figure 2.1	
Sampling strategies	
45
Figure 2.2	
A sample size calculator	
48
Figure 4.1	
Experiments and the use of control groups	
74
Figure 7.1	
Grounded theory	
107
Figure 8.1	
The cyclical process in action research	
125
Figure 9.1	
Flowchart showing the inclusion and exclusion of  
studies from the review	
138
Figure 10.1	 Mixed methods and triangulation	
157
Figure 13.1	 Observation schedule	
211
Figure 15.1	 Correlations and scatter plot: example 	
262
Figure 15.2	 Simple bar chart (example)	
266
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

xvi  List of tables and figures
Figure 15.3	 Horizontal bar chart (example)	
266
Figure 15.4	 Stacked bar chart (example)	
267
Figure 15.5	 Histogram (example)	
267
Figure 15.6	 Scatter plot (example)	
268
Figure 15.7	 Line graph (example)	
269
Figure 15.8	 Pie chart (example)	
269
Figure 16.1	 The grounded theory approach to the analysis of  
qualitative data	
287
Figure 18.1	 The structure of a research report	
327
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Acknowledgements
There are those close to home who contribute to the completion of a book by 
putting the author in a position to start, sustain and finish the book. For this rea-
son, and many others, I would like to dedicate this book to my family. 
Thanks especially to Viv – this book is for you.
Martyn Denscombe
Leicester
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Introduction
A book for ‘project researchers’
Social research is no longer restricted to a small elite of professionals and full-
time researchers. It has become the concern of a far greater number of people 
who are faced with the prospect of undertaking small-scale research projects as 
part of an academic course or as part of their professional development. Such 
people:
•• do not have large sums of money available to fund the research;
• need to complete the research within a relatively short time-span (perhaps 
within 6 months or less);
•• must be responsible for doing the work themselves, rather than being able to 
use others to help with data collection and analysis.
The aim of this book is to present these ‘project researchers’ with practical guid-
ance and a vision of the key issues involved in social research. It attempts to 
provide them with vital information that is easily accessible and which gets to 
the heart of the matter quickly and concisely. In doing this, the book is based on 
three premises:
1	 Most of what needs to be known and done in relation to the production of 
competent social research can be stated in straightforward language.
2	 The foundations of good social research depend on paying attention to certain 
elementary factors. If such factors are ignored or overlooked, the research 
will be open to criticism and serious questions may be raised about the quality 
of the findings.
3	 Project researchers can safeguard against making elementary errors in the 
design and execution of their research by using checklists to assure them-
selves that they have attended to the ‘minimum’ requirements and have not 
overlooked crucial factors associated with the production of good research.
The book is pragmatic in its approach to social research. It does not present par-
ticular types of social research as being inherently better or worse than others 
but, instead, encourages project researchers to choose strategies and methods 
that are likely to work best in the context of the topic they are trying to investi-
gate and the circumstances in which the research is being conducted.
The decisions and choices that project researchers make occur against  
a backdrop of two ‘paradigms’ of social research – two ‘schools of thought’.  
The two paradigms for social research are commonly known as the positivist 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

paradigm and the interpretivist paradigm. The positivist paradigm applies the 
natural science model of research to investigations of the social world. Social 
reality is treated in a similar way to physical reality as something that exists 
independently ‘out there’ with properties that can be studied scientifically. This 
allows the researcher to adopt an objective, detached approach to the study of 
social phenomena. The focus is generally on facts and figures relating to the 
causes and consequences of phenomena in the social world, and the approach 
tends to be associated with the use of quantitative data and statistics. The inter-
pretivist paradigm, by contrast, challenges the idea that social researchers can 
view things from an objective position. It sees social reality as something that is 
subjectively constructed by people’s thoughts and actions. This means that social 
researchers can never hope to be totally objective. They must always be ‘insid-
ers’ – part and parcel of the social reality they are studying. A consequence is 
that, from this perspective, the role of social research must be to interpret social 
phenomena, recognizing that researchers’ thinking will be shaped to some extent 
or other by their own experiences and identities as members of the social world 
within which their work takes place. The aim of research is to develop insights 
into people’s beliefs and their lived experiences, and the approach tends to be 
associated with the use of qualitative data (text and images).
Each paradigm operates on a different set of beliefs about the nature of social 
reality and the ways that it ought to be investigated. Each offers a model of 
best practice when it comes to conducting research. And traditionally each has 
been regarded as holding a position that is incompatible with the other’s position. 
The paradigms have been presented as competing alternatives, putting social 
researchers in the position of having to choose to conduct their research within 
one paradigm or the other.
However, the idea of a two-paradigm schism in social research is something 
that is hard to justify in practice and it vastly over-simplifies matters. It is a legacy 
of the past – and yet it continues to pervade the world of social research. It per-
sists, though, not so much as a literal depiction of what goes on in social research 
so much as in the way that approaches to social research can be described and 
spoken about. It works as a short-hand term to capture broad notions about dif-
ferent styles of research and their underlying assumptions.
It is not the purpose of this book, however, to explore the underlying philoso-
phy of social research – this is introduced in the companion book Ground Rules 
for Social Research (Denscombe 2010, also published by Open University Press). 
The focus here is on practice. And, in this respect, The Good Research Guide 
draws on the fact that social researchers can, and do, combine features of posi-
tivist and interpretivist paradigms within individual projects, crossing bounda-
ries between the traditional paradigms. Chapter 10 on mixed methods develops 
this point. So, while it is wise for project researchers to understand where their 
choices fit in relation to these traditional paradigms a basic tenet of this book 
is that these paradigms need not ring-fence the choices that project researchers 
make when deciding ‘what works best’.
2  The Good Research Guide
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Part 1
Strategies for social research
There is no single pathway to good research: there are always options and alterna-
tives. At any stage of any enquiry researchers need to take decisions, make judge-
ments and use discretion in order to successfully complete a project. One of the 
biggest decisions to be made concerns the choice of research strategy, and the first 
section of this book outlines a variety of strategies that can be used. These are not 
the full range of possibilities that exist because this would be beyond the scope of 
this book and would include strategies more appropriate for large-scale, long-term 
and very costly investigations. The focus, instead, is on the range of strategies that 
are well suited to the needs of project researchers engaged with small-scale, low-
budget research being conducted over relatively short periods of time.
What are research strategies?
A strategy is a plan of action designed to achieve a specific goal. In the context 
of social research this entails a broad approach that has:
•• a distinct research logic and rationale that shapes
• a plan of action (research design) to address
•• a clearly identified research problem (a specific goal that can be achieved).
A research strategy is different from a research method. Research methods 
are the tools for data collection – things like questionnaires, interviews, 
observation and documents (which are outlined in Part 2 of this book). Meth-
ods are the equivalent of a microscope when used by a scientist, a thermom-
eter when used by a medic, or a telescope when used by an astronomer. They 
do a job. They are types of equipment that allow relevant data to be collected.
Which strategy to choose?
Is it suitable?
In themselves, research strategies are neither ‘good’ nor ‘bad’, nor are they ‘right’ 
or ‘wrong’. It is only in relation to how they are used that they take on the mantle 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

4  The Good Research Guide
of being good or bad, right or wrong. They can only be judged in relation to the 
purpose for which they are used and, reflecting this point, it is better to think of 
strategies in terms of how useful they are and how appropriate they are. Thought 
of in this pragmatic way the justification for the choice of any specific strategy 
must depend on having a clear vision of the particular purpose for which it is 
being used. Unless we know what the research is trying to achieve, it is impossible 
to judge whether it is likely to be useful or appropriate. Table P1.1 indicates how 
the research strategies outlined in Part 1 can be valuable for different kinds of 
research purpose, and this should provide some initial guidance on the question of 
whether a particular strategy is suitable for the kind of research that is envisaged.
Table P1.1  Research strategies and research purpose; some links 
Strategy 
Purpose of research 
Surveys and  
sampling
• measure some aspect of a social phenomenon or trend
• gather facts in order to test a theory 
Case studies 
• understand the complex relationship between factors as 
they operate within a particular social setting 
Experiments 
• identify the cause of something
• observe the influence of specific factors 
Ethnography 
• describe cultural practices and traditions
• interpret social interaction within a culture 
Phenomenology 
• describe the essence of specific types of personal 
experience
• understand things through the eyes of someone else 
Grounded theory 
• clarify concepts or produce new theories
• explore a new topic and provide new insights 
Action research 
• solve a practical problem
• produce guidelines for best practice 
Systematic reviews
• get an objective overview of evidence on a specific  
topic
• evaluate the effectiveness of projects or interventions
Mixed methods 
• evaluate a new policy and gauge its impact
• compare alternative perspectives on a phenomenon
• combine aspects of the other strategies 
Key point: The choice of strategy is a matter of ‘horses for courses’
The researcher should choose a strategy that is likely to be successful in 
achieving the aims of the research, and be able to justify the choice of this 
strategy clearly and explicitly.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Strategies for social research  5
Strategies for social research  5
Is it feasible?
The choice of strategy needs to take into account certain practical aspects of 
conducting research. It is vital, for instance, that the researcher can get access to 
the kinds of people, contexts, events and documents that will be crucial for the 
success of the research. This might be a matter of getting the necessary authori-
zation to contact people, enter locations or view documents. It might be a mat-
ter of getting agreement from people or organizations to collaborate with the 
research. Or, it might be a matter of having the resources for specialist equip-
ment or travel to fieldwork locations. Whatever form it takes, the point is that 
access to data sources is crucial for the choice of research strategy.
Another practical consideration is the need to meet deadlines and to complete 
research within specified time constraints. Project researchers generally face dead-
lines for the completion of the research and it would be wrong to choose a strategy 
which could not possibly allow such deadlines to be met. Some strategies are rela-
tively predictable in terms of their time-span and lend themselves to fairly tight time-
planning (e.g. surveys, case studies, experiments). Others are less predictable (e.g. 
grounded theory) or tend to take a relatively long time (e.g. ethnography). This must 
be taken into account in terms of the feasibility of using specific strategies.
When choosing the strategy, researchers should also bear in mind the audience for 
the research and the particular research community within which the researcher is 
working. Different subject areas and disciplines tend to have different perspectives 
on research and, in practice, this means that they generally have a preference for 
certain styles of research rather than others. Project researchers need to be aware 
of this. In particular, those who need to conduct a small-scale piece of research as 
part of an academic qualification might be advised to make their choice of strategy 
mindful of the traditions of their own specific discipline and the predispositions of 
the people who are going to evaluate their research – their tutors and examiners.
Is it ethical?
Research ethics are an over-riding concern when it comes to the choice of 
strategy. It is hard to overstate the importance of research ethics in the con-
text of contemporary social research and, for this reason, practical guidance on 
research ethics is provided in Chapter 17. These guidelines are based on some 
core principles of research ethics, the first of which is that no-one should suffer 
harm as a result of participation in the research. The notion of ‘harm’ in this con-
text is wide-ranging and it calls on the researcher to anticipate possible ways in 
which participants might suffer as a consequence of their involvement with the 
research. A strategy that carries too many potential ethical risks is a strategy to 
be avoided, and so there needs to be some form of risk assessment right at the 
beginning of the research when choosing which strategy to use.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

6  The Good Research Guide
Checklist for the choice of research strategy
When choosing a research strategy you should feel confident about 
answering ‘yes’ to the following questions:
Factors to be considered
Suitability 
Will it produce 
appropriate kinds of 
data?
• Has the purpose of the research been clearly 
identified? 
• Is there a clear link between the purpose of 
the research and the chosen strategy?
• Will the strategy produce findings that can 
answer the research question(s)?
 
 
 
Feasibility 
Can it be done?
• Is there sufficient time for the design of the 
research, collection of data and analysis of 
results?
• Are sufficient resources available to cover the 
costs of the research (e.g. travel, printing)?
• Is it possible and practical to gain access to 
necessary data (people, events, documents)? 
• Will the chosen strategy be favoured by the 
key evaluators of the research?
 
 
 
 
 
Ethics 
Will it allow me  
to be ethical in 
my dealings with 
participants?
• Can I avoid any harm to participants resulting 
from their involvement in the research?
• Can I get informed consent from potential 
participants?
• Will the strategy permit me to work within an 
appropriate code of research ethics?
• Can I guarantee the confidentiality of the 
information given to me during the research?
 
 
 
 
 
✓
© M. Denscombe, The Good Research Guide. Open University Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

• What is a survey? • Types of survey • Which type of survey to choose? 
• Postal surveys • Face-to-face surveys • Group-administered surveys 
• Telephone surveys • Internet surveys • Web-based questionnaire 
surveys • Social network sites • Facebook surveys • The research 
population • Response rates • How to achieve good response rates  
• Non-response bias • Advantages of surveys • Disadvantages of 
surveys • Further reading • Checklist for the use of surveys
Surveys can take a number of forms. In social research the most common of 
these are the kind that attempt to ask people questions. Using the phone, the 
Internet, the postal service or face-to-face contact, their aim is to make contact 
with suitable respondents in order to obtain information from those people. Ques-
tionnaires and interviews are the data collection methods that are normally used.
Surveys can also involve the observation of behaviour and they can involve 
the analysis of documents as well. These type of survey, however, are less com-
monly used in small-scale social research and, for this reason, the focus of this 
chapter will be on those types of survey that ask people questions.
What is a survey?
When something is surveyed, it is ‘viewed comprehensively and in detail’. This 
is clear in the case of geographical surveys, engineering surveys and ordnance 
surveys which map out the landscape or the built environment of roads and 
buildings. The principles, though, have been used to good effect on mapping 
out the social world as well and, indeed, surveys have emerged in recent times 
as one of the most popular approaches to social research. Social surveys tend 
to share with their physical counterparts certain key characteristics. These are:
•• Empirical research. Because ‘to survey’ carries with it the meaning ‘to look’, 
survey work inevitably brings with it the idea of empirical research. It involves 
the idea of purposefully seeking the necessary information from relevant peo-
ple and relevant sites.
Surveys 
1
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

8  The Good Research Guide
• At a specific point in time. Surveys are generally used to provide a snapshot 
of how things are rather than tracing events over a period of time. In most 
cases this is useful for ‘bringing things up to date’ and providing information 
about the current state of affairs. Although it is possible to use surveys as the 
basis for tracking changes over a period of time, this is relatively uncommon in 
the realms of small-scale research projects.
• Wide and inclusive coverage. In order to view things comprehensively sur-
veys can try to get a panoramic view of the situation and strive for wide and 
inclusive coverage of the people or things being investigated. This kind of 
survey tends to cast the net wide to include the whole range of relevant peo-
ple (or things) and, for this reason, they tend to be relatively large in terms 
of the number of participants involved. Such surveys are commonly associ-
ated with quantitative data and statistical analysis relating to trends, propor-
tions and the prevalence of particular traits within the people or things being 
studied.
•• Detailed scrutiny. Another aspect to the notion of a survey involves the idea 
of looking at things ‘in detail’. This emphasizes a need for a ‘close inspec-
tion’ of the people or things of interest. Just as a house survey will focus its 
efforts on inspecting the structure of a specific building, social surveys can 
also examine things in depth and be small-scale rather than large-scale. This 
kind of survey tends to be based on a relatively small number of participants 
and be linked with qualitative data, exploratory research and the discovery of 
ideas about the people or things being investigated.
These characteristics of the survey approach include no mention of specific 
research methods. This is because surveys are a research strategy and, as such, 
they can be used with a variety of data collection methods – including question-
naires, interviews, documents and observation.
Key point
Surveys are used for research into things like:
••
consumer preferences and customer satisfaction;
••
voting behaviour (opinion polls);
••
health-related behaviour, diet, smoking and alcohol consumption;
••
evaluation of innovations, programmes and educational courses;
••
TV viewing and audience ratings.
Types of survey
Surveys differ in terms of the technology they use to communicate with respond-
ents: postal services, telephone networks, the Internet, and face-to-face contact, 
each providing an alternative means for contacting people and obtaining data 
from them (see Table 1.1).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Surveys   9
Which type of survey to choose?
When deciding which type of survey to use, researchers need to appreciate that 
each of the different types of survey brings with it certain possibilities and cer-
tain limitations. The choice should be based on what works best in relation to the 
particular research project, bearing in mind:
•• the objectives of the research, and whether this is to get data from a representa-
tive cross-section of people or whether it is to focus on particular kinds of peo-
ple who are likely to have a special knowledge about the topic of the research;
• the resources available to fund the survey, and the constraints this puts on 
decisions about the size of the research population, the size of any sample 
that might be used (see Chapter 2 Sampling), the number of weeks or months 
required to complete the survey, and the facilities (equipment, software) that 
can be used;
• the geographical area to be covered by the survey, and whether participants 
are dispersed across widely scattered locations;
• the methods of data collection to be used in the survey, and whether there is a 
preference for questionnaires or interviews;
• the speed of responses, and any urgency that surrounds the collection of 
responses from participants;
• the response rate, and the amount of pressure there is to minimize the time 
and effort it takes to respond to the survey – the ‘response burden’ – so that 
busy people are not deterred from participating;
• the contact with potential participants, and the extent to which it is necessary 
to have a ready-made list or directory that researchers can use to select poten-
tial participants for inclusion in the survey;
• the need for face-to-face contact, and the extent to which the research will 
benefit from the ‘personal touch’. Direct contact can be important for engag-
ing with participants, establishing rapport and gaining trust. It also helps the 
researcher to informally assess the validity of the responses being given and 
Table 1.1  Main types of survey and associated methods
Technology for distribution
Method of data collection
Postal
Mail 
Questionnaire
Face to face
Individual
Group
Interview
Questionnaire
Telephone
Landline
Mobile
Interview
Questionnaire
Internet 
Email 
Web-based 
Interview
Questionnaire
Social networking sites
Facebook
Twitter
Questionnaire 
Questionnaire
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

10  The Good Research Guide
it allows the researcher to provide instant clarification on points if the partici-
pant is unsure;
• the need for indirect contact, and the way that remote and impersonal contact 
(e.g. using Internet surveys, postal surveys, self-completion questionnaires) 
can encourage people’s willingness to answer openly and honestly when ques-
tions touch on things where there are particular social sensitivities (e.g. rac-
ism, sexism, homophobia, politics, religion);
• the abilities/disabilities of the respondents, and their capacity to complete 
the survey. If the type of survey includes forms some people cannot fill in, 
screens that some people cannot read, voices that some cannot hear, then 
obviously the survey will suffer. And this is not just a practical matter of 
increasing response rates. There is a larger ethical issue here concerned with 
social inclusion and the need to ensure that certain groups are not disadvan-
taged through exclusion from participation in the survey;
•• the validity of the answers, and the need to avoid the ‘social desirability’ fac-
tor where the respondent might be more inclined to provide answers which 
he/she feels are the expected ones, the correct ones or ones which put him/
her in a better light.
Key point
‘The major development of the twenty-first century, so far, is recognition that 
the use of all survey modes continues, and none seem likely to disappear. Each 
has strengths and weaknesses, allowing it to do things other modes cannot do’ 
(Dillman et al. 2009: 495).
Postal surveys
Distributing a survey through the post used to be the most efficient and effective way 
of conducting a large-scale survey covering a wide geographical area. The postal 
network provided the researcher with the means for sending out self-completion 
questionnaires to a particular research population who could be identified through 
their names or addresses. Participants could then return the completed question-
naire, encouraged possibly by receiving a stamped envelope with the researcher’s 
address on it. The process was fairly simple, straightforward and relatively cheap. 
And it remains a viable and often-used mode of distributing surveys today.
However, three things need to be borne in mind when considering the use of a 
postal survey. First, there is the cost. The printing, packing and postage costs can 
quickly mount up, particularly with larger surveys. Providing stamped addressed 
envelopes for the return of questionnaires, for instance, can double the postage 
costs. Project researchers with limited resources need to think carefully about 
the costs involved. Second, there is the time delay. Planning and preparation 
take time, as they do with all research, but there are specific delays that stem 
from the turn-round time involved with posting and returning questionnaires as 
part of a postal survey. In practice, the data collection is likely to take a number 
of weeks to complete even after the questionnaires have been posted out. Third, 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Surveys   11
there is the response rate. The proportion of people who respond to postal sur-
veys, as is often the case with surveys, tends to be quite low.
Face-to-face surveys
Face-to-face surveys involve direct contact between the researcher and individ-
ual respondents, and typically make use of questionnaires or interviews as the 
data collection method. The most easily recognized version of this kind of survey 
sees the researcher approaching people ‘in the street’ to ask if they will partici-
pate in the research. The sight of the market researcher with her clipboard and 
smile is familiar in town centres and shopping malls. Alternatively, the contact 
can be made by calling at people’s homes. Sometimes this will be ‘on spec’ to see 
if the householder is willing and able to spare the time to help with the research. 
On other occasions, contact will be arranged in advance by letter or phone.
Either way, the face-to-face survey is a more expensive way of collecting data 
than the use of the post, Internet or telephone. Researcher time and travel costs 
are considerable. Weighed against this there is the prospect of probing beneath 
the surface to get a bit more depth to the information that is obtained. Plus, this 
kind of survey with its face-to-face contact offers some immediate means of vali-
dating the data. The researcher can sense if she is being given false information 
in the face-to-face context in a way that is not possible with questionnaires and 
less feasible with telephone surveys. And, with this kind of survey response rates 
pose less of a problem. Partly this is because the face-to-face contact allows the 
researcher to use her interpersonal skills and powers of per-
suasion to encourage the potential respondent to take part 
in the survey. Partly it is because with face-to-face surveys 
the researcher can continue making contacts until she has 
accumulated the total number of responses that are required.
Group-administered surveys
Like individual face-to-face surveys, group-administered surveys are conducted 
in person. They rely on the researcher travelling to a specific site to distribute 
and collect the research instrument – normally a questionnaire. But, unlike face-
to-face surveys the data are collected from groups rather than individuals. Nor-
mally, these groups already exist. Rather than get a group of people together 
specifically for the purpose, it is easier from the researcher’s point of view to use 
naturally occurring groups. For example, a survey of young people could involve 
the distribution of questionnaires in schools to whole classes – possibly 30 or 
more people at a time. The same approach could be taken with work-groups, 
community meetings or any occasions where there will be a (naturally occur-
ring) collection of people who are suitable for the purposes of the research.
This approach does not really lend itself to use with thousands of people at a 
time. For practical purposes the group-administered survey tends to work best 
with fairly small numbers. In this context it is relatively easy to organize and 
can often draw on the researcher’s personal knowledge about the context of 
Link up with 
Quota sampling, 
p. 40.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

12  The Good Research Guide
the research. In terms of turn-round time this form of survey has advantages 
because the questionnaires are generally distributed, completed and returned in 
one process. And the personal, face-to-face contact means 
that response rates tend to be considerably higher than with 
postal, Internet or phone surveys. However, group-adminis-
tered surveys are quite labour-intensive and, depending on 
the locations for research, can incur significant travel costs.
Telephone surveys
Telephone surveys tend to be used mainly in conjunction with one-to-one inter-
views and they have become a well-established alternative to postal or face-to-
face surveys. One reason for this is that the evidence would suggest people are 
as honest and open on the phone as they are when answering postal question-
naires or being interviewed face to face (Dillman et al. 2009). Another reason is 
that conducting surveys via the telephone can have particular benefits in terms 
of time and costs. Researchers do not have to travel to all parts of the country 
to conduct the interviews – they only have to pick up a phone – and there are no 
significant delays with the return of data using a telephone survey because the 
responses are instantaneous. Local and national calls on landlines are not gen-
erally expensive, nor do calls to mobile phones need to incur significant costs. 
And the use of Skype or similar software provides the survey researcher with a 
means for making international calls via the Internet virtually free of cost. Skype 
also enables the interviewer to have visual face-to-face contact on screen with 
the interviewee if the contact is made online between computers.
Telephone surveys, like postal surveys, can target particular geographical 
areas. Researchers can select the area they wish to survey and identify the rel-
evant dialling code for that area. They can then contact phone numbers at ran-
dom within that area using random-digit dialling, where the final digits of the 
phone numbers are produced by computer technology which automatically gen-
erates numbers at random. Mobile phone numbers, however, are not allocated 
by geographical location (in the UK), which means that researchers cannot use 
prior knowledge about the geographical location of any mobile phone user as the 
basis for including them in a survey. As people come to use ‘cell phones’ instead 
of – not just in addition to – conventional land-line phones, this will pose some-
thing of a challenge for telephone surveys in terms of reaching a representative 
sample of the population.
Mobile phones, none the less, have introduced a new dimension to telephone 
surveys: they have enabled surveys to be conducted using SMS text questions 
and answers. In effect, they allow researchers to conduct questionnaire surveys 
(as distinct from the interview surveys associated with land-line phones). Such 
surveys need to keep things simple and short, and they are well suited to occa-
sions when information is needed instantly by way of feedback from a situation. 
This could be an audience response to a performance, customer evaluation of a 
product or service, or some snap opinion poll on a matter ‘of the moment’. Par-
ticipants send their responses to a designated SMS text address – usually a short 
sequence of numbers.
Link up with 
Cluster sampling, 
p. 37.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Surveys   13
Smartphones massively extend the range of possibilities for phone surveys. Sur-
veys designed for smartphones (and tablet computers such as iPads) can include 
images and multimedia features that can make responding to a survey more inter-
esting and more fun. Such surveys can also retrieve details about the location of 
respondents using GPS (Global Positioning Satellite).
Internet surveys
There are three main ways in which surveys can be conducted using the Inter-
net. The first of these involves direct contact through emails. Potential respond-
ents can be contacted by email and, if they agree to cooperate with the research, 
they can be sent a set of questions. If the questions are all sent within one mes-
sage then it constitutes an email questionnaire. If an initial question sets in train 
a dialogue between the researcher and the respondent contained in a series of 
messages then it becomes an email interview. There is not too much to go wrong 
using this approach. It is a simple, cheap and fast way to collect data. But while 
email communication remains a viable means for doing an online interview, 
email questionnaires have been largely superseded by web-based surveys. As 
Sue and Ritter (2012: xvi) point out, ‘The advent of free and easy-to-use survey 
software has rendered email questionnaires an unappealing choice for most pur-
poses.’ Web-based questionnaire surveys are ‘hosted’ on a ‘server’ linked to the 
Internet and respondents visit the host web-site to complete the questionnaire. 
They represent, in this respect, a second way of using the Internet to distribute 
a survey. A third possibility is to tap into online groups and social networks that 
already exist on the Internet, making use of instant messaging or forums that 
exist on the Internet such as chat rooms or discussion groups.
Internet surveys, in whatever form, are enticing for project researchers 
because:
•• They save time: There are no delays involved in delivering questions or receiv-
ing answers.
• They save money: Online surveys eliminate the costs of printing, packaging 
and posting associated with postal surveys. Yes, there are still some costs 
associated with distributing questionnaires online (see below) but these will 
be relatively small.
• They speed up data processing: There is less burden in terms of data entry. 
Data can be downloaded directly without the need to transcribe text data or 
the manual entry of quantitative data into data files.
• They allow wide geographical coverage: Surveys are not restricted to particu-
lar localities. Online surveys can be national or international in scope with 
no additional burden in terms of the time or money needed to reach distant 
participants.
•• They provide an environmentally friendly approach to conducting research: 
Online surveys reduce the need for paper and eliminate the need to travel. In 
these respects they save trees and avoid pollution.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

14  The Good Research Guide
Recent evidence, furthermore, would suggest that the quality of data obtained 
through Internet survey research is not significantly different from that 
obtained using more traditional methods. As the Internet is now part of eve-
ryday life for most people in developed societies there is little evidence that 
respondents provide significantly different kinds of answer or supply differ-
ent amounts of information as a consequence of the online data collection 
method (Denscombe 2006, 2008, 2009; Sue and Ritter 2012; Tourangeau et al. 
2013).
Web-based questionnaire surveys
The most widely used form of Internet survey is the web-based questionnaire 
survey. Its popularity stems from the availability of computer programs spe-
cifically designed for creating and distributing online questionnaires, and 
the fact that social researchers can gain access to this for little or no cost 
through online survey companies or computing facilities within their own 
organization.
Web-based questionnaire surveys involve three distinct processes: (1) design of 
the questionnaire; (2) distribution of the questionnaire; and (3) retrieval of the data.
Design
The first stage entails compiling the questions. The attraction of web-based ques-
tionnaires is that they can include a number of useful fea-
tures that cannot be incorporated into paper questionnaires: 
things such as drop-down menus and the forced completion 
of questions. They can also include images and background 
designs that make them visually attractive, and online sur-
vey companies usually provide templates and examples 
that help with the design of a good questionnaire.
Delivery
Once the questionnaire has been designed then the next stage is to start the sur-
vey by distributing the questionnaire. A number of options are normally avail-
able (Table 1.2). With small-scale research, operating on a very limited budget, 
the most commonly chosen option is to deliver the questionnaire to participants 
who have been chosen specifically in relation to the research project. These par-
ticipants are contacted via email, SMS text or social network site with an invita-
tion to visit the website where the questionnaire is found. Other more expensive 
options include attracting people to the survey through publicity and advertis-
ing – for example, paying for ‘pop-ups’ on a website or a link via a social net-
working site. It is also possible to use a ‘survey panel’ – a list of people who 
volunteer to take part in such surveys and have been recruited on the basis of 
previous responses. Survey companies offer to provide access to suitable panels, 
for which they charge a fee.
Link up with 
Web-based  
questionnaires, 
p. 178.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Surveys   15
Good practice
Web surveys work best when …
••
Either: A list of email addresses is available for the research population 
because this allows the researcher to target relevant people (and allows 
more systematic sampling techniques).
••
Or: Self-selection to the survey is useful because it gives access to people 
specifically relevant for the topic of the research.
When the web survey is based on inviting specific people to participate, it is 
important to keep things simple and straightforward. To help with this the sur-
vey software provides a unique web address (URL) for each questionnaire that is 
made available on the host site. This is the web address that anyone answering the 
questionnaire will visit. When inviting people to participate in the survey it is good 
practice to put this web address in the message in the form of a hyperlink. All the 
person needs to do is click on the link to be taken directly to the questionnaire. 
Alternatively, it is possible to get a link to the survey via a QR code. Anyone with a 
smart phone or tablet (and with a suitable QR code app) will be able to access the 
survey by using their smart phone or tablet to read the ‘Quick Response’ barcode.
As a way of restricting access to the survey it is advisable to put password 
restrictions in place. Again, online survey companies normally include this facil-
ity. Using passwords makes the data more secure in the sense that it ensures the 
only people answering the questionnaire are those to whom the password has 
been revealed. From the researcher’s point of view this can act as a safety device 
that eliminates the prospect of people outside the research population tapping 
into the survey and ‘contaminating’ the findings.
Table 1.2  Delivery options for web-based questionnaire surveys 
Password protect
Only people who have been given the password can access 
the questionnaire
Prevent multiple 
responses
Prevents the accidental duplication of responses from one 
person or the malicious ‘ballot-box stuffing’ from anyone 
determined to fix the results of the survey
Hyperlink
Unique web address for the web location of the questionnaire
Link to social media
Put links to the questionnaire in Facebook pages, etc.
Email
Send the questionnaire to people on an email list
Retrieving the data
The answers from each questionnaire are automatically transferred into a data 
file and the combined data from all the completed questionnaires can be viewed 
online. Sometimes the results can be viewed in the form of graphs, which is use-
ful. It is also possible to look at the results for each individual questionnaire. 
As well as listing the answers to each question, it is possible to see additional 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

16  The Good Research Guide
Table 1.3  Retrieval options for web-based questionnaires 
Data display
View individual respondent’s details
See summary of survey findings
Produce graphs from data in PowerPoint 
Data download
Download the data and save at a location that can be accessed 
later
Export the graphics into a MS Word file and into a PowerPoint file
Respondent 
tracking
Survey tracking: views, started, completed, deleted survey counts
Email tracking: tracking of respondent web or email addresses
Good practice
For a useful website for online web survey design and research findings con-
nected with online surveys, visit http://www.websm.org.
information about each questionnaire – things like how long it took to complete 
and exactly when it was submitted.
Findings from the survey can be exported – and this is really useful. The ben-
efits of being able to download the data directly into an Excel spreadsheet or sta-
tistics package are significant. It means that rather than the data being located 
on the remote server the researcher can ‘take possession’ of it, have it on his/
her own computer, to process and analyse as desired (Table 1.3). However, this 
facility tends to come ‘at a price’, often requiring the researcher to upgrade from 
a free package to a subscription package.
Choosing an online survey company to host your questionnaire
The decision about which online survey company to use is obviously an important 
one that can affect the success of the web survey. The good news on this is that 
for many small-scale researchers the decision should be very straightforward. A 
number of large organizations have their own software for conducting online sur-
veys or have a licence to use the survey facilities offered by companies who spe-
cialize in providing online survey services. Universities might have site licences 
that allow students to use the necessary software, and health service organiza-
tions, local authorities, government agencies, charities and large commercial busi-
nesses might already have the kind of survey software that their employees can 
use for research purposes. In the first instance, therefore, it is important to check 
whether you are eligible to use an existing online survey facility by virtue of 
belonging to a particular organization. If this is the case then it makes sense to use 
what is already available. The chances are that there will be no charges for using 
the survey software, and there is likely to be technical help on hand if it is needed.
If, however, you do not have this pathway for setting up a web-based question-
naire then it is still possible to conduct an online survey using the professional 
software with little cost involved. It might even be possible to collect the data 
for free. This is because there are a number of online survey companies who 
cater for the needs of small-scale researchers by offering low-budget packages. 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Surveys   17
Entry-level packages (with restricted functionality) are generally offered for 
free. These are ‘taster’ packages that allow you to explore the software and get 
the feel for what is on offer. It is feasible, on occasion, to rely entirely on these 
for small-scale projects. In practice, though, with the kind of surveys associated 
for instance with master’s degrees and PhDs, it is likely that you will feel the 
need to upgrade to the next tariff. However, by shopping around it should still 
be possible to get the necessary online survey service for around £15–£25 per 
month (US$23–40). For a survey where data collection lasts for three months, 
then, the total cost could be estimated as £45–£75. Table 1.4 indicates a number 
of important factors that should be borne in mind when deciding which online 
survey company to use and which tariff to select.
Table 1.4  Key things to consider when choosing your online survey company
Contract
•• How much does it cost per month?
•• Is there a minimum sign-up period?
•• Can you stop payments instantly when you want?
Data security
•• How ‘trustworthy’ is the organization? Will it survive?
•• What measures are taken to protect the security and privacy of 
data held on the server?
•• Is data or personal information shared with any third party?
Size of the  
survey
•• Is there a cap on number of respondents? (e.g. 50, 100, 1,000)
•• Is there a limit to the number of questions allowed for each 
questionnaire?
Access to data
•• Can data be downloaded? (free package or upgrade?)
•• In what formats can the data be downloaded?
•• Is the survey restricted to a specific period of time? (e.g. 1 week)
•• Are there limitations on the number of times data can be 
accessed or downloaded?
Data controls
•• Can the software stop respondents submitting multiple 
responses by accident or on purpose?
•• Can access to the survey be restricted by using a password?
•• Are there blocks against computer-generated mass 
submissions? (e.g. where to gain access to the survey each 
respondent needs to ‘decipher’ a number displayed in a format 
which cannot be machine-read) 
Design features
•• Are templates and specimen questions provided?
•• Will the software allow you to add a logo and customize the 
appearance of the survey?
•• Is it possible to insert a progress bar to show respondent how 
far they are through the questionnaire?
•• Will the online survey company insist on inserting 
advertisements in the survey?
Survey tracking
•• Is a log of respondent activity provided? (views, starts, 
completions, drop-outs?)
•• What kind of respondent tracking is offered? (e.g. respondent 
email addresses, web addresses)
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

18  The Good Research Guide
Social network sites
Social network sites (SNS) offer an interesting and rapidly developing ave-
nue for survey research. Specifically they provide new ways of making con-
tact with potential participants and a new channel for distributing surveys  
(Wilson et al. 2012). Facebook is the world leader in terms of numbers, with 
an estimated 1.4 billion users worldwide (2014 figures). Since it was launched 
in 2004 it has grown massively to become something of a social phenomenon. 
Other SNS include Twitter, MySpace, Friendster, LinkedIn, Google+, Bebo, 
and Flickr. What these SNS have in common are three things, each of which is 
vitally important in terms of their use for conducting surveys. First, they are all 
about messages. At the very heart of any SNS lies some form of communication 
between people. SNS exploit new technologies to make it easier and faster for 
users to send messages and this can be extremely valuable for social research-
ers. It provides them with a wealth of data about the people involved which can 
be of interest to many researchers but, more pertinently, it provides a fast and 
free method for researchers to make contact with potential participants.
Second, users of SNS are linked via a communications network. This opens 
up access to a potentially vast audience of people. Research populations can be 
identified on the basis of their interests and the personal information they pro-
vide about themselves and contact can be made with these people to invite them 
to participate in the research.
Third, the communication that takes place tends to be focused on those with 
some shared interest or with some shared identity. The messages are not nor-
mally distributed at random nor are they sent to everyone who is signed up to the 
particular SNS. They are sent to ‘friends’ or ‘groups’ or ‘followers’ – to people who 
want to be involved with certain others. The clue is in the name: ‘social’ network-
ing. This is very useful for researchers because it provides a way of targeting 
groups of people who have something in common, a thing that the researcher 
wishes to investigate. There is a ready-made ‘research population’ (see below) 
with whom it is relatively easy to make contact. It also helps when it comes to 
making contact with people who would normally be hard to identify and locate. 
Using their own personal networks, individuals can open 
up contact with other potential respondents who would not 
otherwise have been discovered by the researcher, rapidly 
expanding access to ‘hard-to-find’ research populations 
through a process of ‘snowballing’.
Key point
‘Social networking sites and online questionnaires make it possible to do  
survey research faster, cheaper, and with less assistance than ever before. 
The methods are especially well-suited for snowball sampling of elusive sub-
populations’ (Brickman-Bhutta 2012: 57).
Link up with 
Snowball  
sampling, p. 42.
Surveys based on SNS, however, also have their limitations. First, SNS users do not 
constitute a cross-section of the population in any of the countries in which they 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Surveys   19
exist (Couper 2011; Smith 2013). This means that findings based on surveys using 
SNS cannot be assumed to apply to the wider population in a simple and straight-
forward fashion. As a consequence, SNS are best used when the aim of the survey 
is to get information from specific kinds of people rather than when trying to get 
information from people who are representative of the wider population.
The second limitation stems from the social nature of such sites and the effect this 
might have on the honesty of answers that are given to any survey questions. This 
poses the question: ‘Will respondents be more inclined to provide “socially accept-
able” answers as they are conscious of the fact that the views they express might 
be visible to others on the network?’ And, for the same reason, might they be more 
reluctant to divulge personal facts or attitudes that they worry will be regarded as 
‘bad’ by friends or others using the SNS? The answer to this lies in ensuring that SNS 
users’ responses are kept private and are never communicated via a public forum. 
Although the invitation to participate can legitimately make use of the public areas 
on the site, any subsequent contact needs to be done on a one-to-one basis as private 
messaging. And it is vital that potential respondents realize this.
Facebook surveys
Most Facebook users have a lot of ‘friends’ – estimates vary between 130–230 and 
significantly more amongst the 12–24 age range. These friends provide a fast and 
effective way of ‘spreading the word’ about a topic of interest. Through personal 
messaging researchers can make direct contact with their friends with a request 
to participate in research. And they can then vastly extend the pool of potential 
participants by asking those individuals to pass on that request to their ‘friends’.
Public messages placed on a ‘wall’ offer another possibility for ‘spreading the 
word’ and distributing an invitation to participate in a survey. Any message sent 
to an individual user’s ‘wall’ is visible to all ‘friends’ and obviously this is an effec-
tive way of spreading a message to other Facebook users. And as a third option, 
researchers can use ‘groups’ as a way of contacting relevant Facebook users. 
This can either be done by creating a group specifically for the purposes of the 
research, or it can entail making contact with existing groups that are relevant 
to the research topic.
An example of how Facebook contacts can be used for surveys is provided 
by Brickman-Bhutta’s (2012) research. Her aim was to make contact with Catho-
lics who had ceased to actively practise their faith and who no longer attended 
church. This research population represented a classic ‘hard-to-contact’ group. 
But Facebook provided a means for getting the contact. She set up her own 
group ‘Please Help Me Find Baptized Catholics!’ The purpose of the group was 
explained on the group website and people were invited to sign-up to the group. 
They were also asked to invite any of their ‘friends’ who were ‘ex-Catholics’ to 
join. After a month, when the group was established, she sent members of the 
group a link to her online questionnaire and, in this way, obtained a good number 
of responses from a research population for which there was no obvious list of 
contacts obtainable through other means. Next, she contacted the administrators 
of other Catholic groups on Facebook to try to enlist their help. Some adminis-
trators were helpful, others less so. And the response rate from these groups 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

20  The Good Research Guide
was quite low, reflecting the fact that in many cases people 
sign up to a group on the spur of the moment and never, or 
hardly ever, return to the site at a later date. So, as a third 
measure she contacted her own network of ‘friends’ to cast 
the net as wide as possible. Overall, her approach worked 
well. In her words (Brickman-Bhutta 2012: 58):
Within five days of releasing a 12-minute online survey to a Facebook group 
of potential volunteers, I harvested 2,788 completed questionnaires. Within a 
month, the total number of respondents increased to about 4,000. Total mon-
etary costs averaged less than one cent (per questionnaire) – vastly less than 
the cost of surveys obtained through mail, phone, or even email.
Advertising and applications
Separate from making contact with potential respondents with a request to par-
ticipate in a survey there are two other ways in which social network sites such 
as Facebook can be used as the basis for collecting survey data. The first of these 
is advertising. Facebook holds data about its users based on the information they 
provide about themselves and the way they use the social network site, and this 
allows advertisements to be selectively targeted on Facebook users with particu-
lar demographics (age, location), particular attributes (such as education and 
job titles), particular interests (based on the pages they like or the groups they 
belong to) and keywords to narrow the field and get access to exactly the kind of 
people they need for the survey. Ramo and Prochaska (2012) used such advertis-
ing as a means of recruiting a sample of young smokers aged 18–25 years living 
in the United States, and their research illustrates the potential of this approach. 
However, the overall cost of obtaining responses from 1,548 young smokers was 
$6,628 (£4,100, €4,800) and the cost per completed survey was $4.28 (£2.65, 
€3.10). While this is certainly cheaper than many alternative modes of survey, 
it still represents quite a substantial outlay of money and this is likely to put it 
beyond the pocket of most small-scale project researchers.
A second possibility is to develop an application (‘app’) that can be hosted 
on Facebook. Apps include games, polls, quizzes and fan pages which appear 
as sponsored links on the user’s home page. It is possible to develop an app spe-
cifically for the purposes of a survey – as was done in the case of the myPerson-
ality app (Kosinski et al. 2013). This was an online personality survey that was 
designed by psychologists and which attracted over 4.5 million users. Develop-
ing such apps, though, requires quite a lot of technical skill and the costs can be 
considerable relative to the resources available for most small-scale research.
The research population
When conducting any kind of survey, researchers need to be clear about the 
kind of people, events or items that will be relevant for the study and likely to 
provide valuable data in terms of the topic that is being investigated. It is worth 
noting that in this context the term ‘population’ has a specific meaning. Rather  
Link up with 
Snowball sam-
pling, p. 42.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Surveys   21
than meaning everyone who lives in a country, population refers to all the items 
in the category of things that are being researched. It means a research popu-
lation. So, if a survey is used to study nurses in Scotland then the survey popula-
tion refers to all nurses working in Scotland (not all the people who populate 
Scotland). Likewise, if the research involves a survey of trade union members in 
the transport industry in Wales then the term ‘population’ refers to all the trans-
port workers in Wales who belong to a trade union.
Making contact with members of the research population
Whether the researcher wants to include all of the population in the survey or, as 
discussed in Chapter 2, a sample drawn from the population, the survey cannot 
begin without having planned some way of making contact with members of the 
research population. This shifts the emphasis from the question of ‘who’ to the 
matter of ‘how’, as it requires the researcher to think ahead about the practical 
task of establishing contact with potential participants in the survey or gain-
ing access to suitable events or items. The survey researcher, in effect, needs 
‘contact points’ for the research population. In practice, these tend to come in 
the form of lists of names, addresses, locations, membership numbers, job titles, 
schedules of events, inventories of items, etc. that allow the researcher to iden-
tify who and where members of the research population can be found. Examples 
of such information are things like:
•• a list of postal addresses (e.g. for businesses in a particular industry);
• a list of names (e.g. of local residents based on an electoral register);
• suitable locations for finding particular kinds of people (e.g. shopping malls 
to find retail customers);
• a list of email addresses (e.g. for employees of a company, or clients for a 
service);
• phone numbers from a directory (e.g. for people or 
companies in a specific area);
•• online groups (e.g. for special interest groups or particu-
lar kinds of people).
Participation by the research population
The willingness and ability of the research population to participate in the sur-
vey are something that can never be taken for granted. When planning a sur-
vey, careful thought needs to be given to the matter: What is the likelihood that 
those people identified as potential participants will agree to co-operate with the 
research? Much will depend on things like:
•• the kind of people involved (e.g. busy or not busy);
• the capacity of the people invited to participate (language, literacy, age, vul-
nerable groups);
• the topic of the survey;
Link up with 
Sampling frame, 
p. 34.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

22  The Good Research Guide
• the context in which the survey is delivered (when, where);
•• the mode of delivery of the survey (face-to-face, Internet, post, phone).
The consequences of participation also warrant consideration. At the plan-
ning stage for a survey it is essential that thought is given to the question of 
whether participation in the survey might in any way harm 
members of the research population, cause them stress, or 
unduly inconvenience them. Researchers, in other words, 
must consider the ethics of inviting people to participate 
in their survey.
Response rates
Rarely do researchers get responses from all the people they invite to participate 
in their survey. Normally, they can expect to receive replies from only a propor-
tion of those who were originally contacted, and this is a basic fact of doing 
surveys. The extent to which a survey is successful in getting replies from those 
who were originally contacted is known as ‘the response rate’. It is calculated 
as a percentage. So, if a researcher distributes 200 questionnaires and receives 
110 completed returns then the survey’s response rate will be 55 per cent. If 200 
questionnaires are distributed and 100 are completed and returned, then this is a 
50 per cent response rate.
When planning a survey it is important to anticipate the likely response rate 
and take this into consideration when deciding on the numbers who will be con-
tacted and asked to collaborate with the research. If you think you might get a 40 
per cent response rate and you need 200 completed questionnaires on which to 
base your analysis, then clearly you will need to distribute 500 questionnaires – a 
considerably larger number.
How to achieve good response rates
Generally speaking, the aim of a good survey is to achieve a high response rate. 
The larger the proportion that responds, the better it is for the survey. The design 
of the survey needs to take this into account and, as far as is possible, survey 
researchers need to incorporate measures that will encourage people to partici-
pate in the survey and, just as importantly, avoid things that are likely to deter 
people from responding. There is no magic formula that will guarantee a good 
response rate, but the following factors have been found to have a significant 
bearing on response rates and they ought to be considered carefully when plan-
ning a small-scale survey.
Target appropriate people for the survey: respondent selection
A good response rate depends on using an accurate population list/sampling 
frame. A scatter-gun approach will cover a large number of potential respondents 
Link up with  
Chapter 17 
Research ethics.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Surveys   23
but many of these will not respond because the topic is not relevant to them. And 
if they do respond, the data from them might not be pertinent to the topic of the 
research. The more a survey can identify and locate relevant people (or items),  
the better the response rate is likely to be.
Follow up non-responses: reminders
The classic way to boost response rates is to ‘follow up’ non-responses and the 
standard advice for survey researchers is that they should build into the survey 
design some tactics for re-contacting anyone who does not respond on the first 
occasion. Measures should also be taken to repeat the reminder two or three 
times if needed. There is clear evidence that this boosts response rates in all 
kinds of surveys (Dillman et al. 2009).
Having said that, there are two issues linked with improving overall response 
rates through follow-ups which need to be borne in mind. First, there is the time 
delay caused by the process. When surveys are conducted under strict time con-
straints, as with much small-scale research, this can pose something of a dilemma. 
Second, there is the matter of anonymity. If questionnaire responses are com-
pletely anonymous and it is not possible to trace the questionnaires back to indi-
vidual respondents, then it will not be possible to work out who has responded 
and who has not. Targeting individual non-respondents becomes impossible.
Give prior notification: invitations in advance
Consistently across the range of types of survey it has been found that prior noti-
fication is beneficial in terms of response rates. When potential respondents are 
made aware of the survey in advance there is more chance of them agreeing to 
participate in the survey. This applies whether the contact is made by post, email 
or in person. With online surveys, having access to a list of email addresses that 
can be used to pre-notify people in advance is beneficial in terms of boosting 
response rates.
Make the topic of interest to respondents: topic salience
Response rates are better when the topic has ‘salience’. This means that the topic 
has to capture the attention of potential respondents. Literally, it has to stand out 
and be conspicuous. A survey of people belonging to a specific interest group, 
of course, should have no problem on this score since those involved will have 
been targeted exactly because of their (known) interest in the topic. In any surveys 
where such a matching of interests cannot be guaranteed, the onus is on research-
ers to do all they can to make the topic interesting. They need to present the topic 
in a way that is upbeat, enthusiastic and positive – doing all they can to get the 
respondent interested in the topic.
Show that participation will ‘make a difference’: response impact
People are more motivated to participate in a survey if they feel that their 
contribution can have some influence and might actually ‘make a difference’ – 
especially when there is some direct, personal benefit to be gained from 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

24  The Good Research Guide
agreeing to participate. Bearing this in mind, survey researchers should indi-
cate (when it is possible) how taking part in the survey might be in the respond-
ents’ interests. If at all possible, they should let potential respondents know 
how their answers will be valuable, and how their contribution to the survey 
can have an effect on something in which they have a vested interest. So, for 
example, potential respondents could be encouraged to participate by know-
ing that the information they provide will be used to improve the quality of a 
particular service they receive or product they buy.
Establish the legitimacy of the survey: sponsorship
Response rates are likely to increase to the extent that the survey is regarded 
as legitimate research. Early in the contact with potential respondents the 
researcher needs to establish that the survey is for a worthy cause and that it is 
being conducted under the auspices of a credible organization. There needs to be 
a basis for trust. For small-scale research projects, especially those conducted 
as part of a university degree, this means that it is important to assure potential 
respondents that the survey is part of a genuine research project and that it will 
be properly conducted. The name of the university, assurances of confidentiality, 
and contact details for the researcher are the kind of thing that give the potential 
respondent some confidence that the survey is legitimate and, therefore, some-
thing that deserves attention.
Minimize the response burden: keep things simple and easy
Asking someone to take part in a survey involves asking for their time and 
effort. The amount of this ‘response burden’ can be a major deterrent to par-
ticipating in a survey. If too much is asked of respondents then response 
rates will plummet as people fail to finish the questionnaire, put down the 
phone or delete the message in frustration and annoyance. Recognizing this 
point, the task for the survey researcher is to minimize the response burden 
by including only those items that are absolutely essential and taking care 
to ask the questions in a way that keeps things as easy and straightforward 
as possible.
Provide information about progress towards completion
Many people who start an interview or questionnaire fail to complete it. They 
stop through frustration and exasperation at the amount of time and effort being 
asked of them. Such drop-outs obviously reduce the response rate and survey 
researchers need to do what they can to prevent this happening. One way of 
tackling the problem is to be clear and open at the outset about the amount of 
time that participation is likely to take. When considering whether to become 
involved in the research, people quite reasonably will want to know: How long 
will the interview take? How many pages are there in the questionnaire? It is 
good practice, therefore, to let people know in advance how much of their time 
will be needed.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Surveys   25
During the process of completing the interview or questionnaire people might 
also want to know: How much more? With a paper questionnaire people can see 
what needs to be done and can easily monitor their progress through the ques-
tionnaire. With online questionnaires, however, the ‘finishing line’ might not be 
so obvious and using a ‘progress bar’ has been shown to be an effective way of 
improving response rates – letting people know how far they have got, and how 
far they still have to go before completing the questionnaire. In the course of an 
interview, similarly, it might be wise to verbally reassure the respondent about 
how far they have progressed and how much is still left to do.
Provide incentives: rewards or feedback
Material incentives can increase response rates. Quite separate from any motiva-
tion stemming from the topic itself or the impact that the findings might have, 
the prospect of material rewards can serve to encourage people to take part in a 
survey. Market research companies using postal surveys might include a small 
amount of money as a ‘token of thanks’. Online surveys can reward respondents 
with shopping tokens and vouchers of various kinds. And the promise of inclu-
sion in a prize draw for a large cash prize or a free holiday can be effective with 
most kinds of survey. But, of course, such material incentives cost money – lots 
of it. Consequently they tend to be used with large-scale commercial research 
projects where sponsors and clients pick up the bill. Small-scale researchers, 
however, cannot normally call on the funding necessary to use this as an effec-
tive method of increasing response rates.
What small-scale low-budget research can offer by way of incentives is feed-
back. Respondents can be motivated by offering them copies of the final report 
or summaries of the findings arising from the investigation. In essence, they 
can be offered information rather than material rewards – information which 
stems directly from their participation in the project and which they may find 
useful and/or interesting. The offer of such feedback, whether it is taken up or 
not, is a nice gesture and one which signals that the researcher would like to 
offer something in return to the respondent.
Good practice: Plan ahead to minimize non-response rates
Remember, response rates are affected by:
••
the amount of spare time people have;
••
the extent to which the survey caters for respondents’ abilities;
••
social sensitivities around the topic being investigated;
••
prejudices and preferences of potential respondents;
••
the social climate and freedom to express views.
Response rates and Internet surveys
Fears have been voiced about low response rates from Internet surveys, caused 
through people feeling ill at ease using computers or not having ready access 
to the Internet. As time progresses, though, the evidence would suggest that 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

26  The Good Research Guide
such anxieties are largely unfounded (Sue and Ritter 2012). Indeed, direct com-
parisons between different survey modes (postal, email, web-based) indicates 
that, generally speaking, there is now little difference in response rates between 
postal mail surveys and web-based surveys (Hoonakker and Carayon 2009).
Acceptable levels of response
There is no benchmark figure for judging what is an acceptable response rate 
and what is not. There is simply no hard and fast rule on the matter. It all depends 
on the circumstances. A large postal survey sent ‘cold’ without prior notification 
to households will get a low response rate – in all likelihood it would be far less 
that 10 per cent. A survey sent on behalf of a club or association to its members 
using a membership list is likely to achieve a far higher response rate – possibly 
over 70 per cent. A survey using face-to-face interviews arranged by personal 
contact between the researcher and the interviewees is likely to get a very high 
response rate – possibly up to 100 per cent. So much depends on who is con-
tacted, how they are contacted and what they are contacted about.
Bearing these things in mind, rather than look for a universal benchmark 
figure for surveys above which response rates are acceptable and below which 
the results become suspect, it is more productive to gauge whether the response 
rate is acceptable by making a comparison with similar surveys. It is the 
response rates achieved by surveys that are similar in terms of their methods, 
their size, their target group, their topic of research, their use of prior contact 
and other relevant factors that provide an indication of what can be treated as 
an acceptable response rate.
Good practice
Look at the response rates achieved by similar types of survey. Use these as 
your target.
Non-response bias
Response rates are important because if a survey has a low response rate, then 
its findings will miss data from those who have chosen not to respond. At one 
level this will be disappointing for the survey researcher since fewer responses 
means less data. But it is not simply the sheer amount of potential data that is 
lost which worries researchers: it is the fear that a (low) response rate can lead 
to a thing called non-response bias. This bias occurs when there is a pattern to 
the responses in which it becomes clear that those who have not completed the 
survey tend to be different from those who have. If this happens, the findings 
from the survey will systematically over-represent data collected from the peo-
ple who are more likely to respond and, by the same token, systematically under-
represent data for those who are less likely to respond. This is likely to have a 
direct bearing on how fair and objective the survey’s findings will be.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Surveys   27
Basically, there are two sources of non-response bias. The first of these is 
non-contact bias. If the survey is designed in such a way that it systematically 
favours the inclusion of some types of people (or items) at the expense of oth-
ers, then a bias will result. An example of this would be if a survey involved 
researchers calling at home addresses to conduct interviews with residents, and 
the researchers made their visits between 9 a.m. and 5 p.m. This would tend to 
miss contact with households where everyone is at work during the day. To avoid 
this, they would need to make contact in the evenings as well as during the day.
A second cause of bias is non-response through refusal. In this case if 
the design of the survey serves to discourage people from responding and 
does so in a way that systematically deters certain types of people rather 
than others, then a non-response bias will occur. The social factors that affect 
response rates, identified above, are significant in this context because dif-
ferent types of people will be more likely to opt out of a survey depending on 
things like the nature of the topic, the burden of participating in the survey, 
and the amount of time they have to spare.
Non-response bias and Internet surveys
Non-response bias through ‘non-contact’ occurs with Internet surveys to the 
extent that only those people who have access to the Internet can take part in the 
survey. Put another way, Internet surveys systematically exclude those who do 
not have Internet access. Now, although a large and increasing proportion of the 
population in developed countries is online, it is worth remembering that there 
are still demographic differences that persist in relation to:
•• social class, with wealthier groups being more likely to have access than 
poorer groups;
•• age, with the elderly being less likely to have access to the Internet than other 
groups.
Internet access also varies across different countries in the world: the vast major-
ity of Internet users live in the USA, Europe or the Asia Pacific rim countries, with 
those living in poorer parts of the world being less likely to be able to participate 
in Internet research.
Another potential source of non-response bias occurs when Internet surveys 
rely on responses from visitors to websites. The problem here is that those who 
visit the site are not likely to constitute a cross-section of the population. The 
issue relates to the use of chat rooms, news groups and online interviews as well. 
In such instances the concern is that those who end up participating in the survey 
might be representative not of the general public but just of those who are online 
and interested in a particular subject.
This danger is illustrated by the case of the BBC’s ‘Great British Class Survey’. 
The British Broadcasting Corporation initiated a survey of social class in Britain. It 
used a web survey which, following substantial publicity on national TV and radio, 
produced a large response. Between January and July 2011 the survey achieved 
161,400 completed online questionnaires. However, the eventual ‘sample’ was far 
from representative of the population as a whole. As Savage et al. (2013: 224) note:
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

28  The Good Research Guide
The survey suffered from a strong selection bias, with respondents being pre-
dominantly drawn from the well-educated social groups. As one BBC journalist 
told us when we reported this problem, ‘Yes, you seem to have got a typical 
BBC news audience there.’
Although the number or respondents was large, the online survey proved to be 
so unrepresentative of the population that the BBC had to get more data from a 
separate survey. This time they outsourced the work to a survey firm who used 
quota-sampling and face-to-face contact with 1026 respondents in order to get a 
nationally representative sample.
Checking for non-response bias
When conducting a survey the researcher needs to ask an important question: Do 
the non-respondents differ in any systematic and relevant fashion from those 
who have responded? Of course, to answer this question the researcher needs to 
have some information about those who have been targeted but not responded. 
This may prove difficult. None the less, it is good practice to endeavour to get 
some data about the non-respondents and to assess whether they are different 
from the respondents in any way that will have a bearing on the findings. For 
instance, are they different in terms of the following:
•• who they are? (e.g. age, sex, gender, social class, religion, opinions)
• what they believe? (e.g. opinions, political views)
•• what they do? (e.g. activities, lifestyles, purchasing behaviour)
Good practice
Researchers should take what practical measures are possible to find out if 
respondents are different from non-respondents in some way that is relevant to 
the survey and which might result in a non-response bias.
Weighting the findings
If it appears that the survey has an imbalance in terms of the kind of people who 
have responded and those who have not responded, there is a solution: that is to 
‘weight’ the findings. It is worth stressing that this mathematical technique tends 
to be associated with large-scale surveys and is not normally a technique that 
should be applied to small-scale research. It is used where the researchers have 
some firm evidence about the proportions of respondents they would expect to 
find included in their survey. So, for example, if an omnibus survey of consumer 
attitudes obtains 5000 responses, of which 20 per cent come from the under-25 
age range, and if national figures for the population indicate that this age group 
actually make up 30 per cent of the population, researchers can mathematically 
boost this group’s impact on the overall findings from 20 per cent to 30 per cent 
– reflecting what would have been the case had the survey been representative 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Surveys   29
of the population. Of course the other age-ranges would also have their impact 
brought in line with the proportions known to exist in the wider population.
Advantages of surveys
Costs and time
Surveys can be an efficient and relatively inexpensive means of collecting data. 
In the case of small-scale surveys the researcher’s time might be the only sig-
nificant cost involved and, although large-scale surveys can involve substantial 
costs, compared with strategies such as experiments and ethnography, they can 
produce a mountain of data in a short time for a relatively low cost. Results can 
be obtained over a fairly short period of time and the researcher can set a finite 
time-span for this, which is very useful when it comes to planning the research 
and delivering the end-product.
‘Real-world’ data
As an approach to social research, the emphasis tends to be on producing data based 
on real-world observations. The very notion of a survey suggests that the research 
has involved an active attempt by the researcher to go out and look and to search. 
Surveys are associated with getting information ‘straight from the horse’s mouth’.
Can be used with large-scale and small-scale research
In the case of large-scale surveys the breadth of coverage is an advantage in get-
ting representative data from which generalizations can be made about the wider 
population. In the case of small-scale interview surveys researchers can build up 
a picture based on data that includes the full range of relevant items or people, 
perhaps selectively including the unusual or extreme ‘outliers’ that are seen as 
likely to provide particularly useful information.
Can collect both quantitative and qualitative data
The survey approach lends itself to being used with particular methods, such as 
the self-completion questionnaire, which can generate large volumes of quanti-
tative data that can be subject to statistical analysis. However, surveys can just 
as easily produce qualitative data, particularly when used in conjunction with 
methods such as an interview.
Disadvantages of surveys
Tendency to focus on data accumulation and  
data description more than theory
With its emphasis on collecting empirical data there is a danger that the ‘data are 
left to speak for themselves’ without an adequate account of the implications of 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

30  The Good Research Guide
those data for relevant issues, problems or theories. There is nothing inevitable 
about this, however, and good survey research certainly does devote attention to 
the analysis of data.
Depth or detail
The data produced through large-scale surveys are likely to lack depth and detail 
on the topic being investigated. This is almost inevitable. Such surveys tend to 
forfeit depth in favour of breadth when it comes to the data that are produced, 
especially where quantitative data are used. This is not true, however, of small-
scale qualitative surveys using interview methods. Where the survey uses inter-
view methods, it can produce data that are rich and detailed, although in this 
case the trade-off is that the number of people taking part in the survey will be 
much smaller.
Low response rates
Response rates from surveys are often quite low and getting a reasonable 
response rate can be quite a challenge for the researcher. This is particularly 
the case with large-scale surveys where potential participants are selected at 
random and where the researcher has no personal contact with the potential par-
ticipants. It is easy to ignore a researcher’s request for help that comes through 
the post or via email. Where selection to a survey involves personal contact the 
response rates tend to be higher. Low response rates can lead to non-response 
bias in the survey.
Contact with ‘hard-to-reach’ research populations
Surveys are easier to use when the research population can be identified and 
contacted through some pre-existing listing or directory. Where the research 
population cannot be located through such means – when they are ‘hard-to-reach’ – 
survey researchers need to use more time-consuming and possibly innovative 
means for contacting potential participants.
Further reading
De Vaus, D. (2014) Surveys in Social Research, 6th edn. London: Routledge.
Dillman, D. A., Smyth, J. D. and Christian, L. M. (2009) Internet, Mail, and Mixed-mode 
Surveys: The Tailored Design Method. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Schonlau, M., Fricker, R. and Elliot, M. (2002) Conducting Research Surveys via E-mail 
and the Web. Rand Monograph MR-1480-RC. Available at: http://www.rand.org/pubs/
monograph_reports/MR1480.html.
Sue, V. M. and Ritter, L. A. (2012) Conducting Online Surveys. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Tourangeau, R., Conrad, F. and Couper, M. (2013) The Science of Web Surveys. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Surveys   31
✓
Checklist for the use of surveys
When conducting a survey you should feel confident about answering  
‘yes’ to the following questions: 
  1	 Does the type of survey match the style of research (large-scale/
small-scale, quantitative/qualitative, explanatory/descriptive/
exploratory)?
 
 
  2	 Has a research population been clearly identified?
  3	 Does a population list/sampling frame exist for the research 
population and can it be used to make contact with potential 
participants? (If appropriate.)
 
 
  4	 Have the costs of the survey been estimated and are these  
‘within budget’ for the research?
 
  5	 Will a pilot survey be conducted to check for potential problems?
  6	 Are suitable measures in place to minimize non-responses and  
to achieve the best possible response rate?
 
  7	 Will potential participants receive prior notification about the 
survey?
 
  8	 Will follow-ups be used to bolster the response rate?
  9	 Have efforts been made to avoid response bias and, where 
possible, have checks been made to see if there are significant 
differences between the respondents and the non-respondents?
 
 
10	 Ethics – has due consideration been given to the possible 
consequences of the survey for participants?
 
© M. Denscombe, The Good Research Guide. Open University Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

2
Representative samples and exploratory samples • Probability sampling 
and non-probability sampling • Sampling frames • Probability sampling 
techniques • Non-probability sampling techniques • Which sampling 
technique should be used? • Size of the sample • Advantages of 
sampling • Disadvantages of sampling • Further reading • Checklist for 
the use of sampling
The basic principle of sampling is that it is possible to produce reasonably accurate 
findings without the need to collect data from each and every member of a 
research population. For survey researchers, in particular, this can be an attrac-
tive proposition. It means that they might be able to save time and money by 
reducing the amount of data they need to collect without sacrificing much in 
terms of the accuracy of their findings.
Representative samples and exploratory samples
When survey researchers select a sample from a population they will be doing 
one of two things. They will either be trying to get a representative sample or they 
will be trying to get an exploratory sample. Each involves a different approach 
and they tend to be associated with different kinds of social research.
Representative samples tend to be associated with larger surveys and with 
the use of quantitative data. A representative sample involves a cross-section of  
the population. It matches the population in terms of its mix of ingredients, and 
relies on using a selection procedure that:
•• includes all relevant factors/variables/events;
•• matches the proportions in the overall population.
Information gathered from a representative sample allows the researcher to 
draw valid conclusions about how things are in the overall research population.
Exploratory samples are often used in small-scale research and tend to lend 
themselves to the use of qualitative data. An exploratory sample is used as a 
Sampling
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Sampling  33
way of probing relatively unexplored topics and as a route to the discovery of 
new ideas or theories. The point of the sample is to provide the researcher with a 
means for generating insights and information. For this purpose it is not always 
necessary to get an accurate cross-section of the population. There are times 
when this might be the case, but selection to an exploratory sample is more likely 
to include interesting, extreme and unusual examples that can illuminate the 
thing being studied.
Probability sampling and non-probability sampling
Echoing in many respects the alternative purposes for which social researchers 
might use sampling, there are two distinct approaches which can be used for the 
selection of samples. Researchers can either choose probability sampling as the 
basis for selecting their sample from the research population, or they can use 
non-probability sampling.
Probability sampling relies on the use of random selection from the 
research population. It is known as probability sampling because it is based 
on statistical theory relating to the ‘normal distribution’ of events. The theory 
behind its use is that the best way to get a representative sample is to ensure 
that the researcher has absolutely no influence on the selection of people/items 
to be included in the sample. The sample, instead, should be based on com-
pletely random selection from among the population being studied. Probability 
sampling works best with large numbers, where there is a known population 
(number, characteristics) and it tends to be associated with large-scale surveys 
using quantitative data.
Non-probability sampling involves an element of discretion or choice on the 
part of the researcher at some point in the selection process and it is used when 
researchers find it difficult or undesirable to rely on random selection to the sam-
ple. The reasons for this are varied but, in the main, they will be because:
•• The researcher feels it is not feasible to include a sufficiently large number of 
examples in the study.
• The researcher does not have sufficient information about the research 
population to undertake probability sampling. The researcher may  
not know who, or how many people or events, make up the research 
population.
• It may prove exceedingly difficult to contact a sample selected through con-
ventional probability sampling techniques. For example, research on drug 
addicts or the homeless would not lend itself to normal forms of probability 
sampling.
Good practice
Researchers need to be very clear and explicit about whether their intention is 
to use a representative sample or an exploratory sample.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

34  The Good Research Guide
Non-probability sampling can still retain the aim of gen-
erating a representative sample. In the interests of saving 
costs, however, the selection of the sample involves an ele-
ment of expediency and established good practice rather 
than strict adherence to the principles of random selection. 
Equally, non-probability sampling can be used where the aim is to produce an 
exploratory sample rather than a representative cross-section of the population. 
Such approaches involve non-probability sampling because people or items are 
selected for the sample on the basis of things like their expertise, their experi-
ence or the fact that they might be unusual or different from the norm (Table 2.1).
Sampling frames
A sampling frame provides a basis for selecting a sample. It is particularly impor-
tant when researchers intend to use probability sampling, but can also be valua-
ble for non-probability sampling as well. A sampling frame contains information 
about the research population. Generally it takes the form of a list of names 
or addresses that includes all of the members of the population from which the 
sample is to be selected. Sometimes a suitable sampling frame can be easy to 
find. Research that involves formal organizations can often draw on things like 
membership lists, email addresses, and employee records to provide a suitable 
sampling frame that includes all members of the population to be researched. 
The information is already kept for other administrative purposes. Research 
involving particular industries and occupations can find that things like trade 
directories, commercial listings and memberships of professional associations 
provide suitable sampling frames. And, surveys targeting the general public 
might be able to use electoral registers or the Postcode Address File (PAF) – a list 
of postcodes and postal addresses produced by the Post Office which contains 
about 99 per cent of all private residential addresses. There can be costs associ-
ated with some listings. Commercial companies will supply lists of businesses, 
schools, hospitals, charities and other organizations, but will charge for the ser-
vice. However, it is possible to be quite specific about which 
types of organization and which areas are to be included in 
the list. This suits the needs of small-scale research projects 
because the lists can be fairly small and supplied at rela-
tively low cost.
Table 2.1  Approaches to sampling
Probability
Random selection
Representative sample
large numbers
Non-probability
Researcher-influenced
selection
Representative sample
or
Exploratory sample
small numbers
Link up with 
Research popula-
tions, p. 21.
Link up with 
Research popula-
tions, p. 21.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Sampling  35
Bias in sampling frames
There is a danger with the use of any sampling frame that it might be incom-
plete. A list of private addresses will not lead the researcher to those who are 
homeless and live on the streets. An electoral register will not include those 
under 18 years of age or those who, for whatever reason, have not registered to 
vote. Things omitted might well be different in some important respects from 
the things which actually exist on the list, and overlooking them as part of 
the research can lead to a biased sample. Just as damaging for the purposes 
of research, registers can include certain items that should not be there. They 
can contain names of people who have passed on – in either a geographical or 
a mortal sense. People move home, people die, and unless the register is regu-
larly and carefully updated on a routine basis there is the likelihood that it will 
be out of date and include items it should not. Either way, the impact can be 
significant. If the sampling frame systematically excludes things that should 
be in, or systematically includes things which should be out, the sample will 
almost inevitably be biased.
Internet surveys and sampling frames
In general, the nature of the Internet makes good sampling frames relatively 
more difficult to find. This is because addresses, identities and contact points 
on the Internet are very different from postal addresses and phone numbers in 
the ‘real’ world. In cyberspace, an address and an identity can be very tempo-
rary and provide no background information of value to the researcher. People 
often have more than one email address, use more than one Internet Service 
Provider (ISP) and there is no guarantee that any address will be used by just 
one individual. Having said this, there are certain types of email lists that are 
well suited to being used as a sampling frame when conducting Internet sur-
veys. Primarily, this is when the research is focused on populations who exist 
in some sort of formal organization because the administration of organiza-
tions almost invariably requires the maintenance of good 
records of the membership, e.g. employees at work, pupils 
in schools, members of clubs, volunteers with charities. 
Such email lists tend to serve known populations and 
can therefore prove to be a valuable basis for a sampling 
frame.
Key point
A good sampling frame should be:
••
relevant: it should contain things directly linked to the research topic;
••
complete: it should cover all relevant items;
••
precise: it should exclude all the items that are not relevant;
••
up-to-date: it should incorporate recent additions and changes, and have 
redundant items cleansed from the list.
Link up with 
Internet surveys, 
p. 13.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

36  The Good Research Guide
Probability sampling techniques
Random sampling: each person/item has an equal chance  
of being selected
Random sampling is often portrayed as the ideal basis for generating a repre-
sentative sample. This is because with random sampling the inclusion of a per-
son/item in the sample is based entirely on chance. Random selection ensures 
that there is no scope for the researcher to influence the sample in some way that 
will introduce bias.
It is important to appreciate that the term ‘random’, as used in this context, 
does not mean that selection can be haphazard or based on an ‘any one will do’ 
approach. And it is a dangerous mistake for the project researcher to use the term 
‘random’ in a loose or colloquial way when dealing with sampling techniques. For 
research purposes the term ‘random’ actually involves quite specific constraints on 
the way that persons/items get selected. From a statistical point of view random-
ness means that ‘each unit should have an equal and known probability of inclu-
sion in the sample’.
To get a random sample there needs to be:
1	 a known population from which the sample is to be taken. The researcher 
needs to know something about the make-up of the overall population from 
which the sample is to be extracted (such as the total number, who they are or 
where they exist).
2	 a sampling frame that provides a list of all the items in the population and 
which allows them to be picked via some unique identifier (such as a name, 
an address, an employee number or a birth date).
3	 a process of random selection which provides the basis for including specific 
units in the sample. For research purposes this can involve the use of a ran-
dom number generator – a utility available free online or through appropriate 
computer software packages.
Key point
A random sample is like a lottery draw. The underlying principle is that no per-
son can influence which items get picked. The selection is based on just one 
factor – pure chance.
Systematic sampling: every nth case is included
Systematic sampling adheres closely to the principle of random selection but, in 
this case, the researcher selects items in a systematic way – picking every nth item 
from an appropriate list. For a sample of 50 from a population of 250 it will be 
every 5th item, for a sample of 70 from a population of 490 it will be every 7th item – 
nth depending on the size of the required sample relative to the number in the 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Sampling  37
research population. It should not matter where on the list the selection starts. The 
researcher, however, will want to feel sure that there is no order or pattern in the list 
that might be related to the topic being investigated because this could undermine 
the principle of random selection and cause some bias to creep into the sample as a 
result of the system of selection.
Cluster sampling: clusters within the population
Rather than using random sampling to select individual people or items, cluster sam-
pling uses random sampling to select specific clusters or groups. Within each of the 
clusters all people/items are included in the sample. The advantage of this sampling 
technique is that the clusters, as the name suggests, contain items that are closely 
grouped together – normally in one location or in one geographical area. By focusing 
on such clusters, the researcher can save a great deal of time and money that would 
otherwise have been spent on travelling to and fro visiting research sites scattered 
throughout the length and breadth of the land. For this reason cluster sampling is 
often used by market researchers and others who need to conduct surveys on a lim-
ited budget.
There are, however, two important conditions that need to be met for the use 
of cluster sampling. First, the clusters must be pre-existing, naturally occurring 
groups. Second, each cluster should reflect the heterogeneity of the total popu-
lation. The idea is that within each cluster the researcher might expect to find 
a mini-version of the total population and that by including all members of the 
cluster within the sample, the researcher will be able to get a representative sam-
ple that will produce findings that accurately match the situation in the total 
research population.
Multi-stage sampling: samples drawn from samples
Multi-stage sampling involves selecting samples in a sequence of stages, each 
sample being drawn from within the previously selected sample. The underlying 
principle is still one of random selection, only in this case it involves sampling at 
multiple stages rather than all at once. In principle, multi-stage sampling can go 
on through any number of levels, each level involving a sample drawn from the 
previous level.
The distinction between multi-stage sampling and cluster sampling is that 
cluster sampling uses all the items or people that exist within each cluster 
whereas multi-stage sampling selects a sample from within the cluster. This 
is particularly useful if: (1) the researcher suspects that the population within 
the chosen clusters will not provide a cross-section of the wider population 
or (2) if resources dictate that it is too expensive to include everyone in the 
cluster.
Stratified sampling: sampling based on subgroups in the population
Stratified sampling continues to adhere to the underlying principle of random 
selection. However, it introduces some element of researcher influence into  
the selection process and, to this extent, moves away slightly from pure random 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

38  The Good Research Guide
sampling. Stratified sampling subdivides the research population into different 
subgroups (strata) and then chooses the required number of items or people 
from within each subgroup using random sampling techniques. The reason for 
introducing stratification into the selection process is to ensure that crucial 
parts of the population are appropriately represented in the overall sample. It 
allows the researcher to select a sample which he/she knows will include, for 
instance, equal number of men and women, or perhaps an appropriate balance 
of different age groups within the sample. There are two important conditions 
that apply to the use of stratified sampling. First, the subgroups must be fairly 
homogeneous in the sense that they share something in common which can be 
used to separate them into clearly identifiable subgroups. Second, this factor 
must be relevant and significant in terms of what is already known about the 
topic.
Example 2.1: Probability sampling techniques
Table 2.2 illustrates how different probability sampling techniques can operate. 
The numbers involved are small which, for the purposes of an illustration, is actu-
ally quite useful because it highlights some of the problems that can arise when 
probability sampling is used with small sample sizes. In practice, however, the 
size of the samples would need to be considerably larger to allow the probability 
samples to produce sufficiently accurate results. 
In this illustration the population consists of 27 people. Let us presume that 
they are members of a football supporters’ club and that we wish to select a 
sample of 9 people to take part in our research (and bear in mind that, in reality, 
the numbers might be one hundred times greater than this miniature illustration). 
The sampling frame consists of a list of members’ names. These are ordered 
alphabetically, and each name has been assigned a number. In principle, this is 
sufficient for us to produce either a pure random sample or a systematic random 
sample. The sampling frame contains two further bits of information about the 
members – location and sex. These permit the use of cluster sampling and strati-
fied sampling.
A random sample can be selected using random number generating software. Sim-
ple utilities for this can be found on the Internet, or they come as part of standard data 
analysis software. We use the software to generate a list of 9 numbers between values 
1 and 27. Those whose names are matched with these numbers on the list are then 
selected to form the random sample. Note that in this particular list there are 7 males 
and 2 females. Running the random number generator again will produce different 
figures and, in all probability, a different balance of males to females. This effect  
is exaggerated by the very small numbers involved but as the sample size increases 
towards 1,000 or more the difference caused by using different random numbers 
would vastly diminish.
A systematic sample can be produced simply by selecting every third person 
on the list. This will provide the researcher with 9 people who have been selected 
simply by chance in terms of where they happen to appear on the list. This pre-
sumes, of course, that there is nothing in the order of the list that could bias the 
sample. Note that in this particular systematic sample there are 9 males and  
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Table 2.2  Illustration of four probability sampling techniques
Sampling frame
Segregated sampling frame
list no.
name
location
sex
Random
Systematic
Cluster
Stratified
list no.
sex
name
001
Ahmed
A
M
•
 
•
001
M
Ahmed
002
Ashton
F
M
•
 
 
002
M
Ashton
003
Bernbaum
C
M
 
•
 
003
M
Bernbaum
004
Bradford
E
F
•
 
 
005
M
Chang
005
Chang
B
M
 
 
•
 
006
M
Davies
006
Davies
A
M
 
•
•
009
M
Ewusie
007
Diego
H
F
 
 
•
 
012
M
Goldberg
008
Duval
E
F
 
 
•
013
M
Gupta
009
Ewusie
I
M
 
•
•
 
015
M
Jones
010
Fleur
A
F
 
 
•
017
M
Mars
011
Gerhardt
I
F
 
 
•
 
018
M
Merton
012
Goldberg
D
M
 
•
 
019
M
O’Reilly
013
Gupta
B
M
 
 
•
 
020
M
Overton
014
Johnson
G
F
•
 
•
021
M
Rahman
015
Jones
B
M
•
•
•
 
023
M
Silva
016
Kheidr
I
F
 
 
•
 
024
M
Tunstall
017
Marsh
D
M
 
 
•
026
M
Webber
018
Merton
G
M
 
•
 
027
M
Williams
019
O’Reilly
H
M
•
 
•
•
004
F
Bradford
020
Overton
C
M
•
 
 
007
F
Diego
021
Rahman
G
M
 
•
 
008
F
Duval
022
Robinson
C
F
 
 
 
010
F
Fleur
023
Silva
E
M
 
 
 
011
F
Gerhardt
024
Tunstall
F
M
•
•
•
014
F
Johnson
025
Waterman
F
F
 
 
 
016
F
Kheidr
026
Webber
H
M
 
 
•
 
022
F
Robinson
027
Williams
D
M
•
•
•
025
F
Waterman
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

40  The Good Research Guide
0 females. However, if the start point is changed the proportions change dra-
matically. Check how the balance changes when we start the systematic selec-
tion at number 001 (3 males, 6 females) or number 002 (6 males, 3 females) 
instead.
For a cluster sample the selection is based on the random selection of 3 clus-
ters and the inclusion of all those within the cluster as part of the sample. In this 
illustration the cluster is based on location. If locations B, H and I happen to be 
randomly selected, the sample will incorporate the 9 people who exist in these 
locations. The assumption here is that location itself is not a significant factor 
that could bias the sample.
A stratified sample is designed to ensure that there is an appropriate repre-
sentation of the population within the overall sample. In this illustration a strat-
ified sample could be used to ensure that males and females are represented 
proportionately in the sample. We know from our sampling frame that there 
is a ratio of 2:1 of males to females in our population (the football supporters’ 
club members). To get a stratified sample we need to segregate the member-
ship list according to sex. This is how the sampling frame is reorganized on 
the right of the table – males separated from females. Then, 6 random num-
bers can be generated for selecting from the list of males and 3 random num-
bers likewise for selecting from the list of females. In this way the researcher 
guarantees to get a sample where appropriate proportions have been ran-
domly selected from within specific strata of the membership of the football 
supporters’ club.
Non-probability sampling techniques
Quota sampling: selected to meet specific criteria
Quota sampling is widely used in market research. It operates on very similar prin-
ciples to stratified sampling. It establishes certain categories (or strata) which are 
considered to be vital for inclusion in the sample, and also seeks to fill these cat-
egories in proportion to their existence in the population. There is, though, one 
distinctive difference between stratified and quota sampling. With quota sampling, 
the method of choosing the people or events that make up the required number 
within each category is not a matter of strict random selection. In effect, it is 
left up to the researcher to choose who fills the quota. It might be on a ‘first to 
hand’ basis – as when market researchers stop people in the street. The people 
might be appropriate but were chosen because they just happened to be there, 
not as part of a random selection from a known population. The technical dif-
ference here excites statisticians but need not trouble the project researcher too 
much. The crucial point is that, like stratified sampling, it has the advantage of 
ensuring the representation of all crucial categories in the sample in proportion 
to their existence in the wider population. It does so without waste. Because the 
quotas are set in advance, no people or events that subsequently become ‘surplus 
to requirements’ are incorporated into the research. Quota sampling, then, has 
particular advantages when it comes to costs – especially when used with face-
to-face interviewing.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Sampling  41
Purposive sampling: hand-picked for the topic
Purposive sampling operates on the principle that we can get the best information 
through focusing on a relatively small number of instances deliberately selected 
on the basis of their known attributes (i.e. not through random selection). With 
purposive sampling the sample is ‘hand-picked’ for the research on the basis of:
•• relevance: to the issue/theory being investigated;
•• knowledge: privileged knowledge or experience about the topic.
Purposive sampling works where the researcher already knows something about 
the specific people or events and deliberately selects particular ones because 
they are seen as instances that are likely to produce the most valuable data. They 
are selected with a specific purpose in mind, and that purpose reflects the par-
ticular qualities of the people or events chosen and their relevance to the topic 
of the investigation.
A purposive sample can be used in order to ensure that a wide cross-section of 
items or people are included in the sample. When used in this way purposive sampling 
is, to a degree, emulating a ‘representative sample’. Based on prior knowledge, the 
researcher can deliberately select the sample in order to ensure that the full range of 
items or people is included (e.g. all age groups, all ethnic groups). This can be useful 
with small-scale surveys where random sampling of itself might not be likely enough 
to include groups that occur in relatively small numbers in the population.
Purposive sampling is particularly well suited for creating an ‘exploratory sam-
ple’. It provides a way of getting the best information by selecting people most 
likely to have the experience or expertise to provide quality information and valu-
able insights on the research topic. It allows the researcher to home in on people or 
events which there are good grounds for believing will be critical for the research. 
These might be extreme cases, rare cases or critical cases rather than ordinary 
ones. Miles and Huberman (2014) call such special instances ‘outliers’, and com-
mend their inclusion in the process of discovery as a check which explores rival 
possible explanations and tests any explanation based on mainstream findings, by 
seeing if they can work with instances which are distinctly not mainstream.
Quota sampling
Stores in a shopping mall might want to know what their customers think about 
the facilities that are available (e.g. parking, toilets, restaurants) and whether 
there are any particular features of the mall that attract them to visit it. A quota 
sample for face-to-face interviews in the mall could be devised on the basis of 
including 200 males and 200 females, and within each group there could be a 
quota of 40 in each of five age categories 12–18, 19–30, 31–45, 46–64, 65+. 
The quotas for interview, then, would be 40 males aged 12–18, 40 females 
aged 12–18, 40 males aged 19–30, 40 females aged 19–30, and so on. Inter-
viewers would approach appropriate shoppers and continue to conduct interviews 
until they had filled the quota for each subgroup. 
Example 2.2
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

42  The Good Research Guide
Theoretical sampling: selected to help generate theories
With theoretical sampling the selection of instances follows a route of discovery 
based on the development of a theory which is ‘grounded’ in evidence. At each 
stage, new evidence is used to modify or confirm a ‘theory’, 
which then points to an appropriate choice of instances 
for research in the next phase. The sample evolves, and 
it continues to grow until such time as the researcher has 
sufficient information in relation to the theory that is being 
developed.
Purposive sampling for key informants
A study of online banking fraud might start by identifying some individuals who 
play key roles in the detection and prevention of such fraud. Major high street 
banks have specialist teams dedicated to online security and the researcher 
could make contact with these teams to arrange interviews. Victims of online 
banking fraud could be sought to provide their particular perspective, and the 
researcher might even try to include fraudsters themselves to get even more 
insight to the topic.
Example 2.3
Theoretical sampling
A study of teachers’ control of classrooms in secondary schools might involve 
observation in classrooms and in-depth interviews with teachers. From early 
fieldwork the researcher could be alerted to the particular significance of noise 
emanating from classrooms as an indicator of (lack of) control. Building on this, 
theoretical sampling would involve choosing further observations and interviews 
deliberately to make comparisons and to check the initial ‘theory’ – perhaps 
looking for instances where noise might not be likely to signify a lack of control 
(e.g. music lessons or PE lessons).
Example 2.4
Snowball sampling: participants refer the researcher  
on to other potential participants
With snowball sampling the sample emerges through a process of reference from 
one person to the next. At the start, the research is likely to involve just one or a few 
people. Each can be asked to nominate some other people who would be relevant for 
the purposes of the research. These nominations are then contacted and, it is hoped, 
included in the sample. The sample thus snowballs in size as each of the nominees 
is asked, in turn, to nominate further persons who might be included in the sample.
Snowball sampling is an effective technique for building up a reasonable-
sized sample, especially when used as part of a small-scale research project. One 
advantage is that the accumulation of numbers is quite quick, using the multiplier 
effect of one person nominating two or more others. Added to this, the researcher 
can approach each new person, having been, in a sense, sponsored by the person 
who had named him or her. The researcher can use the nominator as some kind of 
Link up with 
Chapter 7 
Grounded theory.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Sampling  43
reference to enhance his or her bona fides and credibility, rather than approach 
the new person cold. Snowball sampling is particularly useful where there is no 
sampling frame of any kind which can allow the researcher 
to identify and make contact with appropriate participants. 
For this reason, it is often used in conjunction with qualita-
tive research based on small-scale exploratory samples, and 
its use is perfectly compatible with purposive sampling and 
theoretical sampling. People can be asked to nominate others who meet certain 
criteria for choice, certain conditions related to the research project and cer-
tain characteristics such as age, sex, ethnicity, qualifications, residence, state of 
health or leisure pursuits.
Convenience sampling: first to hand
Convenience sampling is built upon selections which suit the convenience of the 
researcher and which are ‘first to hand’. An element of convenience is likely to 
enter into sampling procedures of most research. Because researchers have lim-
ited money and limited time at their disposal, it is quite reasonable that where 
there is scope for choice between two or more equally valid possibilities for 
inclusion in the sample, the researcher should choose the most convenient. If, 
for example, two or more clusters are equally suitable as research sites, it would 
be crazy to opt for ones that were the furthest away without some good reason 
to do so. Convenience sampling, however, takes this to an extreme by using con-
venience as the main basis for selecting the sample, not a subsidiary one. The 
criterion for selection to the sample is that items are convenient and the key 
advantage of convenience sampling is that it is quick, cheap and easy.
Snowball sampling
A study of smoking cessation among ‘under-age’ smokers could use snowball 
sampling to good advantage. There is no sampling frame for such people and 
there is no obvious or simple way to identify such people. So, the researcher 
could make enquiries until one such person is found. This person is likely to 
know of others his/her age who have started smoking and subsequently quit 
before they reached the age of 16. Assuming the young person is willing to  
co-operate, he/she could be asked to identify two others who have quit smoking. 
In turn, these two could be asked to identify others who fit the needs of the 
sample, and so on. This process builds a sample that snowballs in size.
Example 2.5
Link up with 
Facebook  
surveys, p. 19.
Convenience sampling
A student who wishes to conduct a survey into consumer preferences in rela-
tion to soft drinks might choose all the fellow students on the course to be the 
‘sample’. They are easy to find and can probably be persuaded fairly easily to 
complete a questionnaire on the subject. Alternatively, using face-to-face inter-
views, the student could collect data from students using the canteen. Those 
who are interviewed will constitute a ‘convenience sample’.
Example 2.6
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

44  The Good Research Guide
Caution
Convenience itself offers nothing by way of justification for the inclusion of people 
or events in the sample. It might be a reasonable practical criterion to apply when 
faced with equally viable alternatives but, in its own right, is not a factor that 
should be used by researchers to select the sample. Choosing things on the basis 
of convenience runs counter to the rigour of scientific research. It suggests a lazy 
approach to the work. Good research selects its items for study not on the basis 
that they are the easiest to obtain but for specific reasons linked to the subject 
matter of the research and the requirements of the investigation. For this reason, 
the practice of convenience sampling is hard to equate with good research.
Which sampling technique should be used?
From the outline of sampling techniques above we can see that the survey 
researcher has 10 basic options from which to choose, each characterized by a 
different method of selecting the people or items to be included in the sample. As 
Figure 2.1 shows, the sampling techniques sit somewhere on a continuum with, at 
one extreme, a selection technique which eliminates altogether the influence of 
the researcher (random selection) and at the other extreme a selection technique 
where selection of the sample is left entirely to the discretion of the researcher 
(convenience sampling). In between, there are a range of techniques which differ 
in the extent to which they adhere to the principle of random selection. But not 
only do the techniques sit on a sliding scale in terms of the basis for selecting the 
sample, they also have corresponding positions in terms of the purpose of the 
sample, the kind of data to be collected, the size of the sample and the amount of 
resources they are liable to consume. The choice of sampling technique depends, 
therefore, on how the various techniques fit the needs of the researcher and the 
kind of research he/she proposes to undertake. When deciding which technique to 
use the researcher needs to consider five core questions:
1	 Is my purpose to produce a representative sample or an exploratory sample?
2	 To what extent is this purpose better served by selecting the sample on the 
basis of random selection or deliberate choice?
3	 Will qualitative data or quantitative data be more appropriate for addressing 
my research questions?
4	 Does a suitable sampling frame exist and can I gain access to it?
5	 In terms of the resources available for the research (time and money) which 
sampling technique is both feasible and likely to produce relevant information?
Size of the sample
There are basically three approaches to the calculation of the sample size: sta-
tistical, pragmatic and cumulative. The statistical approach is usually presented 
as the proper approach. As we shall see, however, it is best suited to large-scale 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Sampling  45
Figure 2.1  Sampling strategies
Types of
sampling 
Purpose of
selection 
Basis for
selection 
Typical
use 
Typical 
sample size 
Likely
resources 
Representative
sample 
Probability
sampling 
Random
selection 
Large-scale
research
Quantitative
data 
Large
High
cost 
Time
consuming 
Random
Systematic
Multistage
Cluster
Stratified 
Quota
Snowball
Theoretical
Purposive
Convenience
Exploratory
sample
Non-
probability
sampling 
Deliberate
choice 
Small-scale
research 
Qualitative
data 
Small
Low
cost 
Quick
© M.Denscombe, The Good Research Guide, Open University Press 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

46  The Good Research Guide
surveys and probability sampling techniques. It is the kind of approach that 
works well for things like opinion polls and government surveys which involve 
very large populations and which cost a lot of money. Smaller-scale surveys 
tend to use a more pragmatic approach. This is partly to do with the costs and 
partly to do with the difficulties in meeting all the conditions needed for the 
statistical approach to sample-size calculation. Market researchers often use a 
pragmatic approach, estimating the sample size on the basis of years of prac-
tical experience and on what works well enough within given resource con-
straints. The third approach is normally associated with small-scale, qualitative 
research. The cumulative approach is one in which the researcher continues  
to add to the size of the sample until a point is reached where there is suffi-
cient information and where no benefit is derived from adding any more to the 
­sample.
The purpose of the sample: representative  
or exploratory?
When deciding which approach to take the researcher needs to bear in mind 
the kind of sample that is required. Where the aim is to get a representative 
sample then the numbers involved will tend to be relatively large and where 
the aim is to produce an exploratory sample the numbers involved will be rela-
tively small. There are different considerations for either kind of sample and 
any discussion of sample size needs to reflect the different premises on which 
they operate.
In the case of representative samples there is something of a ‘big is beautiful’ 
stance on survey size. This is based on the principle that the more instances that 
are covered the less likely it is that the sample will be biased. With a large sample, 
the researcher is more assured that:
•• all aspects of relevance to the research question will have been covered and 
included in the findings;
•• there will be some balance between the proportions within the sample and the 
proportions which occur in the overall population being investigated.
Both factors enhance the representativeness of the sample and, in turn, this 
allows greater confidence about making generalizations based on findings from 
the sample.
With exploratory samples the scale of the research tends to be smaller. There 
are two main reasons for this. First, it is likely that each item or person to be 
included in the sample will be studied in greater depth and more detail than will 
be the case with a representative sample. There is no absolute rule on this, but the 
size of exploratory samples generally reflects the fact that researchers want to 
probe deeper than they would do with representative samples. Second, the size of 
exploratory samples is not governed by matters of accuracy but by considerations 
of how informative the sample is. This means that the sample only needs to be 
sufficient in size to enable the researcher to feel that enough information has been 
collected.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Sampling  47
The statistical approach: large-scale surveys using probability sampling 
for a representative sample
If the survey is large-scale and it uses probability sampling there is a precise way 
of calculating the required sample size. This is based on statistical theory and the 
normal curve distribution of events. Without getting involved too heavily in statisti-
cal theory the calculation of an appropriate sample size will depend on four things:
•• The size of the research population. It is important to appreciate, though, that 
population size is significant where smaller numbers are concerned but, as 
Table 2.3 indicates, when the population moves beyond 5,000, changes in the size 
of the population cease to have much impact on the sample size.
• The accuracy of the estimates. Social researchers need to feel confident that 
their estimates lie close to the real (i.e. population) figure and they will normally 
Caution: The anticipated response rate
There is an important distinction to be made between sample size in the sense 
of the number of people initially contacted and sample size in the sense of the 
eventual number who respond. It is the eventual sample size that is crucial for the 
research. The researcher needs to predict the kind of response rate he or she is 
likely to achieve and build in an allowance for non-responses. If data are needed 
from a sample of 100 people and a response rate of 30 per cent is anticipated, 
the size of the sample that needs to be initially contacted will be 334.
Table 2.3  Sample size and population size (probability sampling)
Number in the 
population
                    Required sample size1
(at 95% confidence level)
    5%
margin of error
    3%
margin of error
    1%
margin of error
50
  44
    48
    50
100
  80
    92
    99
250
152
  203
  244
500
217
  341
  475
1,000
278
  516
  906
5,000
357
  879
3288
10,000
370
  964
4899
100,000
383
1056
8763
1 million
384
1066
9513
10 million
384
1067
9595
Note: 1Refers to final usable responses. 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

48  The Good Research Guide
tolerate a margin of error of 3 per cent or 5 per cent. More accurate results 
such as the 1 per cent margin of error require sample sizes that do not offer 
much saving until the population size exceeds 5,000. The margin of error that is 
deemed acceptable for a specific project is known as the confidence interval.
• Confidence that the sample will produce results that are representative of the 
population. This is the level of confidence. Social researchers know that there 
is always a chance that the sample might be extreme and unusual, and they 
want to feel very confident that their findings are not the product of any such 
extreme or unusual sample. In practice, they tend to want a 95 per cent confi-
dence level. They want to know that there would be a less than one in twenty 
chance of this occurring.
•• Variation in the population: less variation requires a bigger sample size. In 
terms of the particular attribute being measured (e.g. voting intention) it 
matters whether the population is evenly matched (nearing a 50:50 split) or 
is widely divided (e.g. 70:30 split). Researchers can get some idea of this in 
advance (i.e. before they actually conduct their survey) either from a review of 
existing research or by using a pilot survey. If this factor cannot be estimated 
it should be assumed that the population is evenly matched because this is a 
‘worst case scenario’ as far as things are concerned when it comes to the size of 
the required sample. By default, the software plays on the safe side.
Taking these four factors into consideration it is possible to calculate the required 
sample size. There is a formula for this calculation but the maths do not need to 
concern the project researcher because there are plenty of software utilities freely 
available on the Internet that do the calculations at the press of a button. A web 
search on ‘sample size calculator’ will identify plenty of these (Figure 2.2). Some 
of these ask for variation (or ‘response distribution’) figures while others do not.
If in doubt, enter 50% in this box. Where they do not ask the user for the vari-
ation, they make the worst case scenario assumption outlined above. What all 
the sample size calculators do, however, is demonstrate very clearly how the 
required sample size varies according to what the researcher wants in terms of 
Figure 2.2  A sample size calculator
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Sampling  49
levels of confidence and margins of error. The greater the level of confidence 
and the greater the level of accuracy, the bigger the size of the sample.
Accuracy and sample size
There is an interesting point that springs from statistical estimates and sample size. 
It is that there is relatively little advantage to be gained in terms of accuracy once 
a sample has reached a given size. There are diminishing returns to increases in the 
size of samples. This runs contrary to common sense, which would probably say to 
us that the degree of accuracy of results would depend on what proportion of the 
population is included in the sample. Common sense might say that a sample of 25 
per cent of cases will produce better results than a sample of 10 per cent. Statistics 
would say that where the population size is large, there is hardly any increase in 
accuracy to be obtained by incorporating another 15 per cent (see Table 2.3).
The pragmatic approach: smaller-scale surveys using non-probability 
sampling for a representative sample
In practice, social research frequently involves surveys with relatively small 
numbers – between 30 and 250 – and when estimating the required sample size 
such surveys tend to depend on non-probability sampling techniques. There are 
three pragmatic reasons for this. First, there is the matter of resources. In the real 
world of research the availability of resources is one factor that always affects the 
researcher’s decision on sample size. The fact is that research does not take place 
with infinite time and money. In practice, it has to be tailored to meet the constraints 
imposed by the amount of time and money which can be spent on the investigation, 
and there are not too many individuals or organizations who can actually afford the 
scale of investigation that involves samples of 1,000 or more. Project researchers 
such as those conducting a survey as part of an academic degree are very unlikely 
to have the time or money to work with large populations and large samples.
Second, there is the nature of research populations and the fact that many of 
the populations that social researchers might like to investigate are relatively 
small. Work organizations in the UK, for example, are predominantly small and 
medium-sized enterprises involving workforces of less than 250 people and any 
survey of individual work-places might well be obliged to operate with relatively 
small numbers. And this is true of so many of the groups, events and locations the 
social researcher might want to study. Project researchers, in particular, are likely 
to want to focus on localized units involving smallish numbers of people or items.
Third, the pragmatic approach subscribes to the argument that, used prop-
erly, non-probability sampling techniques can produce data that is sufficiently 
accurate for the purposes of research. Within the statistical approach, it should 
be noted, there are ways of accommodating the need for small samples and 
coping with the likely impact of such small samples on the accuracy of the 
data they produce. The pragmatic approach, however, tends to rely on non-
probability sampling instead. This is because it is less expensive to undertake 
research using things like quota sampling techniques rather than random sam-
pling techniques. There is, however, an ongoing debate about whether the use 
of non-random sampling techniques with smaller sample sizes jeopardizes the 
accuracy of the data. The pragmatic approach takes the position that the level 
of accuracy needs to be weighed against the additional costs involved and that 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

50  The Good Research Guide
the aim is to get accuracy that is good enough for the purposes of research 
within the resources available for research. Commercial research companies 
actually advise potential customers that for a given sum of money they can 
be supplied with results within a given level of accuracy; a greater level of 
accuracy will cost more. As a consequence, the customer and the commercial 
research company need to agree about whether results will be accurate enough 
in relation to the resources available.
Key point: A pragmatic approach to sample size
‘In practice, the complexity of the competing factors of resources and accuracy 
means that the decision on sample size tends to be based on experience and 
good judgement rather than relying on a strict mathematical formula’ (Hoinville 
et al. 1985: 73).
The good judgement behind the pragmatic approach to sample size is based on 
four important factors. These do not provide the exact figure as would be the 
case with the statistical approach, but they do provide guidelines that can help 
the researcher decide what sample size might be appropriate and acceptable.
•• Comparison with other similar surveys. The researcher’s literature review 
should identify instances where other researchers have conducted surveys 
under comparable conditions, and the sample sizes used in such surveys can 
provide some starting point for deciding what numbers to include in the sample.
• Samples should not involve fewer than 30 people or items. Certainly, it is a 
mistake to use statistical analyses on samples of fewer than 30 without using 
great care about the procedures involved.
• Allowance for the number of subdivisions likely to be made within the 
data. A sample size which initially looks quite large might produce only 
very small returns in relation to specific sub-categories that will be used 
for analysis of the data. So, for example, a sample of 100 people used to 
investigate earnings and occupational status might need to be subdivided 
according to the age, sex, ethnicity, marital status and qualifications of 
the people, and according to whether they are full-time, part-time, unem-
ployed, child-rearing or retired. This simple investigation would need a 
cross-tabulation of five personal factors by five occupational factors, i.e. 
25 subdivisions of the data. If the data were equally distributed, this means 
that there would be only four cases in each of the subdivisions, which is 
hardly an adequate basis for making generalizations. In practice, of course, 
we know that the data would not be evenly distributed and that many of 
the subdivisions would end up with no cases in them at all. The researcher 
therefore needs to think ahead when planning the size of the sample to 
ensure that the subdivisions entailed in the analysis are adequately catered 
for. The smaller the sample, the simpler the analysis should be, in the sense 
that the data should be subjected to fewer subdivisions.
•• Awareness of the limitations. Special caution is needed about the extent 
to which generalizations can be made on the basis of the research findings. 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Sampling  51
Provided that the limitations are acknowledged and taken into account, the 
limited size of the sample need not invalidate the findings.
The cumulative approach: small-scale surveys using  
non-probability sampling for an exploratory sample
There are some approaches to social research where the size of the sample cannot 
be estimated with certainty at the start of the investigation. The sample size grows 
during the course of the research and continues to grow until the researcher has 
accumulated sufficient information for the purposes of the research. This cumula-
tive approach relies on non-probability techniques such as purposive, theoretical 
or snowball sampling and is normally associated with research that:
•• is relatively small-scale (with sample sizes in the region of 5–30);
• uses qualitative data;
• cannot identify the research population in advance;
•• aims to produce an exploratory sample, not a representative one.
The cumulative approach to sample size is illustrated perhaps most neatly in the 
grounded theory approach and its use of theoretical sampling. Here the process 
is one of ‘discovery’. Almost like a detective, the researcher follows a trail of 
clues. As each clue is followed up, it points the researcher in a particular direction 
and throws up new questions that need to be answered. Sometimes the clues can 
lead the researcher up blind alleys. Ultimately, though, the 
researcher needs to pursue his or her investigation until the 
questions have been answered and things can be explained. 
A consequence of this is that the size and composition of 
the sample are not completely predictable at the outset.
Link up with 
Chapter 7 
Grounded theory.
Good practice: The cumulative approach and sample size estimates
The fact that the exact size of the sample cannot be stated with certainty at the 
start of research does not mean that the researcher should start with no idea 
of the final numbers to be included in the sample. Indeed, it makes good prac-
tical sense for researchers using a cumulative approach to have some broad 
idea of the likely size of their accumulated sample despite their desire to pur-
sue threads of inquiry through to a point where they are satisfied they have 
enough information. A shrewd look at the time and resources available, and 
some reading of similar studies, will help to give a reasonable indication before 
the research starts.
Advantages of sampling
Savings in time and costs
The principal advantage of sampling is that it reduces the time and costs of 
collecting data when compared with a strategy of including all people or items 
within the research population.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

52  The Good Research Guide
Provides sufficient accuracy
Sampling need not involve a significant loss of accuracy in terms of its findings. 
Although there might need to be some compromise in terms of the level of accu-
racy and level of confidence in the findings, this should be within the bounds of 
tolerance for most social research projects.
Different techniques for different purposes
There is a range of sampling techniques which cover the requirements of most 
social researchers. While certain techniques will suit the needs of positivistic 
styles of research with a focus on quantitative data, other sampling techniques 
have evolved to suit the needs of interpretive styles of research with a prefer-
ence for qualitative data. Some techniques are good for getting representative 
samples, others are good for getting exploratory samples.
Disadvantages of sampling
Sampling error
There is always the possibility of sampling error which needs to be taken into 
account. Reliance on findings from a sub-section of the total research population 
inevitably opens up the prospect that another sample from that same research 
population might produce slightly different findings. Statistically, it is possible 
to accommodate this fact, but the underlying point is that the use of sampling 
brings with it a level of uncertainty. It always becomes a matter of how likely it 
is that the findings are correct, and within what margins of error.
Sample bias
Sample bias is a constant source of concern. Researchers need to be vigilant to 
avoid bias stemming from the choice of people to include (the sampling frame) 
or the kind of people who participate (response bias).
Availability of sampling frames
Finding suitable sampling frames can pose a challenge, especially for the use of 
probability sampling.
Further reading
Barnett, V. (2002) Sample Survey Principles and Methods, 3rd edn. Chichester: Wiley.
Daniel, J. (2012) Sampling Essentials: Practical Guidelines for Making Sampling Choices. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Emmel, N. (2013) Sampling and Choosing Cases in Qualitative Research: A Realist 
Approach. London: Sage.
Fowler, F. J. (2009) Survey Research Methods, 4th edn. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Sampling  53
✓
Checklist for the use of sampling
When undertaking sampling you should feel confident about  
answering ‘yes’ to the following questions:  
  1	 Has a clear decision been made about whether the sample 
selection should be based on probability or non-probability 
sampling? 
 
 
  2	 Has a specific sampling technique been chosen for use in the 
research, and has it been explicitly named in any account of the 
research methodology?
 
 
  3	 Does the selected sampling technique fit comfortably with the 
purpose for which the sample is being used (representative 
sample or exploratory sample)?
 
 
  4	 Has a suitable sampling frame been identified (if the aim is to use 
a probability sampling technique)?
 
  5	 Can the sample size be justified on the basis of criteria relevant to 
the type of sampling technique being used?
 
  6	 If the sample size is less than 30, have the implications of this for 
statistical analysis been recognized in the research?
 
© M. Denscombe, The Good Research Guide. Open University Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Case studies
3
What is a ‘case’? • The case study approach • The purpose of a case 
study • Selecting a case • Can you generalize from a case study? • 
Advantages of the case study approach • Disadvantages of the case 
study approach • Further reading • Checklist for the use of case studies
Case studies focus on one (or just a few) instances of a particular phenomenon 
with a view to providing an in-depth account of events, relationships, experiences 
or processes occurring in that particular instance. The aim is to illuminate the 
general by looking at the particular. The case study approach is widely used 
in social research, particularly with small-scale projects, and in practice it has 
become aligned with qualitative research rather than quantitative research.
What is a ‘case’?
To qualify as something suitable for case study research it is crucial that the thing 
to be studied has some distinctive identity that allows it to be studied in isolation 
from its context. If the case has no end-point, no outside, no limits, then it blends 
into other social phenomena and cannot be viewed as ‘a case’. Fundamentally:
•• a ‘case’ needs to be a fairly self-contained entity;
•• a ‘case’ needs to have fairly distinct boundaries.
As Table 3.1 shows, there are a wide range of social phenomena that meet these 
criteria and which can be studied using the case study approach.
The case study approach
Spotlight on one instance or a few instances
The main characteristic of the case study approach is its focus on just one 
instance of the thing that is to be investigated. Occasionally, researchers use two 
or more instances but, in principle, the idea of a case study is that the spotlight 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Case studies  55
Table 3.1  Types of cases
Type
Examples
Event
strike, street riot, ceremony, music festival
Organization
commercial business, hospital, school
Policy
new health intervention, change to pension schemes
Location
shopping mall, nightclub, accident hotspot
Process
in-service training, recruitment procedure
is focused very narrowly. The case study approach, then, is quite the opposite 
of any mass study. The logic behind concentrating efforts on one case rather 
than many is that there may be insights to be gained from looking at the indi-
vidual case that can have wider implications and, importantly, that would not 
have come to light through the use of a research strategy that tried to cover a 
large number of instances.
In-depth study
The prospect of getting some valuable insight depends on being able to investi-
gate things in depth. When a researcher takes the strategic decision to devote all 
his or her efforts to researching just one instance, there is obviously far greater 
opportunity to delve into things in more detail and discover things that might not 
have become apparent through more superficial research.
Focus on relationships and processes
Case studies pay attention to the detailed workings of the relationships and social 
processes within social settings. They do so because they are not only interested 
in what goes on in the setting, they are also interested in explaining why those 
things occur. End-products, outcomes and results all remain of interest, but the 
real value of a case study is that it offers the opportunity to go into sufficient 
detail to unravel the complexities of a given situation. A case study conducted in 
Company A, for example, might reveal that it has a high turnover of labour. To 
an extent this fact is interesting in its own right, but the strength of a case study 
approach is that it allows the researcher to investigate the relationships and pro-
cesses that explain the actual level of turnover – the interplay between things 
like the recruitment policy, staff development programme, nature of the work, 
levels of pay and the social background of the workforce.
Key point
‘The case study is a research strategy which focuses on understanding the 
dynamics present within single settings’ (Eisenhardt 1989: 534).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

56  The Good Research Guide
A holistic view
Relationships and processes within social settings are interconnected and to 
explain why things happen as they do within a particular case study setting 
it is necessary to understand how the various facets of the setting are linked 
together. The case study approach works well here because rather than deal 
with ‘isolated factors’ it takes a ‘holistic’ view of what is going on. It views the 
case as a whole, in its entirety, and is thus able to discover how the many parts 
affect one another.
Multiple methods
The case study approach allows the researcher to use a variety of types of data 
(qualitative or quantitative) and a combination of research methods (observation, 
interviews, documents, questionnaires) as part of the investi-
gation. It not only allows this, it actually invites and encour-
ages the researcher to do so in order to get a holistic view. 
Whatever methods are appropriate can be used for investi-
gating the relationships and processes that are of interest.
Key point: The case study strategy
The decision to use a case study approach is a strategic decision that relates to 
the scale and scope of an investigation, and it does not dictate which method(s) 
must be used. Indeed, one strength of the case study approach is that it allows 
the use of a variety of methods depending on the circumstances and the spe-
cific needs of the situation.
Natural setting
‘The case’ that forms the basis of the investigation is normally something that 
already exists. It is not a situation that is artificially generated specifically for the 
purposes of the research. It is not like an experiment where the research design 
is dedicated to imposing controls on variables so that the impact of a specific 
ingredient can be measured. The case is a ‘naturally occurring’ phenomenon. It 
exists prior to the research project and continues to exist once the research has 
finished. Table 3.2 details the characteristics of a case study.
The purpose of a case study
Case studies can be used for a number of purposes. Predominantly, they have 
been used in relation to the discovery of information (following an inductive 
logic). The case study approach enables the research to delve deep into the intri-
cacies of the situation in order to describe things in detail, compare alternatives 
or, perhaps, provide an account that explores particular aspects of the situation. 
Link up with 
Chapter 10 
Mixed methods.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Case studies  57
The information can also be used to fathom the underlying causes of the things 
that have been observed to occur in the case study setting. Used in such ways, 
case studies provide new information which is valuable: (1) in its own right for 
what it says; (2) for what it suggests by way of new avenues to explore; or (3) for 
what it explains in terms of how aspects of the case are interlinked.
Case studies have been used, though less commonly, in relation to the testing 
of theory (following a deductive logic). The purpose of the case, here, is to allow 
the researcher to see whether things that a theory predicts will take place will 
actually be found in practice in real-world settings. Used in this way, the case 
study either: (1) tries to reinforce the value of a theory by demonstrating how it 
works in reality; or (2) sets out to test whether a particular theory might work 
under the specific conditions to be found in the case setting.
It is quite possible for case studies to have more than one purpose. Table 3.3 
outlines the possible ways in which case studies might be used, but should not 
be seen as implying that any particular case study must be restricted to just one 
type of purpose.
Table 3.2  The characteristics of case study research
One setting
rather than 
Many instances
Depth of study 
rather than 
Breadth of study 
The particular 
rather than 
The general 
Relationships/processes 
rather than 
Outcomes and end-products
Holistic view 
rather than 
Isolated factors 
Multiple sources of data
rather than 
One research method 
Natural settings 
rather than 
Artificial situations
Table 3.3  The purpose of a case study: six possibilities
Discovery-led 
Description 
Describes what is happening in a case study 
setting (e.g. events, processes and relationships) 
Exploration 
Explores the key issues affecting those in a case 
study setting (e.g. problems or opportunities) 
Comparison 
Compares settings to learn from the similarities 
and differences between them 
Explanation
Explains the causes of events, processes or 
relationships within a setting
Theory-led 
Illustration 
Uses a case study as an illustration of how a 
particular theory applies in a real-life setting 
Experiment 
Uses a case study as a test-bed for experimenting 
with changes to specific factors (or variables)
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

58  The Good Research Guide
Selecting a case
The case study approach generally calls for the researcher to make choices from 
among a number of possible events, people, organizations, etc. The researcher 
needs to pick out one example (or just a few) from a wider range of examples 
of the class of thing that is being investigated: the choice of one school for a 
case study from among the thousands that could have been chosen; the choice 
of one eye injury clinic from among the many in hospitals across the country; 
the focus on one bus company from among the hundreds throughout the nation 
which provide local public transport services. Whatever the subject matter, the 
case study normally depends on a conscious and deliberate choice about which 
case to select from among a large number of possibilities.
An important point to realize about this is that cases are not randomly selected: 
they are selected on the basis of known attributes. As a distinct alternative to the 
randomization principle associated with classic experiments and large-scale sur-
veys, instances selected for a case study are deliberately chosen on the basis of 
their distinctive features.
Relevance to the topic
A suitable case will be one with features that are relevant in terms of the practical 
problem or theoretical issue that the researcher wants to investigate. This crite-
rion for selection is crucial for the success of the case study and the researcher’s 
decisions on this point need to be explicit and justified as an essential part of the 
case study methodology. For example, if the area of interest is ‘small firms in 
the automotive industry’ the criterion for the selection of any particular organi-
zation as the basis for a case study would be ‘size’. If size is defined in terms of 
the number of employees, then details would need to be given about the number 
of employees in the selected firm and how this compares with (1) definitions of 
small firms (the theory), and (2) a profile of the size of other firms throughout the 
automotive industry. Such details are vital because they justify the choice of the 
particular firm as a suitable example of the broader category of the thing being 
studied (small firms) and they form the basis for any generalizations that can be 
made from the case study findings.
Type of case study
Typical instance
The selection of a particular case can be based on the argument that it is typical. 
The logic being invoked here is that the particular case is similar to others that 
might have been chosen, and that the findings from the case study are therefore 
likely to apply elsewhere. Because the case study is like most of the rest, the find-
ings can be generalized to the whole class of thing.
Extreme instance
A case might be selected on the grounds that, far from being typical, it pro-
vides something of a contrast with the norm. An illustration of this would be 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Case studies  59
the selection of an organization which is notably smaller or notably larger than 
usual. Among local authorities in the country, a very small one might be chosen 
for a case study, and the logic for doing so would be that this would allow the 
influence of the factor (size) to be more easily seen than it would be in the aver-
age size authority. In an extreme instance, a specified factor is seen in relief – 
highlighted in its effect.
Test-site for theory
The logic for the selection of a particular case can be based on the relevance 
of the case for previous theory. This is a point Yin (2014) stresses. Case stud-
ies can be used for the purposes of ‘theory-testing’ as well as ‘theory-building’, 
to use Layder’s (1993) distinction. The rationale for choosing a specific case, 
then, can be that it contains crucial elements that are especially significant, 
and that the researcher should be able to predict certain outcomes if the theory 
holds true.
Least likely instance
Following the idea of test-sites for theory, a case might be selected to test 
the validity of ‘theory’ by seeing if it occurs in an instance where it might be 
least expected. So, for example, a researcher who wants to test the ‘theory’ 
that school teachers place a high value on their autonomy could deliberately 
select a situation where such autonomy would seem to be least valued: a school 
with team teaching in open plan classrooms. If there is evidence supporting the 
‘theory’ even under such ‘least likely’ conditions, then the ‘theory’ has all the 
more credibility.
Practical considerations
Although researchers should never rely on practical reasons as the principal or 
the sole criterion for selecting a case, it would be naïve to ignore the fact that, 
in the real world of research, such factors do have a bearing on the selection  
of cases.
A matter of convenience
In the practical world of research, with its limits to time and resources, the 
selection of cases is quite likely to include a consideration of convenience. 
Faced with alternatives which are equally suitable, it is reasonable for the 
researcher to select the one which involves the least travel, the least expense 
and the least difficulty when it comes to gaining access. The crucial point here, 
though, is that convenience should only come into play when deciding between 
equally suitable alternatives. Selection on the basis of ‘the first to hand’, ‘the 
easiest’ or ‘the cheapest’ is not a criterion in its own right which can be used 
to justify the selection of cases. If used on its own, in fact, it would almost cer-
tainly be a symptom of poor social research. Used properly, it is subordinate 
to the other criteria.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

60  The Good Research Guide
Intrinsically interesting
If a case is intrinsically interesting, then it can prove an attractive proposition. 
The findings are likely to reach a wider audience and the research itself is likely 
to be a more exciting experience. There are even some experts in the field who 
would go as far as to argue that selection on the basis of being intrinsically inter-
esting is a sufficient justification in its own right (Stake 1995). This goes right to 
the heart of the debate about whether cases are studied ‘in their own right’, as 
Stake would maintain, or for what they reveal about others of the kind, and, in 
light of its controversial nature, it would be rather foolhardy for the newcomer 
or project researcher to use this as the sole criterion for selecting a case. The 
vast majority of social researchers would not see it as a justification for selec-
tion in its own right. It might work for journalism, but social research by most 
definitions calls for more than just this (Ragin and Amoroso 2011). It is far wiser, 
therefore, to regard any intrinsic interest of the case as a criterion to be used 
when deciding between instances that in all other crucial respects are equally 
suitable, and as a bonus.
No real choice
On some occasions, researchers do not really have a great deal of choice when 
it comes to the selection of suitable cases for inclusion in the investigation. The 
choice is more or less dictated by circumstances beyond their control. This hap-
pens in the following two circumstances.
The study is part of commissioned research
Commissioned research might leave the researcher with little leeway in the 
selection of cases. The funder will quite likely stipulate that the research must be 
linked to a specified organization or activity, leaving no discretion on the matter 
to the researchers themselves. Under such circumstances, there is no real choice 
in the selection of cases.
There are unique opportunities
There are times when events occur which provide the researcher with unique 
opportunities. The events themselves, of course, will not be unique; they will be 
instances of a class of such events. The opportunity to study such events, how-
ever, may be unique. Situations which could not be planned or created present 
themselves as ‘one-off chances’. At one level, this could take the form of social 
catastrophes, such as war, famine or natural disaster. At a more mundane level, 
the unique opportunities could reflect the unpredictable or rare nature of the 
events. Strikes, for example, might be the kind of class of events that could be 
illuminated through the depth study of individual cases. Researchers, though, 
will have little choice over which instances they select as their cases and will 
necessarily find themselves homing in on such events as and when they occur. 
As a consequence, there is no real element of choice in the selection of the 
cases.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Case studies  61
Can you generalize from a case study?
When opting for a case study approach researchers are likely to confront scepti-
cism about how far it is reasonable to generalize from the findings of one case. The 
researcher will probably find people asking questions such as:
•• How representative is the case?
• Isn’t it possible that the findings, though interesting, are unique to the particu-
lar circumstances of the case?
•• How can you generalize on the basis of research into one instance?
These are reasonable questions. They reflect the key issue of generalization in 
social research (Denscombe 2010) and should not be ignored in the hope that 
readers of the research report will overlook the point. Indeed, it is good practice 
for any researcher who decides to choose a case study approach to pre-empt pos-
sible criticism by addressing the issue head-on.
Analytic generalizations
One way to address the matter is to emphasize the point that individual case 
studies should not be regarded as though they form part of a survey sample. 
They are not a ‘slice of the cake’ whose function is to reveal the contents of 
the whole cake. Instead, the findings from a case study are used for the devel-
opment of theory. The point of a case study is to analyse the situation and to 
arrive at certain concepts, propositions or hypotheses that might explain what 
is happening, and why, in the particular setting that has been investigated. 
Viewed in this way, each case study is like an individual experiment and, as Yin 
(2009: 15) argues:
Case studies, like experiments, are generalizable to theoretical propositions and 
not to populations or universes. In this sense, the case study, like the experi-
ment, does not represent a ‘sample’, and in doing a case study, your goal will be 
to expand and generalize theories (analytic generalization) and not to enumerate 
frequencies (statistical generalization).
From this perspective, the findings from case studies are not to be regarded as 
final or absolute. As with experiments, the findings should be understood as 
being provisional and in need of corroboration through other research which can 
check their validity. Or, looked at another way, the findings might be regarded 
as part of an ongoing process in which initial findings are not only checked for 
accuracy, they are used to refine the ideas and theories developed in the ear-
lier pieces of research – in the spirit of grounded theory (Eisenhardt and Graebner  
2007). Either way, though, case studies tend to be seen as a 
starting point for research, serving as a descriptive or 
exploratory foundation that helps with the development of 
theory, and it is in this analytic respect that the findings 
from case studies can be generalized.
Link up with 
Chapter 7 
Grounded theory.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

62  The Good Research Guide
Transferable findings
Analytic generalizations implicitly treat case studies as part of a broader research 
programme where the value of any individual case study depends on its link with 
alternative types of research or further case studies. Within small-scale research 
projects, however, case studies do not normally occur as part of an ongoing pro-
gramme of research. In all probability they take place as ‘one-offs’. And this calls 
for a slightly different kind of rationale when it comes to generalizing from case 
study findings. Rather than treating case studies as a starting point for research 
they need to be regarded as ends in themselves, finished products whose findings 
have some value in their own right.
The rationale for generalizing, in this instance, depends how far the findings 
are ‘transferable’ to other settings. What is crucial is the extent to which those 
who read the case study findings are able to infer things from them that apply to 
other settings.
The possibility of transferable findings stems from the fact that although each 
case is in some respects unique, it is also a single example of a broader class of 
things. It is one of a type (Hammersley 1992; Ragin and Becker 1992). And the 
extent to which findings from the case study can be generalized to other examples 
in the class depends on how far the case study example compares with others of  
its type. To make some assessment of how far the findings have implications across 
the board for all others of the type, or how far they are restricted to just the case 
study example, readers must be provided with the necessary information on which 
to make an informed judgement on this matter. It is vital, therefore, that reports 
based on the case study include sufficient detail about how the case compares with 
others in the class for the reader to make an informed judgement about how far the 
findings have relevance to other instances. Details should be given about:
•• the type of thing (organization, event, process);
• particulars about the case (detailed facts and figures);
•• how it compares with others of its type (e.g. factors like size, location,  
frequency).
Comparison might call for the inclusion of details on factors such as:
Physical location 	
geographical area, town, building, room, furniture, 
decor 
Historical location 	
developments and changes 
Social location 	
catchment area, ethnic grouping, social class, age, 
sex and other background information about the 
participants 
Institutional location 	
type of organization, size of organization, official 
policies and procedures
Transferable findings
In a case study involving a small primary school the ‘case’ is one of a broader 
type of other schools which are small and which are in the primary sector. 
Example 3.1
‣
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Case studies  63
The transferability of the findings from the case study to other small primary 
schools will depend on how far the case study example shares with other 
schools of the type (small size, primary sector) features which are significant 
with respect to the findings. This could include things like its catchment area, 
the ethnic origins of the pupils and the rate of staff turnover. The transfer-
ability of the findings from the particular case study school to other small 
primary schools will depend on the extent to which its profile on these factors 
is to be found in other examples of this type of school. This means that the 
researcher must obtain data on the significant features (catchment area, the 
ethnic origins of the pupils and the rate of staff turnover) for primary schools 
in general (likely to be based on regional or national figures), and then dem-
onstrate where the case study example fits in relation to the broader picture.
Advantages of the case study approach
Suitable for small-scale research
The case study approach can fit in well with the needs of small-scale research 
through concentrating effort on one research site (or just a few sites).
Takes a holistic view
The focus on particular instances allows the researcher to take a holistic view 
(rather than one based on isolated factors) and to look in depth at the subtleties 
and intricacies of complex social phenomena.
Facilitates the use of multiple methods
The case study approach allows the use of a variety of research methods. More 
than this, it more or less encourages the use of multiple methods and multiple 
sources of data in order to capture the complex reality under scrutiny.
Makes use of naturally occurring settings
The case study approach is particularly suitable in circumstances where it is not 
possible to manipulate features of the setting for the purposes of the research. 
Because the approach is concerned with investigating phenomena as they natu-
rally occur there is no necessity for the researcher to impose controls or imple-
ment changes to key factors or variables.
Flexible approach
Theory-building and theory-testing research can both use the case study approach 
to good effect.
‣
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

64  The Good Research Guide
Disadvantages of the case study approach
Producing generalizable findings
The point at which the case study approach is most vulnerable to criticism is in 
relation to the credibility of generalizations made from its findings. The case 
study researcher needs to be particularly careful to allay suspicions and to dem-
onstrate the extent to which the case is similar to, or contrasts with, others of 
its type.
Defining boundaries to the case
On the technical side, the boundaries of the case can prove difficult to define 
in an absolute and clear-cut fashion. This poses difficulties in terms of deciding 
which sources of data to incorporate in the case study and which to exclude.
Gaining access to case study settings
Negotiating access to case study settings can be a demanding part of the research 
process. Research can flounder if permission is withheld or withdrawn. In case 
studies, access to documents, people and settings can generate ethical problems 
in terms of things like confidentiality.
Focus on process rather than outcomes
Case study research tends to focus on processes rather than measurable end-
products. To this extent the approach is sometimes seen as producing ‘soft’ data 
because it uses qualitative data and interpretive methods rather than quantita-
tive data and statistical procedures. In line with this, case studies are sometimes 
regarded as acceptable in terms of providing descriptive accounts of the situation 
but rather ill-suited to analyses or evaluations. None of this is necessarily justified, 
but it is a preconception which the case study researcher needs to be aware of, and 
one which needs to be challenged by careful attention to detail and rigour in the 
use of the approach.
Further reading
Simons, H. (2009) Case Study Research in Practice. London: Sage.
Stake, R. (1995) The Art of Case Study Research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Swanborn, P. (2010) Case Study Research: What, Why and How? London: Sage.
Thomas, G. (2011) How to Do Your Case Study: A Guide for Students and Researchers. 
London: Sage.
Yin, R. (2014) Case Study Research: Design and Methods, 5th edn. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Case studies  65
✓
Checklist for the use of case studies
When undertaking research which involves the case study approach you 
should feel confident about answering ‘yes’ to the following questions:
  1	 Is the research based on a ‘naturally occurring’ situation?
  2	 Have the criteria for selection of the case (or cases) been 
described and justified?
 
  3	 Has the case been identified as a particular instance of a type of 
social phenomenon (e.g. kind of event, type of organization)?
 
  4	 Have the significant features of the case been described and have 
they been compared with those to be found elsewhere among the 
type of thing being studied?
 
 
  5	 Is the case a fairly self-contained entity?
  6	 Have the boundaries to the case been described and their 
implications considered?
 
  7	 Has careful consideration been given to the issue of 
generalizations stemming from research?
 
  8	 Does the research make suitable use of multiple methods and 
multiple sources of data?
 
  9	 Does the research give due attention to relationships and 
processes, and provide a ‘holistic’ perspective?
 
© M. Denscombe, The Good Research Guide. Open University Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

4
What is an experiment? • When to use an experiment • Types of 
experiment • Experiments involving people – the observer effect • Causal  
relationships and variables • The use of controls • Control groups • Blind 
trials • True experiments and quasi-experiments • Advantages of experiments 
• Disadvantages of experiments • Further reading • Checklist for the 
experimental approach
What is an experiment?
An experiment is an empirical investigation under controlled conditions 
designed to examine the properties of, and relationships between, specific fac-
tors. The point of conducting an experiment is to isolate individual factors and 
observe their effect in detail. The purpose is to discover new relationships or 
properties associated with the thing that is being investigated, or to test exist-
ing theories.
This definition draws on a rather idealized image of the way experiments 
are conducted but it captures the essence of the notion and incorporates 
the three things that lie at the heart of conducting experiments in social 
research:
•• Controls. Experiments involve the manipulation of variables. The 
researcher needs to identify factors that are significant and then intro-
duce them to or exclude them from the situation so that their effect can 
be observed.
• Empirical observation and measurement. Experiments rely on detailed 
empirical observation of changes that occur following the introduction of 
potentially relevant factors. They also involve the precise measurement of the 
changes that are observed.
• The identification of causal factors. The introduction or exclusion of factors 
to or from the situation enables the researcher to pinpoint which factor actu-
ally causes the observed outcome to occur.
Experiments
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Experiments  67
When to use an experiment
There are five conditions that need to be met in order for experiments to be 
selected as a suitable research approach. The first of these is that they should 
be used as part of explanatory research rather than exploratory research. This 
means that the focus should be on questions about ‘why’ things happen and ‘how’ 
they are linked, with the research being designed to explain the link between two 
or more factors.
Second, the research should be able to draw on a fairly well-established body 
of knowledge about the topic to be investigated. The factors that are looked at 
must not be plucked out of thin air but chosen, instead, on the basis of existing 
knowledge about the topic. They should be selected deliberately because they 
are known to be relevant and significant. As a corollary to this, experiments are 
not so well suited to descriptive research or to exploratory research where the 
point of the research is to discover which factors are significant.
Third, and following on from the previous point, existing knowledge about 
the topic for the research should allow research questions to take the form of 
hypotheses. As Brown et al. (1975: 10) point out:
The formation of a hypothesis has two useful functions. Firstly, it serves to 
synthesize the experimenter’s knowledge of previous research into a predica-
tion which can be handled experimentally and, second, it gives direction to his 
subsequent investigations . . . it provides the means by which the variables 
are chosen.
Fourth, the kinds of observations and measurement techniques used in 
experiments mean that they are usually associated with quantitative data rather 
than qualitative data. Because experiments depend on controlling variables and 
upon the careful measurement of changes that occur during the experiment, 
they produce data that are numerical and which lend themselves to statistical 
analysis.
Fifth, the design of experiments requires the ability to implement controls 
over factors that are to be studied in the experiment. In ‘natural experiments’ 
(described below) this is not the case but in other kinds of experiments the 
researcher needs to have the capability, authority and resources to manipulate 
relevant variables.
Key point
Experiments are suitable for explanatory research drawing on well-established 
theory to identify relevant variables that allow research questions in the form 
of hypotheses and research designs that produce quantitative data in cir-
cumstances where the researcher can manipulate variables and implement 
controls.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

68  The Good Research Guide
Types of experiment
Laboratory experiments
Laboratories are purpose-built contexts for the research. They are normally 
enclosed spaces (buildings or locations) which are set out purposefully to aid the 
collection of data on specific factors linked to the experiment. They often make 
use of specialized equipment or facilities to help the researchers obtain detailed 
data about the phenomenon they are studying.
Laboratory experiments, by their nature, are located on site rather than ‘in the 
field’. People or items come to the laboratory in order for the research to take 
place, rather than things being studied in situ. This is necessary, of course, in 
order to take advantage of the purpose-built nature of the setting and the ben-
efits this has for: (1) close control of variables to isolate causal factors; and (2) 
precision and consistency of the observations and measurements that are made. 
However, the benefits in terms of precision and consistency need to be weighed 
against the fact that laboratory experiments are conducted under conditions 
that are artificially created. The artificial setting of an experiment can affect  
the way people react and the quality of a laboratory experiment always needs to 
be judged on how well it replicates conditions that would naturally occur outside 
the laboratory – in ‘real’ life.
Field experiments
Field experiments are experiments that take place outside the laboratory. They 
are conducted ‘in the field’ in places like factories, offices, schools and hospi-
tals. Such settings are not artificially created for the purposes of the research, 
but they do allow researchers to manipulate certain key variables and focus on 
measuring the impact of a specific new factor that is introduced into the setting. 
This new factor often takes the form of a new procedure, a new rule or some 
other kind of specific new initiative that has been put in place following the adop-
tion of a new policy or introduction of a new programme. The field experiment 
involves a systematic evaluation of the new factor with the purpose of finding 
out whether the introduction of the new variable has caused changes to occur 
as had been anticipated. A classic example of such a field 
experiment is the Hawthorne experiments where changes to 
the working environment were introduced in a factory set-
ting in order to find out if things like changes to the level of 
lighting caused changes in the level of productivity.
Randomized controlled trials
Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are a type of field experiment in which 
the effect of specific ‘treatments’ is measured in trials involving comparisons 
between experimental groups and control groups. Random allocation to the 
groups is used to ensure that there is no difference between the groups. RCTs 
are regarded as the gold standard for research design in the realms of medical 
and health research concerned with clinical trials of drugs and other health 
Link up with 
Hawthorne  
studies, p. 148.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Experiments  69
interventions, and are the preferred approach of the ‘evidence-based move-
ment’ for whom it represents the most scientific way of conducting research 
(Higgins and Green 2011).
Natural experiments
Natural experiments make use of events and circumstances that occur nat-
urally in everyday life which provide researchers with the opportunity to 
observe the effects of particular variables and explain the causes of particu-
lar phenomena.
When researchers move outside the laboratory in order to gather data in  
more natural settings, they are likely to pay a high price in terms of their ability 
to control the variables. Much like weather forecasters, they rely on observing 
events which occur in circumstances over which they have no control. Sociolo-
gists cannot control levels of incomes in order to conduct experiments on things 
like poverty. Nor can health educators manipulate levels of smoking among 
adolescent girls in order to study them. Economists cannot generate a reces-
sion in order to investigate its consequences. It is simply not possible to manipu-
late circumstances like these. So, rather than trying to manipulate the situation, 
researchers take advantage of ‘naturally occurring’ experiments – situations in 
which they can see the possibility of observing and measuring the impact of iso-
lated variables through circumstances as they happen, without creating artificial 
environments or imposing artificial controls.
Retrospective experiments
Retrospective experiments begin with the ‘effect’ and the researcher sets out 
to deduce what factor(s) could possibly be the cause of this outcome. The 
idea is to work backwards from the effect to find the cause. For example, the 
researcher might ask, ‘Does imprisonment affect earnings after release from 
detention?’ The research design here would be to identify a number of people 
who had been to prison. This independent variable – imprisonment – is not 
something the research can or should manipulate. It is a fait accompli, exist-
ing prior to and quite separate from the research. However, by comparing ex-
prisoners with people who in most other respects match them, it is possible to 
deduce whether or not that factor has had a direct effect on the earnings.
Experiments involving people – the observer effect
When experiments involve people there are three issues that arise which would 
not apply if the experiment was conducted on plants, chemicals or natural mate-
rials. When humans are the thing that is being studied, the nature of the experi-
ment needs to take into account the fact that:
•• people react to the knowledge that they are being observed;
• participation in experiments can potentially harm people;
•• experiments might involve artificial settings that are different from the real world.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

70  The Good Research Guide
Humans have self-awareness and this makes them very different from plants, 
chemicals or natural materials. When humans become aware that they are the 
focus of attention for research, there is the very real possibility that they will 
act differently from normal. They might become self-conscious or anxious about 
having their behaviour scrutinized by the researcher and consequently alter their 
behaviour in some way. This is known as the observer effect. They might, on the 
other hand, enjoy being in the limelight and respond accordingly with enthusi-
asm and motivation that would not have existed if they had not realized they 
were the subject of special attention. This is known as the halo effect. And if the 
participants know the true purpose of the research there is, in addition, the pros-
pect that they will alter their behaviour directly to take this into account. They 
might try to help the researcher by doing what they think 
is expected of them, or they might try to do the opposite. 
These are self-fulfilling prophecies that can result from the 
knowledge which participants have (or believe they have) 
about what the experiment is trying to achieve.
Key point: The observer effect
People are likely to alter their behaviour when they become aware that they are 
being observed. Unlike atoms, people can become aware of being studied – con-
scious of it – and then react in a way that is not usual.
Experimenters can take steps to overcome the observer effect. They can, for 
instance, make hidden observations from behind a one-way mirror. If people do 
not realize they are being observed, then their behaviour should not be affected. 
Or researchers can disguise the real purpose of the research to avoid altering 
behaviour in relation to the factor being investigated. They can deceive partici-
pants into thinking that the research is about one thing when it is actually about 
another quite separate topic. But both solutions to the observer effect – secret 
observations and disguised purpose – raise ethical problems and need very care-
ful consideration before being used.
A series of experiments conducted by Stanley Milgram at Yale University 
between 1961 and 1962 illustrates the point (Milgram 1974). These experiments 
were cleverly designed to make participants believe they were administering 
progressively stronger electric shocks to a fellow participant as part of an exper-
iment which they were told was about ‘learning’. In fact, the person apparently 
receiving the electric shocks was part of the research team and actually received 
no shocks at all – but the research ‘subjects’ did not know this. During the experi-
ment the subjects were led to believe that, in the name of science, they needed 
to administer dangerously high electric shocks to the other participant as part 
of the experiment on learning. The experiments involved deception about the 
nature of what was being studied – it was actually about obedience to authority – 
and involved the subjects being covertly observed from behind a one-way  
mirror. These alone raise ethical questions. What made the experiments notorious, 
Link up with the 
Hawthorne stud-
ies, p. 14.8.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Experiments  71
however, was their impact on the participants. For some people the experience 
of taking part in the research turned out to be very stressful and perturbing – 
they believed they had been giving potentially fatal electric shocks to the other 
person (Perry 2013). The point these experiments highlight is that research 
involving humans must never lose sight of the fact that it 
is dealing with real people who have emotions and feelings, 
and that the well-being of participants must never be sacri-
ficed in the pursuit of findings, no matter how ‘useful’ those 
findings might be.
Key point
A researcher can do things to chemicals and plants that cannot be contemplated 
with fellow human beings. People have feelings, people have rights.
A final point about experiments involving people is the question of whether 
the responses and reactions observed under experimental conditions will be rep-
licated under real world conditions. This concerns the ecological validity of the 
experiment. Obviously this is a question that applies mainly to laboratory experi-
ments where the environment and the tasks involved are purpose-built and, in 
this sense, artificial rather than natural. When it comes to the value of an experi-
ment and the quality of its findings, however, it is a criterion that applies to all 
types of experiment. The question it poses is this: is the experiment looking at 
the right things in order to draw conclusions that apply to people’s behaviour in 
normal, everyday life?
Causal relationships and variables
Experiments are generally concerned with determining the cause of any changes 
that occur to the thing being studied. It is not normally enough to show that two 
things that occur are linked; that they always occur at the same time or they 
always happen in sequence. Useful though it is to know about such a relationship, 
experiments usually aim to discover which of the factors is the cause. This requires 
a distinction to be made between dependent and independent variables. It is vital 
that the researcher has a clear idea of which is which, and sets up the experiment 
in a way which produces results that show the distinction between the two:
•• The independent variable is the one that has the impact on the dependent 
variable. Its size, number, structure, volume or whatever exist autonomously, 
owing nothing to the other variable. A change in the independent variable 
affects the dependent variable.
•• The dependent variable is the factor that alters as a result of changes to the 
independent variable. It literally ‘depends’ on the independent variable. Any 
change in the dependent variable does not affect the independent variable.
Link up with 
Chapter 17 
Research ethics.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

72  The Good Research Guide
The use of controls
When conducting an experiment the aim is to show that the dependent factor (for 
example, the incidence of lung cancer in the population) responds to changes in 
the independent factor (prevalence of smoking in the society). To do this, the 
researcher needs to be sure it was definitely the prevalence of smoking that was 
responsible for the observed levels of lung cancer and not some other factor 
(e.g. diet or amount of exercise) that actually caused it. This requires the experi-
menter to control variables like smoking, diet, exercise and other factors that 
could perhaps affect the incidence of lung cancer to ensure that, of all of them, it 
is only the one factor, smoking, that could possibly be linked to the level of lung 
cancer in the population. There are a number of ways in which experiments can 
be designed to achieve this, each of which involves the use of controls.
Introduce a new factor
The most straightforward way to isolate the impact of a variable is to introduce it 
while keeping all other relevant factors unchanged. Under these circumstances – 
‘all things being equal’ – it is possible to pinpoint the impact of the new factor and 
to deduce that any observed changes that occur can be attributed to the new fac-
tor. Since the introduction of the new factor is the only thing that has changed, it 
alone can be held responsible for any subsequent changes that occur. In practice, 
however, social researchers face two particular difficulties in this regard. First, 
it can be extremely difficult to ensure that none of the other variables change. 
Second, variables are often linked so that a change in one variable might cause 
changes across a range of other variables.
Eliminate the factor from the experiment
Rather than introduce a new factor to the situation, the researcher might find it 
easier to eliminate one factor. So, for instance, a study of the link between hyper-
activity and diet in children might see the researcher deliberately excluding all 
artificial colourings from the subjects’ diets and then observing any change in 
behaviour. If other factors remain unaltered, it would be logical to deduce that 
any observed change was due to the absence of this factor.
Tobacco smoking
Tobacco smoking is related to the incidence of lung cancer. Both are variables 
and both appear to be linked to each other: more smoking, higher incidence of 
lung cancer; less smoking, lower incidence. Smoking increases the likelihood 
of lung cancer. Lung cancer does not increase the likelihood of smoking. In this 
example, there is clearly a dependent variable and an independent variable. 
Smoking tobacco is the independent variable, and lung cancer is the dependent 
variable.
Example 4.1
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Experiments  73
Hold the factor constant
In social science, a large number of the key relevant variables come in the form 
of attributes that cannot be written out of the equation through eliminating them 
from the situation altogether. Things like income, weight and age are attributes 
that cannot be eliminated. However, they can be controlled for by ‘holding the 
factor constant’. To prevent the factor from having an unwanted intrusion on 
the outcome of the experiment, the researcher can devise a situation in which 
the participants are all of the same income or of the same weight. Observed out-
comes from the experiment, as a result, can be deduced to stem from some factor 
other than income or weight.
Control groups
A standard method of introducing controls involves the use of control groups. 
These are:
A group of subjects as similar as possible to the experimental group and 
treated in exactly the same way except that they are not given the experimen-
tal treatment. The control group provides a base line against which the effects 
of this treatment may be measured.
(Brown et al. 1975: 235)
The use of control groups follows a fairly straightforward logic. It reasons that 
if the control group and the experimental group are identical at the start of the 
experiment, and a specific variable is introduced to the experimental group 
but not to the control group, then at the end of the experiment any difference 
between the experimental group and the control group must have been caused 
by the variable that was introduced. This was, after all, the only factor that dif-
ferentiated between the groups.
The starting point for the experiment, then, is two matched groups (or sam-
ples). The experiment involves introducing a factor to the experimental group 
and leaving the other group with no artificially induced changes. Having added 
the new factor, the experimenter can then look at the two groups again with  
the belief that any difference between the groups can be attributed to the fac-
tor which was artificially induced. Note here that it is not the change in the 
experimental group as such which is important. Certain changes over time  
are likely to happen, irrespective of whether an experiment had taken place. 
Time moves on for all of us. But, if the two groups were as identical as possible 
at the outset, any change of this kind in one group will also occur in the other 
group. So, instead of measuring the change from time 1 to time 2, we measure 
the difference between the control group and the experimental group at the 
end of the experiment at time 2. Any differences we observe can be logically 
deduced to come from the factor which was artificially induced in the experi-
ment (see Figure 4.1).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

74  The Good Research Guide
Allocation to groups
The use of control groups eliminates alternative possible explanations for any 
observed differences between groups after the treatment. But this is only true if 
we can be sure that there is no difference between those who are allocated to the 
control group and those allocated to the experimental group; that at the start of 
the experiment the groups are the same. One way to ensure this is on the basis 
of random allocation to groups. If the research subjects are chosen on a random 
basis, there should be a tendency for those factors which 
are not crucial to cancel themselves out. The principle here 
is that by the choice of a large enough group of participants 
on a random basis, any interference with the results through 
‘confounding’ factors would cancel themselves out in terms 
of the results for the whole research group.
An alternative way of making sure that control groups and experimental groups 
are the same is by matching the groups in terms of factors that are known to be 
relevant. A social researcher, in this respect, might want to ensure that groups are 
balanced in terms of things like age, sex, occupation and ethnicity in an effort to 
establish equivalent groups. Of course, this would involve allocation on the basis of 
quotas rather than random allocation, but it is likely to prove a method better suited 
to small-scale research. Whatever way it is achieved, though, the crucial thing is that 
the researcher creates groups that have no difference on anything relating to the 
variable that will be introduced.
Blind trials
A factor that is not eliminated by the use of control groups is the participants’ 
knowledge that they have been allocated to one group or the other. The observer 
effect comes into play raising the prospect that those who know they are in the 
experimental group will expect to experience something new whereas those in 
the control group may not. To overcome this, the design of the experiment needs 
Figure 4.1  Experiments and the use of control groups
Pre-test
(time 1)
Experimental group
A
C
Control group
Time
Experimental group and control group are matched groups or samples.
Factor E causes a change in the experimental group of (C – A) – (D – B).
B
D
Introduction of
new factor (E)
Post-test
(time 2)
Link up with  
Random sam-
pling, p. 36.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Experiments  75
to include ploys to prevent participants being aware of which group they are in, 
and whether they are actually receiving a new ‘treatment’ or not.
One way of doing this is the use of a ‘blind trial’. In medical research this involves 
the use of placebos – a treatment that looks real but which in fact has no healing 
effect. Everyone appears to be treated the same and through this deception partici-
pants do not know whether they are part of the experimental group or the control 
group. Only the experimenters know which people receive the treatment (in the 
experimental group) and which receive the placebo (in the control group). This 
effectively eliminates any possibility that participants’ expectations could account 
for any observed changes following the introduction of the treatment.
True experiments and quasi-experiments
To qualify as a ‘true’ experiment the research design needs to allow the researcher 
to identify the cause of changes that are observed during the experiment and, 
crucially, to do so in a way that eliminates any alternative possible explanations 
for the results. It needs to be able to rule out all other factors that might possibly 
explain what caused the event or the changes that were observed. A true experi-
ment achieves this through a combination of four things. The design should include:
1	 both a pre-test and a post-test to get measurements before and after the intro-
duction of the variable being investigated;
2	 the use of a control group for comparisons;
3	 the random allocation of people or items to the ‘control’ group and the ‘experi-
mental’ group; 
4	 the introduction (or control) of a variable whose impact the experiment 
wishes to observe.
This basic experimental design is known as a pre-test-post-test control group 
design and is often portrayed in the following way:
Group A		
 R--------O1---------X---------O2
Group B		
 R--------O1--------------------O2
Notation
•• R stands for random allocation to groups
• X stands for introduction of new factor or treatment
• O stands for observation
•• Subscripts 1 and 2 refer to the sequential observations.
There are a multitude of experimental research designs that build upon these 
basic building blocks. Essentially they consist of various combinations of five 
basic ingredients:
•• the times when measurements/observations are made (pre-test/post-test);
• the number of comparison groups used (two-group designs, multiple-group 
designs);
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

76  The Good Research Guide
• whether the control group receives no ‘treatment’ or it receives an alternative 
treatment to that received by the ‘experimental’ group.
• the allocation to groups and whether this is random or not;
•• the number of new factors introduced.
The use of pre- and post-test observations acts as a baseline against which to meas-
ure any changes that occur, and the use of control groups similarly provides a basis 
on which the researcher can make comparisons between the experimental group 
and the control group. Coupled with the allocation to groups on a purely random 
basis, these allow the researcher to eliminate a host of potential alternative expla-
nations and logically deduce the specific cause of the changes that are observed.
Quasi-experiment is a term used to describe a research design that follows 
the spirit of the experimental approach but which, for practical reasons, can-
not meet one or other of the essential conditions. This situation is most likely to 
occur when experiments are conducted outside the laboratory ‘in the field’ where 
circumstances dictate that it is not possible to implement controls on all the rel-
evant variables. Outside the laboratory researchers might find that:
•• they cannot allocate people to groups on a random basis. This will necessitate 
conducting the experiment using ‘non-equivalent’ groups; or
• they cannot use a control group for comparisons; or
•• they cannot conduct both a pre-test and a post-test to get measurements 
before and after the introduction of the variable being investigated.
Cook and Campbell (1979) argue that a quasi-experimental design should include 
no more than one of these three shortcomings. It can use non-equivalent groups 
or it can lack a control group or it can lack pre-test measurements – but it cannot 
incorporate more than one of these without severely jeopardizing its power to 
identify causal factors. Provided it lacks no more than one of these conditions, 
however, a quasi-experiment can still be useful. It is an option that can be used 
prudently as a fall-back position if it proves impossible to meet all the conditions 
for a true experiment. Its limitations, of course, should always be acknowledged 
and it should be used cautiously when it comes to identifying causal factors. 
Cook and Campbell specifically warn against the dangers of making unwar-
ranted causal inferences on the basis of quasi-experimental research designs, 
especially those where assignment to groups is not based on random selection: 
‘While they are often useful for suggesting new ideas, they are normally not suf-
ficient for permitting strong tests of causal hypotheses because they fail to rule 
out a number of plausible alternative interpretations’ (1979: 95).
Advantages of experiments
Credibility
The use of experiments is regarded by many people, including some social scien-
tists, as the most scientific and, therefore, the most credible approach to research. 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Experiments  77
It has a status that trades off an association with ‘hard’ science, and carries with it 
a sense of objectivity and impartiality in terms of its findings.
Repeatable
In the case of laboratory experiments, randomized controlled trials and retro-
spective experiments, the research should lend itself to being checked by other 
researchers by being repeated using identical procedures. With field experiments 
and natural experiments, however, there is only a limited possibility of repeating 
the experiment.
Precision
The nature of experimental research permits a high level of precision and consist-
ency when it comes to the measurements that form the basis of the data.
Causes and explanations
Experiments take place under conditions which involve controls on relevant 
variables and which allow the researcher to identify the exact cause of things 
that are observed.
Disadvantages of experiments
Artificial settings
With laboratory experiments there are questions about whether the experimental 
situation creates conditions comparable with the ‘real-world’ situations in which 
the behaviour/decisions would be made, or whether it encourages artificial 
responses in line with the artificial setting.
Deception and ethics
There are two ethical considerations that need to be borne in mind when con-
sidering the use of experiments. First, will the experiment’s success depend on 
keeping its true purpose secret from the research subjects? If so, this raises a 
question about the ethics of deception when used in social research. Second, if the 
research design employs the use of control groups, which is likely, will there be 
any advantage or disadvantage experienced by those in the respective groups? 
Is it possible that adverse comparisons might result through different treatments 
of experimental and control groups? If there is a significant difference, this could 
pose both ethical and practical/political problems for the researcher.
Control of the relevant variables
Being able to control the relevant variables lies at the heart of the experimental 
method. However, this can be hard to accomplish. And, even when it is possible 
in a practical sense, there can be ethical issues that arise which need to be taken 
into account.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

78  The Good Research Guide
Cause and effect
The experimental approach tends to focus on observable effects and works better 
with relatively straightforward matters. It can miss indirect causes (de Vaus 2001) 
and is not really well suited to dealing with the more complex underlying causes 
of many social phenomena (Pawson and Tilley 1997).
Random allocation to groups
When random allocation to the experimental group and the control group is 
not possible questions will arise about whether the groups genuinely constitute  
a ‘matched pair’. Researchers need to be sure that there is no element of self-
selection to the groups and that the groups are ‘equivalent’.
Further reading
de Vaus, D. (2001) Research Design in Social Research. London: Sage, Chapters 4–6.
Dunning, T. (2012) Natural Experiments in the Social Science: A Design-Based Approach. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Milgram, S. (1974) Obedience to Authority: An Experimental View. New York: HarperCollins.
Thyer, B. A. (2012) Quasi-Experimental Research Designs. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Webster, M. and Sell, J. (2007) Laboratory Experiments in the Social Sciences. Burlington, 
MA: Amsterdam Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Experiments  79
✓
Checklist for the experimental approach
When undertaking research which involves experiments you should  
feel confident about answering ‘yes’ to the following questions: 
  1	 Have the key variables been clearly identified?
  2	 Has a clear distinction been drawn between dependent and 
independent variables?
 
  3	 Can the relevant variables be controlled for the purposes of 
designing the experiment?
 
  4	 Is there a clear hypothesis or proposition that can be tested?
  5	 Have detailed records been kept of the procedures and the results 
(in order to evaluate the design and replicate the experiment)?
 
  6	 If a control group is used, is it closely matched in all key respects 
with the experimental group?
 
  7	 If the research subjects are fully aware of the nature of the 
experiment in which they are taking part, has ‘the observer’ effect 
been taken into account?
 
 
  8	 If the research subjects are not fully aware of the nature of the 
experiment in which they are participating, will they be fully 
informed after the experiment has taken place?
 
 
  9	 Does the experimental situation create conditions comparable to 
the ‘real-world’ situations in which the behaviour/decisions would 
be made?
 
 
10	 Is the research ethical in terms of its treatment of those involved 
in the experiment?
 
© M. Denscombe, The Good Research Guide. Open University Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

What is ethnography? • The alien, the exotic and the routine • Life on 
the Internet • Life history • Access to fieldwork settings • Description 
and theory • Reflexivity: ethnographers as part of the world they seek 
to describe • Putting the researcher’s ‘self’ into ethnographic research • 
Advantages of ethnography • Disadvantages of ethnography • Further 
reading • Checklist for ethnographic research
What is ethnography?
The term ethnography literally means a description of peoples or cultures. It has 
its origins as a research strategy in the works of the early social anthropologists 
whose aim was to provide a detailed and permanent account of the cultures and 
lives of small, isolated tribes. Such tribes were seen, with some justification, as 
‘endangered species’, and the social anthropologists saw the need to map out 
those cultures before they became contaminated by contact with the industrial 
world or withered away to extinction.
The image of the pith-helmeted outsider dressed in khaki shorts arriving 
on the shores of some remote and exotic palm tree island to set up camp 
and study the lives of the ‘native’ has become legendary – largely through 
the works of people like Bronislaw Malinowski (1922) and Margaret Mead 
(1943). The concerns of such social anthropologists and the research strategy 
they employed set the scene for much of what is undertaken as ‘ethnography’ 
today.
Ethnography, based on the early anthropological origins of the term and on 
subsequent developments by influential classics in the field (e.g. Whyte [1943] 
1993), has the following characteristics:
•• It requires the researcher to spend considerable time in the field among the 
people whose lives and culture are being studied. The ethnographer needs to 
share in the lives rather than observe from a position of detachment. Extended 
fieldwork allows for a journey of discovery in which the explanations for 
what is being witnessed emerge over a period of time.
Ethnography
5
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Ethnography  81
• Routine and normal aspects of everyday life are regarded as worthy of con-
sideration as research data. The mundane and the ordinary parts of social life 
are just as valid as the special events and ceremonies which can all too easily 
capture our attention.
• There is special attention given to the way the people being studied see their 
world. Quite distinct from the researcher’s analysis of the situation, the eth-
nographer is generally concerned to find out how the members of the group/
culture being studied understand things, the meanings they attach to happen-
ings, the way they perceive their reality.
• There is an emphasis on the need to look at the interlinkages between the 
various features of the culture and to avoid isolating facets of the culture 
from the wider context within which it exists. Ethnography generally prefers 
a holistic approach which stresses processes, relationships, connections and 
interdependency among the component parts.
•• There is some acknowledgement that the ethnographer’s final account of the 
culture or group being studied is more than just a description – it is a con-
struction. It is not a direct ‘reproduction’, a literal photograph of the situation. 
It is, rather, a crafted construction which employs particular writing skills 
(rhetoric) and which inevitably owes something to the ethnographer’s own 
experiences.
Key point: The holistic perspective of ethnography
‘One of the first conditions of acceptable Ethnographic work certainly is that it 
should deal with the totality of all social, cultural and psychological aspects of 
the community, for they are so interwoven that not one can be understood with-
out taking into consideration all the others’ (Malinowski 1922: xvi).
The alien, the exotic and the routine
Early anthropologists studied groups in societies that were different from their 
own. Their aim was to explain the culture and lifestyles they found in the ‘primi-
tive’ society where their fieldwork was based and, through a process of com-
parison and contrast, to cast fresh light on aspects of their own society as well. 
Ethnography, in this respect, resembles an anthropological approach. However, 
it does not restrict its attention to remote tribes in distant lands. Indeed, the most 
popular development of ethnography has been its application to lifestyles, under-
standings and beliefs within ‘our own’ society.
In its early days, ethnography ‘within our own society’ tended to focus on 
groups who were relatively small in number and who tended to be somewhat 
alien to the mainstream of society. The ‘anthropological stance’ was applied to 
oddball cultures that stood out as different from the norm. And, just as with the 
study of ‘natives’ in far-off lands, there was an immediate attraction for studying  
such groups. They offered something intrinsically interesting in the way their life-
styles seemed quaint, crazy, even exotic, compared with the everyday experience 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

82  The Good Research Guide
of those who studied the groups and those who read the resulting books. The 
focus was on ‘deviant’ groups, such as hobos, alcoholics, drug users, religious 
sects, street gangs, and the like. And ethnography retains today an interest in 
the exotic and the special, with ceremonies and the unusual features of social 
life. A recent ethnography, for example, focused on Wall Street investment 
bankers, exploring their everyday experiences, beliefs and the culture sur-
rounding their lives as financial high-flyers (Ho 2009). However, the routine 
and the mundane, the normal and the unspectacular facets of social life have 
become recognized as equally valid topics for ethnographic enquiry. In recent 
times, attention has been refocused on to more routine, mainstream aspects of 
social life, for example, life in classrooms (Woods 2012) or life on a building site  
(Riemer 1979).
Life on the Internet
The Internet is more than a physical network and electronic technology. It ena-
bles a cyberworld populated by particular kinds of people. And this has attracted 
the attention of some ethnographers. For them, the Internet gives rise to a social 
phenomenon that needs to be investigated and explained. In this vein, research 
has emerged on:
•• the cultural, social and technological conditions giving rise to the Internet and 
its widespread use;
•• the personal attributes of those who use the Internet and the particular facili-
ties it provides.
For others, the Internet is of particular interest because it is seen as a whole new 
aspect of social existence inhabited by communities with their own distinctive 
cultures, styles of interaction and modes of personal communication. The inter-
est in ‘online cultures’ and ‘online communities’ has given rise to what Hine (2000) 
has called ‘virtual ethnography’ and Kozinets (2010) has termed ‘netnography’. 
Ethnography, in such cases, focuses on the culture of cyberspace.
Life history
A life history approach, in a sense, is like a ‘personal ethnography’. It involves 
the in-depth study of individuals or members of social groups. The aim of the 
approach is to portray the lives of specific people, to map how their experiences 
change over time, and to link these experiences with the cultural, social or histori-
cal context in which they occur. The approach came to prominence through the 
work of sociologists at the University of Chicago during the 1920s to 1940s who 
paved the way by conducting detailed empirical studies of individuals, groups and 
communities (Denzin 1970; Bulmer 1984). These ethnographies traced the changes 
and developments that took place over a period of time and paid particular atten-
tion to experiences of those whose lives were being studied. More recently the 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Ethnography  83
approach has been associated with feminist research (Devault 1990) and studies 
of individuals in relation to occupations (Woods 1993) and health (Haglund 2004).
Like biographies, life histories can be based on the whole of a person’s lifespan 
from beginning to end, but can also be used to cover portions of lives – extended 
and substantial parts of people’s lives but not the whole of the life.
There are two themes running through most life history research, both of 
which fit closely with ethnography. The first is that the research provides a 
‘thick’ description of the life of the person. It includes the kind of fine detail that 
allows the reader to see the complex and multi-layered facets of the person’s 
life. The second is that the individual’s understanding of things is treated as a 
crucial part of the life history. As Marshall and Rossman (2011: 151) put it, the 
life history approach ‘understands a culture through the history of one person’s 
development of life within it, told in ways that capture the person’s own feelings, 
views, and perspectives’.
Contrasting slightly with this, some life histories are used descriptively, their 
main aim being to use the personal biography as a means to reveal new things 
about the cultural, historical and social circumstances within which the person 
lives (or lived). The research, in this instance, attempts to provide insights into the 
lifestyle and beliefs of a particular culture or group. The idea is that we can learn 
what things were like from someone who had first-hand experience of being there 
or who had lived during that period.
Other researchers approach life histories in a more analytic fashion. They are 
more inclined to treat the life history as something that should be interpreted in 
terms of the wider social structure within which it occurs. There is an issue, here, 
about whether the life history entails recounting the story of a person’s life in 
the way that they see it, or whether there is a need to bring alternative sources 
to bear by way of corroborating or challenging the person’s version of their own 
life. Denzin argues that:
The life history must contain reports from persons other than the subject. Not 
only must users of life histories triangulate methodologies, but they must also 
triangulate perspectives . . . Unless the perspectives of others are brought to 
bear upon the subject’s statements, observers have no way of assessing the 
idiosyncrasies of those interpretations.
(Denzin 1970: 238)
Despite these differences in emphasis, what life histories share is an approach 
that uses the in-depth study of an individual’s life in order to get a grasp on their 
experiences and thinking in a way that links these to the cultural, social and his-
torical circumstances in which they occur.
Life histories generally make use of in-depth interviews to collect the data. 
They can also make use of secondary source data such as public archive mate-
rial, private archive material, diaries, letters and other forms 
of documentary data to build the life history. As with most 
ethnographic research, a distinctive feature of the data col-
lection is that it takes place over a relatively long period and 
a life history is not something that can be completed quickly.
Link up with 
Narrative analy-
sis, p. 291.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

84  The Good Research Guide
Usually, it will be gathered over a number of years with gentle guidance from the 
social scientist, the subject either writing down episodes of life or tape recording 
them. At its best, it will be backed up with intensive observation of the subject’s 
life, interviews with friends and perusals of letters and photographs.
(Plummer 2001: 14)
Perhaps the most interesting question of methods in relation to the life history 
approach is not how the data are collected, but how the informants are chosen. 
As Plummer (2001: 133) puts it so well: ‘Who from the teeming millions of the 
world population is to be selected for such intensive study and social science 
immortality?’ Obviously, it will be people who are ‘information rich’ – people 
with poignant experiences, fascinating insights and stories to tell. The way 
the researcher finds such people, people who are willing to open up their lives 
to the inquisitive gaze of the researcher, can follow a process of ‘selective 
sampling’. The researcher will be looking in certain appropriate places and 
will have in mind some kind of person who might have the kind of life history 
that will be revealing and informative. However, when it comes to finding the 
‘right’ person – the one who turns out to have the treasure trove of life experi-
ences – famous instances of life history research show that luck has a large 
part to play.
Access to fieldwork settings
Gaining access to people, places and events is a crucial part of successful 
ethnographic research. For field researchers this access cannot be taken for 
granted. Researchers need to set about gaining access, and to do this they need 
to engage in negotiations that have political, ethical and practical implications.
Naturalism
In order to produce a pure and detailed description ethnographers will wish to 
avoid disrupting the situation by their very presence as observers in the field. 
They will wish to preserve the natural state of affairs. And this is why natural-
ism is a key concern of ethnography. The ethnographer’s concern with natural-
ism derives from the wish to study things in their natural 
state – undisturbed by the intrusion of research tools or the 
disruption of experimental designs. Going ‘into the field’ to 
witness events at first hand in their natural habitat lies at the 
very heart of what it means to do ethnography.
Covert research
It is sometimes possible for an ethnographer to conduct fieldwork without 
people knowing that they have a researcher in their midst. The researcher can 
blend into the background by adopting a role that fits in with the normal 
Link up with 
Participant obser-
vation, p. 215.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Ethnography  85
situation. The researcher can go undercover and carry out the research in 
a clandestine manner. This has benefits as far as ethnography is concerned 
because: (1) it preserves the naturalness of the setting; and (2) it generally side-
steps any need to get authorization to conduct the research. However, it gives 
rise to a different type of problem. The decision to undertake covert research 
means that the researcher cannot also have ‘informed consent’ on the part of 
the subjects of his or her research, and this raises substantial ethical problems 
(see Humphreys 1975).
Gatekeepers
Ethnographers do not always work in a covert manner. Indeed, it is fair to say 
that most ethnographies actually involve some degree of openness about the 
role of the researcher; that is, overt research. When this is the case, the ethical 
problems cease to be the sole concern. Added to this, ethnographers are faced 
with the possibility that their explicit research role might disrupt the naturalness 
of the situation. Most of all, though, an overt research role will most probably 
bring with it a call for the researcher to make contact with ‘gatekeepers’ who 
can help the researcher with the vital business of gaining access to the necessary 
fieldwork settings.
Identifying key people who can grant permission, and successfully negotiat-
ing with them for access to people, places and events, is often a prerequisite with-
out which the fieldwork cannot begin. In informal settings, such sponsors act 
as guarantors who vouch for the bona fide status of researcher. They use their 
informal status and relationship with subjects as a currency facilitating both con-
tact and trust between researcher and subject or group (e.g. Whyte [1943] 1993; 
Polsky 2006).
Sponsors and gatekeepers, however, cannot be disregarded once their initial 
approval has been obtained. In reality, they exercise continued influence over the 
nature of the research. Their influence persists in terms of both:
•• the kind of initial agreement established about access (influencing the nature 
of eventual research findings); and
•• the need for access to people and places that were not foreseen at the start of 
the research.
The influence of such gatekeepers, then, goes beyond a simple granting or denial 
of contact with research subjects. As Burgess (1984) argues, access is a con-
tinual process in fieldwork research. It is a process because research is generally 
conducted over a period of time and it is a process, perhaps more importantly, 
because access needs to be sought to new people, places and events as new lines 
of enquiry become incorporated in the research. Since field research, especially 
ethnographic work, tends to evolve and develop in terms of its focus of enquiry, 
it is unlikely that the researcher could state at the outset of research the precise 
nature and extent of access that will be required. Access, in the sense of permis-
sion from a gatekeeper, is necessarily renewable and renegotiable, and should be 
viewed as an ‘access relationship’ rather than a one-off event.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

86  The Good Research Guide
Gatekeepers’ authority to grant or withhold access varies, of course, depend-
ing on the degree to which the people, places and events being studied are part 
of a formal environment. Whereas in the educational context headteachers have 
formal jurisdiction over entry to school premises and can withhold or grant 
access to teachers and pupils, in less formal settings the role of the gatekeeper is 
different. As Whyte illustrated so graphically in his research (Whyte [1943] 1993), 
the role of gatekeeper can become more akin to a guarantor for the bona fide 
status of the researcher. Whyte’s gatekeeper, ‘Doc’, had no formal authority to 
grant or deny access; he used his status with the group to open up the possibility 
of Whyte making contact with the young men in question, and acted as a spon-
sor/guarantor to enable some trust relationship to develop. This is an important 
point. As Hammersley and Atkinson (2007) argue, access is not simply a matter 
of physical presence or absence. It is far more than a matter of granting or with-
holding of permission for research to be conducted. Worthwhile access to people, 
places and events involves, as well, an opening up to allow the researcher into 
the world of the persons involved. Being present is one hurdle, but ‘access’ also 
involves being trusted with insights and insider knowledge.
Description and theory
Thick description
Ethnography involves the description of things witnessed first-hand in the field 
by the researcher. Such descriptions, however, if they are to prove useful from an 
ethnographic perspective, must go beyond a superficial glance. It is vital that they 
contain sufficient depth and detail to allow real insights into the situation being 
studied. The term ‘thick description’ is often referred to in this context. A ‘thick 
description’ (Geertz 1973) aims to describe particular acts or events in relation 
to their cultural context. The emphasis is not just on describing what ‘is’ but on 
explaining how the nature of this phenomenon is closely linked to other aspects 
of its social context. To illustrate what this means, Geertz himself draws on the 
example of ‘winking’. Simply describing the action itself is ‘thin description’. It is 
important to include as part of the description, but if we want to understand the 
meaning of the action we need a ‘thick description’ which supplies information 
about the intentions of the person doing the winking and the symbolic signifi-
cance of the gesture in different settings. Only then can we understand whether 
the action is to be construed as a twitch, as a friendly gesture, as flirting, as a 
subtle conspiracy or whatever.
Idiographic and nomothetic approaches
Detailed descriptions can stand in their own right as a valuable contribution to 
knowledge or, alternatively, they can be treated as building blocks towards the cre-
ation of more general theories about the kind of culture, lifestyle, beliefs or events 
being researched. An idiographic approach aligns with the first of these two posi-
tions. It sees the purpose of ethnographic research as being to produce detailed 
pictures of events or cultures – descriptions which stand in their own right. From 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Ethnography  87
this standpoint there is no need to worry about how representative the situation is 
or what the broader implications might be in terms of other events or cultures of 
the type, or of contributing to wider theories. Any ethnographic description is to 
be regarded as a stand-alone ‘one-off’ that is to be judged by 
the depth of its portrayal and the intricacy of its description. 
There is no attempt to derive something from the description 
that goes beyond the specifics of the situation and which can, 
in some way or other, link to broader issues.
A nomothetic approach, however, challenges the value of producing numer-
ous stand-alone descriptions. It argues that if each ethnographic study produces 
a one-off, isolated piece of information, then there is little prospect of building 
up any generalized knowledge about human societies. The nomothetic approach 
takes the position that ethnographic research should be undertaken quite delib-
erately to develop more generalized and ‘theoretical’ conclusions that will apply 
outside the confines of the individual ethnographic study: it should help to gener-
ate theories. Or it might even be used to test theories. Porter (1993), for example, 
argues that ethnographic research should be used as a way of checking whether a 
theory really does hold true in ‘real life’.
So, at one end of the spectrum there are those who regard the main purpose of 
ethnography as providing rich and detailed descriptions of real-life situations as 
they really are. At the other end of the spectrum there are those who see the role 
of ethnographic fieldwork as a means of developing theories by checking them 
out in small-scale scenarios. And somewhere towards the middle of the spectrum 
lies the pragmatic view ‘that “idiographic” and “nomothetic” approaches are not 
mutually exclusive, and that we can have both rich and intensive description and 
generalizability’ (Woods 2012: 268). Advocates of the middle position are keen to 
hold on to the idiographic aspect of ethnographic research in as much as it pro-
vides a valuable and distinct kind of data – the detailed descriptions of specifics 
based on first-hand observation in naturally occurring situations. But they also 
recognize the need for conclusions to be drawn from the research which have 
implications beyond the bounds of the particular events, customs or people stud-
ied. In the words of Hammersley (1990: 598), the ‘descriptions must remain close 
to the concrete reality of particular events but at the same time reveal general 
features of human social life’.
Link up with 
Chapter 6  
Phenomenology.
Good practice: Generalizing from ethnographies
To accommodate the need for ethnographies to combine detailed description 
of particular settings with the need to produce findings that have some gen-
eral implications beyond the specifics of the situation studied, ethnographies 
should:
••
compare their findings with those of other similar ethnographies;
••
consider how their findings tie in with, or contradict, existing relevant theories 
and understanding about human social behaviour;
••
explain the significance of the topic in relation to the beliefs and priorities of 
the researcher’s own culture.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

88  The Good Research Guide
Reflexivity: ethnographers as part of the world  
they seek to describe
Ethnographers tend to be very sensitive to the matter of reflexivity and the way 
it affects their perception of the culture or events they wish to describe. What 
concerns them is that the conceptual tools they use to understand the cultures or 
events being studied are not, and can never be, neutral and passive instruments 
of discovery.
As researchers, the meanings we attach to things that happen and the lan-
guage we use to describe them are the product of our own culture, social back-
ground and personal experiences. Making sense of what is observed during 
fieldwork observation is a process that relies on what the researcher already 
knows and already believes, and it is not a voyage of discovery which starts with 
a clean sheet. We can only make sense of the world in a way that we have learnt 
to do using conceptual tools which are based on our own culture and our own 
experiences. We have no way of standing outside these to reach some objective 
and neutral vantage point from which to view things ‘as they really are’. To an 
extent, we can describe them only ‘as we see them’, and this is shaped by our 
culture, not theirs.
The question that taxes ethnographers is this: ‘How far can my descrip-
tion of the culture or event depict things from the point of view of those 
involved when I can only use my own way of seeing things, my own concep-
tual tools, to make sense of what is happening?’ Broadly, ethnographers are 
conscious of the way in which their account of any particular lifestyle or 
beliefs is a construction based upon the researcher’s interpretation of events. 
Even when it comes to writing up the ethnography, there are deep-rooted 
doubts about claims to objectivity. The outcome of ethnographic research 
is generally recognized by those who write it as being a creative work in its 
own right – the outcome of interpretation, editing and skilful writing tech-
niques as well as a reflection of the reality of the situ-
ation they set out to study (Woods 2006). Inescapably, 
the account is partial – an edited and abridged version – 
which owes something to the ethnographer as well as the 
culture or events observed. There is nothing new to this. 
Malinowski appreciated the point many years ago:
In ethnography, the distance is often enormous between the brute mate-
rial of information – as it is presented to the student in his own obser-
vations, in native statement, in the kaleidoscope of tribal life – and the 
final authoritative presentations of the results. The ethnographer has to 
traverse this distance in the laborious years between the moment when 
he sets foot upon a native beach, and makes his first attempts to get into 
touch with the natives, and the time when he writes down the final version 
of his results.
(Malinowski 1922: 4)
Link up with  
Producing 
accounts of 
research, p. 335.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Ethnography  89
Putting the researcher’s ‘self’ into ethnographic 
research
One of the characteristic features of ethnography is the significance it attaches 
to the role of the researcher’s ‘self’ in the process of research. The researcher’s 
identity, values and beliefs become part of the equation – a built-in component that 
cannot be eliminated as an influence on the end-product findings of the project.
Ethnographic research, therefore, calls for a certain degree of introspection 
on the part of the researcher. He or she needs to reflect upon the way that back-
ground factors associated with personal experiences, personal beliefs and social 
values may have shaped the way that events and cultures were interpreted.
However, the ethnographic researcher needs to go beyond mere reflection. This 
is, in a sense, a private activity. Necessary though it is, it needs to be portrayed 
more publicly if it is to support the research outcomes. Researchers need to supply 
their readers with some insights into the possible influence of the researcher’s self 
on the interpretation of events or cultures. There needs to be a public account of 
the self which explores the role of the researcher’s self. This account of the self will 
vary in the amount of detail it provides, depending on the nature of the research 
topic, the kind of methods used and the audience for whom the ethnography is 
written. It is obviously a matter of judgement here about the extent to which the 
account should delve to the depths of detail about researchers’ personal matters, 
and the amount of detail that the readership needs to know in order to arrive at a 
reasonable evaluation of the likely impact of the ‘self’ on the research.
Good practice: Reflecting on the researcher’s ‘self’
Ethnographies require some reflection by the researcher on how his/her biogra-
phy, values and experiences might have a bearing on the nature of the study. 
This ‘public account of the role of the self’ can be included in the methodology 
section and possibly in the Preface or Introduction to reports of the findings. As 
a broad guideline, the following factors might be considered:
••
personal beliefs relating to the topic (politics, values, standpoint);
••
personal interests in the area of investigation (vested interest, history of events);
••
personal experience linked to the research topic (incidents affecting self or 
others close to researchers);
••
personal expertise in relation to the topic (qualification, experience).
To give an account of the way personal beliefs, interests, experience and exper-
tise might have a bearing on findings, the researcher is likely to need to draw 
upon personal details about his or her:
•• age
• sex
• ethnicity
• social background (class, family, environment)
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

90  The Good Research Guide
• education and qualifications
•• work experience and skills.
Advantages of ethnography
Detailed data based on direct observation
As a research strategy ethnography is based on direct observation via fieldwork, 
rather than relying on second-hand data or statements made by research sub-
jects. It is grounded in empirical research involving direct contact with relevant 
people and places, and it provides data rich in depth and detail. Potentially, it can 
deal with intricate and subtle realities.
Links with theory
It can be used as a means for developing theory, and it can also be used for testing 
theories.
Holistic
Ethnography aspires to holistic explanations which focus on processes and rela-
tionships that lie behind the surface events. It puts things in context rather than 
abstracting specific aspects in isolation.
A fresh view on things
There is an element of contrast and comparison built into ethnographic research 
which encourages the researcher to look beyond ‘the obvious’ and to see things 
relative to other cultures and lifestyles. Cultures and lifestyles are viewed as 
‘anthropologically strange’.
Actors’ perceptions
Ethnographic research is particularly well suited to dealing with the way mem-
bers of a culture see events – as seen through their eyes. It describes and explores 
the ‘actors’ perceptions’.
Self-awareness
It has an open and explicit awareness of the role of the researcher’s self in the 
choice of topic, process of research and construction of the findings/conclusions. 
It acknowledges the inherent reflexivity of social knowledge.
Ecological validity
It is strong in terms of ecological validity, to the extent that the act of research-
ing should have relatively little impact on the setting – retaining things in their 
‘natural’ form.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Ethnography  91
Disadvantages of ethnography
Tensions within the approach
There is a tension within the realms of ethnography stemming from its twin 
concerns with naturalism and reflexivity. Ethnographies generally attempt 
to accommodate an internal contradiction between (1) ‘realist’ aspirations 
to provide full and detailed descriptions of events or cultures as they natu-
rally exist, and (2) a ‘relativist’ awareness of the reflexive nature of social 
knowledge and the inevitable influence of the researcher’s ‘self’ on the whole 
research endeavour.
Stand-alone descriptions
Ethnographic research has the potential to produce an array of ‘pictures’ 
which coexist, but which tend to remain as separate, isolated stories. There 
is arguably an in-built tendency to scatter these building-block pictures at 
random, rather than erecting a structure where each is a brick which serves 
as a base for further bricks to be laid upon, moving it ever upwards. To avoid 
this, ethnographies need to be guided by (or towards) a coherent theoretical 
framework.
Story-telling
There is the potential to provide detailed descriptive accounts at the expense 
of developing an analytic insight or contributing to a theoretical position. The 
story-telling can become the sole purpose, leaving a research product which is 
a-theoretical, non-analytic and non-critical.
Reliability
Ethnographic studies, because of their nature, are hard to replicate in order to 
check the findings. Accounts of the situation often depend on records kept by a 
single researcher and they tend to rely heavily on the researcher’s interpretation 
of events.
Ethics
There is also a greater potential than with most other approaches to face ethi-
cal problems associated with intrusions upon privacy and with gaining informed 
consent from research subjects.
Access
Ethnographic research can pose particularly acute difficulties of gaining access 
to settings, access which avoids disrupting the naturalness of the setting.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

92  The Good Research Guide
Further reading
Boellstorff, T., Nardi, B., Pearce, C. and Taylor, T. (2012) Ethnography and Virtual Worlds: 
A Handbook of Method. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Brewer, J. (2000) Ethnography. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Hammersley, M. and Atkinson, P. (2007) Ethnography: Principles in Practice, 3rd edn. 
London: Tavistock.
Madden, R. (2010) Being Ethnographic: A Guide to the Theory and Practice of Ethnography. 
London: Sage.
Murchison, J. (2010) Ethnography Essentials: Designing, Conducting, and Presenting 
Your Research. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
O’Reilly, K. (2012) Ethnographic Methods, 2nd edn. London: Routledge.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Ethnography  93
✓
Checklist for ethnographic research
When undertaking ethnographic research you should feel confident  
about answering ‘yes’ to the following questions: 
  1	 Have cultures, lifestyles, customs and beliefs been treated as the 
main interest of the research?
 
  2	 Has a holistic approach been adopted, linking all significant 
contributing factors?
 
  3	 Has the research involved a substantial time ‘in the field’ 
collecting empirical data?
 
  4	 Has access to the fieldwork settings been negotiated through 
relevant ‘gatekeepers’?
 
  5	 Has the research been conducted ethically with due respect to the 
rights of those being studied?
 
  6	 Has the research managed to avoid disrupting the naturalness of 
the settings?
 
  7	 Does the research include an account of the role of the 
researcher’s ‘self’?
 
  8	 Is there a description of how the ethnography builds on (or 
contradicts) existing explanations of the phenomenon?
 
  9	 Are the findings compared and contrasted with other ethnographies 
on similar topics?
 
10	 Has due acknowledgement been given to the fact that the 
ethnography is a researcher’s construction rather than a literal 
description of the situation?
 
 
© M. Denscombe, The Good Research Guide. Open University Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

6
What is the phenomenological approach? • Experience • The everyday 
world • Seeing things through the eyes of others • The social 
construction of reality • Multiple realities • Description • The  
suspension of common-sense beliefs • Members’ accounts • Types  
of phenomenology: underlying essences or actual experiences  
• Advantages of phenomenology • Disadvantages of phenomenology  
• Further reading • Checklist for phenomenology
What is the phenomenological approach?
As an approach to social research, phenomenology is sometimes presented as 
an alternative to positivism. When a simple dichotomy is called for, phenomenol-
ogy has been useful for some writers as an umbrella term covering styles of 
research that do not rely on measurement, statistics or other things generally 
associated with the scientific method. In direct contrast to positivism, it is seen 
as an approach that emphasizes:
•• subjectivity (rather than objectivity);
• description (more than analysis);
• interpretation (rather than measurement);
•• agency (rather than structure).
Its credentials as an alternative to positivism are further reinforced by the fact 
that phenomenological research generally deals with:
•• people’s perceptions or meanings;
• people’s attitudes and beliefs;
•• people’s feelings and emotions.
Such a thumbnail portrait of phenomenology serves to set the scene and provide 
an initial view of its direction as a research strategy. It helps to explain why a 
phenomenological approach has proved useful for researchers in areas such as  
Phenomenology
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Phenomenology  95
health, education and business who want to understand the thinking of patients, 
pupils and employees (van Manen 1990; Crotty 1996). And it gives a clue to 
why phenomenology is associated with humanistic research using qualitative  
methodologies – approaches that place special emphasis on the individual’s views 
and personal experiences.
Experience
Phenomenology is concerned, first and foremost, with human experience – 
something denoted by the term ‘phenomenology’ itself. A phenomenon is some-
thing that stands in need of explanation; something of which we are aware but 
something that, as yet, remains known to us only in terms of how it appears to us 
directly through our senses. A phenomenological approach to research, following 
from this, concentrates its efforts on the kind of human experiences that are pure, 
basic and raw in the sense that they have not (yet) been subjected to processes of 
analysis and theorizing. In contrast to other approaches to research that rely on 
processes of categorizing things, abstracting them, quantifying them and theoriz-
ing about them, phenomenology prefers to concentrate its efforts on getting a clear 
picture of the ‘things in themselves’ – the things as directly experienced by people.
Key point: Phenomenology is an approach that focuses on how life 
is experienced
It is not primarily concerned with explaining the causes of things but tries, 
instead, to provide a description of how things are experienced first-hand by 
those involved. The phenomenological investigation of something like ‘home-
lessness’, for instance, would focus on the experience of being homeless. It 
might be interested in trying to get at the essence of what it means to be home-
less. It might try to understand homelessness from the point of view of those 
who are themselves homeless and try to describe how they see things, how 
they understand the situation, how they interpret events. What it would not try 
to do is measure the extent of homelessness, or explain the causes of home-
lessness. Though both might be worthwhile endeavours, neither would be at the 
heart of phenomenological research.
The everyday world
Phenomenology is also characterized by a particular interest in the basics of social 
existence. This stems from a philosophical concern with the nature of ‘Being-in-
the-world’ (Heidegger 1962) and the lived experience of human beings within the 
‘life-world’ (Husserl 1950). In practice, this translates into special importance being 
attached to the routine and ordinary features of social life, and to questions about 
how people manage to ‘do’ the everyday things on which social life depends. Some-
times this can involve quite fundamental things associated with the way people 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

96  The Good Research Guide
experience their lives, for example, ageing, sexual orientation, faith, major life 
transitions and identity changes (e.g. Bettis 1969; Moustakas 1992; Ahmed 2006). 
On other occasions phenomenological studies have looked at more mundane 
things such as daydreaming (Morley 1998) and complaining about chronic pain 
(Kugelmann 1999). Such topics might draw on normal, routine facets of the every-
day world around us but, from the phenomenological perspective, this does not 
make them trivial or inconsequential.
Seeing things through the eyes of others
When dealing with the way people experience facets of their lives, phenome-
nology stresses the need to present matters as closely as possible to the way 
that those concerned understand them. The phenomenologist’s task, in the first 
instance, is not to interpret the experiences of those concerned, not to analyse 
them or repackage them in some form. The task is to present the experiences in 
a way that is faithful to the original. This entails the ability to see things through 
the eyes of others, to understand things in the way that they understand things 
and to provide a description of matters that adequately portrays how the group 
in question experiences the situation.
This has some significant implications for social research. First, it places the 
ideas and reasoning of the group being studied at the core of the investigation. 
The research necessarily revolves around people and their lives, rather than sys-
tems, aggregates and trends operating at a high level of abstraction. Second, it 
elevates the importance of people’s thinking in terms of the research. Rather 
than being treated as something that is the crude foundation on which to build 
more sophisticated explanations and theories about the experiences, that think-
ing becomes the topic of investigation in its own right. Third, people’s everyday 
thinking is given credibility and respected in its own right as valid. It is not nec-
essarily treated as less rational than or inferior to the ‘scientific’ thinking of the 
social researcher, but is considered as rational in its own terms of reference. For 
these reasons, phenomenology has an affinity with humanistic perspectives on 
research that are keen to accord normal people and their own everyday reason-
ing higher status in research.
The social construction of reality
Phenomenology is particularly interested in how social life is constructed by 
those who participate in it, and it makes two points about this. First, it regards 
people as creative interpreters of events who, through their actions and 
interpretations, literally make sense of their worlds. From the perspective of 
the phenomenologist people do not passively obey a set of social rules; nor do 
they slot into an external social structure; nor do they simply respond to their 
internal physiological drives or psychological dispositions. They are viewed 
instead as ‘agents’ who interpret their experiences and who actively create an 
order to their existence. As an approach to understanding the social world this 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Phenomenology  97
sets phenomenology apart from any belief that things are preordained, that 
there is a reality to social life that exists independently from the way people 
experience it or that the way we experience and understand things is struc-
tured by the way human minds are programmed to perceive things.
Good practice: Making sense of reality
Phenomenological research should focus on the ways in which people interpret 
events and, literally, make sense of their personal experiences.
Second, it acknowledges that the processes of interpreting sights and sounds 
into meaningful events are not unique to each individual. Necessarily, they must 
be shared with others who live in the group or community (Berger and Luck-
mann 1967). If they were not, people would find it virtually impossible to interact 
with one another, since they could be operating on quite different understandings 
about what is going on. They could be living in different worlds, unable to com-
municate and unable to grasp the implications of other people’s actions. Without 
some shared basis for interpreting their experiences there would be no way of 
knowing what others were doing or what their intentions were. There would, 
effectively, be no basis for social life.
Multiple realities
When the social world is seen as ‘socially constructed’ it opens up the possibil-
ity that different groups of people might ‘see things differently’. There is the 
prospect of alternative realities – realities that vary from situation to situation, 
culture to culture. In this respect phenomenology stands in stark contrast to 
positivistic approaches to social research that are premised on the assumption 
of one reality. Whereas positivistic approaches look for explanations that fit 
one universal reality, phenomenological approaches tend to live with, even cel-
ebrate, the possibility of multiple realities. Reflecting the fact that the world 
as experienced by living humans is something that is created through the way 
they interpret and give meaning to their experiences, phenomenology rejects 
the notion that there is one universal reality and accepts, instead, that things 
can be seen in different ways by different people at different times in differ-
ent circumstances, and that each alternative version needs to be recognized as 
being valid in its own right.
Caution: Multiple realities
This phenomenological position certainly allows for competing versions of what 
things are, how they work and what they mean. It implies that there might not 
be one ‘right’ explanation and that different theories might be equally valid.  
It moves researchers away from a mind set where one theory is correct and 
‣
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

98  The Good Research Guide
Description
When it comes to the matter of how phenomenologists actually do their research, 
a key characteristic of the approach is its emphasis on describing authentic 
experiences. Rather than directing their attention to explanations and analyses 
of experiences in an attempt to discover why they occurred, phenomenologists 
focus instead on trying to depict the relevant experiences in a way that is as 
faithful to the original as possible.
To provide a description of the authentic experience, phenomenological 
research first and foremost needs to provide a description that adequately cov-
ers the complexity of the situation. One of the crucial benefits of a phenomeno-
logical approach is that it deals with things in depth and does not try to gloss 
over the subtleties and complications that are essential parts of many – possibly 
most – aspects of human experience. The description, therefore, must be fairly 
detailed.
The phenomenological description should also be prepared to recognize and 
include aspects of the experience that appear to be self-contradictory, irrational 
or even bizarre. The researcher’s role is not to act as editor for the way people 
explain their experiences. Nor is it to impose some artificial order on the thoughts 
of those being studied by trying to remedy any apparent logical inconsistencies. 
The social world is rarely neat and phenomenology does not involve the attempt 
to present life experiences as though they are entirely coherent.
others are inadequate or wrong. It does not imply, however, that there are as 
many social realities as there are individuals – each interpreting his or her world 
in their own unique way. As has been stressed, phenomenology does not treat 
interpretations of the social world as totally individual things. Necessarily, they 
are shared between groups, cultures and societies, and it is only at these levels 
that phenomenology recognizes the possibility of there being multiple realities.
Good practice: Dealing with complexities and contradictions
Phenomenological research should involve a detailed description of the experi-
ence that is being investigated – one that does not gloss over the complexities 
and contradictions that inhabit real life.
The suspension of common-sense beliefs
A phenomenological approach not only encourages the researcher to provide 
a detailed description of experiences, it also advocates the need to do so with a 
minimum reliance on the researcher’s own beliefs, expectations and predisposi-
tions about the phenomenon under investigation.
From a phenomenological perspective, researchers are part and parcel of the 
social world they seek to investigate. Phenomenologists see the social world as 
existing only through the way it is experienced and interpreted by people – and 
‣
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Phenomenology  99
this includes researchers as much as anyone else. Researchers, like other peo-
ple, use common-sense assumptions when interpreting events, and this is where 
phenomenology has an important point to make for researchers. Researchers 
need to be aware of the fact that they rely on such everyday common sense, 
and make an effort to minimize the impact of these assumptions. They need to 
stand back from their ordinary, everyday beliefs and question them to see if 
they are blinkering the researcher’s vision of what is happening. As best they 
can, researchers need temporarily to suspend common-sense beliefs. For the 
purposes of being able to provide a ‘pure’ description, researchers need to 
approach things without predispositions based on events in the past, without 
suppositions drawn from existing theories about the phenomenon being stud-
ied and without using their everyday common-sense assumptions. Such things 
need to be put to one side for the moment, ‘bracketed off’ so that researchers 
are able to describe things not through their own eyes but through the eyes of 
those whose experiences are being described.
One way of ‘bracketing off’ presuppositions is to adopt the stance of ‘the 
stranger’ (Schutz 1962). The value of this is that it allows the researcher to see 
things that would otherwise be hidden from view – things that are so normal 
and obvious that they would not come to the attention of the researcher as 
something significant. A stranger is naïve about how things work, and needs 
to figure them out from first principles before he or she can begin to operate  
as a competent member of the society. A ‘stranger’ is faced with the prospect 
of understanding how members of the society make sense of events. By adopt-
ing the stance of the stranger, then, the researcher is best able to see things for 
what they are, uncluttered by assumptions that form part of everyday thinking 
about those things.
Good practice: Suspending common-sense beliefs
Researchers who use a phenomenological approach need to be explicit about 
their own ways of making sense of the world and, in order to get a clear view of 
how others see the world, they need to suspend (or bracket off) their own beliefs 
temporarily for the purposes of research.
Members’ accounts
Data collection by phenomenology tends to rely on tape-recorded interviews. The 
interviews are conducted with members of the particular group whose experiences 
are being investigated. These members can provide insights into the thinking of the 
group and, through in-depth interviews, their experiences and their reasoning can 
be described and explained to the researcher in a way that allows the researcher to 
see things from the member’s point of view (Denscombe 1983).
The process of interviewing is valuable for phenomenologists for a number 
of reasons. First, it provides the possibility of exploring matters in depth. In phe-
nomenological research, interviews tend to be relatively long (in the region of 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

100  The Good Research Guide
one hour, often more) so that there is plenty of time to delve deeply into issues as 
they arise. Second, interviews allow the interviewee to raise issues that he or she 
feels are important. This helps the phenomenologist’s investigation by highlight-
ing things that matter to the person being interviewed. It helps to ‘see things from 
the member’s point of view’. To encourage this, phenomenological researchers 
tend to use relatively ‘unstructured’ interviews. Rather than the interview being 
conducted using a series of questions devised by the researcher, unstructured 
interviews allow plenty of scope for interviewees to move the discussion to areas 
that they regard as significant. Third, the interview process gives an opportunity 
for interviewees to provide an ‘account’ of their experiences. It is their version, 
spoken in their own words. It allows them both to describe the situation as they 
see it and to provide some justification or rationale, again from their point of 
view. Fourth, interviews allow the researcher the opportunity to check that he or 
she is understanding the interviewee correctly. As a normal part of the interview 
process the researcher can take special care to make sure 
that what he or she is ‘hearing’ is really what the interviewee 
is trying to put across, not a partial or mistaken interpreta-
tion resulting from the researcher’s common-sense assump-
tions or presuppositions.
Types of phenomenology: underlying essences  
or actual experiences
Over time, different versions of phenomenology have developed and there are 
sometimes disagreements among those who would call themselves ‘phenome-
nologists’ about which is the ‘true’ version. The social researcher who is think-
ing about adopting a phenomenological approach should be aware that such 
differences of opinion exist. Although many versions exist, it is probably most 
straightforward to characterize phenomenology as consisting of two main types. 
One version derives from the European tradition of thought and the other, the 
‘new phenomenology’, has a North American origin (Crotty 1996).
The European version is more steeped in the discipline of philosophy and can 
lay claims to being the original version since it owes much to the founding father 
of phenomenology, Edmund Husserl. His ‘transcendental phenomenology’  
(Husserl 1931) approaches the study of human experience with the aim of discov-
ering underlying, fundamental aspects of experience – features that are universal 
and that lie at the very heart of human experience. Though differing somewhat, 
the ‘existential phenomenology’ of Jean-Paul Sartre (1956) and the ‘hermeneutic 
phenomenology’ of Martin Heidegger (1962) draw on similar European philo-
sophical roots and have a crucial thing in common. They share a concern with 
investigating the essence of human experience.
The kinds of experience dealt with by these writers tend to revolve around 
fundamental philosophical questions about ‘being-in-the-world’ and simi-
lar issues relating to ‘the meaning of (everyday) life’. However, this form of 
phenomenology can operate at a more mundane level. For example, it could 
Link up with 
Chapter 12  
Interviews.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Phenomenology  101
address something as topical and down-to-earth as bullying in schools. Based 
on this tradition of phenomenology the research would be interested in the 
experience of being bullied and, in particular, it would focus on the essential 
features of that experience. It would try to identify the core components of the 
notion of bullying by investigating the experiences of those who have found 
themselves the victim of bullying. It would not focus on the extent of bullying 
in schools, nor would it try to explain the causes of bullying. Its focus would be 
on the essence of the experience of being bullied.
Importantly, though, the European tradition of phenomenology stresses that 
such essences exist beyond the realms of individual, personal experiences of 
specific events. While such individual instances might be the starting point for 
investigation, the purpose is always to use them as a means for getting a clearer 
picture of the essential qualities of the experience that exist at a general level. In 
relation to the example of bullying, individual instances of bullying would be of 
interest only to the extent that they could be used to help the identification of the 
broader, essential qualities of that experience: they would be valuable as means 
towards an end, but would not constitute an end in themselves as far as research 
is concerned.
Contrasting with this tradition there is the North American version of phe-
nomenology which is more commonly linked to the disciplines of sociology, 
psychology, education, business studies and health studies. It emanates from 
the ‘social phenomenology’ of Alfred Schutz (1962, 1967). Schutz was primar-
ily interested in the mental processes through which humans make sense of the 
many things they experience. His early work focused on the way that, in order 
to make sense of the social world, people interpret things through seeing them 
as specific instances of more general categories – a process that involves what 
he referred to as ‘typifications’. Within the realms of phenomenology this shift in 
focus had important repercussions. Indeed, through his focus on interpretation 
of the social world, Schutz’s work actually spawned a rather different kind of 
phenomenology. This kind of phenomenology is less concerned with revealing 
the essence of experience and more concerned with describing the ways in which 
humans give meaning to their experiences. Here lies the defining characteristic 
of the North American approach: its concern with the ways people interpret 
social phenomena.
This form of phenomenology retains a concern with things like experience, 
an interest in everyday life and suspending common-sense assumptions in order 
to provide a description that is true to the way those involved experience things. 
However, it also incorporates elements of pragmatism and social interactionism 
into the approach – things that make it controversial in two ways as far as the 
European phenomenological tradition is concerned. First, the North American 
phenomenology is comfortable in describing what is being experienced (for 
example, in relation to something such as homelessness), rather than attempt-
ing to uncover the essence of what is meant by the term. Second, and linked 
with this, it also places some value on describing individuals’ experiences for 
their own sake. The new phenomenology might well investigate homelessness 
by asking what being homeless means to those who are homeless, what events 
and emotions they have experienced as a consequence of being homeless and 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

102  The Good Research Guide
what it means to them. The experiences of the individual are taken as significant 
data in their own right, not something to be put to one side in order to identify the 
universal essence of the phenomenon.
Advantages of phenomenology
Suited to small-scale research
Phenomenological research generally relies on in-depth interviews and does 
not call for technologically sophisticated or expensive equipment for the pur-
poses of data collection and analysis. Coupled with this, it is often undertaken 
in specific localities such as hospitals, schools or industrial plants. In both 
respects, it lends itself to small-scale research where the budget is low and the 
main resource is the researcher himself/herself.
The description of experiences can tell an interesting story
There is an inherent potential within (new) phenomenology to describe experi-
ences in a way that is immediately accessible and interesting to a wide range of 
readers. By unfolding the events and laying bare the feelings experienced by peo-
ple, the research is likely to attract a relatively wide readership. It deals with eve-
ryday life and people can generally relate to this.
Offers the prospect of authentic accounts of complex phenomena
The social world is complex and rarely straightforward. A phenomenological 
approach allows the researcher to deal with that complexity. It scratches beneath 
the superficial aspects of social reality. It calls for the researcher to delve into 
phenomena in depth and to provide descriptions that are detailed enough to 
reflect the complexity of the social world.
A humanistic style of research
There is a respect for people built into the phenomenological approach. It carries 
an aura of humanism and, in its efforts to base its enquiry on the lived experi-
ences of people in the everyday world, it represents a style of research that is 
Good practice: Clarity of purpose
In practice, it is not always easy to separate the two traditions of phenom-
enology. Ideas from one area are imported to the other, not always reflecting 
the original very faithfully. Such blurring of the boundaries complicates life for 
project researchers. This should not, though, deter a researcher from choosing 
this approach, since many aspects of social research operate in such contested 
domains. It does, however, highlight the need for the researcher to be very 
clear about his/her specific aims when investigating the phenomena of human 
experience.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Phenomenology  103
far removed from any high-minded, abstract theorizing. In effect, the researcher 
needs to be close to the objects of study.
Disadvantages of phenomenology
Lacks scientific rigour
The emphasis of phenomenology on subjectivity, description and interpretation 
contrasts with the scientific emphasis on objectivity, analysis and measurement. 
Although phenomenology is self-consciously non-positivist – and proud to be so – 
there is the danger that this can be turned against it and be treated as a weakness 
rather than a strength by those who do not share its stance.
Associated with description and not analysis
The importance attached to providing a detailed and accurate description of the 
events and experiences being studied can lead to accusations that phenomenol-
ogy does nothing but provide descriptions. This might not be warranted, in par-
ticular where the phenomenologist goes on to develop explanations based on the 
descriptive material. There is, none the less, the danger that those who are not 
sympathetic to phenomenology might seize the opportunity to criticize it for its 
primary focus on description.
Generalizations from phenomenological studies
Phenomenological research does not normally involve large numbers of the phe-
nomenon being studied. This will always raise questions about the representa-
tiveness of the data and how far it is justifiable to generalize from the findings. 
Phenomenologists, for their part, might not regard such a concern as relevant to 
their work, but many other kinds of researchers will be concerned with this issue.
Attention to the mundane features of life
For phenomenologists the study of routine aspects of everyday life occurs 
because it is fundamental for understanding the nature of the social world. For 
others it might be (mis)interpreted as dealing with things that are mundane, triv-
ial and relatively unimportant compared with the big issues of the day in the 
spheres of social policy, international relations, economic progress, and the like.
Feasibility of suspending common sense
In principle, suspending presuppositions about the way things work might seem 
a reasonable way of trying to get a clearer view of them. However, it is doubt-
ful indeed if it is ever possible to rid ourselves entirely of such presuppositions. 
Socialization and the use of language make it impossible. What can be done, 
though, is to be reflective and self-conscious about the way perceptions are 
shaped by things like common sense and then to try to moderate their impact.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

104  The Good Research Guide
Further reading
Gallagher, S. (2012) Phenomenology. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Lewis, M. and Staehler, T. (2010) Phenomenology: An Introduction. London: Continuum.
Moustakas, C. (1994) Phenomenological Research Methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Smith, J. A., Flowers, P. and Larkin, M. (2009) Interpretative Phenomenological Analysis: 
Theory, Method and Research. London: Sage.
Van Manen, M. (2014) Phenomenology of Practice: Meaning-Giving Methods in Phenome-
nological Research and Writing. Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Phenomenology  105
✓
Checklist for phenomenology 
When undertaking phenomenological research you should feel  
confident about answering ‘yes’ to the following questions:  
  1	 Is the research concerned with one or more of the following?
• Looking for the essential features of a phenomenon
• Describing the content and nature of lived experiences
• Investigating the everyday rules by which experience is 
structured
 
 
 
  2	 Does the research take into consideration:
• the social construction of reality?
• multiple realities?
  3	 Have efforts been made to bracket off common-sense 
assumptions and take account of researchers’ presuppositions in 
order to provide a ‘pure’ description?
 
 
  4	 Does the research provide a description that adequately deals with 
the complexity, subtlety and contradictions of the phenomenon?
 
  5	 Does the description authentically represent the way things are 
seen by those whose experiences are being studied?
 
  6	 Does the research involve the suitable use of interviews and 
transcripts for checking members’ meanings and intentions?
 
© M. Denscombe, The Good Research Guide. Open University Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

What is the grounded theory approach? • When is the grounded theory 
approach useful? • Starting grounded theory research  
• Theoretical sampling: the selection of sites for fieldwork • Completing 
the research (theoretical saturation) • Methods of data collection  
• Analysing the data • Displaying the process • Theories and grounded 
research • Developments in grounded theory • Advantages of the 
grounded theory approach • Disadvantages of the grounded theory 
approach • Further reading • Checklist for the grounded theory 
approach
The grounded theory approach has become a popular choice of methodology 
among social researchers in recent times. In particular, it has been adopted by 
those engaged in small-scale projects using qualitative data for the study of 
human interaction, and by those whose research is exploratory and focused on 
particular settings.
What is the grounded theory approach?
The approach originated with the work of Barney Glaser and Anselm Strauss and, 
in particular, their book, The Discovery of Grounded Theory, which was published 
in 1967. Since that time the notion of grounded theory has come to mean slightly dif-
ferent things to different people. There has been a tendency for researchers to ‘adopt 
and adapt’ grounded theory and to use it selectively for their own purposes. There 
are, though, certain basic ideas associated with the grounded theory approach that 
remain fairly constant, and these are outlined in this chapter. They draw principally 
on the writings of Glaser and Strauss themselves and the main focus is on those 
components of the grounded theory approach that mark it out as distinctive and 
constitute its core components as an approach to social research (Figure 7.1).
Theories should be ‘grounded’ in empirical research
The approach directly challenges the value of theorizing at a high level of 
abstraction and then, subsequently, doing some empirical work to see if the 
7
Grounded theory
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Grounded theory  107
theory actually works. Instead, it sets out to develop the theories on the basis 
of empirical research and gradually build up general theories that emerge from 
the data.
The insistence that theories should be ‘grounded’ brings with it the idea that 
researchers should be engaged with fieldwork as the fundamental part of the 
work they do. When adopting the grounded theory approach the researcher should 
undertake data collection in the field, not only as the starting point of the research 
but throughout the course of the research as well.
Theories should be generated by a systematic analysis of the data
The emphasis on collecting data in the field does not mean that the researcher 
should simply amass as much detail as possible about particular situations and 
then ‘let the data speak for themselves’. Always high on the agenda for grounded 
theory research is a concerted effort to analyse the data and to generate theo-
ries from the data. And grounded theory is characterized by the specific way in 
which it approaches the business of analysing the data. Concepts and theories are 
developed out of the data through a persistent process of comparing the ideas 
with existing data, and improving the emerging concepts and theories by check-
ing them against new data collected specifically for the purpose – the ‘constant 
comparative method’.
The selection of items to be included in the research reflects  
the developing nature of the theory
The items to be included follow a trail of discovery – like a detective follows a 
‘lead’. Each new phase of the investigation reflects what has been discovered so 
far, with new angles of investigation and new avenues of enquiry to be explored. 
So, in the spirit of ‘grounded theory’ it is neither feasible nor desirable for the 
researcher to identify prior to the start exactly who or what will be included in 
the sample. This, of course, runs right against the grain as far as conventional 
social research practice is concerned. Normally, the social researcher would be 
expected to have a very clear vision of the intended sample, chosen on the basis 
of criteria linked to the ideas and theories being tested by the research.
Figure 7.1  Grounded theory
Grounded theory is an approach dedicated to generating theories. 
In this sense it contrasts with approaches concerned with testing 
theories, and is different from research whose main purpose is to 
provide descriptive accounts of the subject matter.
Theory
Grounded theory is an approach that emphasizes the importance
of empirical fieldwork and the need to link any explanations very
closely to what happens in practical situations in ‘the real world’.
It is different, here, from approaches based on ‘armchair
theorizing’ or explanations that are thought up in the abstract as a
neat system of ideas, and then afterwards checked to see if they
work in reality.       
Grounded
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

108  The Good Research Guide
Researchers should start out with an ‘open mind’
In marked contrast to the researcher who sets out to test a theory the researcher 
who follows the principles of grounded theory needs to approach the topic with-
out a rigid set of ideas that shape what they focus upon during the investigation. 
Rather than basing an investigation upon whether certain theories do or do not 
work, the researcher embarks on a voyage of discovery.
This should not be seen to imply that a good social researcher starts out with 
a ‘blank’ mind.
To be sure, one goes out and studies an area with a particular . . . perspective, 
and with a focus, a general question or a problem in mind. But the researcher 
can (and we believe should) also study an area without any preconceived theory 
that dictates, prior to the research, ‘relevancies’ in concepts and hypotheses.
(Glaser and Strauss 1967: 33)
Theories should be useful at a practical level and meaningful  
to those ‘on the ground’
The grounded theory approach has its roots in pragmatism whose guiding phi-
losophy is clearly acknowledged by Glaser and Strauss. Pragmatism places great 
emphasis on the ‘practical’ rather than the ‘abstract’ when it comes to issues of 
knowledge and truth and it operates on the premise that the value of any theory 
can only be gauged by how well it works in practice. For grounded theory this 
means that the theories produced should have practical relevance and make 
sense to those whose actions it explains.
When is the grounded theory approach useful?
The grounded theory approach does not purport to be the only proper way of 
conducting social research. It is but one approach among many. What it does 
claim, however, is that it offers an approach that is well suited to the needs of 
four kinds of research:
•• qualitative research;
• exploratory research;
• studies of human interaction;
• small-scale research.
Qualitative research
Although in their original exposition of grounded theory Glaser and Strauss 
claimed that the approach could be applied to quantitative data as well as quali-
tative data, and despite subsequent claims that ‘It transcends specific data col-
lection methods’ (Glaser 1978: 6), the grounded theory approach has become 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Grounded theory  109
firmly associated over time with qualitative research. The nature of Glaser and 
Strauss’s own research effectively set the tenor for the kind of research that has 
come to be associated with the grounded theory approach and by far the most 
common use of the grounded theory approach by other researchers has been 
with studies using qualitative data.
Exploratory research
Because there is an emphasis on discovery and because there is a stress on the 
need to approach investigations without being blinkered by the concepts and 
theories of previous research, the grounded theory approach fits neatly with the 
needs of researchers who are setting out to explore new territory in terms of 
either the subject matter of their investigation or the extent to which relevant 
theories have already been developed.
Studies of human interaction
The grounded theory approach is appropriate for social research that focuses 
on human interaction, particularly where the researcher wishes to investigate:
•• practical activity and routine situations;
•• the participants’ points of view.
This reflects the roots of grounded theory within an approach called symbolic 
interactionism. This is a form of social research that focuses on the way that 
participants in social settings make sense of situations and events through the 
use of symbolic actions.
Small-scale research
Grounded theory’s affinity with qualitative research, its desire to generate expla-
nations from the study of particular instances, its need for detailed data about 
activities and practice and its value for exploratory research, combine to make 
it an approach that is well suited to small-scale research conducted by individual 
researchers operating within the constraints of a tight budget.
Starting grounded theory research
Initial ideas and concepts
The grounded theory approach expects the researcher to start research without 
any fixed ideas about the nature of the setting that is about to be investigated. 
The aim is to approach things with an open mind. An open mind, of course, is not 
a blank mind and it is inevitable that existing theories and personal experience 
will have some influence on what the researcher already knows about a topic. 
However, the crucial point is that pre-existing knowledge and concepts are to be 
treated as ‘provisional’ and open to question. They are simply a tentative starting 
point from which to launch the investigation.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

110  The Good Research Guide
Initial sites for fieldwork
Researchers who adopt the grounded theory approach need to start their inves-
tigation by concentrating on a particular situation, event or group. At the begin-
ning, all that is required is that this site is ‘relevant’. The criterion for its selection 
need only be that it might reasonably be expected to provide relevant informa-
tion on the situation, event or group the researcher is interested in investigating.
The criterion of ‘relevance’ means that the grounded theory approach takes 
a distinct position in its choice of the initial site for fieldwork. It differs from the 
case study approach in the sense that there is no need for researchers using the 
grounded theory approach to get overly concerned about locating their initial 
fieldwork in a setting that can be demonstrated as being ‘representative’, ‘typical’ 
or ‘extreme’.
Theoretical sampling: the selection  
of sites for fieldwork
After having selected the initial site for research, subsequent sites are selected 
according to a process of theoretical sampling. This form of sampling is a dis-
tinctive feature of the grounded theory approach and it involves six key features:
•• Sites to be included in the research are deliberately selected by the researcher 
for what they can contribute to the research. This means 
that, unlike random sampling, theoretical sampling is a 
form of non-probability sampling in which the new sites are 
consciously selected by the researcher because of their par-
ticular characteristics.
•  Theoretical sampling is cumulative. There is a sense of building on the pre-
vious instances that have been sampled to date, and on building up a strong 
foundation for the concepts and categories that are being refined through  
the grounded research approach. Events, instances or peo-
ple sampled early in the research should be considered as 
an integral part of the overall sample – a vital component 
in the path of discovery – and not jettisoned as being obso-
lete, irrelevant or wrong.
•  Theoretical sampling is not random or haphazard. Sites are selected because 
of their relevance to emerging categories and concepts. They are deliberately 
chosen to allow comparisons and contrast with previous sites and they allow 
the researcher to test out emerging concepts and verify the developing theory 
as the research goes along. As Corbin and Strauss (2008: 144) stress:
In theoretical sampling the researcher is not sampling persons but concepts. 
The researcher is purposely looking for indicators of those concepts so that he 
or she might examine the data to discover how concepts vary under different 
conditions.
Link up with  
Purposive sam-
pling, p. 41.
Link up with  
Cumulative sam-
pling, p. 51.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Grounded theory  111
• Theoretical sampling involves an increased depth of focus. Initially, the 
researcher’s aim is to generate a large number of categories related to the 
phenomenon being studied – to keep things as ‘open’ as possible early on. 
For this purpose it is necessary to spread the net wide and gather data on a 
wide range of relevant things. As the work progresses, though, certain initial 
codes and categories will become relegated in importance and not pursued. 
As things move on, the researcher will find himself or herself able to concen-
trate on a smaller number of codes and categories – the ones that emerge as 
being more crucial to the analysis. And, because these ones are more central 
to the analysis and are fewer in number, he or she will be in a position to probe 
them more fully and investigate them in more depth.
• Theoretical sampling needs to retain some element of flexibility. Partly this 
is necessary to allow the researcher to respond to opportunities that arise 
during the course of fieldwork. Equally it is vital to permit the exploration of 
new avenues of investigation that the researcher could not have anticipated 
as being relevant.
• Researchers following the principles of grounded theory will not want to, or 
be able to, specify at the outset exactly what the sample will include. They will 
not be able to state exactly how large the sample will be or exactly what sites 
(events or whatever) will be included because the sample emerges, reflect-
ing the pursuit of generating theory. The process of research will involve the 
continued selection of units until the research arrives at the point of ‘theo-
retical saturation’ (see below). It is only when the new data seem to confirm 
the analysis rather than add anything new that the sampling ceases and the 
sample size is ‘enough’.
Theoretical sampling
A researcher wishing to investigate ‘classroom control’ could initiate research 
by observing a small number of lessons in one school. In the first instance the 
selection of the particular lessons and the specific school only requires that the 
sites are relevant for the broad purposes of the research. When some lessons 
have been observed and various participants interviewed, however, the sub-
sequent sites for research will be selected to follow up ideas prompted by an 
early review of the data. From this time forward the selection of sites becomes 
far more critical for the research and far more constrained by the need to fit 
the lines of enquiry suggested by the codes, concepts and categories develop-
ing from the research. Following the example above, sites (schools) might be 
selected as instances where control problems are acknowledged to be rife, and 
lessons might be selected for observation that offer a relevant contrast in terms 
of the way they are routinely organized. History and English lessons in a normal 
classroom might be compared with art lessons, sports classes and chemistry 
laboratory sessions. The relevance of such different contexts might not have 
been realized at the beginning, but their significance is something that emerges 
as the research progresses and new paths of enquiry emerge.
Example 6.1
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

112  The Good Research Guide
Completing the research (theoretical saturation)
Grounded theory research will continue until the research arrives at the point of 
‘theoretical saturation’. It is only when the new data seem to confirm the analysis 
rather than add anything new that the sampling ceases and the sample size is 
‘enough’. This, of course, stands in stark contrast to the conventions that expect 
researchers to be clear at the outset about the size and nature of their intended 
sample.
Key point: Theoretical saturation
Theoretical saturation occurs ‘when additional analysis no longer contributes to 
discovering anything new about a category’ (Strauss 1987: 21).
Methods of data collection
There is not one particular method of data collection that is claimed to be unique 
to grounded theory. Indeed, as Strauss (1987: 1) has indicated, ‘Very diverse 
materials (interviews, transcripts of meetings, court proceedings; field observa-
tions; other documents, like diaries and letters; questionnaire answers; census 
statistics; etc.) provide indispensable data for social research.’
Having made this point, there are certain methods that lend themselves better 
than others to use within a grounded theory approach. These are methods that 
allow the collection of data in a ‘raw’ state – not unduly shaped by prior concepts 
or theories. The point is to generate theories, not to test them, and so there is a 
preference for unstructured interviews rather than structured interviews, for the 
use of open-ended questions in a questionnaire rather than fixed-choice answers, 
and the use of field notes rather than observations based on a tick-box schedule. 
The preference, quite logically, is for the use of methods that produce qualitative 
data that are relatively unstructured.
Good practice: The use of unstructured data
Methods should be used that produce unstructured data – normally in the form of 
text or images. Unstructured interviews, open-ended questions in questionnaires, 
and field notes based on observations can all produce suitable data.
Analysing the data
Codes, categories and concepts
The first stage of analysis involves the coding and categorizing of the data. 
This means that the researcher begins to assign bits of the ‘raw data’ to 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Grounded theory  113
particular categories. Careful scrutiny of the data (for example, an interview 
transcript) will allow the researcher to see that certain bits of the data have 
something in common. Possibly they will refer to the same issue. Possibly 
they will involve statements about the same emotion. Possibly they will share 
the use of a similar word or phrase in relation to a spe-
cific topic. Whatever it is, the chunks of raw data have 
something in common that the researcher can identify 
and that allows those chunks of data to be coded (tagged) 
as belonging to a broader category.
Unlike codes used with quantitative data, in grounded theory, the codes are 
open to change and refinement as research progresses. Initially, the codes will 
be fairly descriptive and are likely to involve labelling chunks of data in terms 
of their content. This is referred to as open coding. As the codes take shape, the 
researcher will look for relationships between the codes – links and associations 
that allow certain codes to be subsumed under broader headings and certain 
codes to be seen as more crucial than others. This is referred to as axial coding 
since it shifts the analysis towards the identification of key (axial) components. 
Eventually, the researcher should be in a position to focus attention on just the 
key components, the most significant categories, and concentrate his or her 
efforts on these. This selective coding focuses attention on just the core codes, 
the ones that have emerged from open and axial coding as being vital to any 
explanation of the complex social phenomenon.
The aim of this process is to arrive at concepts that help to explain the phe-
nomenon – basic ideas that encapsulate the way that the categories relate to 
each other in a single notion. These concepts then form the cornerstone for the 
generation of theories that provide an account of things and, in some sense or 
other, explain why things happen as they do. In the words of Strauss and Cor-
bin (1990), ‘Concepts are the basis of analysis in grounded theory research. All 
grounded theory procedures are aimed at identifying, developing, and relating 
concepts.’
Link up with 
Chapter 16  
Qualitative data.
Good practice: Use a computer to help with the data analysis
There are a number of commercially available software 
programs that can help researchers with the analysis of 
qualitative data. It is good practice to store the data in a 
suitable program – such as NVivo – right from the begin-
ning of the data collection. Such programs are designed 
to help researchers to code their qualitative data and to 
develop categories and concepts based on these codes.
The constant comparative method
The grounded theory approach uses the constant comparative method as a means 
of analysing the data. This entails a commitment to comparing and contrasting 
new codes, categories and concepts as they emerge – constantly seeking to check 
Link up with 
Computer-
assisted 
qualitative data 
analysis, p. 280.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

114  The Good Research Guide
them out against existing versions. By comparing each coded instance with others 
that have been similarly coded, by contrasting instances with those in different cat-
egories, even using hypothetical possibilities, the researcher is able to refine and 
improve the explanatory power of the concepts and theories generated from the 
data. Such comparison helps the researcher to refine the codes, categories and con-
cepts by doing the following:
•• highlighting the similarities and differences that exist (promoting better cat-
egories and descriptions);
• allowing researchers to integrate categories and codes under common head-
ings (facilitating the reduction of complex phenomena to simpler elements);
• allowing researchers to check out their developing theories as they emerge 
(incorporating a way to verify them or refute them at the stage of production 
rather than after the event).
By using the constant comparative method the researcher can never lose sight 
of the data, or move the analysis too far away from what is happening on the 
ground. It ensures that any theory developed by the research remains closely in 
touch with its origins in the data – that it remains ‘grounded’ in empirical reality. 
This, of course, is of vital importance to the whole approach.
Note that an important distinction occurs here between the analysis of 
qualitative data and that of quantitative data. Following the grounded theory 
approach, the concepts that form the foundation of the theory/analysis emerge 
from the process of the research activity itself and are not, as is the case with 
quantitative data, established prior to the investigation itself.
Key point: Data analysis using the constant comparative method
Analysis should always involve:
••
coding and categorizing the raw data (e.g. interview tapes);
••
constantly comparing the emerging codes and categories with the data;
••
checking them out against new data specifically collected for the purpose;
••
generating concepts and theories that are thoroughly grounded in the data.
Displaying the process
The process of analysing the data needs to be explained to those who read 
reports about grounded theory research. The logic and reasoning used to 
move from open coding through to the eventual concepts and theory should be 
described along with some justification for the coding decisions made by the 
researcher. The process of analysis, in other words, needs to be transparent. It 
is not sufficient to describe the process of collecting the data and then move on 
to ‘these are my findings’ or ‘this is my interpretation of the data’. This leaves a 
gap in the account of the research.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Grounded theory  115
The process of analysis, of course, cannot be depicted in every minute 
detail. Necessarily, any account can only capture the key points of what is 
likely to be a complex, iterative process of making sense of the data. It is, 
none the less, vital that some information is provided to the reader about the 
logic used by the researcher when deciding on how to interpret and re-inter-
pret the data. This information allows readers to decide 
for themselves whether the decisions of the researcher 
seem reasonable: they do not simply have to ‘take the 
researcher’s word for it’ that the concepts and theory 
really do derive from the data.
Good practice: Displaying the analytic process
When software like NVivo is used to aid the coding process, it becomes possible 
to display aspects of the analytic process visually using diagrams showing the 
link between categories, codes and concepts.
Theories and grounded research
The grounded theory approach, when it was originally conceived by Glaser and 
Strauss, was a reaction against the kind of ‘grand’ theories produced through the 
logico-deductive method of science that Glaser and Strauss encountered during 
the late 1950s and early 1960s. As Layder (1993: 42) points out:
Such theories are generally ‘speculative’ in nature because they have not 
grown directly out of research, and thus remain ungrounded. As a conse-
quence, these theories very often lack validity because they do not ‘fit’ the 
real world and thereby remain irrelevant to the people concerned.
Glaser and Strauss were dissatisfied with this approach and argued that a theory 
developed through the grounded theory approach would have distinct advantages 
over those derived from the more traditional ‘scientific’ methods.
First, it is unlikely that new data will be found that serve to refute the theory. 
Since the theory has been built upon substantive data extracted from fieldwork, 
the theory should already take account of all the crucial aspects of the situation 
it explains so that there should be no ‘nasty surprises’ waiting to be uncovered 
that will point to a major weakness in the theory. This contrasts, of course, with 
theories that have been logically deduced and that are then subjected to test by 
seeing if they work in practice. The ‘scientific’ approach certainly is susceptible 
to such nasty surprises and radical rethinks about the theory when findings do 
not support the theory. In grounded theory the testing is conducted as an integral 
part of the development of the theory – as an ongoing process – not as a separate 
process conducted after the theory has been put together in an abstract form.
Second, the theory has more credibility. Because the theory emerges from 
the data, there ought to be a comfortable fit between the facts of the situation 
Link up with 
Audit trail,  
p. 298. 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

116  The Good Research Guide
and the theory used to explain them. Put rather simply, the theory is shaped by 
the facts and therefore there should be a good fit. There should be a close corre-
spondence between the realities of the situation and the theories used to explain 
them. On this basis there can be no allegations that researchers are in any sense 
forcing a fit between the data and the theory. By contrast, the process of test-
ing theories can involve a search, more or less consciously, for facts that fit the 
theory. Without necessarily intending to do so researchers can have their vision 
of facts shaped by the theory they are setting out to test. They can end up being 
selective about what they ‘see’ and what they find, managing to corroborate their 
theory by a process of selective perception in which facts that do not fit the 
theory get subtly edited out of the picture as irrelevant or non-existent.
Substantive theory and formal theory
There are two kinds of theory that can be generated using the grounded theory 
approach. The first is linked closely to the empirical situation that has been the 
subject of study. It is a fairly localized kind of theory and is known as substan-
tive theory. This is by far the most common kind of theory associated with the 
approach. The other kind of theory is more conceptual, with more general cover-
age and application to circumstances beyond particular settings. This is known 
as formal theory. Ultimately, the aim is to move from a growing body of good, 
grounded substantive theories towards the integration of these in higher-level 
formal theories.
Developments in grounded theory
Since the notion of a grounded theory approach was first conceived subsequent 
works by the originators have moved in slightly different directions. This diver-
gence reflects two potential stances that coexist within the original grounded theory 
approach. On the one hand, there is Glaser’s version (Glaser 1978, 1995, 1999, 2003). 
As Charmaz (2000: 510) argues, ‘Glaser’s position often comes close to traditional 
positivism, with its assumptions of an objective, external reality [and] a neutral 
observer who discovers data.’ It rests on the belief that the meaning of the data will 
emerge inductively from the data if studied using a suitably neutral methodology. 
Put simply, the meaning exists in the data and the grounded theory approach allows 
the researcher to extract the meaning and develop it into a more abstract theory. By 
looking closely at the data, concepts will occur to the researcher and these concepts 
can be developed and refined by continually comparing them and checking them 
with the original data and with new data collected specifically to verify the concepts.
Contrasting with this there is Strauss’s version (Strauss 1987; Strauss and Cor-
bin 1990, 1998), which moves towards a more post-positivist stance. This stance 
sees the researcher as inevitably imposing some shape and sense on to the data. It 
accepts that researchers cannot be entirely neutral and that the meaning attached 
to any data involves some kind of interpretation by the researcher. The mean-
ing will not, cannot, simply emerge inductively from the data. In practice, the 
researcher needs to make sense of the data; that is, to interpret the data in a sys-
tematic way. To this end there is extensive guidance offered by Strauss and Corbin 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Grounded theory  117
(1990, 1998) on how researchers should proceed with their analysis, turning the 
spotlight away from the data and more towards the procedures for analysing the 
(qualitative) data. Glaser, for his part, has expressed strong reservations about 
this trend, arguing that there is a potential to ‘force’ the data to fit researchers’ 
categories rather than let the data speak for themselves (Glaser 2003).
Some writers have wanted still greater emphasis on the role of the researcher as 
interpreter rather than discoverer of reality. In line with this, Charmaz (2014) has 
advocated a constructivist grounded theory, Clarke (2005) has adapted grounded 
theory to postmodernism in what she calls ‘situational analysis’, and Corbin (Cor-
bin and Strauss 2008) has developed her earlier Straussian position to reflect the 
postmodernist critique with its emphasis on the existence of alternative perspec-
tives and constructions of realities. The researcher who wants to use the grounded 
theory approach needs to be aware that such debates and developments exist 
under the umbrella term ‘grounded theory’. They might even need to delve into the 
schisms and controversies in order to defend their research as being in line with a 
particular version of grounded theory (see Bryant and Charmaz 2010). Professional 
researchers and those using grounded theory as a core feature of a PhD would fall 
into this category. Project researchers, however, are less likely to need to pursue 
the methodology to this depth. They should be justified in saying that they have 
adopted a grounded theory provided their research:
•• uses theoretic sampling as the basis for an emergent research design;
• develops codes and concepts through an iterative process involving constant 
reference to fieldwork data;
• includes some account of how the codes and concepts were developed;
• aims to produce ‘theory’, at least in the form of modest localized explanations 
based on the immediate evidence.
Caution: The use and misuse of the term ‘grounded theory’
The term ‘grounded theory’ is often used in a rather loose way to refer to 
approaches that accept some of the basic premises but do not adopt the meth-
odological rigour espoused by the originators of the term. All too frequently Gla-
ser and Strauss are cited by way of justification for methodologies that actually 
bear few of the hallmarks of the strict conception of ‘grounded theory’. Worse 
than this, there is a very real danger that the term ‘grounded theory’ can be 
hijacked and cited as justification for what is, in reality, sloppy research. Taken 
out of context, ‘grounded theory’ can be misused as a rationale for approaching 
research:
••
without too clear an idea of the topic of research;
••
without a clear basis in mind for selecting the sample;
••
with a general ‘jump in at the deep end’, ‘try it and see’, ‘find out as we go’ 
approach.
This is certainly not in tune with the spirit of grounded theory and its clear con-
cern with rigour in the analysis of qualitative data.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

118  The Good Research Guide
Advantages of the grounded theory approach
Suited to small-scale research
From a project researcher’s point of view, use of the grounded theory approach 
can be appealing because it lends itself to being conducted by lone researchers 
working on a limited budget.
Recognized rationale for qualitative research
The notion of grounded theory has currency in the research community and 
it has become a recognized rationale for qualitative research. Grounded 
theory provides a standard justification that can fend off potential criticism 
from those who might otherwise question the rigour of small-scale qualitative 
research.
Adaptable
The approach is fairly adaptable, lending itself to use with a variety of qualitative 
data collection methods (e.g. interviews, observation, documents) and forms of 
data (interview transcripts, fieldwork, texts).
Systematic way of analysing qualitative data
Especially as developed by Strauss, this can be helpful to the newcomer who 
might wonder how on earth he or she can make sense of the data and how he or 
she can move towards developing concepts and ultimately theories.
Theory development
The approach includes the means for developing theoretical propositions from 
data, and should boost project researchers’ confidence in the realms of theorizing. 
All researchers – not just the venerable experts – are encouraged to arrive at modest 
theories on the basis of the data that they have collected.
Explanations are grounded in reality
Concepts and theories are developed with constant reference to the empirical data 
and this means that, unlike speculative, abstract theory, they are built on a sound 
foundation of evidence. This ensures that grounded theories are kept in touch with 
reality.
Well suited to exploratory research
The approach permits a degree of flexibility in both the selection of instances 
for inclusion in the sample and the analysis of the data – both of which are well 
suited to the exploration of new topics and new ideas.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Grounded theory  119
Disadvantages of the grounded theory approach
Planning
The approach does not lend itself to precise planning. The use of ‘theoretical 
sampling’ means that it is not possible to predict in advance the nature of 
the sample that will be used. And the need to achieve ‘theoretical saturation’ 
makes it impossible to state at the outset the eventual size of the sample. The 
voyage of discovery comes with a price and that price is the ability to plan 
all aspects of the research in advance and anticipate when the research will 
be completed.
Context
By focusing research on specific instances of behaviour in particular settings, 
there is a tendency to divorce the explanation of the situation being studied from 
broader contextual factors. In particular, there is the danger that the theory gen-
erated from the data might ignore the influence of social, economic and politi-
cal factors (e.g. power, globalization, migration, social class, gender and race 
inequalities) and the historical background to events, which might be vital to any 
full and valid theory explaining the phenomenon.
Open-mindedness
An ‘open-minded’ approach to the data is something that can operate at a variety 
of levels. The need to approach things with an ‘open mind’ is a fundamental prin-
ciple of the grounded theory approach but, in practice, it raises some awkward 
questions. Researchers are inevitably influenced by prior conceptions based on 
their own culture and personal experience. The question is: how far can these be 
put to one side for the purposes of analysing the data? There is also the contro-
versial point about how far previous concepts and theories should be allowed 
to influence matters. Should grounded theory researchers avoid undertaking a 
literature review in order to avoid having their minds ‘contaminated’ by existing 
concepts and theories? And, if so, does this invite the possibility of ‘reinventing 
the wheel’ or failing to learn from what has been researched in the past? Within 
the grounded theory approach different researchers adopt different positions on 
such issues.
Complexity
The systematic way of analysing data developed by Strauss and Corbin can be 
daunting in terms of the complexity of the process. Indeed, Strauss’s develop-
ment of ‘guidance’ for the analysis of qualitative data actually incensed his 
former collaborator, Barney Glaser, who saw the template and framework for 
analysis as unnecessary and going against the spirit of grounded theory by 
‘forcing’ categories and codes on to the data, rather than letting them ‘emerge’ 
naturally.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

120  The Good Research Guide
Positivism
Interpretivists will be unhappy with any suggestion that substantive theories pro-
vide the one correct explanation of things. Yet in the writings of Glaser (rather 
than Strauss) there are occasions when this position is taken. There is a posi-
tivistic strand of thought in which the ‘grounding’ of theory means that it is not 
liable to be refuted by the later discovery of facts that do not fit the theory. If the 
theory emerges from the data and is meaningful to the participants, then it is a 
good theory that stands in its own right – not open to alternative interpretation.
Empiricism
The approach can be criticized as being ‘empiricist’. By looking to fieldwork data 
as the source of its theories, and by setting itself against the use of general theo-
ries, it opens itself to the criticism that it relies too heavily on the empirical data – 
expecting an explanation to exist within the accumulated data, waiting to be 
‘discovered’ by the researcher. This inductive approach is rather naïve about the 
complex relationship between theory and data collection and the way it calls for 
researchers to approach the data without the use of prior theories and concepts 
(Layder 1998).
Generalizations
Generalizing from the findings can be misunderstood. It is important for those 
using the grounded theory approach to be clear that any generalizations derived 
from the research are theoretical generalizations. They are ‘abstractions’ from 
the data that are conceptual and which are used to construct theories. They 
are not generalizations in the sense that many people might think of them, and 
grounded theory researchers need to be careful to avoid any impression that 
they are attempting to identify patterns of behaviour in the population on the 
basis of the small, purposively selected sample that they have studied. The pur-
pose of grounded theory is not to make generalizations from the sample to a 
wider population as a survey approach might do.
Further reading
Birks, M. and Mills, J. (2011) Grounded Theory: A Practical Guide. London: Sage.
Charmaz, K. (2014) Constructing Grounded Theory, 2nd edn. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Gibson, B. and Hartman, J. (2014) Rediscovering Grounded Theory. London: Sage.
Oktay, J. (2012) Grounded Theory. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Urquhart, C. (2013) Grounded Theory for Qualitative Research: A Practical Guide.  
London: Sage.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Grounded theory  121
✓
Checklist for the grounded theory approach 
When undertaking grounded theory research you should feel confident  
about answering ‘yes’ to the following questions:  
  1	 Is the aim of the research to generate concepts and theory geared 
to ‘localized’ explanations (substantive theory)?
 
  2	 Will empirical data be used as the foundation for generating the 
concepts and theories?
 
  3	 Have measures been taken to adopt an open-minded approach to 
the meaning of the data?
 
  4	 Will the data be analysed through a systematic process of coding 
and categorization (open coding, etc.)?
 
  5	 Will the codes, categories and concepts be developed with 
constant reference to the fieldwork data (constant comparative 
method)?
 
 
  6	 Does (or will) any report of the research include a section that 
demonstrates how the codes and concepts have been developed?
 
  7	 Is there, or will there be, an explicit justification for the choice of 
the initial site for fieldwork in terms of its relevance to the area of 
research?
 
 
  8	 Have subsequent sites been selected on the basis of theoretical 
sampling?
 
  9	 Did, or will, the research continue until it has reached a point of 
theoretical saturation?
 
10	 Has the research produced explanations that are recognizable to 
the subjects of research?
 
© M. Denscombe, The Good Research Guide. Open University Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

8
What is action research? • The practical nature of action research • 
Change and professional self-development • Action research as a 
cyclical process • Participation in the research process • Issues 
connected with the use of action research • Advantages of action 
research • Disadvantages of action research • Further reading  
• Checklist for action research
What is action research?
Action research is normally associated with ‘hands-on’, small-scale research 
projects. Its origins can be traced back to the work of social scientists in the late 
1940s on both sides of the Atlantic who advocated closer ties between social 
theory and the solving of immediate social problems. More recently, action 
research has been used in a variety of settings in the social sciences but its 
growing popularity as a research approach perhaps owes most to its use in 
areas such as education, organizational development, health and social care. 
In these areas it has a particular niche among professionals who want to use 
research to improve their effectiveness as practitioners.
Action research, from the start, was involved with practical issues – the kind 
of issues and problems, concerns and needs that arose as a routine part of activity 
‘in the real world’. This specifically practical orientation has remained a defining 
characteristic of action research. Early on, action research was also seen as 
research specifically geared to changing matters, and this too has remained a 
core feature of the notion of action research. The thinking here is that research 
should not only be used to gain a better understanding of the problems which 
arise in everyday practice, but actually set out to alter things – to do so as part 
and parcel of the research process rather than tag it on as an afterthought which 
follows the conclusion of the research. This, in fact, points towards a third defin-
ing characteristic of action research: its commitment to a process of research in 
which the application of findings and an evaluation of their impact on practice 
become part of a cycle of research. This process, further, has become associated 
with a trend towards involving those affected by the research in the design and 
implementation of the research – to encourage them to participate as collabora-
tors in the research rather than being subjects of it.
Action research
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Action research  123
Together, these provide the four defining characteristics of action research:
•• Practical nature. It is aimed at dealing with real-world problems and issues, 
typically at work and in organizational settings.
• Change. Both as a way of dealing with practical problems and as a means of 
discovering more about phenomena, change is regarded as an integral part of 
research.
• Cyclical process. Research involves a feedback loop in which initial findings 
generate possibilities for change which are then implemented and evaluated 
as a prelude to further investigation.
• Participation. Practitioners are the crucial people in the research process. 
Their participation is active, not passive.
Key point
Action research is a strategy for social research, not a method. It is concerned 
with the aims of research and the design of the research, but does not specify 
any constraints when it comes to the means for data collection that might be 
adopted by the action researcher.
Key point: Linking research with practice
‘Action research [rejects] the concept of a two-stage process in which research 
is carried out first by researchers and then in a separate second stage the 
knowledge generated from the research is applied by practitioners. Instead, 
the two processes of research and action are integrated’ (Somekh 1995: 34).
The practical nature of action research
Action research is essentially practical and applied. It is driven by the need to solve 
practical, real-world problems. It operates on the premise, as Kurt Lewin put it, that 
‘Research that produces nothing but books will not suffice’ (Lewin 1946: 35).
But being practical would not be enough to set it apart from other approaches 
to research. After all, many approaches can lay claim to this territory. Many 
can claim with justification to offer applied research. While it certainly does 
embrace this aim, being ‘practical’ has a second sense as far as action research 
is concerned, and it is this which helps to give it a unique identity as a research 
strategy. The research needs to be undertaken as part of practice rather than a 
bolt-on addition to it.
Clearly, if the processes of research and action are integrated, then action research 
must involve ‘the practitioner’ very closely. And this provides a further mean-
ing which can be added to the practical nature of action research: practitioner 
research. However, although it may be linked with the notion of practitioner 
research, it is important to appreciate that action research is not exactly the same 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

124  The Good Research Guide
thing as practitioner research. Edwards and Talbot stress this point: ‘Practitioner 
research can only be designated action research if it is carried out by professionals 
who are engaged in researching . . . aspects of their own practice as they engage in 
that practice’ (1999: 62). It is not enough for the research to be undertaken as part 
of the job because this could include all kinds of data gathering and analysis, the 
findings from which might have no bearing on the practitioner’s own activity. To 
accord with the spirit of action research the researcher needs to investigate his or 
her own practices with a view to altering these in a beneficial way.
Change and professional self-development
Action research is wedded to the idea that change is good. Initially, this is because 
studying change is seen as a useful way of learning more about the way a thing 
works. Change, in this sense, is regarded as a valuable enhancer of knowledge in its 
own right, rather than something that is undertaken after the results of the research 
have been obtained. But, of course, the scale and the scope of changes introduced 
through action research will not be grand. The scale of the research is constrained 
by the need for the action researchers to focus on aspects of their own practice as 
they engage in that practice. So change as envisaged by action research is not likely 
to be a wide-spread major alteration to an organization. The element of change will 
not be in the order of a large-scale experiment such as changes in the bonus schemes 
of production workers at Ford’s car assembly plants. No. Because, action research 
tends to be localized and small-scale, it usually focuses on change at the micro level.
One of the most common kinds of change involved in action research is at the 
level of professional self-development. It is in keeping with the notion of professional 
self-development that a person should want to improve practices and that this should 
involve a continual quest for ways in which to change practice for the better. Action 
research provides a way forward for the professional which, while it entails a cer-
tain degree of reflection, adds the systematic and rigorous collection of data to the 
resources the professional can use to achieve the improvement in practice.
It is important to recognize that reflection may be of itself insufficient to 
make the professional’s endeavour ‘action research’. The reflection needs to 
be systematic if it is to qualify as action research. Merely thinking about your 
own practice – though possibly a valuable basis for improving practice – is not 
the same as researching that action. And here a distinction needs to be made 
between the ‘reflective practitioner’ (Schön 1983) as one who strives for profes-
sional self-development through a critical consideration of his or her practices, 
and the action researcher who, while also being a reflective practitioner, adds 
to this by using research techniques to enhance and systematize that reflection.
Action research as a cyclical process
The vision of action research as a cyclical process fits in nicely with the quest for 
perpetual development built into the idea of professionalism (see Figure 8.1). The 
purpose of research, though it might be prompted by a specific problem, is seen 
as part of a broader enterprise in which the aim is to improve practice through a 
rolling programme of research.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Action research  125
The crucial points about the cycle of enquiry in action research are: (1) that 
research feeds back directly into practice; and (2) that the process is ongoing. 
The critical reflection of the practitioner is not only directed to the identifica-
tion of ‘problems’ worthy of investigation with a view to improving practice, but  
can also involve an evaluation of changes just instigated, which can, in their own 
right, prompt further research. It is fair to point out, however, that this is some-
thing of an ideal and that, in reality, action research often limits itself to discrete, 
one-off pieces of research.
Participation in the research process
The participatory nature of action research is probably its most distinctive feature 
since, in some ways, it goes straight to the heart of conventions associated with 
formal social research. Conventionally, research is the province of the expert, the 
outside authority who is a professional. This researcher more often than not initi-
ates the process of research, sets the agenda and designs the collection and analy-
sis of data. After the research is concluded, those involved might receive some 
feedback in the form of results from the research. They may, or may not, instigate 
changes on the basis of such findings. Broadly speaking, the act of doing research 
is separated from the act of making changes. Action research, by contrast, insists 
that practitioners must be participants, not just in the sense of taking part in the 
research but in the sense of being an equal partner in the research.
With action research it can be the practitioner, not some outside professional 
researcher, who wants to instigate a change and who consequently initiates the 
research (Elliott 1991). The research, in this sense, is practitioner-driven, with the 
practitioner not just an equal partner but a sponsor and director of the research 
process. And if this sounds radical, there are others who would push the matter 
further, insisting that the practitioner should be the dominant partner – calling 
the shots at all stages and in all aspects of the research.
1  Professional practice
2  Critical reflection
5  Action
4  Strategic planning
Translate findings
into action plan
Systematic and
rigorous enquiry
3  Research
Identify problem, or
evaluate changes
Instigate
changes
Figure 8.1  The cyclical process in action research
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

126  The Good Research Guide
Even in less radical revisions to the conventional relationship between 
researcher and practitioners, the inclusion of participation as a fundamental fea-
ture of action research brings with it a shift in the direction of democratizing the 
research process. Control is transferred away from the professional researcher 
and towards the practitioner. Power shifts towards the insider who is the prac-
titioner. There is, of course, still a role for the outside expert but that role shifts 
in the direction of mutual collaboration in the research process, or even to the 
position where the outside expert has the role of facilitator of the practitioner’s 
own project, a resource to be drawn upon as and when the practitioner sees fit.
Behind this shift in the relationship there rests a respect for the practitioner’s 
knowledge. Again, this respect may not be unique to action research but it is an 
aspect of action research which is distinctive and built into an approach which 
is broadly sympathetic to democratizing the research process by challenging 
the separation of expert from lay person in research.
There can be an explicitly political angle to the participatory aspect of action 
research, with its ‘democratization’ of the research process and ‘respect for practitioner 
knowledge’. Zuber-Skerritt (1996) refers to this as ‘emancipatory’ action research. 
This type of action research is quite clear about the nature of the change which is 
brought about through action research; it is change which challenges the existing sys-
tem. It is change which goes beyond technical matters that can have a bearing on the 
effectiveness or efficiency of the professional’s current practice. It is change which 
goes beyond practical matters that can have a bearing on the way practitioners inter-
pret the task at hand. For sure, emancipatory action research incorporates these, but 
it also challenges the fundamental framework within which the practice occurs.
Key point: Three approaches to action research
According to Zuber-Skerritt (1996: 4–5):
1	 Technical action research aims to improve the effectiveness of educational 
or managerial practice. The practitioners are co-opted and depend greatly on 
the researcher as a facilitator.
2	 Practical action research, in addition to effectiveness, aims at the practitioners’ 
understanding and professional development. The researcher’s role is . . . to 
encourage practical deliberation and self-reflection on the part of the practitioners.
3	 Action research is emancipating when it aims not only at technical and practi-
cal improvement and the participant’s better understanding, along with trans-
formation and change within the existing boundaries and conditions, but 
also at changing the system itself of those conditions which impede desired 
improvement in the system/organization.
Issues connected with the use of action research
‘Ownership’ of the research
The participatory nature of action research brings with it a question mark concerning 
who owns the research and its outcomes. With conventional approaches to 
research this tends to be less complicated. To offer something of a caricature, the 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Action research  127
outsider researcher initiates the process and approaches practitioners to gain their 
permission for the research to be conducted (by the outsider). Having obtained 
authorization from relevant people, research proceeds, with the outsider ‘owning’ 
the data collected and having full rights over the analysis and publication of find-
ings. Of course, complications arise with various forms of sponsored research and 
consultancy where authorization might include certain restrictions on the rights of 
the two parties over the research and its findings. However, these are likely to be 
explicitly recognized as a result of negotiating access.
In the case of action research the partnership nature of work can make mat-
ters rather less clear-cut. Who is in charge? Who calls the shots? Who decides 
on appropriate action? Who owns the data? These and similar issues need to be 
worked out sensitively and carefully by the partners to ensure that there are 
shared expectations about the nature of participation in action research.
Ethical issues associated with action research
The distinct ethical problem for action research is that, although the research cen-
tres on the activity of the practitioner, it is almost inevitable that the activity of 
colleagues will also come under the microscope at some stage or other as their 
activity interlinks with that of the practitioner who instigates the research. Practi-
tioners are not ‘islands’ – isolated from routine contact with colleagues and clients. 
Their practice and the changes they seek to make can hardly be put in place with-
out some knock-on effect for others who operate close by in organizational terms.
The idea that the action researcher is exempt from the need to gain authori-
zation, as a consequence, evaporates. Because the activity of action research 
almost inevitably affects others it is important to have a clear idea of when 
and where the action research necessarily steps outside the bounds of collect-
ing information which is purely personal and relates to the practitioners alone. 
Where it does so, the usual standards of research ethics must be observed: per-
missions obtained, confidentiality maintained, identities protected.
Two things follow. First, there is a case for arguing that those who engage 
in action research should be open about the research aspect of their practice. It 
should not be hidden or disguised. Second, the need for informed consent from 
those involved in the research should be recognized.
Good practice: Ethics in action research
Action researchers should respect the rights and sensitivities of colleagues and 
clients who become involved in the research. In practice, as Winter (1996: 17) 
suggests, this means:
••
Permission must be obtained before making observations or examining docu-
ments produced for other purposes.
••
The researcher must accept responsibility for maintaining confidentiality.
••
The development of the work must remain visible and open to suggestions 
from others.
••
Description of others’ work and points of view must be negotiated with those 
concerned before being published.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

128  The Good Research Guide
Reflexivity and action research
Practitioners who engage in action research have a privileged insight into the 
way things operate in their particular ‘work-sites’. They have ‘insider knowl-
edge’. This can be a genuine bonus for research. However, it can also pose 
problems. The outsider – ‘the stranger’ – might be better placed to see the kind 
of thing which, to the insider, is too mundane, too obvious, to register as an 
important factor. Because the practitioner cannot escape the web of meanings 
that the ‘insider’ knows, he or she is constrained by the web of meanings. The 
outsider ‘expert’ may not have the ‘right’ answer, but can possibly offer an 
alternative perspective which can help the practitioner to gain new insights 
into the nature of the practical problem.
So, although action research respects the knowledge of 
the practitioners, it would be rather naïve to assume that 
practitioners’ knowledge – of itself – provides all the 
answers. Particularly in relation to practical action research 
and emancipatory action research, their aim is to enhance 
practitioner understanding and this is likely to call upon some modicum of out-
sider advice.
Resources and action research
The action researcher’s investigation is necessarily fairly localized and relatively 
small-scale. None the less, the action researcher faces the difficulty of trying to 
combine a probably demanding workload with systematic and rigorous research. 
Time constraints, alone, make this hard to accomplish. Even if, as should be the 
case, action research is integrated with practice rather than tagged onto prac-
tice, the routine demands of the job are unlikely to be reduced by way of compen-
sation. In the short run, prior to positive benefits emerging, the action researcher 
is likely to face extra work.
Generalizability and action research
Given the constraints on the scope of action research projects, it might be 
argued that their findings will rarely contribute to broader insights. Located 
as they are in the practitioner’s work-site, there are not very good prospects 
for the representativeness of the data in action research. The setting and 
constituent features are ‘givens’ rather than factors which can be controlled 
or varied, and the research is generally focused on the one site rather than 
spread across a range of examples. Action research, therefore, is vulnerable 
to the criticism that the findings relate to one instance and should not be gen-
eralized beyond this specific ‘case’.
In one sense, this reservation needs to be acknowledged. Certainly, prac-
tice-driven research in local settings hardly lends itself 
to conclusions with universal application. New truths 
and new theories will be unlikely to find foundation 
in such studies alone. And this caution is worth tak-
ing to heart for the action researcher: beware of making 
Link up with 
Reflexivity,  
p. 88.
Link up with 
Chapter 3,  
Case studies.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Action research  129
grandiose claims on the basis of action research projects. However, it can 
rightly be argued that action research, while practice-driven and small-scale, 
should not lose anything by way of rigour. Like any other small-scale research 
it can draw on existing theories, apply and test research propositions, use suit-
able methods and, importantly, offer some evaluation of existing knowledge 
(without making unwarranted claims). It is the rigour, rather than the size of 
the project or its purpose, by which the research should be judged.
Advantages of action research
Participation
It involves participation in the research for practitioners. This can democratize 
the research process, depending on the nature of the partnership, and generally 
involves a greater appreciation of, and respect for, practitioner knowledge.
Professional development
It has personal benefits for the practitioner, as it contributes to professional self-
development.
Practical
It addresses practical problems in a positive way, feeding the results of research 
directly back into practice. In the words of Somekh (1995: 340), ‘It directly addresses 
the knotty problem of the persistent failure of research in the social sciences to 
make a difference in terms of bringing about actual improvements in practice.’
Continuous
It should entail a continuous cycle of development and change via on-site 
research in the workplace, which has benefits for the organization to the extent 
that it is geared to improving practice and resolving problems.
Disadvantages of action research
Scope and scale
The necessary involvement of the practitioner limits the scope and scale of 
research. The ‘work-site’ approach affects the representativeness of the findings 
and the extent to which generalizations can be made on the basis of the results.
Control
The integration of research with practice limits the feasibility of exercising con-
trols over factors of relevance to the research. The setting for the research gener-
ally does not allow for the variables to be manipulated or for controls to be put 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

130  The Good Research Guide
in place, because the research is conducted not alongside routine activity but 
actually as part of that activity.
Ownership
Ownership of the research process becomes contestable within the framework of 
the partnership relationship between practitioner and researcher.
Work load
Action research tends to involve an extra burden of work for the practitioners, 
particularly at the early stages before any benefits feed back into improved 
effectiveness.
Impartiality
The action researcher is unlikely to be detached and impartial in his or her 
approach to the research. In this respect, action research stands in marked con-
trast to positivistic approaches. It is clearly geared to resolving problems which 
confront people in their routine, everyday (work) activity, and these people there-
fore have a vested interest in the findings. They cannot be entirely detached or 
impartial in accord with the classic image of science.
Further reading
Coghlan, D. and Brannick, T. (2010) Doing Action Research in Your Own Organization. 
London: Sage.
Kemmis, S., McTaggart, R. and Nixon, R. (2014) The Action Research Planner: Doing Critical 
Participatory Action Research. Singapore: Springer.
McNiff, J. (2013) Action Research: Principles and Practice, 3rd edn. London: Routledge.
Reason, P. and Bradbury, H. (eds) (2013) Handbook of Action Research, 2nd edn. London: 
Sage.
Somekh, B. (2006) Action Research: A Methodology for Change and Development. Maidenhead: 
Open University Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Action research  131
✓
Checklist for action research
When undertaking action research you should feel confident about  
answering ‘yes’ to the following questions: 
  1	 Does the research project address a practical problem?
  2	 Is there participation by the practitioner in all stages of the 
research project?
 
  3	 Have the grounds for the partnership between practitioner and any 
outside expert been explicitly negotiated and agreed?
 
  4	 Is the research part of a continuous cycle of development (rather 
than a one-off project)?
 
  5	 Is there a clear view of how the research findings will feed back 
directly into practice?
 
  6	 Is it clear which kind of action research is being used – ‘technical’, 
‘practical’ or ‘emancipatory’?
 
  7	 Has insider knowledge been acknowledged as having 
disadvantages as well as advantages for the research?
 
  8	 Is the research sufficiently small-scale to be combined with a 
routine workload?
 
  9	 Have ethical matters been taken into consideration?
© M. Denscombe, The Good Research Guide. Open University Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

What is a systematic review? • Benefits of a systematic review • 
Kinds of research problem suitable for systematic review • Qualitative 
research and systematic reviews • How to conduct a systematic review 
• Limitations to systematic reviews • Advantages of systematic reviews 
• Disadvantages of systematic reviews • Further reading • Checklist for 
the use of systematic reviews
Systematic reviews are used by a range of social researchers, practitioners and 
policy-makers who want to get a reliable and objective overview of the evidence 
that is currently available on a specific topic or the impact of a new intervention. 
They have been applied to things such as:
•• the effectiveness of innovations in health service delivery;
• the dissemination and take up of new practices in organizations;
• the incidence of illicit drug use by young people;
• the consequences of social policy in relation to old age pensions;
•• the success rates of motivational interviewing for smoking cessation.
Systematic reviews tend to be associated with ‘evidence-based practice’ – an 
approach that stresses the need for decisions to be based on firm evidence 
from good quality research – and they came to prominence in connection 
with medical and pharmaceutical research where they have now become well 
established as a method for evaluating findings from clinical trials on the 
effectiveness of specific drugs and particular treatments (e.g. the Cochrane 
Reviews).
What is a systematic review?
A systematic review is a review of the research literature whose aim is to arrive 
at a conclusion about the state of knowledge on a topic based on a rigorous and 
unbiased overview of all the research that has been undertaken on that topic. To 
do this, systematic reviews entail:
Systematic reviews
9
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Systematic reviews  133
•• a search for the relevant literature using explicit methods that are both rigor-
ous and systematic;
• a review of the findings which compares them and evaluates them using 
explicit criteria;
•• a conclusion based on an objective analysis of the existing data.
What is the difference between a systematic review  
and a traditional literature review?
Systematic reviews are not quite the same as a traditional literature review. There 
are three main areas of contrast. First, systematic reviews are a self-contained 
study in their own right – rather than a prelude to some empirical investigation. 
Second, they focus on a very specific question, usually linked to a policy or prac-
tical problem. And third, as the name indicates, they are very systematic in the 
process that is used to review the literature.
Benefits of a systematic review
What we already know about a particular topic is not always straightforward 
or clear-cut. There are two main reasons for this. First, research projects inves-
tigating specific topics do not always produce the same findings on which 
everyone can agree. Indeed, in most fields of study there are contested areas 
where the findings from different research projects are disputed and where 
people disagree about ‘what is true’ or ‘what works best’. Second, reviews of 
the evidence can be based on a selection of sources which might not nec-
essarily be the best sources. Indeed, there might be an emphasis on certain 
findings (and disregard for others) on the basis of how far the findings match 
the preferences of the individual doing the review rather than the quality of  
the research itself.
A consequence of these two difficulties is that knowledge about the available 
evidence can be patchy or even biased. But this is where systematic reviews 
come into the picture. Their aim is to reduce the potential for bias by being open 
and honest about:
•• how the search for relevant findings was conducted;
• how decisions were made about which sources to include and which to 
exclude;
•• how judgements were arrived at about the quality of the data reported in the 
various published findings of research.
Key point
Systematic reviews are rigorous in the search for data and transparent in the 
methods of review.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

134  The Good Research Guide
Kinds of research problem suitable  
for systematic review
Systemic reviews are valuable when tackling specific questions on which 
there already exists a considerable body of evidence. They are suited to topics 
where previous research has established some agreement about what needs to 
be known and how it should be investigated, and in this respect they are more 
appropriately applied to findings from explanatory research than exploratory 
research. When the studies share some basic premises about what is to be inves-
tigated, and how this should be done, this allows a comparison of like-with-like 
studies whose evidence can be directly contrasted. Only when this is the case is 
there a reasonable prospect of using the existing research findings to arrive at 
some single ‘objective’ conclusion about what works best, what is right, where 
the truth lies. In practice, this means that there are five criteria that must be met 
in order for systematic reviews to work well:
1	 the topic or problem being reviewed must be clearly defined and quite narrowly 
focused;
2	 a substantial body of research findings must already exist on the topic;
3	 the available evidence must come from studies that use similar methods;
4	 the ‘evidence’ must lend itself to measurement, comparison and evaluation 
(NHMRC 1999; Gough et al. 2012);
5	 the findings are usually based on quantitative data.
Qualitative research and systematic reviews
Although the drive for systematic reviews has come predominantly from ‘scien-
tific’ research where the findings are based on ‘hard, quantitative data’, there has 
been some attention given to the inclusion of qualitative research within system-
atic reviews. From the perspective of medical and health science research, the 
interest in qualitative research has tended to focus on the way that it can support 
and supplement quantitative research. The view is taken that
qualitative studies can: (a) contribute to the development of a more robust 
intervention by helping to define an intervention more precisely; (b) assist 
in the choice of outcome measures and assist in the development of valid 
research questions; and (c) help to understand heterogeneous results from 
studies of effect.
(Petticrew and Roberts 2006: 72)
Within the social sciences, by contrast, qualitative research is more likely to 
be treated as a genuine equal and alternative to quantitative research, offer-
ing its own contribution to knowledge (Dixon-Woods et al. 2006; Pawson 2006;  
Petticrew and Roberts 2006; Pope et al. 2007; Denyer and Tranfield 2009). In 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Systematic reviews  135
either case, the challenge facing those who want to conduct a systematic review 
of qualitative research is how to compare, evaluate and synthesize findings 
based on methodologies that do not conform to a standard model such as the 
randomized controlled trial (RCT). Qualitative research, after all, tends to be 
conducted in a variety of ways and in differing contexts – things which invari-
ably hinder the prospect of direct comparisons between their findings. The 
response to this challenge, described in more detail below in relation to Stage 6 
in the process of conducting systematic reviews, has been to review the findings 
through ‘narrative analysis’, ‘thematic analysis’ and ‘realist synthesis’ rather 
than attempt to aggregate the findings from existing research (see below).
How to conduct a systematic review
There are seven key stages involved in a systematic literature review. These 
stages reflect both the process of actually doing a review and the requirements 
for writing up a systematic review. So both aspects – doing and reporting – are 
dealt with stage by stage in the outline that follows.
Stage 1: The scope of the study
The first task is to decide upon the specific scope of the study. It is important that 
the area of interest that is chosen for the review is quite specific and narrowly 
focused because this sets the boundaries in terms of the content area for the 
search. Systematic reviews cannot work with vague or broad topics because this 
would make it almost impossible to decide what research findings to search for 
and what evidence to consider.
When writing up the review all significant choices made in connection with 
the scope of the review need to be described and justified. This is in line with the 
spirit of transparency which lies at the heart of systematic literature reviews. 
The review needs to start with a statement which pinpoints the chosen area of 
interest and explains why that topic warrants attention.
Stage 2: The search process
Initially this involves a careful consideration of the most accurate and appropri-
ate ‘key words’ and search terms to be used. These should be words or short 
phrases that will best target the relevant research findings: they need to capture 
the essence of the chosen topic. Next, decisions need to be made about where 
these search terms will be used. Which databases, which search engines, which 
archives, which catalogues – what sources will be searched? This might include 
reference to databases such as PsychINFO, LexisLibrary, Medline (PubMed), Web 
of Knowledge. Such sources need to be selected strategically in order to produce 
the best returns from the search. Obviously, the aim here is to conduct as com-
prehensive a search as possible of the available literature on the topic. Ideally, 
it should involve not only published works but also any other relevant findings 
which are available, perhaps in the form of conference papers or unpublished 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

136  The Good Research Guide
reports, although the extent to which this is possible will depend largely on the 
resources that are available. Small-scale research is likely to concentrate on find-
ing just published works.
In terms of writing up the review, and again in the spirit of transparency, there 
needs to be an explicit description of how the search was conducted. As part of 
the ‘audit trail’ sufficient details about the search process need to be provided in 
order to allow other researchers to replicate the search should they wish to do 
so, and readers of the review need to be told about the reasoning behind the vari-
ous choices that have been made. The account of the search process, therefore, 
needs to include:
•• a list of the search terms used, and an explanation of why they were deemed 
to be the most appropriate ones on which to base the research;
• a list of the databases that were searched, along with some explanation of 
why these were considered to be the most relevant ones to use;
• information about the period covered by the search, plus a justification for 
focusing on those particular years;
•• details about the actual dates when the search was conducted.
Stage 3: Evaluation of quality
The sources of information thrown up by the search process will differ in their 
value for the review. Some are likely to be more closely related to the topic than 
others, and some are likely to be of a better quality that others in terms of the 
research on which they are based. So, decisions need to be made about which to 
include and which to exclude from consideration when it comes to the review. 
Such decisions need to be made on explicit criteria: not hunch, not convenience, 
not appeal nor gut-reaction, but explicit and justifiable bench-marks for objective 
decisions. A crucial task, then, when conducting a systematic literature review is 
to establish a set of criteria on which to judge:
•• the relevance of sources to the topic being considered. Findings from previous 
research that is close to the topic might be treated as more significant than 
findings that are less directly on the topic.
•• the quality of the sources. The credibility of the findings might be gauged 
according to the methods used in the research, with higher significance being 
attached to findings produced by particular kinds of research design, for 
instance, or from larger samples.
These criteria need to be systematically applied to each of the studies included 
in the review, and that is why systematic reviews generally require the researcher 
to use a data extraction form for collecting information about the studies. The 
data extraction form acts as a kind of checklist with all the important items the 
researcher needs to record about each study listed, and space for relevant details 
from each study to be noted alongside each item. It is important to recognize that 
the specific items included in any data extraction form will be tailored to meet 
the specific requirements of the particular review. There is no universal form 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Systematic reviews  137
that applies on all occasions. Table 9.1, however, provides some basic starting 
points for the construction of a data extraction form to be used in connection 
with small-scale social science projects.
Table 9.1  Data extraction form: some basic items for inclusion
Item
Data extracted
Reviewer notes
Author(s)
Year of publication
Title of project
Period when research was conducted
Funding source/sponsors
Location of research
Objectives of the research
Type of study
Underlying tradition/philosophy of the research
Research design
Data collection methods
Research population
Number of participants
Sampling techniques
Factors/variables used for analysis
Techniques for data analysis
Quality controls: actions taken to support 
quality and avoid errors in the data
Findings
Recommendations
Evaluation: Researcher assessment of reliability 
of methods and validity of findings 
As with the previous stages, when writing up the review it is vital to provide 
sufficient detail about the decision-making to allow other researchers to under-
stand the reasoning and check the procedures should they wish to do so. This 
entails the inclusion of an open and explicit explanation for the decisions made 
with respect to the individual sources identified in the review. This explanation 
needs to cover:
•• a statement of the rationale for inclusion or exclusion of studies;
• the specific criteria of relevance, and some discussion of their link with the 
topic of the review;
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

138  The Good Research Guide
• the criteria for quality assessment, and some account of how these were 
applied;
•• a copy of the data extraction form.
Stage 4: List of sources included in the review
A full list of the works that are to be incorporated into the review should be 
provided. There are two angles to this. First, it is standard practice to produce 
a flowchart that visually represents the process of inclusion and exclusion of 
studies in the review. Figure 9.1 indicates a straightforward way of doing this 
in the context of a small-scale social research project.
Second, there needs to be sufficient bibliographic detail to allow other 
researchers, should they wish to do so, to find these sources and check their 
contents. Normally, this is supplied in the form of a table containing the basic 
information about those studies actually included in the review subsequent to the 
review of Abstracts stage.
Figure 9.1  Flowchart showing the inclusion and exclusion of studies from the review
Source: Developed from Pettigrew and Roberts (2006: 300).
Studies included
Studies excluded
Initial search results
The number of potential sources obtained
from the literature search process.
(for example, n = 1,033) 
Review of titles
Studies filtered out as obviously not close enough to
the topic or in other ways not suitable for inclusion.
(for example,  n = 977)    
Review of Abstracts 
The number of studies whose Abstracts were
retrieved and considered.
(for example, n = 56) 
Excluded on basis of details in the Abstract
Studies excluded as not suitable on the basis of  the
type of research and/or the relevance to the topic.
(for example, n = 8) 
Review of methods
The number of studies for which full details
were obtained and whose methods were
evaluated.
(for example, n = 48)   
Final filtering
Studies excluded because of concerns about the
research design, the relevance of the findings, or
other significant factors.
(for example, n = 7)   
Findings reviewed
The number of studies whose findings were
incorporated into the review.
(for example, n = 41) 
Good practice
When writing up the systematic review it is necessary to provide:
••
a flowchart indicating the number of studies included and the numbers excluded 
at each stage of the review;
••
a table listing basic information about each of the studies whose findings have 
been reviewed.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Systematic reviews  139
Stage 5: Descriptive summary
Having listed the research findings that will be used, the next stage in a system-
atic review is to produce a descriptive summary of the works – something that 
tells the reader about when the research projects were done, where they were 
done, how they were done (methods) and by whom. This entails categorizing 
the various studies according to a set of explicit criteria that cover the origins of  
the work, and counting the numbers that fall into the various categories. Such 
information is useful because it provides the reader with an overview of the origins 
of the information that will be included in the review.
Writing up this part of a systematic review partly involves stating how many 
works fall in to specific categories, and partly involves a written ‘narrative’ 
that describes the nature of the research that is to be included in the review. 
Combined, these two aspects of the descriptive summary should capture the 
key dimensions of the overall body of work that has been selected for review. 
They should provide the reader with important sign-posts about the available, 
relevant, good quality research in terms of things like:
•• how recent the work is;
• what groups of people have shown the most interest in conducting the research;
• who has funded or sponsored the research;
• which regions or countries are most commonly represented in the work that 
has been done;
•• which research methods have been used in the studies.
Stage 6: Analysis
Meta-analysis
At the heart of the systematic review lies the analysis. What does this 
involve? Well, for some people the ideal thing to do would be to conduct a 
meta-analysis. For those involved in reviews of health, medical and phar-
maceutical research this is often the ultimate goal. As Goldacre (2012: 14) 
describes it:
When you’ve got all the trial data in one place, you can conduct something 
called a meta-analysis, where you bring all the results together in one giant 
spreadsheet, pool all the data and get one single, summary figure, the most 
accurate summary of all the data on one clinical question.
To aggregate the data in this way, however, the findings need to be based on 
research that shares a similar methodology. In systematic reviews of health, 
medical and pharmaceutical research, ‘clinical trials’ are the shared methodol-
ogy which allows the possibility of pooling all the data together and arriving at 
the overall result. In the social sciences, however, there is far less prospect of 
aggregating findings in this way from a variety of research projects on a given 
topic. In the social sciences the methods used by researchers tend to be more  
varied and the findings less amenable to being amalgamated in the way that 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

140  The Good Research Guide
meta-analysis requires. And, for this reason, systematic reviews of research find-
ings in the social sciences are much more likely to be based on some form of 
narrative analysis (Tranfield et al. 2003; Denyer and Tranfield 2009).
Narrative analysis
A narrative analysis provides an account of the findings based on the 
use of words (rather than figures). It involves an attempt to ‘tell the story’ 
behind the findings of the various works that have been reviewed. Now, 
in the traditional literature review the choice of the works to be reviewed, 
the order in which they are introduced, and the emphasis that is placed on 
individual pieces of research are things which depend on the literary skills 
of the reviewer and the story he/she wishes to tell. A good literature review 
guides the reader; it takes them on a journey of discovery which ends with 
a persuasive case being made for the reviewer’s conclusion about what the 
available evidence suggests.
In a systematic review, however, any narrative account needs to be based on 
all the research findings that meet explicit quality standards. Also, in a system-
atic review the persuasiveness of the narrative should stem from the findings 
themselves rather than the literary skills of the reviewer or any preferences he/
she might have in relation to the conclusion to be drawn from the review. The 
nature of the review, in fact, needs to be more transparent, explicit and structured 
than would normally be associated with a traditional literature review. Whether 
identifying themes running through the various research findings (a thematic 
synthesis) or focusing on the reasoning used by the researchers to explain their 
findings (a realist synthesis) the narrative analysis must always endeavour to be 
highly systematic and objective.
Thematic synthesis: organize findings; look for themes; identify patterns
Thematic synthesis, as the name suggests, depends on identifying themes that 
emerge in the existing research. At one level, this involves the search for some 
consensus across the studies being reviewed. Is there agreement about things? 
Is there a shared opinion emerging from the research about the situation and its 
causes? Does existing research produce findings that are consistent and which 
point to causes and consequences upon which there is general agreement? If 
so, then it becomes quite easy to draw a definitive conclusion about the ‘truth’ 
of the situation or what ‘works best’. If not (which in the social sciences is quite 
likely), then the thematic review needs to establish what the disagreements are 
and what issues underlie these ‘contested areas’. Is it a matter of researchers 
approaching a topic using a similar approach and methods but arriving at dif-
ferent findings and alternative conclusions? Or, perhaps, it might be a matter of 
researchers adopting markedly different approaches to a topic which produce 
findings that disagree. Does the source of funding or sponsorship align with 
the kind of findings emerging from the research, or do findings differ accord-
ing to the location in which the research took place? Whatever, the role of the 
thematic review is to establish where the division lines are and explain what 
lies behind the differences of opinion.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Systematic reviews  141
Key point
A thematic synthesis focuses on the substance of the findings and any recom-
mendations arising from the studies included in the review.
Key point
A realist synthesis focuses on explanations for the findings reported by the 
studies included in the review, and it is concerned with developing theories.
Realist synthesis: look for the underlying causes
The analysis does not necessarily have to be based on a review of the findings 
from various studies. Sometimes, it is not so much the findings as the reasons 
for the findings which are the basis for the analysis. From a critical realist per-
spective the quest for themes running through the literature can be directed at 
the factors that researchers see as explaining their findings – the underlying 
causes. As Pawson (2006, 2013) argues, a ‘realist synthesis’ looks across the 
range of relevant studies to see which underlying factors or mechanisms are 
being used to explain the findings. The various pieces of research included in 
the review can be ‘regarded as case studies whose purpose is to test, revise 
and refine the preliminary theory’ (Pawson 2006: 74). The aim is to draw on 
these various explanations to arrive at a conclusion which takes the form of a 
general proposition or theory. Using existing work, for example evaluating the 
effectiveness of particular social policies or interventions, the realist synthesis 
allows conclusions to be drawn about what will work (or not work) for whom 
under what circumstances.
Stage 7: Conclusion
The review provides the platform for a synthesis of the distinct elements of the find-
ings into something new – an objective, over-arching conclusion based on the vari-
ous findings from all the published research that is available on a specific topic.
The importance of the conclusions reflects the point that systematic reviews 
are intended to have a practical value. They are, as has been noted, associated 
with ‘evidence-based practice’ where policy-makers and others look to the sys-
tematic review for guidance. What these people want from a systematic review 
is some definitive statement about the ‘state of things’, something quite specific 
and clear-cut, which they can use as the basis for planning a course of action. 
Conclusions that involve hedging bets, sitting on the fence, or a series of either/
or options are not so useful in this respect.
Good practice
Systematic reviews should aim to arrive at clear-cut conclusions.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

142  The Good Research Guide
Limitations to systematic reviews
There are three limitations to the value of systematic literature reviews which need 
to be borne in mind. The first of these is the general point that such reviews are 
based on findings that have been published or which, through some other means, 
are publicly available. As Goldacre (2012) stresses, though, not all findings from 
research get published. Referring in particular to the development of pharmaceuti-
cal drugs, he shows that research producing negative results are simply less likely 
to hit the light of day. Either researchers do not bother to publish findings about 
things that don’t work (preferring to concentrate on things that do) or there can be 
a more conscious pressure for commercial reasons to suppress negative results – 
they might prevent the further development of the drug. Commercial reasons to 
suppress certain research findings may not apply in the same way to social science 
research but the underlying point still holds – systematic literature reviews are 
based on published findings, and cannot cover findings from research which, for 
whatever reason, have not been made publicly available.
The second limitation concerns the premise that a fairly large body of rele-
vant published findings on a specific topic have already been published. This is 
more likely to be the case when it comes to trials of specific drugs or medicines, 
underlining the emergence of systematic literature reviews in that area. It may 
be less the case in relation to the social sciences. In the social sciences there will 
always be existing research which relates to a given topic, but there is less likely 
to be instances of previous research which is on exactly the same topic and which 
allows for the direct comparison of the findings. The nature of social science topics 
means that there is less prospect of comparing and evaluating data from different 
studies in a direct fashion.
The third limitation continues this theme that systematic literature reviews are 
more easily applied to (medical) science rather than social science. Evaluating the 
quality of data from findings and arriving at ‘objective’ conclusions are things that 
sit more comfortably with quantitative data produced through research designs 
such as experiments and randomized controlled trials (Tranfield et al. 2003). Indeed, 
reflecting this point, it is perhaps not surprising that randomized controlled trials are 
considered to provide the best kind of evidence when it comes to evaluating the find-
ings from research in the medical world (Higgins and Green 2011). But what about 
other kinds of research designs? Can the methods of systematic review be applied to 
alternative research designs such as case studies, action research, grounded theory, 
ethnography and phenomenology? And, in particular, can they work with studies 
that have produced qualitative data? Well, as we have seen, the answer is a quali-
fied ‘yes’. Instead of trying to combine the data from different research projects (as 
in ‘meta-analysis’) we can use some kind of ‘narrative analysis’. As Tranfield et al. 
(2003: 216) argue, a narrative analysis can work, provided that the review adheres to 
the spirit of ‘systematic reviews’ by containing clear and explicit statements about:
•• the criteria used for evaluating the quality of the qualitative research studies 
being considered. And there are a number of suggestions available on this 
score (e.g. Seale 1999; Silverman 2013).
•• the reasons for including or excluding particular studies (which, of course, 
should be related to these criteria).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Systematic reviews  143
Advantages of systematic reviews
Systematic reviews have credibility
They aim to provide an impartial review of existing research and, to this end, 
they adopt a rigorous and transparent approach to the selection and analysis of 
suitable evidence. This bolsters the credibility of the findings and enhances the 
scientific standing of the conclusions that are drawn.
Systematic reviews have practical value – they provide  
answers to questions
Specifically they address questions like ‘what works best?’ and produce answers 
that are of direct value to policy-makers and practitioners who need some guid-
ance about ‘the truth of the matter’ in the midst of large amounts of scientific 
evidence.
Disadvantages of systematic reviews
Applicability to qualitative research
Despite the possibilities offered by narrative analysis, thematic synthesis and real-
ist synthesis (noted above) there are still some question marks over how neatly 
the process of systematic review translates from its use with clinical trials to its 
use with social research – qualitative research in particular. Research in social sci-
ences does not often lend itself to direct comparison in the way that findings from 
clinical trials of drugs might do.
Reliance on existing body of knowledge
Systematic reviews work best in areas that have already attracted a lot of atten-
tion from researchers. They draw on a body of existing research findings – but 
for areas where there is little work that has already been done, it is not really 
possible to conduct a systematic review.
Research evidence that has not been published will not be included. System-
atic reviews do not cover findings that, for whatever reason, have been kept out 
of the public eye.
Resources
Systematic reviews can require a level of resourcing and team-work not nor-
mally associated with small-scale social research projects.
Further reading
Gough, D., Oliver, S. and Thomas, J. (2012) An Introduction to Systematic Reviews.  
London: Sage.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

144  The Good Research Guide
Higgins, J. and Green, S. (eds) (2011) Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of 
Interventions Version 5.1.0 (updated March 2011). The Cochrane Collaboration. Avail-
able at: www.cochrane-handbook.org.
Pawson, R. (2006) Evidence-Based Policy: A Realist Perspective. London: Sage, especially 
Chapters 1 and 4.
Petticrew, M. and Roberts, H. (2006) Systematic Reviews in the Social Sciences: A Practical 
Guide. Oxford: Blackwell.
Pope, C., Mays, N. and Popay, J. (2007) Synthesizing Qualitative and Quantitative Health 
Research: A Guide to Methods. Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Systematic reviews  145
✓
Checklist for the use of systematic reviews
When undertaking a systematic review you should feel confident  
about answering ‘yes’ to the following questions: 
  1	 Has a literature search been undertaken that confirms there is not 
already a systematic review available on the topic?
 
  2	 Do you have access to the software for logging and analysing the 
numerous studies and their findings?
 
  3	 Is the scope of the review sufficiently narrow and well-defined?
  4	 Are the criteria for inclusion of studies in the review clear and 
explicit?
 
  5	 Will the methods of the review be described in sufficient detail for 
readers to understand the rationale of the researcher’s decisions?
 
  6	 Has a data extraction form been produced to systematize the data 
collection?
 
  7	 Will a descriptive summary of the works be included in the review?
  8	 Will the type of analysis match the nature of the research findings 
being reviewed? (Meta-analysis, narrative analysis, thematic 
analysis, realist synthesis?)
 
 
  9	 Is there, or will there be, a clear-cut conclusion resulting from the 
review?
 
10	 Will any limitations to the review be openly acknowledged?
© M. Denscombe, The Good Research Guide. Open University Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

What is the mixed methods approach? • The benefits of using a 
mixed methods approach • Resources and skills • The design of 
mixed methods projects • Triangulation in mixed methods research 
• Non-corroboration of data • Pragmatism and mixed methods • A new 
research paradigm? • Advantages of the mixed methods approach 
• Disadvantages of the mixed methods approach • Further reading 
• Checklist for mixed methods research
A number of different names have been given to mixed methods strategies. 
‘Mixed research’, ‘mixed methodology’, ‘multiple research approaches’, ‘multi-
strategy research’, ‘integrated methods’, ‘multi-method research’ and ‘combined 
methods’ research are just some of the alternatives. The names bear testimony to 
the variety of ways in which research can be mixed and the many aspects of the 
research process that can be involved. The most common form of mix, however, 
involves a mix of methods and, in practice, the term ‘mixed methods’ is used in 
a general sense to cover the spectrum of ways in which mixing can occur in the 
research process.
What is the mixed methods approach?
The mixed methods approach has three characteristic features that set it apart 
from other strategies for social research. These are:
1	 A preference for viewing research problems from a variety of perspectives. 
At the heart of the approach there is a commitment to viewing things from 
different angles. Rather than rely on findings from a single method or a single 
approach, the mixed methods approach regards the use of multiple sources as 
beneficial in terms of the quality and fullness of data it produces. For this rea-
son the idea of triangulation plays a major role in mixed methods research.
2	 The combination of different types of research within a single project. There 
is a willingness to combine methods from different ‘paradigms’ – from different 
Mixed methods
10
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Mixed methods  147
traditions of research with mutually incompatible philosophies. In most cases 
this means mixing ‘qualitative’ and ‘quantitative’ components with researchers 
variously writing about using both qualitative and quantitative methods, qual-
itative and quantitative data or qualitative and quantitative research.
3	 The choice of methods based on ‘what works best’ for tackling a specific problem. 
The approach is problem-driven, and the research problem is always considered 
to be the most important thing when it comes to the choice of methods. It is not 
a matter of particular methods being intrinsically ‘good’ or ‘bad’; it is a matter of 
how useful they are in terms of the specific issue that is being investigated. This 
primacy of the research problem, coupled with the mixing of methods from dif-
ferent paradigms, explains why the mixed methods approach tends to be associ-
ated with pragmatism.
The benefits of using a mixed methods approach
Accuracy of findings
Researchers can improve their confidence in the accuracy of findings through the 
use of different methods to investigate the same subject. In line with the principles 
of triangulation, the mixed methods approach provides the researcher with the 
opportunity to check the findings from one method against the findings from a 
different method. Where different methods produce data that are more or less the 
same, the researcher can feel more confident in assuming that the findings are 
accurate.
Using the same principle of triangulation researchers can also check on the 
impact of a particular research method. For example, if a researcher wants 
to know whether online questionnaires ‘distort’ the kind of answers that are 
given by respondents, he/she could compare the findings from this method of 
data collection with findings from a similar set of respondents completing a 
conventional paper questionnaire. If there is no marked difference between 
the methods in terms of the data collected, the researcher can feel confident 
that the use of the online questionnaires does not have a distorting impact 
on the data (at least, no impact that is different from the conventional paper 
questionnaire).
Key point
This use of the mixed methods approach ‘seeks convergence, corroboration, cor-
respondence of results from the different methods’ (Greene et al. 1989: 259).
A more complete picture
The use of more than one method can enhance the findings of research by pro-
viding a fuller and more complete picture of the thing that is being studied. The 
benefit of the mixed methods approach in this instance is that the data produced 
by the different methods can be complementary. They can provide alternative 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

148  The Good Research Guide
perspectives that, when combined, go further towards an all-embracing vision of 
the subject than could be produced using a mono-method approach. In terms of 
the mixed methods approach this tends to involve the use of both qualitative and 
quantitative methods as a means of seeing things from alternative perspectives 
and, thereby, getting a more complete overview of the subject.
Key point
‘The use of multiple methods, or triangulation, reflects an attempt to secure 
an in-depth understanding of the phenomenon in question’ (Denzin 2012: 82).
Consider, for example, research that focuses on smoking and the health-
related behaviour of young people. A quantitative survey approach would 
certainly produce evidence of the extent of smoking by under-16s and could 
provide good demographic details that will help us to understand the social 
backgrounds of those involved. A series of focus groups involving young 
smokers could be used to provide qualitative data that would help to explain 
why the under-age smokers started smoking and what motivates them to con-
tinue. In their own right, both the quantitative and the qualitative methods are 
valuable and can make a worthwhile contribution to what is known on the 
matter. Combining the methods, however, allows the researcher to produce a 
fuller account of the situation that covers not only the scale of the issue (e.g. 
numbers involved, age, sex, ethnic group) but also gives some insight into the 
motivational factors that give rise to the behaviour (e.g. self-image, stress, peer 
groups).
Developing the analysis
Within a mixed methods strategy contrasting methods can be used as a means of 
moving the analysis forward, with one method being used to inform another. In 
this sense, methods are introduced sequentially as a way of developing the find-
ings obtained from a previous phase of the research.
This can be useful as a means of developing research instruments. For exam-
ple, researchers who are designing a survey questionnaire can start by con-
ducting focus groups or interviews and use these to discover what kinds of 
issues are most important to include in the subsequent survey questionnaire. 
In this way the quantitative data collected using the survey questionnaire are 
developed from the qualitative data that were collected through interviews or 
focus groups.
Mixed methods can also be used to develop on the findings from other parts 
of a research project. In this case, a new method is introduced specifically to 
address a research issue arising through findings produced by a previous method. 
A classic study illustrates how this can work. Between 1924 and 1933 research 
was conducted at the Western Electric company’s Hawthorne Plant in Chicago. The 
aim of these Hawthorne studies was to discover which factors affected worker 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Mixed methods  149
productivity. Initially, management at the plant conducted a sequence of quasi-
experiments in which they altered the level of lighting to see if this was linked with 
productivity. Subsequently, researchers from the Harvard Business School joined 
the investigation and conducted a further series of studies designed to investigate 
the link between fatigue, monotony and worker productivity (Mayo [1933] 2003; 
Roethlisberger and Dickson [1939] 2003). All these controlled, quasi-experimental 
studies produced rather puzzling and inconclusive results and this prompted the 
researchers to introduce an alternative approach. Instead of trying to measure 
the factors that affected productivity they decided to ask the workers what moti-
vated them. The researchers embarked on a huge programme of interviews 
with the workforce. What they found out about workers’ motivation through the 
interviews helped the researchers to make sense of the findings from the initial 
experimental approaches used for the research. The interviews revealed that the 
workers were motivated by factors other than just money; there were personal 
and social rewards from work that affected their productivity as well. Once the 
researchers understood this, they could make sense of the results from the earlier 
phase. Finally, to confirm their findings from the interview phase the research-
ers embarked on a third phase of research which involved observing the informal 
group behaviour of workers. In this way they progressively developed the analysis 
of the factors influencing the productivity of the workers at the plant.
Key point: The main benefits of using a mixed methods approach
••
Check accuracy of findings.
••
Provide a more complete picture.
••
Help to develop the analysis.
Resources and skills
The benefits of using a mixed methods approach need to be weighed against 
the extra demands this approach can place upon the researcher. The most obvi-
ous extra demand on the research comes in the form of the multi-skilling that is 
required. If the researcher is to use more than one method, he/she must become 
proficient in the use of the alternative methods – and this takes time. Added to 
this, data analysis becomes more complex when using mixed methods. Not only 
does the researcher need to use more than one kind of analysis, there is also the 
need to compare, contrast and integrate the findings in a way that is likely to be 
more challenging than sticking with just one method.
Caution
The additional demands of using a mixed methods approach need to be taken 
into account when deciding how long the research will take and what it will cover.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

150  The Good Research Guide
The design of mixed methods projects
A lot of attention is given to the design of mixed methods projects. This is because 
the research design explains the rationale for mixing the various components: it 
indicates which methods are considered to be appropriate for the research ques-
tion being investigated and it shows how the various methods can be interlinked to 
best advantage (Creswell 2013; Morgan 2014).
A large number of design possibilities have been suggested. There have been 
numerous typologies produced which catalogue alternative designs for mixed 
methods research (Onwuegbuzie and Combs 2010; Natasi et al. 2010) and there 
are ongoing efforts to refine and extend the underlying premises of mixed meth-
ods research (see, for example, Leech and Onwuegbuzie 2009; Onwuegbuzie and 
Frels 2013). However, the first thing to note about the various typologies for 
mixed methods research is the way they tend to be based on a clear distinction 
between qualitative and quantitative forms of enquiry. Reflecting this, the design 
of mixed methods research tends to follow a conventional notation in which:
•• QUAL stands for qualitative data in the form of text or pictures that provide 
the basis for interpretations of the meaning they convey;
•• QUAN stands for quantitative data in the form of numbers that provide objec-
tive measurements of observed events.
The labels QUAL and QUAN actually represent a simplified view of a com-
plex reality. In practice the dividing line between qualitative and quantita-
tive approaches is not always clear-cut or simple (Reichardt and Rallis 1994; 
Hammersley 1996; Bergman 2008; Onwuegbuzie 2012). But the labels QUAL 
and QUAN are easy to understand and they provide a convenient short-hand 
notation that signals the amount of emphasis specific methods put on interpre-
tation (QUAL) or measurement (QUAN). For this reason, if no other, the distinc-
tion between QUAL and QUAN remains in widespread use in relation to mixed 
methods research designs
The second point to note about the many mixed methods typologies is that 
they really boil down to some fairly simple and straightforward issues (Guest 
2013). In fact, the basic things a mixed methods researcher needs to explain 
about his/her research design can be reduced to just three things:
•• the sequence of the QUAL and QUAN components;
• the relative importance attached to the QUAL and QUAN components;
•• the purpose of linking the QUAL and QUAN components.
Sequence
When a research design involves the use of methods or strategies drawn from 
different paradigms, the order in which the methods/strategies are used is sig-
nificant. Given that they are used as part of the same investigation of the same 
research question, the sequencing reflects the researcher’s beliefs about how the 
combination of methods and strategies works best. For some purposes it might 
be better to have QUAN followed by QUAL; for other purposes the opposite might 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Mixed methods  151
be true. Possibly, more phases within a research project might be most useful, in 
this case calling for a sequence of three or more QUAL/QUAN components. There 
might also be occasions when the research is best served by conducting the con-
trasting alternatives alongside each other at the same time. This would involve 
the ‘simultaneous’ use of QUAL and QUAN. These basic design options relating 
to sequence and timing are shown, using the conventional notation, in Table 10.1.
Relative importance
Research designs that incorporate aspects of both QUAL and QUAN need not nec-
essarily attach equal weight to the two. Indeed, there is a strong likelihood that 
researchers will tend to regard one as the ‘main’ and the other as the ‘subsidiary’ 
counterbalance or check. For example, the researchers might start by collecting 
and analysing a relatively small amount of qualitative data as an exploratory 
phase of the investigation. They might use interviews or focus groups to get a 
feel for the relevant issues and to explore the way things are perceived. Armed 
with this knowledge, the researchers can then produce a questionnaire (or other 
quantitative research instrument) that can build on information obtained in 
advance. Some psychology and marketing research adopts this approach, using 
the QUAL as a preliminary checking device to ensure the validity of a QUAN 
research instrument. In this approach, it is the QUAN data that are treated as the 
most important material for the investigation.
In contrast to this, the design might treat QUAL as the dominant, perhaps pre-
ceding the QUAN subsidiary. An example of this would be the use of a detailed 
case study that is followed up with small-scale questionnaire survey to check the 
case study findings. The research design, in this instance, centres on the collec-
tion and analysis of qualitative data. It might, for example, consist of interview 
data collected from employees within a particular business. From these interviews 
the researchers might reach certain conclusions. At this point, they might choose 
to conduct a survey of other businesses to check if these conclusions tend to be 
borne out in other situations. The key points might be included in a questionnaire 
distributed to a representative sample of businesses nationwide, with the hope that 
the responses they receive will corroborate the conclusions based on the detailed 
case study. The main thrust of the investigation, in this example, is the QUAL (inter-
views) with the QUAN (questionnaire survey) being used in a supporting role.
In a simplified depiction of the range of possibilities, the sequencing and 
dominance of methods from different research paradigms might take one of the 
­following forms (Table 10.2).
Table 10.1  Sequence in mixed methods research designs
Sequential studies 
   e.g.  QUAL → QUAN 
(two phases)
      QUAN → QUAL 
(possibly ‘multi-phase’)
      QUAN → QUAL → QUAN 
Simultaneous studies 
  e.g. QUAN 
(sometimes called ‘parallel’ studies)
      QUAL
⎧
⎨
⎩
→
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

152  The Good Research Guide
Purpose of the link
Mixed methods research involves more than simply having bits of QUAL and QUAN 
research coexisting within a project. The key to good mixed methods research is 
to link these components in a way that is beneficial for the research and what it is 
trying to achieve. So, one of the crucial things that need to be addressed within any 
mixed methods research design is the matter of what each component contributes 
to the others. Some key possibilities here are:
•• comparison of findings: The link might involve comparing and contrasting 
the findings from various (QUAL and QUAN) components as a means of cross-
checking the results and confirming the validity of the findings.
• building up findings: The link involves one component adding to the findings 
of another. Each extra bit of the research provides a new dimension to what 
is known about the topic, adding an alternative perspective and producing 
different kinds of information.
•• developing on the findings: This can involve specific parts of the research 
being used to shape the issues looked at by subsequent components and to 
inform the direction the research should take. Or the link can be based upon 
the use of findings from particular components to explain findings from 
another part of the research. The point in this case is to take the analysis  
further (as, for example, occurred in the Hawthorne studies described 
above).
These three options map closely onto the three main benefits associated with 
mixed methods research. Comparison is useful for checking the accuracy of find-
ings. Building helps to provide a fuller picture. And developing the findings is val-
uable for taking the analysis forward. When taken together with the options for 
sequencing and the relative importance attributed to the components, these pro-
vide a basic list of 10 mixed methods design options for the project researcher. 
These design options are outlined in Table 10.3.
Some typologies of mixed methods design incorporate a further element. 
Creswell and Plano Clark (2010: 69–70), for example, refer to ‘Explanatory 
sequential designs’ and ‘Exploratory sequential designs’ among their list of 
design options. Terms like ‘explanatory’ and ‘exploratory’, though, do not relate 
exclusively to mixed methods research. They tell us about the overall nature of 
the research and what it is trying to achieve and, as such, can be applied to any 
research design in the social sciences (rather than describing how the mixed 
methods elements within the project are linked).
Table 10.2  Relative importance of components in mixed methods research designs
Equivalent status 
e.g. QUAL  → QUAN 
    QUAN → QUAL → QUAN 
Dominant/less dominant status* 
e.g. qual  → QUAN 
    QUAL  → quan 
*Note: use of lower case letters to denote less importance
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Mixed methods  153
Table 10.3  Ten basic design options for mixed methods research
Benefit
Link
Notation
Description
Improved  
accuracy
Comparison
of findings
 
QUAL + QUANT
Convergent findings.
Alternative methods address 
the same question and 
are given equal status in 
terms of cross-validating the 
findings. The findings from 
each method are used as 
a check on the accuracy of 
findings from the other(s).
More complete 
picture
Build up
findings
QUAL +  QUANT
Qual  + QUANT
QUAL + quant
Additional coverage
Different methods are used 
to investigate separate 
components of the overall 
question. When brought 
together these add new 
dimensions to what is 
known about the topic.
Developing  
the analysis
Inform the 
direction
Explain the
findings
 
QUAL	→ QUAN
QUAN	→ QUAL
qual	 → QUAN
quan	 → QUAL
QUAL	→ quan
QUAN	→ qual
Sequential contributions
Findings from one method 
are used to inform research 
in the next phase within 
the project. There is a clear 
development that plays to 
the strengths of different 
methods. Emphasis can be 
placed on one component 
rather than treating them 
equally.
Key point: The mix can involve more than just ‘methods’
There is no absolute reason why the mix must be a mix of methods. A ‘mixed 
methods’ approach can be based on the mixing of research designs, research 
strategies and modes of analysis. Furthermore, the mix does not have to involve 
qualitative and quantitative components. It is possible to combine different 
quantitative methods together and equally to combine different qualitative meth-
ods within one study (Denzin 2012; Flick et al. 2012).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

154  The Good Research Guide
Triangulation in mixed methods research
One of the defining characteristics of mixed methods research, as noted at the 
beginning of the chapter, is a preference for viewing research problems from 
a variety of perspectives. As we have seen this can be achieved by combining 
different components of a research project in different ways. What each of the 
design options share, however, is the aim of getting a better ‘fix’ on the thing that 
is being investigated by using more than one method to see it from more than 
one angle. The rationale for this owes much to the notion of ‘triangulation’ and 
in the sphere of mixed methods research triangulation has assumed a particular 
significance as a foundation for the premise that a research topic can be better 
understood if it is viewed from more than one perspective.
The idea of triangulation derives from trigonometry and the geometric laws 
associated with triangles. These laws make it possible to find the exact location of 
an item if it is viewed from two other known positions (provided there is informa-
tion about the angles and distances from these two other positions). In practice, 
triangulation is used by geologists, surveyors, navigators and others to measure 
exact locations of things in the physical world.
Social researchers have adapted and developed triangulation for use in the 
social world. Usually drawing on Denzin’s (1970) early work in this area, they 
point to five distinct ways in which triangulation can be used in the social sci-
ences. These are:
1	 methodological triangulation (between-methods). This is the most common 
form of triangulation adopted by mixed methods researchers. The use of alter-
native methods allows the findings from one method to be contrasted with 
the findings from another. The key to this form of triangulation is the use of 
approaches that are markedly different and which allow the researcher to see 
things from as widely different perspectives as possible.
2	 methodological triangulation (within-methods). Comparisons can be made 
using similar kinds of methods rather than ones that are markedly different. 
This is the form of triangulation used by Campbell and Fiske (1959) and Webb 
et al. (1966) in their pioneering work on triangulation. The reasoning here is 
that if similar methods produce the same results, it would seem reasonable 
to conclude that the findings are accurate and that they are authentic (rather 
than being some artificial by-product of the methods used).
3	 data triangulation (use of contrasting sources of information). The validity 
of findings can be checked by using different sources of information. This 
can mean comparing data from different informants (informant triangulation) 
or using data collected at different times (time triangulation). The notion also 
incorporates the idea of space triangulation (the use of more than one cul-
tural, social or geographical context).
4	 investigator triangulation (use of different researchers). As a check against 
bias arising from the influence of any specific researcher, the findings from 
different investigators can be compared for consistency. Do the research-
ers ‘see’ things in the same way? Do they interpret events similarly? Do they 
attach the same codes to the same source of data (e.g. interview transcript, 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Mixed methods  155
observed event)? To the extent that they do, the findings can be accepted with 
more confidence.
5	 theory triangulation. This involves the use of more than one theoretical posi-
tion in relation to the data. Different theories can shape the kind of data that are 
collected and the way the data are interpreted. These different perspectives can 
be based on the approaches of different disciplines. So, for example, research-
ers might choose to contrast a sociological with a psychological approach to 
the particular topic being investigated.
Caution: The use of triangulation in social science
The social world is different from the physical world and social researchers are 
not usually able to make use of fixed/objective positions, universally agreed, 
from which to make their observations. The use of triangulation by social 
researchers, therefore, is not literal. It is not the same as that used by geolo-
gists, surveyors or navigators. It generally refers more loosely to the broader 
underlying principle that viewing something from more than one viewpoint allows 
you to get more worthwhile findings from the research.
Key point: Mixed methods and triangulation: the benefits
••
Improved accuracy:
••
validation of findings in terms of their accuracy and authenticity
••
checking for bias in research methods
••
development of research instruments.
This involves the use of methods, data, etc. that are relatively similar.
••
Fuller picture and more complete findings:
••
production of complementary data (different but related)
••
production of further data (developing out of previous findings).
This involves the use of methods, data, etc. that are contrasting and relatively 
dissimilar.
The use of triangulation in mixed methods research can be illustrated through a 
research project on classroom control (Denscombe 2012). This research primar-
ily made use of between-methods triangulation and information triangulation. The 
starting point for the research was the problem of disruptive behaviour by students 
in secondary school classrooms. Such behaviour has a serious impact on lessons. It is 
stressful and challenging for teachers, and it detracts from the learning environment 
for students. The circumstances giving rise to such behaviour, and the techniques 
used by teachers to control it are, therefore, of practical concern and typical of the 
kind of research problem that can be tackled using a mixed methods approach.
The first phase of the study involved classroom observation. The researcher 
began by sitting in classrooms making field notes about events and focusing, of 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

156  The Good Research Guide
course, on incidents of disruptive behaviour. This use of observation as the initial 
data collection method produced both quantitative data relating to the frequency 
of such behaviour and qualitative data relating to the circumstances surrounding 
the events.
These data were useful in their own right. However, when used as part of a 
mixed methods research design there was more to be gained from them. As part 
of a mixed methods study they could provide:
•• insights about the problem and suggested further avenues of enquiry to be 
pursued in connection with disruptive behaviour;
• a particular perspective on disruptive behaviour (based on classroom obser-
vation);
•• information that could subsequently be checked in terms of (a) accuracy and 
(b) interpretation against findings from alternative sources of information 
and different research methods.
Such benefits, though, required the data from classroom observation to be 
used alongside other methods and other sources of information about disrup-
tive behaviour. To exploit the benefits of between-methods triangulation these 
other methods needed to be quite different from observation, allowing disrup-
tive behaviour to be viewed from a distinctly different angle. So the research 
went on to include a series of one-to-one interviews. In these interviews teach-
ers and students were asked to reflect back on actual incidents of disruptive 
behaviour observed by the researcher during lessons. Used in this way, the inter-
views served two purposes. First, they added background information helping 
to explain why the events occurred. Second, they produced depth information 
shedding light on the meaning of the events for those involved and how the situ-
ations were negotiated.
To add yet another perspective the research also made use of written, docu-
mentary sources of data on disruptive behaviour. This involved an element of 
data triangulation. School records and school rules provided an ‘official’ stand-
point on the matter, one which offered an interesting contrast to the findings 
emerging from observation and interviews. Finally, a questionnaire survey of 
teachers and students was used as a means of verifying the analysis and seeing 
how far the findings could be applied more generally to a wider population.
The research, then, used different types of methods and alternative sources of 
information to look at disruptive behaviour in classrooms from different angles. 
In an effort to get a better overall understanding of the phenomenon it used 
between-methods triangulation and data triangulation. There were, though, two 
aspects to this better understanding. As Figure 10.1 illustrates, triangulation was 
used to check the accuracy of the findings (e.g. about the frequency of disruptive 
behaviour), and it was used to provide a fuller picture (e.g. of the significance of 
disruptive behaviour in terms of its meaning for teachers and students).
Note than in the case of accurate measurement it should not be inferred that 
the use of triangulation will pinpoint a precise, correct ‘truth’ about the situation. 
It will not ‘prove’ that the researcher ‘has got it right’. It can only help to corrobo-
rate findings and give the researcher more confidence about the conclusions. 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Mixed methods  157
Likewise with the use of triangulation to get a more complete picture, it should 
never be suggested that the use of triangulation will have covered all the angles 
and allowed the researcher to say all there is to say on a topic. What it can do, 
more modestly, is help to provide a fuller understanding and produce alternative 
kinds of information which move things towards the complete picture.
Figure 10.1  Mixed methods and triangulation
Towards a more accurate measurement
Method 1
Observation in
classrooms
Method 3
Documents and
school records
Method 3
Documents and
school records
Method 2
Questionnaries to
staff and students
Towards a more complete picture
Method 1
Observation in
classrooms
Method 2
Interviews to
staff and students
Topic
e.g. the frequency of
disruptive behaviour
in classrooms
Topic
e.g. the
significance
of disruptive
behaviour in
classrooms
Non-corroboration of data
The mixed methods approach tends to operate on the assumption that findings 
will coincide or be complementary and that this will be a positive contribution to 
the research project. There is, however, an inherent risk that the findings from 
the various components might not point in the same direction.
In principle, the non-alignment of results should not be regarded as a setback or 
failure of some kind. It should spur further research to investigate the difference 
in findings. The contradictions could be very interesting – revealing limitations to 
the methods of data collection or teasing out fascinating complications within the 
phenomenon being studied.
In practice, though, non-corroboration can have challenging consequences. 
Project researchers and contract researchers can be under pressure to arrive at 
conclusions within a given time-frame. They can be expected to produce reports 
that have to be delivered by a given deadline. But, at the end of the project they 
could be left with contradictory findings from the alternative methods (or data 
sources) and no firm conclusion. Where people look to research to provide con-
crete findings or practical solutions to a pressing problem, they might not be 
very receptive to conclusions that are based on conflicting data from different 
methods. The audience for the research (e.g. funders, examiners) might feel 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

158  The Good Research Guide
dissatisfied that the completion of the project does not provide a clear-cut find-
ing. They might even interpret things to mean that one or other of the methods 
(or data sources) employed was ‘wrong’ and should not have been used within 
the project. Under circumstances such as these the fact is that the non-corrobo-
ration of data can become a challenging and possibly unwelcome occurrence for 
the mixed methods researcher.
Pragmatism and mixed methods
Pragmatism is generally regarded as the philosophical partner of the mixed 
methods approach. This means that there is some broad agreement among mixed 
methods researchers that social research should not be judged by how neatly 
it fits with the quantitative paradigm (positivism) or with the premises of the 
competing camp – the qualitative paradigm (interpretivism). Decisions about 
which methods to use should, instead, be based on how useful the methods are 
for addressing a particular question, issue or problem that is being investigated. 
The crucial consideration is how well the research tools work rather than how 
well they fit within a specific research philosophy.
Pragmatism
In the context of research, pragmatism tends to revolve around the following 
core ideas:
•• Knowledge is based on practical outcomes and ‘what works’. The key crite-
rion for judging knowledge is how useful it is perceived to be and how well it 
works when applied to some practical problem.
• Research should test what works through empirical enquiry.
• There is no single, best ‘scientific’ method that can lead the way to indisput-
able knowledge.
•• Knowledge is provisional. What we understand as truth today may not be 
seen as such in the future. Knowledge is seen as a product of our times. It 
can never be absolute or perfect because it is inevitably a product of the 
historical era and the cultural context within which it is produced. The quest 
for absolute ‘Truth’ is consequently seen as a hopeless cause.
Traditional dualisms in the field of philosophy and science are regarded as 
not helpful. In particular, there is scepticism about the distinction between quan-
titative and qualitative research, but there is also a rejection of distinctions like 
facts/values, objectivism/subjectivism and rationalism/empiricism.
Mixed methods as an alternative option
The link between pragmatism and mixed methods research can be interpreted 
in more than one way. For some mixed methods researchers the tenets of 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Mixed methods  159
pragmatism leave the door open for the use of purely quantitative research 
or purely qualitative research – providing the use of either in isolation can 
produce the kind of findings that work sufficiently well to answer a research 
problem. Pragmatism leads them to regard the use of mixed methods as a 
third alternative – another option open to social researchers if they decide 
that neither quantitative nor qualitative research alone will provide adequate 
findings for the particular piece of research they have in mind. Rather than 
see positivism and interpretivism as having become obsolete, these research-
ers regard the mixed methods approach as simply an alternative research 
strategy that can be used if, and when, necessary. As Morgan (2014: 4, empha-
sis added) makes the point:
Simply having more results or different kinds of results does not inherently 
improve your work; in addition, you must bring those results together in a way 
that demonstrates the value of your additional effort. Hence, research projects 
that use multiple methods are not automatically preferable to studies that use 
just one method.
Mixed methods as a better option
There are others who see pragmatism as representing an advance in thinking 
about social research – the basis for a new research paradigm that should 
replace the earlier paradigms based on positivism and interpretivism (e.g. 
Tashakkori and Teddlie 1998, 2003; Johnson and Onwuegbuzie 2004; Teddlie 
and Tashakkori 2009; Creswell and Plano Clarke 2010). This paves the way for 
a subtly different stance in which the combination of quantitative and qualita-
tive research is seen as a good thing in its own right. From this position it is not 
only allowable to mix methods from alternative and incompatible paradigms of 
research but it is also desirable to do so in order to provide answers that work – 
or, at least, that work better than those based on the use of just quantitative or 
just qualitative research.
A new research paradigm?
The image of mixed methods as a new paradigm has been useful for promoting 
it as the new breakthrough approach that cuts through the stand-off between 
two old-style narrow-visioned paradigms. It creates an identity for the approach 
and it literally ‘makes sense’ of a complex area in a way that is particularly 
useful for newcomers to social research who will find it easy to understand. It 
is useful, therefore, to introduce the approach along lines forged by the ‘mixed 
methods movement’ (as has been done in this chapter).
It would be wrong, however, to suggest that the use of mixed methods is 
entirely new to social research. The idea of combining different kinds of research 
methods within a single research project has been around for a long time (John-
son and Gray 2010). Numerous examples of classic studies, including the Haw-
thorne studies referred to earlier in this chapter, have brought together methods 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

160  The Good Research Guide
and data from contrasting paradigms using different underlying philosophies. 
What is relatively new is the identification of something called the mixed meth-
ods approach. As an approach, with a recognized name and research credibil-
ity, it has only come to the fore in recent years championed by writers such as 
Tashakkori and Teddlie (1998, 2003), Johnson and Onwuegbuzie (2004), Greene 
(2007), Teddlie and Tashakkori (2009), Creswell and Plano Clark (2010), Creswell 
(2013) and Morgan (2014)..
It would also be wrong to infer that pragmatism is the only research philoso-
phy that can be linked with the use of mixed methods. Researchers from other 
philosophical positions have argued for the benefits of using mixed methods. 
Notably, mixed methods has been linked with critical realism (Layder 1993, 
1998; Pawson and Tilley 1997; Lipscomb 2008; Harrits 2011), constructivism  
(Denzin 2012), and transformative/emancipatory styles of research (Mertens 
2009; Onwuegbuzie and Frels 2013). The use of mixed methods, then, is not exclu-
sively tied to pragmatism.
Advantages of the mixed methods approach
A better understanding of the thing that is being studied
Using a form of triangulation the mixed methods approach can be used: (1) to 
validate findings and improve accuracy or (2) to produce a more comprehensive 
account of the thing being researched.
A practical, problem-driven approach to research
As a movement, the mixed methods approach is problem-driven rather than 
theory-driven. Its underlying philosophy is that of pragmatism. As such, it gives 
voice to the general practice of a large proportion of social researchers who 
have, for years, used methods from different research paradigms because it has 
been practical to do so.
Clearer links between different methods and the different kinds of data
The mixed methods approach places emphasis on the integration of alternative 
approaches and encourages the researcher to provide an explicit account of how 
and why the different methods and data complement each other. Good mixed 
methods research avoids an arbitrary ‘mix-and-match’ approach.
Compensating strengths and weaknesses
Research strategies and methods each have their own strengths and their own 
weaknesses and a shrewd combination of strategies and methods allows the 
researcher to exploit the strengths of a particular method without leaving 
himself/herself vulnerable to criticism in connection with that method’s weak-
ness.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Mixed methods  161
Disadvantages of the mixed methods approach
The time and costs of the research project can increase
The combination of phases can extend the time-frame for research design and 
data collection.
The researcher needs to develop skills in more than one method
The researcher needs to develop and exercise skills covering both qualitative and 
quantitative approaches. This adds demands on the researcher and opens up the 
possibility of ‘missing the mark’ for experts in either camp.
Findings from different methods might not corroborate one another
If findings from the different methods do not corroborate one another, the 
researcher can be faced with the need to extend the research to unravel the  
reasons for this.
The QUAL/QUAN distinction tends to oversimplify matters
When making the QUAL/QUAN distinction mixed methods researchers need to 
be aware that the clarity and simplicity of the terms mask a more complicated 
reality.
The underlying philosophy of the mixed methods approach – pragmatism – 
is open to misinterpretation
There is a common-sense use of the word pragmatic which implies expediency 
and a certain lack of principles underlying a course of action. There is the 
danger, then, that the mixed methods approach is associated with this under-
standing of the word and thus becomes regarded as an approach in which ‘any-
thing goes’. It should be stressed that this is not the philosophical meaning of 
pragmatism and it is not a meaning that should be associated with the mixed 
methods approach.
Further reading
Cresswell, J. W. (2013) Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative and Mixed Methods 
Approaches, 4th edn. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, especially Chapters 1 and 10.
Creswell, J. W. and Plano Clark, V. (2010) Designing and Conducting Mixed Methods 
Research, 2nd edn. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Morgan, D. L. (2014) Integrating Qualitative and Quantitative Methods: A Pragmatic 
Approach. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Teddlie, C. and Tashakkori, A. (2009) Foundations of Mixed Methods Research: Integrating 
Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches in the Social and Behavioral Sciences. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

162  The Good Research Guide
✓
Checklist for mixed methods research
When undertaking mixed methods research you should feel  
confident about answering ‘yes’ to the following questions: 
  1	 Does the research project do one or more of the following things?
• make use of more than one research method
• combine more than one kind of research data
• ask questions based on different models (exploratory/
explanatory)
 
  2	 Has a clear statement been made about the benefits of using a 
mixed methods strategy compared with using just one method?
 
  3	 Is the justification for using a mixed methods strategy based on 
one or more of the following criteria?
• the needs of the particular research question
• checking the accuracy of findings
• providing a more complete picture
• developing the analysis
• a means of compensating the strengths and weaknesses of 
particular methods
 
  4	 Does the research have a clear design showing the sequence, 
dominance, and link between the QUAL and QUAN parts?
 
  5	 Are details provided about how triangulation is used in relation to:
• the different methods of data collection?
• the use of qualitative and quantitative data?
• the kinds of data analysis?
 
 
 
  6	 Has consideration been given to the additional skills and resources 
that might be required in order to conduct mixed methods research?
 
© M. Denscombe, The Good Research Guide. Open University Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Part 2
Methods of data collection
2
There are four main methods of data collection that social researchers can use: 
questionnaires, interviews, observation and documents. In many ways these are 
the social scientist’s equivalent of the microscope, the scales and the micrometer 
that natural scientists might use in relation to material objects in the physical 
world. They are tools that help the researcher to gain:
•• a clearer picture of things;
• an accurate measurement of things;
•• facts and evidence about the subject matter.
Selecting methods: a matter of ‘horses for courses’
In the following chapters there is guidance about the key features of each 
method. However, before choosing and using any of them it is important to con-
sider three things. First, research methods are often associated with specific 
research strategies. Questionnaires tend to be linked with surveys, for example, 
while participant observation tends to be used with ethnography. And there are 
some sound theoretical reasons that explain the tendency of particular methods 
to be linked to particular strategies. The linkage, however, is not watertight and 
it is important for the project researcher to recognize that there is likely to be 
some element of choice when selecting which method to use.
Second, each of the methods has its particular strengths and weaknesses. 
These are listed at the end of each chapter. Bearing this in mind, rather than 
trying to look for a method that is superior to all others in any absolute sense, 
it is better to look for a method that works best in practice for the specific pur-
poses of the investigation. When it comes to choosing a method, in other words, 
researchers should base their decision on the criterion of ‘usefulness’. Research-
ers should ask themselves which method is best suited to the task at hand and 
operate on the premise that, when choosing a method for the collection of data, 
it is a matter of ‘horses for courses’.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

164  The Good Research Guide
Third, research methods do not need to be seen as mutually exclusive. If no 
method is intrinsically better than others, and if methods are to be chosen prag-
matically, then this opens up the possibility of combining methods and using a 
mixed methods approach (see Chapter 10). More than one method can be used 
for the research with the clear intention that weaknesses in one method can be 
compensated for by strengths in another method.
Authorization for the research
Having selected the most appropriate method(s) there might be a strong temptation 
to get things started and forge ahead with the data collection. However, before any 
data collection occurs it is essential that the planned research has been approved 
and authorized. This involves two things: ethics approval and authorization.
•• Ethics approval. Ethics approval is required for the vast majority of social 
research projects. It involves making an application to a Research Ethics Com-
mittee or its equivalent. Ethics approval must be obtained before embarking 
on data collection – this is absolutely essential. See Chapter 17 Research Eth-
ics for further guidance on this point.
•• Authorization. Permission should be obtained from those ‘in authority’ who 
control access to the people and settings involved in the research. This might 
mean getting written approval, for example, from senior managers within an 
organization or from ‘guardians’ who have responsibility for protecting the 
interests of vulnerable people. It is vital that such authorization is obtained 
before the data collection begins.
Good practice: Approval for research
Always get approval in advance. Never start data collection without having 
already had the proposed research formally approved.
Preparation, planning and project management
In general, researchers do not have the time or resources to repeat pieces of 
research nor do they have the opportunity to make amendments and correc-
tions to the method of data collection once it has been put in place. And the vast 
majority of respondents are likely to be less than sympathetic to a plea from the 
researcher to repeat the research a second time in order to overcome a mistake 
in the first version. There is, therefore, a lot of pressure to get it right first time. 
This involves suitable preparation, planning and project management. Three 
things worth considering in this respect are:
•• The timescale and schedule. Researchers need to consider what timescale is 
likely to be involved, and it is good practice here to work out a suitable sched-
ule for the data collection using a Gantt chart or similar wall-chart planner.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Methods of data collection  165
• Resources. Provision should be made for the costs involved in the process of 
data collection (transport, equipment, etc.) and the amount of researcher’s 
time that will be needed in order to complete the data collection successfully 
and on time.
•• Research design. The researcher should not be running around frantically 
trying to gather whatever information comes to hand: data collection should 
be conducted as part of a clear pathway for research. It should form part of 
a research design in which the purpose of doing the research is clear and the 
means for accomplishing it are mapped out in advance.
Record keeping
Whichever research method is used written records should be kept as a matter 
of good practice during the course of the project. There are two facets to this:
•• Diary of events and decisions. There should be a record of the collection 
process. This is like a diary of events that occur and decisions made during 
the research project. Such records provide a documented history that can be 
referred back to for information at a later stage.
•• Organization of the data. Careful record keeping needs to be done in con-
nection with the actual data that are collected. The data need to be logged 
and catalogued, filed and indexed in ways that allow the researcher to know 
exactly what data have been collected and to locate specific aspects of the 
data when this is necessary.
Such records of the research must be kept secure: either 
under lock and key or by password protection of computer 
files – ideally both.
Pilot study
Finally, another matter of good practice that applies to any data collection 
method. The method should always be tested out in advance to check how well 
it works in practice. No matter how much time and effort a researcher puts into 
devising a good data collection tool, there is no real substitute for trying it out ‘in 
the field’ with real participants. If all goes well the researcher can feel reassured 
that there should be no nasty surprises when the data collection proper begins. 
If the pilot study reveals areas for improvement, then these can be incorporated 
before the research goes ‘live’ – avoiding what might otherwise have been dam-
aging problems for the research.
Link up with 
Data protection, 
p. 317.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Questionnaires
11
What is a questionnaire? • When is it appropriate to use a questionnaire? 
• Self-completion questionnaires • Successful questionnaires • Vital 
elements of a research questionnaire • The length of the questionnaire  
• Questionnaire fatigue • Devising the questions • Check questions 
• ‘Open’ and ‘closed’ questions • Types of questions • Web-based 
questionnaires • Advantages of questionnaires • Disadvantages of 
questionnaires • Further reading • Checklist for the use of  
questionnaires
What is a questionnaire?
There are many types of questionnaires. They can vary enormously in terms of 
their purpose, their size and their appearance. To qualify as a research question-
naire, however, they should meet the following three criteria.
First, they should be designed to collect information which can be used sub-
sequently as data for analysis. As a research tool, questionnaires do not set out 
to change people’s attitudes or provide them with information. Though question-
naires are sometimes used for this purpose – for instance, as a way of marketing 
a product – it is not strictly in keeping with the spirit of a research questionnaire, 
whose purpose is to discover things.
Second, they should consist of a written list of questions. The important point 
here is that each person who answers the particular questionnaire reads an iden-
tical set of questions. This allows for consistency and precision in terms of the 
wording of the questions, and makes the processing of the answers easier. (Occa-
sionally, pictures might be used instead of written questions.)
Third, they should gather information by asking people directly about the points 
concerned with the research. Questionnaires work on the premise that if you want 
to find out something about people and their attitudes, you simply go and ask them 
what it is you want to know, and get the information ‘straight from the horse’s mouth’.
When is it appropriate to use a questionnaire?
Different methods are suited to different circumstances, and questionnaires 
are no exception. Although they can be used, perhaps ingeniously, across 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Questionnaires  167
a wide spectrum of research situations, questionnaires are at their most 
productive:
•• when the information required tends to be fairly straightforward information – 
relatively brief and uncontroversial;
• when there is a need for standardized data from identical questions – without 
requiring personal, face-to-face interaction;
• when the respondents can be expected to be able to read and understand the 
questions – the implications of age, intellect, language, and eyesight need to 
be considered;
•• when the social climate is open enough to allow full and honest answers.
Self-completion questionnaires
The main focus of this chapter is on self-completion questionnaires. Self-­
completion questionnaires rely on respondents working independently from the 
researcher, providing written answers at their own pace, in their own time. The 
researcher, even if present when the respondent completes the questionnaire, 
does not get involved with the process of filling in the answers. When ­researchers 
do have some direct involvement, however, things are a bit different. When ques-
tionnaires are delivered over the phone, or when a researcher stops someone in 
the street and asks them to complete a questionnaire that is read to them from a 
clipboard or mobile device, then it is more like using a ‘structured interview’. The 
direct interaction between the researcher and the respondent brings into play a 
range of additional issues linked with the ‘interviewer effect’. These issues are 
covered in Chapter 12 on interviews.
Successful questionnaires
The success of a research questionnaire depends on three things:
  i)  response rate	
(how many are returned)
 ii)  completion rate 	
(how fully completed)
iii)  validity of responses 	 (how honest and accurate)
Unless questionnaires are completed and returned to the researcher, they have 
no value at all. It does not matter how technically correct they might be or how 
beautifully designed they are, the simple fact is that research questionnaires are 
worthless unless and until those who receive them bother to provide answers 
and deliver the completed questionnaire to the researcher. Returned question-
naires that have lots of questions left unanswered, of course, are not likely to 
be of much use: if questionnaires are to be of any value, they must also have a 
sufficient proportion of questions filled-in. And, of course, the value of any ques-
tionnaire will depend on the extent to which respondents provide answers that 
are ‘real’ in the sense that the information is both honest and accurate. Bogus 
answers or mistaken answers are perhaps worse than no answers at all.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

168  The Good Research Guide
The challenge facing the researcher is how to design and distribute the ques-
tionnaire in a way that will achieve a good response rate, with most items in the 
questionnaire filled in, and where there are reasonable grounds for supposing 
that the answers are honest and accurate. There are few absolute rules and no 
absolute guarantees on this score but, in essence, when designing and distribut-
ing a questionnaire, researchers need to take into consideration four things.
Capabilities of respondents
The questionnaire design needs to take into account the particular capabilities 
of those who receive the questionnaire. Different target groups might have dif-
ferent abilities and disabilities which have to be taken into consideration not just 
as an ethical point but as a practical point as well. Where people are not able to 
answer, or find it hard to complete a questionnaire, the response rate will suffer. 
Factors to be taken into account here are things like:
•• literacy (reading ability, proficiency with the language);
• sight capacity (blindness, vision disorders, age);
• vulnerability (young people, the elderly, learning disabilities);
•• memory (ability of recall, amount of detail, time since event).
Respondent motivation
Co-operation with the research will depend on the respondent’s motivation to 
spend time and effort filling-in the questionnaire. Researchers should never take 
this for granted. Faced with respondents who might be weary of requests for 
help, they need to think carefully about what they can do to motivate people, 
taking the following factors into account:
•• interest, enthusiasm, goodwill (topic, money, prize draw);
•• circumstances of distribution (convenience, time).
Sensitivity of the topic
Researchers need to be aware that questions on certain topics can be awk-
ward for respondents to answer and, for this reason, might be likely to produce 
answers that are not totally honest, or lead to items being missed altogether as 
respondents simply avoid them. This is not just a matter of the topic itself, it can 
also reflect the context within which the question is posed and the respondents’ 
understanding of who will get to see the answers, so researchers need to take 
into account the potential effect of:
•• asking about sensitive or embarrassing subjects (personal, emotional);
•• context of the research (climate of trust and openness, or fear of reprisal).
Questionnaire design
The design of a questionnaire can make it attractive. It can also include clever 
features that are useful for the researcher. However, probably the most significant 
aspect of questionnaire design concerns the ‘response burden’ – the time and effort 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Questionnaires  169
it takes for the respondent to complete the questionnaire. As a rule of thumb a 
good research design should minimize the response burden in order to bolster the 
prospects of a good response rate. This means that researchers need to consider 
two key factors:
•• the amount of time needed to complete the questionnaire (number of questions);
•• the ease of answering questions (no ambiguity, suitable format for question).
Bearing these points in mind, Table 11.1 provides a summary of the key criteria 
researchers need to be aware of when producing or evaluating a questionnaire.
Table 11.1  Criteria for the production and evaluation of a research questionnaire
Criterion
Research issue
Factors to be considered
Feasibility 
What are the prospects 
of contacting suitable 
respondents? 
Practicality 
  and 
Resource constraints
•• available means for contacting 
relevant people and distributing 
the questionnaire
•• time and  money to cover the 
preparation and distribution of 
the questionnaire
Response rate
Will a sufficient 
proportion of 
questionnaires be 
returned to avoid bias 
in the information 
collected?
Reliability
•• good design of questionnaire
•• motivation of respondents
•• follow-ups used 
Full information
Does the questionnaire 
gather information on all 
the crucial areas 
necessary for the 
research?
Completeness
•• inclusion of all vital topics
•• all sections of the 
questionnaire answered
Accurate information
Is the information free 
from errors arising 
(intentionally or 
accidentally) from the 
nature of the questions 
being asked?
Validity
•• appropriate questions for 
the topic/concepts being 
investigated
•• clear, precise and 
unambiguous questions 
•• honest answers
Ethical stance
Has due consideration 
been given to the rights 
of those supplying the 
information?
Professional  
integrity
•• voluntary co-operation
•• information given about the 
way data will be used
•• respondents’ identities not 
disclosed 
•• protection of sensitive data
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

170  The Good Research Guide
Vital elements of a research questionnaire
All research questionnaires should include some background information 
about the research, some instructions to the respondent to help them with 
the task of filling in the answers, and some means of giving each completed 
questionnaire a unique identifying code or number. These are three features 
whose inclusion is considered to be ‘good practice’ in relation to any research 
questionnaire.
Background information
From both an ethical and a practical point of view the researcher needs to pro-
vide some background information about the research and the questionnaire. 
Each questionnaire should have information about:
•• The sponsor. Under whose auspices is the research being undertaken? Is it 
individual research or does the research originate from an institution? Headed 
notepaper is an obvious way to indicate the nature of the institution from 
which the questionnaire comes.
• The purpose. What is the questionnaire for, and how will the information be 
used? It is important here to reveal sufficient information to explain the pur-
pose of the research without going too far and ‘leading’ the respondent into a 
line of answering. A brief paragraph should suffice.
• Return address and date. It is vital that the questionnaire contains in it some-
where quite visibly the name and contact address (postal or email) of the 
person(s) to whom the completed questionnaire is to be returned.
• Confidentiality. Respondents should be reassured that the information they 
provide will not be disclosed to others (assuming that the research is ­operating 
according to a conventional code of ethics for social researchers).
• Voluntary responses. Respondents are under no obligation to answer the 
questions, and reassurances about the voluntary nature of their participation 
should be given.
•• Thanks. Courtesy suggests that some word of thanks from the researcher 
should appear either as part of the introduction or right at the end of the ques-
tionnaire.
Good practice: The mindset for success
1	 Start from the assumption that people will be reluctant to complete the ques-
tionnaire, and then think how you can entice them to make the effort to fill it 
in.
2	 Put yourself in their shoes and ask, ‘Why should I bother to help the 
researcher?’
3	 Anticipate low response rates: don’t be over-optimistic on this matter.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Questionnaires  171
Instructions to the respondent
It is very important that respondents are instructed on how to go about answer-
ing the questions. Assuming that this is obvious will likely prove to be a big mis-
take. It is useful, therefore, to provide:
•• An example. An example at the start of the questionnaire can set the respond-
ent’s mind at rest and indicate exactly what is expected of him or her.
• Instructions. Specific instructions should be given for each question where 
the style of question varies throughout the questionnaire.
The allocation of serial numbers
With web-based questionnaires the serial numbers are added automatically. Other 
forms of questionnaire might need serial numbers to be added manually. In this 
case, each questionnaire should be numbered so that it can be distinguished from 
others and located if necessary. The serial number can be used to identify the date 
of distribution, the place and possibly the person. But note: if the questionnaires 
are anonymous, such serial numbers should only allow general factors such as the 
date and location to be identified – not the identity of any individual person.
The length of the questionnaire
There is no hard and fast rule about the number of questions that can be included 
in a questionnaire. This will depend on factors such as the topic under investiga-
tion, how complex the questions are, the nature of the respondents who have 
been targeted and the time it takes to complete the questionnaire. Decisions about 
the size of a questionnaire are ultimately a matter of judgement: the researcher 
needs to gauge how many questions can be included before the respondent is 
likely to run out of patience and consign the questionnaire to the waste bin.
In most cases, researchers do not get a second chance to follow up issues they 
might have missed in the initial questionnaire. Conscious of this ‘one-shot’ con-
straint, there may be the temptation to ask about everything that might possibly be 
of relevance. It is, after all, vital to cover all key matters if the questionnaire is to 
supply data which permit a reasonable analysis by the researcher. But the shrewd 
researcher realizes that it is counter-productive to include everything that might 
feasibly have some relevance to the research issues. Every effort should be made 
to keep the questionnaire as brief as possible by avoiding any superfluous detail or 
non-essential topics. When designing a questionnaire, then, the researcher has to 
walk a tightrope between ensuring coverage of all the vital issues and ensuring the 
questionnaire is brief enough to encourage people to bother answering it.
To accomplish this balancing act there are certain rules to bear in mind.
1	 Only ask those questions which are absolutely vital for the research. The 
better the research is planned, the easier it will be to identify the absolutely 
crucial questions and discard the ‘just in case I need this information later’ 
questions.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

172  The Good Research Guide
2	 Be rigorous in weeding out any duplication of questions. For example, if a 
questionnaire contains as separate questions, ‘What is your date of birth?’ and 
‘How old are you?’ we need to ask just how vital it is that both are included.
3	 Pilot the questionnaire to see how long it takes to answer and then consider 
whether it is reasonable to expect the specific target group to spare this 
amount of time supplying the answers.
Questionnaire fatigue
Good practice: Keep questionnaires as short as possible
A questionnaire needs to be crisp and concise, asking just those questions which 
are crucial to the research. It is worth remembering that there is, perhaps, no 
more effective deterrent to answering a questionnaire than its sheer size.
Answering a survey questionnaire takes mental effort. Even though someone has 
agreed to complete a questionnaire, they can lose enthusiasm as they progress 
through the answers. One obvious result of this is that the respondent will ‘drop out’ 
and not complete the questionnaire. Another consequence is that they might not 
complete all of the questions. And a third consequence is that their effort tails off 
during the process of answering the questionnaire. They don’t withdraw (which of 
course they are perfectly entitled to do) but their answers are progressively based 
on minimizing the effort taken to provide an answer. As Krosnick (1991) points out, 
the mental burden of answering the questionnaire can lead to ‘satisficing’ answers. 
These are answers which might appear to the researcher to be genuine but which 
are actually based on the respondent going through the routine of ticking boxes but 
doing so with minimum effort and not a lot of regard for the truth of the matter. This 
can involve taking the ‘easy option’ (e.g. agreeing with all statements), opting for 
‘don’t know’ answers, sticking to the same point on scale (following a pattern) or 
even resorting to random answers simply to put something in the box. The danger 
here is that the questionnaire will appear to have been completed, and the various 
questions within the questionnaire will have answers recorded against them, but 
those answers might not be the most accurate or most thought-through responses. 
At worst, they could simply be anything the respondent can find to fill the box.
The question is, ‘How can this danger be minimized?’ What can be done to 
­offset the prospect of questionnaire fatigue and encourage respondents to com-
plete questionnaires thoughtfully and honestly? Well, there are a number of 
things that help when it comes to the way the researcher designs and delivers the 
questionnaire, the main ones being:
•• Make the task of answering questions as straightforward and easy as possi-
ble. Everything should be clear and succinct in terms of what is being asked of 
the respondent, and the layout of the questionnaire should enable respondents 
to work their way through the questions without difficulty. They should not 
need to fathom what is expected of them – it should be obvious.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Questionnaires  173
• Let respondents know the extent of the burden they are facing. At the begin-
ning of the questionnaire the respondents should be given an honest indica-
tion of how long it will take to complete the questionnaire and how many 
questions are involved. With web-based questionnaires the inclusion of a ‘pro-
gress indicator’ is really helpful in this respect, allowing respondents to see 
how far they have gone and how much remains to be done.
•• Don’t make unrealistic demands in terms of the questions that are asked. 
Respondents are likely to become demoralized and frustrated if they are con-
fronted with questions that are overly complex or hard to answer. The ques-
tions should take into account the ability of respondents to recall things and 
make judgements about things, and recognize that hard questions take mental 
effort to answer.
There are two other factors that will have a bearing on the extent of response 
fatigue experienced by respondents. These are things that the researcher might 
not be in a strong position to influence directly, but they can be addressed in the 
covering letter/statement that is given to respondents as a way of attempting to 
motivate respondents and encourage them to feel enthusiastic about the task of 
completing the questionnaire.
•• Subject salience. The covering letter/statement should do what it can to point 
out how the topic might be of interest. If the respondent can see that the topic 
of the questions is interesting and relevant for them personally, then there is 
an increased prospect that they will complete the questionnaire and put the 
effort into answering all questions openly and honestly.
•• Respondent accountability. To the extent that respondents believe that their 
answers will ‘make a difference’ then they are more likely to engage more 
fully with the questionnaire and provide thoughtful and genuine answers. 
Again, the covering letter/statement provides an oppor-
tunity to put across the message that respondents have 
some stake in the findings and that their answers could 
contribute to some real outcome that affects them per-
sonally.
Devising the questions
Suitable topics
The willingness of respondents to co-operate with research by filling in a ques-
tionnaire can easily be undermined by the nature of the topics in the question-
naire. To avoid this possibility researchers need to ensure that the questions are 
on topics that respondents will:
•• be willing to answer. When constructing the questions the researcher needs to 
think about whether the respondent will want to answer the kind of questions 
that are being asked. This point applies, in particular, to questions touching on 
personal matters or sensitive areas linked with political and religious beliefs.
Link up with 
Response rates, 
p. 22.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

174  The Good Research Guide
•• have some information, knowledge, experience or opinions on. It is no good 
constructing questions where the responses are likely to be a series of ‘don’t 
knows’ or ‘not applicable’.
Direct or indirect questions
Researchers need to consider whether the information being sought from the 
respondent is amenable to direct questions, or whether it will need to be meas-
ured by indirect means. Where the information being sought is of an overt, 
­factual nature, there is not normally a problem on this point. The questions will 
take the form of ‘How many times . . .? or ‘When did you last . . .? However, ques-
tionnaires are frequently geared to less straightforward matters where a direct 
question would be inappropriate. If, for example, the researcher wishes to know 
what social class the respondent comes from, it would not be wise to ask the 
straightforward question, ‘What is your social class?’ Apart from the fact that 
some people might find this offensive, the term ‘social class’ has different mean-
ings for different people, and the question will produce inconsistent answers. 
In this case, the researcher needs to pinpoint exactly what he or she defines as 
social class and then devise questions that will supply the type of information 
which will allow the respondent’s social class to be deduced. For this purpose, 
indirect questions will be used about occupation, income, education, etc.
The wording of the questions
Questions should not be irritating or annoying for the respondents to answer. 
The success of the questionnaire, after all, depends on the willingness of the 
respondents to spend their time completing the answers and they should not be 
deterred from this task by any sense of frustration arising from the manner in 
which the questions are worded. There are some specific things that researchers 
can do to help avoid this possibility:
•• Make sure the wording is completely unambiguous.
• Avoid vague questions. The more specific and concrete the question, the eas-
ier it is to give a precise answer. And, in all probability, the answer will prove 
to be of more value to the researcher.
• Use only the minimum amount of technical jargon. In terms of a question-
naire, the aim is not to see how clever people are.
• Use wording that is suited to the specific target group. Questions geared 
to 14-year-olds will need to be different in terms of conceptual complexity 
and wording from ones aimed at, for example, members of a professional 
association.
• Keep the questions as short and straightforward as possible. This will avoid 
unnecessary confusion and wasted time re-reading questions or trying to deci-
pher the meaning of the question.
• Avoid asking the same question twice in a different fashion (except as 
‘check’ questions).
• Avoid the use of ‘leading’ questions. These are questions which suggest an 
answer or which prompt the respondent to give a particular kind of answer 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Questionnaires  175
(e.g. Would you agree that there should be controls on the emission of carbon 
dioxide from cars?).
• Be sure to include sufficient options in the answer. If the list might prove too 
long, selecting the main possibilities and then tagging on the ‘Other (please 
specify)’ option is a good strategy.
• Pay attention to the way the questions are numbered. Obviously they should 
be sequential, but there are clever ways of using sub-questions (e.g. 4a, 4b and 
so on) which can help the respondent to map his or her way through the series 
of questions.
•• Avoid words or phrases which might cause offence. If, for example, the ques-
tionnaire involves ethnic minority issues, it is prudent to use the ‘politically 
correct’ terms.
Good practice: Questions should be worded with clarity and precision
There is little room for vagueness or imprecision. This means that the researcher 
must have a clear vision of exactly what issues are at the heart of the research 
and what kind of information would enlighten those issues.
Good practice: The order of the questions
It is usually best to ensure that:
••
the most straightforward questions come at the start;
••
the least contentious questions and least sensitive issues are dealt with at 
the beginning of the questionnaire;
••
the sequence of questions does not lead the respondents towards ­‘inevitable’ 
answers, where the answers to later questions are effectively predicated on 
the answers to earlier ones.
The order of the questions
The ordering of the questions in a questionnaire is important for two reasons. 
First and foremost, it can entice or deter the respondent from continuing with 
the exercise of providing answers. If the respondent is immediately faced with 
the most complex of the questions at the start of the questionnaire this might 
deter him or her from going any further. However, if the questionnaire starts with 
straightforward questions and then gradually moves towards such questions at a 
later stage, there is a greater likelihood that the respondent will persevere. This 
same point is true for those questions which might be perceived as more personal 
and on sensitive issues. There will be a greater chance of success if such ques-
tions appear later in the questionnaire than if they appear right at the start.
The second way in which the ordering of questions can be important is that 
questions asked at an earlier point in the questionnaire can affect the answers 
supplied at a later stage. This is evident in many commercial ‘marketing/sales 
questionnaires’ where there is a conscious attempt to make use of this feature of 
questionnaires.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

176  The Good Research Guide
Check questions
‘Check questions’ are questions embedded in a questionnaire whose specific pur-
pose is to check the respondent’s answers for consistency. A check question is 
not a simple duplication of a question: it is a question that appears in a different 
guise but whose answer should be the same as an alternatively worded ques-
tion that is placed elsewhere in the questionnaire. To the extent that check ques-
tions do provide answers that match, the researcher can feel some confidence 
that the questionnaire is a reliable research instrument and that the findings are 
valid. Where there is not a match, then it raises questions about whether the other 
responses on the questionnaire can be treated as honest and accurate.
‘Open’ and ‘closed’ questions
Open questions are those that leave the respondent to decide the wording of 
the answer, the length of the answer and the kind of matters to be raised in the 
answer. The questions tend to be short and the answers tend to be long. For 
example, the questionnaire might ask, ‘How do you feel about the inclusion of 
nuclear arms as part of Britain’s defence capability?’ and then provide a number 
of empty lines which invite the respondent to enter his or her thoughts on the 
matter.
The advantage of ‘open’ questions is that the information gathered by way of 
the responses is more likely to reflect the full richness and complexity of the views 
held by the respondent. Respondents are allowed space to express themselves 
in their own words. Weighed against this, however, there are two disadvantages 
which are built into the use of open questions. First, they demand more effort on 
the part of the respondents (which might well reduce their willingness to take part 
in the research). Second, they leave the researcher with data which are quite ‘raw’ 
and require a lot of time-consuming analysis before they can be used.
Closed questions structure the answers by allowing only answers which fit 
into categories that have been established in advance by the researcher. The 
researcher, in this case, instructs the respondent to answer by selecting from a 
range of two or more options supplied on the questionnaire. The options can be 
restricted to as few as two (e.g. ‘Yes’ or ‘No’; ‘Male’ or ‘Female’) or can include 
quite complex lists of alternatives from which the respondent can choose.
The advantages and disadvantages of the ‘closed’ question are more or less a 
mirror image of those connected with the open, unstructured approach. In a nut-
shell, the structure imposed on the respondents’ answers provides the researcher 
with information that lends itself nicely to being quantified and compared. The 
answers, in fact, provide pre-coded data that can easily be analysed. Weighed 
against this, however, closed questions allow less scope for respondents to sup-
ply answers which reflect the exact facts or true feelings on a topic if the facts or 
opinions happen to be complicated or do not exactly fit into the range of options 
supplied in the questionnaire. As a result, respondents might get frustrated by not 
being allowed to express their views fully in a way that accounts for any sophis-
tication, intricacy or even inconsistencies in their views.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Questionnaires  177
Types of questions
There are a variety of ways in which questions can be put in a questionnaire,  
and these are listed in Example 11.1. However, from the outset it is worth giving 
some thought to whether the overall questionnaire will benefit from using a variety 
of kinds of questions, or whether it is better to aim for a consistent style throughout. 
Variety has two potential advantages. First, it stops the respondent becoming bored. 
Second, it stops the respondent falling into a ‘pattern’ of answers where, for example, 
on a scale of 1–5 he or she begins to put 4 down as the answer to all questions. Aim-
ing for a consistent style of question, for its part, has the advantage of allowing the 
respondent to get used to the kind of questions so that they can be answered quickly 
and with less likelihood of confusion or misunderstanding. There is no hard and fast 
rule on this point: it is down to a judgement call on the part of the researcher.
Ten types of question
1  An amount
Example:
How many times have you travelled from the UK to another European Union 
country in the past 5 years?  _________
2  A ‘yes/no’ answer 
Example:
Have you travelled from the UK to another European Union country in the past 
12 months?  Yes/No
3  Choose from a list of options 
Example:
Which ONE of the following list of European countries do you feel has the 
strongest economy?
Spain
UK
Belgium
Poland
Ireland
France
Germany
Italy
4  Rank order 
Example:
From the following list of European countries choose the THREE which you feel 
have the strongest economies and put them in rank order: 1 = strongest, 2 = 
second strongest, 3 = third strongest.
Spain 
UK 
Belgium 
Poland
Ireland 
France 
Germany 
Italy 
5  Agree/disagree with a statement 
Example:
Would you agree or disagree with the following statement?
European unity carries economic advantages which outweigh the political 
disadvantages.  Agree/Disagree
6  Degree of agreement and disagreement: the Likert Scale 
Example:
Membership of the European Union is a good thing for the UK.
Strongly agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly disagree 
Example 11.1
‣
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

178  The Good Research Guide
7  Rate items 
Example:
How significant would you rate the following factors in affecting further 
European integration?
Not  
significant 
Very  
significant 
political sovereignty 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
national identities 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
past history 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
religious differences 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
language barriers 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8  Feelings about a topic: the semantic differential 
Example:
Progress towards European unity is:
Important 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Unimportant 
Difficult 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Easy 
Risky 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Safe 
Unlikely 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Likely 
Boring 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Interesting 
9  A list 
Example:
Please list the issues you feel are most important in relation to the UK’s 
membership of the European Union:
_____________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________
10  A statement 
Example:
What do you think about the UK’s membership of the European Union?
_____________________________________________________________________ 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
_____________________________________________________________________
Web-based questionnaires
Web-based questionnaires are well suited to the needs of small-scale social 
research. Generally, such questionnaires are designed using software provided 
by an organization that ‘hosts’ the questionnaire and makes 
it available to respondents online. The commercial compa-
nies are ones like SurveyMonkey, QuestionPro, KwikSur-
veys, Survs, and many others that are easily located by 
doing an online search for ‘web questionnaires’.
There are some distinct advantages to using the design facilities provided by 
such organizations because, as Bhaskaran and LeClaire (2010) point out:
Link up with 
Internet  
surveys, p. 13.
‣
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Questionnaires  179
•• They help with good practice: There are plenty of templates and examples 
that are freely available which can be used as a starting point for designing 
the questionnaire. No need to start from scratch – help is always at hand. And 
the software, in any case, tends to have built-in assistance that guides you 
towards good practice when setting up the questions.
• They encourage completion: The options available for the design and layout 
of the questionnaire can be used to make it appealing. Colourful images and 
graphs are easy to incorporate within a web-based questionnaire and these 
can provide a means for sparking interest in the topic and encouraging the 
respondent to spend time completing the questionnaire.
• They reduce potential errors: The questionnaire can incorporate a range of 
features which reduce the possibility of errors creeping in during the process 
of completing the questionnaire. These features boost the prospects of get-
ting questionnaires returned that have been completed fully and clearly, and 
which have a minimum amount of ‘missing data’.
• They help with data processing: The respondents’ answers are automatically 
transferred from the questionnaire into a data file. The software does not do the 
analysis for the researcher, but it does transfer the data from the questionnaires 
and puts them into a data file which is in a format that can be entered straight 
into an Excel spreadsheet or some equivalent. This automated process saves 
the researcher an awful lot of time but, perhaps even more importantly, it also 
removes an element of the survey process where human error can occur.
Design options for web-based questionnaires:  
what features are available?
The software for designing web-based questionnaires offers a large array of 
options. Some of them are available when you sign up for the basic ‘trial’ ver-
sion; others come at a price when you upgrade from the free introductory pack-
age. Table 11.2 gives an overview of the main options available. Schonlau et al. 
(2006), however, warn against getting carried away with the design options. 
The emphasis should be on keeping things clean and 
­simple, they argue, and it is for this reason that graphics 
and matrix questions should be used sparingly. They also 
advise that making questions mandatory can deter peo-
ple from completing a questionnaire. Such forced answers 
should only be used when really necessary.
Link up with 
Web-based  
questionnaire 
surveys, p. 14.
Table 11.2  Design options for web-based questionnaires 
Templates
A range of established designs is normally available to copy or 
adapt
Appearance
Options for background colour, fonts and layout are available
Logos
Logos, images and other personalizing features can be inserted
Progress bar 
To show respondent how far they are through the questionnaire
Identifier
Unique number; web address of sender; timestamp
(continued)
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

180  The Good Research Guide
Radio buttons and check boxes
When preparing questions for an online questionnaire it is important to distin-
guish between radio buttons and check boxes. Radio buttons are used when 
respondents need to select a single option from a list: they do not permit the 
respondent to enter more than one choice from the list. Check boxes (or tick 
boxes) allow respondents to make multiple choices from a list: they permit 
respondents to choose two or more choices from the list of possible answers 
provided by the researcher.
      
  [Select one from]           
  [Check all that apply]
If the appropriate choice is not made at the design stage there will be big trou-
ble ahead when it comes to the analysis of the data. Think: ‘Do I want respond-
ents to provide one single answer to the question I am asking, or do I want 
to allow them to select two or possibly more options?’ If you want to allow 
multiple responses you need to work out in advance how you plan to analyse 
the data. Note that the safer thing to do is to stick to the radio buttons, keeping 
things simple and straightforward by permitting just one response to be chosen 
from a list of alternatives presented to respondents in the question: one answer 
to one question.
Advantages of questionnaires
Questionnaires are economical
They can supply a considerable amount of research data for a relatively low cost 
in terms of materials, money and time.
Table 11.2  Design options for web-based questionnaires (Continued)
Question 
types
Single option answer: radio buttons
Multiple choice answer: check box/drop down menu 
Matrix questions: used for rating and scaling 
Rank order questions
Open-ended text 
Order of 
questions
Randomize the order of questions
Question branching: respondent’s answer determines subsequent 
series of questions
Skip logic: to allow certain questions to be missed
Question numbering: automatic
Response 
options
Mandatory answer: Respondents will not be able to submit  
their questionnaire unless they have answered these 
questions
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Questionnaires  181
Relatively easy to arrange
Self-completion questionnaires are easier to arrange than, for example, personal 
interviews. Respondents are free to choose when and where they fill-in the ques-
tionnaire.
The delivery of questions is standardized
All respondents are posed exactly the same questions. And with self-completion 
questionnaires there is little scope for the data to be affected by interpersonal 
factors or the manner in which the questions are asked.
Data accuracy
The answers to web-based questionnaires can be fed directly into a data file, thus 
automating the process of data entry. This effectively eliminates the human error 
factor that inevitably arises when people need to read the responses to a paper 
questionnaire and then enter the data manually via the computer keyboard.
Online questionnaires facilitate ‘accessibility’
They can be configured so that people with sight impairment or learning difficul-
ties can have the same opportunity as others to respond to the questionnaire. 
This is very important in terms of equal opportunities.
Disadvantages of questionnaires
In many respects the potential disadvantages of questionnaires go hand in hand 
with the potential advantages.
Pre-coded questions can be frustrating
While the respondents might find it less demanding merely to tick appropriate 
boxes they might, equally, find this restricting and frustrating – and it could even 
deter respondents from completing the questionnaire.
Pre-coded questions impose a structure on the answers
This can bias the findings towards the researcher’s, rather than the respond-
ent’s, way of seeing things. Questionnaires, by their very nature, start to impose 
a structure on the answers and shape the nature of the responses in a way that 
reflects the researcher’s thinking rather than the respondent’s. Good research 
practice will minimize the prospect of this, but there is always the danger that 
the options open to the respondent when answering the questions will channel 
responses away from the respondent’s perception of matters to fit in with a line 
of thinking established by the researcher.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

182  The Good Research Guide
Checks on truthfulness
Self-completion questionnaires offer little opportunity for the researcher to 
check the truthfulness of the answers given by the respondents. Because the 
research does not take place face-to-face and because the answers are given ‘at 
a distance’ the researcher cannot rely on a number of clues that an interviewer 
might have about whether the answers are genuine or not.
Further reading
Brace, I. (2013) Questionnaire Design, 3rd edn. London: Kogan Page.
Bradburn, N. M., Sudman, S. and Wansink, B. (2004) Asking Questions: The Definitive 
Guide to Questionnaire Design, 2nd edn. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Gillham, B. (2007) Developing a Questionnaire, 2nd edn. London: Continuum.
Oppenheim, A.N. (2000) Questionnaire Design, Interviewing and Attitude ­Measurement, 
2nd edn. London: Continuum.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Questionnaires  183
✓
Checklist for the use of questionnaires 
When using a questionnaire for research you should feel confident  
about answering ‘yes’ to the following questions: 
  1	 Has an explanation of the purpose of the questionnaire been 
provided?
 
  2	 Has information about the researchers (including contact details) 
been included?
 
  3	 Are there assurances about anonymity and the confidentiality of 
data?
 
  4	 When necessary, are instructions given on how to complete the 
questions?
 
  5	 Have thanks been expressed to the respondents?
  6	 Has a progress indicator been included or some alternative 
information about the time needed for completion of the 
questionnaire?
 
 
  7	 Have the design of the questionnaire and the wording of the 
questions been tailored to suit the particular kind of respondents?
 
  8	 Have all non-essential questions been excluded?
  9	 Does the layout of the questionnaire make it easy to follow?
10	 Are the questions clear and unambiguous?
11	 Are the questions in a suitable order?
12	 Has the questionnaire been piloted?
© M. Denscombe, The Good Research Guide. Open University Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Interviews
12
What is a research interview? • When is it appropriate to use 
interviews? • The structure of interviews • One-to-one interviews • Group 
interviews • Focus groups • The interviewer effect • Skills for face-to-
face interviewing • Conducting a face-to-face interview • Recording the 
interview • Online interviews • How do you know the informant is telling 
the truth? • Advantages of interviews • Disadvantages of interviews   
• Further reading • Checklist for the use of interviews
What is a research interview?
Research interviews are a method of data collection that uses people’s answers 
to researchers’ questions as their source of data. In this respect they have some-
thing in common with questionnaires – the data comes from what people tell 
the researcher. This contrasts with observational methods (which look at what 
people do) and the use of documents (where attention is given to what has been 
written and recorded). Research interviews, for their part, focus on self-reports –  
what people say they do, what they say they believe, what opinions they say  
they have.
Interviews and conversations
Research interviews involve a set of implicit assumptions about the situation 
that are not associated with a normal conversation (Denscombe 1983; Silverman 
1985, 2013). When someone agrees to take part in a research interview they rec-
ognize that they are taking part in a formal piece of research and, through their 
agreement to be interviewed, they tacitly acknowledge that:
•• They give their consent to participation in the research. It is explicitly a meet-
ing intended to produce material that will be used for research purposes – and 
the interviewee understands this and agrees to it. From the researcher’s point 
of view this is particularly important in relation to research ethics.
• Interviewees’ words can be used as research data. Unless interviewees ­specify 
to the contrary, what is said during the interview can be taken as material that 
is both ‘on record’ and ‘for the record’.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Interviews  185
•• The agenda for the discussion is set by the researcher. Although the degree of 
control exercised by the researcher will vary according to the style of inter-
viewing, there is a tacit agreement built into the notion of being interviewed 
that the proceedings and the agenda for the discussion will be controlled by 
the researcher.
Caution: Consent to be interviewed
Although agreeing to be interviewed carries an implicit 
understanding about what the interview situation entails, it 
is generally good practice to put these things in writing, for 
example as part of the ‘consent form’.
When is it appropriate to use interviews?
The decision to use interviews for a research project needs to take account of 
their feasibility as a data collection method. The first thing to be considered in 
this respect is the possibility of gaining access to potential interviewees. There 
is obviously no point in pursuing the idea of conducting interviews unless there 
are good grounds for believing that the necessary people can be accessed. Two 
factors come into play here. Important people are likely to be busy and might 
well have secretaries devoted to protecting their boss’s diary. Getting a time-slot 
in the diary of such people might not be easy or, indeed, it might prove impos-
sible. There is also the matter of authorization. Even if an individual agrees to 
be interviewed, access might depend on gaining approval for the interview from 
some relevant authority. This can be important in the case of people working in 
a formal organization, and it is absolutely vital in the case of interviewing any-
one considered ‘vulnerable’ (e.g. children).
The next thing to consider is the cost. Research interviews can prove to be a 
relatively expensive way of collecting data. They can involve considerable travel 
costs if interviewees are scattered widely, and they are fairly time-consuming 
in terms of travel time, the time of the interview itself and the analysis of the 
data (see Transcribing audio recordings of interviews, p. 277). Online interviews 
(see below) can eliminate many of the costs but when contemplating the use of 
face-to-face interviews it is important to consider whether interviews are viable 
in terms of the costs in time and travel involved. Particularly with low-budget, 
small-scale research projects, the researcher needs to ensure that the people are 
not distributed too widely across a large geographical area and that conducting 
the interviews will not incur prohibitive costs.
The third thing to be considered is the kind of data that is required for the 
research project. If the aim is to collect information on simple and uncontrover-
sial facts, or if the aim is to accumulate quantitative data, then that kind of data 
can be collected just as effectively but more cheaply using an alternative method. 
Distributing a questionnaire is likely to prove to be a more cost-effective method 
Link up with 
Chapter 17 
Research ethics.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

186  The Good Research Guide
to use. Particularly in the context of low-budget small-scale research, the time 
and effort put into conducting interviews are best rewarded when the research 
wants to explore complex and subtle phenomena – things such as:
•• Opinions, feelings, emotions and experiences, where the aim of the research is 
to understand them in depth rather than report them in a simple word or two.
• Complex issues, where the research focuses on complicated matters that call 
for a detailed understanding of how things work, how factors are inter-con-
nected or how systems operate.
•• Privileged information, where the opportunity arises to speak with key play-
ers in the field who can give particularly valuable insights and wisdom based 
on their experience or position.
Key point
The use of interviews in small-scale research tends to involve the use of 
semi-structured interviews to investigate attitudes and issues in detail, and is 
­generally used as part of qualitative research.
The structure of interviews
Interview data are collected at a meeting, or series of meetings, which are 
normally pre-arranged and where the interviewer and the interviewee engage 
in a sequence of questions and answers on a specific topic of interest to the 
researcher. The extent to which the sequence of questions and answers stick rig-
idly to an agenda can vary and it is conventional to classify interviews as being 
‘structured’, ‘semi-structured’ or ‘unstructured’ to signify how much flexibility 
there is in the format of the meeting.
•• Structured interviews involve tight control over the format of the questions 
and answers. In essence, the structured interview is like a questionnaire which 
is administered face-to-face with a respondent. The researcher has a predeter-
mined list of questions, to which the respondent is invited to offer limited-option 
responses. This standardizes the process of data collection, something that is 
particularly useful with large-scale projects involving ‘computer-assisted per-
sonal interviewing’ (CAPI) with many interviewers inputting responses direct 
into mobile devices (tablets, smart phones, laptop computers).
• With semi-structured interviews the interviewer still has a clear list of issues 
to be addressed and questions to be answered. However, the interviewer is 
prepared to be flexible in terms of the order in which the topics are consid-
ered, and, perhaps more significantly, to let the interviewee develop ideas and 
speak more widely on the issues raised by the researcher. The answers are 
open-ended, and there is more emphasis on the interviewee elaborating points 
of interest.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Interviews  187
•• Unstructured interviews go further in the extent to which emphasis is placed 
on the interviewee’s thoughts. The interviewer’s role is to start the ball roll-
ing by introducing a theme or topic, but then to be as non-directive as pos-
sible. The idea is to let interviewees develop their own ideas and pursue their 
own train of thought rather than have the discussion shaped by questions 
which the researcher already has in mind.
With semi-structured and unstructured interviews it is the possible for the inter-
view to develop and change through the course of the project – to be used devel-
opmentally. Rather than keeping each interview the same, the questions asked 
can change from one interview to the next as a result of information given in pre-
vious interviews and a desire to follow up new lines of enquiry. Such interviews 
take place consecutively and are normally associated with qualitative research 
and approaches such as grounded theory (see Chapter 7).
Good practice
It is crucial from the start to have a clear idea about whether the research pro-
ject needs a standardized interview procedure (structured) or whether it needs to 
develop ideas through a more flexible approach (semi- or unstructured).
One-to-one interviews
The most common form of interview is the one-to-one variety which involves 
a meeting between one researcher and one informant. One reason for its popu-
larity is that it is relatively easy to arrange. Only two people’s diaries need to 
coincide. Another advantage is that the opinions and views expressed through-
out the interview stem from one source: the interviewee. This makes it fairly 
straightforward for the researcher to locate specific ideas with specific people. 
A third advantage is that the one-to-one interview is relatively easy to control. 
The researcher only has one person’s ideas to grasp and interrogate, and one 
person to guide through the interview agenda. And a fourth advantage of con-
ducting one-to-one interviews becomes evident when the researcher embarks on 
transcribing the interview tape: it is far easier to transcribe a recorded interview 
when the talk involves just one interviewee. There is only one voice to recognize 
and only one person talking at a time.
Group interviews
A disadvantage of the one-to-one interview is that it limits the number of views 
and opinions available to the researcher. Listening to one person at a time effec-
tively restricts the number of voices that can be heard and the range of views 
that can be included within a research project. Group interviews, however, pro-
vide a practical solution to this. By interviewing more than one person at a time 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

188  The Good Research Guide
the researcher is able to dramatically increase the number and range of partici-
pants involved in the research.
Increasing the numbers involved can have benefits in terms of the representa-
tiveness of the data. The inclusion of more participants is likely to mean that a 
broader spectrum of people are covered by the research and that there might be 
a greater variety of experiences and opinions emerging from the investigation. 
Indeed, under certain circumstances researchers can deliberately select partici-
pants who are very different in order to gather widely differing views and experi-
ences on the topic of the interview.
A group interview can be conducted very much like a one-to-one interview 
in the sense that the interviewer remains the focal point of the interaction that 
takes place. The questions and answers are channelled through the interviewer. 
The difference is that instead of each question prompting a response from just 
one interviewee the researcher can get perhaps four responses from four people 
during the interview.
An alternative vision of the group interview is one that stresses the ‘group’ 
characteristics of the interaction during an interview. It sees the group interview 
as distinctive in the way that it can get the participants to respond as part of a 
group, rather than as individuals. The researcher’s incentive for using a group 
interview, in this case, is not a quantitative one concerned with increased num-
bers and improved representativeness. It is, instead, a qualitative one concerned 
with the way that group discussions can be more illuminating. The group discus-
sion allows participants to listen to alternative points of view. It allows members 
to express support for certain views and to challenge views with which they 
disagree. The group interview, in this sense, trades on group dynamics. It uses 
the social and psychological aspects of group behaviour to foster the ability of 
participants to get involved, speak their minds and reflect on the views of others.
Focus groups
Focus groups consist of small groups of people who are brought together by a 
‘moderator’ (the researcher) to explore attitudes and perceptions, feelings and 
ideas about a specific topic. Typically they last for 1½ to 2 hours and are useful 
for gauging the extent to which there are shared views among a group of people 
in relation to a specific topic. Ideally, focus groups have six to nine people in 
them. This is a large enough number to allow a range of views and opinions to  
be present among the group but not too large as to be unmanageable in terms of 
the discussion. In small-scale research projects the numbers are often smaller. 
The reason for this is that focus groups can be costly and time-consuming to 
arrange. It is not easy to organize a venue for the meeting and get six or more 
people to turn up on time. And it can prove to be quite expensive if the researcher 
needs to fund participants’ travel and pay for the room.
Focus groups have three distinctive features which mark them out as different 
from other kinds of interview:
•• there is a focus to the session, with the group discussion being based on an 
item or experience about which all participants have similar knowledge;
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Interviews  189
• the moderator’s role is to facilitate the group interaction rather than lead the 
discussion;
•• particular emphasis is placed on group dynamics and interaction within the 
group as means of eliciting information.
During a focus group session participants are encouraged to discuss the topic 
among themselves. This interaction helps the researcher to understand the rea-
soning behind the views and opinions that are expressed by group members. It 
provides the researcher with a method of investigating the participants’ reason-
ing and a means for exploring underlying factors that might explain why people 
hold the opinions and feelings they do. As Morgan (2006: 121) puts it:
[Focus group members] share their experiences and thoughts, while also 
comparing their own contributions to what others have said. This process of 
sharing and comparing is especially useful for hearing and understanding a 
range of responses on a research topic. The best focus groups thus not only 
provide data on what the participants think but also why they think the way 
they do.
Such sharing and comparing of personally held points of view can lead in either 
of two directions – both of which can be of value to the researcher. The group 
discussion can lead to some consensus with members of the group largely agree-
ing and arriving at some shared viewpoint. Alternatively, the group discussion 
might serve to expose significant differences among group members in which 
case the researcher is presented with data about a range of opinions and feelings 
relating to the topic. Either way, the benefit of the discussion and interaction, 
questioning and reflection, is that it reveals the reasoning and underlying logic 
used by participants. It thus gives the researcher an insight into not only what 
people think, but also why they hold those views.
The success of a focus group, however, depends on establishing a climate 
of trust within the group, and it is a key part of the role of the moderator 
to foster a situation in which participants feel at ease and sufficiently com-
fortable in the company of the other group members to express themselves 
freely. A crucial factor here is confidentiality. Group members need to feel 
assured that if they express a personal feeling or reveal some aspect of their 
personal life during the discussion that such information will be treated as 
confidential by the group. What is said by individuals during the focus group 
session ought to remain private and not be disclosed publicly by other mem-
bers of the group.
The interviewer effect
Personal identity
People respond differently depending on how they perceive the person asking 
the questions. In particular, the sex, the age and the ethnic origins of the inter-
viewer have a bearing on the amount of information people are willing to divulge 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

190  The Good Research Guide
and their honesty about what they reveal. The data, in other words, are affected 
by the personal identity of the researcher.
The impact of the researcher’s personal identity, of course, will depend 
on who is being interviewed. It is not, strictly speaking, the identity in its 
own right that affects the data, but what the researcher’s identity means as 
far as the person being interviewed is concerned. And, of course, the effect 
of the researcher’s identity will also depend on the nature of the topic being 
discussed. On sensitive issues or on matters regarded as rather personal, the 
interviewer’s identity assumes particular importance. If the research is deal-
ing with religious beliefs, with earnings, with sexual relationships, with per-
sonal health or any of a host of similar issues, the sex, age and ethnicity of 
the interviewer in relation to the sex, age and ethnicity of the interviewee 
are very likely to influence the nature of the data that emerge – their full-
ness and their honesty. On some questions people can be embarrassed. They 
can feel awkward or defensive. Whenever this is the case, there is the pos-
sibility that interviewees might supply answers which they feel fit in with 
what the researcher expects from them – fulfilling the perceived expectations  
of the researcher. Or the answers might tend to be tailored to match what the 
interviewee suspects is the researcher’s point of view, keeping the researcher 
happy. Either way, the quality of the data suffers.
From the perspective of the small-scale project researcher there is a limit 
to what can be done about this. Although interviews conducted over the Inter-
net, and to a lesser extent interviews conducted by phone, do provide some 
possibilities for disguising who we are, there are definite limits to the extent 
that researchers can disguise their ‘self’ during face-to-face interviews. We 
bring to such interviews certain personal attributes which are ‘givens’ and 
which cannot be altered on a whim to suit the needs of the research inter-
view. Our sex, our age, our ethnic origin, our accent, even our occupational 
status, all are aspects of our ‘self’ which, for practical purposes, cannot be 
changed. We can make efforts to be polite and punctual, receptive and neutral, 
in order to encourage the right climate for an interviewee to feel comfortable 
and provide honest answers. What we cannot do is change these biographical 
attributes.
Good practice: Be aware of the interviewer effect
Social researchers should consider the following questions:
•
•
What are the social status, educational qualifications and professional exper-
tise of the people to be interviewed, and how do these compare with my 
own? Is this likely to affect the interviewer–interviewee relationship in a posi-
tive or negative manner?
••
Is there likely to be an age gap between myself and the interviewee(s) and, 
if so, how might this affect the interview?
••
In relation to the topic being researched, will interviewing someone of the 
opposite sex or a different ethnic group have an impact on their willingness 
to answer questions openly and honestly?
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Interviews  191
Self-presentation
Conventional advice to researchers has been geared to minimizing the impact of 
researchers on the outcome of the research by having them adopt a passive and 
neutral stance. The idea is that the researcher:
•• presents himself or herself in a light which is designed not to antagonize or 
upset the interviewee (conventional clothes, courtesy, etc.);
•• remains neutral and non-committal on the statements made during the inter-
view by the interviewee.
Passivity and neutrality are the order of the day. The researcher’s ‘self’, adopting 
this approach, is kept firmly hidden beneath a cloak of cordiality and receptive-
ness to the words of the interviewee. To a certain degree, this is sound advice. 
The researcher, after all, is there to listen and learn, not to preach. The point is 
to get the interviewee to open up, not to provoke hostility or put the interviewee 
on the defensive.
Personal involvement
One line of reasoning argues that a cold and calculating style of interviewing 
reinforces a gulf between the researcher and the informant, and does little to 
help or empower the informant. Now, if the aims of the research are specifically 
to help or empower the people being researched, rather than dispassionately 
learn from them, then the approach of the interviewer will need to alter accord-
ingly ­(Oakley 1981). Under these circumstances, the researcher will be inclined 
to show emotion, to respond with feeling and to engage in a true dialogue with the 
interviewee. The researcher will become fully involved as a person with feelings, 
with experiences and with knowledge that can be shared with the interviewee. 
A word of warning, though. This style of interviewing remains ‘unconventional’, 
and the researcher needs to be confident and committed to make it work. The 
researcher also needs to feel sure that his or her audience understand and share 
the underlying logic of the approach rather than expecting the researcher to 
adopt the cool and dispassionate stance.
Skills for face-to-face interviewing
A good research interview is not simply a casual conversation. This point has 
already been made. Unlike casual conversations, research interviews require a 
good deal of concentrated effort if they are to be successful. The researcher needs 
to think about how to get the best response from the interviewee and how to make 
the interview as productive as possible in terms of the aims of the research. This is 
particularly the case with face-to-face interviews. In this context:
•• The good interviewer needs to be attentive. This may sound obvious, but it 
is all too easy to lose the thread of the discussion because the researcher 
needs to be monitoring a few other things while listening closely to what the 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

192  The Good Research Guide
­informant has to say: writing the field notes, looking for relevant non-verbal 
communication, checking that the recorder is working.
• The good interviewer is sensitive to the feelings of the informant. This is not 
just a matter of social courtesy, though that is certainly a worthy aspect of 
it. It is also a skill which is necessary for getting the best out of an interview. 
Where interviewers are able to empathize with the informant and to gauge the 
feelings of the informant, they will be in a better position to coax out the most 
relevant information.
• The good interviewer is able to tolerate silences during the talk, and knows 
when to shut up and say nothing. Anxiety is the main danger. Fearing that 
the interview might be on the verge of breaking down, the researcher can 
feel the need to say something quickly to kick-start the discussion. Worry-
ing about cramming in every possible gem of wisdom in the allotted time, 
the interviewer can be inclined to rush the informant on quickly to the next 
point. But, most of all, feeling uncomfortable when the conversation lapses 
into silence, the interviewer can be all too quick to say something when a 
more experienced interviewer would know that the silence can be used as a 
wonderful resource during interviews.
• The good interviewer is adept at using prompts. Although silences can be pro-
ductive, the interviewer needs to exercise judgement on this. There are times 
during an interview when the researcher might feel that it is necessary to spur 
the informant to speak. Listed below are some examples of how this can be 
done. What the examples share is a degree of subtlety. It is not normally accept-
able for research interviewers to demand that the informant answers the ques-
tions. Research interviews are not police interviews. The idea is to nudge the 
informant gently into revealing their knowledge or thoughts on a specific point.
• The good interviewer is adept at using probes. There are occasions during an 
interview when the researcher might want to delve deeper into a topic rather 
than let the discussion flow on to the next point. An informant might make a 
point in passing which the researcher thinks should be explored in more detail. 
Some explanation might be called for, or some justification for a comment. Some 
apparent inconsistency in the informant’s line of reasoning might be detected, 
an inconsistency which needs unravelling. Without being aggressive the good 
interviewer knows how to probe points further when it is required.
• The good interviewer is adept at using checks. One of the major advantages 
of interviews is that they offer the researcher the opportunity to check that 
he or she has understood the informant correctly. As an ongoing part of the 
normal talk during interviews, the researcher can present a summary of what 
they think the informant has said, which the informant can then confirm as an 
accurate understanding, or can correct if it is felt to be a misunderstanding 
of what has been said. Such checks can be used at strategic points during the 
interview as a way of concluding discussion on one aspect of the topic.
• The good interviewer is non-judgemental. As far as possible interviewers 
should suspend personal values and adopt a non-judgemental stance in rela-
tion to the topics covered during the interview. This means not only biting 
your lip on occasion, but also taking care not to reveal disgust, surprise or 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Interviews  193
pleasure through facial gestures. The good interviewer must also respect the 
rights of the interviewee. This means accepting if a person simply does not 
wish to tell you something and knowing when to back off if the discussion is 
beginning to cause the interviewee particular embarrassment or stress. This 
is a point of personal sensitivity and research ethics.
•• With group interviews and focus groups, the good interviewer/facilitator 
manages to let everyone have a say. It is vital to avoid the situation where a 
dominant personality hogs the discussion and bullies others in the group to 
agree with his or her opinion.
Good practice: Tactics for interviews – prompts, probes and checks
Prompts:	
Offer some examples (to help with answering the question)
	
Repeat the last few words spoken by the interviewee (to invite them 
to continue)
	
Repeat the question (to clarify and allow more time for a response)
	
Remain silent (to allow a pause that encourages them to pursue 
their thoughts)
Probes:	
Ask for an example
	
Ask for clarification
	
Ask for more details
Check:	
Summarize their thoughts, e.g. So, if I understand you correctly . . .
	
What this means, then, is that . . .
Conducting a face-to-face interview
Planning the interview
In the case of face-to-face interviews, securing an agreement to be interviewed 
is normally easier if the prospective interviewee is contacted in advance. This 
allows both parties to arrange a mutually convenient time for the interview. At 
this point, of course, the researcher will probably be asked how long the inter-
view will take, and should therefore be in a position to respond. It is most unlikely 
that busy people will feel comfortable with a suggestion that the interview will 
‘take as long as it takes’. The researcher needs to make a bid for an agreed length 
of time whether it be 15 minutes, half an hour, 45 minutes or an hour.
Where a face-to-face interview takes place ‘on site’, events are sometimes 
beyond the control of the researcher. This means there is an added danger that 
things can go wrong. Through whatever means, though, the researcher needs to 
try to get a location for the interview which will not be disturbed, which offers 
privacy, which has fairly good acoustics and which is reasonably quiet. This can 
prove to be a pretty tall order in places like busy organizations, schools, hospi-
tals, and so on. But at least the desirability of such a venue should be conveyed 
to the person arranging the interview room.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

194  The Good Research Guide
Within the interview room, it is important to be able to set up the seat-
ing arrangements in a way that allows comfortable interaction between the 
researcher and the interviewee(s). In a one-to-one interview the researcher 
should try to arrange seating so that the two parties are at a 90 degree angle 
to each other. This allows for eye contact without the confrontational feeling 
arising from sitting directly opposite the other person. With group interviews, it 
is important to arrange the seating to allow contact between all parties without 
hiding individuals at the back of the group or outside the group.
Introduction and formalities
At the beginning of a research interview there should be the opportunity to say 
‘Hello’, to do some introductions, to talk about the aims of the research and to 
say something about the origins of the researcher’s own interest in the topic. 
During the initial phase, there should also be confirmation that you have per-
mission to record the discussion and reassurances about the confidentiality of 
comments made during the interview. The aim is to set the tone for the rest of 
the interview – normally a relaxed atmosphere in which the interviewee feels 
free to open up on the topic under consideration. Trust and rapport are the 
keywords.
During the pre-interview phase, the interviewer should do two other things:
•• prepare the recording equipment;
•• as far as possible, arrange the seating positions to best advantage.
Starting the interview
The first question takes on a particular significance for the interview. It should 
offer the interviewee the chance to settle down and relax. For this reason it is 
normally good practice to kick off with an ‘easy’ question: something on which 
the interviewee might be expected to have well-formulated views and something 
that is quite near the forefront of their mind. Two tactics might help here.
•• Ask respondents, in a general way, about themselves and their role as it relates 
to the overall area of the interview. This allows the researcher to collect valu-
able background information about informants while, at the same time, let-
ting informants start off by covering familiar territory.
•• Use some ‘trigger’ or ‘stimulus’ material, so that the discussion can relate to 
something concrete, rather than launch straight into abstract ideas.
Monitoring progress
During the interview the researcher should keep a discreet eye on the time. The 
good researcher needs to wind things up within the allotted time and will have 
covered most of the key issues during that time. While doing this the good inter-
viewer also needs to attend to the following things during the progress of the 
interview itself:
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Interviews  195
•• Identify the main points being stated by the interviewee and the priorities as 
expressed by the interviewee. With focus groups, what consensus is emerging 
about the key points?
• Look for the underlying logic of what is being said by the informant. The 
interviewer needs to ‘read between the lines’ to decipher the rationale lying 
beneath the surface of what is being said. The interviewer should ask ‘What 
are they really telling me here?’ and, perhaps more significantly, ‘What are 
they not mentioning?’
• Look for inconsistencies in the position being outlined by the interviewee. If 
such inconsistencies exist, this does not invalidate their position. Most people 
have inconsistencies in their opinions and feelings on many topics. However, 
such inconsistencies will be worth probing as the interview progresses to see 
what they reveal.
• Pick up clues about whether the informant’s answers involve an element of 
boasting or are answers intended to please the interviewer.
• Be constantly on the look-out for the kind of answer that is a ‘fob-off’.
• Get a feel for the context in which the discussion is taking place. The priorities 
expressed by the interviewee might reflect events immediately prior to the 
interview, or things about to happen in the near future. They might be ‘issues 
of the moment’, which would not assume such importance were the interview 
to be conducted a few weeks later. The researcher needs to be sensitive to 
this possibility and find out from the interviewee if there are events which are 
influencing priorities in this way.
•• Keep a suitable level of eye contact throughout the interview and make a note 
of non-verbal communication which might help a later interpretation of the 
interview talk.
Finishing the interview
Having kept an eye on the time, and having ensured that most of the required 
areas for discussion have been covered, the interviewer should draw events to a 
close making sure that:
•• the interviewee is invited to raise any points that they think still need to be 
covered and have not been covered so far;
•• the interviewee is thanked for having given up the time to participate in the 
interview.
Caution: Interviews are more than a conversation
The superficial similarity between an interview and a conversation should not 
lead the researcher into thinking that interviewing is an easy option when it 
comes to data collection. The research interview, like any other method, requires 
proper planning and the use of appropriate techniques and skills.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

196  The Good Research Guide
Recording the interview
Memory is a rather unreliable way of capturing the discussion that happens dur-
ing a face-to-face interview. As psychologists tell us, human memory is prone to 
partial recall, bias and error. Interviewers, instead, should rely on other more 
permanent records of what was said.
Audio and video recordings
In practice, most face-to-face interviewers rely on audio recordings. Initially, 
interviewees can feel rather inhibited by the process of recording but most par-
ticipants become more relaxed after a short while. When used sensitively, audio 
recording does not pose too much of a disturbance to interview situations, and 
it has certain clear benefits. Audio recordings offer a permanent record and one 
that is fairly complete in terms of the speech that occurs. They also lend them-
selves to being checked by other researchers. However, the downside is that they 
capture only speech, and miss non-verbal communication and other contextual 
factors. Video recordings, for their part, capture non-verbal as well as verbal 
communications and offer a more complete record of events during the inter-
view. And, as with audio recordings, they provide a permanent record that can 
be checked by other researchers. The use of video recordings, however, tends 
to be the exception rather than the rule. It is not the cost factor that explains 
this because video equipment is not particularly expensive. Generally, it is the 
intrusiveness of video recordings that deters researchers 
from using them. For practical purposes most interviewers 
would consider that audio recordings provide data that are 
good enough for the purpose of the research, and that the 
benefits gained through the video recording of an interview 
are outweighed by the extra disruption that video recording 
brings to the setting.
Link up with  
Transcribing 
audio recordings 
of interviews,  
p. 277.
Good practice: Recording equipment
Use equipment that is good enough to supply adequate sound (or visual) repro-
duction.
•
•
Be certain that the equipment is functioning well before the interview.
••
Have a reliable power source plus back-up in case of emergency.
••
Choose storage devices that have enough memory, or last long enough, to 
cover the planned duration of the interview.
Field notes
Under certain circumstances interviewers will need to rely on field notes. Most 
commonly this occurs when interviewees decline to be recorded. When this hap-
pens it raises the prospect of there being no record of the actual discussion that 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Interviews  197
takes place. This means that the words spoken during the interview will always 
remain a matter of recollection and interpretation. Of course, where the discus-
sion touches on sensitive issues, commercially, politically or even personally, 
this might well suit the needs of certain interviewees. Field notes, however, offer 
a compromise in such situations. Provided that they are written during the inter-
view or, if this is not feasible, as soon afterwards as possible while events remain 
fresh in the mind, they provide the interviewer with some permanent record of 
the event which can be referred to at various later stages in the research in order 
to refresh the memory about what was said.
Field notes, however, can play another role in relation to interviews: they can 
be used as a complement to audio recording. They can be used to fill in some 
of the relevant information that a recording alone might miss. Field notes can 
cover information relating to the context of the location, the climate and atmos-
phere under which the interview was conducted, clues about the intent behind 
the statements and comments on aspects of non-verbal communication as they 
were deemed relevant to the interview.
Good practice: Write field notes as a complement to audio recordings
When conducting face-to-face interviews it is valuable to combine the use of audio 
recording with field notes that provide important supplementary information.
Online interviews
Online interviews can be conducted with anyone who has access to a computer 
and the Internet. The costs are negligible and this mode of conducting interviews 
allows the researcher to interview people across the world without worrying 
about the time and costs of travel. This is obviously an attractive proposition.
Real time with visual contact
Online interviews can take place in real time and include visual contact 
between the interviewer and the interviewee. Using a webcam and communi-
cation software like Skype the interview can be conducted very much like a 
face-to-face interview – only at a distance. Such Skype interviews share the 
benefits and the drawbacks associated with the personal interaction involved 
in face-to-face interviews but avoid the costs and inconvenience associated 
with travel.
Without direct visual contact
Online interviews can be conducted in ways that do not include real-time vis-
ual interaction between the interviewer and the interviewee. An online inter-
view can be based on straightforward email correspondence with a sequence 
of written questions prompting follow-up answers from the respondents. Or it 
can take place using social networking sites, discussion forums or even SMS 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

198  The Good Research Guide
text messaging. Basically, interviews can be conducted online using any of the 
available communication platforms. Like face-to-face interviews these kinds 
of interview retain a basic question and answer sequence. There are, however, 
some significant differences that need to be taken into account, and these are 
outlined below.
Recording online data
One distinct advantage to conducting online interviews is that the responses 
are provided in written format. There is, therefore, no need to transcribe verbal 
statements which, in turn, means there are no transcription errors, nor are there 
any indecipherable parts of the interview which are unusable. Added to that, the 
responses are already in a digital format that can be downloaded directly into a 
word processor or qualitative data analysis software (e.g. NVivo).
Private contact with interviewees
The use of social networking sites, discussion forums and, indeed, any online 
technology for interviews depends crucially on one thing: it must allow private 
exchanges between the interviewer and the interviewees. When conducting one-
to-one interviews online it is essential that the exchanges are private and that 
care is taken to avoid the messages getting distributed to other users. With group 
interviews and focus groups online the same proviso operates: the communica-
tion must be restricted to just those people directly involved.
Caution: Online interviews
Care needs to be taken to ensure that questions and especially the answers are 
not broadcast to everyone using the network or forum.
Remoteness
In contrast with face-to-face interviews there is no direct visual contact involved. 
The effect of this is that the respondent is more ‘remote’ and distant not just in 
a physical sense but in a psychological sense as well. And this can have some 
interesting consequences. On the downside, it means that the researcher has less 
opportunity to confirm the identity of the interviewee or verify the information 
given by that person. It can be difficult to know for certain who the respondent 
is or that their answers are genuine and honest.
Weighed against this, the remoteness can have its benefits. The most signifi-
cant of these is that it can reduce the ‘interviewer effect’ through the way it does 
the following:
•• Reduces the culture and gender effects of interaction. The absence of visual 
clues means that what is stated by the interviewees is less likely to be affected 
by status factors linked to the respective age, sex, ethnicity, accent and social 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Interviews  199
class of the interviewer and the interviewee. It acts as an ‘equalizer’ in terms 
of the communication.
• Overcomes embarrassment on some topics. The lack of face-to-face contact 
can help to reduce any sense of discomfort when responding to questions 
on sensitive topics. The contact, being less ‘personal’, is less likely to cause 
embarrassment because there is no direct interaction with the researcher. 
There is no need to feel awkward in the presence of a researcher whose age, 
sex, social class or ethnic origin could inhibit the interviewee from giving 
a candid and honest answer. A cautionary note, however, is needed on this 
point. As so often happens with research methods there can be exceptions 
to the rule. Sometimes the personal element of face-to-face interviews might 
actually be a crucial factor encouraging people to talk openly about intimate 
issues, more so than they would have done in an email interview (Gillham 
2005). This is more likely to happen with depth, unstructured interviews where 
a good rapport and climate of trust are developed between the interviewer 
and the interviewee.
Time delay
Another difference from conventional face-to-face interviews is that, depending 
on the particular online platform being used, there can be a time-delay between 
the questions and answers. Again, this can have an impact on the information 
provided by the respondent. Specifically it allows interviewees time to reflect 
on the question and provide a response that they have had time to think about 
carefully. Now this could be a good thing from the researcher’s point of view, or 
it might not be if the researcher is hoping to get a fast reaction to the question 
rather than a cautiously considered answer.
Written responses to interview questions
Online interviews generally require the respondents to write their answers 
rather than speak them. An important thing to bear in mind here is that there 
can be a significant difference in the way people express themselves verbally 
compared with the way they express themselves in writing. At one level this 
could affect the style of language. In the context of an online interview people 
might use the kind of informal ‘text talk’ and abbreviations associated with 
online media and social networks, whereas in the context of a face-to-face 
interview a more formal style might be adopted. At another level it can affect 
the quantity of data gathered through the interview. A likely consequence of 
needing to write answers is that interviewees will use fewer words than they 
would have done if they were talking to an interviewer face-to-face. As is so 
often the case with social research methods, however, there is not a hard and 
fast rule on this. With interviewing a lot depends on how confident and articu-
late the person is in face-to-face situations. Someone who is shy could well 
prefer to write a response and perhaps go into greater depth and detail using 
a keyboard than talking directly to a researcher in a face-to-face interviewer 
situation.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

200  The Good Research Guide
How do you know the informant is telling the truth?
This is a crucial question facing research interviews. When the interview is con-
cerned with gathering information of a factual nature the researcher can make 
some checks to see if the information is broadly corroborated by other people 
and other sources. When the interview concerns matters such as the emotions, 
feelings and experiences of the interviewee, it is a lot more difficult to make 
such checks. Ultimately, there is no absolute way of verifying what someone 
tells you about their thoughts and feelings. Researchers are not ‘mind readers’. 
But there are still some practical checks researchers can make to gauge the cred-
ibility of what they have been told. It should be stressed, though, that these are 
not watertight methods of detecting false statements given during interviews. 
They are practical ways of helping the researcher to avoid being a gullible dupe 
who accepts all that he or she is told at face value. They help the researcher to 
‘smell a rat’. By the same token, if the following checks are used, the researcher 
can have greater confidence in the interview data, knowing that some effort has 
been made to ensure the validity of the data.
Check the data with other sources
The researcher should make efforts to corroborate the interview data with other 
sources of information on the topic. Triangulation should be used. Documents 
and observations can provide some back-up for the content of the interview, or 
can cast some doubt on how seriously the interview data should be taken. Inter-
view content can even be checked against other interviews 
to see if there is some level of consistency. The point is that 
interview data should not be taken at face value if it is at all 
possible to confirm or dispute the statements using alterna-
tive sources.
Check the transcript with the informant
Where possible, the researcher should go back to the interviewee with the tran-
script to check with that person that it is an accurate record. This is known as 
‘respondent validation’. If the researcher is solely concerned with gathering facts 
from the interview, this is an opportunity to ensure that the facts are correct and 
Key point: Online interviews
If the online interview does not make use of software like Skype to conduct the 
equivalent of a face-to-face interview, then researchers need to weigh up the 
likely consequences of collecting interview data in terms of:
••
the remoteness and loss of visual contact
••
the time-delay between interactions
••
the reliance on written answers rather than spoken words.
Link up with 
Triangulation,  
p. 154.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Interviews  201
that the interviewer has got the correct information. That is a nice safeguard. 
If, alternatively, the interview is concerned with a person’s emotions, opinions 
and experiences, the exercise invites the interviewee to confirm that the views 
expressed during the interview were meant, and not something given ‘in the heat 
of the moment’. Either way, there is an initial check on the accuracy of the data.
Check the plausibility of the data
Some people are interviewed specifically because they are in a position to know 
about the things that interest the researcher. The ‘key players’ are picked out 
precisely because they are specialists, experts, highly experienced – and their 
testimony carries with it a high degree of credibility. This is not necessarily the 
case with those chosen for interview on some other grounds. When assessing 
the credibility of information contained in an interview, the researcher needs to 
gauge how far an informant might be expected to be in possession of the facts 
and to know about the topic being discussed. The researcher should ask if it is 
reasonable to suppose that such a person would be in a position to comment 
authoritatively on the topic – or is there a chance that they are talking about 
something of which they have little knowledge?
Look for themes
Where possible, interview research should avoid basing its findings on one inter-
view. It is safer to look for themes emerging from a number of interviews. Where 
themes emerge across a number of interviews, the researcher does not have to 
rely on any one person’s statements as the sole source of what is ‘real’ or ‘cor-
rect’. A recurrent theme in interviews indicates that the 
idea/issue is something that is shared among a wider group, 
and therefore the researcher can refer to it with rather more 
confidence than any idea/issue that stems from the words 
of one individual.
Advantages of interviews
Depth of information
Interviews are particularly good at producing data which deal with topics in 
depth and in detail. Subjects can be probed, issues pursued and lines of investiga-
tion followed over a relatively lengthy period.
Insights
The researcher is likely to gain valuable insights based on the depth of the infor-
mation gathered and the wisdom of ‘key informants’.
Equipment
Interviews require only simple equipment (digital recorder, computer, online 
connection).
Link up with 
Chapter 16  
Qualitative data.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

202  The Good Research Guide
Informants’ priorities
Interviews are a good method for producing data based on informants’ priori-
ties, opinions and ideas. Informants have the opportunity to expand their ideas, 
explain their views and identify what they regard as the crucial factors.
Flexibility
With semi-structured and unstructured interviews adjustments to the lines of 
enquiry can be made during the interview itself. Interviewing allows for a devel-
oping line of enquiry.
High response rate
Interviews are generally prearranged and scheduled for a convenient time and 
location. This ensures a relatively high response rate.
Validity of the data
In the case of face-to-face interviews, direct contact at the point of the inter-
view means that data can be checked for accuracy and relevance as they are 
collected. In the case of online interviews there is also the elimination of errors 
at the data entry stage. The researcher is no longer faced with passages in an 
audio-recorded interview where voices cannot be heard clearly and where there 
is consequently some doubt about what was actually said.
Therapeutic
Interviews can be a rewarding experience for the informant. Compared with 
questionnaires, observation and experiments, there is a more personal element 
to the method, and people tend to enjoy the rather rare chance to talk about their 
ideas at length to a person whose purpose is to listen and note the ideas without 
being critical.
Disadvantages of interviews
Validity of the data
The data from interviews are based on what people say rather than what they do. 
The two may not tally. What people say they do, what they say they prefer and 
what they say they think cannot automatically be assumed to reflect the truth.
Interviewer effect
Interviewee statements can be affected by the identity of the researcher. How-
ever, online interviews can go a long way towards avoiding this problem.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Interviews  203
Reliability
With semi-structured and unstructured interviews consistency is hard to achieve. 
The data collected are, to an extent, affected by the specific context and the spe-
cific individuals involved.
Time-consuming
Semi-structured and unstructured interviews produce data that are not pre-coded 
and have a relatively open format. This means that data preparation and analysis 
are generally ‘end-loaded’. The transcribing and coding of interview data are a 
major task for the researcher which occurs after the data have been collected.
Resources
With face-to-face interviews the costs of the interviewer’s time and travel can be 
relatively high, particularly if the informants are geographically dispersed.
Inhibitions
In the case of face-to-face interviews, the audio recorder (or video recorder) can 
inhibit the informant. Although the impact of the recording device tends to wear 
off quite quickly, this is not always the case. Online interviews, of course, do not 
have this problem.
Invasion of privacy
Tactless interviewing can be an invasion of privacy and/or upsetting for the 
informant. While interviews can be enjoyable, the other side of the coin is that the 
personal element of being interviewed carries its own kinds of dangers as well.
Further reading
Diamante, T. (2013) Effective Interviewing and Information Gathering: Proven Tactics 
to Increase the Power of Your Questioning Skills. New York: McGraw-Hill/Business 
Expert Press.
Gillham, B. (2005) Research Interviewing: The Range of Techniques. Maidenhead: Open 
University Press.
Kamberelis, G. and Dimitriadis, G. (2013) Focus Groups: From Structured Interviews to 
Collective Conversations. London: Routledge.
Keats, D. M. (2000) Interviewing: A Practical Guide for Students and Professionals. Maid-
enhead: Open University Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

204  The Good Research Guide
✓
Checklist for the use of interviews  
When conducting interviews you should feel confident about  
answering ‘yes’ to the following questions:  
  1	 Is it clear which type of interview is being used and why (one-to-
one, group, online, focus group)?
  2	 Does the format of the interview match the aims of the research 
in terms of the kind of data that is required (structured, semi-
structured, unstructured)
 
 
  3	 Have field notes been written to provide supplementary 
information about the interaction during the interview?
 
  4	 Have relevant details been collected about the context within which 
the interviews took place (location, prior events, ambience, etc.)?
 
  5	 Has consideration been given to the effect of the recording 
equipment on the openness with which informants replied?
 
  6	 Where possible, have attempts been made to check the accuracy 
and honesty of statements made by interviewees (triangulation, 
respondent validation)?
 
 
  7	 With semi-structured and unstructured interviews have prompts, 
probes and checks been used to gain worthwhile, detailed 
insights?
 
 
  8	 Has consideration been given to the interviewer effect and the way 
the researcher’s self-identity might have affected:
• the interaction during the interview?
• the interpretation of the data?
 
 
  9	 With online interviews has consideration been given to the  
effects of:
• the loss of visual clues during the interaction?
• the use of non-real-time communication?
 
 
© M. Denscombe, The Good Research Guide. Open University Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

13
Observation
• What is observational research? • Perception and memory  
• Systematic observation • Observation schedules • Sampling and 
observation • Retaining the naturalness of the setting • Example of  
an observation schedule • Advantages of systematic observation  
• Disadvantages of systematic observation • Further reading • Checklist 
for the use of observation schedules • Participant observation  
• Types of participation • Fieldwork • Research ethics • Self, identity 
and participant observation • Dangers of fieldwork • Advantages of 
participant observation • Disadvantages of participant observation  
• Further reading • Checklist for participant observation
What is observational research?
There are essentially two kinds of observational research used in the social 
­sciences. The first of these is systematic observation (also known as ‘structured 
observation’). Systematic observation has its origins in social psychology – in 
particular, the study of interaction in settings such as school classrooms. It is 
normally linked with the production of quantitative data and the use of statistical 
analysis. The second is participant observation. This is mainly associated with 
sociology and anthropology, and is used by researchers to investigate the life-
styles, cultures and beliefs of particular social groups. It is normally associated 
with qualitative data and ethnographic approaches to research.
These two methods might seem poles apart in terms of their origins and their 
use in current social research, but they share some vital characteristics:
•• Direct observation. They both rely on direct evidence of the eye to witness 
events at first hand. In this respect they stand together, in contrast to methods 
such as questionnaires and interviews, which base their data on what inform-
ants tell the researcher, and in contrast to documents where the researcher 
tends to be one step removed from the action.
• Fieldwork in natural settings. They both rely on collecting data in real-life 
situations, out there ‘in the field’. Fieldwork observation occurs in situations 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

206  The Good Research Guide
which would have occurred whether or not the research had taken place. 
The whole point is to observe things as they normally happen, rather than as 
they happen under artificially created conditions such as laboratory experi-
ments. There is a major concern to avoid disrupting the naturalness of the 
setting when undertaking the research. In this approach to social research, it 
becomes very important to minimize the extent to which the presence of the 
researcher might alter the situation being researched.
•• The issue of perception. Systematic observation and participant observation 
both recognize that the process of observing is far from straightforward. Both 
are acutely sensitive to the possibility that researchers’ perceptions of situa-
tions might be influenced by personal factors and that the data collected could 
thus be unreliable. They offer very different ways of overcoming this, but both 
see it as a problem that needs to be addressed.
Perception and memory
On the basis of common sense it might seem fairly obvious that two researchers 
looking at the same event will record precisely the same things as having hap-
pened. Their records of the events – the data – should be identical. Yet in practice 
this might not be the case. It is quite possible that the two researchers will pro-
duce different records of the thing they jointly witnessed. Why should this be the 
case? Obviously, the competence of each individual researcher is a factor which 
has to be taken into consideration. The powers of observation, the powers of 
recall and the level of commitment of individual researchers will vary, and this 
will have an effect on the observational data that are produced. However, the 
variation in records also reflects more general psychological factors connected 
to memory and perception, and there are three things which are particularly 
important that emerge from the work of psychologists in this area.
First, psychologists point to the frailties of human memory and the way that 
we cannot possibly remember each and every detail of the events and situations 
we observe. Basically, we forget most of what we see. But what we forget and 
what we recall are not decided at random. There is a pattern to the way the mind 
manages to recall certain things and forget others. There is selective recall.
Second, they point to the way the mind filters the information it receives 
through the senses. It not only acts to reduce the amount of information, it also 
operates certain ‘filters’ which let some kinds of information through to be expe-
rienced as ‘what happened’, while simultaneously putting up barriers to many 
others. There is selective perception.
Third, they point to experiments which show how these filters not only let in 
some information while excluding the rest, but also boost our sensitivity to cer-
tain signals depending on our emotional and physical state, and our past experi-
ences. What we experience can be influenced to some extent by whether we are, 
for instance, very hungry, angry, anxious, frustrated, prejudiced, etc. What we 
experience is shaped by our feelings at the moment and by the emotional bag-
gage we carry around with us as a result of significant things that have happened 
to us during our lifetime. These things account for accentuated perception.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Observation  207
Without delving too deeply into the psychology of perception, it is easy to 
appreciate that, as human beings, researchers do not simply observe and record 
the events they witness in some mechanical and straightforward fashion. In prac-
tice, there is an element of interpretation with the mind acting as an intermedi-
ary between ‘the world out there’ and the way it is experienced by the individual.
Systematic observation
The possibility that different observers might produce different records of the 
situation is rather worrying when it comes to the use of observation as a method 
for collecting data. It suggests that the data could vary depending on the particu-
lar observer rather than the event being researched. But it is precisely this prob-
lem which is addressed by systematic observation. Systematic observation, as 
the name suggests, is a research method that introduces a system to the process 
of observation, a system that aims to produce data that are consistent between 
observers – eliminating variations arising from the psychological factors that 
influence individual researchers’ perceptions of events and situations.
Observation schedules
To achieve this aim, systematic observation makes use of observation schedules. 
These schedules contain a list of items that act much like a checklist. All observ-
ers involved with a project use identical schedules and thus have their attention 
directed to the same things. This helps to make the record of the events consist-
ent between researchers because what is being observed is dictated by the items 
contained in the schedule.
Observation schedules not only specify what is to be observed, they also spec-
ify how those things are to be measured. This is important. The data collected by 
different observers are hardly likely to be consistent and standardized simply by 
directing attention to key items of interest and then leaving it up to individual 
observers to decide how they record the item. Individuals could choose differ-
ent terms to describe what they see and produce collections of data that, while 
focused on the same event or behaviour, might vary widely in format and detail. 
To be systematic the observation needs to include some way of ensuring that 
that the events or behaviour are recorded in an objective and consistent man-
ner. This is done by collecting quantitative data based on counts, amounts and 
frequencies relating to the item of interest. Rather than portray the events or 
behaviour in words, the purpose of the observation schedule is to produce data 
using things like:
•• the frequency of events: making a numerical count of the frequency with 
which the items on the observation schedule occur.
•• the duration of events: quantifying the amount of time covered by an event 
or taken by a specific behaviour. When instances of the item occur they are 
timed, start to finish, so that the researcher gets information on the total time 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

208  The Good Research Guide
for each item and the points at which it occurred during the overall time-block 
for the period of observation.
When researchers are properly trained and experienced there should be a good 
inter-observer reliability with different researchers producing almost identi-
cal data when observing the same social setting. The influence of the individual 
researcher and factors affecting his/her perception and memory should be minimal.
Good practice
Observation schedules should:
••
ensure that all researchers are alert to the same activities and looking out 
for the same things;
••
get researchers to record data systematically and in a standardized fashion
Selection of specific items for inclusion in the observation schedule
Events and behaviour that occur within social settings tend to be complex and 
multi-faceted. This creates a challenge for researchers wishing to use systematic 
observation. In settings where they might want to use an observation schedule 
it is likely that there will be many things going on at the same time – so many, 
indeed, that it would be impossible for any observation schedule to cover every 
aspect of what happens in the setting. Inevitably, then, researchers need to exer-
cise some selectivity in terms of the items they include in the schedule and the 
ones they leave off the list.
When selecting which events or behaviours to include in the observation 
schedule there are four basic things that need to be taken into consideration. 
First and foremost, the items to be included should be valid indicators of the 
topic that is being investigated. Obviously, the findings from an observation 
schedule will only be of value if the items listed in the schedule are the most 
relevant for the purposes of the investigation. Precise records of something that 
is irrelevant will not advance the research at all. Previous research and previous 
theories provide the key to deciding what things warrant attention and, initially, 
a literature review should be used to identify significant things to be included in 
the observation schedule.
Second, the items that are included should cover all possibilities: they should 
be complete. Care needs to be taken to ensure, as far as is possible, that the cat-
egories on the observation schedule cover the full range of possibilities and that 
there are not gaps which will become glaringly evident once the observation 
schedule is used in the field.
Third, the items should be clear-cut and self-evident. Observers should not 
need to decipher the action or wonder whether an action fits one or another 
­category – it should be fairly obvious. This means that items on the schedule 
should only include overt behaviours and events that are observable in a direct 
manner. Things like attitudes and thoughts that need to be inferred by the 
researcher are not suitable because they are not visible in a direct manner. It 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Observation  209
also means that the items need to be precise. There should be no ambiguity and 
no overlap between the items on the observation schedule.
Last, but not least, the choice of items for inclusion in the schedule needs 
to be conscious of practical issues relating to the frequency and sequencing of 
events to be observed. On the one hand the items should occur with sufficient 
regularity for the observer to be able to collect a reasonable amount of data. If 
the event is something that occurs infrequently and is relatively rare, it will prove 
frustrating and wasteful of time to have a researcher poised – waiting, waiting, 
waiting for something to happen. On the other hand if the actions or events are 
too frequent it might be impossible for the observer to keep up to speed. If the 
events are bunched and all come at once the observer might well find it impos-
sible to log all instances.
Key point: Suitability of events or behaviour for observation
The events or behaviour selected for inclusion in an observation schedule 
should be:
•
•
relevant – the best indicators of the thing being investigated;
••
complete – include the full range of possibilities for the item;
••
overt – observable and measurable in a direct manner;
••
obvious – require a minimum of interpretation by the researcher;
••
precise – there should be no ambiguity about the categories;
••
easy to record – occur with sufficient regularity and sequence for the observer 
to be able to log the occurrences accurately.
Sampling and observation
Researchers using systematic observation generally organize their research 
around set time-blocks of observation in the field. For example, these might be 
one-hour chunks of time in situ. These time-blocks themselves need to be cho-
sen so as to avoid any bias and to incorporate a representative sample of the 
thing in question. So, if the research were to involve observations of interac-
tion in school classrooms the researcher would need to ensure that the research 
occurred across the full school week, the full school day and a cross-section of 
subjects. To confine observations to Friday afternoons, or to one subject such as 
history, would not provide an accurate picture across the board.
The same applies to the selection of people or events for inclusion in the 
study. To get a representative picture of the situation, systematic observation 
can involve a deliberate selection of people or events to be observed so that the 
data cover a cross-section of the whole research population. This can take the 
form of:
•• time-sampling to ensure a sequence of snap-shot observations at set inter-
vals. Every 30 seconds, for instance, the observer could record the relevant 
events or behaviour that are happening at that instant.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

210  The Good Research Guide
• tracking the activities of specific individuals one after 
another. Individuals can be observed for predetermined 
periods of time, after which the observer’s attention is 
switched to another person in a rota designed eventu-
ally to produce a reasonable profile covering all those 
involved.
Good practice: Use field notes to complement systematic observation data
Quantitative data produced by systematic observation schedules should 
be complemented by field notes (qualitative data) in which the researcher  
(1) describes the context and (2) records his/her impressions about the circum-
stances surrounding the events or behaviour being observed (Galton et al. 1980). 
Such background information helps to explain the events that are observed and 
should be logged with the schedule results to help the observer understand the 
data he or she has collected.
Retaining the naturalness of the setting
With systematic observation, the issue of retaining the naturalness of the set-
ting hinges on the prospect of the researcher fading into the background and 
becoming, to all intents and purposes, invisible. At first this might seem an 
implausible thing. Armed with some kind of equipment for keeping a record of 
what is observed (such as a laptop, tablet or clipboard), and looking like a ‘time 
and motion’ researcher, it would seem unlikely that such systematic observa-
tion could avoid disrupting the events it seeks to measure. However, those who 
engage in this style of research report that it is indeed possible to ‘merge into the 
wallpaper’ and have no discernible impact. They stress that to minimize the likeli-
hood of disruption researchers should pay attention to three things:
•• Positioning. Unobtrusive positioning is vital. But the researcher still needs to 
be able to view the whole arena of action.
• Avoiding interaction. The advice here is to be ‘socially invisible’, not engag-
ing with the participants in the setting if at all possible.
• Time on site. The experience of systematic observers 
assures them that the longer they are ‘on site’ the more 
their presence is taken for granted and the less they have 
any significant effect on proceedings.
Example of an observation schedule
If systematic observation was used for the study of art classes in a primary 
school, it might use an observation schedule specifically designed to collect data 
about pupils’ activity during the lessons. The motive for doing the research might 
Link up with 
Chapter 2  
Sampling.
Link up with  
the Observer 
effect, p. 70.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Observation  211
be to provide quantitative, objective data in support of the art teacher’s bid for 
resources to have a second sink installed in the art classroom, and to do so by 
measuring the amount of lesson time wasted by students queuing to clean their 
paint brushes in the one sink that is currently available in the classroom. A sim-
ple observation schedule that could be used for this purpose might be as shown 
in Figure 13.1.
Location: School A.         Teacher: Chris Jones             Art lesson
 
Observation #4  
Date: 28 April  
Time: 11 a.m. to 12 noon 
 
 
Name  
Time starts queuing  
Time arrives at sink  
Queuing time  
Asha 
11.15 
11.15 
0 
Sami  
11.15 
11.18 
3 
Douglas  
11.15 
11.20 
5 
Olivia  
11.16 
11.23 
7 
Jack  
11.17 
11.24 
7 
Jing  
11.19 
11.26 
7 
Max 
11.22 
11.28 
6 
Olga 
11.23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 13.1  Observation schedule
In this example, a decision has been made to record the amount of time 
spent queuing. It would have been possible to record the number of occasions 
that students in the class queued, or to have noted at intervals of, say, 30 sec-
onds over a one-hour period how many students were queuing at that moment. 
These would have provided three slightly different kinds of results. If we were 
concerned with how queuing interrupted the concentration of students on a 
task it would have been more appropriate to record the frequency. Had the 
aim been to look at bottlenecks in the queuing then time sampling would have 
allowed the ebb and flow of students to the sink to be shown quite clearly. 
In this example, however, the aim is to support the claim that students’ time 
is wasted in queues for the sink and it is therefore appropriate to record the 
amount of time spent in the queue.
The item to be observed in this example is suitably straightforward. It is rea-
sonable to presume that standing in line is an obvious and observable form of 
behaviour and that, despite some occasions when students might not be solely 
concerned with getting their paint brushes clean when they join the queue 
(they might be socializing or wasting time deliberately), standing in line offers 
a fairly valid indicator of the thing that is of interest to the researcher: time 
wasted queuing.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

212  The Good Research Guide
Advantages of systematic observation
Direct data collection
It directly records what people do, as distinct from what they say they do.
Systematic and rigorous
The use of an observation schedule provides an answer to the problems associ-
ated with the selective perception of observers, and it appears to produce objec-
tive observations. The schedule effectively eliminates any bias from the current 
emotions or personal background of the observer.
Efficient
It provides a means for collecting substantial amounts of data in a relatively 
short time-span.
Pre-coded data
It produces quantitative data which are pre-coded and ready for analysis.
Reliability
When properly established it should achieve high levels of inter-observer reli-
ability in the sense that two or more observers using a schedule should record 
very similar data.
Disadvantages of systematic observation
Behaviour, not intentions
This method of data collection focuses on overt behaviour and manifest events. 
It therefore describes what happens, but not why it happens. It does not deal with 
the intentions that motivated the behaviour or factors that caused the events.
Oversimplifies
Systematic observation assumes that overt behaviours can be measured in terms 
of categories that are fairly straightforward and unproblematic. This is prem-
ised on the idea that the observer and the observed share an understanding of  
the overt behaviour, and that the behaviour has no double meaning, hidden mean-
ing or confusion associated with it. As such, systematic observation has the in-
built potential to oversimplify; to ignore or distort the subtleties of the situation.
Contextual information
Observation schedules, by themselves, tend to miss contextual information 
which has a bearing on the behaviours recorded.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Observation  213
Naturalness of the setting
Although researchers who use systematic observation express confidence that 
their presence does not actually disrupt the naturalness of the setting to any 
significant extent, some question mark must surely remain about the observer’s 
ability to fade into the background. Can a researcher using an observation sched-
ule really avoid disrupting the naturalness of the setting?
Further reading
Bakeman, R. and Gottman, J. M. (1997) Observing Interaction: An Introduction to 
­Sequential Analysis, 2nd edn. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Croll, P. (1986) Systematic Classroom Observation. London: Falmer Press.
Gillham, B. (2008) Observation Techniques: Structured and Unstructured Approaches. 
London: Continuum.
O’Leary, M. (2014) Classroom Observation. London: Routledge.
Yoder, P. and Symons, F. (2010) Observational Measurement of Behavior. New York: 
Springer Publishing.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

214  The Good Research Guide
✓
Checklist for the use of observation schedules 
When using an observation schedule you should feel confident about 
answering ‘yes’ to the following questions:  
  1	 Are the events/behaviour to be observed: 
• sufficiently clear-cut and unambiguous to allow reliable coding?
• the most relevant indicators for the purposes of the research?
 
  2	 Is the schedule complete (incorporating all likely categories of 
events/behaviour)?
 
  3	 Do the events/behaviour occur regularly enough to provide 
sufficient data?
 
  4	 Does the schedule avoid multiple simultaneous occurrences of the 
event/behaviour which might prevent accurate coding?
 
  5	 Is the kind of sampling (event/point/time) the most appropriate?
  6	 Do the planned periods for observation provide a representative 
sample (time, place, context)?
 
  7	 Have efforts been made to minimize any disturbance to the 
naturalness of the setting caused by the presence of the 
observer?
 
 
  8	 Is there provision for the collection of contextual information to 
accompany the schedule data?
 
© M. Denscombe, The Good Research Guide. Open University Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Observation  215
Participant observation
Participant observation is an unobtrusive method of data collection that allows 
the researcher to gather information about lifestyles, cultures and beliefs as they 
exist in their natural setting. A classic definition of participant observation spells 
out the crucial characteristics of this approach and the things which distinguish 
it from systematic observation:
By participant observation we mean the method in which the observer par-
ticipates in the daily life of the people under study, either openly in the 
role of researcher or covertly in some disguised role, observing things that 
happen, listening to what is said, and questioning people, over some length 
of time.
(Becker and Geer 1957: 28)
There are two main reasons for such participation. First, lifestyles, cultures and 
beliefs can be very intricate and complex things – difficult to understand and 
hard to explain. There is more likelihood of producing a good account of such 
things using a method that puts the researcher ‘on site’ and in the thick of the 
action for a reasonable period of time. Second, there are aspects of lifestyles, 
cultures and beliefs that people might feel inhibited about revealing to an out-
sider – particularly a researcher wishing to conduct an interview or distribute 
a questionnaire. Becoming a participant in the setting provides a way of side-
stepping such inhibitions.
Key point: Participant observation has three elements
An insider’s perspective
The experience of participating in everyday life situations 
gives researchers a ‘feel’ for the situation which can gen-
erate insights into particular cultures, lifestyles or beliefs. 
These insights come specifically from the experience of 
things as an insider.
Naturalness of the setting
A concern for seeing things ‘as they really are’ without dis-
turbing the naturalness of the setting makes preserving the 
naturalness of the setting a key priority.
Depth and detail
Participant observation helps researchers to deal with 
the detail, the subtleties, the complexity and the inter-
connectedness of the cultures, lifestyles and beliefs 
being investigated.
Link up with 
Chapter 6  
Phenomenology. 
Link up with the 
Observer effect, 
p. 70.
Link up with 
Chapter 5  
Ethnography.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

216  The Good Research Guide
Types of participation
The participant observer can operate in a completely covert fashion – like 
an undercover agent whose success depends on remaining undetected, 
whose purpose remains top secret. If no one knows about the research 
except the researcher, the logic is that no one will act in anything but a 
normal way.
There are versions of participant observation, however, in which participa-
tion means something slightly different. It can, for instance, mean operating 
within a setting but not actually taking part in the particular actions that are 
the focus of concern for the research. For example, in Humphreys’ (1975) study 
of impersonal sexual encounters in public toilets, he adopted a ‘lookout’ role 
which allowed him to be accepted as part of the general scene without actually 
taking part in the sexual encounters. And when O’Connell Davidson (1995) was 
studying the working practices of Madame Desirée – a prosperous independent 
prostitute – she occasionally posed as Madame Desirée’s receptionist working 
from a desk outside the rooms used by clients. This allowed her to be part of 
the normal scene but also allowed her a judicious distance from the heart of the 
action. Obviously, in this instance the researcher’s role was not totally secret. 
Madame Desirée knew that O’Connell Davidson was a researcher, but the cli-
ents did not.
Another possibility involves hanging out with a group rather than becom-
ing a member of that group. This can allow researchers to be open about 
their purpose – to get consent for the research – in a way that is denied to the 
covert version of participant observation. Of course, the downside of this is 
that the presence of the researcher can serve to disrupt the naturalness of the 
setting.
There are numerous variations to the extent of total participation and the 
extent of open observation that can be used, but broadly speaking these boil 
down to three basic alternatives:
•• Total participation, where the researcher’s role is kept secret. The researcher 
assumes the role of someone who normally participates in the setting. Con-
sent cannot be gained for the research, which poses ethical problems.
• Participation in the normal setting, where the researcher’s role may be 
known to certain ‘gatekeepers’, but may be hidden from most of those in the 
setting. The role adopted in this type of participant observation is chosen 
deliberately to permit observation without affecting the naturalness of the 
setting, but it also allows the researcher to keep a distance from the key 
group under study. This distance might be warranted on the grounds of pro-
priety, or the researcher lacks the personal credentials to take on the role in 
question.
•• Participation as observer, where the researcher’s identity as a researcher is 
openly recognized – thus having the advantage of gaining informed consent 
from those involved – and takes the form of ‘shadowing’ a person or group 
through normal life, witnessing at first hand and in intimate detail the culture/
events of interest.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Observation  217
Fieldwork
The researcher enters the field to learn about the situation. The longer the 
researcher is able to spend ‘on site’ the better because the longer he or she is part 
of the action, the more can be learnt about the situation. Good participant obser-
vation demands that the researcher devotes considerable time to the fieldwork. 
This is not a hit-and-run research method. Time on site is needed to gain trust, to 
establish rapport and foster insights, insights that are the trademark of partici-
pant observation as a research method.
What to observe
Participant observers usually start out being fairly non-selective in terms of 
what they observe. Before anything else they aim to get an ‘overall feel’ for the 
situation, and to do this they tend to begin by engaging in what can be termed 
‘holistic observation’. This is valuable as a background scene-setting device but, 
in practice, getting a general feel for the setting normally acts as a prelude to 
more focused observations. As things emerge which appear to have particular 
significance or interest, observation will shift from the broad canvas of activity 
in the setting towards specific areas. Things which emerge as important, strange 
or unusual invite closer scrutiny. Following from focused observations the 
researcher might be able to undertake special observations which concentrate 
on aspects of the setting in which there appear to be things which are unexpected 
or contradictory. Attention can be focused upon things that, according to the 
observer’s common sense, ought not to happen. Finally, observations can try to 
identify issues and problems which participants themselves regard as crucial. 
The point is to observe instances which indicate how members of the setting see 
things – their views, beliefs and experiences.
Making field notes
The fieldwork researcher needs to translate the observations into some perma-
nent record at the very earliest opportunity. This might be ‘field notes’ in the form 
of written records or tape-recorded memos. Whatever the form, the researcher 
doing fieldwork needs to develop a strategy for writing up field notes as soon as 
possible after the observation.
The need to do so stems from two things. First, the human memory is not 
only selective, but also frail. It is so easy to forget things, particularly the minor 
incidents and passing thoughts, if field notes are delayed for a matter of days, 
let alone weeks. Field notes are urgent business. The researcher needs to build 
into the research some provision to make the field notes on a regular and prompt 
basis. The second factor involved here is the general need to take field notes 
outside the arena of action. To take field notes while engaging in the action as a 
participant, to state the obvious, would be (1) to disrupt the naturalness of the 
setting, and (2) to disclose the researcher’s role as observer. As a general rule, 
then, participant observers need to establish occasions during fieldwork, or very 
soon afterwards, when they can make field notes in private and unknown to 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

218  The Good Research Guide
those being observed. The simplest strategy is to write up the field notes as soon 
as you get home – assuming that home is separate from the field being studied.
Good practice: Making field notes with participant observation
Detailed field notes should be made to accompany participant observation. 
These notes should be made as soon as possible following each episode of 
observation.
Research ethics
Participant observation can pose particular ethical problems for the researcher. 
If ‘total’ participation is used, then those being studied will not be aware of the 
research or their role in it. They can hardly give ‘informed consent’. The justifi-
cation for such covert research cannot depend on consent, but draws instead 
on two other arguments. First, if it can be demonstrated that none of those who 
were studied suffered as a result of being observed, the researcher can argue that 
certain ethical standards were maintained. Second, and linked, if the researcher 
can show that the identities of those involved were never disclosed, again there 
is a reasonable case for saying that the participant observation was conducted 
in an ethical manner.
Whichever variant of participant observation is used there is the possibil-
ity that confidential material might ‘fall into the hands’ of the researcher. Now, 
while this is true of most research methods its prospects are exacerbated with 
the use of participant observation owing to the closeness and intimacy of the 
researcher’s role vis-à-vis those being researched. Confidential material might 
be disclosed inadvertently by someone who does not know the research interest 
of the participant. Or, possibly even more problematic, things might get revealed 
as a result of the trust and rapport developed between the researcher and those 
being observed. This could be true for any of the variants of participant observa-
tion. The ethical problem is whether to use such material and how to use it. And 
here the guidelines are quite clear: (1) any use of the mate-
rial should ensure that no one suffers as a result; and (2) any 
use of the material should avoid disclosing the identities of 
those involved. Any departure from these guidelines would 
need very special consideration and justification.
Self, identity and participant observation
Equipment for research: the ‘self’
One of the attractions of participant observation is that it hinges on the research-
er’s ‘self’, and does not call on much by the way of technical back-up in the form 
of gadgets or software. Nor does it tend to produce data that call for statistical  
Link up with 
Chapter 17 
Research ethics.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Observation  219
analysis. The key instrument of participant observation methods is the researcher 
as a person.
This suggests that there is little in the way of ‘entry costs’ to act as a deter-
rent. Equipment costs are very low. There might appear to be no need for train-
ing (though this, of course, would be a fallacy). The researcher, it might seem, 
can jump right into the fieldwork and get on with it. However, as we see in the 
next sections, this dependence on the ‘self’ is not altogether a straightforward 
advantage.
Access to settings
From the participant observer’s point of view gaining access to a setting might 
involve something more than getting approval from relevant authorities or get-
ting a ‘gatekeeper’ to help open doors to the necessary contacts and settings. 
When engaging in the total version of participant observation there is a further 
issue affecting access. If the researcher is to adopt a role in the setting then he or 
she needs to have the necessary credentials.
To operate ‘under cover’ in a setting it is obvious that the researcher should 
not stand out like a sore thumb. Depending on the situation this can effectively 
exclude many researchers from many roles. The age factor will bar most (all?) 
researchers from using participant observation to investigate student cultures 
in schools. Observing the setting as a teacher is a more likely prospect. Sex will 
offer other barriers. Male researchers will be hard pushed to use total partici-
pant observation for the study of, for example, cocktail waitresses. Observing 
as a barman in the setting is a more likely prospect. Black researchers will find 
it exceptionally difficult to infiltrate the Ku Klux Klan. The biological factors 
place severe constraints on access to situations. Skills and qualifications provide 
another barrier. To participate in the sense of adopting a role it is necessary 
to have the necessary skills and qualifications associated with that group. As 
Polsky (2006) points out, his study of pool hall hustling was only possible as 
a participant observer because – through a ‘misspent youth’ – he was already 
something of an accomplished pool player himself. The would-be researcher, 
however, might be reluctant or unable to achieve such a skill specifically for the 
purpose of a piece of research. Following the logic here, there are many, many 
roles which the researcher will be unable to adopt – from brain surgeon to tree 
surgeon – because of a lack of personal credentials.
Selecting a topic
In view of the constraints on access as a full participant, there are two things 
which emerge that have a direct bearing on the selection of a topic.
•• To a large extent researchers who do participant observation have their topic 
selected for them on the basis of their pre-existing personal attributes. The 
‘choice’ is rarely much of a free choice. The researcher’s self – age, sex, ethnic-
ity, qualifications, skills, social background and lifestyle – tends to direct the 
possibilities and provide major constraints on the roles that can be adopted.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

220  The Good Research Guide
•• While it is arguably the most revealing and sensitive of research methods in the 
social sciences, it is also very demanding. It is not a soft option. The level of 
commitment needed for full participant observation can be far more than that 
demanded by other methods – commitment in terms of researcher’s time and the 
degree to which the act of research invades the routine life of the researcher.
It is not surprising, then, that many of the fascinating studies emerge as ‘one-
offs’ in which researchers have explored an area of social life for which they are 
uniquely qualified to participate through their own past experience. It is far more 
unusual to find examples where researchers have been deliberately employed 
to infiltrate a group (e.g. Festinger et al. 1956) or where researchers have con-
sciously adopted a role which is alien to them and which involves danger and 
discomfort (e.g. Griffin 1962).
Another consequence of the restrictions to full participation is the decision of 
many social researchers to opt for the version of participant observation which is 
not ‘total participation’. Participation in the setting and participation as observer 
offer approaches which side-step some of the dangers of total participation and 
offer a more palatable experience for the researcher on many occasions (e.g. 
Whyte [1943] 1981; Humphreys 1975; O’Connell Davidson 1995).
Key point: Choosing a topic to suit your ‘self’
Researchers using participant observation generally choose a topic about which 
they have some insider knowledge and personal experience. The setting is nor-
mally one where the researcher can fit in easily and comfortably without dis-
turbing the naturalness of the setting. In both senses, then, the choice of topic 
tends to suit the researcher’s ‘self’.
Dangers of fieldwork
Doing participant observation can be dangerous. First, there is physical danger. 
As Lee (1995) points out, being physically injured while doing fieldwork is fairly 
unlikely but, depending on the circumstances, cannot be ignored as a possibility. It 
is a potential built into some forms of fieldwork. Danger lurks for anthropologists 
who travel in remote regions with inhospitable climates and treacherous terrains. 
In the early years of the century, evidently, there were instances where anthro-
pologists were actually killed by the people they were studying (Howell 1990). 
Danger lurks for political scientists who operate in unstable societies where the 
rule of law is tenuous and civilians can get caught up in factional disputes. Danger 
lurks for sociologists and ethnographers when they make contact with groups 
whose activities are on the margins of, or even outside, the law. As they tap into 
the underworlds of drugs, prostitution, football hooligans, bikers, religious sects 
and the like, they are taking a risk. This is not just a reference to the prospect of 
getting mugged or assaulted, or of retribution if the cover is blown at some stage. 
There is also the danger posed by the lifestyle itself and the impact on health of 
a changed diet and changed accommodation. Changing lifestyle carries its own 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Observation  221
hazards. Of course, if the researcher were to become dependent on the use of hard 
drugs, the health consequences could be far more dramatic.
The fieldwork could involve a second danger: legal prosecution. Being ‘part 
of the scene’ when hard drugs are around immediately puts the researcher at risk 
of prosecution. There are no special immunities afforded to social researchers.
The researcher who chooses to engage in such fieldwork might also jeopard-
ize his or her social well-being. The ‘other’ life he or she is called upon to live 
for the purposes of the research can have an adverse effect on domestic life, on 
relationships with others and on commitments to do with work and leisure which 
make up the ‘normal’ life of the researcher. The researcher, in effect, needs to 
sustain two lifestyles, and these may not be compatible. Being away from home, 
being out late and doing fieldwork at ‘unsocial’ hours can tax the patience of the 
nearest and dearest. And then there is the psychological danger resulting from 
the dual existence demanded of fieldwork such as this. The lifestyle, at its worst, 
can have something of a traumatic effect on the researcher, or can have a lasting 
or permanent effect on the researcher’s personality.
Going native
When it requires some form of ‘dual existence’ the success of participant obser-
vation depends on the researcher being able to draw a line between the two roles. 
There is a danger, though, that the researcher might become unable to draw a 
clear distinction between themselves as a researcher and themselves as a par-
ticipant. At its most extreme it can involve joining the group that you set out to 
study. If the researcher’s ‘self’ gets lost in this way this is rather like an anthro-
pologist forgetting all about the research and settling down to live out their days 
as a member of the ‘tribe’ that they had originally set out to study. This is known 
as ‘going native’. As Delamont (1992: 34) points out:
Going native is an objectionable term, deservedly, for an objectionable phe-
nomenon. It means over-identifying with the respondents, and losing the 
researcher’s twin perspective of her own culture and, more importantly, of her 
‘research’ and outlook.
Good practice: Avoid dangerous fieldwork
A risk assessment of the fieldwork setting should be conducted and potential 
dangers identified. Although experienced researchers might venture into danger-
ous contexts to conduct their participant observation, this should not be done 
by project researchers.
Advantages of participant observation
Basic equipment
Participant observation uses the researcher’s ‘self’ as the main instrument of 
research, and therefore requires little by way of technical/statistical support.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

222  The Good Research Guide
Non-interference
It stands a better chance of retaining the naturalness of the setting than other 
social research methods.
Subjects’ points of view
As a method of social research, participant observation is good for getting at 
actors’ meanings as they see them.
Insights
It provides a good platform for gaining rich insights into social processes and is 
suited to dealing with complex realities.
Ecological validity
The data produced by participant observation have the potential to be particu-
larly context-sensitive and ecologically valid.
Disadvantages of participant observation
Access
There are limited options open to the researcher about which roles to adopt or 
settings to participate in.
Commitment
Participant observation can be a very demanding method in terms of personal 
commitment and personal resources.
Danger
Participant observation can be potentially hazardous for the researcher; physi-
cally, legally, socially and psychologically risky.
Reliability
Dependence on the ‘self’ of the researcher and on the use of field notes as data 
leads to a lack of verifiable data. Reliability is open to doubt. Because par-
ticipant observation relies so crucially on the researcher’s ‘self’ as the instru-
ment of research, it becomes exceedingly difficult to repeat a study to check 
for reliability. The dependence on field notes for data, constructed (soon) after 
fieldwork and based on the researcher’s recollections of events, does little to 
encourage those who would want to apply conventional criteria for reliability 
to this method.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Observation  223
Representativeness of the data
There are problems of generalizing from the research. The focal role of the 
researcher’s ‘self’ and the emphasis on detailed research of the particular setting 
open participant observation to the criticism that it is difficult to generalize from 
the findings. In one sense, this might hold water as a valid criticism. After all, 
the situations for research using participant observation are not selected on the 
grounds of being representative. As we have seen, they tend to be chosen on the 
basis of a mixture of availability and convenience. However, it might be argued 
that it is inappropriate to apply standard criteria of reliability and generalizabil-
ity to this method.
Deception
When researchers opt to conduct full participation, keeping their true identity 
and purpose secret from others in the setting, there are ethical problems arising 
from the absence of consent on the part of those being observed, and of decep-
tion by the researcher.
Further reading
DeWalt, K. M. and DeWalt, B. R. (2011) Participant Observation: A Guide for Fieldworkers, 
2nd edn. Lanham, MD: AltaMira Press.
Gillham, B. (2008) Observation Techniques: Structured and Unstructured Approaches. 
London: Continuum.
Jorgensen, D. L. (1989) Participant Observation: A Methodology for Human Studies. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Sanger, J. (1996) The Compleat Observer?: A Field Research Guide to Observation. Lon-
don: Falmer Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

224  The Good Research Guide
✓
Checklist for participant observation 
When undertaking participant observation you should feel confident  
about answering ‘yes’ to the following questions: 
  1	 Does the participant observation research allow insights to  
events, cultures and lifestyles that would not be possible using 
other methods?
 
  2	 Are there good grounds for believing that participant observation 
will not, or did not, disturb the naturalness of the setting?
 
  3	 Is it clear which type of participant observation will be, or has 
been, used (total participation, participation in normal setting, 
participation as observer)?
 
 
  4	 Has consideration been given to the ethics of the fieldwork 
(secrecy, consent, confidentiality)?
 
  5	 Has the influence of the researcher’s self-identity been examined 
in terms of:
• the choice of fieldwork situation?
• access to the setting?
• the perception of events and cultures?
 
 
 
 
  6	 Has sufficient time been spent in the field:
• to allow trust and rapport to develop?
• to allow detailed observations and an in-depth understanding of 
the situation (detail, context, interconnections)?
 
  7	 Have field notes been made at the time or soon after participating 
in the field?
 
  8	 Has a risk assessment been conducted which shows that there 
are no specific dangers linked with the fieldwork?
 
© M. Denscombe, The Good Research Guide. Open University Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

14
Documents
• What is documentary research? • Sources of documentary data  
• Access to documentary sources • The validity of documentary data 
• The credibility of articles, journals and books • The evaluation of 
Internet documents and web pages • The credibility of official statistics 
• The credibility of records of meetings • Image-based research • The 
use of ‘created’ images • The use of ‘found’ images • Advantages of 
documentary research • Disadvantages of documentary research  
• Further reading • Checklist for the use of documents (text and  
visual images)
What is documentary research?
Documentary research, as the name implies, is a kind of social enquiry that 
uses documents as its source of data. More specifically, it treats documents as a 
source of primary data and, in this respect, it contrasts with the use of question-
naires, interviews or observation in social research. Documents can exist as:
•• written text (e.g. books, articles, reports);
• digital communication (e.g. web pages, SMS texts, blogs, social network 
sites);
•• visual sources (e.g. pictures, video, artefacts).
Whatever form they take, documents have two features that are useful when 
it comes to social research. First, they contain information that can be used as 
evidence of something. Built into the concept of a ‘document’ is the idea that the 
information it contains is of value beyond its literal contents. It stands for some-
thing and it conveys something that is significant and useful. This feature is obvi-
ous in documents such as contracts, charters, deeds, registers, reports, forms 
and certificates. For social researchers, though, this suggests that documents 
can serve as a source of data that can be used to reveal things that are not imme-
diately apparent. Rather than take the contents at face value there are things to 
be learnt from a deeper reading of the document. Documentary research, for this 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

226  The Good Research Guide
reason, generally goes beyond the straightforward collec-
tion of facts from documents: it tends to involve interpret-
ing the document as well, looking for hidden meanings or 
structures in the work.
Second, the notion of a document carries with it the idea 
of a permanent record. Documents provide some record whose existence, if not 
permanent for all of time, does at least persist in a stable form well beyond the 
moment in which it was produced. The information documents contain is neither 
fleeting nor transitory: it is captured in some format or other, and saved. This 
feature, again, is useful in the context of social research.
Sources of documentary data
Government publications and official statistics
Government publications and official statistics would appear to provide a docu-
mentary source of information that is:
•• Authoritative. Since the data have been produced by the state, employing 
large resources and expert professionals, they tend to have credibility.
• Objective. Since the data have been produced by officials, they might be 
regarded as impartial.
•• Factual. In the case of the statistics, they take the form of numbers that are 
amenable to computer storage/analysis, and constitute ‘hard facts’ over which 
there can be no ambiguity.
It is not surprising, then, that in the Western world government publications and 
official statistics have come to provide a key source of documentary information 
for social scientists. However, the extent to which such documents can live up to 
the image of being authoritative, objective and factual depends very much on the 
data they contain (see below).
Newspapers and magazines
The ‘Press’ provides a potentially valuable source of information for research 
purposes. One reason for this is that newspapers and magazines can supply good, 
up-to-date information. In this case, the value of the newspaper or magazine for 
the research will stem from one or a combination of:
•• the expertise of the journalists;
• the specialism of the publication;
•• the insider information which the correspondents can uncover.
So, for example, in the UK, business researchers might use The Economist or 
the Financial Times for these reasons. Of course, the discerning researcher will 
also realize that there are plenty of newspapers and magazines whose contents 
Link up with 
Chapter 16  
Qualitative data.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Documents  227
should not be relied upon to reflect anything approaching an objective account 
of real events!
Records of meetings
The bureaucratization of industrial society has created a wealth of documentation 
in relation to administration, policy, management, finance and commerce. These 
provide an abundant source of data for social researchers in whatever field they 
operate.
The purpose of most such documentation is to enhance accountability. The 
records kept of meetings (minutes), the records kept of transactions, the records 
kept of finances, etc. are kept in principle so that people and institutions can be 
held accountable for their actions. This means that the records need to have two 
qualities, both of which happen to be of particular value for research.
•• Systematic picture of things that have happened. These might be decisions of 
a committee or transfers of money between accounts. Whatever the records, 
though, the principle behind them is that they provide a detailed and accurate 
picture of what took place. They have got to make events sufficiently trans-
parent for the readers to comprehend what took place and why.
•• Publicly available. The records only serve the function of accountability to 
the extent that they are made available to relevant people to scrutinize.
Letters and memos
Private correspondence between people can be used for research purposes. This 
can take the form of memos sent between people at work or even personal letters 
exchanged between people. The more private the correspondence, of course, the 
more difficult it is for the researcher to gain access to the documents.
These are really at the other end of the spectrum from the publicly available 
reports, and pose far more of a challenge for the researcher when it comes to get-
ting hold of such documents and, especially, when it comes to getting permission 
to use them as research data.
Letters and memos also differ from reports in terms of the extent to which 
there is any formal obligation on the writer to give a full and accurate portrayal of 
events. Because they are written to specific people, rather than for a broader pub-
lic, their contents are likely to rely far more on assumptions about what the other 
person already knows or what that person feels. They are more likely to ‘fill in the 
bits’ rather than paint the whole picture. They can be expected to be from a per-
sonal point of view rather than be impartial. When contemplating the use of letters 
or memos as data for research, then, you need to recognize that they are not very 
reliable as accounts which depict objective reality, but they are extremely valuable 
as a source which reveals the writer’s own perceptions and views of events.
Diaries
As a source of documentary data, diaries are written by people whose thoughts 
and behaviour the researcher wishes to study. For research purposes such dia-
ries are important in terms of recording things that have already happened. We 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

228  The Good Research Guide
are not talking about the kind of diaries which act as a planner, noting commit-
ments in the future that need to be scheduled. For research purposes, the diary is 
normally a retrospective account of things that have happened.
There are three crucial elements to this kind of diary – three elements which, 
incidentally, are shared with the literary diary and the statesman’s diary:
•• factual data: a log of things that happened, decisions made and people 
involved;
• significant incidents: the identification of things seen as particularly impor-
tant and a description of the diary-writer’s priorities;
•• personal interpretation: a personal reflection and interpretation of happen-
ings, plus an account of the personal feelings and emotions surrounding the 
events described.
Each of these three things has the potential to provide a rich source of data for 
the researcher. However, the accounts they provide should not be used by the 
researcher as a statement of objective fact. That would be very naïve. As a ret-
rospective account, diaries must always be seen as a version of things as seen 
by the writer, filtered through the writer’s past experiences, own identity, own 
aspirations and own personality.
It is also worth noting that diaries, as a form of documentary data, lend 
themselves to being analysed in a variety of ways. As a 
method of data collection they do not prescribe such mat-
ters and, as Alaszewski (2006) argues, they can be analysed 
using approaches as widely different as content analysis, 
grounded theory and discourse analysis.
Website pages and the Internet
Documents, as a form of data, include material obtained via the Internet. In a 
sense, the medium through which the document is obtained is not the issue. We 
can read newspapers in their original paper form, or we can read them on micro-
fiche or via a CD-ROM. Equally, we can obtain documents through website pages, 
apps on mobile devices or email, and this does not, of itself, have a bearing on the 
use of the output as a document for research. Websites, though, can be treated as 
documents in their own right. Home pages, etc. can be treated as a form of docu-
ment, and their content analysed in terms of the text and images they contain. In 
effect, they can be treated like online documents.
Access to documentary sources
Probably the greatest attraction of using documentary sources is their accessibility. 
To get hold of the material the researcher needs only to visit the library or go online 
via a computer. The Internet provides the researcher with access to a host of govern-
ment sites that provide a wide range of information on social and economic factors. 
In the UK a list of government websites can be found at https://www.gov.uk, and in 
Link up with 
Chapter 16  
Qualitative data.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Documents  229
the USA there are sites like http://www.gpo.gov and http://fedworld.ntis.gov that offer 
entry points to search for official data and government publications. This means that 
vast amounts of information are conveniently available without much cost, without 
much delay, without prior appointment, without the need for authorization and with-
out any likelihood of ethical problems. Documents, in other words, pose considerably 
fewer problems than people as a source of data for social researchers. Table 14.1 
presents examples of access to documents.
Good practice: Gaining access to documentary sources of data
Researchers should check in advance whether their access to documentary data 
sources will need authorization or require payment. The feasibility of using docu-
mentary research should then be assessed bearing in mind any restrictions 
these factors might impose on full access to the documents.
Table 14.1  Access to documents for research
Type of document 
Examples 
Access via 
Typical use 
Public domain 
Books, journals, 
official statistics, 
some company 
records 
Internet, libraries
Academic research 
and consultancy 
Restricted access 
Medical records, 
police files, internal 
memos, personal 
papers/diaries,  
some tax accounts 
Negotiations with 
gatekeepers, 
sponsors 
Consultancy and 
academic research 
Secret 
Military plans, 
Cabinet minutes, 
corporate plans, 
records of illegal 
trade
Insider knowledge, 
participation, 
deception 
Investigative 
journalism, 
fraud detection, 
undercover work 
There are times, however, when the use of documents does not completely 
side-step the kind of problems that face researchers using other sources. While 
access to documents in the public domain is certainly straightforward, research-
ers can sometimes need to use materials whose availability is deliberately 
restricted. When this is the case, access becomes a crucial part of the research 
method – more than something that can be taken for granted. When documents 
are not available, researchers need to enter negotiations with those who hold the 
data in order to persuade them to allow the researcher the privilege of access to 
the material. Documents such as police files and medical records, and certain 
kinds of company reports and memos, might rightly be considered sensitive and 
confidential by those who ‘own’ them, and they are only likely to grant access 
when they are convinced that the researcher will honour the confidentiality of the 
material and use it in a way that will not harm the interests of anyone concerned.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

230  The Good Research Guide
Access to information on the Internet can be controlled by the actions of cer-
tain strategic ‘gatekeepers’ who can influence what information is made avail-
able and who is allowed access to that information. Some information, such as 
academic articles and market research data, will only be accessible on condi-
tion of payment of money. Separate from this, Internet researchers need to be 
sensitive to the role of ‘moderators’ and ‘webmasters’ in filtering the informa-
tion. Some sites, but by no means all, are controlled by people whose role it is to 
monitor the content of the site and the conduct of those who use it. Moderators 
(mailing lists, chat rooms) and webmasters (email servers) acting in this capac-
ity are effectively ‘gatekeepers’. They have the power to deny access to the site 
and might need to be persuaded of the relevance and worthiness of a proposed 
piece of research before they will grant access.
In the case of documents considered to be secret, of course, the holders will 
seek to deny any access to outsiders. Companies may have secret strategic 
plans regarded as too sensitive for even a bona fide researcher. The government 
wishes to keep many documents secret ‘in the national interest’. Records of ille-
gal activities, whether a drug smuggler’s diary or a second set of books for VAT 
returns, are extremely unlikely to be opened to the researcher. To get access 
to such secret documents requires the approach of investigative journalism or 
participant observation with a degree of deception and covert infiltration being 
used.
The validity of documentary data
For the purposes of research, documentary sources should never be accepted 
at face value. Their validity is something that needs to be established and it is 
important that any documents used as sources of data are evaluated in relation 
to four basic criteria.
Authenticity. Is it the genuine article? Is it the real thing? Can we be satisfied 
that the document is what it purports to be – not a fake or a forgery?
Representativeness. Is the document typical of its type? Does it represent a 
typical instance of the thing it portrays? Is the document complete? Has it been 
edited? Is the extract treated ‘in context’?
Meaning. Is the meaning of the words clear and unambiguous? Are there hid-
den meanings? Does the document contain argot and subtle codes? Are there 
meanings which involve ‘what’s left unsaid’ or ‘reading between the lines’?
Credibility. Is it accurate? Is it free from bias and errors? This will depend on 
factors like:
•• What purpose was the document written for?
• Who produced the document? What was the status of the author and did he 
or she have a particular belief or persuasion that would colour the version 
of things?
• If it reports on events, was it a first-hand report directly witnessed by the 
author? How long after the event was the document written?
• When was the document produced? In what social context and climate?
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Documents  231
The credibility of articles, journals and books
Academic journals and commercial publishers generally have their material 
reviewed by experts in the field before the work is published, so the researcher 
has some assurance about the quality of their content. However, this offers no 
absolute guarantee. And how does the reader find out which journals use ‘peer 
review’ and which publishers are reputable? Some rules of thumb might help 
here. For journals:
•• How long has the journal existed? Generally, a journal which has existed for 
a long time will be OK. Less confidence can be held about new journals. How-
ever, this does not mean old equals good, new equals bad: that would be far 
too simplistic.
• Does the title involve a national title (e.g. British Medical Journal, American 
Journal of Sociology)? Again, there is nothing cast iron about this, but it offers 
some clue as to the standing of the journal.
• Is the journal published by, or on behalf of, a professional association or some 
authority?
• Does the journal website provide a list of its editorial board and editorial 
advisers, and do these people strike you as ‘of high standing’ in the field?
•• Is there a clear statement that articles are peer reviewed?
For books and their publishers, the following questions might help with the 
evaluation of the sources.
•• Is the publisher a university press (e.g. Cambridge University Press)? If so, 
again this offers some confidence about the academic quality of the work 
being published.
•• Is the book in a second or subsequent edition? If so, there has been sufficient 
demand for the book to warrant new editions, and this would suggest that it 
has something worthwhile to say. The same applies to a lesser extent where a 
book has been reprinted several times. Look for the details, usually contained 
on the imprint page between the title and contents pages.
The evaluation of Internet documents and web pages
The evaluation of the documents downloaded from the Internet centres around 
one issue more than others. Because there are few restrictions on what is placed 
on the Internet any documents to be used for research need to be considered very 
carefully in terms of their authorship, their credibility and their authenticity. The 
documents need to be subjected to the researcher’s own quality audit along the 
lines of those recommended in relation to books and journals – but with even 
more vigour and rigour.
When it comes to the evaluation of the websites a similar point applies. For 
research purposes, judgements need to be made about the credibility of the site 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

232  The Good Research Guide
where the pages are located. Judgements about this can be made on the basis of 
four criteria:
•• The authoritativeness of the site. A university or government site might add 
some credibility to the source, whereas a private web page might need to be 
viewed with caution.
• The trustworthiness of the site. Does the site convey a sense of serious and 
legitimate purpose? Does it contain suitable disclaimers and explicit state-
ments about its purpose?
• How up-to-date the site is. Attention should be given to how regularly the 
pages are updated. Is the date of last updating visible and, crucially, is it 
recent?
•• The popularity of the site. The extent of interest in a website and the size of its 
audience can suggest something about the site’s recognition and popularity. 
These can be gauged by the number of times people have logged on to that 
site – the number of ‘hits’ on the site.
The credibility of official statistics
Certain types of official statistics will, to all intents and purposes, provide an 
objective picture of reality. Unfortunately, the same cannot be said for certain 
other types of official statistics. When politicians debate the accuracy of unem-
ployment figures or the significance of particular national economic figures 
there is clearly room for some doubt and controversy about the objectivity, the 
accuracy, the completeness and the relevance of some official statistics. This 
should alert us to the point that official statistics cannot always be taken as 
‘objective facts’.
To say this is not to reject the use of all official statistics as a source of data 
for social research. But what it does mean is that before treating a set of official 
statistics as accurate and objective the researcher should consider the following 
factors:
•• The extent to which the event or thing being measured is clear-cut and 
straightforward. Basically, the more clear-cut the event, the more confidence 
we can have in the data. The official statistics on things like births, deaths, mar-
riages and divorce are likely to be virtually complete. Whether or not someone 
is born or dies, whether a marriage or divorce occurs, does not require much 
in the way of interpretation by the registrars involved. The events themselves 
happen or don’t happen, with little scope for ‘creative accounting’ or biased 
interpretation. Alright, a very small number of births and deaths might go unre-
corded and slip through the net of the tight official procedures for collecting 
such data. But the numbers will be sufficiently low not to present any serious 
challenge to the idea that these official statistics are a full and accurate record. 
Things like unemployment, homelessness and ill health, though, are far less 
clear-cut. There are a number of ways of defining these things and this opens 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Documents  233
up the possibility of disputes about whether the statistics depict real levels of 
unemployment, etc., or whether they offer a picture biased by the nature of the 
definition that has been used.
• Whether there are vested interests behind the statistics that are produced. 
When those who produce the statistics stand to gain or lose on the basis of 
what the figures reveal, the astute researcher should treat them with some 
caution. Trade figures, hospital waiting lists, sales figures: all have conse-
quences for people who want or need the statistics to reveal a particular trend. 
And official statistics are not immune to the point. Governments can have a 
vested interest in a variety of statistics, from trade to inflation, from unem-
ployment to health.
•• The extent to which the statistics are the outcome of a series of decisions 
and judgements made by people. The more the statistics rely on decisions 
and choices by those who produce them, the more the eventual official sta-
tistics become open to being challenged. The more the statistics are the end-
product of a series of choices made by people – choices that involve judge-
ment and discretion – the more the official statistics can be regarded as 
a ‘social construction’ rather than a detached, impartial picture of the real 
world.
Crime statistics provide a good illustration of the construction of official sta-
tistics. Crime statistics are based on those crimes that people decide to report 
to the police. A large proportion of crime, however, never gets reported. Petty 
crimes may go unreported. Theft is frequently not reported, particularly when 
people see no chance of recovering their property and when the property is not 
insured. (If a claim is to be made through insurance, a ‘crime number’ is needed 
from the police and this motivates people to report the crime.) Many crimes are 
not discovered and so obviously do not get reported (e.g. embezzlement). There 
are the ‘crimes with no victims’ where, unless someone is caught by the police no 
record of the offence will ever appear (e.g. recreational drug use). In the case of 
some crimes there may be an unwillingness of the victim to complain because of 
the accruing stigma (e.g. rape) or fear of retribution.
Even when a crime is reported to the police there is a level of discretion open 
to them about how they interpret things and whether to formalize the matter. 
A lot of ‘crime’ is sorted out informally, without ever entering the system as a 
recorded crime. Even when it is in the system, the nature of the offence is open 
to some degree of interpretation. From the police officer receiving the report 
onwards, there is some scope for leeway and interpretation about (1) whether 
to prosecute; (2) what kind of offence gets noted; (3) whether a caution is given; 
(4) whether the matter proceeds to court; and (5) whether the prosecution is 
successful or not. At each stage, people are taking decisions, using discretion 
and making judgements. Overall, these can have a marked impact on the end-
product: the official statistics. It means that there will be a huge difference (in 
the case of crime) between the real level of crime in society and the figures that 
get published by the government as ‘the crime rate’. It is estimated that recorded 
crime may be as little as one-fifth of ‘actual’ crime.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

234  The Good Research Guide
The credibility of records of meetings
Records of meetings, whether publicly available or on restricted access, purport 
to depict things that have happened in a full and accurate manner. However, there 
is ample evidence that such records tend to be partial – in both senses of the word. 
They will tend to be selective in terms of what they report, emphasizing some 
things and ignoring others, and thus recording only part of the overall event. They 
will also tend to reflect a particular interpretation of what happened, recording 
events from a particular angle. We should remember that when such records are 
produced as part of public accountability there will be a tendency to be cautious 
about what is recorded. Things might have been said ‘off the record’ or following 
‘Don’t minute this but . . .’. The records, in other words, may be subtly edited to 
exclude things which might render people vulnerable to criticism when the record 
is published. The researcher, therefore, needs to be cautious about accepting such 
records at face value. Publicly available records reflect upon matters in a way 
that is publicly acceptable at a given time and in a given social sphere. They tend 
to offer a version of reality massaged to meet public expectations.
Good practice: Always assess the credibility of documentary sources
Before being used in research, documents should always be checked in terms 
of the credibility of their origins, their purpose and their author.
Image-based research
The documents referred to so far have been text-based. There are, however, alter-
native kinds of documentary data available to social researchers, ones that are 
based on visual images. Central to the idea of image-based research, visual images 
can be used as data in their own right – distinct from text, numbers or sounds as a 
potential source of research information. Just like other documents, visual images 
can prove to be valuable for the purposes of the research in terms of:
•• the factual information they contain;
• how they represent things (the symbolism and hidden meanings communi-
cated through the document or image).
Types of image
For practical reasons there has been a tendency to concentrate on two-dimen-
sional ‘still’ images such as photographs as the source of image-based data. Pho-
tographs are relatively inexpensive. They also lend themselves to analysis and 
reproduction alongside more conventional text-based research, e.g. in printed 
journals or academic dissertations. Potentially, though, there are a wide variety 
of visual images that could be used. There have been adventurous attempts on 
occasion to explore the possibilities of moving images and even three-dimen-
sional objects (Banks 2001, 2007; Emmison et al. 2012) (Table 14.2).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Documents  235
The use of ‘created’ images
Researchers can generate images specifically for the purposes of their investi-
gation – so-called created images. The visual images, in this sense, provide pri-
mary source data. These images can be valuable as a means of recording things. 
Researchers can make records of events, people, cultures, and so on by pho-
tographing, filming or drawing them. Such visual records 
provide an alternative to tape recordings (sound), an alter-
native to the use of written documents such as field notes, 
diaries or minutes (text) and an alternative to the use of 
quantitative data such as figures from questionnaires or 
statistics based on systematic observation (numbers).
When contemplating the use of created images there are 
some practical issues that ought to be borne in mind. The first concerns equip-
ment. Cameras/phones for photographs and camcorders for videos come in a 
range of technical specifications and prices. The researcher needs to decide what 
equipment will best suit the purposes of the research and what equipment is actu-
ally available. This may well call for some sort of compromise decision that bal-
ances the quality and format of the output against the resources that exist. In 
arriving at the decision the researcher will need to be aware that more sophis-
ticated equipment might call for specific technical skills and expertise and that 
any additional technical wizardry attached to more expensive equipment might 
be wasted without the necessary talent to make use of it. Weighed against this, 
cheap equipment that produces poor quality images might prove to be a poor 
saving of resources. Forethought needs to be given to the environments in which 
the images will be collected. Will the lighting be adequate to avoid flash photog-
raphy that might be intrusive or distracting? Will better quality equipment over-
come such a problem? Will a zoom lens be necessary to capture enough detail?
Quite apart from the technical considerations involved with image-based 
research when researchers set out to capture data by ‘creating’ the images first 
hand, they are confronted as well by a range of social and cultural factors that 
can have a marked impact on their ability to record things ‘as they are’. Even 
when things might seem quite straightforward there can be problems lurking 
just beneath the surface. For example, filming objects such as buildings, trans-
port facilities and artefacts would appear to be fairly unproblematic as a means 
of data collection. There are circumstances, however, where filming and pho-
tography are not allowed. Some countries might regard it as a security threat 
Table 14.2  Potential sources of image-based documentary data
Still
Movie
Object
Photographs, 
advertisements, 
drawings, graffiti 
Video recording, archive  
film 
Cultural artefacts, clothing 
and fashion items, built 
environment and places, 
body signs/language 
Link up with 
the analysis of 
image-based 
data, p. 292.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

236  The Good Research Guide
depending on the location. There are issues of privacy to be considered, and in 
galleries and museums there are often restrictions on photography and filming 
of the artefacts. Forethought needs to be given to the legal and cultural context 
within which data collection is to take place in order to minimize the risk that the 
filming or photography of specific objects will be regarded as an offence or as 
offensive.
When the image-based research involves people, there is all the more need 
for sensitivity to the social and cultural context. As Prosser and Schwartz (1998: 
119) point out, researchers need to appreciate that ‘making pictures can be a 
threatening act (amply demonstrated by the metaphors photography invokes: 
we “load”, “aim” and “shoot”).’ The act of being ‘captured’ on film can be per-
ceived as threatening even if the researcher’s intention is benign, and this likeli-
hood has two important repercussions for the process of data collection:
•• It can limit access to research sites. If people feel threatened, if they feel that 
there is an invasion of privacy, they might well refuse to cooperate with the 
research.
•• It can cause people to become self-conscious and to act in a way that they 
would not do normally.
There is, in effect, an element of reflexivity involved with the collection of ‘cre-
ated’ images. Prosser (1998: 104–5) writes of this in terms of ‘procedural reac-
tivity’ and ‘personal reactivity’. Procedural reactivity refers to the way the act 
of taking the photographs makes the researcher more obviously visible when 
collecting data for the record and the way that this can alter the natural state of 
affairs by inhibiting, embarrassing or in some other way altering the behaviour 
and activities of the person(s) being photographed. Personal reactivity refers to 
the way the photographer/researcher can have an effect on the situation simply 
on the basis of their own identity and personal characteristics, and their own 
judgements in terms of the nature of the photograph that is taken. An example 
might be a photographer’s presence when recording images at the birth of a child 
and the way the sex and age of the photographer might have a bearing on the 
types of photograph that are taken and the reaction of the mother, the father and 
nursing staff to being photographed during this intimate moment.
Bearing the issue of reflexivity in mind, researchers need to be conscious of 
the way their actions will be perceived. Consideration needs to be given to the 
impact of things like:
•• The equipment. Flash photography will be more evident than daylight pho-
tography, and a discreet small digital camera will be less visible than bulky, 
professional camcorder equipment.
• The situation. Certain events involve film records more normally than others. 
Ceremonial events, for instance, might allow the use of created images by 
the researcher in a way that would not be the case in more personal, intimate 
circumstances.
• The people involved. People who live ‘in the public eye’, those with high-pro-
file jobs and people like media celebrities, will probably be fairly comfortable 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Documents  237
in the knowledge that they are being filmed or photographed because it is a 
routine part of their working lives. They might, however, reserve the right to 
privacy on occasions when they are ‘off duty’, regarding this as their personal 
and private life.
•• Personalities. Extroverts and publicity seekers will be likely to adore the 
attention of the camera in a way that more introverted and camera-shy peo-
ple will not.
These factors come into play, of course, only when people are aware that they 
are being filmed. This need not always be the case. The researcher might choose 
to undertake covert research, in which the process of filming is kept secret from 
those who are being studied. There are particular ethical issues that arise in this 
case and to gain approval from any relevant authorizing body (e.g. an ethics com-
mittee) a strong case will need to be made for not seeking informed consent from 
those being studied. This pertains, of course, to a range of social research meth-
ods but the fullness of the data captured on film can make 
people all the more defensive and reticent to co-operate – 
more than would be the case if the research relied on things 
like interviews or questionnaire data.
The use of ‘found’ images
Documentary research can be based on images that already exist rather than 
ones produced by the researcher for the specific purposes of the research. They 
can use ‘found images’ that have been produced by other people for reasons not 
directly connected with the researcher’s investigation.
The kind of images used depends largely on the subject discipline of the 
researcher. Media studies and marketing often use advertisements and newspa-
per photographs. Anthropologists, historians and sociologists will use images of 
groups and cultural events portrayed using film, photographs, paintings, graffiti 
or artefacts. Such items contain a visual record that can be used to provide factual 
information about groups or events, or the images can be interpreted to provide 
some better understanding of the ideas and lifestyles that generated the images.
As a source of data, ‘found’ images sidestep a number of problems associ-
ated with the data gathering process for ‘created’ images. Technical issues about 
equipment and practical issues of access to locations, for instance, no longer 
arise since the image already exists. Immediately, this suggests that the use of 
found images is an attractive proposition for the social researcher because it 
requires less skill to produce and may well prove less expensive if it saves field-
work, travel and production costs. Equally attractively, it overcomes the ethical 
concerns of getting informed consent in those cases where the image involves 
living people. Added to this, the Internet offers a huge stock of downloadable 
images that social researchers can potentially use. No fieldwork and no travel 
are required.
However, the ease with which found images can be obtained should not seduce 
the researcher into opting for their use without recognizing that there are also 
Link up with 
Chapter 17 
Research ethics.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

238  The Good Research Guide
some specific issues that need to be weighed against the ease and cost factors – 
issues surrounding the authenticity of the images and copyright protection.
Authenticity
As with other documentary data, the social researcher who uses visual images 
will want to feel certain about the authenticity of the image. This is particularly 
the case with ‘found’ images that are to be used as a source of factual informa-
tion. The researcher needs to be wary about whether the image has been tam-
pered with, changed or edited from the original. Computer software, of course, 
makes this increasingly simple to do. Photographic images, in particular, are 
relatively easy to alter and the researcher should not take it as a matter of trust 
that the image is genuine. As Loizos (2000: 95) warns:
One fallacy is implied by the phrase ‘the camera cannot lie’. Humans, the 
agents who wield cameras, can and do lie: . . . they can distort the evidential 
recording capacity of visual data just as readily as they can distort written 
words.
Copyright
Ownership of an image is an important issue particularly if the image is to be 
reproduced and made publicly available through the process of research. Where 
the image has been created by the researcher there is generally not too much of 
a problem. The image is usually owned by the researcher. However, this may not 
always be the case. In some cases ownership of the image might be claimed on 
behalf of the person or event portrayed. However, as Banks (2001: 168) notes, 
this issue is ‘relevant largely to representations of celebrities, those deemed 
likely to have a financial interest in the use of their representations’.
If the image already exists, the chances are that it ‘belongs’ to some person, 
company or institution, in which case it is necessary to obtain permission to use 
the image. At one extreme this might be a fairly informal thing. If, for example, 
the image to be used is a personal photograph from a family album the necessary 
permission could involve little more than getting approval (preferably in writ-
ing) from the owner for the use of the image for research purposes. At the other 
extreme images based on advertisements, or works of art, or drawn from news 
media, entertainment magazines or the Internet, are the kind of thing that will 
probably require a very formal request to the copyright holder for permission to 
reproduce the image. If the copyright holder agrees to this it might be conditional 
on the payment of a fee. The fee can be prohibitively large and it is important to 
make it clear when requesting permission that the image is to be used for the pur-
poses of small-scale, private research from which there will be no monetary gain. 
Fees might be waived or reduced under these circumstances, though this will 
depend on the nature of the image and the policies of the particular copyright 
holder. If the image to be used has an obscure origin and the copyright holder 
cannot be traced there is a standard solution to the problem which consists of 
making a clear statement at the start of any report or dissertation along the lines 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Documents  239
that ‘Efforts have been made to obtain permission from copyright holders of the 
(photographic images) used. Where the copyright owners have not been traced 
the author invites further information from anyone concerned and will seek to 
remedy the situation.’ This does presume, of course, that rigorous efforts have 
indeed been made and the statement should not be used as a way to avoid the 
work of tracing copyright holders.
Key point: Copyright and visual images
Special care should be taken to ensure that the use of visual images for research 
purposes, especially those downloaded from the Internet, do not infringe copy-
right laws.
Advantages of documentary research
Access to data
Vast amounts of information are held in documents. Depending on the nature of 
the documents, most researchers will find access to the sources relatively easy 
and inexpensive.
Cost-effective
Documentary research provides a cost-effective method of getting data, particu-
larly large-scale data such as those provided by official statistics.
Permanence of data
Documents generally provide a source of data which is permanent and available 
in a form that can be checked by others. The data are open to public scrutiny.
Caution: The use of image-based data
Despite claims that contemporary society has become more of a ‘visual cul-
ture’ than in the past, and despite some signs of a growing interest in visual 
research, the use of image-based data remains relatively uncommon in the 
social sciences. Part of the reason for this is that film, video and three-dimen-
sional images do not readily fit the medium within which research data and 
analyses are normally presented. They may not fit in dissertations, journals or 
computer documents that favour a two-dimensional, text-based format. Although 
digital technology now makes it easy to incorporate pictures and video data 
within such documents it is clear that image-based research remains somewhat 
marginalized and, as yet, struggles to achieve a parity of status in the social sci-
ences with research whose data take the form of numbers or words. The project 
researcher undertaking small-scale research might do well to bear this in mind.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

240  The Good Research Guide
Disadvantages of documentary research
Credibility of the source
Researchers need to be discerning about the information they use. They need to 
evaluate the authority of the source and the procedures used to produce the orig-
inal data in order to gauge the credibility of the documents. This is not always 
easy. Internet documents, in particular, need special scrutiny. Information found 
on the Internet can be up-to-date and good quality stuff. However, just as easily, 
it can be out-of-date, poor quality material because there is little control over 
what is placed on the Internet.
Secondary data
When researchers use documents as a source of data, they generally rely on 
something which has been produced for other purposes and not for the specific 
aims of the investigation.
Social constructions
Documents can owe more to the interpretations of those who produce them than 
to an objective picture of reality.
Further reading
Banks, M. (2007) Using Visual Data in Qualitative Research. London: Sage.
Marion, J. S. and Crowder, J. W. (2013) Visual Research: A Concise Introduction to Think-
ing Visually. London: Bloomsbury Academic.
Plummer, K. (2001) Documents of Life 2: An Invitation to a Critical Humanism. London: 
Sage.
Prior, L. (2003) Using Documents in Social Research. London: Sage.
Rapley, T. (2007) Doing Conversation, Discourse and Document Analysis. London: Sage.
Scott, J. (1990) A Matter of Record: Documentary Sources in Social Research. Cambridge: 
Polity.
Spencer, S. (2011) Visual Research Methods in the Social Sciences: Awakening Visions. 
London: Routledge.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Documents  241
✓
Checklist for the use of documents  
(text and visual images) 
When undertaking documentary research you should feel confident  
about answering ‘yes’ to the following questions:
  1	 Am I satisfied that the documents/images are genuine in terms of 
what they purport to be (not drafts, forgeries, misleading second 
versions, etc.)?
 
 
  2	 Have I considered the credibility of the documents or images in 
terms of:
• their source (published book, journal article, official statistics)?
• their author or creator (status, role, in a position to know)?
• their sponsorship (organization, funding, pressure group)?
• the accessibility of the information they use (public domain, 
restricted, secret)?
  3	 Have website sources been evaluated in terms of their accuracy 
and how recently they have been updated (where applicable)?
 
  4	 Am I satisfied that I have taken account of possible bias in the 
document or image arising from:
• its purpose (description, theory, persuasion)?
• how representative it is (typical, extreme)?
• the editing and selection of extracts used in it?
• its interpretation of facts or theories?
• sensitivity to the information or image it contains?
  5	 Have I provided full details of the sources of the texts or images 
used?
  6	 Has the research avoided contravening copyright laws?
© M. Denscombe, The Good Research Guide. Open University Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Part 3
Data analysis
3
The purpose of analysing something is to gain a better understanding of it. 
Through a detailed examination of the thing that is being studied the analysis 
aims to do the following:
•• describe its constituent elements; or
• explain how it works; or
• interpret what it means.
Description
A description can provide the basis for research in its own right. There are types 
of social research such as ethnography and phenomenology where the research-
er’s aim is to portray particular cultures or experiences in depth and in detail, 
allowing the texture and subtlety of the situation to become visible to the reader. 
In this case the description is valuable in its own right through the way it allows 
new insights to be gained. On other occasions descriptions are used as a starting 
point for research – a platform for a subsequent analysis based on explanation 
or interpretation. The logic here is that there needs to be a clear vision of what 
the thing entails before it is possible to give an accurate explanation or interpre-
tation of how it works. Either way, whether the description is to be used in its 
own right or as a prelude to further investigation, the emphasis is on providing 
details about:
•• What the thing looks like: measurements, components, appearance, dura-
tion, etc.
• When it happened: dates, context of other events, etc.
• Who was involved: the individuals, the demographics of the sample/popula-
tion, etc.
• How often it happens: frequency, duration, etc.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

244  The Good Research Guide
Explanation
An explanation looks for rules and regularities that underlie the occurrence of 
particular social phenomena. The aim is to find out how things work by looking 
for evidence of cause–effect relationships in the data. Once the researcher has 
discovered the causes of specific behaviour, events or interactions there is the 
possibility of predicting how and when things might happen in the future – a pros-
pect which has proved very enticing for disciplines such as economics and psy-
chology but which has also been relished by many researchers in areas of health, 
education and business studies. What these researchers are trying to discover is:
•• How things are connected: associations and correlations, etc.
• Why things happen: underlying mechanisms, causes, etc.
• When things will happen: probability of recurrence, projections for the future, etc.
Interpretation
Interpretation, like explanation, is interested in patterns and regularities that lie 
behind the occurrence of social phenomena. The difference is that interpretive 
researchers see their analysis as a matter of providing an understanding rather 
than providing something that is an objective, universal truth. Interpretivists are 
still interested in gaining knowledge about how and why things happen, but they 
are sceptical about the prospects of being able to provide explanations that can 
ever be purely objective. They argue that, to a greater or lesser extent, theo-
ries must inevitably reflect the cultural and historical context within which the 
research takes place and be shaped by the personal values and experiences of 
the researcher. Any theories that are produced, it follows, will be ‘value-laden’ 
rather than objective. The consequence of such reasoning is that for interpretiv-
ists the aim of analysis is to produce a viable account of how things work (rather 
than discover regularities that exist objectively in the social world). Bearing this 
in mind, they tend to focus on things like:
•• How and why things happen: in terms of possible mechanisms, potential 
causes, plausible theories, etc.
• Who undertook the research: researcher biography, identity and experiences.
• When and where the study took place: cultural and historical context, social 
values.
•• What alternative explanations exist: comparisons with competing theories.
Quantitative and qualitative research
There are many kinds of analysis the social researcher can use in order to 
describe, explain or interpret the data. In practice, though, the options tend to 
gravitate around the notions of ‘quantitative’ and ‘qualitative’ research. These 
terms are widely used and commonly understood within social research, and 
they have come to represent contrasting alternatives that signify distinct, some 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Data analysis  245
would even say incompatible, stances on a broad range of beliefs and practices 
relating to social research. Initially, the contrast concerns the different kinds of 
data that they use and the implications of this are explored in Chapters 15 and 
16. In a nutshell, the distinction between the approaches centres on the fact that:
•• quantitative research uses numbers as the unit of analysis;
•• qualitative research uses words or visual images as the unit of analysis.
Linked with this the terms have also come to be associated with a particular set of 
assumptions about the nature of the social world. Quantitative research tends to be 
linked with positivism and qualitative research tends to be associated with inter-
pretivism. This division is far from watertight but it continues to work as an initial 
assumption about the respective stances of quantitative and qualitative research. 
Quantitative research is associated with the production of numerical data that are 
‘objective’ in the sense that they exist independently of the researcher and are not 
the result of undue influence on the part of the researcher. Ideally, the numerical 
data are seen as the product of research instruments that have been tested for valid-
ity and reliability to ensure that the data accurately reflect the event itself, not the 
researcher’s preferences. Qualitative research, by contrast, tends to place emphasis 
on the role of the researcher in the construction of the data. There is typically little 
use of standardized research instruments in qualitative research. Rather, it is recog-
nized that the researcher is the crucial ‘measurement device’ and that the research-
er’s background, values, identity and beliefs might have a significant bearing on the 
nature of the data collected and the analysis of that data. In essence, this means that:
•• quantitative research tends to be associated with researcher detachment;
•• qualitative research tends to be associated with researcher involvement.
The terms are also associated with visions about the size, focus and design of the 
investigation that is required. Quantitative research tends to favour larger-scale 
research with larger numbers and greater quantities. The sheer amounts involved, 
once they have been transformed into numerical data, do not slow down the analysis 
to any discernible degree. A statistical procedure can be undertaken by a computer 
on a sample of 1,000 pretty much as quickly as it can on a sample of 100. The results, 
though, will be more reliable when conducted on 1,000 than on 100. The larger the 
numbers involved the more the results are likely to be generalizable and reliable, sta-
tistically speaking. By contrast, qualitative research tends to involve relatively few 
people or events. Much of this reflects the preference for depth of study and the asso-
ciated ‘thick description’ which only becomes possible in relation to limited numbers. 
Qualitative researchers like to be ‘close to the data’ and like to have a detailed famili-
arity with the data in order to conduct the analysis. Their preference for small-scale 
studies also reflects the fact that words do not lend themselves to the kind of analysis 
that can utilize the power of computers in the same way that numbers do. For the 
qualitative researcher there is a vast difference in the time it takes to analyse results 
from larger amounts of data compared with smaller amounts. For these reasons:
•• quantitative research tends to be associated with large-scale studies;
•• qualitative research tends to be associated with small-scale studies.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

246  The Good Research Guide
The terms quantitative and qualitative research also imply a distinction in terms of 
the breadth of focus of an investigation. In the case of quantitative research there 
is a tendency to focus on specific variables and to study them, if not in isolation, at 
least with reference to a limited range of other variables. Qualitative research, on 
the other hand, generally exhibits a preference for seeing things ‘in context’ and 
for stressing the importance of multiple interrelationships between a wide range 
of factors in operation at any one time in the setting. Qualitative research tends to 
operate on the assumption that ‘[social] realities are wholes that cannot be under-
stood in isolation from their contexts, nor can they be fragmented for separate 
study of their parts’ (Lincoln and Guba 1985: 39). As a generalization, then:
•• quantitative research tends to be associated with analysing specific variables;
•• qualitative research tends to be associated with a holistic perspective.
Finally, the notions of quantitative and qualitative research carry with them an 
image of contrasting approaches to research design. Quantitative research tends 
to be associated with precise research designs in which the process of analysis is 
clearly separated from the process of data collection. At the beginning the research 
questions or hypotheses are carefully formulated. After this comes the process of 
data collection which usually involves a predetermined sample to be collected or 
experimental procedure to be undertaken. And then there comes the data analysis 
stage in which the data that have been previously collected are subjected to statis-
tical tests or other quantitative analysis. In contrast with this qualitative research 
tends to be linked with the idea that research questions should not, and cannot, be 
specified precisely in advance of the data collection stage. Nor can data analysis 
be hived off to a period after the data collection has been completed. As exem-
plified by the grounded theory approach (see Chapter 7) this style of qualitative 
research sees the formulation of the research question, the collection of data and 
the analysis of data as an emerging and iterative process. In effect, the analysis 
commences at the earliest stage of research and continues throughout the whole 
time of the investigation. The distinction, then, revolves around the way that:
•• quantitative research tends to be associated with data analysis after data col-
lection;
•• qualitative research tends to be associated with data analysis during data 
collection.
Caution: The distinction between quantitative and qualitative 
research
In the real world of social research things may not fall neatly into the two cat-
egories. There are three main reasons for this:
1	 In theory, the distinction is too simplistic. The assumptions associated with 
the two approaches are sometimes shared and sometimes overlap.
‣
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

The process of data analysis
The analysis of research data tends to follow a process involving five stages. 
The stages can be seen in relation to both quantitative and qualitative data, as 
Table P3.1 shows. However, it also shows that there are differences between 
quantitative and qualitative data analysis, with quantitative approaches tending 
to shape their data more consciously and more explicitly in the earlier stages of 
the process compared with qualitative approaches. More details on the specific 
approaches to data analysis are provided in Chapters 15 and 16.
Table P3.1  Five stages of data analysis
Quantitative data
Qualitative data
1  Data preparation 
Coding (which normally 
takes place before data 
collection)
Categorizing the data
Checking the numbers 
Cataloguing the text or visual 
data
Transcribing the text
Preparation of data and 
loading to software (if 
applicable) 
2  Initial exploration of  
the data 
Look for obvious trends or 
correlations 
Look for obvious recurrent 
themes or issues
Add notes to the data. Write 
memos to capture ideas 
3  Analysis of the data 
Use of statistical tests (e.g. 
descriptive statistics, 
factor analysis, cluster 
analysis)
Link to research questions  
or hypotheses 
Code the data
Group the codes into 
categories or themes
Comparison of categories 
and themes
Look for concepts (or fewer, 
more abstract categories) 
that encapsulate the 
categories 
4  Presentation and 
display of the data 
Tables
Figures
Written interpretation of the 
statistical findings 
Written interpretation of the 
findings
Illustration of points by 
quotes and pictures
Use of visual models, figures 
and tables 
(continued)
Data analysis  247
2	 In practice, many researchers use a mixed methods approach which com-
bines quantitative and qualitative research rather than treating them as 
incompatible alternatives.
3	 Strictly speaking, the distinction between ‘quantitative’ and ‘qualitative’ 
should relate to the treatment of data, rather than types of research as such.
‣
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

248  The Good Research Guide
Quantitative data
Qualitative data
5  Validation of the 
data 
External benchmarks
Internal consistency
Comparison with alternative 
explanations 
Data and method 
triangulation
Member validation
Comparison with alternative 
explanations 
Source: Adapted from Creswell and Plano Clarke (2007: 129), Table 7.1. 
Table P3.1  Five stages of data analysis (Continued)
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

15
This chapter focuses on basic aspects of the analysis and presentation of quan-
titative data. There is no attempt to cover more advanced statistical procedures 
that use quantitative data for testing hypotheses or forecasting outcomes. Such 
‘inferential’ statistics are valuable, but they require a level of familiarity with sta-
tistics that project researchers might not have the time or inclination to acquire. 
For those who want to study the statistical analysis of quantitative data in more 
depth there are many textbooks and online resources that are readily available, 
and reference should be made to such sources. The majority of project research-
ers, however, will prefer to restrict their analysis to the use of basic descriptive 
statistics. The premise of this chapter is that, properly used, simple ‘descriptive’ 
statistics can offer the project researcher a straightforward, yet rigorous way of:
•• describing the profile of findings (frequencies, averages, distributions);
• exploring connections between parts of the data (correlations and associations);
• summarizing and displaying the findings.
Sources of quantitative data • Types of quantitative data • Describing 
the mid-point or average • Describing the spread of data • Looking for 
patterns and relationships in the data • Statistical tests for association 
and difference • Presenting the data: tables and charts • Reliability 
and validity: quantitative research • Advantages of quantitative data 
analysis • Disadvantages of quantitative data analysis • Further reading 
• Checklist for the use of quantitative data
Key point: The use of quantitative data in small-scale research
Quantitative data can be used very effectively without the need for complex 
statistical analysis. ‘Every researcher can and should use numbers in their 
research’ (Gorard 2006: 2).
Quantitative data
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

250  The Good Research Guide
Sources of quantitative data
Quantitative data take the form of numbers. They are associated primarily with 
strategies of research such as surveys and experiments, and with research meth-
ods such as questionnaires and observation. These are not, however, the only 
sources of quantitative data. As Table 15.1 indicates, quantitative data can be 
produced by a variety of research methods.
Table 15.1  Sources of quantitative data
Numbers
Research method
Answers to closed-ended questions
Questionnaires
Content analysis of transcripts
Interviews
Measurements from experiments
Observation
Observation schedule used with events
Official statistics (health, education, trade, etc.)
Documents
Business data (performance, employment, etc.)
Content analysis of, for example, company reports
Types of quantitative data
Numbers can represent different types of things, and social researchers who want 
to use quantitative data need to be absolutely clear about the type of numerical 
data they are using. This makes a major difference to what can be done with the 
data, statistically speaking, and the kind of conclusions that can be drawn from 
the analysis. There are certain statistical techniques that work with some kinds 
of data that will not work with others. In this respect, numerical data can be 
considered under six headings. The first four concern the distinction established 
by Stevens (1946) between four types of measurement. These are called nominal, 
ordinal, interval and ratio. In addition to this, researchers should also be aware 
of the difference between ‘discrete’ and ‘continuous’ data.
Nominal data
As the name suggests nominal data represent something to which a name has 
been attached. In social research, an example of this occurs in relation to any 
numerical data collected about people’s sex or their ethnicity. It is useful to col-
lect data that allow us to quantify the population in terms of things like their 
sex and their ethnicity, but these features of people’s identity do not naturally 
occur as a number. Any numerical data that are collected about them are based 
on the named categories of sex and ethnicity that we choose to apply (such 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Quantitative data  251
as male/female or White/South Asian/African Caribbean). Nominal data of this 
kind are used very widely in social research and they allow us to talk about 
amounts, proportions and frequencies of a range of categories like locations, 
religions, diseases, personalities, etc. We can count the numbers in each cat-
egory and use the figures to good effect. However, nominal data allow little by 
way of mathematical manipulation compared with the other types of data. It 
makes no sense, for instance, to think of the average place to live or the aver-
age illness to suffer. The numbers are based simply on names of things, and 
there is no underlying order to what those names signify.
Ordinal data
Like nominal data, ordinal data are based on counts of things assigned to specific 
categories but, in this case, the categories stand in some clear, ordered relation-
ship. The categories are in rank order. This means that the data in each category 
can be compared with data in the other categories as being higher or lower than, 
more or less than, etc., those in the other categories. The most obvious example 
of ordinal data comes from the use of questionnaires in which respondents are 
asked to respond on a five-point scale, known as the Likert scale. The responses 
coded as 2 (agree) can legitimately be seen as more positive than those coded 
as 3, 4 or 5 (neutral, disagree, strongly disagree), but less positive than those 
coded 1 (strongly agree).
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly disagree 
Interval and ratio data
With interval data the ‘distance’ between the data points is proportionate. This 
means that the researcher not only can deal with the data in terms of ‘more than’ 
or ‘less than’, but also say how much more or how much less. Calendar years 
provide a suitable example of such data. Data collected for the years 1974, 1984, 
1994, 2004 and 2014 not only differ in terms of being earlier or later than one 
another, they are also earlier or later by a known timespan interval. This allows 
the researcher to measure the difference between various periods: the difference 
between 1984 and 1994 can be directly compared with the difference between 
2004 and 2014, and so on. Ratio data are like interval data except that they exist 
on a scale which has a ‘true zero’ or an absolute reference point. When the cat-
egories concern things like incomes, distances and weights, they give rise to 
ratio data because the scales have a zero point. Calendar years, in the previ-
ous example, do not exist on such a scale, because the year 0 does not denote 
the beginning of all time and history. The important thing about interval and 
ratio data, however, is that the researcher can compare and contrast the data 
for each category in terms of ratios, using multiplication and division. They are 
the highest level of data in terms of how amenable they are to mathematical 
manipulation.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

252  The Good Research Guide
Discrete data
Certain data are based on phenomena which naturally come in whole units. 
Numbers of children per family, in reality, have to be whole numbers. We 
might aggregate the numbers to arrive at an average figure of 1.9 or what-
ever, but we do not suppose that there exists anywhere 0.9 of a child belong-
ing to a family. In this example, our measurement of children per family can 
be exact for each and every household, with no need for approximations or 
results accurate to the nearest fraction. The discrete data come in chunks:  
1, 2, 3, 4, and so on.
Continuous data
Contrasted with this there are certain kinds of data which, for practical pur-
poses, are inevitably measured ‘to the nearest unit’ simply because they do 
not come in neat, discrete chunks. Such things are measured to the nearest 
small unit because, as a variable, they are continuous. People’s height, age and 
weight are obvious examples here. In principle, there is no end to the precision 
with which we might try to measure these items. We could measure height in 
millimetres, weight in grammes, age in seconds. For practical purposes, how-
ever, such precision would be counter-productive because it would throw up 
vast arrays of data which would not lend themselves to analysis. When vari-
ables are continuous, the researcher, in practice, needs to categorize the data. 
The unit of data is not exact height, exact weight, exact age; rather, it is ‘height 
falling within a range of 2 cm’, ‘weight to the nearest 0.5 kilogrammes’ or ‘age 
at last birthday’.
The significance of continuous data lies with the implicit categories which are 
formed by the researcher to cope with difficulties of measuring points/units on a 
sliding scale. The researcher needs to be absolutely clear about the boundaries 
to such categories and exactly where the mid-point of the category resides. The 
accuracy of statistics based on continuous data depends on knowing the bounda-
ries and mid-point to the categories of the data.
Key point: Different kinds of numerical data
Researchers wanting to use quantitative data need to understand what kind of 
data they are working with and appreciate the possibilities and limitations asso-
ciated with that particular kind of numerical data.
Describing the mid-point or average
One of the basic things that a researcher needs to do with a quantitative data set 
is to provide a description of the mid-point or the average. There are three ways 
of doing this and the choice of which measure of central tendency is used will 
depend on the kind of numerical data involved.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Quantitative data  253
The mean (the arithmetic average)
The mean is what most people have in mind when, in common parlance, they 
think about ‘the average’. It is a measure of central tendency based on imagining 
what would happen if instead of the values in the distribution all varying they 
were all the same – if there was an equal distribution of values. By adding all the 
values together and dividing by the number of cases it is easy to calculate this 
arithmetically. To calculate the mean of the values below:
•• add together the total of all the values for a variable or category (= 116)
• divide this total by the number of cases (÷ 8)
This gives a mean of 14.5.
1
4
7
11
12
17
17
47
For social researchers, the mean has certain strengths and certain limitations 
when it comes to describing the data.
•• The mean can be used with interval and ratio data. In practice, it is often 
used with ordinal data as well, although this is controversial. Calculations of 
the mean, however, are definitely not appropriate when working with nominal 
data. Clearly it makes no sense to think of the average when the researcher is 
dealing with nominal data such as categories of sex, ethnic group or occupa-
tions; how can you calculate the average of two sexes, of four ethnic groups 
or of ten occupations?
• The mean is affected by extreme values (‘outliers’). Because the mean includes 
all values, it is prone to being affected by the odd one or two values that might 
be vastly different from the rest. Extreme or unusual values get included in the 
overall mean, and can shift the figure for the mean towards any such ‘outliers’. 
Two things will minimize the impact of such outliers. First, a large data set will 
shroud the influence of the odd one or two outliers. An outlier will have less of 
a distorting impact on a large sample than it will on a small sample, because 
the extent of its deviation from the rest will get subdivided more and more as 
the size of the sample gets bigger. Second, and linked to this, calculations of the 
mean are safest when there are relatively few outliers, and the outliers that do 
exist have a tendency to balance up and cancel each other out.
•• Use of the mean may lead to strange descriptions. When we conclude, for exam-
ple, that the average size of households in Britain has fallen from 2.91 persons in 
1979 to 2.1 persons in 2014 we clearly do not mean this as a literal description of 
the situation. What does 0.3 of a person look like? It is a statistical description.
The median (the middle point)
The idea of ‘average’ can sometimes carry with it the idea of ‘middle of the range’ 
and this is the sense in which the median operates. The median is the mid-point 
of a range.
↓
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

254  The Good Research Guide
Calculation of the median is really very straightforward. Values in the data 
are placed in either ascending or descending rank order and the point which lies 
in the middle of the range is the median. With even numbers of values, it is the 
mid-point of the two central values. So, in the following set of data, the median 
is 11.5, half-way between the two middle values.
1
4
7
11
12
17
17
47
There are some crucial advantages and limitations connected with the use of the 
median as a measure of central tendency.
•• It can be used with ordinal data as well as interval and ratio data. This opens up 
the scope of uses to many areas which are not suitable for the arithmetic mean.
• Because it is an ordinal operation, the median is not affected by extreme 
values, the ‘outliers’. Looking at the values above, it should be clear that 
the value of 47, an obvious outlier, does not affect the calculation of the 
median. It does, though, affect the calculation of the mean. As far as the 
median is concerned, that value could lie anywhere between 18 and infin-
ity because its sole significance is that it exists as a value in the range 
which is greater than 17. Now this, of course, can cut both ways. While the 
median is unaffected by outliers, it is equally insensitive to the implica-
tions of any such extreme values. It effectively eliminates such data from 
the picture.
• The median works well with a low number of values. In fact, in contrast to the 
mean, it is better suited to low numbers of values.
• We have the advantage of knowing that exactly half the values are above the 
median and half the values are below the median. It offers a quick and easy-
to-grasp measure of the central point of the data.
• The main disadvantage of the median is that it does not allow for further 
mathematical processing.
The mode (the most common)
As the name suggests, when social researchers use the mode as a measure of 
central tendency they have in mind the most fashionable or popular figure. But 
this does not imply that they are looking for the best liked value in the data. It 
is the value which is most common that is the mode. Identification of the modal 
value simply consists of seeing which value among a set occurs most frequently: 
this is the mode. In the set below, the mode is 17.
1  1  4  4  7  11  12  17  17  17  47
↓
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Quantitative data  255
As with the mean and the median, there are certain strengths and weaknesses 
pertaining to the use of the mode, and these need to be considered:
•• The mode can be used with nominal data, as well as ordinal, interval and 
ratio data. It has the widest possible scope for application, then, in relation to 
social data. As a measure of central tendency it makes sense, for example, to 
talk about the most commonly watched soap opera on TV, whereas we cannot 
sensibly talk about the mean or median soap opera.
• Like the median, it is unaffected by outliers or extreme values. It focuses only 
on the most common value and ignores all others.
• It shares with the median the limitation that the mode does not allow any 
further mathematical processing to be undertaken on it. It is a stand-alone 
end-product.
•• One other limitation: there might not be one most popular value, or some val-
ues might share top spot, so that there might be two or more modes.
Key point: The difference between means, medians and modes
When describing data, social researchers need to be aware of the difference 
between the three measures of central tendency and decide which is most 
appropriate for their specific purpose.
Describing the spread of data
If researchers wish to describe a set of frequencies it will help if they can provide 
not only a measure of central tendency but also some idea of the way the data 
are spread out from that central point – a measure of dispersion.
The range
This is the most simple way of describing the spread of data. It is none the less 
effective, and a valuable method of giving an instant image of the dispersion of the 
data. The range of the data is calculated by subtracting the minimum value from 
the maximum value. In the set of values below, the range is 44 (i.e. 47 minus 3).
3  4  7  11  12  17  17  47
Although a statement of the range has value as an instant picture of how wide 
the data are spread it does have a rather serious limitation as a statistic. It is 
governed by the extreme values in any set and may consequently give a biased 
picture of the spread of the values between the extremes. In the example above 
the range of 44 is obviously determined by the outlier value of 47. Visually, it is 
evident that seven of the eight values lie within a range of just 14 (i.e. 17 minus 
3). So although reference to the range of values is quick and easy it needs to be 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

256  The Good Research Guide
used cautiously and with attention paid to any extreme values and the way these 
might give a misleading impression of the spread.
Fractiles
Fractiles are based on the idea of dividing the range of the data into fractions. 
Each fraction contains the same number of data cases. When quartiles are used 
the data are divided into four sections. Deciles operate on the same principle but, 
as the name suggests, they divide the range into tenths. Where percentiles are 
used the data are divided into 100 equal parts.
There are two uses of fractiles for social researchers. First, they can be used 
for the selection of cases to analyse. Researchers can use them as a way of elimi-
nating extreme highs and lows from the data they wish to examine. For example, 
by focusing on those cases that come in the second and third quartiles research-
ers know that they are dealing with exactly half of all the cases and, more than 
that, they are dealing with the half that are ‘in the middle’. This middle part of the 
range is known as the ‘inter-quartile range’. With incomes, for instance, use of the 
inter-quartile range overcomes the possibility of some very high incomes distort-
ing the overall picture, since these would occur in the top quartile. Likewise, by 
not using the bottom quartile the researchers would eliminate very low incomes 
from their analysis.
A second use of fractiles is for comparison. They allow comparisons to be 
made between those cases that occur at one end of the range and those that 
occur elsewhere in the range. The top quarter can be compared with the bot-
tom quarter, or the highest 10 per cent with the lowest 10 per cent. The most 
prominent use of this is in comparisons of income and wealth. The top decile 
(the 10 per cent of all earners who earn more than the other 90 per cent of 
earners) can have their pay compared with the 10 per cent of all earners who 
earn the least. The comparison can be in terms of how much is earned. Here the 
researchers can calculate the mean earnings of the top decile and compare this 
with the mean earnings of the bottom decile. Used in such a way fractiles can 
be a valuable tool for the social scientist in describing the spread in a frequency 
distribution.
Standard deviation
An alternative method of dealing with the spread of data comes in the form of 
the standard deviation. This works on the idea that if we wish to understand 
the dispersion of the data it would be useful to know how far, on average, the 
values varied from the mean. It is not an absolute measure of the difference 
between the highest value and the lowest value, as is the case with the use of 
ranges. More subtly, the standard deviation uses all the values (not just top and 
bottom) to calculate how far in general the values tend to be spread out around 
the mean.
There are variations in the formulae used for calculating the standard devia-
tion and there are certain complications that set in when it is used with grouped 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Quantitative data  257
frequencies. However, these should not detain us because computer software 
will generally take care of the mathematics involved. The basic point is this: the 
greater the dispersion, the larger the standard deviation.
Use of the standard deviation as a measure of dispersion has some distinct 
advantages in relation to the analysis of quantitative data. Specifically:
•• The standard deviation lends itself to further mathematical analysis in a way 
that a straightforward description of the spread does not.
•• Following from this, the standard deviation assumes huge importance in 
social research because it is the basis of so many other statistical procedures.
However, it is important to remember that it is not a measure of dispersion that 
can be used with nominal data. Because it takes the arithmetic mean as the basis 
of its calculations only those kinds of data that lend themselves to this measure 
of central tendency can be used. That is, the standard deviation can be used only 
with cardinal numbers (interval and ratio data). It is meaningless to use it with 
nominal or even, strictly speaking, with ordinal data.
Good practice: Calculating the standard deviation: the logic
Technically, we want to know ‘the mean variation from the mean’. In common 
language, we want to know ‘the average amount by which our data is spread 
out from the middle’. To do this we could add up the amounts by which each 
value on our data list varies from the mean and, to get the ‘average’, divide this 
total by the number of values on the list. If we did so, however, the result would 
always equal zero. This is because the positive and the negative differences 
from the mean, when totalled, will always cancel each other out. To get around 
this the differences from the mean need to be squared because this ensures 
that they all have a positive value and cannot cancel each other out. When these 
‘squares of the differences from the mean’ are added together and divided by 
the number of cases in the data list they provide a measure of the ‘average’ 
spread around the middle. Or, to put this in statistical jargon, we can calculate 
the mean of ‘the sum of the squares’ and get a measure of the variance of the 
data. To get the units back to the same as those in the actual distribution being 
looked at we need to get the ‘square-root of the variance’ – and it is this which 
is known as the ‘standard deviation’.
Looking for patterns and relationships in the data
Having produced a description of the profile of the data the next stage of analy-
sis is to look for patterns and relationships in the data. This involves looking for 
connections. Researchers will want to check whether there are any patterns of 
association between variables within a data set or whether there are any rela-
tionships between two or more sets of data. Does one category of data match 
another, or does one category vary along with another? Is there a difference 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

258  The Good Research Guide
between two sets of data where it might have been expected that there would be 
a similarity?
Looking for connections, at one level, can be a very straightforward process. In 
essence it need only involve looking at the data in the tables or the charts to see 
what links are evident. However, appearances can be deceptive. For research pur-
poses the mere appearance of a connection is not enough. Good researchers want 
to know:
•• whether the findings were a fluke;
• how strong the connection is between the two variables;
•• whether one causes the other, or whether the two are mutually interdependent.
These seem reasonable things to ask of the data. And this is where statistical 
tests of significance prove to be of enormous benefit. Such statistical tests pro-
vide an estimate of the probability that any association we find between two 
or more variables is the product of sheer chance rather than a genuine connec-
tion between such variables – connections that will be found on other occasions. 
They provide a benchmark for researchers, indicating whether to proceed on the 
assumption that the apparent connection is real or whether to treat the data as 
unreliable evidence on the point.
Good practice: A cautious approach and the null hypothesis
Social researchers should start from the premise that there is no real pattern or 
no real relationship between sets of data and only be persuaded to reject this 
position if the statistics point to a probability of less than 1 in 20 (p < 0.05) that 
the results arose by chance.
Good researchers are very cautious in their approach to the search for pat-
terns and relationships in the data. They approach things with a sceptical mind-
set and start from the premise that any pattern they might detect in the data could 
actually be the outcome of nothing more than sheer chance. As an expression of 
this cautious approach researchers using statistics start with a null hypothesis. 
They approach their findings with the presumption that there is no real pattern 
or no real relationship between sets of data, and they will only be persuaded to 
reject this position if there is ‘overwhelming’ statistical evidence to the contrary. 
In the social sciences there is a convention that researchers will not accept that 
observed patterns or relationships are worthy of being considered ‘real’ unless 
the probability of them arising by chance is less than 1 in 20. In technical terms 
this involves a significance level of p < 0.05. Only if the patterns or relationships 
are shown to have a ‘probability of less than 5%’ of being due to chance (shown 
as p < 0.05) will the good researcher be persuaded to reject the null hypothesis. 
Like members of a jury the researcher needs to be persuaded beyond reasonable 
doubt and this happens where the evidence/findings is likely to be true at least 
19 times out of 20.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Quantitative data  259
Caution: The meaning of ‘significance’
Statistical significance does not necessarily imply social significance. The 
researcher needs to be wary of mixing the two senses of ‘significance’. Sta-
tistical significance only relates to the amount of confidence we have that the 
findings we obtained were not the product of pure chance. It does not auto-
matically imply that the findings are ‘important’. That is something to be shown 
elsewhere by other means.
Statistical tests for association and difference
How do I find out if two variables are associated to a significant level?
Probably the most flexible and certainly the most commonly used statistical test 
for this is the chi-square test. The chi-square test works with nominal data as well 
as ordinal, interval and ratio data – which does much to explain its popularity. 
The columns and rows can use nominal data based on things like sex, ethnicity 
and occupation, factors which feature prominently in data collected by social 
researchers (see Table 15.2).
It works on the supposition that if there were no relationship between the vari-
ables then the units would be distributed in the cells of the contingency table in 
equal proportion. This means that if there were three times as many women as 
men in a sample, we would start from the assumption that women would account 
for 75 per cent of the amounts or frequencies we are measuring, for instance, 
Table 15.2  Chi-square and contingency tables: example
Days absent from work through illness during the previous year, by sex of employee
Sex
Male
Female
Total
Days lost 
0–5 days 
Count 
      8 
        7 
    15 
Expected count 
     7.0 
      8.0 
15.0 
6 or more days 
Count 
      6 
      9 
    15 
Expected count 
     7.0 
     8.0 
   15.0 
Total 
Count 
     14 
     16 
    30 
Expected count 
14.0 
16.0 
30.0 
Value
d.f.
(2-sided)
Pearson chi-square
0.536*
1
0.464
Note: *0 cells (0.0%) have expected count less than 5. The minimum expected count 
is 7.00. 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

260  The Good Research Guide
absences from work. If there is no connection between sex and absenteeism from 
work we might expect the larger proportion of women in the sample to account 
for a larger proportion of absences – in the strict ratio of 3:1. This ‘expected’ 
distribution (based on the null hypothesis) is, in other words, a theoretical dis-
tribution based on a starting premise that the two variables concerned do not 
affect each other. In reality it is extremely unlikely that the research findings will 
match this theoretical distribution. Almost certainly there will be a difference 
between what might be expected and what is actually found in practice. And this 
difference, the difference between what was ‘observed’ and what was ‘expected’, 
is the key to the chi-square test. The chi-square test uses the extent of difference 
(in the cells of a contingency table) between what was observed and what might 
have been expected in order to calculate whether we can have confidence that 
the observed relationship was actually due to something other than pure chance 
– whether it was real or a fluke.
The main restriction on the use of the chi-square test is that there needs to be a 
sufficiently large data set and/or a sufficiently even distribution among the various 
categories in order to get a minimum of five in each cell. Where cells in the contin-
gency table have fewer than five in them it threatens the accuracy of the statistic. 
There are ways around this should it become a problem. There is a statistical fix 
which can be used (e.g. the Yates correction factor) and most computer programs 
will put this into operation automatically. Alternatively, the categories can be com-
bined and reduced in number to ensure that each cell has enough data in it.
There is a danger with the use of the chi-square test that the results are heavily 
affected by the categories which are used. Where categories are combined (for 
example, to ensure a minimum of five in each cell) or where categories are based 
on grouped frequencies, the researcher needs to be very aware that:
•• the ‘boundaries’ for the categories are creations of the researcher;
•• use of different combinations or boundaries will affect the chi-square statistic.
The flexibility in terms of categories in the columns and rows, then, turns out to 
be both a strength and a potential weakness of the test.
How do I see if two groups or categories are different to a significant level?
Project researchers often wish to compare two sets of data to see if there is a signifi-
cant difference between them. For example, a teacher might wish to compare two 
sets of test scores obtained from students: one set obtained at the start of the school 
year, the other set obtained from the same students on the same test at the end of 
the school year. Alternatively, he/she might wish to compare the results obtained 
from students in one class with those from another. In small-scale research the need 
to compare two such groups or categories in these ways is very common.
The most appropriate statistical test for this purpose is the t-test. The t-test 
provides the researcher with a statistical test of significance. It uses the means 
of the two sets of data and their standard deviations to arrive at a figure which 
tells the researcher the specific likelihood that any differences between the two 
sets of data are due to chance.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Quantitative data  261
Researchers using the t-test take the null hypothesis as their starting point. They 
presume that there is no real difference until they can be persuaded otherwise by 
a statistical test which points to a very strong likelihood that any variation found 
between the two sets of data was the result of something other than pure chance. As 
with the chi-square test, researchers normally treat differences as ‘real’ (not a fluke) 
when they find that there is a probability of less than 1 in 20, usually expressed as  
‘p < 0.05’, that any difference between the two sets of data was due to chance.
The t-test
We have two sets of marks obtained from two classes who have both taken the 
same test at about the same time. Is there a significant difference between the 
scores obtained by students in class A (mean = 60.25) and the scores obtained 
by those in class B (mean = 57.00)? The ‘independent groups’ t-test can be 
used to answer this.
Class A (%)
Class B (%)
70
55
60
45
45
70
80
75
55
50
65
55
65
40
50
60
80
75
55
50
65
55
65
40
50
60
25
70
80
55
45
75
70
55
50
t = 0.73  p = 0.471  i.e difference is not statistically significant
Example 15.1
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

262  The Good Research Guide
The t-test has two notable strengths which are of particular benefit for small-
scale research. The t-test works well with small sample sizes (less than 30) – an 
obvious advantage with small-scale research – and the groups do not have to be 
exactly the same size. A data set of 20 items can be compared with a data set of 
15, for example.
There are other statistical tests which compare the results from two sets of 
data that will work with ordinal data rather than interval or ratio data. For exam-
ple, the Mann–Whitney U test is a well-known test that works by using the rank-
ordering of cases in each group. This is why it can work with ordinal data such as 
examination grades (A, B, etc.) if actual percentage scores are not available. The 
Mann–Whitney U test works by producing one overall ranking which is made 
from both groups being investigated. The positions of members of each group on 
this combined ranking are then used as the basis for calculating whether there is 
a statistically significant difference between the two groups.
How do I see if three or more groups or categories  
are significantly related?
This question is likely to be moving beyond the scope of interest for project 
researchers. It suggests a fairly large data set with more than two variables 
potentially connected and worthy of statistical test. It calls for a basic factor 
analysis such as one-way ANOVA (analysis of variance). This test analyses the 
variation within and between groups or categories of data using a comparison 
of means.
How do I assess the strength of a relationship  
between two variables?
This question is not concerned with the likelihood of any apparent connection 
between two variables being real; it is concerned with how closely two variables 
are connected. The relevant statistics here are correlations.
Correlations between two variables can be visualized using a scatter plot. 
These need ratio, interval or ordinal data, and cannot be used with nominal data. 
They also require reasonably large data sets to work best (see Figure 15.1).
Figure 15.1  Correlations and scatter plot: example 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Quantitative data  263
The two most commonly used correlation statistics are Spearman’s rank 
correlation coefficient (which works with ordinal data) and Pearson’s product 
moment correlation coefficient (which works with interval and ratio data).
These statistical tests are used to arrive at a correlation coefficient based on 
the data. The correlation coefficients range from +1 to --1 as shown in Table 15.3.
Caution: Correlation does not indicate cause
It is important to appreciate that correlation is different from cause. The connec-
tion between two variables that might be demonstrated using a correlation test 
says nothing about which variable is the dependent and which is the independ-
ent one. It says nothing about which is the cause and which is the effect. It only 
establishes that there is a connection, with a specified closeness of fit between 
the variables. Researchers wishing to investigate connections in terms of cause 
and effect need to use regression analysis.
Presenting the data: tables and charts
Statistical packages and spreadsheets generally contain a table-making and a 
chart-making facility. So ‘drawing’ the tables and charts does not generally pose 
much of a problem for project researchers. The skill of producing good tables 
and charts tends to revolve far more around ‘design’ issues and the researcher’s 
ability to do the following:
•• present enough information without ‘drowning’ the reader with information 
overload;
Table 15.3  Correlation coefficients range
+1 
0 
-1 
perfect positive
no relationship
perfect negative
correlation 
correlation 
(one goes up, 
(one goes up, 
other goes up) 
other goes down) 
In reality, correlations are unlikely to be perfect. Researchers generally regard 
any correlation coefficient between 0.3 and 0.7 (plus or minus) as demonstrating 
some reasonable correlation between two variables. 0.3 is reasonably weak, 0.7 
is reasonably strong.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

264  The Good Research Guide
• help the reader to interpret the table or chart through visual clues and appro-
priate presentation;
• use an appropriate type of table or chart for the purpose at hand.
Vital information
There are certain pieces of information which must always be included. If these 
are absent, then the table or chart ceases to have much value as far as the reader 
is concerned. The table or chart must always have:
•• a title;
• information about the units being represented in the columns of the table or 
on the axes of the chart (sometimes this is placed by the axes, sometimes by 
the bars or lines, sometimes in a legend);
•• the source of the data, if they were originally produced elsewhere.
Added to this, in most cases – though not all:
•• the horizontal axis is the ‘x axis’ and is used for the independent variable;
•• the vertical axis is the ‘y axis’ and is used for the dependent variable.
There are some exceptions to the rule about the x axis being the horizontal axis, 
and these are mentioned below. When constructing a chart or table, though, it is 
important for the researcher to have a clear view about which variable is seen to 
be the ‘cause’ and which is the ‘effect’. The variable which is treated as the ‘cause’ 
is the independent variable (normally on the horizontal axis) and the variable 
which is being affected is the dependent variable (normally on the vertical axis). 
Dates (for example, 1984, 1994, 2004, 2014) are usually on the horizontal axis and 
are treated as an independent variable.
If the researcher pays attention to these points, the remaining dangers to the 
success of the table or chart generally come from trying to be too ambitious 
and putting in too much detail. Simplicity is a virtue that is hard to overstress in 
relation to the production of tables and charts. If too much data are supplied in 
a table, it becomes almost impossible for the reader to decipher the meaning of 
the data. Too many patterns, too many words, too many figures, and the impact 
of the table or chart is lost.
Good practice
Simplicity is a virtue when it comes to the presentation of tables and charts.
Tables
One of the main virtues of tables is their flexibility. They can be used with just 
about all types of numerical data. Computer software offers a variety of templates 
for tables, which aid the presentation of data in a visually attractive fashion.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Quantitative data  265
The degree of complexity of the table depends on two things: the audience 
being addressed and the restrictions imposed by the format of the document in 
which the table appears. For the purposes of most project researchers it is likely 
that tables will remain fairly simple in structure. If the table does need to involve 
a considerable number of rows, the researcher should be prepared to insert hori-
zontal and vertical ‘breaks’ or blank lines to ease reading and to avoid the eye 
slipping to the wrong line of data (see Table 15.4).
Table 15.5  Contingency table (example)
Days absent from work through illness during the previous year, 30 employees
Days lost 
Male (n = 14) 
Female (n = 16) 
0–5 days 
21 
18 
6 or more days 
74 
82 
Source: Human Resources Dept, Healthy Life Insurance Co. 
Table 15.4  Table (example)
Days absent from work through illness during the previous year, 30 employees
Days 
Frequency 
Days
Frequency
Days
Frequency
0
4
5
2
10
3
1
1
6
3
12
1
2
1
7
1
13
1
3
6
8
2
15
1
4 
2 
9 
1 
36 
1 
Source: Human Resources Dept, Healthy Life Insurance Co. 
One particularly common use of tables is to present a comparison of sets of 
nominal data. Such tables are known as contingency tables (see Table 15.5). They 
allow a visual comparison of the data and also act as the basis for statistical tests 
of association, such as the chi-square test.
Bar charts
Bar charts are an effective way of presenting frequencies, and they are very 
common in reports of small-scale research. They can be used with nominal data 
and with discrete data. The principle behind them is that the bars should be of 
equal width, with the height of the bars representing the frequency or the amount 
for each separate category. Conventionally, there is a space between each bar. 
Their strength is that they are visually striking and simple to read – provided, 
that is, that not too many categories are used. The fewer the categories (bars), 
the more striking the impact. Beyond ten categories bar charts tend to become 
too crowded and confusing to read. Figure 15.2 shows a simple bar chart.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

266  The Good Research Guide
There are many variations on the standard bar chart. The pictogram embel-
lishes the basic idea by using symbols or images instead of the standard bar. It 
does not tell you anything more, but it catches the eye more readily.
Bar charts are sometimes turned on their sides to make it easier to label the 
categories (see Figure 15.3). In such horizontal bar charts, the vertical axis 
becomes the x axis – as an exception to the convention.
Figure 15.2  Simple bar chart (example)
Figure 15.3  Horizontal bar chart (example)
Sometimes each bar incorporates the component elements of the total for a 
category. This is known as a stacked bar chart (see Figure 15.4). Interestingly, 
stacked bar charts can be used as an alternative to pie charts (see below) because 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Quantitative data  267
they clearly show the relative proportions of the factors that make up the total. 
They have an advantage, too. A number of stacked bars can be incorporated into 
the same chart, allowing a more direct visual contrast than could be achieved by 
placing a similar number of pie charts together.
Histograms
A histogram, like a bar chart, is a valuable aid to presenting data on frequencies 
or amounts (see Figure 15.5). Like a bar chart, the bars are normally of equal 
Figure 15.4  Stacked bar chart (example)
Figure 15.5  Histogram (example)
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

268  The Good Research Guide
width and where they are of equal width, the height of the bar is used to depict 
variations in the frequencies or amounts. What distinguishes a histogram from a 
bar chart is that the histogram is used for continuous data, whereas a bar chart 
is used for discrete data or nominal data. In contrast to the bar chart:
•• there are no gaps between the bars;
•• the data ‘flow’ along the x axis, rather than being distinct and separate items.
Scatter plots
A scatter plot is used to display the extent of a relationship between two variables 
(see Figure 15.6). The data are represented by unconnected points on a grid, and 
the clustering or spread of such points is the basis for detecting a close co-variation 
between two variables, or a not so close co-variation. The closer the points come 
together, the closer the relationship between the variables on the x axis and the 
y axis. The more spread out the points are, the less closely the variables are con-
nected. The extent of the relationship is made nicely visible; indeed the scatter 
plot is particularly good at showing patterns and deviations. There is a drawback, 
however. It does need a reasonable amount of data to reveal such a pattern.
Figure 15.6  Scatter plot (example)
Line graphs
A line graph is used for depicting development or progression in a sequence of 
data (see Figure 15.7). It is good for showing trends in data. The most common 
use of the line graph is with dates. A time sequence is plotted left to right on the 
x axis. The line varies in height according to the frequency or the amount of the 
units. Line graphs work better with large data sets and big variations. A bar chart 
can be used to do the same thing, and sometimes bars and lines are combined 
within the same chart.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Quantitative data  269
Pie charts
Pie charts, as their name suggests, present data as segments of the whole pie (see 
Figure 15.8). Pie charts are visually powerful. They convey simply and straight-
forwardly the proportions of each category which go to make up the total. In 
most cases, the segments are presented in terms of percentages.
Figure 15.7  Line graph (example)
Figure 15.8  Pie chart (example)
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

270  The Good Research Guide
To enhance their impact, pie charts that wish to draw attention to one par-
ticular component have that segment extracted from the rest of the pie. On other 
occasions, all segments are pulled away from the core in what is known as an 
exploded pie chart.
Weighed against their visual strength, pie charts can only be used with one 
data set. Their impact is also dependent on not having too many segments. As a 
rule of thumb, a pie chart should have no more than seven segments and have no 
segment which accounts for less than 2 per cent of the total.
As a form of chart they tend to take up quite a lot of space on a page. The 
labels need be kept horizontal, and this spreads the chart out across the page. As 
good practice, incidentally, the proportions should be shown as a figure, where 
possible, within the segments.
Caution: Avoid distorting the data
The presentation of quantitative data in graphs and charts can be used to mis-
lead and give the wrong impression. Playing around with the scales on the x 
axis and the y axis can artificially exaggerate or underplay the appearance of 
differences in the data. Care needs to be taken to avoid distorting the data in 
this way.
Tables and charts: which one to choose?
When it comes to choosing which kind of chart or table to use researchers are 
faced with a range of possibilities. Their choice, however, is not simply a matter 
of picking ‘the best’. There is no hierarchy with particular kinds of tables and 
charts being inherently better or worse than others. The choice, instead, needs 
to be based on the fact that some are better suited than others for portraying 
particular features of the data. As Table 15.6 indicates, when it comes to the 
presentation of quantitative data, certain kinds of table or chart work for certain 
purposes. It is important to get this right and to present the data appropriately.
Table 15.6  The use of suitable charts or tables
Purpose
Suitable chart or table
Amounts
or
Frequencies
tables
bar charts
histograms
Extent of a relationship
scatter plots
contingency tables
Covering a span of time
line graphs
Proportions of a total
pie charts
stacked bar charts
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Quantitative data  271
Reliability and validity: quantitative research
The credibility of quantitative data depends on how good the research methods 
are at producing data that are accurate and consistent. The data must be valid 
and the methods must be ‘reliable’, and these things are normally judged accord-
ing to the following criteria.
Validity of the data
Validity refers to the accuracy and precision of the data. It also concerns appro-
priateness of the data in terms of the research question being investigated. The 
basic question is ‘Are the data the right kind for investigating the topic and have 
they been measured correctly?’
Whether the right questions have been asked is something that the researcher 
needs to consider in relation to the existing theories and knowledge on the area. 
The data can be analysed, however, to gauge the extent to which the data are an 
accurate reflection of ‘the truth’ in the following ways:
•• use ‘check questions’ within a questionnaire to see whether people’s responses 
are the same to a very similar question;
•• check for consistency in the profile of answers within the dataset, based on 
the assumption that similar respondents should provide the same kind of 
answers to similar questions.
The validity of the data, of course, will also depend on checking the data to make 
sure that they contain no errors arising from mistakes with data entry. This can 
be quite a laborious process but it is vital (unless the data files are constructed 
automatically). Where the data files have been entered via a manual process, 
with people typing in data from one source to another, there is the prospect of 
errors. It is the duty of the researcher to inspect the data files and check them 
against the sources.
Reliability of the methods
Reliability refers to whether a research instrument is neutral in its effect and con-
sistent across multiple occasions of its use. This is frequently translated as the 
question ‘Would the research instrument produce the same results on different 
occasions (all other things being equal)?’
There are a variety of ways researchers can analyse their data to check on 
reliability. They can, for example:
•• use the research instrument on a later occasion and then compare the results. 
The test–retest approach should produce results that are very similar;
• split the dataset in half and compare one half with the other in terms of the 
findings they contain. Again, there should be a good level of consistency using 
this split-half approach;
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

272  The Good Research Guide
• for data based on observations efforts can be made to find out whether differ-
ent researchers would arrive at similar conclusions when looking at the same 
event. The level of inter-observer reliability should be high.
Generalizability of the findings (external validity)
Generalizability refers to the prospect of applying the findings from research to 
other examples of the phenomenon. It concerns the ability of research findings 
to explain, or occur in, similar phenomena at a general level rather than being 
something that is unique to the particular case(s) used for the research. Where 
the data are based on a large representative sample then there are good grounds 
for generalizing from the findings.
Objectivity of the researcher
Objectivity refers to the absence of bias in the research. It denotes research that 
is impartial and neutral in terms of the researcher’s influence on its outcome, 
and it denotes processes of data collection and analysis that are fair and even-
handed. Researchers are expected to address this by:
••
treating the data in a fair and impartial manner;
• 
giving due consideration to competing theories and 
alternative views in relation to the data;
• 
giving details of any sponsors of the research;
••
declaring any vested interests in the outcomes of the 
research.
Advantages of quantitative data analysis
Scientific status
Quantitative data lend themselves to various forms of statistical techniques 
based on the principles of mathematics and probability. Such statistics provide 
the analyses with an aura of scientific respectability. The analyses appear to be 
based on objective laws rather than the values of the researcher.
Confidence in the findings
Statistical tests of significance give researchers additional credibility in terms 
of the interpretations they make and the confidence they have in their findings.
Precise measurement
The analysis of quantitative data provides a solid foundation for description and 
analysis. Interpretations and findings are based on measured quantities rather 
than impressions, and these are, at least in principle, quantities that can be 
checked by others for authenticity.
Link up with 
Reliability and 
validity: qualita-
tive research,  
p. 297.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Quantitative data  273
Analysis of large volumes of data
Large volumes of quantitative data can be analysed relatively quickly, provided 
adequate preparation and planning have occurred in advance. Once the proce-
dures are ‘up and running’, researchers can interrogate their results relatively 
quickly.
Concise presentation of data
Tables and charts provide a succinct and effective way of organizing quantita-
tive data and communicating the findings to others. Widely available computer 
software aids the design of tables and charts, and takes most of the hard labour 
out of statistical analysis.
Disadvantages of quantitative data analysis
Quality of data
There is a danger that appearances might be deceptive if the positive aspects of 
analysis and presentation associated with quantitative data flatter research that 
is actually based on weak data. The data need to be valid if the analysis is to have 
any value.
Technicist
There is a danger of researchers becoming obsessed with the techniques of anal-
ysis at the expense of the broader issues underlying the research. Particularly 
with the power of computers at researchers’ fingertips, attention can shift from 
the real purpose of the research towards a blinkered concern with the technical 
aspects of analysis.
Data overload
Large volumes of data can be a strength of quantitative analysis but, without 
care, it can start to overload the researcher. Too many cases, too many variables, 
too many factors to consider – the analysis can be driven towards too much com-
plexity. The researcher can get swamped.
Quantitative analysis is not as scientifically objective  
as it might seem on the surface
Researchers have an element of discretion and choice when conducting their 
data analysis, just as they do with qualitative data. And their decisions can influ-
ence the findings. Although the analysis of quantitative data might seem to be 
technical and scientific, in reality the researcher still has the ability to influence 
the findings in subtle ways.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

274  The Good Research Guide
Further reading
Balnaves, M. and Caputi, P. (2001) Introduction to Quantitative Research Methods: An 
Investigative Approach. London: Sage.
Field, A. (2013) Discovering Statistics Using IBM SPSS Statistics, 4th edn. London: Sage.
Gorrard, S. (2006) Using Everyday Numbers Effectively in Research. London: Continuum.
Rowntree, D. (1981) Statistics Without Tears: An Introduction for Non-mathematicians. 
London: Penguin.
Walker, I. (2010) Research Methods and Statistics. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Quantitative data  275
✓
Checklist for the use of quantitative data  
When using quantitative data in your research you should feel  
confident about answering ‘yes’ to the following questions:  
  1	 Is it clear which type of quantitative measure is being used 
(nominal, ordinal, interval, ratio)?
 
  2	 Have frequency distributions been described in terms of their 
midpoint and their range (e.g. mean, standard deviation)?
 
  3	 Has the research explored patterns and relationships between 
variables?
 
  4	 Are the results of data analysis presented in appropriate types of 
table or chart?
 
  5	 Are the tables or charts clear and thoughtfully designed?
  6	 Has all necessary information been supplied on the units being 
represented in the columns of the tables or on the axes of the 
charts?
 
 
  7	 Have basic statistical tests been used to check on associations 
and correlations within the data?
 
  8	 If so . . . Is the dataset sufficiently large to warrant statistical 
analysis?
  9	 Are any statistical procedures used for data analysis suitable for:
• the type of data collected (i.e. nominal, ordinal, interval, ratio)?
• looking for connections (e.g. correlation, chi-square, t-test)?
10	 Have any statistical tests of significance achieved a satisfactorily 
low probability (p < 0.05) to justify conclusions based on the 
data?
© M. Denscombe, The Good Research Guide. Open University Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

16
Types of qualitative data (words and images) • Preparing qualitative 
data for analysis • Transcribing audio recordings of interviews  
• Computer-assisted qualitative data analysis • Analysis of talk and 
text • Content analysis • Grounded theory • Discourse analysis • 
Conversation analysis • Narrative analysis • Analysis of image-based 
data • Presenting the data • Reliability and validity: qualitative research 
• Advantages of qualitative data analysis • Disadvantages of qualitative 
data analysis • Further reading • Checklist for the analysis of qualitative 
data
Types of qualitative data (words and images)
Qualitative data take the form of words (spoken or written) and visual images 
(observed or creatively produced). They are associated primarily with strategies 
of research such as case studies, grounded theory, ethnography and phenom-
enology, and with research methods such as interviews, documents and observa-
tion. Qualitative data, however, can be produced by other means. For example, 
the use of open-ended questions as part of a survey questionnaire can produce 
answers in the form of text. It is important to bear this point in mind and to rec-
ognize that qualitative data can be produced by a variety of research methods, 
as Table 16.1 indicates.
Preparing qualitative data for analysis
Qualitative data need to be prepared and organized before they can be analysed. 
It is important to appreciate that in a ‘raw’ condition qualitative data are likely to 
be difficult to interrogate in any systematic and meaningful fashion. Before the 
data can be used for research purposes, therefore, they need to be processed in a 
way that makes them amenable to analysis.
First, the original data should be protected. Back-up copies should be made 
of all original materials and it is generally advisable to use these back-up copies 
during the process of data analysis so that the originals can be preserved and 
protected against any unintentional corruption or damage.
Qualitative data
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Qualitative data  277
Second, the data should be catalogued and indexed. Each piece of ‘raw data’ 
should be identified with a unique serial number for reference purposes. The 
importance of this is that when analysing the data it is vital that the researcher 
is able to return to points in the data which are of particular interest. Without 
an adequate reference system it will be virtually impossible for the researcher 
to navigate back and forth through the data or to record which bits of data are 
significant. There are various ways of doing this but, to illustrate one possibility, 
when indexing page 10 of a transcript of an interview that took place with Ms 
Hallam at Dovedale High School, Ms Hallam might be allocated T07 (the sev-
enth teacher interviewed, perhaps), Dovedale High School might be allocated 
the code 13 (as school number 13), so that the actual code added to the transcript 
would be anonymized as [T07:13: p.10].
Transcribing audio recordings of interviews
Audio recordings normally need to be transcribed and annotated. Transcriptions 
help with detailed searches and comparisons of the data. They are also necessary 
when using qualitative data software (see below). The amount of the raw data that 
needs to be transcribed will depend on the use to which the data is being put. If the 
contents of an interview are being used for the factual information they provide, 
Table 16.1  Types of qualitative data
Source of data 
Research method 
Format of data 
Interviews 
Interviews 
Talk, transcript 
Reports, diaries, minutes of meetings, 
scripts (e.g. for political speeches or 
media programmes) 
 
Documents 
 
Text, image 
Interactions between people (including 
naturally occurring actions, responses, 
language)
Events (e.g. ceremonies, rituals, 
performances)
Artefacts, symbols, cultural objects (e.g. 
paintings, advertisements) 
Observation 
Photographs  
Pictures
Video recordings 
Answers to open-ended questions 
Questionnaires 
Text 
Good practice: Make back-up copies
Because qualitative data tend to be irreplaceable, it is good practice to make a 
duplicate of any recordings, to make copies of computer files and to photocopy 
any visual images or documents such as field notes or transcripts.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

278  The Good Research Guide
then the researcher can be quite selective; transcription 
might only be needed for the purposes of small extracts that 
can be used as ‘quotes’ to illustrate particular points when 
writing up the findings. If the researcher is looking for the 
underlying structure of the talk or the implied meanings of 
a discussion, the audio recordings will need to be transcribed quite extensively – 
possibly in their entirety.
Transcribing audio recordings is very time-consuming. For every hour of talk 
on an audio recording it will take several more to transcribe it. The actual time 
will depend on the clarity of the recording itself, the availability of transcription 
equipment and the typing speed of the researcher. When you are planning inter-
view research it is important to bear this in mind. From the point of view of the 
project researcher the process of transcribing needs to be recognized as a sub-
stantial part of the method of interviewing and not to be treated as some trivial 
chore to be tagged on once the real business of interviewing has been completed.
Transcription might be laborious but it is also a very valuable part of the research 
because it brings the researcher ‘close to the data’. The process brings the talk to 
life again and is a real asset when it comes to using interviews for qualitative data. 
Added to this the end-product of the process provides the researcher with a form of 
data that is far easier to analyse than the audio recording in its original state.
Link up with 
Chapter 12  
Interviews.
Good practice
Allow sufficient time for the transcription of audio recordings. The transcription 
of audio recordings is a time-consuming activity. For every one hour of interview 
recording it can easily take three hours or more of work to transcribe the talk 
into text.
Annotations
When transcribing an audio recording, the researcher should put informal notes 
and comments alongside the interviewee’s words. These annotations can draw 
on field notes taken during the interview or notes made soon afterwards about 
the interview. They should include observations about the ambience of the inter-
view and things like gestures, outside interferences, uncomfortable silences or 
other feelings that give a richer meaning to the words that were spoken. These 
annotations should be placed in a special column on the page.
Line numbering and coding
To locate different parts of the transcript and to help navigate through to particu-
lar points in it, each line in the transcript should ideally have a unique line number 
by which to identify it. Qualitative data analysis software always includes a facility 
to do this but it is also easily accomplished using basic word processing software 
such as MS Word. The page layout for the transcript should include a reasonable 
amount of clear space on which to write notes and there should be a wide margin 
on the side of the page that can be used later for coding and classifying the data 
and for writing notes. Qualitative data analysis software allows this automatically.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Qualitative data  279
Problems of transcription
The transcription of audio recordings is rarely a straightforward mechanical 
exercise in which the researcher simply writes down the words that are spoken 
by research participants. In practice, it can be quite challenging, and there are 
three main reasons for this:
•• The recorded talk is not always easy to hear. Especially with group inter-
views, but also with one-to-one versions, there can be occasions when more 
than one person speaks at the same time, where outside noises interfere or 
where poor audio quality itself makes transcribing the words very difficult. 
There is a fine dividing line here between the need to ditch these parts of the 
interview records and disregard them as worthless data and the need to exer-
cise some reasonable interpretation about what was actually said.
• People do not always speak in nice finite sentences. Normally, the researcher 
needs to add punctuation and a sentence structure to the talk so that a reader can 
understand the sequence of words. The talk, in a sense, needs to be reconstructed 
so that it makes sense in a written form. This process takes time – and it also 
means that the raw data get cleaned up a little by the researcher so that they can 
be intelligible to a readership who were not present at the time of the recording.
• Intonation, emphasis and accents used in speech are hard to depict in a tran-
script. There are established conventions which allow these to be added to a 
written transcript but the project researcher is unlikely to be able to devote 
the necessary time to learn these conventions. The result is that transcripts in 
small-scale research are generally based on the words and the words alone, 
with little attempt to show intonation, emphasis and accents. Nor are pauses 
and silences always reported on a transcript. The consequence is that, in prac-
tice, the data are stripped of some of their meaning.
Key point
Transcription is not always simple and straightforward. Transcription is not a 
mechanical process of putting audio-recorded talk into written sentences. The 
talk needs to be ‘tidied up’ and edited a little to put it in a format on the written 
page that is understandable to the reader. Inevitably, it loses some authenticity 
through this process.
Example 16.1:  Interview transcripts
Part of the transcript of a group interview conducted with 15- and 16-year-olds 
about peer pressure and alcohol consumption. The names have been changed. 
Notice how, typical of a group interview, more than one person is trying to 
talk at once. Elise cuts across James, and then gets interrupted in turn by Gor-
don, who manages to hold the spotlight for a moment or two. When more than 
one person is talking at one time, it makes transcription difficult because it is 
hard to capture on tape what is being said. 
‣
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

280  The Good Research Guide
Computer-assisted qualitative data analysis
A number of computer software packages have been developed specifically to 
help with the analysis of qualitative data. These are generally known as CAQDAS 
which stands for computer-assisted qualitative data analysis software. Some of 
these are more popular than others and some are more expensive than others. 
The best-known is NVivo, but there are many others that can be used and there 
are some valuable sites online which review the many alternatives and there are 
also a number of books that provide detailed guidance on the use of software 
like NVivo (e.g. Gibbs 2002; Di Gregorio and Davidson 2008; Bazeley and Jackson 
2013; Lewins and Silver 2014).
It is advisable for the project researcher to use one of these computer soft-
ware packages because, apart from anything else, they are designed to ensure 
that qualitative data are organized and stored in an appropriate fashion. In effect, 
using one of the packages obliges the researcher to prepare the data suitably and 
to take advantage of the computer’s abilities to manage:
•• the storage of data. Interview transcripts, field notes and documents can be 
kept in text files. Copies are quick and easy to make.
• the coding of data. The data can be easily coded – in the sense of both index-
ing the data (serial codes) and categorizing chunks of the data as a prelimi-
nary part of the analysis.
• the retrieval of data. The search facilities of the software make it easy to 
locate data once it has been coded and to pluck it out for further scrutiny.
Line of the 
transcript 
Code for  
the content 
Notes 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
52 
53 
54 
55 
56 
57 
58 
59 
60 
61 
62 
63 
64 
65 
Interviewer: Do you feel under pressure to drink when 
you go out with your mates because they are drinking? 
James looked
annoyed as
Elise
and Gordon
talked over him
James: Yeh, but it’s not always . . . (untranscribable) 
Elise: . . . it’s worse with the lads, I think, because. . . 
Gordon: . . . I was on holiday, and I don’t like beer, and  
all my friends were drinking. I was drinking half a glass  
and I thought I can stick that out because I don’t like it  
at all. I was drinking it and thinking this is horrible, just  
to look like one of the crowd, because I felt a bit left  
out. My brother came up to me in front of the crowd  
and said ‘Gordon you don’t like lager!’ So all my  
friends found out, and they said ‘Look, we understand  
if you don’t like it’ – and some of the people there were 
just like me, they didn’t like it. 
08 
15
Gordon says 
later that he 
drinks beer 
regularly now.
‣
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Qualitative data  281
Good practice
Use computer software for qualitative data analysis. Qualitative researchers 
should make use of CAQDAS packages because they help with the preparation, 
organization and storage of qualitative data.
CAQDAS packages, however, should not be regarded as a quick and easy fix 
for the task of analysing qualitative data. For one thing, they do not actually do 
the analysis – the researcher still needs to decide the codes and look for the con-
nections within the data. The software helps with this – but there is no automatic 
processing of the data comparable with the way that statistics packages analyse 
quantitative data. And, of course, the use of computer software, no matter how 
straightforward, involves some start-up time. For the first-time user, there is the 
time taken in getting to know the package and understand its potential. There is 
also the time taken to input the data.
Analysis of talk and text
Qualitative data analysis is predominantly concerned with the analysis of talk 
and text, and the following sections of this chapter outline the main options avail-
able to the project researcher through a discussion of content analysis, grounded 
theory, discourse analysis, conversation analysis and narrative analysis.  
Table 16.2 summarizes the different purposes of the approaches and how these 
are reflected in their treatment of data. The analysis of image-based data occupies 
more of a niche position within social research and the specific issues concerned 
with the analysis of images and artefacts, therefore, are covered separately at a 
later stage in this chapter.
Across the range of approaches it is evident that there are different visions of 
the work done by words. The philosophy behind this is fundamental to the social 
sciences but from the position of the project researcher it is perhaps only neces-
sary to appreciate that words do a lot more than simply describe something. As 
reflected in the different approaches, words can be analysed in terms of the back-
ground assumptions needed to interpret the words (what they imply and what 
they presume) or in terms of how words underlie social structure and interaction 
(how they produce things and construct things). So, whereas the text and talk 
might be treated at a surface level for the facts and information they contain, the 
words can also be used as a basis for ‘reading between the lines’ to see what lies 
beneath the surface. This can allow the researcher to interpret the hidden mean-
ings contained in the talk and text or it can enable the researcher to see how 
things like speeches or stories or conversations are structured and sequenced in 
a particular fashion.
There is also a difference between the approaches in terms of the extent to 
which bits of the talk and text are used in separation from their context. The dis-
tinctions here are not hard and fast but the project researcher should be aware of 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

282  The Good Research Guide
Table 16.2  Analysis of text and talk: a comparison of five approaches
Content analysis 
Grounded theory 
Discourse analysis 
Conversation analysis Narrative analysis 
Purpose of analysis 
Look for hidden 
message 
Develop concepts 
or theory 
Show how power is 
exercised through 
language 
Reveal underlying 
rules and structure of 
talk and interaction 
Depict constructions 
of personal identity 
and social worlds 
Data 
Text and talk 
Text and talk 
Text and talk 
Text and talk 
Text and talk 
Work done by words 
Denote things 
Imply things 
Presume things 
Produce things 
Construct things 
Significance of data 
Frequency of 
occurrence 
Derived meaning 
Implied meaning 
Displayed meaning 
Implied meaning 
Focus of attention 
Surface content 
Meaning of content Content in context 
Structure of content 
Structure or meaning 
of content 
Units of analysis 
Words and phrases 
Sentences and 
paragraphs 
Paragraphs and 
whole documents 
Blocks of text or talk 
Whole story or text 
Treatment of data 
Measured (based 
on frequency and 
position) 
Coded (using 
constant 
comparative 
method) 
Related (to wider 
social structures and 
processes) 
Deconstructed (to 
display underlying 
rules) 
Deciphered (to find 
symbolic significance 
of story) 
Data analysis 
Quantification of text Interpretation of 
text 
Implication of text 
Sequence and 
structure of talk 
Structure or social 
implications of the 
text 
© M. Denscombe, The Good Research Guide. Open University Press. 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Qualitative data  283
the different levels of contextualization to be found in the approaches. The unit 
of analysis can sometimes be individual words, sometimes sentences or para-
graphs, other times the whole text, and the difference here revolves around how 
far the different approaches tend to isolate bits of text from (1) the words that 
surround them or from (2) the social context in which the words were used. For 
some kinds of content analysis it is not a problem to focus on instances of indi-
vidual words extracted from the text. For approaches like discourse analysis and 
narrative analysis it is important not to separate units of the text from their wider 
social context. And with conversation analysis there is a particular importance 
given to the location of the unit of analysis within the rest of the text or talk 
within which it occurs.
Finally, a word on the underlying philosophies of the various approaches. 
In the case of content analysis there is a strong focus on measurement and it 
is interesting that although it is used in conjunction with qualitative data, it 
produces quantitative measurements. In this respect it might be seen as quite 
positivistic in its approach. Likewise with grounded theory the reliance on an 
inductive approach suggests an affiliation with positivism – although as we 
saw in Chapter 7, this is mainly the case with a specific branch of grounded 
theory. Discourse analysis, conversation analysis and narrative analysis, how-
ever, have little to do with positivism. Their assumptions about social reality 
and their preferences in terms of how the data should be treated are based, 
instead, on elements of critical realism, pragmatism and postmodernism. 
Broadly speaking, they are approaches to the analysis of qualitative data that 
are based on interpretations.
Content analysis
Content analysis can be used with any ‘text’ whether it is in the form of writing, 
sounds or pictures. It is used as a way of quantifying the contents of that text. 
Political scientists might use it to study the transcripts of speeches, education-
ists to study the content of children’s books, and historians to study statesmen’s 
correspondence. Whatever its specific application, content analysis generally 
follows a logical and relatively straightforward procedure:
1	 Choose an appropriate sample of texts or images. The criterion for the choice 
of such a sample should be explicit. If the choice involves sampling, then 
there needs to be a justification for the kind of sampling technique used (see 
Chapter 2).
2	 Break the text down into smaller component units. The unit for analysis can 
be each and every word. Alternatively, the analysis can use complete sen-
tences as the unit, whole paragraphs or things like headlines. It can also be 
based on visual images or the content of pictures.
3	 Develop relevant categories for analysing the data. The researcher needs to 
have a clear idea of the kinds of categories, issues and ideas that he or she is 
concerned with and how these might appear in the text. This might take the 
form of ‘key words’ associated with the theme. So, for example, a search for 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

284  The Good Research Guide
sex bias in children’s stories might look for instances of boys’ names and girls’ 
names – the names being treated as indicative of the nature of the content. The 
researcher might also wish to code the text in terms of the kinds of names, 
rather than just how many times such names occur.
4	 Code the units in line with the categories. Meticulous attention to the text is 
needed to code all the relevant words, sentences, etc. These codes are either 
written on the text and subsequently referred to, or entered via a computer 
program specially designed for the purpose.
5	 Count the frequency with which these units occur. The first part of analysis 
is normally a tally of the times when various units occur.
6	 Analyse the text in terms of the frequency of the units and their relationship 
with other units that occur in the text. Once the units have been coded, a 
more sophisticated analysis is possible which links the units and attempts to 
explain when and why they occur in the way they do.
Content analysis has the potential to disclose many 
‘hidden’ aspects of what is being communicated through the 
written text (Table 16.3). The idea is that, quite independent 
of what the writer had consciously intended, the text car-
ries some clues about a deeper-rooted and possibly uninten-
tional message that is actually being communicated. You do not have to base the 
analysis on what the author thought he/she was saying when the text contains 
more tangible evidence about its message (Gerbner et al. 1969; Krippendorf 
2013).
The main strength of content analysis is that it provides a means of quantify-
ing the contents of a text, and it does so by using a method that is clear and, in 
principle, repeatable by other researchers. Its main limitation is that it has an 
in-built tendency to dislocate the units and their meaning from the context in 
which they were made, and even the intentions of the writer. And it is difficult 
for content analysis to deal with the meaning of the text in terms of its implied 
meanings, how the meaning draws on what has just been said, what follows or 
even what is left unsaid. In many ways it is a rather crude instrument for dealing 
Link up with 
Chapter 14 
­Documents.
Table 16.3  Content analysis
Content analysis reveals . . . 
By measuring . . . 
What the text establishes as relevant 
What is contained (e.g. particular 
relevant words, ideas) 
The priorities portrayed through the text 
How frequently it occurs; in what order 
it occurs 
The values conveyed in the text 
Positive and negative views on things 
How ideas are related 
Proximity of ideas within the text, 
logical association 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Qualitative data  285
with the subtle and intricate ways in which a text conveys meaning. In practice, 
therefore, content analysis is at its best when dealing with aspects of communi-
cation which tend to be more straightforward, obvious and simple. The more the 
text relies on subtle and intricate meanings conveyed by the writer or inferred by 
the reader, the less valuable content analysis becomes in revealing the meaning 
of the text.
Grounded theory
The grounded theory approach is primarily associated with the analysis of inter-
view transcripts (although it can be used with a variety of types of qualitative 
data). The analysis requires a detailed scrutiny of the text and involves a gradual 
process of coding and categorizing the data. The ultimate goal of the analysis is 
to derive concepts and theories that capture the meaning 
contained within the data. The grounded theory approach 
tends to be ‘inductive’ in the sense that it seeks to use find-
ings from particular instances as the basis for developing 
statements that apply at a general level.
Explore the data
The first task for the researcher is to become thoroughly familiar with the data. 
This means reading and re-reading the transcripts. It entails getting a feel for the 
data and becoming immersed in the minute details of what was said, what was 
done, what was observed and what is portrayed through the data. To start with 
the researcher can take a fairly superficial look at the text (or images). Because 
some time might have elapsed since the data were collected, and because there 
is likely to be a considerable amount of data to work on, the aim should be to 
refresh the researcher’s memory about the content of the data and to remind him/
her about the broad scope of the material that is available. Returning to the data 
for further inspection, the researcher should begin to cross-reference the mate-
rial with field notes to enable a better understanding of the data in context. Sub-
sequent re-readings of the data should allow the researcher to identify themes in 
the data.
Memos
As the analysis progresses new things will emerge as relevant or new inter-
pretations might spring to mind. As new insights come to the researcher, the 
ideas need to be noted. Brief thoughts can be appended to the data but more 
detailed insights are easier kept as memos. These memos are of practical value 
as a means for logging new thoughts and exploring new possibilities in relation 
to the analysis of the data. Such memos, in addition, are valuable in the way 
they provide a documented record of the analytic thinking of the researcher 
as they refine the codes and categories. In this sense memos are a note pad on 
which the researcher records how and why decisions were taken in relation to 
Link up with 
Chapter 7 
Grounded theory.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

286  The Good Research Guide
the emerging analysis of the data. In effect, they render the process of analysis 
explicit and accountable, and can form part of the ‘audit trail’ (see below).
Good practice: The use of memos
Researchers should write memos as a way of keeping track of their decisions in 
relation to the analysis of the data. The memos provide a permanent record and 
can be referred back to as a reminder about the researcher’s thinking at specific 
points during the research.
Code the data
Codes are tags or labels that are attached to the ‘raw’ data. They can take 
the form of names, initials or numbers; it does not matter as long as the code 
is succinct and is used systematically to link bits of the data to an idea that 
relates to the analysis. The use of codes in connection with the interpretation 
of data is quite distinct from the process of putting a reference code on the var-
ious pieces of data so that the parts can be identified and stored in an organ-
ized manner. During the interpretation of the data the researcher engages in 
analytic coding.
Whatever the form of the data – interview transcripts, field notes, documents, 
photographs or video recordings – the first thing the researcher needs to do is 
decide on the units that will be used for coding the data. This process is some-
times known as ‘unitizing’ the data. With text data the units could be as small 
as individual words, they could be lines in the text, complete sentences or they 
could be paragraphs. Whichever, a decision needs to be made on what chunks of 
the data are to have codes attached to them.
Next, a decision needs to be made about the kind of thing that will be coded. 
Obviously, this will be guided to a considerable extent by the nature of the 
research problem but, to give an indication of the coding decision involved at 
this point, the researcher could base his/her coding on things like:
•• a kind of event;
• a type of action;
• a shade of opinion;
• an instance of the use of a particular word or expression;
•• an implied meaning or sentiment.
Finally, a decision needs to be made on the choice of initial codes that might 
usefully be applied to the data. The researcher can use respondent categories 
for this purpose; that is, base the initial codes on something that springs from the 
contents of the data. Or, the initial codes can be based on personal/professional 
hunches about what will prove useful for the analysis. The choice is not crucial at 
the initial phase of analysis because the codes are subject to a continual process 
of refinement during the research, so if the initial codes are ‘incorrect’, later ver-
sions will be refined and improved.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Qualitative data  287
Categorize the codes
The next task is to identify ways in which the codes can be grouped into categories. 
The categories act as an umbrella term under which a number of individual codes 
can be placed. The terms ‘taxonomy’ and ‘typology’ are sometimes applied to this 
stage in the analysis, reflecting the general idea of classifying the various compo-
nents of the data under key headings. The task for the researcher is to ‘make the link’.
Reduce the number of codes and categories
At the beginning there are likely to be a large number of codes and categories –  
too many to be useful for any meaningful analysis. Part of the analysis, then, 
is to identify where there is sufficient congruence between them to allow some 
to be merged and others to be brought together within a broader category. 
Each of the codes brought together within the category will have some feature 
that is shared with the others and, of course, this feature will be particularly 
relevant for the emerging analysis. At this point some decisions also need to 
be made about which parts of the data are more important than others. Atten-
tion has to be focused on these parts, with other parts of the data being rel-
egated to the sidelines. The importance of such parts of the data, it should be 
stressed, is determined solely by their significance for the emerging analysis.
Develop a hierarchy of codes and categories
Making sense of the data will involve differentiating among higher level and 
lower level codes. The higher level codes will be broader and more inclusive. 
Crucially, though, the task for the researcher is to develop hierarchical pyra-
mids of codes by subsuming some (lower level) codes under other broader codes 
(higher level). The categories will necessarily operate at a higher level of gener-
ality which will allow them to cover a number of lower-level, more specific codes 
(see Figure 16.1).
Figure 16.1  The grounded theory approach to the analysis of qualitative data
Categories
Concepts
Generalized
conclusions
code
A
code
B
code
C
Categories
Qualitative data
code
D
code
E
Categories
code
F
code
G
Hypotheses
Theory
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

288  The Good Research Guide
Check the emerging codes, categories and concepts with the data
The steps towards refining the categories and concepts form part of an iterative 
process. They are steps in the ‘data analysis spiral’ which means that each task 
is likely to be revisited on more than one occasion as the codes, categories and 
concepts are developed and refined.
Good practice: Check the emerging analysis against competing theories 
and alternative explanations
Researchers should review their analysis in the light of other explanations of 
similar data. Competing theories should be considered, and the analysis should 
be evaluated in relation to the alternatives. Particular attention should be paid to 
any instances within the researcher’s own data that might appear to contradict 
the emerging analysis.
Move towards key concepts
In principle, grounded theory analysis aims to use the higher level codes and 
categories as the basis for identifying key concepts. The development of these 
concepts is the main purpose of the analysis because the concepts provide some 
new understanding of the data and constitute the foundations for any theory or 
general conclusions to emerge from the research.
Discourse analysis
Discourse analysis approaches qualitative data with the view that they should 
never be taken ‘at face value’. Instead, they should be ‘deconstructed’ to reveal the 
hidden messages that they contain. It is an approach to the analysis of qualitative 
data that focuses on the implied meaning of the text rather than its explicit content. 
It is concerned with what is accomplished through the use of words – what words 
‘do’ rather than what they literally represent – and draws on the philosophical influ-
ence of people like Wittgenstein (1968) and Austin (1962). Discourse analysis has 
been developed by postmodernists such as Foucault and Derrida and is familiar 
within the fields of social psychology, sociology and linguistics. It is used in rela-
tion to a wide range of social research areas including cultural studies, marketing 
(especially advertising), education and feminist studies.
In line with other approaches to qualitative data analysis, discourse analysis 
likes to keep close to the data. The task of the researcher is to interrogate the 
data with the aim of showing just how the discourse can be discerned through 
the particular data being studied. Discourse analysis, in this sense, does not dif-
fer from the kind of qualitative data analysis outlined elsewhere in this chapter 
to the extent that it relies on:
•• a close scrutiny of the text/image;
•• a firm grounding of conclusions within the data.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Qualitative data  289
However, discourse analysis differs from approaches like content analysis and 
grounded theory in the way its analysis goes beyond the ‘evidence’ to be found 
within the text, talk or images being used as data. This is almost inevitable 
because discourse analysis, in its attempt to reveal the cultural assumptions 
that need to come into play in order to understand the data, looks at what is 
absent from the text or image as well as what is contained. It looks at what is 
implied as much as what is explicit. The question arises: ‘How would you know 
what was missing if you did not have some idea of what should be expected to 
“fill the gaps” and “speak the unspoken”?’ The answer to this is that researchers 
who undertake discourse analysis need to bring into play ‘outside’ factors in 
order to complete the picture and read between the lines. They must use existing 
knowledge about society, culture, politics, etc. and incorporate more general, 
background knowledge to decipher the significance of the message contained 
in the data.
Critical discourse analysis tends to add a political bite to the approach. 
It explores the ways the hidden, background meanings that are used to make 
sense of a text or image serve the interests of some groups more than oth-
ers. In fact, this approach explores how power in society is achieved through 
discourse and how this is evident in particular instances of text or images. In 
doing so, it relies quite heavily on the use of political, economic and social 
ideologies as its frame of reference for understanding the meanings embodied 
in the data.
One limitation of using discourse analysis is that it does not lend itself to 
the kind of audit trail (see below) that might be needed to satisfy conven-
tional evaluations of the research. It is not easy to verify its methods and 
findings. This is because the approach places particularly heavy reliance on 
the insights and intuition of the researcher for interpreting the data. Some 
discourse analysts eschew the idea that their research can, or should, be sub-
ject to any process of verification. They argue, in effect, that the findings 
stand as just ‘the researcher’s interpretation’ – no better and no worse than 
anybody else’s. No more scientific; no more credible. This is a controversial 
stance and it is one that could prove unwise for a project researcher to adopt. 
But, unless the researcher is prepared to risk taking this ‘postmodernist’ posi-
tion, they need to be aware of the difficulties of verification inherent in the 
approach. With this in mind, what practical guidance can be given in relation 
to discourse analysis?
Be clear about which aspects of discourse are being studied
The researcher needs to specify whether the particular talk, text or image is 
being used in relation to:
•• the shared background meanings and cultural assumptions necessary to 
make sense of the data themselves (micro);
•• the wider ideology and cultural relations that are created and reinforced 
through the data (macro).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

290  The Good Research Guide
Be clear about which aspects of deconstruction  
are best applied
There is no hard and fast process involved in discourse analysis, but the 
researcher who embarks on deconstructing the data needs to have a clear 
vision of the things he/she is looking for and the way these link with the micro 
and macro aspects of discourse. A number of relevant questions to be asked 
include:
•• Is there evidence of a wider ideology being communicated via the talk, text 
and images?
• Do the data reflect particular social, political or historical conditions in which 
they were produced?
• In what way does the talk, text or image stem from other sources (‘inter-
texuality’)?
• How is power or influence being exerted through the talk, text or image?
• Whose version of reality is being portrayed through this talk, text or image?
• How are people, processes and objects categorized and defined through the 
talk, text or image?
• Are there people, processes or objects that are notably absent or excluded?
• Are there contradictions within the talk, text or image? How are these coped 
with?
• What things are missing from the talk, text or image?
• Are there views that appear to be suppressed?
• Are there things that are not said that might have been expected to be 
stated?
• What rhetorical or linguistic devices are being used to argue the point?
• What version of things is being portrayed as normal/abnormal, legitimate/ille-
gitimate, moral/immoral, natural/unnatural, etc.?
•• Would alternative interpretations of the talk, text or image be possible or 
likely depending on the particular audience?
Conversation analysis
Conversation analysis focuses on the structure and sequencing of everyday talk. 
It is often considered to be a variant of discourse analysis because it focuses 
attention on how things get done through language use. In this instance research-
ers look at naturally occurring talk and the way that routine aspects of every-
day life get accomplished through language (Hutchby and Wooffitt 2008; Sidnell 
2010). There have been studies of things like taking turns in everyday conversa-
tion, greeting people, starting a school lesson – apparently mundane and minute 
parts of social life but ones that advocates of ethnomethodology stress are the 
fundamental building blocks of social interaction – without which there would be 
no such thing as social life.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Qualitative data  291
Conversation analysts are inclined to underplay the extent to which they draw 
on presuppositions. However, their analysis must still rely on cultural insights. 
Indeed, the researcher’s background knowledge can be argued to be absolutely 
essential to the sensible interpretation of routine conversation. For any reason-
able interpretation, it is vital that the researcher has appropriate background 
knowledge, shared with those doing the talking. Otherwise, they would literally 
have no way of knowing what was going on.
Narrative analysis
A narrative relates to a story. A story can be told in many forms; in writing 
through books and in speech through interviews, as well as a whole host 
of other mediums perhaps less commonly used as sources of data by social 
researchers such as visual images, music and drama. Treated as a narrative, 
though, the story needs to have certain properties (Riessman 2003, 2008; 
Elliott 2005; Andrews et al. 2013). Normally, it would be expected to do the 
following:
•• have some specific purpose. This could be a moral message or it could be an 
account of personal circumstances. Whatever the subject matter of the story, 
it has to be leading somewhere.
• contain a plot line linking the past to the present. There is normally some 
sense of development and change over time in which past events are recounted 
and linked explicitly to the present.
•• involve people. The theme needs to have a human element to it, referring 
to feelings and experiences in the context of social events and human 
interaction.
For qualitative research such stories can be useful in two ways. First, they 
can be analysed in terms of how they construct the social world. The point 
here is that stories can have a special importance in culture which can go 
well beyond that of entertainment. They might be parables with strong moral 
lessons involved. They might be contemporary news stories built on under-
lying beliefs about rights and wrongs in politics. Or they might be ‘classics’ 
with great symbolic significance, handed down from generation to genera-
tion as part of the transmission of culture, telling of how things were and 
why things happened and serving to bolster the beliefs and values that bind a 
society together. Second, they can be analysed in terms of how they construct 
a personal world. This aspect of narrative analysis links quite closely with 
research on life histories and oral histories. It is concerned with the way that 
stories are used by people as ways of representing themselves and their lives 
to others. The stories are used, consciously or not, as a device through which 
people describe and explain themselves and the circumstances surrounding 
their existence.
Narrative analysis applied to any such stories is not overly concerned with 
whether the content of the story is built on truth or myth; the focus is more on 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

292  The Good Research Guide
how those stories work. The stories are analysed to reveal the way the story con-
structs and interprets the social world, and the focus of attention is on:
•• the meanings and ideology the story conveys;
• the techniques and communicative devices the story-teller uses;
•• how the story links with the cultural and historical context within which it is told.
Analysis of image-based data
The kind of analysis used for image-based data depends on the purposes for 
which the data were collected. Broadly, images are used for either, or both, of 
two reasons:
•• for the factual information they contain;
•• for the cultural significance and symbolic meaning that lie behind their 
content.
There are various strands to the analysis of visual images. Without becoming 
embroiled in the detail of the differences it is perhaps possible to identify three 
elements to the analysis of image-based data:
•• the image itself: contents, genre, styles;
• the producer: intentions and context (by whom, when, under what circum-
stances, why, the intention of the creator);
•• the viewer: interpretation and context.
The image itself can be valuable as a source of factual information. There is 
a case to be made that images provide a relatively reliable source of data – 
preferable, at least, argues Collier (2001: 59) to the ‘deceptive world of words’. 
Objectively frozen in time, the image contains evidence of things with a clarity 
that words could never hope to match. Photographs from 
archives, film from distant fieldwork settings, snapshots 
from a family album, each contains a firm record of events 
that can be subsequently analysed by the researcher. ‘Such 
images are produced to serve as records of reality, as docu-
mentary evidence of the people, places, things, actions and 
events they depict. Their analysis is a matter of extracting just that kind of infor-
mation from them’ (van Leeuwen and Jewitt 2001: 4).
To help get to grips with the information contained in large collections of 
images researchers can use content analysis, and it is quite possible to pro-
duce quantitative data as part of the analysis of images (see Bell 2000, for a 
detailed account of this). In practice, however, image-based research has 
largely favoured a qualitative approach. The key reason for this is that social 
researchers in recent years have become reluctant to take the content of images 
entirely ‘at face value’. Rather than accepting images as neutral depictions of 
reality (along with the positivistic connotations this has), most social research-
Link up with 
Image-based 
research,  
p. 234.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Qualitative data  293
ers in the twenty-first century would acknowledge, as Rose (2012) argues, that 
images do not contain ‘one right meaning’. What they depict is open to interpre-
tation and it would be rather naïve to presume that the contents of visual images 
are self-explanatory. Without entirely abandoning the use of images in terms 
of their ostensive content (the ‘facts’ they portray), researchers have become 
more inclined to treat the contents as something that needs to be interpreted. 
The meaning of the image is the thing of value for the researcher, the meaning 
as given within a particular culture, within a given time, within a social context 
within which it was produced.
Another way of interpreting an image is as a cultural artefact. As a cultural 
artefact the focus moves away from just the content of the image and what this 
can tell the researcher to incorporate, also, questions about the context in which 
the image was produced. What purpose did/does it serve? Why was it produced? 
As a source of evidence the value of the image is in what lies behind the sur-
face appearance. To give an illustration, a photograph might appear to show a 
family on a seaside beach. At one level the researcher could use the image to 
get factual information about the style of beachwear worn at the time the pho-
tograph was taken. Provided the photograph was authentic, the image acts as 
a source of factual data. However, that same image might be interpreted as a 
cultural artefact by asking questions about how and why it was produced. Who 
took the photograph? Why was it taken? What importance is attached to it that 
might explain why it has been kept over a long period of time? What equipment 
was used to take the photograph? Such lines of enquiry could help researchers 
to understand the significance of family holidays, the role of photo albums and 
the nature of leisure activity in their cultural context. The meaning of the photo-
graph, that is, goes beyond the superficial content depicting two adults and two 
children at the seaside.
Another approach to the analysis of images interprets them in terms of 
what they denote. It probes the image as a symbolic representation whose 
interest lies not so much in the ‘facts’ contained in the image as in the sig-
nificance attached to the contents by those who view it. Images, used in this 
way, provide a source for uncovering ideologies and cultural codes. Drawing 
on the field of ‘semiotics’ the researcher first considers the various aspects 
of the content to see what they denote. Taken at face value, what do they 
‘say’? Next the researcher considers the connotations of the key elements in 
the image. What associations spring to mind when looking at those elements? 
Then, in the final stage of analysis, semiotics moves towards drawing con-
trasts and similarities with other signs in a way that helps us to understand 
the symbolism of the image. (See Penn 2000, for further information on the 
semiotic analysis of still images.)
It is important to note that reading the message is not entirely an individual, 
personal thing in which each viewer interprets things differently. While there 
is certainly some scope for variation, semiotics and cultural studies operate 
on the premise that there is a degree of consensus among viewers about the 
meaning of an image. People who come from a similar cultural background, 
who are members of the same society or who have been brought up within 
a particular ideological tradition (e.g. democracy, Christianity), might be 
expected to make sense of images in roughly the same way. As members of 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

294  The Good Research Guide
social groups they will have been socialized into ways of seeing what is meant 
by visual images – learning from others since their early years how to make 
sense of visual clues contained in things like signs, advertisements, portraits 
and music videos.
Caution: Context is important
When using images for research purposes there is always the danger that they 
might be ‘taken out of context’. Events prior and subsequent to the moment 
captured by the image might have a crucial bearing on the meaning that can be 
attributed to it.
Presenting the data
An explanation of statistical techniques and data manipulation always accom-
panies the use of quantitative data in research yet, all too often, an account of 
the comparable processes is missing or very scant when it comes to reports 
that have used qualitative data. The process that leads from the data to the 
researcher’s conclusions gets ignored, with the reader of the research report 
being given little or no indication of how the data were actually analysed. The 
quality of qualitative research is increasingly coming under the microscope in 
this respect (Seale 1999; Seale et al. 2007; Silverman 2011) and, quite rightly, 
those who use qualitative data are now expected to include in their accounts of 
research a description of the processes they used to move from the raw data to 
their findings.
Key point
Researchers need to be explicit about the analytic procedures they have used. 
It is not acceptable to say ‘this is how I collected the data’ (methods) and ‘these 
are my results’ (findings) without giving an account of how the data were ana-
lysed.
Qualitative researchers, however, face a special challenge when it comes to 
depicting the process involved in the analysis of their data (Woods 2006). 
Partly, this is because qualitative data analysis is ‘a messy, ambiguous, time-
consuming, creative, and fascinating process. It does not proceed in a linear 
fashion: it is not neat’ (Marshall and Rossman 2011: 207). Partly, it is because 
the data are not as amenable to being presented in a concise fashion as is 
the case with quantitative data. Quantitative data can be represented using 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Qualitative data  295
statistics and tables. These provide a succinct and well-established means 
enabling researchers to encapsulate the findings from large volumes of data 
and provide the reader with explicit information about the techniques used 
for data analysis. The challenge for qualitative researchers is to depict their 
kind of data analysis within the confines of a relatively few pages when  
dealing with:
•• a fairly complicated and messy process of data analysis;
•• a relatively large volume of data based on words or images.
To deal with this challenge, qualitative researchers need to come to terms very 
quickly with the fact that it is not feasible for them to present all of their data. 
They need to be selective in what they present and acknowledge that they have 
to act as an editor – identifying key parts of the data/analysis and prioritizing 
certain parts over others.
Next, and linked with the editorial role, it needs to be recognized that the data 
chosen for inclusion within a report does not constitute evidence that proves a 
point. It is more likely to be introduced as an illustration of a point that is being 
made. Because the reader of the report does not normally have access to all the 
data, they have no way of knowing whether the selection was a fair reflection of 
the data or not. Further discussion of this point can be found in relation to the use 
of extracts from interview transcripts.
Finally, the representation of qualitative data/analysis involves an element of 
‘rhetoric’. That is, the credibility of the research owes something to the skill of 
the researcher in managing to produce a persuasive account of the research that 
‘touches the right buttons’ and conveys a sense of authority and authenticity. 
There are some different styles of writing that qualitative researchers can employ 
to achieve this (van Maanen 1995; Woods 2006). Without 
delving into the rhetorical devices themselves, the point to 
note is that the credibility of qualitative research, although 
it still depends on providing relevant factual details relating 
to the research procedures, also relies on the literary skills 
of the researcher to write a convincing account.
The use of interview extracts in research reports
Extracts from transcripts play an important role in qualitative research. They 
can be interesting in their own right, giving the reader a flavour of the data and 
letting the reader ‘hear’ the points as stated by the informants. Or they can be 
used as a piece of evidence supporting the argument that is being constructed in 
the report by the researcher. What an extract is very unlikely to do, however, is 
provide proof of a point. There are two reasons for this:
•• The significance of extracts from transcripts is always limited by the fact 
that they are, to some extent, presented out of context. Extracts, as the very 
word itself suggests, are pieces of the data that are plucked from their context 
within the rest of the recorded interview. This opens up the possibility that the 
Link up with 
Chapter 18 
Research 
reports.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

296  The Good Research Guide
quote could be taken ‘out of context’. Everyone knows the danger of being 
quoted out of context. The meaning of the words is changed by the fact that 
they are not linked to what came before and what was said after. The shrewd 
researcher will try to explain to the reader the context within which the extract 
arose but, inevitably, there is limited opportunity to do this in research reports.
•• The process of selecting extracts involves a level of judgement and discretion 
on the part of the researcher. The selection of which parts of the transcript to 
include is entirely at the discretion of the researcher, and this inevitably limits 
the significance which can be attached to any one extract. It is an editorial deci-
sion which reflects the needs of the particular research report. How does the 
reader know that it was a fair selection, representative of the overall picture?
As a result, in the vast majority of reports produced by project researchers, 
extracts will serve as illustrations of a point and supporting evidence for an argu-
ment – nothing more and nothing less. It is important that the project researcher 
is aware of this when using extracts and avoids the temptation to present quotes 
from interviewees as though they stand in their own right as unequivocal proof 
of the point being discussed.
Having made this point, there are some things the researcher can do to get the 
best out of the extracts that are selected.
•• Use quotes and extracts verbatim. Despite the points above about the diffi-
culty of transcribing recordings, the researcher should be as literal as possible 
when quoting people. Use the exact words.
• Change the names to ensure anonymity (unless you have their explicit permis-
sion to reveal the person’s identity).
• Provide some details about the person you are quoting, without endangering 
their anonymity. The general best advice here is to provide sufficient detail to 
distinguish informants from one another and to provide the reader with some 
idea of relevant background factors associated with the person, but to protect 
the identity of the person you quote by restricting how much information is 
given (e.g. teacher A, female, school 4, geography, mid-career).
•• Try to give some indication of the context in which the quotation arose. Within 
the confines of a research report, try to provide some indication of the con-
text of the extract so that the meaning as intended comes through. As far as 
it is feasible, the researcher should address the inevitable problem of taking 
the extract ‘out of context’ by giving the reader some guidance on the back-
ground within which the statement arose.
Good practice: The use of diagrams
In reports based on qualitative research it is particularly useful to include dia-
grams that show the link between the concepts that are developed. This provides 
the reader with a visual picture of what can often be complex links. It also gives 
some transparency to the process of data analysis.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Qualitative data  297
Reliability and validity: qualitative research
The credibility of qualitative research is not easily judged using the criteria con-
ventionally used for quantitative research. It is not feasible, for instance, to check 
the quality of research and its findings by replicating the research in the same 
way that scientists might repeat an experiment. The first reason for this is that 
it is virtually impossible to replicate a social setting. Time inevitably changes 
things and the prospects of assembling equivalent people 
in similar settings in a social environment that has not 
changed are, to say the least, slim. The second reason is that 
the researcher tends to be intimately involved in the collec-
tion and analysis of qualitative data, so closely involved 
that the prospects of some other researcher being able to 
produce identical data and arrive at identical conclusions 
are equally slim.
Recognizing such difficulties, some qualitative researchers have suggested 
abandoning any commitment to these conventional ways of judging the qual-
ity of research. The majority, though, have been rather more reticent to aban-
don the conventional criteria used by the positivistic research. They make 
the point that, although the nature of qualitative research means that it will 
never be possible to be verified in the same way as quantitative research, 
there is still a need to address the need for verification (e.g. Kirk and Miller 
1986; Seale 1999; Gibbs 2007; Silverman 2011; Miles et al. 2014). Such qualita-
tive researchers have adopted a more pragmatic or ‘subtle’ realist perspective 
‘that does not give up on scientific aims as conventionally conceived, but also 
draws on the insights of post-scientific conceptions of social research’ (Seale 
1999: x). The discussion and guidance that follow are rooted in this point of 
view.
Credibility (validity)
The issue here is the extent to which qualitative researchers can demonstrate 
that their data are accurate and appropriate. Lincoln and Guba (1985) make 
the point that it is not possible for qualitative researchers to prove in any 
absolute way that they have ‘got it right’. (As a consequence, they prefer 
to use the term ‘credibility’ in relation to this aspect of the verification of 
research.) There are, though, steps to be taken that can help with the task of 
persuading readers of the research that the data are reasonably likely to be 
accurate and appropriate. These steps provide no guarantee, because none 
are available. They offer, instead, reassurances that the qualitative data have 
been produced and checked in accord with good practice. It is on this basis 
that judgements can be made about the credibility of the data. To address the 
matters of accuracy and appropriateness of data qualitative researchers can 
use:
•• Respondent validation. The researcher can return to the participants with the 
data and findings as a means of checking the validity of the findings. This 
Link up with 
Reliability and 
validity: quantita-
tive research,  
p. 271.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

298  The Good Research Guide
allows a check on factual accuracy and allows the researcher’s understand-
ings to be confirmed (or amended) by those whose opinions, views or experi-
ences are being studied.
• Grounded data. One of the key benefits of qualitative research is that the 
findings will have been grounded extensively in fieldwork and empirical 
data. Qualitative research tends to involve relatively long times spent ‘on 
location’ conducting the fieldwork and it builds on a detailed scrutiny of the 
text or visual images involved. This provides a solid foundation for the con-
clusions based on the data and adds to the credibility of the 
research.
• Triangulation. Avoiding any naïve use of triangulation, 
the researcher can use contrasting data sources to bol-
ster confidence that the data are ‘on the right lines’.
Dependability (reliability)
With qualitative research the researcher’s ‘self’ tends to be very closely bound up 
with the research instrument – sometimes an integral part of it. As a participant 
observer or interviewer, for example, the researcher becomes almost an integral 
part of the data collecting technique. As a result, the question of reliability trans-
lates from ‘Would the research instrument produce the same results when used 
by different researchers (all other things being equal)?’ to ‘If someone else did 
the research, would he or she have got the same results and arrived at the same 
conclusions?’ In an absolute sense there is probably no way of knowing this for 
certain. Yet there are ways of dealing with this issue in qualitative research – 
ways that accord broadly with what Lincoln and Guba (1985) call ‘dependability’. 
Principally, these revolve around the demonstration that their research reflects 
procedures and decisions that other researchers can ‘see’ and evaluate in terms 
of how far they constitute reputable procedures and reasonable decisions. This 
acts as a proxy for being able to replicate research. Only if such information is 
supplied is it possible to reach conclusions about how far another researcher 
would have come up with comparable findings. As a check on reliability, this 
calls for an explicit account of the methods, analysis and decision-making and 
‘the provision of a fully reflexive account of procedures and methods, showing 
the readers in as much detail as possible the lines of enquiry that led to particu-
lar conclusions’ (Seale 1999: 157). In effect, the research process must be open 
for audit.
Link up with 
Triangulation, 
p. 154.
Good practice: An audit trail
An audit trail should be constructed and mapped out for the reader – allowing 
them to follow the path and key decisions taken by the researcher from concep-
tion of the research through to the findings and conclusions derived from the 
research. But, as Lincoln and Guba (1985: 319) stress, ‘An inquiry audit cannot 
be conducted without a residue of records stemming from the inquiry, just as a 
‣
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Qualitative data  299
Transferability (generalizability)
Qualitative research tends to be based on the intensive study of a relatively 
small number of cases. Inevitably, this raises questions about how representa-
tive those cases are and how likely it is that what was found in the few cases will 
be found elsewhere in similar cases. The thorny issue is often raised through 
the question; ‘How can you generalize on the basis of such a small number?’ 
Statistically speaking, this is a reasonable question. It is one that is difficult to 
dodge.
Some qualitative researchers try to side-step the issue by asserting that it is 
not their business to make such generalizations. They argue that the findings 
from things like case studies are worthwhile in their own right simply as a depic-
tion of the specific, possibly unique, situation. This, however, is a minority posi-
tion. The majority of qualitative researchers accept that the issue is relevant but 
argue that it needs to be approached in a different way when being used in rela-
tion to qualitative research. They point out that generalizability is based on the 
statistical probability of some aspect of the data recurring elsewhere, and it is a 
probability that relies on a large sample that is representative of the wider popu-
lation. Research based on small numbers and qualitative data needs an alter-
native way of addressing the issue. This alternative way is what Lincoln and 
Guba (1985) have called ‘transferability’. This is an imaginative process in which 
the reader of the research uses information about the particular instance that 
has been studied to arrive at a judgement about how far it would apply to other 
comparable instances. The question becomes ‘To what extent could the findings 
be transferred to other instances?’ rather than ‘To what extent are the findings 
likely to exist in other instances?’
Good practice: Transferability of findings
The researcher needs to supply information enabling others to infer the rel-
evance and applicability of the findings (to other people, settings, case studies, 
organizations, etc.). In other words, to gauge how far the findings are transfer-
able, the reader needs to be presented with relevant details on which to base a 
comparison. If, for example, the research is on the eating habits of young peo-
ple and it is based on interviews with 55 students in one school, the ­findings 
‣
fiscal audit cannot be conducted without a residue of records from the business 
transactions involved.’ This is why it is good practice to keep a fairly detailed 
record of the process of the research decisions. The principle behind the audit 
trail is that research procedures and decision-making could be checked by other 
researchers who would be in a position to confirm the existence of the data and 
evaluate the decisions made in relation to the data collection and analysis.
‣
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

300  The Good Research Guide
Confirmability (objectivity)
This issue of objectivity concerns the extent to which qualitative research can 
produce findings that are free from the influence of the researcher(s) who con-
ducted the enquiry. At a fundamental level it needs to be recognized straight 
away that no research is ever free from the influence of those who conduct it. 
Qualitative data, whether text or images, are always the product of a process 
of interpretation. The data do not exist ‘out there’ waiting to be discovered (as 
might be assumed if a positivistic approach were adopted) but are produced  
by the way they are interpreted and used by researchers. This has consequences 
for the prospects of objectivity. First, it raises questions about the involvement  
of the researcher’s ‘self’ in the interpretation of the data and, second, it raises 
questions about the prospects of keeping an open mind and being willing to  
consider alternative and competing explanations of the data.
The researcher’s ‘self’
The researcher’s identity, values and beliefs cannot be entirely eliminated from 
the process of analysing qualitative data. There are, though, two ways in which 
qualitative researchers can deal with this involvement of the self. On the one 
hand, they can deal with it by saying:
The researcher’s identity, values and beliefs play a role in the production and 
analysis of qualitative data and therefore researchers should be on their guard 
to distance themselves from their normal, everyday beliefs and to suspend 
judgements on social issues for the duration of their research.
At this end of the scale researchers know that their self is intertwined with their 
research activity but proceed on the basis that they can exercise sufficient con-
trol over their normal attitudes to allow them to operate in a detached manner, 
so that their investigation is not clouded by personal prejudices. In this case the 
researcher needs to suspend personal values and beliefs for the purposes of the 
production and analysis of the data.
On the other hand, qualitative researchers could take the position that:
The researcher’s identity, values and beliefs play a role in the production and 
analysis of qualitative data and therefore researchers should come clean 
about the way their research agenda has been shaped by personal experi-
ences and social backgrounds.
might not be generalizable to the population of students in all schools. However, 
armed with appropriate information about the age/sex/ethnicity of the students 
and the social context of the school, it becomes possible to think about how 
the findings might apply to similar students in similar schools. Armed with the 
appropriate information, the reader can consider the transferability of the find-
ings.
‣
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Qualitative data  301
At the extreme, this approach can take the form of celebrating the extent to 
which the self is intertwined with the research process. There are those who 
argue that their self gives them a privileged insight into social issues, so that the 
researcher’s self should not be regarded as a limitation to the research but as a 
crucial resource. Some feminist researchers and some researchers in the field 
of ‘race’ make the case that their identity, values and beliefs actually enable the 
research and should be exploited to the full to get at areas that will remain barred 
to researchers with a different self. So some feminists argue that only a woman 
can truly grasp the significance of factors concerned with the subordination of 
women in society. Some black researchers would make a similar point in relation 
to ‘race’ inequality.
Between the two positions outlined above lie a variety of shades of opinion 
about the degree to which the researcher’s self can and should be acknowledged 
as affecting the production and analysis of qualitative data. However, there is a 
general consensus on the key point: the role of the self in qualitative research 
is important. To ignore the role of the researcher’s self in qualitative research, 
then, would be ill-advised.
A reflexive account of researcher’s self
The analysis of qualitative data calls for a reflexive account by the researcher 
concerning the researcher’s self and its impact on the research. There is a grow-
ing acceptance among those involved in qualitative data analysis that some bio-
graphical details about the researcher warrant inclusion as part of the analysis, 
thus allowing the writer to explore the ways in which he or she feels personal 
experiences and values might influence matters. The reader of the research, 
by the same token, is given valuable information on which to base a judgement 
about how reasonable the writer’s claims are with regard to the detachment or 
involvement of self-identity, values and beliefs.
An open mind
Qualitative researchers, like all researchers, need to approach the analysis of the 
data with an open mind. If they do not, they can be accused of lacking objectiv-
ity. In practice, a way of demonstrating such openness is for the researcher to 
take seriously the possibility of having ‘got it wrong’. This is actually a funda-
mental point in relation to the production of knowledge. It is linked to the argu-
ment that good research is concerned not with the verification of findings but 
with their ‘falsification’. For the project researcher there are perhaps two aspects 
of this which can be addressed quite practically. Qualitative researchers should:
•• Avoid neglecting data that do not fit the analysis. Qualitative researchers such 
as Seale (1999) and Silverman (2011) have argued that good research should 
not ignore those instances within the data that might appear to disconfirm the 
researcher’s analysis. There might be only a few such ‘outliers’. There might 
be just the occasional bit of data that does not fit nicely or that contradicts the 
general trend. These should not be ignored, but should be actively investigated 
to see if there is an explanation for them that can be accommodated within 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

302  The Good Research Guide
the emerging analysis, of whether there is some genuine significance in them. 
Looking for, and accounting for, negative instances or deviant cases that con-
tradict the emerging analysis are important.
•• Check rival explanations. Alternative possible explanations need to be 
explored. The researcher needs to demonstrate that he or she has not simply 
plumped for the first explanation that fits, rather than seeing if rival theories 
work or whether there are hidden problems with the proposed explanation.
Good practice: The need to be open about the researcher’s ‘self’
Qualitative researchers should provide some biographical details about them-
selves and their interest in the research. They should also address the issue 
of objectivity by demonstrating the extent to which they have approached the 
research with an ‘open mind’.
Advantages of qualitative data analysis
There is a richness and detail to the data
The in-depth study of relatively focused areas, the tendency towards small-scale 
research and the generation of ‘thick descriptions’ mean that qualitative research 
scores well in terms of the way it deals with complex social situations and the 
subtleties of social life.
The data and the analysis are ‘grounded’
With qualitative research the findings are based upon evidence drawn from real-
world settings. There is little scope for ‘armchair theorizing’ or ‘ideas plucked 
out of thin air’.
There can be alternative explanations
Qualitative analysis, because it draws on the interpretive skills of the researcher, 
opens up the possibility of more than one explanation being valid. Rather than 
a presumption that there must be, in theory at least, one correct explanation, it 
allows for the possibility that different researchers might reach different conclu-
sions, despite using broadly the same methods.
There is tolerance of ambiguity and contradictions
To the extent that social existence involves uncertainty, accounts of that exist-
ence ought to be able to tolerate ambiguities and contradictions, and qualita-
tive research is better able to do this than quantitative research. This is not 
a reflection of a weak analysis. It is a reflection of the social reality being 
investigated.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Qualitative data  303
Disadvantages of qualitative data analysis
Generalizability of the findings
One repercussion of qualitative research’s tendency to rely on the detailed, in-
depth study of a small number of instances is that it becomes more difficult to 
establish how far the findings may be generalized to other similar instances.
The analysis takes longer
Computer programs can assist with the management of the data and they can 
even help with the analysis, but nowhere near to the extent that they can with 
quantitative data. A key factor here is that qualitative data are generally unstruc-
tured when they are first collected in their ‘raw’ state (e.g. interviews, field notes, 
photographs) and need to be coded before they can be analysed.
Questions can be raised about the objectivity of the findings
Qualitative research recognizes more openly than does quantitative research 
that the researcher’s own identity, background and beliefs have a role in the crea-
tion of data and the analysis of data.
There is the danger of taking the data ‘out of context’
The analysis of qualitative data needs to be wary about wrenching the data from 
its location (1) within a sequence of data (e.g. interview talk) or (2) within sur-
rounding circumstances. Both things have a bearing on the meaning of the text 
or image.
Further reading
Bazeley, P. (2013) Qualitative Data Analysis: Practical Strategies. London: Sage.
Gibbs, G. (2002) Qualitative Data Analysis: Explorations with NVivo. Buckingham: Open 
University Press.
Grbich, C. (2013) Qualitative Data Analysis: An Introduction, 2nd edn. London: Sage.
Miles, M. B., Huberman, A. M. and Saldana, J. M. (2014) Qualitative Data Analysis: A Meth-
ods Sourcebook, 3rd edn. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Richards, L. (2009) Handling Qualitative Data: A Practical Guide, 2nd edn. London: Sage.
Silverman, D. (2011) Interpreting Qualitative Data, 4th edn. London: Sage.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

304  The Good Research Guide
✓
Checklist for the analysis of qualitative data  
When analysing qualitative data you should feel confident about  
answering ‘yes’ to the following question: 
  1	 Does the data analysis do one or more of the following:
• Look for hidden messages – content analysis?
• Develop concepts or theories – grounded theory?
• Expose the workings of power through language – discourse 
analysis?
• Reveal underlying rules and structures of talk – conversation 
analysis?
• Give an account of the construction of self and social world – 
narrative analysis?
• Explain the meaning and cultural significance of images – 
image-based analysis?
  2	 Does any report of the findings include an explicit account of the 
process of data analysis?
 
  3	 Have sufficient details been incorporated to allow an ‘audit’ of key 
decisions in the process of the research?
 
  4	 Has the data analysis taken an iterative approach?
  5	 Has the analysis been based on a depth scrutiny of the data?
  6	 Have relevant details been supplied to permit readers to think 
about the transferability of the findings?
 
  7	 Has the topic been approached with an ‘open mind’?
  8	 Have alternative explanations been considered?
  9	 Does the research report include some reflexive account of the 
researcher’s self and its possible impact?
 
© M. Denscombe, The Good Research Guide. Open University Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Part 4
Context
4
Social research takes place within a context that shapes the possibilities of what 
can be done. That context is society. Society places limits on what researchers 
can do in the pursuit of knowledge and it has expectations about how research 
should be conducted. 
The most obvious way in which such limits and expectations confront the 
researcher is through the duties and obligations associated with research eth-
ics. Society sets certain standards of conduct which researchers are expected 
to maintain and good research must meet these standards. Its methods must be 
acceptable within the cultural norms of the society in which it takes place and 
accord with a variety of moral, legal and safety considerations. Chapter 17 out-
lines the expectations that operate in the western world in the twenty-first cen-
tury and provides guidance on how these expectations can be met.
The context of research is also significant in terms of the accountability 
of researchers and the obligation this places on researchers to make their 
research findings available for scrutiny by a wider public. As the twenty-first 
century progresses, an increasing emphasis is being placed on the dissemina-
tion of findings from research and the need to make findings easily accessible 
to other researchers or anyone who has an interest in the outcomes from a 
research project. This brings into the foreground the role of the research report 
as the means by which researchers communicate their work. Chapter 18 out-
lines the general features of research reports. It also suggests ways in which 
project researchers can provide an account of their research to an audience 
with a specific interest in evaluating the quality of the research that has been 
undertaken.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

17
Research ethics
• Ethics Committee approval • The kinds of research that need ethical 
approval • Codes of research ethics • Key principles of research ethics • 
Written consent form • Data protection • Ethics and Internet research • 
Summary • Further reading • Checklist for research ethics 
Social researchers are expected to approach their task in an ethical manner. On 
moral grounds, this expectation stems from the belief that the public should be 
protected from researchers who might be tempted to use any means available to 
advance the state of knowledge on a given topic. It rests on the assumption that 
researchers have no privileged position in society that justifies them pursuing 
their interests at the expense of those they are studying – no matter how valuable 
they hope the findings might be.
Key point
Research ethics is not an option – it is a fundamental feature of all good 
research.
Ethics Committee approval 
The importance attached to research ethics is evident in the fact that social 
researchers will normally need to get prior approval for their investigation from 
an Ethics Committee. Even with small-scale research, it is increasingly the case 
that before the research can be conducted it will need to have been scrutinized 
by a committee of suitably qualified experts to ensure that the design of the 
research includes appropriate measures to protect the interests of the people and 
groups covered by the research. Researchers in the field of health will find that 
medical ethics committees are powerful in this respect, and those conducting 
investigations as part of any academic qualification will normally be required 
to have their plans vetted by an Ethics Committee within their university before 
they are allowed to start the investigation. Submissions to Ethics Committees 
will be judged according to the broad principles for ethical research outlined 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Research ethics  307
below, and might include further specific stipulations depending on the field of 
the research. 
Good practice: Get ethics approval before commencing data collection
Approval from an Ethics Committee should be obtained before any primary data 
is collected from the people involved in the research. The approval process can 
take weeks, sometimes months, to complete and this needs to be taken into 
consideration when planning the data collection phase of the research.
The kinds of research that need ethical approval
Research that involves data collection from or about living individuals generally 
requires ethical scrutiny. This means that projects will normally need to be con-
sidered by an Ethics Committee if they plan to collect data directly from or about 
people using the following methods:
•• questionnaires;
• interviews or focus groups;
•• participant observation or systematic observation.
This scrutiny is intended to ensure that no harm is caused by the investigation. 
Why is this necessary? In many cases social research might seem fairly innocu-
ous involving perhaps some market research questions about people’s purchas-
ing habits or some other kind of enquiry that would not appear to pose much 
of a risk to the well-being of those who take part in the research. However, the 
dangers of social research can be real and substantial. It is the role of an Ethics 
Committee to consider the potential risks entailed in carrying out a proposed 
piece of research and to arrive at a conclusion about whether the risks have been 
considered, whether effective precautions will be taken to minimize the risks, 
and whether the plan of work is likely to produce worthwhile results without 
endangering the well-being of participants involved. 
Ethics Committees will pay particular attention to any kinds of research that, 
in the words of the Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC), ‘involve more 
than minimal risk’ to participants. This is the kind of research that involves: 
•• vulnerable groups (e.g. children, people with a learning disability);
• sensitive topics (e.g. sexual, religious or illegal behaviour);
• deception or carried out without the informed consent of participants;
• use of confidential information about identifiable individuals;
• processes that might cause psychological stress, anxiety, humiliation or cause 
more than minimal pain;
• intrusive interventions (e.g. administration of drugs or vigorous physical 
exercise that would not be part of participants’ normal lives).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

308  The Good Research Guide
Exceptions to the rule
There are certain kinds of research that do not need to go through a process of 
formal scrutiny by an Ethics Committee. First, there can be exceptions when the 
investigation is regarded as part of routine and normal work, and therefore not 
really ‘research’ as such. In the National Health Service, for instance, data collec-
tion and analysis undertaken as part of the routine work and management of the 
organization would not normally need to be submitted to an Ethics Committee 
for approval (Department of Health 2005). The kind of investigations and data 
collection which would not need approval include: 
•• audits;
• service evaluation;
• clinical case studies;
• equipment testing;
•• customer satisfaction surveys.
Second, there can be exceptions when the research draws exclusively on pub-
lished secondary source material. Library-based research, archive research, his-
torical research, the use of official statistics and economic data are the kind of 
research that fall into this category. If the research uses aggregated data where 
individuals cannot be identified, if it uses data that are already in the public 
domain, or if relates to historical or fictional characters, then it might be treated 
as involving little risk and therefore permissible without the need for prior 
approval by an Ethics Committee. The thinking here is that there are no prob-
lems that can arise in the data collection phase (because the data have already 
been collected on a previous occasion) and no privacy issues because the data 
are in the public sphere and widely available to anyone.
The risks associated with social research, however, are not limited to the harm 
that might potentially occur during the data collection phase. As we shall see, 
research ethics is also concerned with the repercussions for participants result-
ing from the publication of findings. These things apply whatever the kind of 
social research that is being conducted and, for this reason, there is an increas-
ing tendency to require every social research project to go through some initial 
vetting, some kind of scrutiny, before it is allowed to proceed. Even if the data 
collection appears to be unproblematic, institutions need to feel assured that 
any research conducted under their auspices (for a university degree, or by an 
employee) equally meets the required ethical standards when it comes to the 
analysis of the data and the dissemination of the data. 
Caution 
Be aware that research ethics applies to all social research, even if formal 
approval from an Ethics Committee is not required.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Research ethics  309
Codes of research ethics
Codes of research ethics provide guidance on the kind of actions that should 
be taken and the kind that must be avoided when undertaking research. Pro-
fessional research associations almost always publish a code of conduct that 
they expect their members to abide by. Research funding bodies and govern-
ment departments that commission research have similar guidelines govern-
ing acceptable practice in the context of research. There is some difference in 
emphasis between these codes. Market research associations approach things in 
a slightly different way from medical associations, reflecting the different nature 
of the procedures the researchers are likely to use and the potential harm that 
might be done to participants. Market researchers collecting data on consumer 
preferences are not likely to be exposing participants to the same kind of risk, 
psychological or physical, as health researchers investigating the effectiveness 
of a new drug or surgical procedure.
Good practice: Abide by a specific code of research ethics
Project researchers should identify a code of ethics that represents their aca-
demic discipline or professional association. This code should be used in rela-
tion to the research and, importantly, should be explicitly referred to in any 
account of the methods used in the research.
Key principles of research ethics
There are four key principles which underlie codes of research ethics. These 
principles have their origins in medical research and were established initially in 
response to atrocities committed during the Second World War which purported 
to have been done in the name of science and the progress of medical knowledge. 
Through the Nuremberg Code (1947–49), and later the Declaration of Helsinki 
(1964), the international community established the foundations for research 
ethics and enshrined the fundamental principle that the ends do not justify the 
means in the pursuit of knowledge.
The Nuremberg Code and the Declaration of Helsinki have been developed 
over the years and various professional bodies, academic disciplines and govern-
ment departments have adapted them for use in the context of social research as 
distinct from medical research. These codes of ethics for social research stick to 
the core principle (that in their pursuit of knowledge researchers must not ruth-
lessly use any means at their disposal) and they develop this along four lines. 
Social researchers are expected to conduct their investigations in a way that:
•• protects the interests of the participants;
• ensures that participation is voluntary and based on informed consent;
• avoids deception and operates with scientific integrity;
• complies with the laws of the land.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

310  The Good Research Guide
Principle 1: Participants’ interests should be protected
There is general agreement that people should not suffer as a consequence of 
their involvement with a piece of research. Those who contribute to research 
as informants or as research subjects should be no worse off at the end of their 
participation than they were when they started. Nor should there be longer-term 
repercussions stemming from their involvement that in any sense harm the par-
ticipants.
In accord with this principle, researchers have a duty to consider in advance 
the likely consequences of participation and to take measures that safeguard 
the interests of those who help with the investigation. First of all, they need to 
ensure that participants do not come to any physical harm as a result of the 
research. With some kinds of research there needs to be careful consideration 
of the physical safety of participants, anticipating any threats arising from 
the time/location of meetings, travel to such locations, or even the possibility 
of the participant suffering retribution from people who feel threatened by 
the participant’s involvement in the research or the disclosure of particular 
information. The possibility might seem quite remote, but researchers have 
a responsibility to anticipate such risks and avoid any physical harm from 
occurring.
Second, care needs to be taken to avoid psychological harm resulting from 
research. Any investigation that is potentially going to lead to trauma, stress 
or other psychological harm will be considered unethical. Researchers there-
fore need to anticipate the likelihood that their investigation might be per-
ceived as intrusive, touch on sensitive issues, or threaten the beliefs of the 
participants because these are the kinds of thing that could give rise to psy-
chological harm.
Third, participants should suffer no personal harm arising from the disclo-
sure of information collected during the research. Disclosure of personal infor-
mation could be embarrassing for the participants and, depending on the type 
of information, it could also involve economic loss or even the prospect of legal 
action being taken against participants on the basis of the disclosed information 
if it was to come to the attention of relevant authorities (e.g. employers, Inland 
Revenue, social security inspectors, the police, customs officials). There is broad 
agreement, therefore, that researchers need to protect the interests of the partici-
pants by ensuring the confidentiality of information that is given to them. When 
publishing results, care needs to be taken not to disclose the personal identities 
of individuals who have contributed to the findings.
Fourth, the participants should stand to benefit from the outcomes from the 
research. This does not mean that each participant is expected to gain person-
ally from taking part in the research but that, in principle, a person such as them 
might benefit at some point in the future as a consequence of the research. The 
idea is that the participants are not just ‘guinea pigs’ whose sole value is that of 
providing data. Their willingness to devote time and effort, indeed their willing-
ness to expose themselves to risks in the case of medical research, should be 
done on the basis of getting something back. Not money, but some other form of 
benefit for people like them. This stems from the ethical principle of ‘beneficence’ 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Research ethics  311
which states that research on people should always be done ‘for the good of peo-
ple’, never frivolously or for malicious purposes.
Fifth, and linked to this, participants should be treated fairly and equally in 
terms of the participation in the research. People should not be included in the 
research, nor excluded from the research, on grounds which are unfair or irrel-
evant. And this is not just a matter of good practice in terms of gaining a rep-
resentative sample: it is an ethical point based on the idea that any benefits or 
risks associated with a piece of research should be shared equally amongst all 
those concerned. The reasoning is easy to see in the case of medical research. As 
Goldacre (2012) argues, it is unfair to trial Aids vaccines in Africa if the prime 
beneficiaries of any breakthrough will be residents of rich countries in the West 
and where the risks are taken by those who, in all likelihood, will not be able to 
afford any new breakthrough vaccine that results from the research. In social 
research, this translates as meaning that researchers need to ensure that their 
research design does not discriminate against the involvement of parties whose 
voices ought to be heard and whose interests need to be represented through 
their inclusion as participants in the research. For ethical reasons, that is, the 
research design should be sure to represent the interests of all relevant people, 
including the underprivileged, the weak, the vulnerable and minority groups.
Good practice: Protecting participants’ interests
Researchers should:
••
anticipate any threats to the personal safety of participants, and take steps 
to avoid these occurring; 
••
respect participants’ privacy and sensitivities, and avoid undue intrusion 
when collecting data; 
••
treat all information disclosed to them during research as confidential, and 
not disclose it to other participants or people not connected with the research;
••
guarantee the anonymity of individuals and organizations in any published 
documents arising from the research – unless participants give explicit (and 
written) consent to identify them by name;
••
ensure that the benefits and risks associated with inclusion in the research 
are spread fairly and equally among relevant groups.
Principle 2: Participation should be voluntary and  
based on informed consent 
People should never be forced or coerced into helping with research. Their partici-
pation must always be voluntary, and they must have sufficient information about 
the research to arrive at a reasoned judgement about whether or not they want 
to participate. These are the premises of ‘informed consent’. Particularly where 
the kind of information collected is of a sensitive nature, there is a need to get 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

312  The Good Research Guide
informed consent. But, more than this, there is often a need to get that consent in 
writing. When the consent is in writing, it acts as a way of formally recording the 
agreement to participate and confirming that the participant has been informed 
about the nature of the research. This protects the researcher from any possible 
accusation that he or she acted improperly when recruiting people to take part in 
the research.
Good practice: Informed consent
For participants to be able to give informed consent researchers need to: 
••
make it very clear that participation is voluntary;
••
provide participants with adequate information about the research;
••
specify what kind of commitment is being required of participants. 
A formal way to confirm that participation is on the basis of informed consent is 
to use a consent form (see the template below).
What if it is not possible to get written consent?
It may not always be possible to gain consent from all those who take part in a 
research project. Research on crowd behaviour at football matches or observa-
tion of the movements of visitors to art galleries are clearly instances where it 
would prove impossible to get everyone to complete a consent form. There are 
other occasions where it may not be deemed practical or, indeed, necessary to get 
written consent. Approaching people in the street to ask a few questions about 
their shopping habits, for example, might not be seen as requiring the comple-
tion of a consent form. In this case there is some tacit consent. The agreement to 
answer the questions clearly indicates that their participation is voluntary and, 
because the nature of the participants’ involvement in the research is rather ‘low 
risk’, under the circumstances this ‘verbal consent’ might be deemed sufficient. 
The codes of conduct of the professional associations generally recognize this 
and include clauses that acknowledge that exceptions might need to be made 
to the general rule about written consent. Normally, the conditions under which 
researchers can collect data ethically without getting written consent are those 
where:
•• the form of data collection is unlikely to involve much by way of personal 
risks to the informant, and
•• it is not realistically possible to get such consent.
Principle 3: Researchers should operate in an open and honest manner 
with respect to the investigation 
Researchers are expected to avoid deception or misrepresentation in their deal-
ings with participants. They are expected to be open and explicit about what 
they are doing – to let people know that they are researchers and that they 
intend to collect data for the purposes of an investigation into a particular topic. 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Research ethics  313
Furthermore, they are expected to tell the truth about the nature of their investi-
gation and the role of the participants in that research.
Good practice: Openness in the conduct of research
Researchers should:
••
produce a brief summary of the aims of the research and the nature of the 
data that are to be collected. This should be no more than one page in length 
and written without jargon so that the purpose of the research can be clearly 
understood by potential participants and others who might have an interest 
in the research;
••
where possible, develop a website for the project so that information about 
the project can be widely available to interested parties. Links from the Home 
page can be used to provide further information about the researchers (their 
credentials and experience) and more details about the background to the 
project for those who might want to know more.
There is also an expectation that researchers operate with ‘scientific integrity’. 
This means, in effect, that researchers are expected to uphold the highest stand-
ards of professionalism and honesty in terms of their treatment of the data and 
dealings with other researchers. On the first point, working ethically means 
doing the best possible job to collect and analyse data in an objective and honest 
way. Researchers should not be swayed to supply findings that suit the needs of 
those who fund or sponsor the research. Nor should they allow personal prefer-
ences and ideals to cloud their judgement and get in the way of providing a bal-
anced and dispassionate interpretation of their findings. They should be ‘fair’ and 
unbiased. On the second point, there is an expectation that researchers should 
acknowledge the contribution of others and not ‘steal’ their work through pla-
giarism. Researchers certainly need to ‘use’ the work of others – either by way 
of building upon it or by criticizing it – but when doing so they should always 
explicitly acknowledge the source of the other work.
Scientific integrity covers two further obligations on the researcher. First, the 
researcher is expected to have the appropriate experience and competence to 
undertake the investigation. Without this there is a danger that the participants 
might be harmed. Thinking of medical research the point behind this is easy to 
see. With social research too, however, Ethics Committees will look to be reas-
sured that researchers will restrict their investigations to those styles of research 
for which they are qualified and for which their experience makes them well 
prepared. And second, as we have already noted, there is a clear expectation 
that researchers should not engage in research which is frivolous or whimsical, 
or for which there is not a good ‘scientific’ reason to believe that something of 
value will be learnt as an outcome. Behind both these points there is the principle 
that participants should not be exposed to the risk of harm or inconvenience by 
being asked to participate in research that is not likely to be beneficial. This is 
the principle of ‘beneficence’.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

314  The Good Research Guide
What if some deception is necessary?
There are occasions when it is not feasible for the researcher to be completely 
open and honest with participants. To be so would automatically jeopardize any 
prospect of the investigation actually taking place or would cause participants to 
react to the research in a way that would contaminate the results. Many psychol-
ogy experiments, for example, would be ruined if the subjects knew in advance 
what the researcher was investigating, and it has been estimated that about 
three-quarters of psychology experiments involve giving participants informa-
tion that, in one respect or another, actually misleads them about the purpose of 
the experiment. Some types of ethnographic study, likewise, involve fieldwork 
where the researcher needs to disguise his/her true role because if people knew 
that research was being conducted they would act differently from normal, and 
the ‘naturalness’ of the setting would be destroyed.
When some form of deception is seen as necessary, researchers face an ethical 
dilemma: from the point of view of good research design, deception is regarded 
as essential, yet from the point of view of ethical research such deception is bad 
practice. The codes of conduct published by professional associations, however, 
generally acknowledge that, on certain occasions, some deception by research-
ers might be warranted as absolutely necessary for the purposes of the research. 
Such occasions, though, need to be treated as exceptions to the rule – ones that 
can be justified only on the basis of the very special circumstances surrounding 
the particular investigation. The conditions under which it might be acceptable 
generally require the researcher:
•• to provide an explicit justification for why the deception is vital and why there 
is no suitable alternative approach that would permit full disclosure about the 
nature of the research;
• to use a ‘debriefing’ session in which, after the event, participants are put in 
the picture about the true nature of the enquiry and why they could not be 
informed about this at the beginning.
Principle 4: Research should comply with the laws of the land 
Researchers do not stand above the law nor should they put themselves outside 
the law. Operating within the law, of course, does not necessarily make an action 
Good practice: Honesty and integrity in the conduct of research
Researchers should:
••
avoid deception or misrepresentation in their dealings with participants;
••
provide fair and unbiased interpretation of their findings;
••
explicitly acknowledge any sponsorship or vested interests relating to the 
research;
••
avoid plagiarizing other researchers’ work;
••
have the necessary skills and experience to carry out the research;
••
show that real benefits are likely to emerge from the research.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Research ethics  315
ethical. Indeed, there are many actions a researcher could take that might be 
perfectly legal but which would be considered to be absolutely unethical in the 
context of conducting research. And a case could be made that a researcher who 
breaks the law might, nonetheless, be doing something that is ethical. Like an 
investigative journalist who needs to use unscrupulous methods in order to expose 
a case of corruption or organized crime, it is possible that a social researcher 
might make a similar case for stepping outside the law. However, this would be 
a dangerous thing for any but the most experienced researchers and for project 
researchers would be most ill-advised. Most codes of research ethics are quite 
clear on the point: social researchers are expected to abide by the laws of the land.
Bearing this in mind, there are some laws which are of particular relevance for 
social researchers. First, there are those laws that set bounds to what is accept-
able in terms of the topic of the research. There are areas where the nature of 
any research project is likely to ‘cross the line’ in terms of the law, and for this 
reason project researchers should steer well clear of such areas. Obvious exam-
ples would be the way that research involving empirical investigation into top-
ics such as terrorism, drug trafficking, paedophilia, prostitution or pornography 
could all too easily, and unintentionally, end up breaking the law. Second, there 
are certain ways of collecting data that could fall foul of the law. There are data 
protection laws that need to be considered, laws against hacking into computers, 
laws against fraud, and copyright laws, all of which set boundaries around what 
can be legitimately used as a means for collecting data. The 
data protection laws also have a bearing on the way that 
researchers need to store their data and the extent to which 
personal data can be distributed to third parties not actually 
involved with the research (see below).
Good practice: Compliance with the law
To help them stay within the law, researchers should:
••
avoid researching sensitive topics where the methods of data collection and 
analysis might lead them to break the law;
••
take care on matters relating to the ownership of the data, intellectual prop-
erty rights and copyright matters;
••
take reasonable measures to ensure that data are kept private and secure.
Link up with 
Data protection, 
p. 317.
Written consent form 
‘Informed consent’, as we have seen, is a cornerstone of research ethics. Basi-
cally, anyone participating in research should know what they are agreeing to 
do. Yes, there are exceptions to the rule. And there are times when consent might 
need to be tacit rather than explicit. But on those occasions when researchers 
are able to seek informed consent on a more formal basis it is standard practice 
to use a ‘consent form’. This form does two things. First, it provides the potential 
participant with enough information about the research and their involvement 
for them to make an informed decision. Second, it provides the researcher with 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

316  The Good Research Guide
some documented evidence that the participant has agreed to take part in the 
research – written consent. The forms vary in length and detail according to the 
nature of the research, but generally include the following sections.
Identity of the researcher 
Participants are entitled to know who is conducting the research and where they 
can be contacted. The consent form, therefore, should include:
•• the name(s) of the researcher;
• an address and other contact details at which he or she can be contacted;
• where appropriate, the name of the organization under whose auspices the 
research is being conducted.
Information about the research 
There needs to be a statement providing enough detail for the participant to under-
stand, in broad terms, the aims, methods and anticipated outcomes of the research. 
This must be brief since participants will not normally wish to spend a lot of time 
reading page after page of details. Some researchers present the information on a 
separate sheet that can be left with the participant for future reference. At other 
times, the statement is limited to a few sentences on the consent form itself. Either 
way, participants need to be provided with a brief description of:
•• what the research is investigating;
• how it is to be conducted;
• who, if anybody, is sponsoring the research;
• what benefits are likely to emerge from the investigation.
Expectations about the participant’s contribution
Informed consent presumes that participants know in advance what tasks the 
researcher expects them to undertake and what, if any, reward they might expect 
for their efforts. They will need to be told whether they are expected to take part 
in an interview, take part in a laboratory experiment, or complete a question-
naire. And they should be given some indication of how much time this is likely 
to take. They might also need to know whether any expenses they incur will be 
paid for by the researcher, and whether they will receive some kind of payment 
or other incentive (such as a free copy of the final report of the research). The 
consent form, then, should specify:
•• why they were selected for inclusion in the study;
• what tasks the participant will undertake;
• how much of their time this is likely to take;
• what general benefits or specific incentives there might be for taking part in 
the research.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Research ethics  317
The right to withdraw consent
Signing a consent form does not oblige participants to continue in the role if, at 
some subsequent stage, they no longer wish to do so. The consent form is not a con-
tract that binds a person to the task of helping with the research – and this should 
be made clear on the consent form itself. Participants should be made aware that, 
should they wish to do so, it is their right to withdraw their consent at any time.
Confidentiality and security of data
The consent form needs to incorporate some commitment by the researcher with 
regard to the conduct of the research and the treatment of the data. Any agree-
ment to take part in research ought to be made with an understanding of what 
code of ethics the researcher will use and what measures will be taken to safe-
guard the data and protect participants from any disclosure of their individual 
identity. Such assurances could include:
•• specifying which professional association’s code of ethics will be used to dur-
ing the course of the research;
• what security measures will be taken to ensure the confidentiality of the data;
• how anonymity of the data will be guaranteed (if appropriate).
Ownership and use of the data
It can be prudent to get participants’ formal approval for the researcher to use 
the information they provide and the words they use for the purposes of aca-
demic research and publications arising from the project. 
Signature of the participant, with date 
This signature can incorporate an acknowledgement that the participant has 
been advised about the requirements of the research and has understood what 
is involved (e.g. ‘I have read and understood the written details provided for me 
about the research, and agree to participate in the project. Signed . . .’).
Counter-signature of the researcher, with date 
It is good practice for the researcher, as well as the participant, to sign the con-
sent form effectively committing the researcher to uphold his or her side of the 
agreement.
Data protection
Prompted by the potential of computers to store and process vast quantities of 
information, and given further impetus by the growth of the Internet, most socie-
ties have data protection laws that are designed to protect the public from the 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

318  The Good Research Guide
unscrupulous collection and use of personal data. In the UK, as in many other 
countries, Human Rights legislation and Freedom of Information laws have 
imposed certain controls on the misuse of data, but the main piece of relevant 
legislation is the Data Protection Act (1988). This law relates to ‘personal data’ - 
data that includes personal details from which living individuals can be identi-
fied – and covers data held on any ‘relevant filing system’. This includes paper 
records as well as computer files if they are kept systematically.
The Data Protection Act says that anyone storing such data is acting as a 
‘data controller’ and this carries with it three responsibilities. First, data control-
lers must ‘notify’ the Information Commissioner’s Office (http://www.ico.org.
uk/) about the kind of data they hold, the purpose for which it is being used, and 
who the data will be disclosed to. This provides the Information Commissioner’s 
Office with a national picture of what data is being held, who holds the data, and 
how that data is being used. Second, data controllers assume responsibility for 
keeping the data secure and ensuring the data are accurate and up-to-date. The 
legislation is designed to ensure that data held about individuals is handled prop-
erly and that the organizations involved take steps to ensure that the information 
on their database is correct. And third, data controllers become responsible for 
making the data available if, and when, any individual applies to see the data 
that is held about them. From a civil liberties point of view this is the key aspect 
of the legislation: it allows individual citizens to find out what data is held about 
them and, if necessary, challenge the validity of the data.
The implications for small-scale research
At first glance it might seem that, to comply with the law, social researchers 
will need to go through the process of notifying the Information Commissioner’s 
Office (or equivalent regulatory body if not in the UK) about the data they hold. 
In reality, though, this is unlikely to be the case – particularly for small-scale 
social researchers conducting research as part of a university course. There are 
three reasons for this.
First, the Act does not apply to anonymized or aggregated data. Provided it 
is not possible to identify individuals from the data that are being held, and that 
the process of anonymization cannot be reversed, the data are not regarded as 
‘personal’. Bearing this in mind, researchers might ask themselves whether they 
really need to have personal identifying information attached to their dataset. 
Is it vital to directly link personal details (name, address, telephone number and 
email address, etc.) to each participant’s data? If not, it makes sense to ensure 
that the data are duly anonymized.
Second, where research is conducted under the auspices of a large organiza-
tion the organization itself might have a ‘notification’ that already covers the 
activity of the individual researchers who study with, or work for, that organ-
ization. Students and staff at universities are likely to be covered in this way 
particularly with respect to research conducted for academic dissertations and 
coursework.
And third, the Act includes a number of exemptions, meaning that certain 
kinds of data held by certain kinds of organization do not need be ‘notified’ to 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Research ethics  319
the Information Commissioner’s Office. ‘Personal data that is processed only for 
research, statistical or historical purposes’ is one of them.
In practice, then, individual small-scale social researchers in the UK do not 
normally need to go through the process of notifying the Information Commis-
sioner’s Office about the data they hold.
Data protection principles
Although small-scale researchers may not need to formally notify the Informa-
tion Commissioner’s Office about the data they hold, this does not mean that the 
legislation simply ‘does not apply’ or that the standards for data protection estab-
lished through the Act can be ignored. It is important to recognize that the legisla-
tion identifies some fundamental principles about data protection and effectively 
sets a benchmark for good practice when it comes to the storage and dissemina-
tion of personal data. To meet these standards social researchers should:
•• Collect and process data in a fair and lawful manner. There is an obligation 
on researchers to stick within the law in the way they collect their data and, 
equally, to avoid deception or subterfuge in order to get their information.
• Use data only for the purposes originally specified. It is not legitimate to col-
lect data for one purpose and then use them for some other purpose that was 
not stated at the time the data were collected.
• Collect only the data that are actually needed. Researchers should not collect 
vast amounts of data anticipating that some of it might come in useful now or 
at some time in the future. The data collection should be targeted at the cur-
rent and actual needs of the project.
• Take care to ensure the data are accurate. Researchers, like other data col-
lectors, have a duty of care to make sure the data they hold are accurate and, 
where appropriate, kept up to date.
• Keep data no longer than is necessary. Although researchers do not need to 
erase data after any given time, the legislation establishes the principle that data 
should be kept for use rather than simply accumulated. Obviously, in research 
terms there is some real value in retaining data for future comparison and check-
ing, and for large projects there is generally some stipulation that all data must 
be kept for a minimum period following the completion of a project (ranging 
from 2 years to 10 years and upwards depending on the nature of the data).
• Keep the data secure. Very importantly, data should be kept safe. Depend-
ing upon the sensitivity of the data, appropriate measures need to be taken 
to avoid the possibility of them falling into the wrong hands by being lost or 
stolen. With data held on computers, this entails a suitable use of passwords or 
encryption to prevent unauthorized access to the data. With paper documents, 
the data need to be kept under lock and key.
• Control the distribution of the data. It is legitimate for researchers to give 
copies of their data to other researchers for specifically research purposes 
but data should not be distributed to third parties who might use the data for 
other purposes. 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

320  The Good Research Guide
• Where possible, anonymize the data. The researcher should consider whether 
it is really necessary to collect data that are linked to identifiable individu-
als since anonymized data are exempted from the legislation. Data that are 
anonymous cannot be traced to any particular individual.
Ethics and Internet research
Internet-based research involves the same principles of research ethics as all 
other research but it brings with it some issues that warrant particular attention. 
A considerable amount of attention has been paid to the new kinds of challenge 
faced by Internet research in terms of things like informed consent, privacy and 
deception, confidentiality and legislation (e.g. McKee and Porter 2009; Heider 
and Massanari 2012; Farrimond 2013; Ess 2014).
Informed consent and ‘Internet surveys’
When Internet research takes the form of surveys, questionnaires or interviews, 
then the issues of consent and anonymity follow the lines of traditional research 
in the sense that the role of the researcher is explicit and expectations about 
consent can be met in an open and relatively unproblematic fashion. An outline 
of the research can be emailed to them. Alternatively, they can be asked to visit 
a website where the information is held. Or, again, with forums and chat rooms 
the information and consent details can be posted ahead of the time when it is 
proposed to begin the research.
Confirming that the would-be participant has read the information, and under-
stands it, is rather more difficult. One possibility here is to ask for the email, the 
attachment, the posting or the web page containing the information to be sent back 
to the researcher as a way of confirming that it has been read and understood, and 
that there is agreement to participation. If sent back from email or a web page, the 
form could contain a tick box (yes/no) that allows the would-be participants to con-
firm their willingness to take part – a kind of proxy signature that, though it is not 
as good as a formal signature, at least signals agreement to take part in a project 
whose details have been made available. Alternatively, those who have been con-
tacted could be asked to print off a copy of the downloaded form, sign it and return 
it to the researcher through the ordinary post. This provides a more robust kind of 
informed consent, but takes more effort on the part of the would-be participant and 
might well have the effect of deterring them from agreeing to participate.
Special care needs to be taken in the case of research that, intentionally or oth-
erwise, includes children and young people. Permission from parents or someone 
with equivalent parental authority is needed according to most codes of conduct 
for research and this applies just as much to Internet research as it does to con-
ventional data collection methods. Although it is difficult to be certain about the 
age of contacts on the Internet, researchers are still expected to:
•• use their best endeavours to identify any respondents who might be aged 
under 16;
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Research ethics  321
• where appropriate, seek parental permission (or its equivalent) on behalf of 
such young people;
• abide by relevant national laws relating to contact with children and young 
people.
Privacy and the use of ‘online documents’
Internet research that involves the study of online documents can pose interest-
ing questions in terms of privacy. Such research focuses on various forms of texts 
and images that have been put online – but were not produced with research in 
mind. The motive for putting the material online could be commercial, political, 
religious or personal and they might take the form of web-pages, blogs, discus-
sion forums or messages on social network sites. A crucial point, though, is that 
wherever they appear and whatever form they take they were not intended as 
things that would form the basis for research data. 
The decision to seek consent for the use of the material needs to be made 
on the basis of how public or private the communication was intended to be. If 
the material was intended for public consumption and intended to reach a wide 
audience then there would not normally be a requirement to gain consent before 
using that material as data for a research project. It is published work in the pub-
lic domain. Analysis of company websites, online journals, tweets and the like 
fall into this category. In the case of more private material the situation becomes 
more murky. Contributions to a discussion forum, for example, might be intended 
for a particular online community and things said on social network sites might 
be intended for a restricted group of ‘friends’. Ethically speaking, the researcher 
needs to think about how far the writer intended the words for unrestricted pub-
lic consumption and how personal the material is in terms of its content. The 
more personal and private the communication is, the more the researcher should 
be inclined to seek consent before using the material as research data.
Deception and the study of online communities
Internet research that involves participation in an online community can involve 
issues surrounding the use of deception by the researcher. Such issues do not 
occur if the researcher chooses to be explicit about the reasons for joining in 
with the group and openly seeking the consent of the members to his/her partici-
pation. However, the nature of online communities means that it is often possible 
to conduct covert research and observe the workings of a community without 
openly declaring a presence in the group. It allows researchers to monitor and 
record events secretly by hiding in the background and not declaring their pres-
ence. It enables them to enter chat rooms and observe proceedings by ‘lurking’ 
rather than joining in. Researchers can read postings to bulletin boards, again 
observing proceedings without disturbing the natural course of events. 
The question is, does this involve a form of deception? Should Internet 
researchers be morally obliged to declare their presence and state openly the 
purpose for observing events? There is a position on research ethics that would 
say ‘yes’. Others, however, would argue that the information provided through 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

322  The Good Research Guide
these channels has been made open and public by those who supplied it, argu-
ably removing any need on the part of the researcher to disclose the existence 
of the research activity or to try to get consent from those who are to become 
the objects of study. On the understanding that such information is ‘public’, some 
Internet researchers (e.g. Denzin 1999) have chosen to proceed without being 
open about who they are and what they are doing. Under specific circumstances 
they argue that it is not necessary to get permission to use the postings as data 
for research. Any researcher contemplating such Internet research needs to be 
aware of the alternative views and should explicitly state their considered posi-
tion on this issue.
Separate from the issue of not declaring a presence, the Internet also makes 
it relatively easy to adopt an alias or take on a false (online) identity for the pur-
poses of the research. This sidesteps the need for researchers to be fully honest 
about who they are and why they wish to participate in the group’s online inter-
actions and it can pave the way for actively engaging with a community without 
destroying the naturalness of the communication between the members. But is 
this simply a matter of deception and can it be ethical? Well, as with any research, 
there can be situations where researchers argue that some degree of deception 
is unavoidable; when it is not expedient to disclose research activity because 
to do so would be to jeopardize the research aims. A good illustration of this is 
provided by Glaser et al. (2002), who collected data from chat rooms associated 
with white racist groups. They wanted to find out what kind of events or circum-
stances triggered such people into advocating physical violence against ethnic 
groups, and covertly conducted semi-structured interviews with 38 participants 
through these chat rooms. The sensitivity of the issue meant that they did not 
seek informed consent. They argued that racists appear to ‘express their views 
rather freely [on the Internet], at least when they are interacting with those they 
perceive to be like-minded’ (p. 181) and that revealing the researchers’ identity 
and purpose would have been likely to deter such openness. In this specific case, 
under these special circumstances, they were able to gain the approval of the 
relevant Ethics Committee (at Yale University) on the grounds that:
•• the respondents’ statements were made in a public forum under conditions 
that were entirely normal for the chat room and so were naturally occurring 
data;
• the deception was absolutely necessary in order for the research to be under-
taken;
• respondents’ identities were carefully protected.
Confidentiality 
It is difficult, arguably impossible, for researchers using the Internet to guaran-
tee that respondents’ contributions will be private and will not be traced back to 
them. Despite the efforts of individuals and organizations to protect the anonym-
ity of sources of Internet communications, and despite the potential of encryp-
tion, the reality is that governments and security agencies have the power and 
the ability to trace just about any kind of Internet communication should they 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Research ethics  323
wish to do so. Researchers, therefore, should be wary about making promises 
they are not in a position to keep, and should word statements about the confi-
dentiality of data supplied via the Internet in a way that acknowledges the point, 
yet also reassures the respondent that all reasonable precautions will be taken to 
avoid the disclosure of identities.
Legislation 
The laws that need to be observed vary from country to country and are evolv-
ing to meet the repercussions of the spread of the Internet. Mann and Stewart 
(2000) suggest that, in the face of this uncertainty, researchers are best advised 
to make a clear statement to participants about which country’s legal jurisdic-
tion is being applied as far as the research is concerned – normally the country 
in which the researcher is based. Complications arise when researchers wish to 
base their research in more than one country – for example, with collaboration 
between universities in the UK, Russia and the USA. Such complications, how-
ever, are fairly unlikely to arise in the context of a small-scale research project. 
Broadly, though, there are three aspects of legislation that are likely to affect 
Internet research and that need to be reflected in the researcher’s use of the Inter-
net for data collection:
•• Data protection: the data should be collected, stored and used in accord with 
relevant data protection legislation.
• Copyright: downloading text and images is simple, but the use of text and 
images needs to be in accord with copyright conventions and legislation con-
cerned with things like trademarks and intellectual property rights.
• Sensitive issues: researchers hold no special position in the eyes of the law 
and need to exercise particular caution when investigating topics that are 
politically sensitive or that involve things like pornography or terrorism.
Summary
Researchers are expected to operate in accord with ethical standards and within 
boundaries set by the law. These expectations manifest themselves at four stages 
in the research process.
At the planning stage approval needs to be obtained by an Ethics Committee. 
Before any empirical research gets under way, the plans for the research are nor-
mally scrutinized by people with relevant experience and expertise to check that 
appropriate measures will be in place to enable the research to meet the required 
ethical standards.
During the data collection stage researchers need to be vigilant to ensure 
that no harm is caused to participants. Potential risks, possible dangers and 
unwanted by-products from the research should have been predicted and pre-
empted through the design of the research but, none the less, as the data collec-
tion progresses there needs to be a constant monitoring of events to prevent any 
unforeseen circumstances from causing harm to participants.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

324  The Good Research Guide
At the data analysis stage there is a need to act with integrity and high pro-
fessional standards. Researchers are expected to be honest in the way they ana-
lyse the data and must avoid any temptation to manipulate the data or approach 
things in a biased manner. It also means that care should be taken not to plagia-
rize the work of other researchers.
At the dissemination stage there is a need to consider the impact of publica-
tion of findings. The harm that can be done to participants is not confined to the 
data collection stage as the researcher goes about the business of eliciting infor-
mation. With social research there is possibly more chance of harm arising from 
what is done with that information. Particular care needs to be given to keeping 
the data secure and treating it as confidential. And when it comes to publish-
ing findings from the research, consideration needs to be given to the potential 
impact on the lives of those who contributed to the research findings.
Further reading
Farrimond, H. (2013) Doing Ethical Research. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Israel, M. and Hay, I. (2006) Research Ethics for Social Scientists: Between Ethical ­Conduct 
and Regulatory Compliance. London: Sage.
Oliver, P. (2010) The Student’s Guide to Research Ethics, 2nd edn. Maidenhead: Open 
­University Press.
Wiles, R. (2013) What Are Qualitative Research Ethics? London: Bloomsbury.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Research ethics  325
✓
Checklist for research ethics 
When considering the ethics of the research you should feel  
confident about answering ‘yes’ to the following questions: 
  1	 Will prior approval for the research be obtained, or has it already 
been obtained, from a relevant Ethics Committee?
  2	 Will the research be conducted in accord with a specific (and 
named) code of research ethics?
 
  3	 Will informed consent be obtained from participants? If not, can 
this be justified in relation to the nature of the research?
 
  4	 Will reasonable steps be taken to safeguard the security of the 
data?
 
  5	 Will the data collection process:
• avoid harm, stress or emotional upset to those taking part?
• respect the privacy of individuals and avoid undue intrusion?
 
 
  6	 Will the interests of participants be protected through:
• maintaining the confidentiality of information?
• protecting their anonymity?
 
 
  7	 Does the process of selecting participants ensure that the benefits 
and risks are spread fairly and equally among relevant groups?
 
  8	 Will the research avoid the use of deception? If not, can this be 
justified in relation to the nature of the research?
  
  9	 Will data be collected using only legal and legitimate means?
10	 Will the research be conducted with professional integrity in an 
honest, objective and unbiased fashion?
 
11	 Will the research respect social values and cultural norms of the 
society within which it is conducted?
 
12	 Has consideration been given to the likely impact of publishing 
research findings on those who contribute to the research?
 
© M. Denscombe, The Good Research Guide. Open University Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

18
Research reports
• The structure of research reports • Writing up qualitative research 
• The research methods section • Referencing • Guidelines on style 
• Guidelines on presentation • Writing for an audience • Producing 
accounts of research • Further reading • Checklist for writing research 
reports
Research is not complete until the aims, methods and findings have been writ-
ten up in some form of research report (e.g. a dissertation, a thesis or an arti-
cle). Such reports are vital because the purpose of research is to contribute to 
knowledge and this means that the findings from a research project need to be 
distributed, disseminated and discussed in the wider world rather than being 
kept private. Some military research and research on commercially sensitive 
topics, admittedly, might involve special efforts to keep the results secret, but 
these instances need to be regarded as exceptions to the general rule which is 
this: research findings should be distributed and made available for scrutiny 
by other researchers.
Writing a research report, though, is not a simple, mechanical process of ‘writ-
ing up’ what happened. It requires a degree of writing craft in order to present 
the details of the research in a fashion that is interesting and accessible to the 
specific audience for whom the report is produced. The report also needs to con-
form to certain conventions and adopt a format that is readily recognized by 
those who will evaluate the work. This chapter, therefore, provides some guide-
lines to the relevant conventions and writing styles that are associated with good 
research reports.
The structure of research reports
There is a conventional structure to research reports (Figure 18.1). The order in 
which they present material, and even the headings used, tend to conform to a 
familiar pattern – a pattern which is dictated largely by the need to present infor-
mation in a logical order, with each new section building on information that has 
been provided earlier.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Research reports  327
The conventional structure for reporting research divides the material into 
three parts: the preliminary part, the main text and the end matter. This is as 
true for a full-length book as it is for a PhD, for a brief journal article and for a 
workplace project.
The preliminary part
• Title. The title itself needs to indicate accurately the contents of the work. It 
also needs to be fairly brief. A good way of combining the two is to have a 
two-part title: title and subtitle. The first part acts as the main title and gives 
a broad indication of the area of the work. The second part adds more detail. 
For example, ‘Ethnicity and friendship: the contrast between sociometric 
research and fieldwork observation in primary school classrooms’.
• Abstract. An abstract is a synopsis of a piece of research. Its purpose is to 
provide a brief summary which can be circulated widely to allow other people 
to see, at a glance, if the research is relevant to their needs and worth tracking 
down to read in full. An abstract is normally about 250–300 words in length, 
and is presented on a separate sheet.
• Key words. Researchers are often asked to identify up to five ‘key words’. 
These words are ‘identifiers’ – words that capture the essence of what the 
report is all about. They can combine two, sometimes three, words if nec-
essary. For example, ‘employee motivation’ can be used as a key word. 
Figure 18.1  The structure of a research report
The preliminary part 
Title
Abstract
Key words
List of contents
List of tables and figures
Preface
Acknowledgements
List of abbreviations        
The main text 
Introduction
Literature review
Methods of investigation
Findings
Discussion and analysis
Conclusions and recommendations
The end matter 
Appendices
Notes
References
Index   
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

328  The Good Research Guide
It identifies a concept in a way that any single, individual key words do not. 
Key words are needed for bibliographic searches.
• List of contents. Depending on the context, this can range from being just a 
list of chapter headings and their starting page through to being an extensive 
list, including details of the contents within the major section of the report, for 
instance, based on headings and sub-headings.
• List of tables and figures. This should list the titles of the various tables and 
figures and their locations.
• Preface. This provides the opportunity for the researcher to give a personal 
statement about the origins of the research and the significance of the research 
for the researcher as a person. In view of the importance of the ‘self’ in the 
research process, the Preface offers a valuable place in the research report to 
explore, albeit briefly, how the research reflects the personal experiences and 
biography of the researcher.
• Acknowledgements. Under this heading, credit can be given to those who have 
helped with the research. This can include people who acted as ‘gatekeep-
ers’ in relation to fieldwork, academic supervisors, and those who have com-
mented on early drafts of the research report.
• List of abbreviations. If the nature of the report demands that many abbrevia-
tions are used in the text, these should be listed, usually alphabetically, under 
this heading, alongside the full version of what they stand for.
The main text
The main text is generally divided into sections. The sections might be chap-
ters as in the case of a larger piece of work or headings as in the case of 
shorter reports. In either case, they are normally presented in the following 
order.
•• Introduction. For the purposes of writing up research there needs to be an 
introduction. On most occasions this will be a stand-alone section or chapter, 
but it might be incorporated in other ways. The important thing to recognize 
is that, at the beginning, the reader needs to be provided with information 
about:
–– the background to the work (in relation to significant issues, problems, ideas);
–– the aims of the research;
–– key definitions and concepts to be used;
–– optionally, in longer pieces, an overview of the report (mapping out its con-
tents).
• Literature review. This might be presented as an integral part of the ‘Intro-
duction’ or it might appear as a separate chapter or section. It is, though, 
essential that in the early stages of the report there is a review of the material 
that already exists on the topic in question. The current research should build 
on existing knowledge, not ‘reinvent the wheel’. The literature review should 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Research reports  329
demonstrate how the research being reported relates to previous research 
and, if possible, how it gives rise to particular issues, problems and ideas that 
the current research addresses.
• Methods of investigation. At this point, having analysed the existing state of 
knowledge on a topic, it is reasonable to describe the methods of investiga-
tion. See the section on ‘The research methods section’ (below) for guidance 
on how this should be done.
• Findings. This is where the reader is presented with the relevant findings. The 
idea at this stage is to describe the findings rather than launch immediately 
into a discussion of what they might tell us. First things first: let’s see what we 
have found.
• Analysis and discussion. In this section of the report the findings are ana-
lysed. The findings are reviewed and interrogated to see what they imply. 
And then this leads on to a discussion that connects the emerging ideas to the 
theories and ideas, issues and problems that were noted earlier in the report 
as providing the context in which the research was conceived. The researcher 
‘makes sense’ of the findings by considering their implications beyond the 
confines of the current research.
• Conclusions and recommendations. Finally, in the main text, the researcher 
needs to draw together the threads of the research to arrive at some general 
conclusion and, perhaps, to suggest some way forward. Rather than let the 
report fizzle out as it reaches the end, this part of the report should be con-
structive and positive. It can contain some of the following things:
–– a retrospective evaluation of the research and its contribution;
–– recommendations for improving the situation, guidelines or codes of practice;
–– identification of new directions for further research.
The end matter
• Appendices. This is the place for material which is too bulky for the main body 
of the text, or for material which, though directly relevant to the discussion, 
might entail too much of a sidetrack if placed in the text. Typical items that 
can be lodged in an appendix are:
–– extensive tables of data;
–– questionnaires used in a survey;
–– extracts from an interview transcript;
–– memos or minutes of meetings;
–– technical specifications.
• References. Sources cited in the body of the text are listed in this part of the 
report. See the guidance on referencing below.
• Index. Provision of an index is usually restricted to large reports and books. 
It is unlikely that the kind of report produced by a project researcher would 
require an index.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

330  The Good Research Guide
Writing up qualitative research
For the qualitative researcher the presentation of research in sections under the 
headings of ‘methods’, ‘findings’, ‘discussion’ and ‘conclusions’ might seem inap-
propriate and not in keeping with the way the research actually evolved. Head-
ings like these might seem to accord with a design and execution of research 
more in line with experiments and surveys than ethnography or grounded the-
ory. Rather than totally rejecting the conventional headings, however, qualitative 
researchers can benefit from adapting them for their own purposes. The head-
ings may not provide a means for faithfully depicting what actually happened in 
the process of research but they can provide a means for presenting the research 
in a way that:
• addresses and highlights the key issues;
• is logically ordered;
• is comfortably recognized by those coming from differ-
ent traditions within the social sciences.
The research methods section
Research reports normally include a description of the methods used to collect 
the data. In larger works this appears in a separate chapter. In shorter reports 
and articles it tends to be limited to a section under a ‘research methods’ heading 
or to a clearly identifiable paragraph or two. This account of the methods is vital 
in order for the reader to make some informed evaluation of the study. Basically, 
if the reader is not told how and why the data were collected, he or she cannot 
make any judgement about how good the research is and whether any credibility 
should be given to its findings or conclusions.
Within the confines of the space available the methods section should do three 
things.: (1) describe how the research was conduced; (2) justify these procedures; 
and (3) acknowledge any limitations to the methods employed.
Describe how the research was conducted
Precise details need to be given, using specific and accurate numbers and dates. 
These should address basic questions about the data collection process such as:
•• what methods were used (the technical names)?
• when did the research take place (month and year, duration of research)?
• where did the research take place (location, situation)?
• how was access to the data or subjects obtained?
• who was involved in the research (the population, sample, cases, examples)?
• how many were involved in the research (precise numbers)?
• how were they selected (sampling technique)?
Link up with  
Presenting  
qualitative data, 
p. 294.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Research reports  331
Justify these procedures
An argument needs to be put forward supporting the choice of methods. The 
methods should be justified as being:
•• reasonable in terms of the resources and time available;
• reliable and appropriate for collecting the necessary type of data;
• suitable for addressing the issues, problems or questions that underpin the 
research and likely to produce data that are valid;
• conforming with ethical standards.
Acknowledge any limitations to the methods employed
Good research evaluates the weaknesses as well as the strengths of its methodol-
ogy. The researcher should acknowledge:
•• any inherent limitations of the methodology;
• the scope of what can, and cannot, be concluded on the basis of the research 
that was undertaken;
• any ways in which resource constraints had a direct influence on the volume 
or kind of findings produced;
• any reservations about the authenticity, accuracy or honesty of answers;
• the ways in which, in retrospect, alternative methods might have proved to be 
more useful;
• any unexpected factors which arose during research that influenced the out-
come.
Referencing
It is essential to acknowledge the original sources of the ideas, arguments and 
supporting evidence that are directly mentioned in a research report. These 
sources must be ‘referenced’. Broadly speaking there are two conventions that 
can be used for this: the numerical system (e.g. the Vancouver system) or the 
author-date system (e.g. the Harvard system). The numerical system involves 
placing a number in the text at each point where the author wishes to refer to a 
specific source. The full references are then given at the end of the book or indi-
vidual chapters, and these can be incorporated into endnotes. It is the other sys-
tem, the author-date system, however, which is more common in social research 
and, for that reason, further details in this chapter will concentrate on this con-
vention.
Citing sources
In the author-date system the sources are referenced by citing the name of the author 
and the date of publication of the relevant work. This is done at the appropriate point 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

332  The Good Research Guide
in the text – immediately connected to the idea, argument or supporting evidence 
that has been introduced to the discussion. To avoid cluttering the text, full details 
of the publication are not given at this point. They are subsequently given at the end 
of the report where readers who might wish to do so can see all the details of the 
author(s) and publication. The author-date system involves referring to authors in 
the text in the following ways:
•• Baker (2014) argues that communism has a dubious future.
• It has been argued that communism has a dubious future (Baker 2014).
•• The point has been made that ‘it is not easy to see what contribution commu-
nism will make in the twenty-first century’ (Baker 2014: 131).
In the References section towards the end of the research report, the full details 
of ‘Baker 2014’ are given, as they are for all the authors’ works cited in the report. 
For Baker, it might look like this:
Baker, G. (2014) The future of communism in a globalised economy, International Journal 
of Politics and Economics, 25: 249–66.
Listing references
Using the author-date system the References section contains a list of the 
works cited in the research report. This list appears in (1) alphabetical order 
based on (2) the surname of the authors and includes (3) all the sources 
cited. The list is restricted to just those sources that have been referred to 
within the report and does not include other works that, though they might 
be relevant, have not actually been cited. The information supplied about the 
sources covers:
•• Author’s name and initial(s). Surname followed by forename or initial. If the 
book is an edited volume, then (ed.) or (eds) should follow the name.
• Date of publication. To identify when the work was written and to distinguish 
different works published by the same author(s).
• Title. The title of a book is put in italics and uses capital letters for the first 
letter of the main words. Papers and article titles are not in italics and have 
titles in lower case.
• Journal name (if applicable). This is put in italics and details are given of the 
number, volume and page numbers of the specified article.
• Chapter in an edited volume. If the source is a contribution to an edited vol-
ume, then details are given about the book in which it appears (i.e. editor’s 
name, title of edited volume).
• Place of publication. This is usually the city in which the publisher is located.
• Publisher. This is included for books but not for journals.
• Edition. If the work appears in a second or subsequent edition this needs to 
be specified.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Research reports  333
Look at the References section towards the end of this book to see examples 
of how the author-date system presents information about the sources that are 
cited. Further guidance on referencing techniques can be found in sources such 
as the Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association and Tura-
bian’s (2013) manual for writers.
Good practice: Use referencing software
Software packages help with the organization of references and with citing 
sources referred to in research reports. Packages like EndNote, Mendeley, 
RefWorks, Reference Manager, and Zotero allow the researcher to adhere to 
any one of the many styles that might be required.
Guidelines on style
The conventions associated with writing research reports are rather like the 
rules of writing which operate for the English language. Experienced writ-
ers might occasionally break the rules, but the assumption is that they real-
ize they are breaking the rules and are doing so consciously for a particular 
purpose – to achieve a specific effect. Inexperienced writers, however, are 
better advised to play safe and stick to the rules. The same applies in relation 
to research reports: unless you are experienced, it is safer to abide by the 
conventions.
•• Use the third person.
This means adopting the following style: ‘Research involved the distribution of 
164 questionnaires . . .; A response rate of 46 per cent was achieved . . .; Find-
ings from the research indicated that . . .’. This is particularly the case for formal 
reports such as dissertations and theses. This style contrasts with use of the first 
person which takes the form:‘I distributed 164 questionnaires . . .; I received 46 
per cent back . . .; From the research I found that . . .’.Sometimes this style is to 
be found in qualitative research when researchers are keen to emphasize their 
personal involvement and the role of their personal identity in the collection and 
analysis of the data. Or, it might be used in the context of an informal report 
intended for restricted distribution. It is more conventional, however, to use the 
third person.
•• Use the past tense.
For the most part this convention poses little trouble because researchers are 
reflecting upon events that happened in the past. It might be the recent past, but 
none the less the writing up refers to things that were done and events that hap-
pened.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

334  The Good Research Guide
Guidelines on presentation
For the production of dissertations and theses each university will have its own spe-
cific regulations and guidelines that stipulate the technical requirements in terms of 
things like the layout of the text and the referencing system, and publishers always 
include guidance to authors which spell out their own particular policy as far as the 
presentation of work is concerned. These requirements must be followed. The gen-
eral advice about presentation, however, is that research reports should:
•• Ensure good standards of spelling and grammar.
Perhaps obvious, this requirement is still worth stressing. Spell-checkers are nor-
mally built into word-processing packages and can be used to eliminate typing errors 
as well as helping with awkward spellings. Scrutiny of the text by the researcher is 
still needed, however, to avoid those text errors which cannot be picked up by the 
spell-checker; where ‘at’ has been typed instead of ‘an’, for example.
•• Develop logical links from one section to the next.
A good report is one that takes the reader on a journey of discovery. The path-
ways of this journey should be clear, and the reader should never be left in doubt 
about the direction of the discussion or the crucial points that are being argued. 
The logic of the discussion should build point on point towards a final conclusion.
•• Use headings and sub-headings to divide the text into clear sections.
Judicious use of headings and sub-headings can separate the text into blocks in 
a way that makes the reader’s task of understanding the overall report far easier. 
They act as signposts. As with signposts, too few and the reader gets lost, too 
many and the reader gets confused. As with signposts, their success depends on 
being clear and being in the right place.
•• Be consistent in the use of the referencing style.
Whether the author-date or the numerical style is used there should be consist-
ency throughout the report. Use one or the other, not a mixture of the two.
•• Use care with the page layout.
The visual element of the presentation is important and the researcher should 
give some consideration to things like the page layout and the use of graphs, 
tables and illustrations to enhance the appeal of the report.
•    Present tables and figures properly.
Tables and figures should be presented in a consistent style 
that provides the reader with the necessary information to 
decipher the meaning of the data contained in them.
Link up with 
­Presenting quan-
titative data,  
p. 263.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Research reports  335
Writing for an audience
Research reports need to be tailored to meet the expectations of the audience 
for whom they are produced. For example, research reports produced for an 
academic qualification – an undergraduate project, a master’s dissertation, 
a doctoral thesis – will be assessed by supervisors and examiners who will be 
focusing on detail, rigour, precision, coherence and originality as top priorities. 
A different audience might hold different expectations. In the case of commis-
sioned research the audience might be more concerned with reading a report 
that is succinct, easy to digest and strong on practical outcomes. When writing a 
report, then, the researcher has to think carefully about who will read it and how 
best to make sure that the report is pitched at the right level. Different kinds of 
audience will have a bearing on:
•• the style of presentation;
• the detail and length of the account;
• the amount of technical detail included;
• the terminology used.
Good practice: Meet the readers’ expectations
Research reports should be tailored to meet the expectations and abilities of the 
audience for whom they are written.
Producing accounts of research
Finally, there is a fundamental point worth bearing in mind in relation to the 
nature of research reports. When writing a research report it is important to 
recognize that the task is not one of simply recording what happened during the 
project. Writing up is actually a skilful process of distilling the key events and 
decisions that occurred during a project and, within the confines of the space 
that is available, capturing and presenting these for a particular audience. A 
research report can never be a literal description of what took place. No matter 
how scrupulous the researcher might be, the end product – even if it is a dis-
sertation or thesis – will always be an edited account of the research. There are 
four reasons for this. First, there are always limitations to the space available 
to provide the account of what happened, which means the researcher needs to 
provide an edited version of the totality. Decisions need to be made about what 
details are included and which are considered less important and can be missed 
out of the account.
Second, the editorial decisions taken by the researcher are likely to be shaped 
by the researcher’s need to present the methods in their best possible light. Quite 
rationally, the researcher will wish to put a positive spin on events and to bring 
out the best in the process. Without resorting to deceit or untruths, the account 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

336  The Good Research Guide
of research will almost certainly entail some upbeat positive filtering. The point, 
after all, is to justify the procedures as ‘good’ research.
Third, although research notes will be used to anchor the description of what 
happened during the course of the research, the writing up is inevitably a retro-
spective vision. Situations and data are likely to have a different meaning when 
viewed from the end of the research process from that at the time they occurred. 
They will be interpreted with the wisdom of hindsight.
Fourth, the impact of social norms and personal values on the way we inter-
pret events pretty well guarantees that, to a greater or lesser extent, any account 
of research should be regarded as a version of the truth rather than a literal 
depiction of what happened. Within the social sciences, the idea of a purely 
objective position is controversial, and a researcher would be naïve to presume 
that his or her account can stand, without careful consideration, as an ‘objective’ 
description of what really occurred.
Further reading
Denscombe, M. (2012) Research Proposals: A Practical Guide. Maidenhead: Open Univer-
sity Press.
Murray, N. and Hughes, G. (2008) Writing Up Your University Assignments and Research 
Projects: A Practical Handbook. Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Murray, R. (2013) Writing for Academic Journals, 3rd edn. Maidenhead: Open University 
Press.
Reid, M. (2012) Report Writing. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Turabian, K. (2013) A Manual for Writers of Research Papers, Theses, and Dissertations, 
8th edn. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Research reports  337
✓
Checklist for writing research reports 
When writing a research report you should feel confident about  
answering ‘yes’ to the following questions: 
  1	 Is there a suitable structure and logical development to the 
report?
  2	 Is the text written in a clear style, free of spelling and grammatical 
errors?
 
  3	 Have the necessary conventions been followed in the writing up of 
the research? 
 
  4	 Does the report meet the expectations of the main audience for 
the research (format, style, length, detail)?
 
  5	 Has an appropriately detailed and precise description of the 
research process been provided?
 
  6	 Has the choice of method(s) been justified in relation to the type 
of data required and the practical circumstances surrounding the 
research?
 
 
  7	 Have the limitations of the research methodology been 
acknowledged?
 
  8	 Are the references complete and do they follow a recognized style 
(e.g. author-date system)?
  
  9	 Are the tables, figures, illustrations and diagrams properly 
labelled?
 
© M. Denscombe, The Good Research Guide. Open University Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

References
Ahmed, S. (2006) Queer Phenomenology: Orientations, Objects, Others. Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press.
Alaszewski, A. (2006) Using Diaries for Social Research. London: Sage.
Andrews, M., Squire, C. and Tamboukou, M. (2013) Doing Narrative Research, 2nd edn. 
London: Sage.
Austin, J.L. (1962) How to Do Things with Words. Oxford: Clarendon.
Bakeman, R. and Gottman, J.M. (1997) Observing Interaction: An Introduction to Sequen-
tial Analysis, 2nd edn. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Balnaves, M. and Caputi, P. (2001) Introduction to Quantitative Research Methods: An 
Investigative Approach. London: Sage.
Banks, M. (2001) Visual Methods in Social Research. London: Sage.
Banks, M. (2007) Using Visual Data in Qualitative Research. London: Sage.
Barnett, V. (2002) Sample Survey Principles and Methods, 3rd edn. Chichester: Wiley.
Bazeley, P. (2013) Qualitative Data Analysis: Practical Strategies. London: Sage.
Bazeley, P. and Jackson, K. (2013) Qualitative Data Analysis with NVivo, 2nd edn. Lon-
don: Sage.
Becker, H. and Geer, B. (1957) Participant observation and interviewing: a comparison, 
Human Organization, 16(3): 28–35.
Bell, P. (2000) Content analysis of visual images, in T. van Leeuwen and C. Jewitt (eds) The 
Handbook of Visual Analysis. London: Sage.
Berger, P. and Luckmann, T. (1967) The Social Construction of Reality. London: Allen 
Lane.
Bergman, M. (ed.) (2008) Advances in Mixed Methods Research: Theories and Applica-
tions. London: Sage.
Bettis, J.D. (1969) Phenomenology of Religion. New York: Harper & Row.
Bhaskaran, V. and LeClaire, J. (2010) Online Surveys for Dummies. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Birks, M. and Mills, J. (2011) Grounded Theory: A Practical Guide. London: Sage.
Bloor, M., Frankland, J., Thomas, M. and Robson, K. (2001) Focus Groups in Social 
Research. London: Sage.
Boellstorff, T., Nardi, B., Pearce, C. and Taylor, T. (2012) Ethnography and Virtual Worlds: 
A Handbook of Method. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Brace, I. (2013) Questionnaire Design, 3rd edn. London: Kogan Page.
Bradburn, N.M., Sudman, S. and Wansink, B. (2004) Asking Questions: The Definitive 
Guide to Questionnaire Design, 2nd edn. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Brewer, J. (2000) Ethnography. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Brickman-Bhutta, C. (2012) Not by the book: Facebook as a sampling frame, Sociological 
Methods and Research, 41(1):57–88.
Brown, G., Cherrington, D.H. and Cohen, L. (1975) Experiments in the Social Sciences. 
London: Harper & Row.
Bryant, A. and Charmaz, K. (2010) The Sage Handbook of Grounded Theory (paperback 
edition). London: Sage.
Bryman, A. (1988) Quality and Quantity in Social Research. London: Unwin Hyman.
Bryman, A. (2006) Integrating quantitative and qualitative research: how is it done? Quali-
tative Research, 6(1): 97–113.
Bryman, A. (2007) Qualitative Research. London: Sage.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

340  References
Bulmer, M. (1984) The Chicago School of Sociology: Institutionalization, Diversity, and 
the Rise of Sociological Research. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Burgess, R.G. (1984) In the Field: An Introduction to Field Research. London: Allen & 
Unwin.
Campbell, D.T. and Fiske, D.W. (1959) Convergent and discriminant validation by the mul-
titrait-multimethod matrix, Psychological Bulletin, 56(2): 81–105.
Charmaz, K. (2000) Grounded theory: objectivist and constructivist methods in N. Denzin 
and Y. Lincoln (eds) Handbook of Qualitative Research, 2nd edn. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage, pp. 509–35.
Charmaz, K. (2014) Constructing Grounded Theory, 2nd edn. London: Sage.
Clarke, A.E. (2005) Situational Analysis: Grounded Theory after the Postmodern Turn. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Coghlan, D. and Brannick, T. (2010) Doing Action Research in Your Own Organization. 
London: Sage.
Collier, M. (2001) Approaches to the analysis of visual images, in T. van Leeuwen and J. 
Jewitt (eds) Handbook of Visual Analysis. London: Sage.
Cook, T.D. and Campbell, D.T. (1979) Quasi-Experimentation: Design and Analysis 
Issues for Field Settings. Chicago, IL : Rand McNally College Pub. Co.
Corbin, J.M. and Strauss, A.L. (2008) Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Pro-
cedures for Developing Grounded Theory. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Couper, M.P. (2000) Web surveys, Public Opinion Quarterly, 64(4): 464–95.
Couper, M.P. (2011) The future of modes of data collection, Public Opinion Quarterly, 75: 
889–908.
Creswell, J.W. (1998) Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design: Choosing Among Five 
Traditions. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Cresswell, J.W. (2013) Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative and Mixed Methods 
Approaches, 4th edn. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Creswell, J.W. and Plano Clark, V. (2010) Designing and Conducting Mixed Methods 
Research, 2nd edn. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Crotty, M. (1996) Phenomenology and Nursing Research. Melbourne: Churchill Living-
stone.
Daniel, J. (2012) Sampling Essentials: Practical Guidelines for Making Sampling Choices. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Delamont, S. (1992) Fieldwork in Educational Settings. London: Falmer.
Denscombe, M. (1983) Interviews, accounts and ethnographic research on teachers, in 
M. Hammersley (ed.) The Ethnography of Schooling: Methodological Issues. Driffield: 
Nafferton Books.
Denscombe, M. (2006) Web-based questionnaires: an assessment of the mode effect on the 
validity of data, Social Science Computer Review, 24(2): 246–54.
Denscombe, M. (2009) Item non-response rates: a comparison of online and paper ques-
tionnaires, International Journal of Social Research Methodology, 12(4): 281–91.
Denscombe, M. (2008) The length of responses to open-ended questions: a comparison of 
online and paper questionnaires in terms of a mode effect, Social Science Computer 
Review, 26(3): 359–68.
Denscombe, M. (2010) Ground Rules for Social Research, 2nd edn. Maidenhead: Open Uni-
versity Press.
Denscombe, M. (2012a) Classroom Control: A Sociological Perspective. London: Routledge.
Denscombe, M. (2012b) Research Proposals: A Practical Guide. Maidenhead: Open Uni-
versity Press.
Denyer, D. and Tranfield, D. (2009) Producing a systematic review, in D. Buchanan and A. 
Bryman (eds) The Sage Handbook of Organizational Research Methods. London: Sage, 
pp. 671–89.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

References  341
Denzin, N.K. (1970) Strategies of multiple triangulation, in N.K. Denzin (ed.) The Research 
Act in Sociology: A Theoretical Introduction to Sociological Method. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, pp. 297–313.
Denzin, N.K. (1999) Cybertalk and the method of instances, in S. Jones (ed.) Doing Internet 
Research: Critical Issues and Methods for Examining the Net. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage.
Denzin, N.K. (2012) Triangulation 2.0, Journal of Mixed Methods Research, 6(2): 80–8.
Department of Health (2005) Research Governance Framework for Health and Social Care 
(England), 2nd edn. London: Dept of Health.
Devault, M. (1990) Talking and listening from women’s standpoint, Social Problems, 37(1): 
96–116.
De Vaus, D. (2001) Research Design in Social Research. London: Sage. 
De Vaus, D. (2014) Surveys in Social Research, 6th edn. London: Routledge.
DeWalt, K.M. and DeWalt, B.R. (2011) Participant Observation: A Guide for Fieldworkers, 
2nd edn. Lanham, MD: AltaMira Press.
Dey, I. (1993) Qualitative Data Analysis: A User-friendly Guide for Social Scientists. 
London: Routledge.
Diamante, T. (2013) Effective Interviewing and Information Gathering: Proven Tactics 
to Increase the Power of Your Questioning Skills. New York: McGraw-Hill/Business 
Expert Press.
Di Gregorio, S. and Davidson, J. (2008) Qualitative Research Design for Software Users. 
Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Dillman, D.A., Smyth, J.D. and Christian, L.M. (2009) Internet, Mail, and Mixed-mode Sur-
veys: The Tailored Design Method. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Dixon-Woods, M., Bonas, S., Booth, A., Jones, D., Miller, T., Shaw, R., Smith, J., Sutton, A. 
and Young, B. (2006) How can systematic reviews incorporate qualitative research? A 
critical perspective, Qualitative Research, 6: 27–44.
Dunning, T. (2012) Natural Experiments in the Social Sciences: A Design-Based Approach. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Edwards, A. and Talbot, R. (1999) The Hard-pressed Researcher: A Research Handbook for 
the Caring Professions, 2nd edn. Harlow: Pearson.
Eisenhardt, K.M. (1989) Building theories from case study research, Academy of Manage-
ment Review, 14(4): 532–50.
Eisenhardt, K.M. and Graebner, M.E. (2007) Theory building from cases: opportunities and 
challenges, Academy of Management Journal, 50(1): 25–32.
Elliott, J. (1991) Action Research for Educational Change. Buckingham: Open University 
Press.
Elliott, J. (2005) Using Narrative in Social Research: Qualitative and Quantitative 
Approaches. London: Sage.
Emmel, N. (2013) Sampling and Choosing Cases in Qualitative Research: A Realist 
Approach. London: Sage.
Emmison, M., Smith, P. and Mayall, M. (2012) Researching the Visual, 2nd edn. London: 
Sage.
Ess, C. (2014) Digital Media Ethics, 2nd edn. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Facebook (2011) Anatomy of Facebook. Available at https://www.facebook.com/notes/
facebook-data-team/anatomy-of-facebook/10150388519243859 (accessed 30 October. 
2013).
Farrimond, H. (2013) Doing Ethical Research. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Festinger, L., Reicken, H. and Schachter, S. (1956) When Prophecy Fails. Minneapolis: Uni-
versity of Minnesota Press (republished London: Harper & Row, 1964).
Field, A. (2013) Discovering Statistics Using IBM SPSS Statistics, 4th edn. London: Sage.
Fink, A. (2009) How to Conduct Surveys: A Step by Step Guide. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

342  References
Flick, U., Garms-Homolová, V., Herrmann, W.J., Kuck, J. and Röhnsch, G. (2012) ‘I can’t 
prescribe something just because someone asks for it . . .’: Using mixed methods in the 
framework of triangulation, Journal of Mixed Methods Research, 6(2): 97–110.
Fowler, F.J. (2009) Survey Research Methods, 4th edn. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Gallagher, S. (2012) Phenomenology. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Galton, M., Simon, B. and Croll, P. (1980) Inside the Primary Classroom. London: Rout-
ledge & Kegan Paul.
Geertz, C. (1973) Thick description: toward an interpretive theory of culture, in C. Geertz 
(ed.) The Interpretation of Cultures. New York: Basic Books.
Gerbner, G., Holsti, O., Krippendorf, K., Paisley, W. and Stone, P. (eds) (1969) The Analysis 
of Communication Content. New York: Wiley.
Gibbs, G. (2002) Qualitative Data Analysis: Explorations with NVivo. Maidenhead: Open 
University Press.
Gibbs, G. (2007) Analysing Qualitative Data. London: Sage.
Gibson, B. and Hartman, J. (2014) Rediscovering Grounded Theory. London: Sage.
Gillham, B. (2005) Research Interviewing: The Range of Techniques. Maidenhead: Open 
University Press.
Gillham, B. (2007) Developing a Questionnaire, 2nd edn. London: Continuum.
Gillham, B. (2008) Observation Techniques: Structured and Unstructured Approaches. 
London: Continuum.
Glaser, B. (1978) Theoretical Sensitivity. Mill Valley, CA: Sociology Press.
Glaser, B. (ed.) (1995) Grounded Theory, 1984–1994. Mill Valley, CA: Sociology Press.
Glaser, B. (1999) The future of grounded theory, Qualitative Health Research, 9(6): 836–45.
Glaser, B. (2003) The Grounded Theory Perspective II: Description’s Remodelling of 
Grounded Theory Methodology. Mill Valley, CA: Sociology Press.
Glaser, B. and Strauss, A. (1967) The Discovery of Grounded Theory. Chicago, IL: Aldine.
Glaser, J., Dixit, J. and Green, D. (2002) Studying hate crime with the Internet: what makes 
racists advocate racial violence, Journal of Social Issues, 58(1): 177–93.
Goldacre, B. (2012) Bad Pharma. London: Fourth Estate.
Gorard, S. (2006) Using Everyday Numbers Effectively in Research. London: Continuum.
Gorard, S. and Taylor, C. (2004) Combining Methods in Educational and Social Research. 
Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Gough, D., Oliver, S. and Thomas, J. (2012) An Introduction to Systematic Reviews. Lon-
don: Sage.
Grbich, C. (2013) Qualitative Data Analysis: An Introduction, 2nd edn. London: Sage.
Greene, J.C. (2007) Mixed Methods in Social Inquiry. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Greene, J.C., Caracelli, V.J. and Graham, W.F. (1989) Toward a conceptual framework for mixed-
method evaluation designs, Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 11(3): 255–74.
Griffin, J. (1962) Black Like Me. London: Collins.
Guest, G. (2013) Describing mixed methods research: an alternative to typologies, Journal 
of Mixed Methods Research, 7(2): 141–51.
Haglund, K. (2004) Conducting life history research with adolescents, Qualitative Health 
Research, 14(9): 1309–19.
Hammersley, M. (1990) What’s wrong with ethnography? The myth of theoretical descrip-
tion, Sociology, 24: 597–615.
Hammersley, M. (1992) What’s Wrong with Ethnography? London: Routledge.
Hammersley, M. (1996) The relationship between qualitative and quantitative research: 
paradigm loyalty versus methodological eclecticism, in J.E.T. Richardson (ed.) Hand-
book of Qualitative Research Methods for Psychology and the Social Sciences. Leices-
ter: British Psychological Society, pp. 159–74.
Hammersley, M. and Atkinson, P. (2007) Ethnography: Principles in Practice, 3rd edn. 
London: Tavistock.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

References  343
Harrits, G.S. (2011) More than method?: a discussion of paradigm differences within mixed 
methods research, Journal of Mixed Methods Research, 5(2): 150–66.
Heidegger, M. (1962) Being and Time. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Heider, D. and Massanari, A.L. (eds) (2012) Digital Ethics: Research and Practice. New 
York: Peter Lang Publishing.
Higgins, J. and Green, S. (eds) (2011) Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of 
Interventions Version 5.1.0 [updated March 2011]. The Cochrane Collaboration, 2011. 
Available at: www.cochrane-handbook.org.
Hine, C. (2000) Virtual Ethnography. London: Sage.
Hine, C. (ed.) (2005) Virtual Methods: Issues in Social Research on the Internet. Oxford: Berg.
Ho, K. (2009) Liquidated: An Ethnography of Wall Street. Durham, NC: Duke University 
Press.
Hoinville, G., Jowell, R. and Associates (1985) Survey Research Practice. Aldershot: Gower.
Hoonakker, P. and Carayon, P. (2009) Questionnaire survey nonresponse: a comparison of 
postal mail and Internet surveys, International Journal of Human–Computer Interac-
tion, 25(5): 348–73.
Howell, N. (1990) Surviving Fieldwork: A Report of the Advisory Panel on Health and 
Safety in Fieldwork. Washington, DC: American Anthropological Association.
Humphreys, L. (1975) Tearoom Trade. New Brunswick, NJ: Aldine Transaction.
Husserl, E. (1931) Ideas: General Introduction to Pure Phenomenology. London: George 
Allen & Unwin (reprinted 2012, London: Routledge).
Husserl, E. (1950) Cartesian Meditations: An Introduction to Phenomenology. The Hague: 
Martinus Nijhoff (reprinted 1999, Dordrecht: Kluwer).
Hutchby, I. and Wooffitt, R. (2008) Conversation Analysis. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Israel, M. and Hay, I. (2006) Research Ethics for Social Scientists: Between Ethical Con-
duct and Regulatory Compliance. London: Sage.
Johnson, R.B. and Gray, R. (2010) A history of philosophical and theoretical issues for 
mixed methods research, in A. Tashakkori and C. Teddlie (eds) Sage Handbook of 
Mixed Methods in Social and Behavioral Research, 2nd edn. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 
pp. 69–94.
Johnson, R.B. and Onwuegbuzie, A.J. (2004) Mixed methods research: a research paradigm 
whose time has come, Educational Researcher, 33(7): 14–26.
Johnson, R.B., Onwuegbuzie, A.J. and Turner, L.A. (2007) Toward a definition of mixed 
methods research, Journal of Mixed Methods Research, 1(2): 112–33.
Jorgensen, D.L. (1989) Participant Observation: A Methodology for Human Studies. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Kamberelis, G. and Dimitriadis, G. (2013) Focus Groups: From Structured Interviews to 
Collective Conversations. London: Routledge.
Keats, D.M. (2000) Interviewing: A Practical Guide for Students and Professionals. Maid-
enhead: Open University Press.
Kemmis, S., McTaggart, R. and Nixon, R. (2014) The Action Research Planner: Doing Crit-
ical Participatory Action Research. Singapore: Springer.
Kirk, J. and Miller, M. (1986) Reliability and Validity in Qualitative Research. Beverly 
Hills, CA: Sage.
Koshy, V. (2010) Action Research for Improving Educational Practice, 2nd edn. London: 
Sage.
Kosinski, M., Stillwell, D.J. and Graepel, T. (2013) Private traits and attributes are predict-
able from digital records of human behavior, Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences USA, 110(15): 5802–5.
Kozinets, R.V. (2010) Netnography: Doing Ethnographic Research Online. London: Sage.
Krippendorf, K. (2013) Content Analysis: An Introduction to its Methodology, 3rd edn. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

344  References
Krosnick, J.A. (1991) Response strategies for coping with the cognitive demands of atti-
tude measures in surveys, Applied Cognitive Psychology, 5: 213–36.
Kugelmann, R. (1999) Complaining about chronic pain, Social Science and Medicine, 
49(12): 16–63.
Layder, D. (1993) New Strategies in Social Research. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Layder, D. (1998) Sociological Practice: Linking Theory and Social Research. London: Sage.
Lee, R. (1995) Dangerous Fieldwork. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Leech, N.L. and Onwuegbuzie, A.J. (2009) A typology of mixed method research designs, 
Quality and Quantity, 43: 265–75.
Lewin, K. (1946) Action research and minority problems, Journal of Social Issues, 2: 34–46.
Lewins, A. and Silver, C. (2014) Using Software in Qualitative Research: A Step-by-Step 
Guide, 2nd edn. London: Sage.
Lewis, M. and Staehler, T. (2010) Phenomenology: An Introduction. London: Continuum.
Lincoln, Y. and Guba, E. (1985) Naturalistic Enquiry. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Lipscomb, M. (2008) Mixed method nursing studies: a critical realist critique, Nursing Phi-
losophy, 9(1): 32–45.
Loizos, P. (2000) Video, film and photographs as research documents, in M.W. Bauer and 
G. Gaskell (eds) Qualitative Researching with Text, Image and Sound. London: Sage.
Lozar Manfreda, K., Bosnjak, M., Berzelak, J., Haas, I. and Vehovar, V. (2008) Web surveys 
versus other survey modes: a meta-analysis comparing response rates, International 
Journal of Market Research, 50(1): 79–104.
Madden, R. (2010) Being Ethnographic: A Guide to the Theory and Practice of Ethnogra-
phy. London: Sage.
Malinowski, B. (1922) Argonauts of the Western Pacific. London: Routledge & Kegan 
Paul.
Mann, C. and Stewart, F. (2000) Internet Communication and Qualitative Research: A 
Handbook for Researching Online. London: Sage.
Marion, J.S. and Crowder, J.W. (2013) Visual Research: A Concise Introduction to Think-
ing Visually. London: Bloomsbury Academic.
Marshall, C. and Rossman, G.B. (2011) Designing Qualitative Research, 5th edn. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Mayo, E. ([1933] 2003) The Human Problems of an Industrial Civilization. London: Rout-
ledge.
McCabe, S.E. (2004) Comparison of web and mail surveys in collecting illicit drug use data: 
a randomized experiment, Journal of Drug Education, 34(1): 61–73.
McKee, H.A. and Porter, J.E. (2009) The Ethics of Internet Research: A Rhetorical, Case-
based Process. New York: Peter Lang.
McNiff, J. (2013) Action Research: Principles and Practice, 3rd edn. London: Routledge.
Mead, M. (1943) Coming of Age in Samoa: A Study of Adolescence and Sex in Primitive 
Societies. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Mertens, D.M. (2009) Transformative Research and Evaluation. New York: Guilford.
Miles, M.B., Huberman, A.M. and Saldana, J.M. (2014) Qualitative Data Analysis: A 
Methods Sourcebook, 3rd edn. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Milgram, S. (1974) Obedience to Authority. New York: Harper & Row.
Morgan, D.L. (2006) Focus group, in V. Jupp (ed.) The Sage Dictionary of Social Research 
Methods. London: Sage, pp. 121–3.
Morgan, D.L. (2014) Integrating Qualitative and Quantitative Methods: A Pragmatic 
Approach. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Morley, J. (1998) The private theater: a phenomenological investigation of daydreaming, 
Journal of Phenomenological Psychology, 29(1): 116–35.
Moustakas, C. (1992) Firebrand: the experience of being different, The Human Psycholo-
gist, 20(2/3): 175–88.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

References  345
Moustakas, C. (1994) Phenomenological Research Methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Murchison, J. (2010) Ethnography Essentials: Designing, Conducting, and Presenting 
Your Research. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Murray, N. and Hughes, G. (2008) Writing Up Your University Assignments and Research 
Projects: A Practical Handbook. Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Murray, R. (2013) Writing for Academic Journals, 3rd edn. Maidenhead: Open University 
Press.
Natasi, B.K., Hitchcock, J.H. and Brown, L.M. (2010) An inclusive framework for conceptu-
alizing mixed methods design typologies: moving towards fully integrated synergistic 
research models, in A. Tashakkori and C. Teddlie (eds) Handbook of Mixed Methods in 
Social and Behavioral Research, 3rd edn. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, pp. 305–38.
NHMRC (1999) How to Review the Evidence: Systematic Identification and Review of the 
Scientific Literature. Canberra: National Health and Medical Research Council. Avail-
able at: http://www.nhmrc.gov.au/_files_nhmrc/publications/attachments/cp65.pdf.
Oakley, A. (1981) Interviewing women: a contradiction in terms, in H. Roberts (ed.) Doing 
Feminist Research. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
O’Connell Davidson, J. (1995) The anatomy of ‘free choice’ prostitution, Gender, Work and 
Organization, 2: 1–10.
Oktay, J. (2012) Grounded Theory. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
O’Leary, M. (2014) Classroom Observation. London: Routledge.
Oliver, P. (2010) The Student’s Guide to Research Ethics, 2nd edn. Maidenhead: Open Uni-
versity Press.
Onwuegbuzie, A.J. (2012) Putting the ‘mixed’ back into quantitative and qualitative 
research in educational research and beyond: moving toward the ‘radical middle’, 
International Journal of Multiple Research Approaches, 6(3): 192–219.
Onwuegbuzie, A. and Combs, J.P. (2010) Emergent data analysis techniques in mixed 
methods research: a synthesis, in A. Tashakkori and C. Teddlie (eds) Sage Handbook 
of Mixed Methods in Social and Behavioral Research, 2nd edn. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage, pp. 397–430.
Onwuegbuzie, A.J. and Frels, R.K. (2013) Toward a new research philosophy for address-
ing social justice issues: critical dialectical pluralism, International Journal of Multiple 
Research Approaches, 7(1): 9–26.
Oppenheim, A.N. (2000) Questionnaire Design, Interviewing and Attitude Measurement, 
2nd edn. London: Continuum.
O’Reilly, K. (2012) Ethnographic Methods, 2nd edn. London: Routledge.
Pawson, R. (2006) Evidence-Based Policy: A Realist Perspective. London: Sage.
Pawson, R. (2013) The Science of Evaluation: A Realist Manifesto. London: Sage.
Pawson, R. and Tilley, N. (1997) Realistic Evaluation. London: Sage.
Penn, G. (2000) Semiotic analysis of still images, in M.W. Bauer and G. Gaskell (eds) Quali-
tative Researching with Text, Image, Sound. London: Sage.
Perry, G. (2013) Behind the Shock Machine: The Untold Story of the Notorious Milgram 
Psychology Experiments. Melbourne: Scribe.
Petticrew, M. and Roberts, H. (2006) Systematic Reviews in the Social Sciences: A Practi-
cal Guide. Oxford: Blackwell.
Plummer, K. (2001) Documents of Life 2: An Invitation to a Critical Humanism, 2nd edn. 
London: Sage.
Polsky, N. (2006) Hustlers, Beats and Others. New Brunswick, NJ: Aldine Transaction.
Pope, C., Mays, N. and Popay, J. (2007) Synthesizing Qualitative and Quantitative Health 
Research: A Guide to Methods. Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Porter, S. (1993) Critical realist ethnography: the case of racism and professionalism in a 
medical setting, Sociology, 27: 591–601.
Prior, L. (2003) Using Documents in Social Research. London: Sage.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

346  References
Prosser, J. (1998) The status of image-based research, in J. Prosser (ed.) Image-based 
Research: A Sourcebook for Qualitative Researchers. London: Falmer.
Prosser, J. and Schwartz, D. (1998) Photographs within the sociological research process, 
in J. Prosser (ed.) Image-based Research: A Sourcebook for Qualitative Researchers. 
London: Falmer.
Ragin, C. and Amoroso, L. (2011) Constructing Social Research, 2nd edn. Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Pine Forge Press.
Ragin, C. and Becker, H. (1992) What Is a Case? Exploring the Foundations of Social 
Enquiry. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Ramo, D.E. and Prochaska, J.J. (2012) Broad reach and targeted recruitment using Face-
book for an online survey of young adult substance use, Journal of Medical Internet 
Research. Jan.–Feb.; 14(1): e28. Available at: http://www.jmir.org/2012/1/e28/ (accessed 
28 October 2013).
Rapley, T. (2007) Doing Conversation, Discourse and Document Analysis. London: Sage.
Reason, P. and Bradbury, H. (eds) (2013) Handbook of Action Research, 2nd edn. London: 
Sage.
Reichardt, C.S. and Rallis, S.F. (1994) Qualitative and quantitative inquiries are not incom-
patible: a call for a new partnership, in C.S. Reichardt and S.F. Rallis (eds) The Quali-
tative–Quantitative Debate: New Perspectives. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, pp. 
85–92.
Reid, M. (2012) Report Writing. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Richards, L. (2009) Handling Qualitative Data: A Practical Guide, 2nd edn. London: Sage.
Riemer, J. (1979) Hard Hats: The Work World of Construction Workers. Beverly Hills, CA: 
Sage.
Riessman, C.K. (2003) Narrative Analysis. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Riessman, C.K. (2008) Narrative Methods for the Human Sciences. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage.
Roethlisberger, F.J. and Dickson, W.J. ([1939] 2003) Management and the Worker. London: 
Routledge.
Rose, G. (2012) Visual Methodologies, 3rd edn. London: Sage.
Rowntree, D. (1981) Statistics Without Tears: An Introduction for Non-mathematicians. 
London: Penguin.
Sanger, J. (1996) The Compleat Observer?: A Field Research Guide to Observation. Lon-
don: Falmer Press.
Sartre, J.-P. (1956) Being and Nothingness: An Essay on Phenomenological Ontology. New 
York: Methuen.
Savage, M., Devine, F., Cunningham, N., Taylor, M., Li, Y., Hjellbrekke, J., Le Roux, B., 
Friedman, S. and Miles, A. (2013) A new model of social class? Findings from the BBC’s 
Great British Class Survey experiment, Sociology, 47(2): 219–50.
Schön, D. (1983) The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action. New 
York: Basic Books.
Schonlau, M., Fricker, R. and Elliot, M. (2002) Conducting Research Surveys via E-mail 
and the Web. Rand Monograph MR-1480-RC. Available online at: http://www.rand.org/
pubs/monograph_reports/MR1480.html.
Schutz, A. (1962) Collected Papers, Volume 1. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Schutz, A. (1967) The Phenomenology of the Social World. Evanston, IL: Northwestern 
University Press.
Scott, J. (1990) A Matter of Record. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Seale, C. (1999) The Quality of Qualitative Research. London: Sage.
Seale, C., Gobo, G., Gubrium, J. and Silverman, D. (eds) (2007) Qualitative Research Prac-
tice. London: Sage.
Sidnell, J. (2010) Conversation Analysis: An Introduction. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

References  347
Silverman, D. (1985) Qualitative Methodology and Sociology. Aldershot: Gower.
Silverman, D. (2010) Doing Qualitative Research: A Practical Handbook, 3rd edn. London: Sage.
Silverman, D. (2011) Interpreting Qualitative Data: Methods for Analyzing Talk, Text and 
Interaction, 4th edn. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Silverman, D. (2013) Doing Qualitative Research: A Practical Handbook, 4th edn. London: 
Sage.
Simons, H. (2009) Case Study Research in Practice. London: Sage.
Smith, J.A., Flowers, P. and Larkin, M. (2009) Interpretative Phenomenological Analysis: 
Theory, Method and Research. London: Sage.
Smith, T.W. (2013) Survey-research paradigms old and new, International Journal of Pub-
lic Opinion Research, 25(2): 218–29.
Somekh, B. (1995) The contribution of action research to development in social endeav-
ours: a position paper on action research methodology, British Educational Research 
Journal, 21(3): 339–55.
Somekh, B. (2006) Action Research: A Methodology for Change and Development. Maiden-
head: Open University Press.
Spencer, S. (2011) Visual Research Methods in the Social Sciences: Awakening Visions. 
London: Routledge.
Stake, R. (1995) The Art of Case Study Research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Stanton, J. and Rogelberg, S. (2001) Using Internet/intranet web pages to collect organiza-
tional research data, Organizational Research Methods, 4(3): 200–17.
Stevens, S.S. (1946) On the theory of scales of measurement, Science, 103(2684): 677–80.
Strauss, A. (1987) Qualitative Analysis for Social Scientists. Cambridge: Cambridge 
­University Press.
Strauss, A.L. and Corbin, J. (1990) Basics of Qualitative Research: Grounded Theory Pro-
cedures and Techniques. London: Sage.
Strauss, A.L. and Corbin, J. (1998) Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Proce-
dures for Developing Grounded Theory, 2nd edn. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Sue, V.M. and Ritter, L.A. (2012) Conducting Online Surveys. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Swanborn, P. (2010) Case Study Research: What, Why and How? London: Sage.
Tashakkori, A. and Teddlie, C. (1998) Mixed Methodology: Combining Qualitative and 
Quantitative Approaches. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Tashakkori, A. and Teddlie, C. (eds) (2003) Handbook of Mixed Methods in Social and 
Behavioral Research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Teddlie, C. and Tashakkori, A. (2009) Foundations of Mixed Methods Research: Integrat-
ing Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches in the Social and Behavioral Sciences. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Tesch, R. (1993) Software for qualitative researchers: analysis needs and program capa-
bilities, in N. Fielding and R. Lee (eds) Using Computers in Qualitative Research, 2nd 
edn. London: Sage.
Thomas, G. (2011) How to Do Your Case Study: A Guide for Students and Researchers. 
London: Sage.
Thyer, B.A. (2012) Quasi-Experimental Research Designs. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Tourangeau, R., Conrad, F. and Couper, M. (2013) The Science of Web Surveys. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Tranfield, D., Denyer, D. and Smart, P. (2003) Towards a methodology for developing 
evidence-informed management knowledge by means of systematic review, British 
Journal of Management, 14: 207–22.
Truell, A.D., Bartlett, J.E. and Alexander, M.W. (2002) Response rate, speed and complete-
ness: a comparison of Internet-based and mail surveys, Behaviour Research Methods, 
Instruments and Computers, 34(1): 46–9.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

348  References
Turabian, K. (2013) A Manual for Writers of Research Papers, Theses, and Dissertations, 
8th edn. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Urquhart, C. (2013) Grounded Theory for Qualitative Research: A Practical Guide. 
­London: Sage.
van Leeuwen, T. and Jewitt, J. (eds) (2001) Handbook of Visual Analysis. London: Sage.
van Maanen, J. (ed.) (1995) Representation in Ethnography. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
van Manen, M. (1990) Researching Lived Experience: Human Science for an Action Sen-
sitive Pedagogy. London, Ontario: Althouse.
van Manen, M. (2014) Phenomenology of Practice: Meaning-Giving Methods in Phenom-
enological Research and Writing. Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press.
Walker, I. (2010) Research Methods and Statistics. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Webb, E.J., Campbell, D.T., Schwartz, R.D. and Sechrest, L. (1966) Unobtrusive Measures: 
Non-reactive Research in the Social Sciences. Chicago, IL: Rand McNally.
Webster, M. and Sell, J. (2007) Laboratory Experiments in the Social Sciences. London: 
Academic Press.
Whyte, W.F. ([1943] 1993) Street Corner Society: The Social Structure of an Italian Slum, 
4th edn. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Wiles, R. (2013) What Are Qualitative Research Ethics? London: Bloomsbury.
Wilson, R., Gosling, S.D. and Graham, L.T. (2012) A review of Facebook research in the 
social sciences, Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7(3): 203–20.
Winter, R. (1996) Some principles and procedures for the conduct of action research, in O. 
Zuber-Skerritt (ed.) New Directions in Action Research. London: Falmer Press.
Wittgenstein, L. (1968) Philosophical Investigations. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Woods, P. (2012) The Divided School. London: Routledge.
Woods, P. (1993) Managing marginality: teacher development through grounded life his-
tory, British Educational Research Journal, 19(5): 447–65.
Woods, P. (2006) Successful Writing for Qualitative Researchers, 2nd edn. London: Rout-
ledge.
Worthington, H. and Holloway, P. (1997) Making sense of statistics, International Journal 
of Health Education, 35(3): 76–80.
Yin, R. (2009) Case Study Research: Design and Methods, 4th edn. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage.
Yin, R. (2014) Case Study Research: Design and Methods, 5th edn. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage.
Yoder, P. and Symons, F. (2010) Observational Measurement of Behavior. New York: 
Springer.
Zuber-Skerritt, O. (ed.) (1996) New Directions in Action Research. London: Falmer Press.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Index
Access to data 5, 17
research settings 2, 219-20, 222
documents 228-30, 236, 239
gatekeepers 85-6, 93
interviews 185, 197
participant observation 84, 219-20, 222
Action research 4, 122-31
definition 122-3
change 123
cyclical process 123-5, 131
emancipatory approach 126, 128, 131
ownership of the research 126-7, 130
participation 129
practical action 122-3, 129, 131
professional self-development 124, 129
Ahmed, S. 96
Alaszewski, A. 228
Analysis of data 243-8, 329
action research 124-6
documentary data 226, 228, 234-5
ethnography 81
experiments 67
grounded theory 107, 112-5, 246, 276
using interviews 185, 198, 203
mixed methods 148-9, 152-3, 156, 162
observation 205, 212, 219
phenomenology 94-5, 99-103, 276
qualitative data 244-8, 276-8, 280-304
quantitative data 244-8, 249-50, 252,  
256-7, 260, 263, 272-4
using questionnaires 167, 171, 176,  
179-80
and research reports 308, 315, 321, 324, 
329, 334
sampling 50, 53
surveys 8, 29
systematic review 133, 135, 137, 139, 
140-2
Andrews, M. 291
Atkinson, P. 86, 92
Austin, J.L. 288
Bakeman, R. 213
Balnaves, M. 274
Banks, M. 234, 238, 240
Barnett, V. 52
Bazeley, P. 280, 303
Becker, H. 62, 215
Bell, P. 292
Berger, P. 97
Bergman, M. 150
Bettis, J.D. 96
Bhaskaran, V. 178
Birks, M. 120
Boellstorff, T. 92
Brace, I. 182
Bradburn, N. M. 182
Bradbury, H. 130
Brannick, T. 130
Brewer, J. 92
Brickman-Bhutta, C. 18, 19,  
20
Brown, G. 67, 73
Bryant, A. 117
Bulmer, M. 82
Burgess, R.G. 85
Campbell, D.T. 76
Caputi, P. 274
Carayon, P. 26
Case studies 4, 54-65
definition 54-6, 64
boundaries 54, 64, 65
generalizing from 61-3, 64, 65
purposes of 56-7
selection of cases 58-60, 65
Charmaz, K. 116-7, 120
Christian, L.M. 30
Clarke, A.E. 117
Cochrane reviews 132
Coding data
content analysis 283-4
grounded theory 286-8
interviews 278-81
qualitative data 247-8
quantitative data 247-8
Coghlan, D. 130
Collier, M. 292
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

350  Index
Combs, J.P. 150
Concepts 112-3, 117, 121, 286-8
Content analysis 282, 283-5, 289, 304
Conversation analysis 282, 291, 304
Conrad, F. 30
Cook, T.D. 76
Copyright 315, 323
Corbin, J. 110, 113, 116-7, 119
Couper, M. 19, 30
Creswell, J.W. 150, 152, 159-61, 248
Croll, P. 213
Crotty, M. 95, 100
Crowder, J.W. 240
Danial, J. 52
Data protection 165, 315, 317-20, 323,  
325
Data Protection Act 318
data security 315, 317, 319, 325
principles 319-20
and small-scale research 318
Davidson, J. 280
Declaration of Helsinki 309
Delamont, S. 221
Denscombe, M. 2, 14, 61, 99, 155, 184, 336
Denyer, D. 134, 140
Denzin, N. 82, 83, 148, 153, 154, 160, 322
Department of Health 308
Devault, M. 83
De Vaus, D. 30, 78
DeWalt, K.M. 223
DeWalt, B.R. 223
Descriptive statistics
chi-square test 259-60
correlations 257-63
fractiles 256
mean 253
median 254
mode 254-5
range 255-6
standard deviation 256-7
statistical significance 258-9
t-test 260-2
tests for association 259-61
Di Gregorio, S. 280
Diamante, T. 203
Dickson, W.J. 149
Dillman, D.A. 10, 12, 23, 30
Dimitriadis, G. 203
Discourse analysis 282, 288-90, 304
Dixon-Woods, M. 134
Documents 225-41, 277, 284
access 229-30
authenticity 240-1
copyright 238-9, 241
definition 225-6
diaries 227, 235
equipment 235-6
image-based research 234-9
letters and memos 227
newspapers 226-7
official statistics 232-3
records of meetings 227, 234
resources 229
sources of 226-8
websites and the internet 228, 231-2, 241
validity 230-1, 241
Dunning, T. 78
Edwards, A. 124
Eisenhart, K.M. 55, 61
Elliott, J. 125, 291
Elliot, M. 30
Emmel, N. 52
Emmison, M. 234
Empirical research 7
Ess, C.E. 320
Ethics 5, 6, 169, 237, 305-25
and action research 127, 131
approval 306-8, 322, 325
beneficence 313, 325
confidentiality 307, 311, 322-3, 325
codes of conduct 309, 325
deception 307, 314, 321-2, 325
and experiments 77
and focus groups 307
and internet research 320-3
informed consent 184, 311-2, 315-7,  
320-1, 325
and interviews 184-5, 307 
and law 314-5, 323
openness and honesty 312-4, 316, 325
and participant observation 91, 218,  
224, 307
participants’ interests 31, 310-1
principles 309-15
researcher competence 313-4
and privacy 311, 321, 325
Ethnography 4, 80-92, 215, 243
covert research 84-5
definition 80
everyday life 81
fieldwork 85, 93
gatekeepers 85-6, 93
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Index  351
idiographic approach 86-7
Internet 82 
life history 82-4
naturalism 84, 93
nomothetic approach 86-7
reflexivity 88
self 89-90, 93
thick description 86
Ethnomethodology 291
Experiments 4, 66-79
definition 66-7
cause and effect 66, 71, 77-8
control groups 73
controls 66, 72, 75
dependent variables 71-2, 258
and ethics 77
field experiments 68
independent variables 71-2, 258
laboratory experiments 68
natural experiments 69
observation and measurement 66,  
69-71
quasi experiments 75-6
randomized controlled trials 68-9
retrospective experiments 69
types of 68-71, 75-6
Farrimond, H. 320, 324
Feasibility of research 2, 5, 6, 165
Festinger, L. 220
Field, A. 274
Field notes 217-8, 224
Fiske, D.W. 154
Flick, U. 153
Flowers, P. 104
Focus groups 188-9
Fowler, F.J. 52
Frels, R.K. 150, 160
Fricker, R. 30
Gallagher, S. 104
Galton, M. 210
Geer, B. 215
Geertz, C. 86
Generalizability
from action research 128
from a case study 61-3, 64, 65
transferability 299-300, 303
Gerbner, G. 284
Gibbs, G. 280, 297, 303
Gibson, B. 120
Gillham, B. 182, 203, 213, 223
Glaser, B. 106, 108, 115-7, 119
Glaser, J. 322
Goldacre, B. 139, 142, 311
Gorard, S. 249, 274
Gottman, J.M. 213
Gough, D. 134, 143
Graebner, M.E. 61
Gray, R. 159
Grbich, C. 303
Green, S. 69, 142, 143
Greene, J.C. 147, 160
Griffin, J. 220
Grounded theory 4, 106-21, 282, 285-8, 304
definition 106-8
codes categories and concepts 112-3, 
117, 121, 286-8
constant comparative method 113-4, 121
and qualitative research 108
substantive and formal theory 115-7
theoretical sampling 42, 51, 110-12,  
117, 121
theoretical saturation 111-2, 121
Guba, E. 297-9
Guest, G. 150
Haglund, K. 83
Hammersley, M. 62, 86, 87, 92, 150
Harrits, G.S. 160
Hartman, J. 120
Hawthorne studies 148-9
Hay, I. 324
Heidegger, M. 95, 100
Heider, D. 320
Higgins, J. 69, 142, 143
Hine, C. 82
Ho, K. 82
Hoinville, G. 50
Hoonakker, P. 26
Howell, N. 220
Huberman, A. 41, 303
Hughes, G. 336
Humphreys, L. 85, 216, 220
Husserl, E. 95, 100
Hutchby, I. 291
Image-based research 234, 292-4
Internet research
ethics 320-3
ethnography 82
interviews 197-200, 204
legislation 320, 323
questionnaires 178-80
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

352  Index
Internet research (Continued)
surveys 9, 13-4, 178
websites 228, 231-1, 241
Interpretivism 2, 158-60
Interviews 100, 167, 184-204, 277-8
definition 184-5
computer assisted 186, 280-1
conducting the interview 185-6, 193-5
equipment 201, 204
extracts in reports 295-6
face to face 185, 204
focus groups 188-9, 193, 204
group interviews 187-8
interview skills 191-3
interviewer effect 189-91, 198-9, 202, 204
one-to-one 187, 204
online interviews 197-200, 204
personal involvement 191
planning and preparation 193-5
presentation of data 294-6
recording 196-8, 204
semi-structured interviews 186, 204
self-presentation 191
structured interviews 186, 204
telephone 11-13
transcribing 185, 196, 277
unstructured 187
validity 200-1, 202, 204
Israel, M. 324
Jackson, K. 280
Jewitt, C. 292
Johnson, R.B. 159-60
Jorgensen, D.L. 223
Kamberelis, G. 203
Keats, D.M. 203
Kemmis, S. 130
Kirk, J. 297
Kosinski, M. 20
Kozinets, R.V. 82
Krosnick, J.A. 172
Krippendorf, K. 284
Kugelmann, R. 96
Larkin, M. 104
Layder, D. 59, 115, 120, 160
LeClaire, J. 178
Lee, R. 220
Leech, N.L. 150
Lewin, K. 123
Lewins, A. 280
Lewis, M. 104
Lincoln, Y. 297-9
Lipscomb, M. 160
Literature review 50, 119, 133, 135-6, 140, 
142, 208, 327-8
Loizos, P. 238
Luckmann, T. 97
McKee, H.A. 320
McNiff, J. 130
McTaggart, R. 130
Madden, R. 92
Malinowski, B. 80, 81, 88
Mann, C. 323
Marion, J.S. 240
Marshall, C. 83, 294
Masssanari, A.L. 320
Mayo, E. 149
Mays, N. 144
Mead, M. 80
Mertens, D. 160
Miles, M. 41, 297, 303
Milgram, S. 70, 78
Miller, M. 297
Mills, J. 120
Morgan, D.L. 150, 159-61, 189
Morley, J. 96
Moustakas, C. 96, 104
Mixed methods 2, 4, 146-62
and accuracy of findings 147, 153
definition 146-7
design 150-3, 162
pragmatism 147, 158-61
triangulation 146, 148, 154-7
Murchison, J. 92
Murray, N. 336
Murray, R. 336
Nardi, B. 92
Narrative analysis 84, 282, 291-2, 304
Nat. Health and Med. Res. Council 134
Natasi, B.K. 150
Nixon, R. 130
Null hypothesis 258-61
Nuremberg Code 309
Oakley, A. 191
Objectivity 272, 300-2
Observer effect 69-71, 210, 215
O’Connell Davidson, J. 216, 220
O’Leary, N. 213
O’Reilly, K. 92
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Index  353
Oktay, J. 120
Oliver, P. 324
Oliver, S. 143
Onwuegbuzie, A.J. 150, 159-60
Oppenheim, A.N. 182
Paradigms of research 1-4, 146-7, 150-1, 
158-60
Participant observation 215-224, 277
access to settings 219-20, 222
dangers of 220-222
definition 205-6, 215
ecological validity 222
ethics 91, 218, 224
fieldwork 205, 217
reliability 222
naturalness of setting 215
and self identity 218-9, 221, 224
types 216
Penn, G. 293
Perry, G. 71
Petticrew, M. 134, 138, 144
Phenomenology 4, 87, 94-105, 215, 243
description 98, 103
definition 94-5
common-sense beliefs 96, 98, 103
everyday life 95
lived experience 95, 102, 103
members’ accounts 99-100
multiple realities 97, 103
social construction of reality 96, 103
types of 100-2
Pilot study 165, 172, 183
Plano Clark, V. 152, 159-61, 248
Plummer, K. 84, 240
Polsky, N. 85, 219-20
Popay, J. 144
Pope, C. 134, 144
Porter, J.E. 87
Porter, S. 320
Positivism 1, 120, 158-9, 297, 300
Pragmatism 1-4, 44, 46, 49-50, 87, 101, 108, 
147, 158-61, 164, 283, 297
Presentation of quantitative data 247,  
273, 334
bar charts 265-7, 270
frequency distributions 265-8, 275
histograms 267, 270
Likert scale 251
line graphs 268-9, 270
pictogram 266
pie charts 269-70
scatter plots 262, 268
tables 259, 263-5, 270, 275
x-axis 264, 268
y-axis 264
Prior, L. 240
Prochaska, J.J. 20
Prosser, J. 236
Qualitative data 2, 44, 226
analysis 276-7, 280-92
audit trail 298-93, 304
coding and categories 278, 284, 286-8
computer-assisted analysis 280-1
definition 244-7
grounded data 108, 118, 298, 302
image-based data 235, 292-6
indexing 277
iterative process 304
memos 217, 227, 229, 247, 285, 329
and mixed methods 150-3, 162
presentation 294-6, 330
reliability 297-302
sources 277
transferability of findings 299-300, 303
transcribing audio recordings 277-80, 
295-6
types 276
validity of responses 297-302, 304
verifying 297
Quantitative data 2, 29, 44 
analysis 249-75
chi-square test 259-60, 265, 275
coding 181
continuous data 252, 268
correlations 257-9, 262-3, 275
definition 244-7
discrete data 252
interval data 251, 253-4
mid-points or averages 253-5
and mixed methods 150-3, 162
null hypothesis 258
nominal data 250-1, 255, 275
ordinal data 251, 254, 275
ratio data 251, 253-4
spread of data 255-7
standard deviation 256-7
sources 250
t-test 260-2, 275
Questionnaires 166-83, 235, 277
check questions 176
completion rate 167, 169
definition 166-7
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

354  Index
Questionnaires (Continued)
devising the questions 173-6, 183
evaluation 169
fatigue 172-3
length and appearance 171-3, 180
open and closed questions 176
order of questions 175, 180, 183 
progress bar 180, 183
response rate 167-70, 173
reliability 169
self-completion 167
types of questions 177-8, 180
validity of responses 167, 169, 182
vital elements 170-1, 183
web-based questionnaires 178-80
Ragin, C. 62 
Rallis, S.F. 150
Ramo, D.E. 20
Rapley, T. 240
Reason, P. 130
Record keeping 165
Reflexivity
in action research 128
in ethnographic research 90, 91
in qualitative data analysis 236
Reichardt, C.S. 150
Reid, M. 336
Reimer, J. 82
Reissman, C.K. 291
Reliability
dependability 298-9
ethnography 91
interviews 203
observation 208, 212
qualitative data 297-302
quantitative data 271
Research community 5
Research population 20-22, 34
definition 20-21
participation 21-22, 29
Research reports 295-6, 326-37
as accounts 335-6
audience 335, 337
presentation 334, 337
referencing 331-3, 337
research methods 329-31, 337
structure 326-9, 337
writing up 330
writing style 333, 337
Research strategies
choice 6
definition 3
types 3-5
Resources for research 5, 6, 164-5, 331
action research 124, 128
case studies 59
documents 226, 235
experiments 67
feasibility 2, 5, 6, 165
interviews 203
mixed methods 149, 162
observation 211, 222
quantitative data 249
sampling 37, 44-5, 49-51
surveys 9, 10, 20
systematic reviews 136, 143
Richards, L. 303
Ritter, L.A. 13, 14, 26, 30
Roberts, H. 134, 138, 144
Roethlisberger, F.J. 149
Rose, G. 293
Rossman, G.B. 83, 294
Rowntree, D. 274
Safety of researchers 70, 220-1, 223-4, 305
Saldana, J.M. 303
Sample size 38, 44-51, 53
Samples
exploratory 32-33, 34, 46
representative 32-33, 34, 46
Sampling bias 35, 52
Sampling frame 21, 34-35, 36, 38, 52, 53
Sampling principles
non-probability sampling 33, 34, 40-44, 
45, 53
probability sampling 33, 34, 36-40, 45,  
47, 53
theoretical sampling 42, 45
in small-scale research 51
Sampling techniques 
choice 44, 52, 53
cluster sampling 37, 39, 40, 45
convenience sampling 43-44, 45
multi-stage sampling 37, 39, 45
purposive sampling 41-42, 45 
snowball sampling 18, 42-43, 45
stratified sampling 37, 39, 40, 45
systematic sampling 36, 38, 39, 45
quota sampling 40-41, 45
random sampling 36, 38, 39, 45
Sanger, J. 223
Sartre, J.-P. 100
Savage, M. 27
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Index  355
Schon, D. 124
Schonlau, M. 30, 179
Schutz, A. 99, 101
Schwartz, D. 236
Scott, J. 240
Seale, C. 142, 294, 297-8, 301 
Sell, J. 78
Self, researcher 
common-sense assumptions 98-101, 103, 
105
ethnography 89-90, 93
insider knowledge 86, 128, 131, 220, 229
participation in research 123, 125-7, 129, 
131, 216, 218, 220, 223-4, 229
personal beliefs 89
personal identity 189-90, 333
and qualitative data 300-2, 304
self-presentation 191
researcher identity 89, 189-91, 198, 202, 
204, 216, 218-9, 223-4, 236, 245, 300-1, 
303, 316, 322, 333
research topic 89
Semantic differential 178
Sidnell, J. 290
Silver, C. 280
Silverman, D. 142, 184, 294, 297, 301, 303
Simons, H. 64
Small-scale research 1, 3, 7, 17, 25, 29, 45, 
63, 102, 108-9, 118, 131, 186, 260, 318
Smith, J.A. 104
Smith, T.W. 19
Smyth, J.D. 30
Social construction of reality 96, 103
Somekh, B. 123, 129-30
Spencer, S. 240
Stachler, T. 104
Stake, R. 60, 64
Strategies, for research 3-6
definition 3
choices 3-4
Stevens, S.S. 250
Stewart, F. 323
Strauss, A. 106, 108-10, 112-3, 115-8, 120
Sudman, S. 182
Sue, V.M. 13, 14, 26, 30
Surveys 7-31
choice 9-10
definition 7-8
documents 7
group-administered 9, 11-12
face-to-face surveys 9, 11
using Facebook 9, 18, 19-20, 43
internet surveys 9, 13-14, 178
non-response bias 26-29, 31
observational 7
pilot survey 31
population 20-22, 34
postal survey 9 
response rates 22-26, 30, 31, 47
size 17 
sampling frame 31
social network sites 9, 18-19
telephone surveys 9, 12-13
types 8-10
web-based questionnaire surveys 9, 13, 
14-17, 179
Symbolic interactionism 109
Symons, F. 213
Systematic observation 205-214, 235, 277
data 212
definition 205-6
ethics 91
fieldwork 205
inter-observer reliability 208, 212
naturalness of setting 210, 213-4
and perception 206
sampling 209-10, 211, 214
schedules 207-9, 210-11, 214
Systematic reviews 4, 132-145
audit trail 136
data extraction form 136-8, 145
definition 132-3
and evidence-based practice 132
and literature reviews 133
and literature searches 135-6, 145
meta-analysis 139-40, 142, 145
narrative analysis 135, 140, 142, 145
and qualitative research 134-5, 142-3
and radomized controlled trials 135, 142
realist synthesis 135, 141, 145
resources 143
thematic synthesis 135, 140-41, 145
Swanborn, P. 64
Talbot, R. 124
Tashakkori, A. 159-61
Taylor, T. 92
Teddlie, C. 159-61
Theory 29, 33, 44, 47, 61, 67, 86-7, 90, 97, 
141, 155, 160, 241
building 59, 63
formal 116
grounded 4-5, 42, 51, 106-121, 187, 228, 
282-3, 285-8, 304
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

356  Index
Theory (Continued)
and qualitative data 108-9, 246, 276
substantive 116
testing 4, 57-9, 63, 108, 285
Thick description 83, 86, 245, 302
Thomas, G. 64
Thomas, J. 143
Thyer, B.A. 78
Tilley, N. 78, 160
Tourangeau, R. 14, 30
Triangulation 147, 154-7, 200, 298
Tranfield, D. 134, 140, 142
Turabian, K.L. 336
Urquhart, C. 120
Validity 
and credibility 230, 271, 297-8
of documents 230-1, 241
ecological 222
in ethnography 90
of interview data 200-2, 204
and participant observation 222-3
and qualitative data 272, 297-302, 304
and quantitative data 271-2
and questionnaire data 167, 169, 182
respondent validation 200-1, 204, 297-8
and triangulation 154
Van Leeuwen, T. 292
Van Manen, M. 95, 104
Van Maanen, J. 295
Walker, I. 274
Wansick, B. 182
Webb, E.J. 154
Webster, M. 78
Whyte, W.F. 80, 85, 86, 220
Wiles, R. 324
Wilson, R. 18
Winter, R. 127
Wittgenstein, L. 288
Woods, P. 82, 87, 88, 93, 294-5
Wooffitt, R. 290
Yin, R. 59, 61, 64
Yoder, P. 213
Zuber-Skerritt, O. 126
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

www.openup.co.uk
RESEARCH METHODS IN HEALTH 4/e
INVESTIGATING HEALTH AND HEALTH SERVICES
Ann Bowling
June 2014
9780335262748 –Paperback
eBook also available
This bestselling book provides an accessible introduction to the concepts and 
practicalities of research methods in health and health services. This new edition has 
been extensively re-worked and expanded and now includes expanded coverage of:
•  Qualitative methods
•  Social research
•  Evaluation methodology
•  Mixed methods
•  Secondary data analysis
•  Literature reviewing and critical appraisal
•  Evidence based practice
Covering all core methodologies in detail the book looks at the following kinds of 
health research:
•  health needs
•  morbidity and mortality trends and rates
•  costing health services
•  sampling for survey research
•  cross sectional and longitudinal survey design
-
•  experimental methods and techniques of group assignment
•  questionnaire design
•  interviewing techniques
•  coding and analysis of quantitative data
•  methods and analysis of qualitative observational studies
•  unstructured interviewing
The book is grounded in the author's career as a researcher on health and health 
service issues, and the valuable experience this has provided in meeting the 
challenges of research on people and organisations in real life settings.
This book is an essential companion for students and researchers of health and health 
services, health clinicians and policy-makers with responsibility for applying research
findings and judging the soundness of research.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

www.openup.co.uk
RESEARCH PROPOSALS
A PRACTICAL GUIDE
Martyn Denscombe
2012
9780335244065 –Paperback
eBook also available
Whether you are an undergraduate student doing 
your final year project, a Mastersstudent writing your dissertation, or a
PhD student applying for acceptance onto a doctoral programme, this
practical book will 
help you to produce a successful and persuasive research proposal. 
Written by an experienced and best-selling author, this handbook uniquely 
draws a parallel between a research proposal and a sales pitch. The book 
provides guidance on what to include and what to omit from your proposal 
and demonstrates how to ‘sell’ your research idea. Denscombe ably guides
you through each stage of the process:
•  Choosing a research topic 
•  Reviewing the literature 
•  Formulating the research question 
•  Explaining the research methods
•  Estimating the costs and planning the time involved 
•  Obtaining research ethics approval 
With top tips throughout, this book provides an insight to the logic behind 
research pr oposals and the way that good proposals address 7 basic 
questions that readers will ask when they evaluate any proposal.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Martyn Denscombe is Emeritus Professor of Social Research in the 
Faculty of Business and Law at De Montfort University, UK.
The Good Research Guide by bestselling author Martyn Denscombe 
has established itself as THE introductory book on the basics of social 
research. It provides practical and straightforward guidance for those 
who need to conduct small-scale research projects as part of their 
undergraduate, postgraduate or professional studies. 
This brand new fifth edition has been thoroughly updated and revised 
throughout and includes new material on:
• The use of social media in research, including guidelines on the  
 use of social networking sites 
• More on internet research and how to run online surveys  
• How to conduct systematic literature reviews  
• Getting good response rates to a survey 
• Writing research reports 
• Research ethics
Retaining the clear, friendly and practical approach that has made the 
book a must for student researchers, the new edition includes many 
helpful learning features such as “at a glance” summaries in “Key 
Points” boxes, helpful “Checklists” to guide good practice and handy 
“Link-ups” between key topics across the book.  Every chapter provides 
up-to-date further reading lists to help you develop your knowledge and 
research skills.
This is an invaluable resource for anyone conducting social research 
including those in applied areas such as business studies, health 
studies, nursing, education, social work, policy studies, marketing, 
media studies and criminology.
The Good Research Guide
For small-scale social research projects
Fifth Edition
Cover design by Naomi Mitchell
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

