The LIVING Supply Chain

The LIVING Supply Chain
The Evolving Imperative of
Operating in Real Time
Robert Handfield
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC, USA
Tom Linton
FLEXTM
San Jose, CA, USA

This edition ﬁrst published 2017
© 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, except as permitted by law. Advice on how to obtain permission to reuse material from
this title is available at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
The right of Robert Handﬁeld and Tom Linton to be identiﬁed as the authors of this work has
been asserted in accordance with law.
Registered Oﬃce
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA
Editorial Oﬃce
111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA
For details of our global editorial oﬃces, customer services, and more information about Wiley
products visit us at www.wiley.com.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some
content that appears in standard print versions of this book may not be available in other formats.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty
The publisher and the authors make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy
or completeness of the contents of this work and speciﬁcally disclaim all warranties, including
without limitation any implied warranties of ﬁtness for a particular purpose. This work is sold
with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. The
advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for every situation. In view of ongoing
research, equipment modiﬁcations, changes in governmental regulations, and the constant ﬂow
of information relating to the use of experimental reagents, equipment, and devices, the reader is
urged to review and evaluate the information provided in the package insert or instructions for
each chemical, piece of equipment, reagent, or device for, among other things, any changes in the
instructions or indication of usage and for added warnings and precautions. The fact that an
organization or website is referred to in this work as a citation and/or potential source of further
information does not mean that the author or the publisher endorses the information the
organization or website may provide or recommendations it may make. Further, readers should
be aware that websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this
works was written and when it is read. No warranty may be created or extended by any
promotional statements for this work. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for any
damages arising herefrom.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Handﬁeld, Robert B., author. | Linton, Tom (Thomas K.), author.
Title: The living supply chain : the evolving imperative of operating in real time / Robert
Handﬁeld, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA, Tom Linton, FLEX,
Milpitas, CA, USA.
Description: First edition. | Hoboken, NJ : John Wiley & Sons, Inc., [2017] | Includes index. |
Identiﬁers: LCCN 2017012501 (print) | LCCN 2017022127 (ebook) | ISBN 9781119307198 (pdf) |
ISBN 9781119307228 (epub) | ISBN 9781119306252 (cloth)
Subjects: LCSH: Industrial procurement–Management. | Business logistics–Management.
Classiﬁcation: LCC HD39.5 (ebook) | LCC HD39.5 .H364 2017 (print) | DDC 658.7–dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2017012501
Cover image: © Riccardo Vallini Pics/Gettyimages
Cover design by Wiley
Set in 10/12pt WarnockPro by Aptara Inc., New Delhi, India
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

To Lise and Rodney, my dear parents
Robert Handﬁeld
To my wife Cheryl whose encouragement gives me strength and whose
wisdom the courage and curiosity to explore new ideas.
Tom Linton

What the Experts are Saying About This Book
Handﬁeld and Linton reveal the “secret ingredient” to leveraging the power of a well
managed supply chain. The emphasis on visibility is key to turning companies that sim-
ply react to their environments into proactive champions for their customers. This book
is a “How To” guide to leveraging the untapped power of a well managed supply chain. It
will teach you how to turn from a reactive “ﬁreﬁghter” into a proactive champion for the
customer. The book will revolutionize the way companies approach supply chain man-
agement. It turns conventional wisdom on its ear, and is timely and relevant to tomor-
row’s business environment.
—Frank Crespo, Vice President, Global Supply Network Division
(CPO/Logistics/IoT Analytics), Caterpillar Inc.
The LIVING supply chain is a wake up call to any enterprise that depends on suppliers
and contractors. Be fast, be nimble and make supply chain transparency the nucleus of
your operations or become endangered.
—Paul Massih, Vice President, BP PSCM
Tom Linton and Robert Handﬁeld’s book is a fascinating journey through the future of
supply chain management – the LIVING supply chain. Such future involves speedy sup-
ply chain networks leading to high customer satisfaction, high asset velocity and high
proﬁts. Such future is based on real time information and connected systems between
trusted partners. Rather than a theoretical manuscript, the book is based on the expe-
rience and work of Linton, who is Chief Procurement and Supply Chain Oﬃcer at Flex.
He is actually building and evolving such a supply chain and thus the book is a must read
for every supply chain professional.
—Yossi Sheﬃ, Professor, MIT Center for Transportation and Logistics
The book on The Living Supply Chain is itself a great “living” reading on how to
bring supply chain to a powerful living state. The idea of Live–Interactive–Velocity–
Intelligent–Networked-Good is the foundation of how supply chains can be agile, adap-
tive and aligned. The book brings the AAA supply chain concepts to life. I congratulate
the authors for producing this book that would be of value to every supply chain exec-
utive and practitioner.
—Hau Lee, Professor, Stanford University
The concept of the supply chain had a short but useful life. Much value has been
unlocked in the last 30 or more years in the recognition that functions once thought of
as discrete – procurement, logistics, materials management, etc. – were not only linked
but also had mutual dependencies. However, as a practical matter, we have reached the
limit of new insights from this one-dimensional model. Handﬁeld and Linton’s book
explores a multi-dimensional model based on the biological concept of an ecosystem.
This new way of thinking promises to yield vast amounts of additional insights that will
enable the next wave of innovation in supply management.
—Tom Derry, President, Institute of Supply Management
Supply chains are the nervous system of the material world, a living universe of ﬂows
that propels the world economy forward. As this lucid book reveals, Flex is the supply

viii
chain’s brain, evolving the global production system through technologies that promote
transparency and trust. No matter what political obstacles emerge in the years ahead,
supply chains will ﬂourish and optimize the world economy for everyone’s beneﬁt.
—Parag Khanna, Author of “Connectography”
In an age when most organizations and functions are focused on the transition from
human labor to AI and smart machines, Handﬁeld and Linton looked at the modern sup-
ply chain and realized that it has come alive! Their global ecosystem view of the “living”
supply chain emphasizes the need for speed, transparency, and alignment — particu-
larly when there is a high level of dependency on suppliers for the creation of customer
value.
—Kelly Barner, Owner & Editor, Buyers Meeting Point, LLC
Successful businesses are those that support the success of their customers. This book
captures the essence of our volatile, uncertain world and the opportunities that exist for
the commercially astute, organizationally integrated business. More important, it oﬀers
insight to the recipe for 21st century operations and the management of complex supply
ecosystems.
—Tim Cummins, CEO, International Association of
Commercial and Contract Management
A LIVING supply chain requires a living company. The authors make a great case for
how Flex is creating a living company to thrive in the living supply chain.
—Tom Choi, Harold E. Fearon Eminent Scholar Chair of
Purchasing Management, Arizona State University
Executive Director, CAPS Research
As it becomes more important to move faster and respond eﬀectively to change, this
book starts to explore some of the principles organizations can adopt to succeed in our
“real time” world …
The world we’re living in means it’s more important than ever for companies to build
hyper reactive supply chains. This book plots the path to success in our “real time”
world …
—Alex Martinez, CEO, Procurement Leaders
Linton and Handﬁeld chart the future of supply management from the perspective of an
exemplar best practice in a winning ﬁrm that links a myriad of stakeholders in real time.
Winners must move beyond restrictive chains to enlightened networks that understand
and implement supply network speed, transparency and trust. The authors show you the
why and what of such interdependent ecosystems. Simply put, supply networks resem-
ble nature since success results from mutually beneﬁcial, fast, autonomous, balanced
and fair interactions. The future is here, but as William Gibson observed, it’s not evenly
distributed. A must read with a caution: This book is not for the faint of heart – you’ll
be exposed to radically new ways of thinking that, once accepted, can never be turned
back.
—Joe Sandor, Hoagland–Metzler Professor of Purchasing and
Supply Management, The Eli Broad School of Business, The Eli Broad
Graduate School of Management, Michigan State University

ix
A great book to understand the impact of today’s digital transformation on global supply
chains. Data is the new natural resource that is changing how Enterprises operate. When
you consider that data is not only growing at incredible rates, but almost 80% of data is
unstructured (think text, pictures and sensor data), getting your arms around all this
data can be daunting. However, what is so exciting is that we now we have systems that
can understand unstructured data and draw insights from all these vast data sources.
This is where we are focused within IBM’s Watson Supply Chain business. Leveraging
cognitive systems to provide insights, intelligence and improved visibility.
—Jeanette Medlin Barlow, Vice President of Watson Supply Chain, IBM
This is one of the most inspiring and conceptually innovative books that I’ve read about
supply chain management in a long time. It fuses the experience and ideas of a top supply
chain executive with those of an academic guru on the subject to create a vision of the
real-time, intelligent, collaborative and hyper-responsive supply chain. The term “living”
nicely encapsulates the very essence of this supply chain about which the authors write
with great erudition, eloquence and enthusiasm.
—Alan C. McKinnon, Professor of Logistics, K¨uhne Logistics University
Over my career in multiple large corporations I have often heard the term “End State
Design” used in the context of Supply Chain design and technology enablement. The
reality is that there is no “End State”. To survive we need to have an adaptive supply chain
and capability to both optimize and adapt simultaneously. Today the rate of change is
just too fast, and those that master the ability to adapt their supply chains in response
to the rapidly changing environment will be the winners. We need to embrace the rapid
change in business models, embrace the fact that innovation by companies such as Uber
& Airbnb can shift an entire industry on its back with minimal startup capital. This book
begins to describe the ability to shift from functional silos to E2E Frictionless ﬂow with
the maturity to make E2E tradeoﬀdecisions as a key enabler for success. Striking this
balance whilst still keeping the technical depth and expertise in functional teams is a
critical success factor and will only enabled through a transparent supply chain.
—Wayne Rothman, Vice President, Enterprise Supply Chain
Planning, Johnson & Johnson
This book combines supply chain theory and practice research from Professor Hand-
ﬁeld, one of the leading Supply Chain professors, with the real world experience of Tom
Linton, leader of Flextronics supply chain a business that had to be agile to survive in
a fast changing industry. This book blends insight with practical case study that will
beneﬁt supply chain professionals in their journey to excellence.
—Phil Priest, SVP GBS, Smith & Nephew
A fantastic read and excellent stories from Dr. Handﬁeld and Tom. Years ago IBM
embarked on a journey to develop our Transparent Supply Chain solution, to provide
visibility, alerting and disruption management across our global supply chain. This jour-
ney has been incredibly transformational for IBM. Transparency leads to velocity and
velocity is paramount in supply chains! In order to delight our clients everyday, acting
with agility and speed in a complex and ever-changing global chain has been a critical
success factor for IBM.
—Joanne E. Wright, Vice President, IBM Supply Chain

xi
Contents
Preface
xiii
Introduction
xvii

The LIVING Supply Chain
1

LIVE! Transparency as a Core Operating Value
25

INTERACTIVE! The Emergence of Federated Supply Chain Networks
53

VELOCITY! Working Capital: The Overlooked Asset
81

INTELLIGENT! Linking the Genomes of Products in Your Supply Chain
111

NETWORKED! Co-evolution and Co-innovation in Federated
Supply Chains
129

GOOD! The Ability to Build Balanced Supply Chains
153

The Future of Supply Chains
175
Index
197

xiii
Preface
On a wet morning in January 2016, I sat next to a cozy ﬁre in a Portland coﬀee
shop, with a warm cup of black coﬀee and an open Apple laptop. I thought about
what I had seen the day before, on a tour of the Flex Pulse Center in Milpitas,
California, and the discussion I’d had with Flex’s chief supply chain oﬃcer, Tom
Linton.
I’ve known Tom for over a decade. Tom worked at IBM from 1981 to 2001
before moving to e2Open during the dot.com years, then to Agere Systems
(now LSI), then to Freescale, and then 3 years in Korea as the head of pro-
curement for LG in 2008. He started at Flex in 2011. We had kept up with one
another over the last 20 years, and Tom had visited NC State on two occasions.
A month earlier, Tom had urged me to come out to California and see what he
was doing with something he kept calling the “Pulse.” Since I was traveling to
the West coast to visit Nike in January 2016, I agreed to drop by and visit.
And what a visit! My brain was still reeling, trying to absorb it all. What I
had seen in Flex’s Pulse Center, and at Elementum, its startup company, which
created the software “wrapper” that made the Pulse available to everyone, had
made such an impression on me that I believed it was the start of something
that seemed both organic and very, very new and uncharted. Flex was deploying
an experiment of sorts, one that took everything we ever knew about supply
chains, tossed it out the window, and started from scratch.
I had left Tom with a parting comment: “I think we need to write a book about
what you’re doing here.” Tom had smiled, and nodded knowingly.
So as I sat in the coﬀee shop that early morning, I thought about whether
there indeed was a book to be written. I didn’t have much time, as I was sched-
uled to meet with the Nike Global Sustainability & Manufacturing team in
nearby Beaverton later that morning.
But I gave it a shot. Typing quickly, I came up with a list of 10 key points that
had jumped out at me in the brief hours I had spent at Flex. I wrote down ideas
for eight chapters, copied them into an email to Tom, and asked him what he
thought.

xiv
Preface
Within an hour, Tom wrote back:
I think you captured some of our thinking exactly. A tighter economy
requires a new way of optimizing how supply is managed. Maybe we can
set up some regular calls and ﬂesh this out?
And that’s how this book was born.
I am a college professor who has been hanging around supply chain execu-
tives for 25 years. I have witnessed the popularizing of the term “supply chain
management,” though many people still think of it as “something that has to
do with logistics, right?” Over this period, I’ve also witnessed the Internet bub-
ble in 2000, and heard people say it would “change everything.” I’ve seen enor-
mous organizational change, including shifts such as the “logistics renaissance,”
“world-class procurement,” “the Internet of Things,” “Big Data analytics,” and
many other buzzwords that populate the lingo of executives worldwide. What
I saw that winter day at Flex, however, seemed truly revolutionary. And I was
determined to write about this phenomenon.
In the months that followed, Tom and I put together our thoughts and obser-
vations, with Tom sharing his stream of consciousness as he launched the Pulse
Center, while I recorded my observations from the perspective of an academic
working in the supply chain ﬁeld for years. I decided to start each chapter with
an observation taken from my remarkable tour of the Flex facility.
Another important part of the story is several books that we both read
during the writing of this work. These include The Serengeti Rules by Sean
Carroll, NonZero by Robert Wright, Team of Teams by Gen. Hugh McChrystal,
Connectography: Mapping the Future of Global Civilization by Parag Khanna,
and The Homing Instinct by Bernd Heinrich. These works were diverse: one was
on biological evolution, the second on world history, the third on military cam-
paigns in Afghanistan, the fourth on the future of global economics, and the last
on the migratory patterns of wildlife. But a common thread runs through these
books, which ultimately helped shape our thinking in developing the “new
rules of supply chains,” which readers will discover for themselves.
As you read this book, bear in mind that three major shifts are shaping the
new digital economy.
1. Data is foundational to everything we do. Data is a natural resource – those
who capture data and learn how to exploit it will be those who succeed in
the new economy.
2. The Cloud is transforming information technology and moving business
processes into digital services. Understanding how to make data available
to make decisions is foundational to how we operate.
3. The shift to cognitive computing is unlocking new insights and enabling
optimized outcomes. Human–machine interaction will change everything
about the way we work.

Preface
xv
We are truly moving to a critical inﬂection point where the management of
multi-tier supply chains is driven by the evolution of new hardware devices
and software possibilities, but which is held together by a concept which we
call “federation.” These changes are both evolutionary and revolutionary. New
combinations of cloud, mobility, and human–machine interaction are pointing
to a great leap forward in the supply chain profession and its impact on the
company performance.
The story is still being written. The narrative that follows gives you an idea
of how exciting this ride is going to be. It may be diﬀerent by the time you are
reading this – so you’ll have to keep up in “real time” on your own from that
point on.
Rob Handﬁeld

xvii
Introduction
Supply chain management is an evolving ﬁeld. While logistics, sourcing,
planning, materials management, and data and systems have existed for gener-
ations, the combination of these disciplines is less than 40 years old. The incor-
poration of data and real-time systems in the way we operate supply chains is
just emerging.
This book is about re-imagining what supply chain is, and what it’s becoming.
The premise of the book is that supply chains are ecosystems that adjust and
evolve in ways similar to the way the natural world behaves. We have used our
creative imagination to envision how supply chains will evolve and adapt to the
emerging complex new business environment of the future.
This book also introduces the topic of balance to supply chains, not in the
classic context of supply and demand but as it relates to the values compa-
nies increasingly are placing on healthy, honest, and transparent supply chains.
What is “good” in supply chain management has been an area of inquiry that
has expanded in ways both unforeseen and consistent over the last 100 years.
So if, as Abraham Lincoln suggested, we are to rely on the “better angels
of our nature,” forgive us. In addressing the LIVING supply chain and the
common purpose and federated forces behind them, we are merely disclos-
ing what is happening in the world today. Even though forces and ﬂows also
exist within illicit supply chains, we believe companies driving good supply
chains are becoming increasingly prominent and are improving the state of the
world. The Dodd–Frank Bill, for example, regulates American companies’ use
of so-called “conﬂict minerals,” the UN Global Compact calls on companies
to support internationally proclaimed human rights, and numerous interna-
tional agreements now regulate carbon emissions and trade. All these consen-
sus actions align with a win–win approach to integrating global corporations
on common standards of behavior.
The new rules of supply chain management do not eradicate the old rules.
The fundamentals of value chain, supply–demand, and customer-centric solu-
tions driven by mass customization, omni-channel solutions, and globalization

xviii
Introduction
are only a back story to the rising wave of Big Data analytics and cognitive sup-
ply chains that will eventually make supply chains intelligent enough to accu-
rately predict outcomes. For decades, supply chains have been about nodes
and processes that deﬁne both the design and network of how things move.
We have targeted revenue beneﬁts, income statement cost improvements, and
procure-to-pay cash lifecycle beneﬁts through to inventory contributions to
balance sheets. We have pushed globalization, driven cycle time improvements,
and focused on leaning out and leaning in as we pushed for recognition as a
“C-level” function. Each contribution over the decades by industry leaders and
organizations such as the Institute for Supply Management the Council of SCM
Professionals, and APICS have helped deﬁne supply chain today.
The central argument of this book is that balanced supply chains will win and
selﬁsh supply chains will lose. The challenge we face is that supply chains are
selﬁsh by nature. The success of our new rules lies in making sure they allow
business practices that balance the proﬁt motive with healthy supply chains.
We use an analogy to Sean Carroll’s The Serengeti Rules to oﬀer insights into
how nature and business are more parallel than previously thought.
Dr. Robert Handﬁeld and I have worked together for over a decade. I often
reference his widely used and respected Purchasing and Supply Chain Man-
agement (written with Robert J. Monczka, Larry C. Guinipero, and James L.
Patterson and initially published in 2001), one of the most widely used sup-
ply chain textbooks of our time. My personal copy has been annotated and
dog-eared multiple times, and its fundamentals are essential learning in supply
chain courses and companies worldwide. When Rob suggested we put down in
a book, the innovations we were developing at Flex, where I serve as the chief
procurement and supply chain oﬃcer based on my career in supply chain man-
agement, I could not say no.
I hope this book becomes a starting point for a new wave of innovative con-
versations about what supply chain IS versus what it DOES. When we start to
understand the underlying values we are promoting and the time we are dis-
rupting, we are on our way to a new understanding of how supply chains aﬀect
business outcomes. Whether our function becomes part of the autonomous
new fabric of business in the coming decades will be rooted in how LIVING
principles and new supply chain rules are adopted globally.
Time is on our side. After all, in business, we own it.
Tom Linton



The LIVING Supply Chain
New Rules for the New Normal
It was raining hard in San Jose the morning I walked from the A-Loft Hotel to
meet Tom Linton at the Flex oﬃces.
“We don’t usually get this much rain,” several locals had informed me, “but
we are sure glad, because we need it. Four or ﬁve years of droughts have really
depleted our water supply.”
I had driven by the site of the 2016 Super Bowl the night before – a site where
the favored Carolina Panthers oﬀense would be decimated by an attacking
Denver Broncos defense, a reminder that a great defense can beat a good
oﬀense.
Our meeting began with a broad overview of Flex. The name change from
Flextronics to Flex had occurred in July 2015, in response to the fact that the
company was no longer a “contract manufacturer” in the traditional sense of
the word.1 Contract manufacturing was Flextronics’ original business, during
the boom years of the 1990s and the Internet boom, when the company largely
manufactured PCs for big names like HP, Dell, and others. Contract manufac-
turing was a volume business, with razor-thin margins, and it relied on a com-
pany’s ability to scale up a new product assembly line anywhere in the world. I
had written about Flextronics in one of the ﬁrst-ever supply chain books, Intro-
duction to Supply Chain Management, published in 1999.
“We are no longer a contract manufacturer,” Tom emphasized, “but we are
in full transition to become a company that, when I think about it, hasn’t ever
existed before. In each of the organizations I’ve worked in, I like to experiment
with organizational models. This is the biggest experiment of them all, and I
believe we are achieving an essential alignment of procurement and the supply
chain organization that is unique. We are inﬂuencing and shaping Flex’s corpo-
rate strategy, but we are also totally supporting it.
1 The terms Flextronics, Flex, Sketch-to-ScaleTM, Intelligence of ThingsTM, the Pulse CenterTM,
and other terms in this book belong to Flex International Ltd., or its aﬃliates.
The LIVING Supply Chain: The Evolving Imperative of Operating in Real Time, First Edition.
Robert Handﬁeld and Tom Linton.
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.


The LIVING Supply Chain
Figure .Flex’s Business Divisions. Source: Reproduced with permission of Flex
“We are a capability supply chain company,” Tom said. “Supply chain is our
business, but it is supply chain on steroids. We have over 200,000 employees
and over 1000 customers in 18 diﬀerent industries, and produce $1 billion or
more in at least 12 of these verticals”, referring me to a chart showing all of
Flex’s business verticals (Figure 1.1). “I’m involved in the downstream supply
and manufacturing side, as well as the upstream, quoting to our customers
when they come to us for a new product. We call it ‘Sketch-to-ScaleTM’ to
represent what we do from design through manufacturing. We incubate star-
tups and drive scale for large original equipment manufacturers. We don’t just
make PCs anymore – but produce just about every electronic product you can
think of that’s out there. We make cell phones, Nike footwear, industrial prod-
ucts, Wink networks for the connected home, Bose speakers, Apple servers,
Microsoft X-boxes, Fit-Bits, drones, and dozens of devices for the emerging
connected world. We produce medical products for J&J, Cisco products, and
automotive products for Ford. We’re a signiﬁcant player in everything from
ﬂoor care (Dyson, Bissell) to industrial test equipment and solar energy and

1
The LIVING Supply Chain

are running billion dollar businesses in each of these sectors. But you won’t
ever see our name or our brand on these products. We are one of the biggest
companies nobody has ever heard of, and we are continuing to expand in other
areas.” In late 2016, Flex announced that they are partnering with a company
Rib Software to form a joint venture, YTwo Formative, to digitize the acquisi-
tion of building materials in a revolutionary set of solutions for the $9 trillion
housing industry.2
Droughts and Super Bowl outcomes are just two of the many uncertainties
facing the population in our global ecosystem. One-in-a-thousand-years rain
like the one that hit South Carolina in October 2015, the Tianjin explosion, the
Bangkok monsoon ﬂooding, and the Japanese earthquake/tsunami and result-
ing devastation are just a few of the natural disasters to hit global supply chains
in the last few years. These disasters create disruptions, but nothing like the
disruptions brought about by global terrorist events, political foment and civil
unrest, worker strikes, increased challenges in border crossing, and labor issues
that are part and parcel of the global supply chain. As any student of business
history knows, globalization has brought about a huge number of discontinu-
ities and disruptions. These disruptions are no longer unique and rare; they are
ubiquitous, and the time between disruptions seems to be shrinking. In fact, it
is a rare day when no disruptions of any kind occur.
Managing volatility would be an acceptable strategy if the return on this level
of risk were high. But that doesn’t seem to be the case. The press continues to
talk about stock market volatility, with pundits predicting that the economic
downturn in China will impact the global market. Low oil prices, low com-
modity prices, and low food prices had everyone worried, as this indicated that
demand was also low. Growth rates were predicted to be anemic. A collection
of CEOs in Davos, Switzerland, predicted doom and gloom,3 as validated by
a Deloitte survey of 1700 executives who all felt that there would be negative
growth in the year ahead. Britain’s 2016 vote to enact Article 50 and exit the
European Union (“Brexit”) has caused panic and uncertainty for Europe and
the UK, with UK oﬃcials running around frantically and interest rates reach-
ing new lows. Indeed, there seems to be no upside. Worse, experts noted that
volatility “is the new normal,” and that there isn’t much hope for stability.
In January 2016, economists predicted that United States and global GDP
growth would hover between 1.9% and 2.4% based on slowing growth in China.
The outlook in January 2017 also hovers around 2% in the face of a Trump pres-
idency, while global GDP is predicted to be at 2.9–3.4%.4 Lower investment,
unfavorable demographics, and weak productivity growth are the hallmarks
2 http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/ﬂex-and-rib-software-join-forces-to-transform-
building-and-housing-industry-300367092.html
3 http://www.pwc.com/gx/en/ceo-agenda/pwc-at-davos.html
4 Doerﬂer, S., “The Big Unknown,” Inside Supply Management, January 2017, pp. 17–21.


The LIVING Supply Chain
Table .Real GDP Growth (%)
Country Groups






Aggregates
Advanced economies
1.1
1.7
1.8
1.7
1.9
1.9
High-income economies
1.2
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.9
1.9
Developing economies
5.3
4.9
4.3
4.3
4.9
5.1
Low-income economies
6.5
6.1
4.5
5.3
6.3
6.6
BRICS
5.7
5.1
3.8
4.2
5.1
5.3
Emerging market and developing
economies (EMDEs)
4.7
4.2
3.4
3.5
4.4
4.7
World
2.4
2.6
2.4
2.4
2.8
3
Regions/Economies
Europe and Central Asia
2.3
1.8
−0.1
1.2
2.5
2.8
Latin America and the Caribbean
2.9
1
−0.7
−1.3
1.2
2.1
Middle East and North Africa
2
2.9
2.6
2.9
3.5
3.6
Sub-Saharan Africa
4.8
4.5
3
2.5
3.9
4.4
East Asia and Paciﬁc
7.1
6.8
6.5
6.3
6.2
6.1
South Asia
6.1
6.8
7
7.1
7.2
7.3
Source: Reproduced with permission of World Bank
of the global economy5 – certainly nothing that anyone is looking forward to.
Business conﬁdence is lower, manufacturing is “quiet,” and rapid changes in this
environment are causing many supply chain executives to scratch their heads
and wonder how to deal with an economy that is at best subdued. Hopes that the
Trans-Paciﬁc Partnership might boost production due to removal of the more
than 18,000 taxes on American exports were dashed when President Trump
withdrew from the agreement. There are increasing signs that the once-popular
trend toward open borders and globalization is moving toward regionalization
and protectionism (Table 1.1).6
Increased complexity in the global economy is adding another layer of
malaise to supply chain executives. As customers are increasingly demanding
“customized” solutions, companies are forced to produce in smaller quantities,
leading to what is known as “mass customization.” Increased regionalization of
5 Siegfried, M., “2016: A Year of Transitions,” Inside Supply Management, January 2016, pp. 22–
24, http://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/global-economic-prospects
6 https://scm.ncsu.edu/blog/2016/07/08/the-growing-fragmentation-of-global-trade-guest-
post-by-tim-barnes/

1
The LIVING Supply Chain

product regulations and even localization requirements are driving increased
scrutiny of shipments across borders, as well as new packaging and traceability
requirements. The move toward e-commerce and shipments to end consumers
via Amazon and Ali Baba is driving smaller packages, increasing congestion
on city streets due to more deliveries, and escalating the potential for logistical
malfunctions. How will companies survive?
One approach that many companies have sought in order to reduce risk in
this environment is to outsource to third parties like Flex. Outsourcing involves
divesting your company of processes that once were done internally, and have,
them done by third-party suppliers. Because Flex works as a contract manufac-
turer across 18 of the largest global industries, it essentially acts as an absorber
of global risk for many customers, including Apple, Ford, Amazon, and oth-
ers. On the other hand, this structure also provides companies like Flex with
the power of global insight. Each of the 12 verticals to which Flex contributes
represents more than $1 billion in business. But, this value only represents the
cost of goods sold for the end customer; since brands in electronics and other
industries often mark up their products, the real revenue impact is often two,
three, or four times higher. In each one of these business segments, Flex typ-
ically has 30–50 customers and often builds the newer technology products
that, while cutting edge, require low-cost manufacturing in order to maintain
market-friendly pricing.
As a result, Flex can triangulate across operations strategies, geographic
strategies, and product strategies like no other company. It also can begin to
predict how technologies, consumer behavior, supply chain innovations, or dig-
italization that are emerging in one sector – say the consumer products seg-
ment – may appear in automotive or medical products tomorrow. For exam-
ple, who ever thought people could one day play music in their cars from their
portable phones?
Learning More About Flex: A New Business Model
In his role as Flex’s chief supply chain oﬃcer, Tom Linton runs an end-to-end
supply chain. But end-to-end really means end-to-end – including customer-
facing ﬂows, supplier and material-facing ﬂows, and all the sourcing and logis-
tics in between. One organization manages all of it – because all these processes
have to be so tightly linked. This is tricky, because non-disclosure agreements
between customers may prevent Flex from spanning boundaries in the business
with other customers who are their competitors!
Flex’s supply chain organization controls sourcing on electrical, direct, and
indirect procurement, and also oversees all materials at over 120 global site
locations, including all the intellectual property, inventory, cash cycle, days
sales outstanding, days payable outstanding, and the entire ﬁnancial workﬂow


The LIVING Supply Chain
of the organization. When their Chief Supply Chain Oﬃcer (Linton) presents
to leadership, he is eﬀectively talking to them about managing the balance sheet
and the income statement, as well as supporting incoming revenue.
The biggest advantage of this level of oversight is that it allows Linton to align
organizational capability and ﬁnancial outcomes with procurement and supply
chain strategy. In so many supply chains, the diﬀerent pieces of the supply chain
are often misaligned. Information systems have, for years, tried to “integrate”
these disparate pieces, but this has still resulted in misalignment of decisions,
primarily for political reasons. Every function has its own agenda, its own per-
formance measures, and its own culture, and operates in a silo. Installing an
ERP system to “Integrate” these parts does little to address these disparities.
Linton puts it this way: “All of the pieces, for the ﬁrst time in my career, are
fully aligned. I’m fortunate that Flex is an organization that readily welcomes
change and adaption to a change ecosystem, and is able to attract and retain
very talented people because of that. It is like a big chiropractic alignment, and
when it happens, it is truly the secret sauce of successful organizations, versus
those that remain functionally aligned with functional strategies that aren’t
aligned. We have true visibility to all ﬁnancial ﬂows, which ensures that we are
proﬁtable.”
The Milpitas site that we visited later that morning was the location for much
of the R&D in the company. We were traveling to Building 2, where many of the
prototyping and new technology start-ups were experimenting with prototype
and design-scaling eﬀorts. Once these new processes are developed, Flex scales
them up in diﬀerent parts of the world – Brazil, China, Mexico, or wherever
they are appropriate for a Flex customer.
Companies like Cisco, Microsoft, and Apple all have a huge market cap, but
their manufacturing activities are unlimited. Flex manages all these activities
for them, which means Flex must run a top-notch end-to-end supply chain. So
even though you won’t see a “Made by Flex” label on these companies’ prod-
ucts, Flex is in the background, ensuring that everything is coming together.
This is one reason that Flex and other contract manufacturers are emerging
as the fabric of the emerging trend toward what Flex calls the “Intelligence of
ThingsTM.”
The other interesting anomaly is that “top 25” lists of the “best supply chains”
at Gartner7 often list these very companies: Fitbit, Amazon, Apple, Cisco, Nike,
Inditex, Samsung, Intel, H&M, Lenovo, and others. Tom noted, “We manufac-
ture for many of these companies, and actually hold a lot of their assets for
them. So when Gartner measures the top supply chains, one of the criteria they
use is the ratio of the company’s revenues to its assets. All these companies are
asset-light – because Flex is holding their inventory for them!”
7 http://www.gartner.com/technology/supply-chain/top25.jsp

1
The LIVING Supply Chain

Now my interest was really piqued. Flex and others like them hold a lot of the
inventory and material and manage the shipping ﬂows for these big companies.
How does that work? How can one company manage so many supply chain
processes and so many customers?
A Brief History of Supply Chain Management (The New
Rules of LIVING Supply Chains)
The new Flex supply chain structure in this book is part of a massive evolu-
tion in today’s supply chain world. These changes will occur sometimes quickly,
sometimes slowly, but will undoubtedly come into being in the next decade. The
changes we write about in this book are not just about technology – they are
about true evolution, in a biological sense. In fact, many of the changes we are
seeing have been captured in a set of statements we call the “Rules of LIVING
Supply Chains.” These new rules are aligned with many of the rules that dictate
how species, human beings, and genetics have evolved, and represent a natural,
rather than a radical evolution. They are occurring because the world of global
trade is reshaping the way we operate. In a sense, this world has reached the lim-
its of growth. The new rules will require a new set of management approaches,
as the traditional approaches to managing the supply chain will no longer apply.
To understand this, a brief history lesson is in order. Supply chain manage-
ment as a ﬁeld continued to evolve as large organizations saw the need for
dedicated functions responsible for management of materials, which included
purchasing raw materials, managing manufacturing processes, and moving
materials (logistics). The mid-1960s witnessed a dramatic growth of, and inter-
est in, the materials management concept. Still, the concept’s origins date to
the 1800s. Organizing under the materials management concept was common
during the latter half of the 19th century in the US railroads, which combined
related functions such as purchasing, inventory control, receiving, and stores
under the authority of one individual.
External events directly aﬀected the operation of the typical ﬁrm. The
Vietnam War, for example, resulted in rising price and material availabil-
ity pressures. During the 1970s, ﬁrms experienced material problems related
to oil “shortages” and embargoes. The logical response of industry was to
become more eﬃcient, particularly in the purchase and control of materials.
Widespread agreement existed about the primary objective of the materials
concept and the functions that might fall under the materials umbrella. The
overall objective of materials management was to solve materials problems
from a total system cost perspective rather than from the viewpoint of indi-
vidual functions or activities. Functions that fell under the materials umbrella
included material planning and control, inventory planning and control,
materials and procurement research, purchasing, incoming traﬃc, receiving,


The LIVING Supply Chain
incoming quality control, stores, materials movement, and scrap and surplus
disposal.
Rob Handﬁeld witnessed the evolution of the management ﬁeld now known
as “supply chain management” as a young assistant professor at Michigan State
University (MSU). Handﬁeld was part of a group called the Global Procure-
ment Benchmarking Initiative, led by Dr. Robert Monczka. During his time
at Michigan State (1992–1999), the GPBI benchmarked more than 300 global
companies, and set forth many of what became known as the principles of
“World Class Procurement.” Many of these principles became the foundation
for consulting practices at Accenture, Deloitte, Booz Allen, and others. At
the time, these principles were appropriate. The idea was that procurement
needed to establish a position not just as a “buyer of stuﬀ,” but as a centralized
function that tabulated spending across both direct and indirect categories
of spending, leveraged this volume through purchase power, and sought to
achieve signiﬁcant cost improvement. Business consultants also began looking
at procurement as a vehicle for measuring supplier performance, improving
suppliers through development activities that needed help, and acknowledging
that some relationships with suppliers needed to be more strategic than others.
As purchasing became more eﬃcient, the term “strategic sourcing” was coined,
which involved combining volumes of requirements from across the business,
grouping them into large bids that went out to suppliers, and driving down
costs due to larger quantity discounts achieved. This also led to the use of
“reverse auctions,” in which suppliers would bid on these quantities online. In
logistics, the focus became on centralizing distribution centers and warehouses
to drive optimization in transportation routing and reduce inventory across the
system.
Many of the traditional concepts that evolved from this perspective of “driv-
ing cost of materials lower” focused on increasing the eﬃciency of operations in
the supply chain from supplier to end customer. Many of these principles also
coincided with the introduction of “lean manufacturing,” based on the “just-
in-time” thinking pioneered by the likes of Toyota. For example, the “Theory
of Constraints”8 emphasized that to optimize an end-to-end system, “bottle-
necks” had to be addressed by adding capacity at this operation. “Just-in-time”
and “lean manufacturing” focused on standardizing products, improving coor-
dination between diﬀerent enterprises to reduce inventory, and only delivering
the exact amount needed, in quantities that could be immediately consumed
by the follow-on operation.
Another group at MSU, led by Dr. Donald Bowersox, also spurred new think-
ing on the “Logistics Renaissance,” proclaiming that the role of logistics was to
add value and drive market penetration through technology integration. All the
8 Goldratt, E., The Goal, 2nd ed., North River Press, Great Barrington, MA, 1992.

1
The LIVING Supply Chain

work done in this period highlighted many important issues, encapsulated in a
“maturity model” that identiﬁed how organizations could develop these capa-
bilities over time toward a truly “world class supply chain” organization.
However, “world class” still emphasized distinctions in the ﬁeld. Purchas-
ing, operations, and logistics were still viewed as disparate functions, and argu-
ments broke out over which area should dominate. The three groups involved
in these activities (purchasing, operations, and logistics) were lumped together
as “supply chain” functions, but never stopped working independently of one
another. Professional disputes emerged among the logistics, operations, and
purchasing trade associations over who was really in control of the supply chain;
purchasing felt they were calling the shots, while logistics professionals claimed
that they had oversight over all movement of material in the chain. All the while,
they claimed to be driving “world class procurement” or “world class logistics”
practices, implying that these practices are the best of the best. “Technology
integration” was intended to bring these groups together; however, lingering
tensions, discontinuities, and waste in the end-to-end supply chain of many
organizations still exist. Sure, they could buy things more eﬃciently and ship
things more eﬃciently – but were they really linked? Hardly.
In the end, there are some real problems with the “world class” view of the
supply chain. Although transactional excellence and eﬃciency is certainly an
operative element that forms the basis for excellence, there is a shift away from
the idea that “world class” applies to every situation. A supply chain executive
at BP stated this very well: “World class is simply a set of tools on a tool belt –
but the real wave of change involves understanding the business well enough to
apply the tools that will drive a total cost view of end-to-end value stream. Sup-
ply chain analysts are too focused on getting an answer that is cost-optimized,
rather than focusing on an outcome. And a centralized world-class solution
is not always appropriate in every operation globally, because a single model
may not work for every small, medium, and large operation. And so we need to
approach the problem with a diﬀerent tool belt, and be ready to use a number
of diﬀerent tools depending on the diﬀerent business drivers and geographic
components that are in play in diﬀerent situations.”
So, if “world-class supply chain management” is no longer the objective, what
is the next generation of supply chains going to look like? To answer this, it is
important to emphasize that managing supply chains is no longer just about
cost optimization, but about deep understanding of the components of cus-
tomer value, and making decisions quickly in response to sudden shifts in cus-
tomers’ requirements. While cost optimization may well be one element of this
equation, value has many meanings. Managing the supply chain ﬁrst and fore-
most requires that managers act as internal consultants who spend most of
their days listening closely, not just to the explicit needs of internal customers
for materials, information, services, knowledge, and capability, but also to the
intangible elements customers need. In a sense, real-time supply chains involve


The LIVING Supply Chain
understanding and predicting what internal users and customers will need
right now, even before they themselves recognize that they need it. And veloc-
ity/speed is an integral capability that requires quick response to customer
needs to create the right capability.
The New Rules of the LIVING Supply Chain
Attention to speed and velocity is also an idea promulgated by evolutionary
economics and biologists, who emphasize that organisms and creatures that
are quick to respond will evolve more quickly, and will survive. Those who don’t
will die out. One of the best books to cover this concept is “The Serengeti Rules”
by biologist Sean Carroll. Carroll explains how and why entire ecosystems can
get “sick” when the populations of certain members are too low or too high. In
fact, these rules provide an excellent set of guidelines for thinking about how
supply chains operate as an ecosystem; instead of applying the rules to animals
or biological entities, we have applied them to enterprises. In this manner, we
propose the idea of a “LIVING” supply chain as one of a set of networked enter-
prises that are subject to biological rules.
Biologists have observed that systems of animals, birds, insects, and bacteria
depend on one another for survival, and in fact can be characterized as “food
webs” (Carroll, p. 39). An example of one of such food web links nitrogen, bac-
teria, plants, spiders, gulls, dung, puﬃns, arctic foxes, polar bears, seals, and
other animals based on observations by Charles Elton in the 1920s. Elton vis-
ited the Arctic Islands and created a “food-cycle” schematic that showed the
interconnected set of chains and webs that existed between species on the Bear
Island (see Figure 1.2).9 In this ﬁgure, one can trace the chain that begins with
nitrogen and bacteria at the upper left, and traces the link all the way through
land birds, which provide food for the arctic fox. Other scientists (Smith, Hair-
ton, and Slobodkin, going by the acronym of HSS) suggested that there are four
general “trophic levels” of biological communities10: decomposers (fungi and
worms), producers (plants and algae), herbivores (birds, insects, etc.), and car-
nivores (sharks lions, etc.). In this framework, the well-known HSS hypothesis
emerged that “predators regulate herbivore populations,” and that the removal
of predators can lead to an explosion in herbivore populations. The reverse
has also been shown to be true: Sea otters “induce” the growth of kelp by
repressing the population of sea urchins. Other examples of “trophic cascades”
include bass–minnows–algae, wolves–moose–ﬁr trees, and armadillos–leaf-
cutter ants–trees.
9
Carroll, S., The Serengeti Rules, Princeton University Press, 2016, p. 39.
10 Hairston, N., Smith, F., and Slobodkin, L., “Community Structure, Population Control, and
Competition,” The American Naturalist, vol. 94, no. 879, November/December 1960, pp. 421–
425.

1
The LIVING Supply Chain

Nitrogen
Bacteria
Mineral salts
Dung
Dead plants
Plants
Worms
Geese
Collembola
Diptera
Mites
Hymenoptera
Ptarmigan
Spider
Purple sandpiper
Snow bunting
Algae
Protozoa
Entomostraca
Rotifera
?
Fresh water plankton
Fresh water Bottom and littoral
Decaying
matter
Algae
Protozoa
Moss
Lepidurus
Arctic
fox
Dung
Marine
animals
Seals
Polar
bear
Diptera (immature)
Entomostraca
Rotifera
Tardigrada
Oligochaeta
Nematoda
Diptera
(adult)
Protozoa
Skua
Glaucous gull
Kittiwake
Guillemots
Fulmar petrel
Little auk
Puffin
Northern eider
Long-tailed duck
Red throated diver
Figure .Charles Elton Figure of the Arctic Island Food System. Source: Reproduced with
permission of Princeton University Press
These observations comprise the elements of the Serengeti Rule 1 summa-
rized by Sean Carroll in the book by the same name:
Serengeti Rule 1: Not all species are equal. This rule proposes that some
species exert eﬀects on the stability and diversity of their community that are
disproportionate to their numbers or biomass. These are termed “keystone
species” based on the magnitude of their inﬂuence on the food chain.
We have applied this biological rule to create a rule for the emerging supply
chain network ecosystem.
New Supply Chain Rule 1: Not all enterprises are equal. Firms that adopt
more quickly by embracing real-time data, velocity, transparency, and rapid
response to change in the ecosystem will adapt more quickly, and will survive.
Those that do not adopt these principles will become extinct. Hyper-reactive
and predictive supply chains have a competitive advantage.


The LIVING Supply Chain
Companies need to inﬂuence their supply chains as a responsibility. Every com-
pany has a supply chain and they need to know their position in it and play their
position.
Why is velocity and real-time transparency so important in the supply chain?
There are many reasons, but an anecdote Tom told me in our ﬁrst meeting made
it very clear.
I was driving alone, stuck in traﬃc when the three lanes of the 101 were
blocked, with an empty HOV lane next to me. There was a ﬁfth lane used
by police cars and ﬁre trucks, who ripped oﬀtoward the accident which
was blocking the highway. I wasn’t allowed to use the HOV or police
lanes, but it suddenly made me think: rather than trying to weave in and
out of traﬃc in the blocked lanes, it would be much faster to get into a
lane that is moving quickly, which would mean adding a passenger. And
the analogy was clear: rather than focusing on how to optimize the con-
straint through lean manufacturing and six sigma, why not just change
the game so you can move quickly? And if you focus on speed by thinking
diﬀerently, then you can go around constraints and won’t have to pass
through them. So now when people come to my oﬃce and tell me about
some supply chain problem they’re having, my response is to just keep
the momentum, switch to the HOV lane, and move quickly around the
problem!
This analogy points out a simple concept: in the new global era, speed and
velocity are more important than everything else! Speed drives business value
and inventory turns, reduces working capital, produces cash (monetizes) assets,
and makes customers happy, which in turn further drives top line revenue (see
Table 1.2). Supply chain optimization typically involves turning the knobs on a
supply chain design that is broken. But creation of real-time supply chains pro-
vide a means for creating value that the customer cares about, and in today’s
rapid environment, velocity has customer value. Late deliveries, substandard
quality, safety incidents, damaged shipments, and multiple other problems do
not alleviate the beneﬁts oﬀered to a customer for lower price, as many logisti-
cians and planners will tell you. In many cases, speed not only reduces costs –
it also creates customer value (Table 1.2).
To summarize, companies with speed enabled by real-time visibility will see
improved customer satisfaction. What customer doesn’t want his or her prod-
uct more quickly? Speed also reduces costs, as agility and nimbleness allow
companies to move quickly to address situations that may end up costing them
a lot of money. Speed also reduces inventory, as working capital moves more
quickly, and reduces obsolescence and excess inventory. Inventory is a substi-
tute for lead time, so as lead time shrinks, so does inventory. Finally, speed frees
up cash ﬂow in a ﬁrm’s global operations. Companies with more cash ﬂow can
reinvest in the business, acquire another company, or buy their stock. All these

1
The LIVING Supply Chain

Table .Speed Wins! Pros and Cons of Speed
Pros
Cons
Customer satisfaction improves as revenue
is increased
Quality issues may occur through speed
Proﬁts rise as more goods are produced
Growth is challenging
Assets move faster; improving drives
productivity
Risk of making the wrong decision
Net working capital and free cash ﬂow
improve
Requires increased information visibility
which may be perceived as risky
outcomes make the company stronger, and more able to withstand the chal-
lenges of the global ecosystem. As predicted by the New Supply Chain Rule 1,
enterprises with higher velocity are not equal to slower companies; they are
stronger, more nimble, in better ﬁnancial health, and growing by leaps and
bounds, while the slower ﬁrms will slowly go extinct (similar to the health of
keystone species as deﬁned in Serengeti Rule 1).
Amazon’s Flywheel Eﬀect
One company that “gets this” more than any other is Amazon. Amazon not
only developed the world’s largest online marketplace, but has moved to create
features like Amazon Prime that promise free shipping in two days. Speed is
continually being improved on, as Amazon seeks to create same-day shipping
capabilities, to make customer satisfaction even faster. In his book The Ama-
zon Way, John Rossman writes about the “ﬂywheel eﬀect.”11 This eﬀect is the
opposite of the “bullwhip eﬀect,” a traditional supply chain “theory” that states
that rational decision-making based on limited human views of phenomena
drive excess inventory in the chain. The ﬂywheel eﬀect is a core element in the
rise of Amazon. John Rossman notes, “Allen Mandelbrot founded the ﬁeld of
fractal mathematics, which studies, among other phenomena, how patterns in
nature have a tendency to repeat themselves at diﬀerent scales – for example,
the way spiral galaxies resemble whirling sea shells which in turn resemble tiny
unfurling fern fronds. In a similar fractal fashion, the virtuous cycle is repli-
cated throughout Amazon.com at macro and micro levels. It generates a set of
self-reinforcing energies that continue to ﬂow even when the energy source is
discontinuous – much like a ﬂywheel, which is the favorite metaphor for this
phenomenon at Amazon.” (p. 8)
11 Rossman, J., The Amazon Eﬀect, 2nd ed., CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, May
9, 2014.


The LIVING Supply Chain
The ﬂywheel is a metaphor for the emphasis on speed and velocity of
decision-making driving ﬂow and interactive speed, or the “anti-control tower”
phenomenon. Supply chains are proposed to ﬂow to the point of least resis-
tance, very much like the Chinese proverb that states that cost, like water, will
always ﬂow to the lowest point. Similarly, supply chains will always ﬁnd the
fastest way. Route maps have evolved into works of lean architecture in which
time is treated as waste, as waste equals cost. The impact of new, responsive
supply chains, especially around interactive objects and the “Uber-ization of
trucking” poses a radical threat to traditional premium services such as UPS
and FedEx, which were founded on traditional point-to-point supply chains
with large discontinuities.
Visibility Drives Velocity
Two key concepts reﬂect the core elements of real-time supply chains. Velocity
is the ability of an organization to enable the ﬂow of working capital rapidly
through its end-to-end supply chain. Working capital generally comes in the
form of inventory, which is an asset that doesn’t produce any revenue or cash.
Thus, the object of the real-time supply chain is to achieve velocity in every
aspect of how companies run their business. This includes how inventory is
tracked and monitored, how much to produce, how much to ship, what modes
of transportation to use, how to organize distribution, how to move product
through logistics systems, and most importantly, how quickly people in all areas
of the supply chain (suppliers, distributors, customers) are able to react and
make decisions related to unexpected events and disruptions that impact the
supply chain. This is deﬁned by a simple set of principles:
r Real-time data increases visibility
r Increased visibility results in improved velocity
r Velocity increases ﬂow and decreases friction
r Visibility increases prediction accuracy
The key to enabling the ability to have velocity is through visibility – deﬁned
as the relative transparency of events, material, and ﬂows to all key decision-
makers in the extended supply chain. Visibility allows individuals to see what is
going on, and in empowered ways, allows these individuals to interpret infor-
mation and rapidly make decisions in response to data. The opposite of visibility
is opacity, which refers to a complete lack of visibility regarding what is happen-
ing in one’s upstream and downstream network. When individuals have visibil-
ity that results in velocity of decisions, the system becomes frictionless. Speed
of decisions increases not just the ﬂow of information, but also the ﬂow of mate-
rials, shipments, production, and all activities in the chain. This reduces fric-
tion, which increases ﬂow. Friction includes all the typical delays and problems
that slow ﬂow and cause inventory to build up. This includes multiple layers

1
The LIVING Supply Chain

of approvals, delays in decisions until more information becomes available, or
even operating as normal when a major disruption has occurred unbeknownst
to you. It can produce bottlenecks in production systems and shipments, which
delays material and causes inventory to build.
These principles are not new. Many of the concepts around “lean production
systems” emphasize ﬂow and visibility. However, in the context of the digitiza-
tion of the supply chain, these concepts have a new meaning and impact. It is
also the case that many organizations have invested in very expensive systems
called “control towers.” In a control tower, information from all of an organi-
zation’s logistics systems, production facilities, inbound shipments, outbound
shipments, and inventory levels are dumped into a massive data warehouse.
The information is then centralized into a “control tower,” where individuals
scan what is going on, and senior executives “call the shots,” sometimes using
complicated algorithms and automated ordering systems. The fundamental
assumption behind control towers is that the people at the top “know best”
on how to optimize the entire supply chain, because they are the only ones
who have access to all the data. Much of the data pulled are from ERP systems,
transportation management systems (TMSs), warehouse management systems
(WMSs), distribution requirement systems (DRPs), and material requirement
planning systems (MRPs). Because many of these systems are in a “batch mode,”
which means they are updated on a weekly, or perhaps daily basis, the informa-
tion being viewed in the control tower is always lagging. As a result, decision-
makers in the control tower are making decisions based on what happened a
few days ago, and are determining what to do next, based on what they think will
happen next. This scenario embodies the “old” themes of “supply chain integra-
tion”: batch processing, information updates, “control-tower” thinking where
only some people see the information, and decisions requiring signoﬀs by the
“higher ups.” Linton notes that
Real time supply chains are the anti-control tower. Real-time visibility
of information is a driver of velocity, and the two are linked in busi-
ness and the supply chain. Think about visibility in the context of driving
your car. If you are watching your speedometer, you don’t want informa-
tion on your vehicle’s velocity from a week ago, an hour ago, or even a
minute ago. You want to know how fast you are moving right now! The
same principle applies to the supply chain. To make informed decisions
based on insight pulled from data, we need the data to be as fresh and
as current as possible! In this way visible real-time information drives
increased supply chain speed.
Traditional enterprise software accumulates silos of data. Managers call upon
this data and pull it up in reports that can be used to make decisions. It provides
information in chunks or batches, which, by deﬁnition, are historical. In fact,
almost all decisions in current supply chain systems are based on information


The LIVING Supply Chain
about things that happened in the past. It’s as if your car speedometer told you
how fast you were going yesterday. This is our current scenario. We know how
much we quoted, sourced, contracted, and paid yesterday. What if we could
make all our decisions in real time? What would happen to our performance if
we had data in real time?
The opposite of ﬂow is friction. Friction occurs when layers of decision-
making are introduced into a process, slowing it down. Friction also includes
disruptive events, or workers that don’t feel empowered to make a diﬀerence
in their operation, or who feel pressured to say and do things that they don’t
agree with. Flow is not just about material, it is about the enablement of indi-
viduals who work in the entire supply chain to contribute their ideas, thoughts,
and observations to their work, with the end customer in mind, and who are
allowed to provide feedback and shape the outcome in a positive way.
Visibility is only possible to the extent it is today because of the evolution
of technology. Clearly, the establishment of the Internet led to the explosion
of information and the subsequent supply chain tools and applications that are
now harvesting data, and leading to the evolution of “cognitive” computing. But
the disruption has not yet fully matured; in fact, it is only beginning. As orga-
nizations begin to operate entities that mediate impacts that are upstream and
downstream, the power of this force will become evident as those companies
who understand how to deploy this approach survive and thrive.
I had heard this sentiment 20 years ago, when I was working at Michigan
State. At the time, Dave Nelson, the CPO of Honda, shared with me a vision
that stayed with me for many years.
Think of the number of individuals working in Honda’s supply base. Say
it’s 20,000 people. What if we were able to get each of those 20,000
individuals to go to work every day, and be thinking about how to
make Honda’s products more innovative, how to improve quality, how to
improve ﬂow, and how to be more eﬃcient at doing it? Think of the col-
lective power that resides in the gray matter between the ears of 20,000
individuals, all working toward making Honda better! How can we har-
ness that force!
As those organizations who grasp the viability of this approach expand their
approach to inﬂuence the ecosystem, the ecosystem will thrive. Enabling people
through visibility drives velocity which drives ﬂow. But do people intervene
when friction is present? It depends.
Changes Driving LIVING Supply Chains
A focus on speed is essential to the real-time supply chain. Every action should
be focused on driving increased velocity of materials through the system.

1
The LIVING Supply Chain

Linton notes “I tell my people, if you wake up and go to work, and are con-
fused as to what you should focus on that day – focus on speed. Speed will
drive all other ﬁnancial beneﬁts that we need to be paying attention to. It will
drive up customer satisfaction, as customers get their products sooner, and get
new innovations that come to market sooner. It will drive out excess inventory,
and improve our balance sheet. And it will speed up our cash-to-cash cycle,
which makes our shareholders happy.”
Tom recalls that this wasn’t always the case. “This is my ﬁfth year at Flex,” he
said. “When I arrived, lead-times were in excess of 40 days, in some cases. We
set a goal for everyone of getting our lead times to under one month. Through
our real-time information eﬀorts, we’ve cut many lead-times by 25% or more.
Because the focus in the electronics industry is on shipping everything at the
end of the quarter, production is always heavier at the end of the quarter. But
if you think of a quarter being only 12 weeks, and recognize that the material
can drive 75% or more of your revenue, you need to plan lead times with the
ability to pull material quickly. We have a big problem if they don’t align. Speed
is essential when moving materials. If the material is not in a supplier manage-
ment inventory (SMI) hub or Kan Ban, we can’t get material in time to drive
revenue. The opposite of this kind of integration is guessing what you think the
customer is going to do, and when they don’t do it, you are stuck holding all
this inventory. So velocity is the only way to be agile.”
Important issues follow from the principle of emphasizing speed in all areas
of the supply chain.
1. The ﬁrst is that the centralized control tower is giving way to a new layer of
capabilities. It’s now a mistake to “control” a supply chain – which by def-
inition means to introduce a series of decisions that limit its performance.
We need to rethink what we mean by control towers; so we add visibility to
increase velocity and not add decision-making gates to slow things down.
Supply chains are become more virtually vertical, which means that as we
become more reliant on our partners, we need to create a virtual form of
vertical integration. This boils down to dramatically increasing the connec-
tivity we have with companies in our supply chain. If you look around, there
is a ﬂattening of labor costs, which means that the only way to drive down
total cost is through regionalization, through regional or local sourcing. This
also drives down an organization’s carbon footprint, by reducing transporta-
tion output. Whole Foods has the same idea when they use regional sources
of produce, seafood, and meat.
2. The second big change that is coming is that cloud computing is becoming the
singular most important component of running a global supply chain. Cloud
computing is allowing something very special to happen, which I like to call
business process convergence. In the past, we automated separate business
processes that were each operating with one another based on commercial


The LIVING Supply Chain
invoices, purchase orders, and transactional documents. As these auto-
mated processes now start to link with one another in the cloud, these
traditional transactional documents become obsolete. If you have a strategic
supplier with a life-long contract to produce for you, and you know how
much you are paying them per unit of output, why do you need a purchase
order? You simply pay them electronically as products are shipped in the
chain.
Cloud computing allows for the various steps in the business process to be
linked in a single view, from multiple companies in multiple devices (mobile).
As Cloud computing gets faster and software is developed to optimize for
intercompany transactions, supply chains will ﬁnd new ways to add layers of
transparency to traditional business processes.
3. The third big change is that labor arbitrage will no longer be relevant, and
that raw material costs and oil prices will eventually go back up. When this
occurs, proximity will gain new advantages as commodities held up in long
global supply chains will cause balance sheets and other logistics costs to rise.
Global labor costs are quickly becoming regionalized, in that manufacturing
will increasingly also become regionalized. That’s why we believe manufac-
turing to satisfy demand in North America will return here, as manufac-
turing for China and Asia will stay over there. The same scenario will hold
for the European continent. Because all labor costs will eventually become
equal, we are running out of places to ﬁnd lower cost labor. By the same
token, there is a limited quantity of raw materials, whether you are talking
about rare earths, metals, or precious metals. Because of the growth in pop-
ulation, demand will go back up, there will be scarcity, and costs will go up.
We are in a “golden time” of low oil and commodity prices – but it is only a
matter of time before they go up. Our only solution in the end will be to ﬁnd
alternative raw material sources, including bio-based fuel and other prod-
ucts, as well as substituting things like aluminum for copper. But this will
take time and engineering.
4. The fourth big change is that unpredictability is the only thing that is pre-
dictable. Risk is always present and will introduce itself in unpredictable
ways. Which means that we need to be more inﬂuenced by the use of tools
that respond to unpredictability. Tom said, “I recently spoke at MIT and I
challenged the engineers to come up with algorithmic models that could
better forecast disasters. Now once they occur, we are able to react quickly
within less than 24 hours. But forecasting when and where these disasters
will occur is impossible. But what we can do is to build models that can tell
us the disabling network impact of ANY disaster – something called the “Kill
Shot.” I’ll talk more about that later. In our opinion, the focus on disaster
response is like quality was 30 years ago. People are trying to predict where
problems will occur – and it is pretty much impossible using the standard

1
The LIVING Supply Chain

probabilistic models that we are applying today. It is like trying to improve
product quality by inspecting every PC we made, instead of designing prod-
ucts for quality.
5. The rise of real-time information allows for enhanced predictability from live
visibility. This is one of the reasons Flex created the Flex Pulse Center. It is
designed to create a model to take both physical and information latency
out of the supply chain process by using real-time information around
exception-based management to improve operational outcomes. The system
should let you know when you are over your minimum order quantity – and
creates a signal to the pulse center. This is like a tire pressure light on your
car that only lights up when something is wrong. You have to be notiﬁed if
there is a problem in your supply chain, whether it’s a late delivery, a quality
spill, a capacity problem, a transportation delay, a holdup at customs cross-
ing a border, or even a major earthquake at a site. Your supply chain should
run on an automated basis, and people are introduced into it only when
needed.
6. The ﬁnal big change we need is to overturn our entire cultural and psycho-
logical mindset when it comes to the supply chain. I recently read Non-Zero
by Robert Wright, which I consider one of the most important books of the
decade. It starts with a premise that the world is NOT moving to a zero-sum
game, but to a non-zero sum outcome. For example, when a tribe of Inuit
people killed a whale for food, they shared it with all the other tribes. All the
tribes were trying to survive, so they formed alliances and states, worked
together, and were able to march through time together based on collabo-
ration. I started thinking about it – we need to adopt non-zero approaches
to supplier management, if we are all to survive. But then I thought: collab-
oration is good, but it needs to be in balance. And so you need to ask those
you respect, and that deserve it, and that you can trust, to join your supply
chain.
For the uninitiated, Non-Zero explores the non-zero concept behind game the-
ory, which suggests that over the course of history, zero-sum games are not
as common as non-zero-sum games. In the latter case, non-zero-sum games
involve collaboration between the parties in an eco-system, and emphasize how
parties that work together – whether they’re cells from multicellular organ-
isms, multi-village policies with centralized rules, or hunter–gatherer soci-
eties – tend to mutually beneﬁt. Wright has a positive view of the world, and
suggests that positive correlations in non-zero-sum games produces two win-
ners, and that this occurs in economics a good deal. Wright does not deny the
existence of exploitation, but is intrinsically upbeat on history moving more
toward win–win than win–lose. This is a fundamental concept underlying the
LIVING supply chain. Unless organisms work together as a network with full


The LIVING Supply Chain
information, applying this characteristic we call “trust,” survival in a complex,
constantly changing world is not possible.
This doesn’t mean that you don’t compete hard to win. When the ocean sup-
ply chain (plankton, ﬁsh, sharks, and other predators) is all in balance, it is beau-
tiful. But when you take out one of the predators in the chain, it gets all screwed
up, and ﬁsh and sharks start to starve and die out. So you need a balanced
supply chain, and when you are in a balanced set of relationships, you will all
survive.
The Big Change: Driving the Need for Real Time
An increasingly common set of discussions also revolves around the digitiza-
tion and active tracking of product and materials in the network – and not just
in the boardroom at Flex. In conversations with several executives at other com-
panies, we discussed the increasing focus on the digitization of supply chains
that were moving toward becoming live, fast, and intelligent. We have also pre-
sented this theme in several public and private forums, where the conversa-
tion inevitably turns to the need to understand the Internet of Things, in which
smart and connected objects are driving the digitization of the supply chain.
Here are a few examples:
r John Deere has formed an Enterprise Analytics Leadership Council which
seeks to build a strategy for analytics for the enterprise, to provide leadership
across the enterprise for analytics, and to identify opportunities for adopting
analytics techniques.
r Continental is discussing how automobiles will increasingly be automated
and connected to the Internet, resulting in an era of driverless vehicles.
r Drone technology is being explored for logistics, inspection of pipelines, and
an increasing number of tasks.
r IBM is rolling out cognitive analytics as a base for creating Watson Buyer
Assistant, BlueHound, and other technologies for assisting and eventually
replacing procurement buyers.
Clearly something bigger is going on here. The role of supply chains is becom-
ing increasingly important in what we believe is our next industrial revolution.
The World Economic Forum is calling digitization the Fourth Industrial Revo-
lution.12 They characterize it as follows:
12 http://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/01/the-fourth-industrial-revolution-what-it-means-
and-how-to-respond

1
The LIVING Supply Chain

The First Industrial Revolution used water and steam power to mech-
anize production (∼1784). The Second used electric power to create
mass production (∼1870). The Third used electronics and information
technology to automate production (∼1969). Now a Fourth Industrial
Revolution is building on the Third, and is producing the digital revo-
lution that has been occurring since the middle of the last century. It
is characterized by a fusion of technologies that is blurring the lines
between the physical, digital, and biological spheres. … The possibilities
of billions of people connected by mobile devices, with unprecedented
processing power, storage capacity, and access to knowledge, are unlim-
ited. And these possibilities will be multiplied by emerging technology
breakthroughs in ﬁelds such as artiﬁcial intelligence, robotics, the
Internet of Things, autonomous vehicles, 3D printing, nanotechnol-
ogy, biotechnology, materials science, energy storage, and quantum
computing.
But how will this revolution impact multi-enterprise networks of organizations
working in the supply chain? How did this digitization manifest itself? The idea,
of course was compelling, but how to operationalize this big, fuzzy concept
into practical approaches? This is what the analytics council at Deere and other
companies were trying to ﬁgure out.
Linton thought hard about what was going on here in our discussion at the
Pulse Center.
We are at an inﬂection point in the history of the ﬁeld. Real-time will
change the way we think about operating in a global economy, and how
we produce things and interact with them in the digital world. The new
supply chain is an interdisciplinary system that is driven by real-time
information, and which will transform the way companies operate with
one another. We need to make people aware of the importance of how
real-time data and information will interact with managers of the future.
We want them to think about velocity, not about statistical process con-
trol, lean manufacturing, or the theory of constraints. This will also
require a new kind of manager – one who is much more savvy about
working with data and who is comfortable gleaning information from
multiple sources of information.
This was the thinking that led us to begin this book. To begin to think about how
digitization can be exploited to drive competitive value, we have concluded that
the “intelligent” piece of the real-time supply chain needs to be combined with a
number of other cultural values within the organization and with the upstream
and downstream supply chain network. A good acronym that captures these


The LIVING Supply Chain
concepts is the LIVING supply chain, which forms the basis for the remaining
chapters in this book.
Characteristics of the LIVING Supply Chain
The principles of the LIVING supply chain embody this book’s key themes:
Live: Do you have a real-time (LIVE) view of your information?
Intelligent: Are you able to connect the essential leverage points in your net-
work through cloud, mobile, and other mediums to provide a platform for
analytics? Can you track the DNA of your supply chain at a part number level,
globally? Can the system evolve to link the objects in your supply chain?
Velocity: Is your entire enterprise and network focused on moving assets faster
than ever in its history?
Interactive: Is there a common governance structure that deﬁnes how obser-
vations are translated into issues, how they are monitored and validated, and
how they are translated into speciﬁc actions and responses?
Networked: Is your multi-enterprise supply chain networked so that a com-
mon and aligned view of business priorities and actions corresponds to trust-
ing relationships common to everyone?
Good: Is your network truly good, with a common cultural understanding that
transcends borders and views as strong principles integrity, doing the right
thing, and being transparent about your intentions and actions?
The idea of a LIVING network is a powerful metaphor for what is going on
at Flex. Flex recognizes that the “Intelligence of Things,” not the “Internet of
Things,” is the key driver for change in the new era. The Internet is just the util-
ity that keeps data ﬂowing in the system. The emergence of more automation,
3D printing, hyper regionalization, and omni-channel customer service needs
will be explicitly considered within an organization’s technology roadmap, with
the implicit assumption that these technologies will bear fruit in the next 2–5
years. This is not an unreasonable assumption, as the World Economic Forum
predicts a “supply-side miracle, with long-term gains in eﬃciency and produc-
tivity. Transportation and communication costs will drop, logistics and global
supply chains will become more eﬀective, and the cost of trade will diminish,
all of which will open new markets and drive economic growth.”
The idea of an organic, LIVING supply chain suggests that not only is the
supply chain an evolving, living organism, but that every product, and indeed
every worker who toils in our networked factories, suggests a part number and
human genome with endless requirements for transparency, in the same man-
ner that the mining of conﬂict minerals demands visibility to the nth level back-
ward into our material supply chains.

1
The LIVING Supply Chain

What’s Next?
The rain was still pouring down as we stepped out of the building that morning.
“Oh, and there is one more big change,” Tom said. “We are going to
need increasingly specialized skills for people working in the supply
chain. Generalists won’t cut it anymore. We need people who have deep
knowledge of procurement, analytics, logistics, transportation, com-
puter science, databases, and other unique skill sets. Because we can’t
teach people these things – they need to know what to do when they
come out of school.”
“But I also believe that the best soup has a lot of ingredients,” he said.
“Too much pepper, and it doesn’t work. So I like to mix up students we
hire from diﬀerent schools, and like seeing people from diﬀerent back-
grounds and genders. Otherwise, if you are too similar in recruiting,
you get a certain way of thinking that leads to bias. And in most cases
you need people from diﬀerent places – someone from North Carolina,
someone from Brazil, someone from Eastern Europe. Skill-building is
something I love to do. I just brought in an Eastern European I met in
one of the sites to be my director of the Pulse Center. I gave him the title
Vice President of Real Time! Let’s go meet him!”
We walked out into the drizzle of what was supposed to be sunny California.
The Super Bowl stadium was in the distance.



LIVE! Transparency as a Core Operating Value
This is the world we live in. If you are not real time, collaborative, mobile
and multi-enterprise, you can’t survive.
—Mike McNamara, CEO, Flex
The idea behind the Pulse Center is to enable people to have the RIGHT
information in REAL time. It is about having the right information, the
right parts, and the right deliveries available at the right time. And not all
information needs to be broadcast in real-time. It depends – on what it
is you need to know!
—Marcin Fic, Vice President of Real Time, Flex
Nothing about the Flex Innovation Center in Milpitas looked out of the ordi-
nary. A ﬂat-topped building, constructed like many of the other high-tech
companies along the Santa Clara–Milpitas–Mountain View sprawl we drove
through along the way. Our host noted that a Mexican restaurant that had just
celebrated its 25-year anniversary had been recently knocked down to make
room for expansion of Google’s headquarters – but that this was nothing new.
As we walked into the building, we were greeted by a group of young women,
one of whom was our tour guide for the day. We were introduced to a tall,
bespectacled fellow, Marcin Fic, Vice President, Supply Chain Solutions, but
whose preferred title is “Vice President of Real-Time.” Tom had recruited
Marcin from an Eastern European Flex site. Marcin worked at Flex for 14 years,
originally at a Flex factory in Poland as a planning manager and later as a mate-
rial director. He moved into the supply chain systems sector, seeking to align
its business processes with the tool set for Europe. “I got the oﬀer from Tom
to come on as a global lead for all supply chain solutions at Flex, and then he
proposed that I come out to San Jose,” Marcin said. “He told me he was getting
ready to make some big strategic and organizational changes, and that I needed
to be close to the action if I wanted to get in on it. And I did!”
The LIVING Supply Chain: The Evolving Imperative of Operating in Real Time, First Edition.
Robert Handﬁeld and Tom Linton.
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.


The LIVING Supply Chain
Figure .Flex Pulse Center. Source: Courtesy of Flex
When we arrived at Flex’s oﬃces, we were immediately taken into the
“theater” area. There we were inundated by a 360-degree movie about the
world of Flex, and the number of diﬀerent markets and projects they work in.
The closest thing to this experience was a 360 theater I’d been in at Disney
World. Not surprisingly, Michael Mendenhall, Flex’s Chief Marketing Oﬃcer,
spent 17 years at Disney and believes in making the customer visit a true
experience, complete with the brightly decorated Disney-like buses that take
visitors between buildings.
Our next stop was the Pulse CenterTM, shown in Figure 2.1. The center
was a means to connect all the parties at Flex to a centralized nerve center, to
keep everyone up to speed on what was happening across Flex’s network of
120 factories worldwide. As we walked into the Pulse Center, we saw a line of
laptops and desks facing a large oval room, half of which was covered with large
HDTV screens that spanned about 100 feet end-to-end. On the screens were
a multitude of maps, charts, graphs, and other indicators. But these weren’t
regular TV screens – they were touch TV screens. Our guide could use her
ﬁnger to move pictures around, double tap on a graph to “drill down” into the
data on the screen for a closer look, and swirl them around – much like I’d seen
in the latest Star Wars or Star Trek movie. This was almost too much for me to
take in!
“All the screens you see are also available on mobile devices. In fact, 90% of the
viewers aren’t looking at this information through the central Pulse Center, but
on their mobile devices. The idea is for anyone who is impacted by any global
event in the world at any time to be able to see what’s happening, comment
or add to the information, or even write about what they see when they see
something that is worth noting.”

2
LIVE! Transparency as a Core Operating Value

The year before, Francois Barbier, Group President of Operations at Flex,
required that all IT departments shift to a mobile platform where anyone any-
where can access and use solutions in app form, regardless of whether they were
in a Pulse Center.
The Vice President of Real Time explained this further:
Think about Henry Ford when he designed the Model T production line.
His emphasis was that people needed to have the parts available on the
line at the exact time they were needed. The same goes for information.
It’s not about having batch-based systems and intermittent downloads of
information in large quantities that no one can use. What people need
to make eﬀective decisions is the RIGHT data at the RIGHT time … .
not ALL the data ALL of the time! We needed to design a system that
was transparent, and that showed what was happening not just in our
facilities, but also in our supplier’s facilities. That spans not just produc-
tion, but social responsibility issues, and a real-time feed that allows us to
continually adapt to what is happening in our ecosystem. The data needs
to be ﬁltered to eliminate noise, translated into information and prior-
itized; only then we achieve the ultimate goal of accelerating decisions
that impact supply chain performance.
In one of the screens, one of the managers showed us video feed of workers
busily working in a factory. “Ideally, we’d have video feeds on all manufacturing
lines. This would be the epitome of transparency and conﬁrm that our expec-
tations for compliance with workforce policies are met throughout the supply
chain. We might want (in addition to all emergency actions around planning
& procurement) to monitor whether a critical production line is running
smoothly. Another example would be the case of a natural disaster; when there
was a ﬂood in Chennai, aﬀecting our Global Business Services center, we were
able to monitor the situation in and around the building, and see how high
the water was in the facility!”
“The Pulse CenterTM is about having multiple forms of the right data come
together in an integrated fashion, but it is critical that we decide what is critical
for us to monitor and watch. That is what makes us able to evolve. In fact, the
LIVING supply chain implies an ability to be able to evolve and adapt – which
is very organic and central to the way that our supply chain can operate. Supply
chain networks are inherently organic creatures. They are constantly changing.
Suppliers are being added or removed, transportation of material is constantly
ﬂowing, workers are active, coming and going, and machines are moving and
functioning and breaking down. A healthy supply chain is one that continues to
evolve. An unhealthy supply chain is one that stops adapting, and goes dormant
and static. If you aren’t constantly changing then you aren’t healthy – and that
is the end of your business and your life.”


The LIVING Supply Chain
“The idea of ‘real-time’ and ‘transparency’ are not always heard in the same
sentence – but they are here at Flex. Transparency refers to the ability to bi-
laterally exchange both data and qualitative information, to provide an open
view of issues, data, current state status quo conditions, and potential future
predictions of upcoming events. This ability to provide a ‘window into the
future’ is a predictive capability, that is not always part of transparency, but
which can occur. The digitization and technological developments in the ﬁeld
allow us to ensure that transparency occurs in real time, or as close to it as you
can achieve.”
Later that day when I returned from my tour, Tom added:
What’s stunning about Flex Pulse is that our CIO Gus Shahin was able to
take a simple design which I sketched on a piece of paper, and in the space
of three months build something beyond my expectations. The basic idea
I brought to our CEO was for a circular room that reached into every
dimension of supply chain. We ended up compromising to a semicircle
but the essential idea was to have a place where data could be pulled up
from wherever it resided, and through its visibility drive improvements.
We wanted to have our hands on the pulse, in real time of what was hap-
pening or about to happen around the world. Our initial goal was to start
with asset velocity to drive inventory improvements, but that expanded
rapidly to include other areas of the supply chain and the business.
In using Flex Pulse we ﬁnd we are entering into the supply chain in a
somewhat visceral way. When you start to touch and manipulate data
to simulate scenarios, you start heading down a path where concepts
around predictive and cognitive supply chains become real, and data
comes to life in ways not possible in a world of batch-based reporting
or managing.
The Second Rule of the LIVING Supply Chain
There is more evidence than ever that the “old rules” of “strategic supply chain
management” are fading in a time when transparency is the new law of the land
and collective innovation of enterprises in the global network is the driver for
growth. In a single-digit growth world, companies like Flex are an anomaly. The
company’s focus on the balance sheet, and not just the price of products, has
enabled it to produce cash from its balance sheet and buy back stock. Con-
tract manufacturing is by deﬁnition a low-margin business, but the company is
attractive because of its ability to manage working capital. Jim Cramer, host of
CNBC’s “Mad Money,” has raved about the company’s ability to co-innovate, its

2
LIVE! Transparency as a Core Operating Value

move into the “Intelligence of ThingsTM,” as well as its ability to produce cash.1
And the reason behind this is the focus on velocity.
Amazon and Flex are doing something that others have not yet mastered –
the ability to think strategically in terms of the entire supply chain, including
their partners, and to work closely with these partners to drive collective growth
and proﬁtability. This approach is equivalent to another law of the Serengeti
desert.
Serengeti Rule 2: Some species mediate strong indirect eﬀects through
trophic cascades. That is, some members of food webs have disproportion-
ately strong (top-down) eﬀects that ripple through communities and indi-
rectly aﬀect species at lower trophic levels.
New Supply Chain Rule 2: Enterprises that mediate indirect eﬀects down-
ward (and upward) in the supply chain by considering system eﬀects
will thrive. Those that do not will slow down and become extinct. We
propose that in a supply chain, some enterprises mediate strong direct and
indirect eﬀects in the supply chain, and those companies are proliferating an
approach to transparency and rapid response to events in the supply chain.
By promulgating the ability to rapidly adapt to uncertainty and change in
their ecosystem, they will ensure that other enterprises (creatures) that they
depend on, and which depend on them, will mutually beneﬁt and thrive.
Those that continue to operate in a silo, and fail to view the supply chain
as an ecosystem, will slow down and not be able to adapt.
A number of examples exist of this rule. Walmart is the obvious counterexam-
ple, as many have argued that Walmart exerts an undue but negative inﬂuence
on smaller companies, due to its volume of business (10% of US retail busi-
ness) and its ﬁerce emphasis on reducing prices. Walmart has been criticized
for reducing margins by imposing fees for using distribution centers and stores,
and delaying payments to suppliers. Walmart’s approach to squeezing price dis-
counts from suppliers for future purchases has worked for many years, but the
company has lately experienced slower growth and signs of attrition.2 In 2016,
it closed 269 stores, 154 in the United States, due to slowing growth.
On the other hand, organizations that have adopted an approach focused on
visibility, real-time response, and digitization have seen rapid growth. Amazon
is a leader in the retail space, and has grown signiﬁcantly, through their rev-
olutionized markets and online marketplace. In fact, we ﬁnd that WalMart is
now seeking to mimic Amazon, in the hopes of returning to its once-vaulted
position as the dominant keystone species. Others that are seeing growth and
1 http://ﬁnance.yahoo.com/video/cramer-believe-ﬂex-231500797.html
2 http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-09-11/wal-mart-sparks-battle-with-suppliers-
over-margin-squeezing-fees


The LIVING Supply Chain
inﬂuence through digitization and visibility include Apple, which drive many
diﬀerent software platforms and app developers, as well as Facebook, which
dominates much of social media and online advertising. Flex is also a ﬁrm that
is seeing major growth through its approach to digitization and virtually inte-
grated supply chains.
Coase and Williamson Wouldn’t Like This One Bit!
If the concept of complete transparency as a corporate value is diﬃcult for you
to swallow, you’re not alone. The transparency concept conﬂicts with many of
the traditional theoretical foundations of inter-organizational behavior.
One of the pioneers of inter-organizational behavior theory was the
economist Ronald Coase, who wrote The Theory of the Firm in 1937, while
working on his doctorate at the London School of Economics. When he wrote
the book, no one paid attention – economists were more interested in sup-
ply, demand, and the impact of prices in the market. After bouncing around
England at several schools, he ended up in a presentation at the University of
Chicago – presenting to none other than George Stigler and Milton Friedman.
In 2 hours, he blew these gurus away with his insights!
Coase argues that ﬁrms make economic sense because they reduce or elim-
inate the “transaction” cost of going to market by doing things in-house. The
assumption is that the external costs of doing business include negotiation, con-
tracting, and transfer of information on what ﬁrms want from their suppliers.
This argument made sense in 1937, when procurement was viewed primarily
as a transactional activity. The only focus they had was to drive prices down –
otherwise they kept their jobs in-house.
With the risk of outsourcing in the 1980s and 1990s, however, ﬁrms were try-
ing to drive out as many business processes as possible. The number of activi-
ties that went out to global suppliers in India, China, Vietnam, Brazil, Mexico,
and other “low-cost countries” was a function of lower costs – something that
Coase couldn’t have possibly imagined in 1937.
Even in a world of global outsourcing, however, digitization and the Internet
have caused many of the old costs of procurement transactions to decrease. As
ﬁrms move toward transparency, these transaction costs come close to disap-
pearing altogether. Because transactions occur electronically, systems facilitate
movements of funds and materials in a near-perfect vacuum. And as organiza-
tions seek to build collaborative relationships with a select group of suppliers,
contractual-related complexities related to higher transaction costs fall by the
wayside, to be replaced by exchange processes that are more eﬃcient, giving
rise to a new body of thinking around “social exchange theory” by sociologists
like Peter Blau (1964). Economist Oliver Williamson introduced a second set
of theoretical views with transaction cost analysis, which states that the risk of

2
LIVE! Transparency as a Core Operating Value

partner opportunism limits the eﬀectiveness of relational governance in
exchange relationships. This body of theory predicts that ﬁrms will exploit one
another through opportunistic behavior if they get too close to one another
through social exchanges.
Coase, however, was the ﬁrst to drive the insourcing–outsourcing argument.
Interestingly, Coase’s ﬁnal book, How China Became Capitalist (2012), notes
that the Chinese economic model and its trajectory diﬀers remarkably from
the Western experience. Certainly an important diﬀerence here is the radically
diﬀerent role of social exchange in outsourced relationships in China, owing
to the importance of both business and personal relationships that lie at the
heart of China’s Confucian culture. This concept, often referred to as “guanxi,”
is another subject altogether. Even shortly before his death in 2013, Coase was
still wondering why ﬁrms behave the way they do.
The point here is that Oliver Williamson’s traditional view of transaction cost
economics positions many relationships between ﬁrms as driven by transaction
costs. As visibility and digitization have disappeared, transaction costs have
shrunk to zero, turning his theory upside down, something Williamson could
never have imagined. The implications are signiﬁcant: data can no longer be
protected, but indeed must be shared to create the right insight and decision-
rights in the supply chain-extended network outside the four walls of the
company. We also will explore the fact that transparency is the “bridge of no
return” – you can’t go back once you’ve started down the path of transparency.
What Does Transparency Mean in Real Life?
The concept of transparency is one that every chief executive, CFO, chief risk
oﬃcer, and chief supply chain oﬃcer will agree is a positive attribute. Trans-
parency suggests that “you have nothing to hide,” and that you have nothing
but good news to share: “Here, see for yourself! We are completely open about
how we run this company, and have nothing to hide!” Every Wall Street ana-
lyst loves to hear this, as the company can only be judged based on what it has
in black and white in its SEC report. Companies that are “private” are not so
transparent, and generally can operate under a shroud of secrecy – which can
be a good and a bad thing.
But the transparency we are talking about in this book has nothing to do with
ﬁnancial reporting. It is much more about data, and how your organization and
the people in it think about data. An implicit “psychology” is associated with
sharing data in an open, collaborative supply chain. This is closely related to the
development of a “culture” that welcomes transparency, and sees it as a core
operating value not just for employees of a company, but for all parties in the
extended supply chain. And that’s when chief executives start to squirm and
become more uncomfortable, as we will see.


The LIVING Supply Chain
Nader Mikhail, the 30-year-old CEO of Elementum, spoke to me on my visit
to California, describing in a very forthright manner how transparency is chal-
lenging companies. Elementum was the company that built the platform that
created transparency in the Pulse.
“Think about LinkedIn, one of the most popular social networks,” Nader said.
“You control your own LinkedIn proﬁle, you control you own data in your pro-
ﬁle, and you as an individual can choose who to share your proﬁle with, as well
as the level of sharing that you want to provide. We have adopted this model for
our own platform, as we believe the LinkedIn model creates the right incentives
across the enterprise. Only now, you have included factories and suppliers who
control their own proﬁle. So I can tell you if I pass my audits and my suppliers
are conﬂict-mineral free, and I can also tell you what is helpful to you in under-
standing what is going on in my business. But by default, because this is now
an open network that allows a high level of transparency, there is an implicit
message sent if I choose NOT to tell you a few things about myself. And by
deﬁnition, you know that if I am not telling you something you need to know to
ascertain that your supply chain is operating appropriately, then your level of
suspicion will go up and the level of trust will go down.”
“This is creating a very interesting dynamic. People believe that large Fortune
500 companies are in control of supply chains. I believe the exact opposite is
happening today. Suppliers who have been beaten down for a long time are
ﬁnally coming into their own. The tide has changed, and has swung to creating
more power for suppliers than the OEMs in the network. Suppliers are more
agile, and OEMs are more dependent on them to deliver against the promises
they are making to their customers.”
“For instance, JeﬀBezos at Amazon is investing in his own transporta-
tion freight company, because FedEx would not commit to deliver against the
promises Amazon was making to their customers! So if we are more dependent
on our suppliers, then we need to make sure we have the right set of suppliers
in our network. We need to think about how we create trust and share infor-
mation, and develop relationships that foster the creation of open data shar-
ing. We need suppliers who will share their LinkedIn proﬁle with us. And in a
sense, nobody ‘owns’ the data. Because everyone has their own data, and they
can choose who they want to share it with – which is those partners with whom
you have the right set of relationships. The implication of this type of network
is very, very important, and people really struggle with it.”
“Several dimensions of transparency as it relates to increasing velocity are
worth exploring. These dimensions contrast with what ‘standard’ perceptions
or deﬁnitions of transparency typically engender. These views will cause you
to re-think whether your organization is prepared and willing to commit to
transparency as a corporate value.”
Tom added, “Transparency is a one-way bridge. When you cross it you
have to blow up the bridge behind you. It’s that signiﬁcant a change in how

2
LIVE! Transparency as a Core Operating Value

you think and what you do. At Flex we have expanded it to be called ‘Global
Citizenship.’ It’s who we are – being transparent becomes your identity and it’s
a value driven by our CEO and embraced now by our entire company. Our Chief
Human Resources Oﬃcer, Paul Baldessari, actually owns this for the company –
in eﬀect treating our supply chain with the same values that we expect of our
company.”
Sustainability in the supply chain is one of the most challenging issues at play
in the workplace. The challenge occurs because it is so diﬃcult to control what
happens in these factories, which are hidden from the world.
In its Pulse Center, Flex is experimenting with cameras to supplement real-
time data with real-time communications, leveraging state-of-the-art video
networks.
Monitoring activity in a factory halfway around the world is much more dif-
ﬁcult than it seems. Auditors can be brought in with a checklist of things to
look for. They may look at ﬁnancial and payroll records, interview workers,
inspect the facilities, and conduct any number of activities related to due dili-
gence. Such audits, however, do not guarantee that a supplier is meeting com-
pany expectations. And all it takes is a single employee who decides to “sab-
otage” the owner because they have a grudge, and issues a complaint to take
down the stock price using a Twitter account. So the issue is – how can fac-
tory networks in apparel, electronics, and other areas eﬀectively become aware
of issues before they reach the mass media and are broadcast and possibly
misinterpreted?
To become truly transparent requires that organizations also have living,
breathing supplier networks that adopt a similar manifesto for data trans-
parency. The implication is that organizations must strive to work with sup-
pliers that have the same set of moral imperatives and integrity as employees
within their organization. This also may mean that the lowest bid supplier is not
always the best choice – a transparent supplier, on the other hand, may have a
higher product price, but may have the lowest total cost when all other factors
are considered. So how can organizations inspire transparency when it comes
to sustainable outcomes in their supply base?
Tom Linton has some very strong ideas about transparency as sustainability.
“We have to be able to map the genome of our supply chain partners, just like
we do with objects and material,” he said. “Think of it – we have barcodes on
everything. Every object now has or will have a part number and a country of
origin on it that tells you where it came from, who made it, what countries it
passed through on the way to getting to you, and all of the enterprises it passed
through on the way to your location. You will also become part of that genome.
We need to be able to do the same mapping for the labor issue.”
He pointed to a bottle of water on his desk. “You need to have a source code
that tells you where that bottle of water was bottled, the source of the water,
the well it was drawn from and the place it came from. Why not? You can then


The LIVING Supply Chain
go down to the chromosome level, and look at the mitochondria – and map
out each element of glue, rubber, and source of the plastic. This is the organic
analogy to supply chain management – it has to be that deep. The only way we
can get our arms around this issue is to be able to have a problem in a factory
ﬂashed to us through the network, telling us we have an issue with a speciﬁc
tier 3 supplier and a speciﬁc individual who has a problem at that factory. It
is a warning indicator, like a tire pressure light, that something in a particu-
lar factory is out of alignment, and you get that message in real time. Perhaps
the factory hasn’t done adequate criminal background checks, or is using ille-
gal migrant workers and working them 80 hours a week. Whatever the issue,
there needs to be an indicator light. Until that level of transparency becomes
available, you are subject to the random behaviors and events associated with
supply chain disruption.”
Transparency as a Corporate Value with Roots
in Financial Accountability
Transparency is a concept that goes back not only to the laws of public account-
ability and generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), but to the concept
of shareholder accountability. Organizations that are open about their opera-
tional strengths and weaknesses are taking a stance that the markets can decide
on the fair value of the company, but market perceptions have nothing to do
with corporate integrity and leadership. In eﬀect, transparency takes the stance
that being an open book will always lead to the best outcome.
This is a tough proposition for many chief operating oﬃcers and chief risk
oﬃcers to swallow. Nader Mikhail, the CEO of Elementum, states it this way:
I speak to a lot of COOs and risk oﬃcers – and I always ﬁnd it comical to
compare their reactions between the ﬁrst and the third meetings we have
together. The ﬁrst meeting inevitably involves conversations such as “this
kind of transparency could get me in real trouble!” By the third meeting,
however, the dialogue goes something like “Hey, this stuﬀis happening
anyways! If I could know about it sooner, I might be able to minimize the
damage.”
Flex has undertaken its journey with Elementum to achieve its goal of becom-
ing hyper-transparent. Flex’s fundamental vision is to let everyone who needs
to know what is going on – and that is a very wide net – have full-real-time visi-
bility to this information. The opposite view, held by many companies today, is,
“If anything bad comes up, we need to cover it up and ﬁx it as quickly as possible,
and hope that no one ﬁnds out about it!” But if we go about running a business
pretending that bad things aren’t happening, we will never make things better.

2
LIVE! Transparency as a Core Operating Value

Nader oﬀered a great example.
The world is full of problems. Is there crime in the city of Pittsburgh?
Yes, of course, just like in any major metropolitan area. Is there any city
that doesn’t have crime? No! Does that mean we should try to hide the
fact that there is crime? Of course not! But if we actually have data that
tracks the location and types of crime, and make the community aware
of it, we can get all of the eyes and ears of people out there in the com-
munity more aware of what is going on, and they can become part of the
solution.
Similarly, Flex is an organization with 200,000 employees – a city smaller
then the size of Pittsburgh. We start with the assumption that there will
be crime – counterfeit, fraud, and so on (a topic covered in Chapter 6).
But if we develop a capability to identify crime, deal with it, move quickly
to respond to crime when it happens, conduct post-mortems to identify
the source of crime and get ahead of it – then my city will always be
tougher on crime and there will be less of it.
As Tom pointed out “It’s not easy – our CEO had to call a meeting with the
senior executives just to make sure everyone understands that this kind of
transparency is not an option. It’s not something you do one day and not the
next or for one thing and not the other – it is everything. It is who and what
we are.”
The Transparent Supply Chain
Standard views of transparency in supply chains are often related to the concept
of “inventory visibility” and “schedule visibility.” In fact, most corporate plan-
ning and inventory systems operate oﬀmaterial requirement planning (MRP)
systems, often encapsulated within broader enterprise resource planning (ERP)
systems. These systems typically operate in a “batch” mode – they recalculate
information based on feeds coming in from such sources as EDI transmissions,
advanced ship notices, manual inventory counts, warehouse management sys-
tems, distribution planning systems, material planning systems, etc. Unfortu-
nately, neither the quality of the data in these systems, nor the timeliness of
the information, is reliable, and therefore, it is always suspected. I’ve spoken
to people who maintain that they have to wait until the end of the month to
know whether they’ve met their delivery and shipment and inventory targets,
and whether they are on track. (Returning to the vehicle metaphor: Imagine if
you got a report only once a month telling you how fast and how far you had
driven that month.)


The LIVING Supply Chain
The Elementum platform was designed on the assumption that only real-time
information is reliable and useful. Elementum has a mobile device app for each
function. There is SOURCE for procurement, TRANSPORT for shipments, and
INVENTORY for planning, as well as an EXECUTIVE APP that allows cross-
functional visibility. Each function has its own culture and peculiarities when
it comes to data form and type, and to how employees like to view it and act on
it. But the source of the data comes from the same single source of truth.
An important component of the system is an organization’s unique culture,
and how people in the organization make decisions. For example, centralized
organizations have a strong center of gravity, with decisions emanating from the
core (usually senior executives). Decentralized organizations are the opposite,
with a high degree of decision-making authority allocated to people in the ﬁeld.
Center-led organizations are in the middle, with some decisions relegated to
centralized decision-makers who collect analytics, with governance allowing
other decisions to be made by empowered ﬁeld workers. There is no “right”
organizational model, by the way – and these models often shift, based on a
ﬁrm’s “re-organization,” especially those occurring when leadership changes.
Your ﬁrm’s governance structure also should be designed with the organiza-
tion model in mind. In a decentralized environment with ﬁve business units,
each business unit is run separately, and the supply chain for each SBU may
be run in an integrated fashion, but only within the business unit. So there is
cross-functional data visibility, but only within each business unit. In a cen-
tralized structure, a common platform and approach spans all ﬁve units, and
control over who sees and doesn’t see the data may be delegated by speciﬁc
user “admin rights” established in the system.
The designation of administrative rights is core to the concept and spirit of
transparency. Some rules of thumb include:
1. People who are most directly impacted by information need to see it.
2. People who see or hear events that impact the supply chain (e.g., disruptive
events, problems) are empowered to “create an issue.”
3. Issues are normally reviewed and validated. All data input into the system
must be validated before it is dispersed.
4. Data is typically shared within a business unit or functional group, unless it
requires escalation to more senior levels.
5. Everyone empowered to see data can add insights, input, and other factors.
This is important, as a piece of data may not mean much to a senior exec-
utive, but could be interpreted very diﬀerently by someone else in the ﬁeld,
requiring that data to be escalated in importance.
6. A user group called “executives” can have complete visibility. However, indi-
vidual users who are creating users may not want the “noise” to go all the way
up the chain – so data can be “abstracted” up to the executive level using a
“permissions” model.

2
LIVE! Transparency as a Core Operating Value

7. Every organization is unique; data transparency “toggles” need to be ﬂipped
based on the unique strategy and desired organizational communication
model.
One element Elementum is developing relates to the TRANSPORT module
which is focused on all movement of material in the supply chain. This is
especially important for trans-ocean shipping, which traditionally has been
considered the “black hole” of supply chain visibility. Think about it – once a
shipment of products is put into a container, it is loaded onto a truck, taken to
a port, and put on a ship. The ship leaves the harbor … and then what? Nobody
knows where their stuﬀis until the ship, maybe, provides an update – but that
could happen days later. And once the ship lands at a port … forget about it! We
all know how non-automated port operations are, and a ship could be at port
for days before it is even unloaded and put onto a truck for its next destination.
Although some shipping companies are seeking to embed transmitting devices
in their containers, products are still pretty much invisible when they are on a
boat in the middle of the Paciﬁc Ocean, where there are no Wi-Fi connections.
That is starting to change. Until recently, companies like Maersk, one of the
largest shipping lines in America, were getting 12-hour updates on their loca-
tion – which is still infrequent – a far cry from “real-time.” Maersk is working
with Elementum to explore ways not only to generate GPS satellite signals
from the ship, but to discover ways to generate container signals and even
product-level signals to provide greater transparency of shipment movements.
And Maersk is also ﬁnding out that customers are willing to pay extra for this
level of service.
One problem with traditional shipping lines is that they have focused on per
unit cost savings, NOT on speed and ﬂexibility. In today’s challenging economy,
which focuses on velocity and working capital reduction, this strategy is mov-
ing in the exact opposite direction of the competitive trends of transport cus-
tomers. Airbus made a similar mistake in designing the A380, a massive passen-
ger plane for long-haul trans-Paciﬁc ﬂights. While per passenger economics are
good, this system requires that airlines ﬁll the plane to the brim to derive bene-
ﬁt. This system thus limits the number of locations and ﬂights available to pas-
sengers, as well as the size of the airports they can use. On the other hand, the
787, a much more fuel-eﬃcient plane designed for smaller destinations, oﬀers
more ﬂexibility for shorter routes and does not have to be full to derive value.
Recently a logistics company, Matson Logistics, began running a “fast boat”
from Shanghai, China to Long Beach, California. The idea was to provide a pre-
mium, fast, and ﬂexible service for priority shipments, targeted for customers
who value velocity over cost. To speed up port operations, Matson invested in
its own terminal at Long Beach, thus controlling delivery without being held
hostage to local port operators. Matson’s ocean services, company-operated
warehouses on the East and West Coasts, and 53-foot intermodal containers


The LIVING Supply Chain
create a network of asset-based services that support a supply chain from
China to virtually any point in North America. The company also has devel-
oped strong relationships with rail and trucking providers to complete its broad
menu of logistics services. This unique mix of resources allows the company to
tailor speciﬁc solutions for a customer, and to remain agile as the customer’s
needs change. Matson’s most important capability is that it provides a guar-
anteed delivery time across the Paciﬁc. The combination of both velocity and
consistency is a diﬀerentiated oﬀering for which many global supply chain com-
panies are willing to pay.
Management Principles for Executing Visibility Strategies
As organizations move toward visible, high-velocity, transparent supply chains,
a number of fundamental but diﬃcult questions arise:
r How do we extend concept visibility and control beyond our four walls to
drive better execution in our supply chain?
r How do we get materials from suppliers to partners to customers – given that
we rely primarily on spreadsheets and email to interact?
r How do we understand and limit the data we focus on for decision-making?
The problem in most supply chains is not that there is “not enough data,”
because data is being created from machines, from people, from systems,
and from external sources. No, the problem is too much data, not too little!
r What do I care about and therefore focus on? The primary factor that will
hinder my ability to get products and services to customers. This means ﬁnd-
ing the right data, the right tools, and the exceptions, and rendering decisions
based on the data excerpts available. No easy task.
r How do we identify problems that are hidden in the mass of unﬁltered data
we have today? Often the sources of information are hidden in piles of data
that we don’t think about. For example, Elementum identiﬁed the Tianjin
explosion when someone took a photo of the explosion, tagged it, and posted
it on Sina Weibo, the Chinese version of Twitter. Social media feeds are just
one more form of intelligence that can be leveraged to deal with the ﬂood of
information. But the challenge is that although companies have all sorts of
news and media monitoring, very little of it is actionable information.
The problem thus becomes contextualized into the following sets of questions:
r How do we translate information and data into the context of our company
and our situation, and leverage this information into actionable insights?
r How will real-time intelligence help me any more than what I’m doing today?
r What impact does digitization (the Internet of Things, or IoT) have on my
organization and my employees?
r Will digitization change the way we measure things and monitor metrics?

2
LIVE! Transparency as a Core Operating Value

Figure .Wildebeest in the Serengeti Trophic Cascade. Source: Reproduced with
permission of iStock
This brings up another rule that was observed in the Serengeti desert, based
on the growth of the wildebeest population, and that also applies to digitized
supply chains (see Figure 2.2).
It turns out that the wildebeest is a keystone species in the Serengeti ecosys-
tem (see Figure 2.3). This wasn’t immediately obvious, until a virus began killing
the wildebeest hordes in the 1950s. This virus was eradicated in 1963, and dis-
appeared entirely in wildebeest calves born after 1964. This resulted in a boom
in the wildebeest population, which reduced the amount of grass, leading to
fewer ﬁres, more trees, and then more giraﬀes and other species.
The population of predators that fed oﬀwildebeest (lions and jackals) also
increased. This led to the third rule observed in the ecosystem.
Serengeti Rule 3: Some species compete for common resources. Species
that compete for space, food, or habitat can regulate the abundance of other
species. In the example above, the wildebeests’ many direct and indirect
eﬀects on grasses, ﬁre, trees, predators, giraﬀes, herbs, insects, and other
grazers reveal that they have disproportionate impacts on the structure and
regulation of communities. In eﬀect, wildebeests dominate the Serengeti.
What makes this rule interesting is that there is a natural limit to the growth
of some species, based on consumption of resources. If species are starved of


The LIVING Supply Chain
Figure .Wildebeest Herd. Source: Reproduced with permission of iStock
resources, their numbers decline. Therefore, it makes sense that species that
operate using the optimal amount of resources will stay in balance, along with
the entire network. Balance is the key to a healthy Serengeti desert, where all
species balance each other out. If species are competing for common resources,
then those that are able to either ﬁnd alternative resources, or survive with
fewer resources, will thrive. This leads to Supply Chain Rule 3a.
New Supply Chain Rule 3a: Enterprises operating at higher velocity con-
sume fewer resources and will thrive. Some enterprises drive multiple
supply chains and impact many industries, pulling in materials, intellectual
capital, and talent. For example, Intel’s invention of the microchip had a per-
vasive and massive impact on multiple industries beyond the personal com-
puter. Similarly, Apple’s invention of the iPhone created a massive demand
for contract labor, which resulted in the explosion of ﬁrms like FoxConn,
resulting in millions of jobs in China. But those companies that were able to
do so using fewer resources, with less material and lower inventories, moved
more nimbly in this environment. Outsourcing was only part of the solution
here; even outsourcing requires a delicate balancing act to work across the
network without decreasing customer satisfaction.
Organizations that operate with fewer resources are leaner, and are able to
ﬂow resources through their chain. Flow in this context refers to material ﬂow,

2
LIVE! Transparency as a Core Operating Value

information ﬂow, transactional ﬂows, and ﬂows of services, funds, resources,
and capabilities. Indeed, multiple forms of ﬂow go up and down the echelons
of a supply chain. The problem of increasing ﬂow has existed since the early
days of Just-in-Time. However, the newest approaches stem from being able to
employ cloud-based computing and real-time data in a way that has never been
feasible before.
Elementum’s Dana Martin’s presentation at the 33rd Semi-Annual Supply
Chain Resource Cooperative meeting at North Carolina State University on
April 22, 2016 addressed the many challenges of the supply chain, and Elemen-
tum’s journey to drive information ﬂow across supply chains for their software
clients to drive improved problem-solving.
Dana (Head of Product Development) emphasized the need to think
about the next generation of supply chains. “Vertical integration went
away because we have moved in the direction of running virtual vertical
integration,” he said. “Brand owners are a key part of this. Companies like
Flex are looking for ways to integrate vertically, not just on product man-
ufacturing, but also in terms of how to collaborate better to drive more
eﬃciency. This also implies the need to restructure contractual terms to
be able to ensure that as problems arise – whether due to ﬂuctuations in
demand or other factors – managers can quickly adapt to these changes
in the supply chain to drive the right outcome.”
“This ability to contextualize data into decision-making does not occur
overnight. It is an evolution that occurs in stages. Today, we are mostly
reactive, because we are so close to the problem. Though you may not
realize it, executives aren’t making many decisions, because there aren’t
many to make! Executives are forced down a path because they found
out too late. But if we can begin to learn about problems earlier, we will
have more options, and very often these options happen to have much
lower costs.”
Data Crosses Functional Silos
Dana emphasized that the shifts he described are happening as ﬁrms drive vis-
ibility into the supply chain. “The responsive piece is all about how to align
teams not just internally, but across the organization,” he said. “We are used to
operating in functional silos that involve managing people and keeping them
in buckets, and the data these people are exposed to reinforce these silos. And
very often, the processes those functions have are within silos as well. A prob-
lem in procurement can impact manufacturing and logistics and planning, but
often these dots are never connected, so there never emerges a cross-functional


The LIVING Supply Chain
approach to working on them. But when we connect the dots linking a problem
to other functions, we can create a coordinated and multidisciplinary team that
together is able to solve the problem faster.”
OK, great! We now know that cross-enterprise data can be automated and
can tie people together. Big deal – people have been saying that for years. The
real challenge is not only automating this process, but ensuring that only the
exceptions are used to pull the functional silos together to solve problems. Let
me emphasize that: The exceptions govern. They bring the right team of people
from silos together to solve a problem. So what an enterprise needs is a mech-
anism that pulls exceptions and puts together in real time, a cross-functional
team that operates across the end-to-end supply chain (including manufactur-
ing sites, 3PL, 4PL, transportation, distribution sites, and suppliers). This mech-
anism must be driven not simply by external impacts, such as ﬂoods in Houston
or explosions in Tianjin. It must work at a far more ﬁnite level to extract data
showing events that impact the overall eﬃciency and throughput of our supply
chains.
Monitoring Small Events, Not Black Swans
The mechanism for screening data is therefore not just about tracking black
swan events, so-called because they are rare and diﬃcult to predict. It doesn’t
make sense to optimize your supply chain in expectation of a black swan. The
challenge is to ﬁlter out small issues and everyday events. Customers change the
quantity they ship inside of lead times set by the supply base, and the quantities
double. There is a quality problem in production and the schedule falls behind
while the problem is being resolved. The server goes down for an hour and shuts
down communication. Or there is a quantity shortage on a critical raw material
at a sub-tier supplier that delays shipment by a day.
These types of small but important events require the attention of a cross-
functional team, composed of individuals from multiple functions, including
design, marketing, sales, order fulﬁllment, logistics, procurement, manufactur-
ing, and suppliers. A demand ﬂuctuation or a planning issue, if left unresolved,
can quickly escalate into a bigger problem unless it is solved using the right
team. The late delivery may be escalated if there is a contractual obligation with
the customer. Small issues represent friction on the ﬂow of the supply chain
that drives up cost and impacts customer satisfaction. Addressing these issues
requires a small team for the initial assessment, then building a larger team if
the problem is bigger than anticipated. The speed at which teams are drafted
and combined to solve problems is in direct proportion to the ﬁrm’s ability to
solve the problem quickly at a low cost and minimize this friction.
A problem in on-time customer delivery, say, really only becomes a major
problem if it is not visible across a multi-carrier network route. A ﬁrm’s ability

2
LIVE! Transparency as a Core Operating Value

to quickly become aware of the problem and solve it means having the right
data pulled and put in front of decision-makers at the right place and the right
time. Improved decision-making occurs when data is presented in a fashion
that escalates speciﬁc information on an issue to decision-makers. This is also
challenging if decision-makers are dispersed across Brazil, the UK, the US, and
other locations. The worst-case scenario is that everyone believes everything is
ﬁne until the customer notices that they haven’t received their stuﬀ, and con-
tacts the company to inquire about it. This is eﬀectively the customer’s ﬁrst
recognition that the delivery is late, but by that time, it will be too late to do
anything about it. The late delivery has already occurred. So buyers are now in
ﬁreﬁghting mode, trying to ﬁnd the right data to explain where the shipment is
and why it’s late. No matter how this issue is resolved, the shipment is already
late and the customer is upset.
Assumptions for Creating Transparency
The problem, of course, is that information in the supply chain is never com-
plete, and will always contain bad data. Even as US-based companies world-
wide invest in standard softwares such as SAP and Oracle, availability and
consistency of data produced by these systems will never be 100% stable. And
when a ﬁrm’s supply chain expands to places like China, Vietnam, and Latin
America, where emerging country customers are located, the variability in data
standards and integrity only increases, as many individuals in these regions are
still communicating with fax machines and phones.
The de facto position, therefore, should be that data is relatively easy to get,
often contains errors and incomplete datasets, and is produced by a multitude
of technologies. Any visibility system must be constructed with these tenets in
mind. Elementum uses non-relational databases that have no set data schemas,
allowing them to input any kind of data that will be stored and analyzed. Graph-
ical interconnections between people, parts, and functions are constructed to
enable a problem in one area to be immediately linked and related to another
area, where the problems can be quickly scanned and potentially solved. This
approach of linking data through non-traditional forms of relationships is
the true “secret sauce” behind eﬀective visibility systems in real-time supply
chain systems. It is a characteristic that makes the approach powerful and
actionable.
How are these connections identiﬁed, established, and hard-coded into the
visibility system? Dana notes, “We want to understand your end-to-end supply
chain, and begin by literally mapping the entire supply chain from supply dis-
tribution through to customers. We want to know where your subassemblies
come from, at as granular a level as we possibly can, which is the level at which
there is speciﬁc risk. We want to know how you are organized, where you have


The LIVING Supply Chain
external dependencies, whether it is a location, a supplier, or something else,
and how these elements are interconnected to your supply chain.”
This simple mapping activity should be happening anyhow – but companies
often overlook this tool, even though it can drive continuous improvement and
visibility.
In one example, Elementum mapped out a client’s supply chain and found
that 93 sites in the network relied on a sole source. Of these sole sources, only
4% had a possible second source available. This was a current existing supply
base. When these sites were mapped against revenue streams, it was discovered
that 86% of the company’s revenues were tied to suppliers in a small region of
Malaysia. Any disasters in this region would shut down 86% of revenues! In this
environment, the company was seeking to lower inventory and working capital,
but was not tracking the risk impact of its supply chain design.
A recent study by the Center for Advanced Purchasing Studies also aligns
with the concept of the “kill shot,” by identifying what researchers call “nexus
suppliers.” A nexus supplier refers to a supplier that is critical to a buying ﬁrm’s
operations because of its structural position in the ﬁrm’s supply network (i.e.,
how its business relationships are structured with other ﬁrms in the focal ﬁrm’s
extended supply network). Physically, a nexus supplier may be several tiers
removed from the buying ﬁrm, and hence not directly noticeable. As a con-
sequence, the challenge is identifying nexus suppliers so that a buying ﬁrm can
proactively manage its suppliers, be better prepared to take advantage of poten-
tial beneﬁts (e.g., innovation opportunities), and also mitigate the associated
risks (e.g., materials ﬂow disruption).
Nexus suppliers diﬀer from strategic suppliers in two ways. First, nexus sup-
pliers are critical because of their structurally embedded positions inside the
supply network, while strategic suppliers are critical based on the character-
istics of their products, services, or technologies. Second, nexus suppliers can
be located anywhere in a supply network, while strategic suppliers are typically
located in the ﬁrst tier of the network. In other words, nexus suppliers might
not be directly visible to a focal ﬁrm, while strategic suppliers will likely be
visible.3
To give you an idea of what a typical supply chain looks like, CAPS (the Cen-
ter for Advanced Purchasing Studies) examined the Honda of America supplier
network. They found that of Honda’s 10,832 suppliers, 245 are ﬁrst-tier, 1643
are second-tier, 4605 are third-tier, and 4339 are fourth-tier. These 10,833
supplier companies span 83 countries and 66 industry sectors. The researchers
also composed a “nexus supplier index” (NSI) and computed NSI scores for
all suppliers in the second and third tiers of Honda’s supply network. The NSI
score indicates a supplier’s overall structural importance in the network. In
3 Shao, B., Shi, Y., and Choi, T. Y., “Feasibility Study of a Nexus Supplier Index Identifying and
Categorizing Nexus Suppliers through Business Analytics,” Center for Advanced Purchasing
Studies, 2016.

2
LIVE! Transparency as a Core Operating Value

tiers two and three of Honda’s supply network, the CAPS Study found major
multinational companies (such as Siemens, SAP, Hewlett-Packard, and General
Electric) as potential nexus suppliers across such diverse industry sectors as
electronics, semiconductors, chemicals, software development, and the like.
The study also identiﬁed companies of which Honda supply managers were
unaware.
The importance of understanding what node in the supply chain can be dis-
rupted and the cost of what happens when these areas of our supply chain are
shut down, is at the core of the “kill shot” concept. Mapping and linking the sup-
ply chain structure creates these insights, and causes executives to rethink how
they should rationalize their supply base, in a way that considers the many fac-
tors associated with risk. Executives also must consider how to establish leading
indicators of suppliers to identify when a disruptive event occurs, and to ﬁnd
ways of working more proactively to mitigate that risk. This involves thinking
through the types of data coming from diﬀerent locations in the supply chain,
and how to leverage this information correctly. This requires establishing a sin-
gle data platform that collects incoming data, and then ﬁlters the data into an
issues management system. A ﬁrm’s challenge is to establish the criteria that
will identify the exceptions, tie them to the problems created, and escalate the
exceptions to the people who can solve these problems.
This is much easier said than done, of course. Consider the example of Gen.
Stanley McChrystal and the “Team of Teams” he created in Iraq. (This was a
foundation of the thinking that went into the Flex/Elementum platform). In
Iraq, every intelligence agency had its own data platform, and its own intelli-
gence in its own databases. No one was sharing data with anyone else in the
service. This “siloed data” made getting actionable information to execute mis-
sions on a timely basis diﬃcult. Once the teams began working independently
yet in a uniﬁed fashion, and the entire operation’s intelligence data resided in a
single platform accessible to all, data became much more actionable and help-
ful to troops on the ground. The new system allowed the operations to ramp
up from 6 to 300 missions a month, as better intelligence allowed the teams to
connect the dots on what they were seeing.
The concept also applies to such supply chain problems as not getting deliv-
eries to customers on time. Creating a data platform can allow individuals to
more quickly and easily understand why problems are occurring, which in turn
speeds up the velocity of decision-making. The goal, which ties back to our sup-
ply chain theory of everything, is simply to speed up the number of “wins” and
slow down the occurrence of “losses.”
Several key characteristics of creating supply chain visibility should be
remembered here:
r The transformation is a journey – it doesn’t happen overnight.
r End-to-end visibility is necessary not just for individual functions, but across
the enterprise.


The LIVING Supply Chain
r Data freshness is critical. Instead of periodic roll-ups, data transmission
needs to happen in real time.
r The supply chain context should move from internal to global, manual anal-
ysis to decision assistance, and shift functional silo’s decisions to cross-
organization, cross-enterprise problem resolution methods. Issue tracking
via emails and phone calls should move toward enterprise issue management.
A Shipping Example
Many examples illustrate how quickly formed teams can focus on immediate
problems when the right data is put in front of them. A typical example exists
for companies importing goods into the United States from China, Vietnam, or
India. Let’s say a company has a product shipped from Asia to the port of Long
Beach, then puts it on a truck to distribution centers and customers. Suddenly,
the monitoring system picks up a Twitter feed from truckers at the port, one of
whom notes, “We are seeing a slowdown in productivity at Long Beach, from
12- hour to 48-hour ship unloads.” (By the way, this is not at all an uncommon
event in the Long Beach Port). This may seem like an unimportant event, but
the system also notes that the predicted ripple eﬀect impact is that shipping
times to customers will extend from 6 days to 12 days! To avoid late shipments
to customer distribution centers, a team of transportation planners, analysts,
and customer service representatives convene virtually and proactively devise
options to avoid paying late-delivery fees. They might ask:
r Can we reship the product to another location?
r Can we repackage a similar product already in the distribution center’s inven-
tory and deliver that product to the customer on time?
r Can we expedite the product from the port once it gets through Customs?
In this manner, the team adjusts the dials on its supply chain so that a practi-
cal and feasible option is developed and executed. The customer gets a phone
call about the situation and how the team has resolved it, and is immediately
relieved to have dodged a bullet!
This example illustrates how real-time data, when structured in the right
form and which is selective in nature, ﬂows through the organization in such a
way that it brings together key decision-makers across functions to solve real
supply chain problems. Dana noted that the full implications of this approach
are still being ﬁgured out, and that Elementum is working with its customers
to explore how best to structure the ﬂow of real-time data to drive the right
level of cross-functional and cross-industry problem-solving. Information ﬂow
is key to reducing friction in the supply chain. Understanding information ﬂows
begins by understanding how work occurs, and the speciﬁc workﬂow that takes
place when there are “exceptions” in the supply chain. As noted earlier, an

2
LIVE! Transparency as a Core Operating Value

“exception” is anything that slows ﬂow: product disruptions, material problems,
quality problems, lack of information, long cycle times, or any other headache
that is part of a typical supply chain planners’ everyday job.
The Old Way of Doing It
Today, exceptions are primarily managed by email. No analytics are involved –
just an email that tells a planner that there is a problem, and somebody has to
ﬁx it. Typically, the planner will look at an Excel spreadsheet, comb through the
data ﬁles, try to ﬁnd the right contact person, and begin making phone calls.
The planner is likely trying to ﬁnd out which products are tied to the supply
chain event, which suppliers are involved, which transportation providers are
impacted, and most importantly, which customers will feel the impact and be
irate at the end of the day. But since every planner does it diﬀerently, there isn’t a
document work ﬂow process at all. So the initial problem results in the planner
(or whoever gets the email) trying to get to the root of the problem.
In doing so, he or she will pull in 20 other people, both inside and outside
the organization. The boss has been pulled into the problem, and everyone is
involved in trying to understand what has happened. Too often, not all of the
20 people SHOULD be involved, as this is a problem over which they have no
decision-making authority and which will not aﬀect them. But they are pulled in
anyway. As a result, all the strategic initiatives they are working on get pushed to
the side, because it’s “All hands on deck,” and “We have an Emergency!” (Every-
body hates an emergency case). The day-to-day issues have once again taken
priority, so there is no time to work on driving down lead times, improving
eﬃciencies, working capital reduction, initiating innovative projects, or other
important strategic initiatives.
Deﬁning Workﬂow for Unexpected Issues
However, optimizing the ﬂow of information across the supply chain signiﬁ-
cantly curtails the number of people who get pulled into these emergencies.
Because there is a workﬂow around how to deal with exceptions, and real-time
data is broadcast to people’s mobile devices, everyone knows the protocol. As
a result, CxOs are only pulled into these problems once a month or once a
quarter, when their level of insight is absolutely required. They can check their
mobile devices to learn the status of a problem without getting involved, and
can assess the magnitude of the issue, the history of the issue to date, and choose
whether to get involved. These executives will feel the same level of control as
before, are not taken by surprise by issues, and are kept informed on all updates
and resolutions. They also are free to push the top-level strategic initiatives
down into the organization when they see ﬁt, and involve lower-level people
who would otherwise spend their entire day on issue management.


The LIVING Supply Chain
To enable this capability, it is important to document which parties across
functions should be the “owners” of an issue. Granted, this depends on the type
of issue involved. In addition, a counterparty may be involved: a customer-
facing brand owner, a logistics planner, a supplier, or others. It is imperative
upfront to understand and deﬁne which parts of the organization need to be
involved, and to ensure that these sectors are part of the real-time data ﬂows
when an issue is triggered in their domain of responsibility. This leads us to
Supply Chain Rule 3b.
New Supply Chain Rule 3b: Static Supply Chain Risk Probabilities Aren’t
Predictive in Managing Supply Chain Disruptions.
Why Static Risk Probabilities Won’t Work
Many supply chain risk management systems are predicated on being able to
“predict” where the next major event and issue will occur. The theory is that
by predicting the likelihood of an event, we can buﬀer against it by employing
extra inventory, replicating capabilities, enlisting two supply sources, and other
approaches. This is often known as “building a resilient supply chain.”4
Tom Linton disagrees with this approach. Predicting where the next disrup-
tion will occur and creating redundancies is a way of creating extra waste in the
supply chain. “Supply chain resiliency sounds expensive!” he said. “I don’t want
to build up a bunch of inventory and extra capabilities for something that I don’t
even know will occur. And how are people coming up with these probabilities?
In most cases, it’s a guess, using subjective factors. Resilience is about creat-
ing even more friction and slowing down your supply chain. It sounds bulky.
Who wants to drive a tank down the street that can withstand anything? I’d
much rather drive a Ferrari and get there that much quicker. Although the risk
is there, I’m going to get there much faster.”
Dana added, “The problem with static risk analysis is that it doesn’t consider
what is actually happening today, at this exact moment, at each of the nodes
we deem as risky. We need to be aware of what’s happening in real time. Real-
istically, how well can we guess that because something has certain attributes,
it’s riskier than something else? Is a new supplier in Afghanistan riskier than a
supplier in Wisconsin? Absolutely. But a lot of the risk centers on how well they
execute within your supply chain. We need to have real-time data that provides
context on what is happening at that node. Once we have data, we can discuss
how they tie in to other ﬂows in the supply chain, the context, whether they are a
sole source, how long will it take to qualify another supplier, and whether there
4 Sheﬃ, Y., The Power of Resilience: How the Best Companies Manage the Unexpected, MIT
Press, Cambridge, 2015.

2
LIVE! Transparency as a Core Operating Value

is an alternative. Does the supplier have a historical record of shipping on-time
in-full? Does it have a good quality record and a track record for solving prob-
lems? These are all data that can drive the right level of discussion, which need
to be pulled together quickly when an issue is discovered. If the data associated
with a node are readily available, people can drill down into it virtually and see
what options can be constructed. Because it’s virtually impossible to predict
where problems are likely to happen – a strike in Long Beach, an earthquake in
Japan, or a ﬂood in Thailand or Houston. So we need to ﬁnd ways to be more
agile and responsive to alerts of events when they occur.”
Dana Martin is intimately familiar with risk. “I worked with the Department
of Homeland Security after 9/11, and was tasked with ranking the biggest risks
for every facility in the Federal Government infrastructure, and then fortifying
the resilience of the riskiest facilities,” he said. “So we found, for instance, that
there was a building that was part of a critical infrastructure next to a river,
so we’d build a jetty so that if there was a torrential rain, the building wouldn’t
be ﬂooded. We spent billions of taxpayer dollars on these reinforcements. And
after many years, all our investment was used in protection against a single
disaster – but in this case, it still didn’t fully mitigate the outcome of the disaster,
so the same outcome occurred regardless.”
Dana believes it is better instead to tie risk decisions to ﬁnancial outcomes,
and to focus on this dimension of performance. This approach involves creat-
ing new measures to gauge employee performance, and evaluating these mea-
sures on how fast they can solve problems in the supply chain. By deﬁnition, if
employees know that speed of decision-making is key, they will tie themselves
into monitoring demand ﬂuctuations and events to achieve responsiveness.
“It’s also important to monitor demand ﬂuctuations, not demand spikes,”
Dana said. “By looking at ﬂuctuations, you can reduce buﬀer stock signiﬁcantly.
For example, Elementum worked with a customer to monitor the standard devi-
ation of shipping lane times from point A to point B. We found that the average
was 30 days, the maximum was 80 days, and the 80th percentile was 50 days.
Using this data, we planned for a 50-day route, and used a buﬀer stock equiva-
lent to this time. We found that we had inventory planned for an 80-day period,
which was highly unlikely, and we were keeping much more inventory then
what we needed, which equated to millions of dollars of extra working capital
that could be freed up. We took out a total of two days of working capital, which
resulted in millions that could be invested in other initiatives. And because
we had real-time, early warning detection capabilities, we had increased issue
awareness, so if there was a slowdown in transit times, we would be noti-
ﬁed well in advance of issues. Real-time data combined with reduced work-
ing capital is indeed possible. This occurs because of increased issue aware-
ness, greater proactive eﬀorts on the part of employees, early warning detection
mechanisms, predictive logistics ETAs (estimated time of arrival), and cross-
organization/cross-enterprise discipline. The company reduced inventory by


The LIVING Supply Chain
over 10%, because they were holding the ‘wrong inventory’ for the wrong
reasons.”
Real-time visibility creates other important secondary and tertiary value
components. For example, the qualitative factor of knowing what is happen-
ing because information is available drives improved workforce eﬃciency.
How many more problems can they solve? How many more carriers, contract
manufacturers, shippers, suppliers can they monitor? Today, companies have
regional divisions doing all this work, and often employ shared services on top
of this to supplement all the monitoring that needs to be done. Real-time visibil-
ity minimizes the number of people required to solve a problem, and increases
the ability of these individuals to work with customers and focus on the things
that make customers happy.
But there are challenges. It is important to ensure that data is kept within
ﬁrewalls when extending it up and down the supply chain. If information about
a supplier problem is surfaced to a customer, this may not please the customer.
So it is important to evaluate a supplier within the context of the overall supply
chain network design, and this has to be done on a global scale. Requirements
for data feeds have to be negotiated into contractual discussions with both sup-
pliers and customers independently; otherwise, risks can increase dramatically.
How do you get started on your journey toward creating a true data democ-
racy, fueled by real-time data? Dana urges people to “Start out with a region
and business, and understand your organization structure and the problems
you’re trying to solve. If you are in procurement or planning, you’ll want to
start with the business sponsors who see the most value in this tool. You want
business sponsors out there promoting this concept in their organization and
driving the change. The technology implementation is surprisingly quick: 2–3
months is needed to stand up a business unit and a whole company using a
very ﬂexible ingestion of data. The tough part, however, is ﬁguring out how to
ﬁt this into your everyday life – and understanding how to purpose the system
to enable everyone to become better at his or her job. We have to re-think
how we as individuals interact with this new type of data, and the pyramid of
information that it is based on. Issue management is the hook that gets people
involved initially, and it is used typically to drive a weekly team operation
meeting. This type of weekly meeting would be very diﬀerent. The discussion
would be along the lines of, ‘What elements are in motion right now? and, ‘Let’s
line up the 10 problems and line up actions to deal with them.’ The software
and tools and information become part of that day-to-day life, and that is a
big change.”
Elementum established a business model that is aligned with their concept
of transparency, data democracy, and speed. “We made a couple of decisions
to NOT charge by the user – or by the number of transactions, unlike many,
we want it to be adopted by as many people as possible,” he said. “We want an
intelligence platform to bring everyone together. We recognize that everyone

2
LIVE! Transparency as a Core Operating Value

is so busy, and there are so many emails. This is a new form of interacting with
digital information, and it will be a challenge.”
The Bridge of No Return
To truly be open to change and to becoming transparent is a major shift in
the way that organizations operate, and will require executives committed to
this course of action. Because once you start on this journey, there is no going
back. Customers and suppliers will expect that same level of visibility and trans-
parency, and it will be seen as a core service that comes bundled with your
products. In fact, it is fair to say that there is no such thing as a pure prod-
uct or service – it is truly a bundled capability. It is impossible to become less
transparent once you’ve opened yourself up.



INTERACTIVE! The Emergence of Federated
Supply Chain Networks
Who wants to be the one to stand up and say ‘I’ve found a problem!’? I’ve
found someone who isn’t working in a compliant manner in my factory, or
I’ve found a violation of a supplier’s working conditions, or product dis-
position regulations, or environmental waste water violations? Let’s make
a big deal out of it! Of course not. People, especially those in emerging
countries, do not want to open themselves up to problems, and partners
don’t want to share issues they’re having. So we have had to think hard
about how we can create the right motivation in people to do so. The way
we have thought of, and what we instill in our training, is that it is about
“protecting revenue,” and not just “revenue at risk.”
—Nader Mikhail, CEO, Elementum
The Tianjin Explosion
On August 12, 2015, two massive explosions occurred at a container facility in
the port of Tianjin in northern China. (An aerial photo is shown in Figure 3.1).
The ﬁrst two explosions occurred within 30 seconds of each other; the second
one involved the detonation of about 800 tons of ammonium nitrate.1 Fires
caused by the explosions burned throughout the weekend, and the blast killed
more than a hundred people, left hundreds more injured and devastated large
areas of the city. The cause of the explosion was ultimately linked to an over-
heated container of dry nitrocellulose.2 According to the China Earthquake
Networks Centre, the initial explosion had a power equivalent to 3 tons of
1 “China Blasts: Casualties as Tianjin Shipment Blows Up,” BBC News, August 12, 2015.
2 Huang, P., and Zhang, J., “Facts Related to August 12, 2015 Explosion Accident in Tianjin,
China,” Process Safety Progress, vol. 34, no. 4, 2015, pp. 313–314.
The LIVING Supply Chain: The Evolving Imperative of Operating in Real Time, First Edition.
Robert Handﬁeld and Tom Linton.
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.


The LIVING Supply Chain
Figure .The Tianjin Explosion. Source: Reproduced with permission of European
Pressphoto Agency
TNT detonating, in this city of 15 million, and the second was the equivalent of
21 tons of dynamite.3
At the time, three of Flex’s major product suppliers were in the immediate
vicinity of the explosion, and multiple employees worked in the area. But unlike
in many disasters, the Pulse Center provided an immediate alert and response
to the emergency. Tom Linton recalls what happened. “When the explosion hit,
I received an immediate alert on my mobile phone,” he said. “The Elementum
network monitors all Twitter feeds in the vicinity of all of our major facilities –
and in this case, they were suddenly picking up a lot of Twitter traﬃc and police
scanner reports in the airwaves around Tianjin. This was immediately commu-
nicated to all the managers and executives that had product, people, or activity
related to that facility. The network had been preprogrammed to create the right
level of alerts for these individuals based on their proﬁle, and this ensured that
all the people who needed to know were alerted immediately.”
3 “Chinese Investigators Identify Cause of Tianjin Explosion,” Chemical & Engineering News,
February 8, 2016. The immediate cause of the accident was the spontaneous ignition of overly
dry nitrocellulose stored in a container that overheated.

3
INTERACTIVE! The Emergence of Federated Supply Chain Networks

In this case, Flex had 3 suppliers located within 3 kilometers of the port.
The system created alerts for all the part numbers associated with a possible
disruption associated with those facilities. “This visibility increased the velocity
with which we could react and take action to the issue,” Tom recalled. “You can’t
move what you can’t see! This is a universal truth that drives all our activity and
decision-making; visibility and velocity decrease costs and increase revenues.
But this can only occur when people have access to data, meaning that anyone
who is able to see what is happening cannot only react to an issue, but also
is empowered to ‘raise’ an issue. So if someone sees something that isn’t right
or which could impact the network, he is empowered to raise that issue and
react to it.”
Once again, the parallel to the military concept of “situational intelligence”
took over. The ﬁrst call from Flex’s response team went to the supplier’s them-
selves, to determine if there had been damage. Executives at the supplier’s head-
quarters were taken aback: “What explosion? What do you mean?” “Haven’t you
heard? There was an explosion … in fact, it’s reported the windows have been
blown out of your facility!”
Incredibly, Flex’s response to the disaster was so rapid that the executives
from the suppliers hadn’t even gotten a word back from their own facility opera-
tors that an explosion had occurred. These executives called the facilities, deter-
mined that no one had been hurt and that production lines were intact, and
reported on the conditions to the response team.
But it didn’t end there. The HR team at Flex immediately took action after
being notiﬁed through the Pulse Center to determine who among their person-
nel was on-site at supplier locations in Tianjin. They quickly determined that
more than 60 employees needed to be evacuated. The system allowed Flex to
quickly mine the data and contact these individuals with instructions on how
to proceed. The team contacted its travel agency, which likewise was not yet
aware of the explosion, and quickly was able to schedule buses from the site
to the airport, reserve ﬂight reservations and travel arrangements to evacuate
Flex employees from the scene. HR’s ability to act quickly ensured that everyone
was able to get out safely in a timely and expeditious manner. The travel agency
noted that none of the other global companies in the area contacted them with
the speed and agility that Flex did in this situation.
The Tianjin explosion and Flex’s ability to react quickly illustrates one of the
many beneﬁts of creating visibility and velocity in the global network through
the combination of local insight and globalized actions. The Flex team was able
to initiate action within 15 minutes of the explosion, based on tracking tweets
and other signals in the network. Most organizations are unaware of the impact
of natural disasters on their supply chains. In many cases, they are not even sure
what the impact of such a disaster would be on their supply base, their logistics
network, the products in the channel, and in the end, on their business revenue.
So when they occur, they panic. But in a truly connected supply chain with


The LIVING Supply Chain
real-time visibility, reacting to disasters and variability becomes a much more
controlled and planned response.
The Psychology of Raising Issues in the Pulse
The Pulse Center’s ability to create rapid insight is a combination of eﬀective
monitoring of “big data” (news feeds, Twitter accounts, police scanners, and
multiple other data sources), combined with a structure that enables anyone in
the Flex network to create an “issue.” For instance, if someone in the network
sees or hears a potential disruptor (or opportunity, for that matter), he or she
is enabled to create an “issue” on their phone app. Similar to the idea of mil-
itary servicemen observing enemy movement on the front lines and alerting
others in the network, raising issues is encouraged, but has some established
guidelines that govern how they are approved and escalated in the network.
A team of “issue monitors” at a third-party location in the Elementum struc-
ture assigned to the Flex account is able to validate the issue, and follow up to
validate the claim that an issue has occurred. The systems assumes that the ini-
tial data coming in is not accurate, so a human curation team quickly takes steps
to triangulate it with other data and validate it. This happens within seconds of
the issue being raised. The analysis team may triangulate the information with
other secondary data (tweets, social media, etc.) and establish whether it has
evidence to support it. Much as an intelligence oﬃcer uses multiple sources
of information to validate an insight (geospatial data, ﬁeld observations, and
secondary reports), validation is an integral part of the Pulse Center real-time
capability.
Issue claims may be “closed” if there is not enough evidence, meaning that
they are removed from the system. However, others in the network may “re-
open” an issue if there is reason to believe that it has been incorrectly closed.
This occurs frequently, because in some cases, the issue has meaning to some-
one close to the site, but may not seem to be important to an executive or to
someone at a monitoring station who is not able to interpret the issue in the
context of disruptions to the network.
When an issue is validated or closed and reopened, an established network
of individuals on the notiﬁcation list receive an alert on their mobile phones.
The governance around this notiﬁcation list may be aligned around geogra-
phies, product lines, functional groupings, or other factors that are organized
and established around the individual company’s corporate strategy and struc-
ture. In general, however, anybody is authorized to jump onto an issue, and
empowered to say, “I can help,” or, “Here’s my insight on this issue.” In this way,
notes and comments are posted to an issue, providing an immediate forum for
discussion and sharing of points of view. This occurs in real time, whereas many

3
INTERACTIVE! The Emergence of Federated Supply Chain Networks

companies require days and even weeks of conference calls and meetings to
fully understand what happened and how to resolve it.
A critical rule of disruption management is that as length of time to react
to a reaction is reduced, so is the impact on operations and cost to resolve the
issue. Because of the Pulse Center capability, the resolution time for Flex to
address an issue has gone down by 30–40% since inception of the system. But
the challenge isn’t just about people in Flex’s factories raising issues; suppliers
themselves have to be willing to raise issues occurring in their own facilities!
The ability to adopt a uniﬁed approach to raising issues is a massive shift in
supply chain thinking and culture. This is not simply a technology problem, but
of a “people problem.” The psychological shift and corporate culture associated
with creating issues will undoubtedly be one of the biggest challenges to which
companies who go down this path must adjust.
As noted in this chapter’s opening quote, Elementum’s CEO points out that
problem discovery is key to transparency and requires federation of the parties
in the supply chain to be able to act on data. In this case, revenue protection, not
revenue risk, is the key. Companies need to think of their supply chain partners
as those with the power to shut down supply chain networks, and who thus are
the “guardians of revenue.” Even the most minuscule of issues, which might be a
minor violation, can quickly spin out of control, especially if it is captured by the
press and embellished with innuendo and double meanings. And that causes a
massive hit on product revenue. By the time it gets to decision-makers, every
minor issue in the supply chain can become a multimillion dollar problem due
to the length of the time required to escalate issues to senior executives who
make decisions. Like the Vietnam-era soldier who suﬀered because of delays
in decisions made at the HQ, those in the ﬁeld need to create issues that have
immediate visibility and can be acted upon quickly to address, contain, and
resolve problems at their source.
The ability to rapidly assess the validity of an event requires highly intel-
ligent machine capabilities, combined with intelligent analysts who can scan
evidence and rapidly asses the gravity of a situation. The process is not perfect,
but it combines automated data capture with human intelligence and decision-
making. Just as farmers view satellite data to determine the changing color of
their corn crops and estimate their growth pattern and timing, analysts need to
use some level of judgment to enable decision-making in supply chains. But the
power of “crowd-sourcing” is important here, as it is well known that the power
of multiple observations and judgments highly exceeds those of a single indi-
vidual, which is why others in the network can comment on the event. Flex’s
Pulse Center uses insights from supplier factories, IP address locations, satel-
lite data, digital camera inputs, social media posts, and news feeds to quickly
assess issues as they arise. This requires suppliers to share their data. One way
of enhancing this capability is to provide suppliers with “free” software that not


The LIVING Supply Chain
only allows them to better manage their shipments and inventory, but also pro-
vides data feeds on production levels, inventory, and issues. In many situations,
changes in production levels can indicate issues and problems that may other-
wise go undetected.
Many suppliers in low-cost countries are reluctant to provide the physical
location of the factories where their products are produced. But if software
exists that tracks IP addresses of production items, the data can be used to
validate the point of origin of shipments, a capability that is becoming increas-
ingly important. (For example, if the supplier says it has two factories as its risk
mitigation plan, but they are across the street from one another, this isn’t an
eﬀective plan!) If the production does not appear to be coming from the fac-
tory that was audited as part of the supplier qualiﬁcation, then perhaps it is
being illegally subcontracted from another location.
Information collected from the ﬁeld is an integral component of the real-
time, LIVING supply chain. Field teams are an integral part of the intelligence
network, just as ﬁeld agents inform intelligence analysts in the government.
“Hope” is not a good strategy to rely on in today’s global environment (e.g., “We
HOPE our suppliers are doing the right thing! We HOPE a ﬂood doesn’t wipe
out our inventory of hard drives!”) The essential ingredient is not just technol-
ogy, but reliance on people in the network who can be trusted to report some-
thing that isn’t right, even if it is just a perception or a hunch. It also requires
human curation and judgment to understand who is providing the intelligence,
as well as the ability to understand what they are saying, map their insights to
the parts of the network that are impacted, and determine how to solve the
problem. But the key is to get the right people working in the supply base,
because that’s where it all starts.
The purpose of analysts/curators in the data centers is NOT to discover prob-
lems – that is the job of the people on the ground who are seeing ﬁrst-hand what
is happening. Analysts need to validate the issue, escalate it to the right people,
and quickly coordinate the solution. Once the right individuals are presented
with a problem, they can determine how to solve it. This change of mindset is
a transformation that is going on today in the Flex network. This is where the
acceleration in problem-solving has emerged as a key capability of its integrated
global network.
But ultimately, culture trumps process. You can’t always see the individual
who is raising the issues in Pulse. But you can determine that person’s reliabil-
ity over time, and that is another factor included in the analytical dashboards.
If one person is raising a lot of issues that are never validated, the analytics
will show that as well. One can also see who is solving issues, which is another
policing mechanism. Flex holds global issue management meetings to review
the history of issues raised, and to determine who was responsible for raising,
solving, and validating issues, and whether there is a problem with certain indi-
viduals. But to make it work, you have to have a core ingredient: trust.

3
INTERACTIVE! The Emergence of Federated Supply Chain Networks

Creating Federated Supply Chains
Trust is the currency of collaboration, in that it requires individuals to
demonstrate that there is a visible eﬀort to listen, understand, and be
inclusive. It is up to senior executives and all leaders to invest in relation-
ships with local leaders, to establish a culture that seeks to understand
what is happening.
–JeﬀGe, Chief Supply Chain Oﬃcer, Steelcase
The need to create a new global culture and a new way of building an orga-
nization is fundamental to development of “real-time” supply chain capability.
JeﬀGe, Chief Supply Chain Oﬃcer of Steelcase, shared with me his vision of
the critical nature of becoming a data-driven, real-time organization that was
bound by a common culture. Jeﬀemphasized that this change was less about
building the right software platform, than with transforming culture. This was
all the more important, he said, as we operate in a global world.
The idea of a “federated supply chain” is at the very core of this evolution.
It is, as Tom points out, a realization that we are all in this together – no
matter what tier of the supply chain you are in. One link fails and the chain
breaks.
In a federated supply chain, the “customer-end” of the chain determines
the behavior, requirements and norms expected of every participant in
the chain from its earliest beginning to its end.
One element that is becoming increasingly apparent is that organizations that
create supply chains that have a common purpose, a common objective, and an
aligned set of cultural norms, seem to operate better than those who work in
an adversarial, dog-eat-dog network. Once again, the natural laws of evolution
provide a clue to this phenomenon.
Serengeti Rule 4: Body size aﬀects the mode of regulation. Observers of ani-
mal behaviors in the Serengeti noted that creatures smaller than 120 kilo-
grams tended to die from attacks by predators, while larger animals, who
often were herbivores (giraﬀes, hippos, rhinos, and elephants) were often too
big to be preyed on by lions and other predators. Thus, smaller animals are
regulated by predators, but concurrently larger animals are regulated by food
supply (bottom-up regulation).
A parallel rule exists in the global supply chain.
New Supply Chain Rule 4: Large ﬁrms dominate smaller ﬁrms through
acquisition or “federation.” New small ﬁrms sustain the growth of larger
ﬁrms.


The LIVING Supply Chain
Or stated another way:
New Supply Chain Rule 4: Collaborative competition ensures that supply
chains remain healthy.
This observation can be seen in the manner in which companies have
acquired others in their ecosystem (Dow-Dupont, Dell-EMC, Medtronic-
Covidien, Microsoft-LinkedIn). As ﬁrms grow, their inﬂuence on the supply
chain expands, and they acquire competitors. This leads to increased size,
which drives a continuous cycle of growth. However, as ﬁrms acquire smaller
companies, they often ﬁnd themselves less nimble, which is why smaller ﬁrms
are often more agile and more innovative. This quality makes them a target for
acquisition.
But is acquisition the only model of growth? An alternative to acquiring new
ﬁrms is to work with ﬁrms through “federation.” Federated supply chains pre-
sume that entities operate in a decentralized network, but that they are aligned
based on a strong central entity, guided by a strong centralized purpose that
is established by the dominant ﬁrm in the network. This dominant ﬁrm estab-
lishes the processes, industry standards, metrics, standards of ethical and sus-
tainable behavior, and drives these cultural elements into organizations they
work with. A lot of this occurs through collaborative means, suggesting that
organic growth occurs when all the enterprises (living things) are in balance
and operating on a common wavelength. But collaboration has to also be com-
petitive – and only the healthiest animals will stay alive and grow. In the course
of this, predators will integrate smaller prey into their network, but will pro-
vide sustenance to these smaller prey that will allow them to survive and remain
healthy. The entire ecosystem of larger enterprises supporting smaller ones and
vice versa keeps the supply chain healthy: natural competition is combined with
collaboration.
The idea that large organizations can create a “federated” network by inte-
grating smaller ﬁrms into their network, thereby dominating the network, is
emerging as key to global competition. Federation implies common operating
procedures and established standards, driving aligned supply chain processes
and tacit understanding of how things work. The idea of federated supply chains
has actually been around for a while, and Peter Drucker ﬁrst described the idea.
Any organization requires strong parts and a strong center. “The term
decentralization is actually misleading – though far too common by now
to be discarded. Federal decentralization requires strong guidance from
the center through the setting of clear, meaningful and strong objec-
tives for the whole. The objectives must demand both a high degree of
business performance and a high standard of conduct throughout the
enterprise.”4
4 Drucker, P., The Practice of Management, Harper Business, New York, 1956, p. 214.

3
INTERACTIVE! The Emergence of Federated Supply Chain Networks

Suppliers who work for a larger company in a federated supply chain are
happy. The suppliers I’ve interviewed at federated supply chains like Honda,
John Deere, Intel, and Flex don’t want to leave, as they feel they are treated as
equals and assured a steady revenue. They also understand that they are in it
for the long haul. Over time, suppliers’ loyalty toward the dominant ﬁrm grows.
That is one reason that companies like Honda have begun using the term “sup-
plier for life,” which suggests a strong, paternal relationship governed by high
performance expectations, fair product price negotiations, and deep under-
standing of long-term technology and customer roadmaps.
So if “federated” supply chains implies a common purpose, standards,
and approach – isn’t this the same as “collaborative supply chains”? Not
necessarily.
A cautionary note – In his book The Serengeti Rules, Carroll explains how the
bottom aﬀects the top in the chain of life. In the 1920s, wolves were eﬀectively
wiped out in the American West. This led to an explosion in the elk population,
which caused a rapid decline in the aspen population, as elk eat aspen shoots. As
the aspen was depleted, the elk struggled. The lesson? Success is in the balance,
and even predators are an important component of the natural environment in
maintaining this balance.
Beyond Collaboration and Integration: Federated Supply
Chains Are the Next Frontier
The concept of collaboration has gotten a lot of grief lately. Recent articles in
Harvard Business Review (HBR) and The Economist emphasize that collabo-
ration has reached the point of “godliness” in modern business, and that as
managers are overwhelmed with collaborative tools, they complain that multi-
tasking through collaboration reduces the quality of work and takes too long.
HBR estimates that 20–35% of value-added collaborations come from only
3–5% of employees. The cost of collaboration is also estimated to be severe;
researchers at the University of Virginia estimate that knowledge workers spend
70–85% of their time attending meetings, dealing with e-mail, talking on the
phone, or dealing with an avalanche of requests for input or advice. Such dis-
tractions are believed to make “deep work” diﬃcult if not impossible. The
authors suggest that distraction is the enemy and that we need to recognize
that workers have a ﬁnite amount of time, and that small demands can quickly
escalate into massive invasions into their ability to get work done.
While this perspective has some merit, real-time supply chain companies
have found a way to manage the ﬁne line between too much invasion into peo-
ple’s thinking time, and the ability to drive improved decision-making through
a more process-driven form of collaboration, one that includes a level of gover-
nance and oversight that results in the right behavior. The Pulse Center at Flex
has become a hub of activity, which drives collaborative behavior around data.


The LIVING Supply Chain
Access to real-time data leads naturally to ad hoc workshops, as people gather
to review data, debate issues, and reach consensus on important decisions. But
it is the data that creates the “place” that is Pulse. Data simultaneously provides
a system, a place, and a natural magnet for collaboration. Real-time data is the
glue that drives federated supply chains, as information leads to understanding
and common action.
A supply chain executive at Steelcase, JeﬀNg, understands how global col-
laboration is key to a federated supply chain system.
This need to understand many points of view is the central theme of col-
laboration. It requires that you be able to understand who people are, and
what they do. It also requires that you understand how work happens
today, and be willing to allow some variation in processes, up to a point.
Aligning people around data and a common process for decision-making is
key to federation. Also, key is allowing some level of variation in how deci-
sions are made. Organizations have always needed to establish standards of
performance, embodied in policies and procedures. However, in a recent global
study of logistics providers,5 we discovered that top-performing organizations
have designed a form of supply chain governance that builds in ﬂexibility to
adapt to local requirements. These organizations, for example, develop a global
process for delivering an outcome in the form of a “maturity framework,” one
which allowed people in the global network to achieve the outcome in a manner
appropriate to local cultural norms.
Many of the leading organizations we interviewed recognize that logistics
requirements vary from region to region, and thus have moved to a regional
logistics design governed by a centralized supply chain council. This governing
council establishes overall guidelines and structures that allow regional work
to operate at a world-class level. Typically, such councils’ standards consist of
three components: process, policy, and playbooks. First, the standards deﬁne
the necessary processes (e.g., customer order promising, transportation plan-
ning, order fulﬁllment). Second, they deﬁne necessary policies (e.g., ﬁnalizing
orders, allocation, scheduling). Finally, “playbooks” act as user guides on how
employees should think through and achieve process requirements.
When major tradeoﬀs or conﬂicts occur between regional requirements,
organizations have adopted a global sales and operations planning function to
optimize global requirements across regional requirements, especially around
global product lines. Once these plans are established, however, top executives
realize that each region will interpret and act on them diﬀerently. The out-
come – a federated supply chain – is the desired outcome for this approach.
5 Handﬁeld, R., Straube, F., Pfohl, H.-C., and Wieland, A., Trends and Strategies in Logistics and
Supply Chain Management, BVL International, Berlin, 2013.

3
INTERACTIVE! The Emergence of Federated Supply Chain Networks

Federation is based on the simple thesis that supply chain leaders cannot
standardize the entire world, and need processes that solve issues in 80% of
cases, allowing for local adoption in the remaining 20% of cases (so long as
the outcome meets the process playbook). Federation thus requires a clearly
deﬁned organization, with clear roles and responsibilities, so that people may
address the same processes using the same toolboxes. This ensures that all
parties are “speaking the same language” and using comparable metrics and
plans. At the same time, diﬀerences should be highlighted. Leaders should be
aware of the challenges and successes of regions, what they struggle with, and
what they are proud of. Leaders also should be prepared to accept diﬀerent
points of view on what is working locally and what is not, in order to adapt
the process to ﬁt local requirements. This requires interactive communication
to ensure that everyone is kept informed of decisions. Interaction creates
intelligence. Thus, a cyclical view of new ideas, feedback, and response that
forms the interactivity drives new knowledge. Technology is the game changer
that allows knowledge-building to happen more quickly. Trust, however, is the
essential ingredient. It allows data to cross boundaries, and forms the glue for
federation.
The idea of collaboration is also implicit in Nonzero: The Logic of Human
Destiny by historian Robert Wright. This book explores the non-zero con-
cept behind game theory, which suggests that over the course of history, zero-
sum games are not as common as non-zero-sum games. In the latter case,
non-zero-sum games involve collaboration between the parties in an eco-
system – whether they are cells from multicellular organisms, multi-village
policies with centralized rules, or hunter–gatherer societies. When these par-
ties work together, they tend to mutually beneﬁt. Wright, who has a positive
view of the world, suggests that positive correlations in non-zero-sum games
produce two winners, and that this often occurs in economics. Wright does not
deny the existence of exploitation, but is intrinsically upbeat, claiming that non-
zero-sum games create more win–win than win–lose outcomes. This concept
is fundamental to the LIVING supply chain. Unless organisms work together
as a network with full information and trust, survival in a complex, constantly
changing world is impossible.
So what does this mean for collaboration? It means that organizations need to
create a culture that welcomes transparency, because, simply put, transparency
leads to trust. In a culture of transparency and trust, collaboration becomes
something that occurs naturally, and is not “forced” on people by apps, social
media, or tools. The central theme is that people speak up when they need to,
but that otherwise, guidelines that maximize ﬂow and velocity drive the right
balance of input. This concept goes beyond value chains, in which “control tow-
ers” pass down decisions from the top, toward collaboration, in which customer
value is the primary objective. Collaboration works when it is an intrinsic part
of the system, not added as an external tool. Similarly, nature is in balance


The LIVING Supply Chain
through an intrinsic self-guiding collaborative environment, and falls out of
balance when one or more forces are disrupted leading to disruption in the
balance.
The guidelines below can help create the right balance of trust, collaboration,
and ﬂow that leads to federated supply chains. These guidelines, which apply to
the extended enterprise, not just to the four walls of a company, are embedded
in Flex’s culture.
1. Multi-tier supplier management is a multicompany visibility imperative
Every individual in every supplier company has a responsibility and a commit-
ment to raise issues and create a visible, transparent process. This is a massive
commitment for many companies, and executives we met with emphasize that
it is almost impossible in places such as Asia and the Middle East. The fact that
these business cultures are averse to transparency is not an excuse. Visibility is
a requirement for change. Creating visibility requires developing trust, which
requires a “series of small promises kept” over time. When individuals perceive
that their business partners’ actions are well intentioned, change will come.
Legal and IP issues often hinder collaboration in the supply market. IACCM’s
Tim Cummins proposes that contracts, if developed properly, become vehicles
that enhance collaboration. However, if all is well in the “ocean” of competition,
then the shark–ﬁsh–shrimp–algae food chain should remain in balance. As dis-
cussed in “Serengeti Rule 4”, larger predators keep the balance, and smaller ani-
mals and plants beneﬁt. In the same way, supply chains stay healthy through
balanced competition as dictated by “New Supply Chain Rule 4”; natural com-
petition drives suppliers to continually improve performance, and enough cus-
tomers exist to allow suppliers to switch from those that are not proﬁtable
enough to keep. Balanced competition implies a federated system in which
larger companies ensure a large enough pool of suppliers to keep competition
healthy, but not so many that relationship management becomes cumbersome.
Flex calls this “managed supplier relationships” (MSR), which implies relation-
ships that are practical, realistic, and healthy. And when transparency comple-
ments competition and healthy tension, a new dynamic is created that creates
federated supply chains.
As another example, Honda, even though it believes in “suppliers for life,” also
always maintains healthy competition in its markets. Honda utilizes “cost mod-
els” that allowed them to pinpoint variables such as labor and material costs,
appropriate levels of overhead for diﬀerent industry sectors, and a healthy,
but not over-the-top margin. In driving year-over-year cost reduction, Honda
is continually seeking ways to remove cost from the variable and overhead
segments of a supplier’s cost, while ensuring a healthy margin. The company is
however, always looking for new suppliers particularly as they expand to new

3
INTERACTIVE! The Emergence of Federated Supply Chain Networks

global regions. However, new suppliers go through a rigorous set of audits
and inspections, and must demonstrate that they are not only competitive on
cost, but have the capability for delivery, quality service, and new technology
development. New product introduction and ramp-up is a critical element of
performance, and happens on an annual basis, with a 5-year rolling window.
Procurement at Honda owns the “commercial” side of the relationship, while
engineering works on the “technical” side, with the two groups working
side by side to create eﬀective competition and continuous performance
improvement.
2. Technology can be applied to Create Supply Chain Transparency
The old tools of collaboration, whether they are email, LinkedIn, Facebook,
social chatter, or Twitter are public, and have a very diﬀerent purpose than
the tools necessary to manage the real-time supply chain. New tools must be
designed with the psychological understanding and intention to create visibil-
ity. These technologies must create greater transparency, the ultimate ingredi-
ent that leads to visibility in federated supply chains. The Elementum and Flex
story provides a useful case study.
Nader Mikhail, founder and CEO of the software company Elementum,
described how the ﬁrm got started.
I was working for Flex, and was hired in to solve the problem of trans-
parency. I looked at how the company was purchasing products and con-
tracting services and working with suppliers, and thought about how we
could solve the problem using third-party software. Eventually, I went to
the board and told them I thought we could create this transparency net-
work ourselves. Although we were “born from Flex,” we had no software
because nothing existed around our vision, so we had to build it from
scratch. We hired the very top guys from Google and Netﬂix and Ama-
zon and challenged them to address the problem. The premise upfront
was that 90% of our transparency applications and usage would be on
mobile devices.
Elementum is striving to build a culture of transparency across a number of
global companies, using software that combines Big Data analytics, LinkedIn
social media, and planning and control systems on steroids. Understanding
how Elementum works is less about understanding the technology and more
about understanding how technology drives transparency in a new, meaningful
way. Transparency refers to upstream participants (suppliers) being transpar-
ent about what is going on in their factories. Visibility refers to the ability of
downstream participants (the big animals) to see what is going on downwind


The LIVING Supply Chain
in their supply chain. Multiple cultural issues get in the way of transparency
and visibility, which is a key part of the federated supply chain concept. Nader
explained:
The reality, of course, is that “trust” is a very diﬃcult word to get around
in a highly litigious society. This is a very real cultural issue that com-
panies need to give some thought to before they go down the road of
transparency. If you are going to be transparent, you need to be pre-
pared for the aftermath of what happens when all this information is
out there in the network! The demands for transparency from suppli-
ers and manufacturers are increasing rapidly. Governments now want
to know whether conﬂict minerals are present in your products, and
whether workers in factories all over the world are working in ILO-
compliant working conditions. These same legal counsels are throwing a
lot of money at these problems in the form of increased audits – but we
all know an audit can only uncover so much, so they aren’t having much
success. And the key element to consider is that you can’t sort out these
kinds of problems on your own. You need to have a link with trusted
partners in the network, to “design-in” a conﬂict mineral tracking pro-
cess, for example, that spans multiple tiers of the supply chain, to include
indicators that provide warnings that all is not right in third world fac-
tories. People are very excited about solving these types of problems –
but fail to recognize the importance of the relationship that has to exist
between companies in the supply chain network. You can’t deﬁne soft-
ware systems to measure these indicators automatically – they require
that partners be certiﬁed, and have agreements to share information not
just on their own internal operations, but those of their suppliers, mean-
ing they will need to act as an intermediary. This is almost heresy when
you start to look at cultures such as Asia, where no one wants to share
information at all!
Driving this level of insight requires signiﬁcant investments in new tools that
meet the multicompany, multi-tier visibility, and transparency imperative.
3. Legal limits are needed to manage supply chain inter-company
communication
While complete transparency is the ultimate objective, legal issues must be
respected. Multicompany NDAs and memos of understanding are a start. How-
ever, ultimately, responsibility for behaviors comes down to mutual trust. Years
ago, companies like Honda derived the term “supplier for life,” which suggests
that “unless you do something to break our bond of trust and mutual respect
and improvement, you will continue to be a partner.”

3
INTERACTIVE! The Emergence of Federated Supply Chain Networks

Elementum’s leadership team encountered several big legal issues with
clients. Whenever you start sharing information, lawyers start to get in the way.
The ﬁrst set of comments lawyers inevitably raise when confronted with a move
toward information transparency and visibility are
r Who owns the data?
r Who can access the information?
r What is our risk exposure?
r We can’t do this.
Lawyers are very good at saying “NO.” I’ve also seen this in our work at our
Supply Chain Resource Cooperative6 at North Carolina State University. Our
projects have focused on building collaborative platform for “should cost” mod-
els to track labor, material, overhead, and productivity rates for a standard set of
manufacturing processes. Lawyers’ ﬁrst reaction to sharing data in any format,
anonymous or not, is resistance. They often raise major concerns about intel-
lectual privacy, or more often, making available information that could lead to
litigation.
The second major legal hurdle is country borders. This issue is especially
complicated in Europe. Not only has Brexit raised regulatory issues, but many
European countries have regulations that basically state that “you have to make
sure all data stays in Europe!” How can you keep data in Europe when by def-
inition, you have a global supply chain with suppliers all over the world?! This
causes a big hurdle: “I want transparency, but don’t want my data to leave
Europe!” We encountered the same issue in China, where the government
restricts data from going outside the country.
The third legal problem occurs when companies want to start sharing
information about planning across the enterprise. If you are a “secretive
company” – and companies like Apple are very secretive, especially about their
product releases – you don’t want to share ﬁles and information with everyone
in your supply chain. In the last year, rumors circulated from Apple’s suppliers
that their orders are lower than normal, leading to predictions about iPhone
sales and Apple’s lowering revenue projections. People want to hide informa-
tion when they believe the markets – and competitors – will get wind of it.
Imagine that your ﬁrm was hyper-transparent, so that everyone knew what
was happening in the supply chain. This is enough to drive a typical general
counsel absolutely nuts, as she or he can’t control the message. Then the CFO
gets concerned as well. Analysts who get hold of this information can start
making all sorts of market trades that can careen the share price into volatile
territory.
6 The Supply Chain Resource Cooperative (http://scm.ncsu.edu) is a university–industry part-
nership focused on thought leadership for the supply chain community.


The LIVING Supply Chain
Flex recognizes the importance of legal considerations in rolling out the
LIVING Supply Chain. In fact, the company has helped to introduce what
might be considered a new specialty in legal services by bringing on Ben
Warner, (a 16-year veteran of Flex having served in both procurement and legal
roles), who is now familiarly called the “VP of Future Time Information.” Ben is
requiring Flex’s lawyers to become more integrated with the supply chain func-
tion, in order to understand the goals of the LIVING Supply Chain. Ben notes
that “Running a legal services organization on Pulse and with the aid of the VP
of Real Time Information helps us deliver more transparency and value to our
customers.”
The need to both be transparent about information as well as prevent leaks
for customer can prove to be challenging. For example, an extreme amount of
security surrounds new product events. Consider the following description of
a new product roll-out for a major technology provider:
Security is one of the most challenging components of a product roll-out,
because the manufacturer wishes to be able to deploy a product roll-
out simultaneously across the entire country, in California, New York,
Chicago, Shanghai, and everywhere in the world. This makes it extremely
challenging for logistics providers. Some companies emphasize the same
“experience” for all of their products, and this was one of the toughest
parts of meeting their logistics requirements on new products. This can
be challenging as Customs clearance becomes critical to the success of
the roll-out.
Does this mean that transparency compromises product roll-outs? Not at
all. In this case, the availability of real-time data actually served to render the
simultaneous, global roll-out of this product more secure and smoother than
ever. This occurred because all parties in the supply chain were “federated,” and
aligned in a common goal: keeping the roll-out as secret as possible, and run-
ning it on time.
UPS is a third-party distributor that specializes in this type of activity. A UPS
executive recently spoke in one of my classes on the importance of transparency
and product tracking in the supply chain.
One of the beneﬁts of UPS is that we have our own people on customs,
and we can get the material through much easier than a third party can.
One of the biggest diﬀerentiators for us is that for demanding customers,
every transfer point has to be electronic and real time – and there is
a cost with the demands for the tracking and tracing of the shipment.
Real-time commitment is critical. If you can’t provide real-time tracking,
you won’t even be invited to bid. This is all done by real-time scanning
with agreed-on scan points, including the transfer from their dock at the

3
INTERACTIVE! The Emergence of Federated Supply Chain Networks

plant, transport to the airport, turnover to the carrier, loading onto the
plane, another transmission on wheels-up (showing whether the plane is
behind), and the technology wrapped around all these scans and systems
has a cost to be wrapped around that. Liability insurance is another
issue. Will it be for each container, product in the container, or the entire
aircraft? If the entire aircraft goes down, there is a cost to providing that
insurance. If we don’t use our own airline, we have to buy insurance.
Once the plane lands, we move the product from the airport to the
factory, and in some countries, need to worry about security of drivers
and prevention of hijacking. The route has to be approved and in some
parts of the world, chase vehicles provided with the trucks so there is no
hijacking. This makes simultaneous product release at stores even more
complicated.
Despite the complexity of product roll-outs, real-time data sharing is the key.
That, and the alignment of people in a federated supply chain with a common
purpose.
4. Collective, informed, individual decisions drive optimal outcomes
Is there a common governance structure that deﬁnes how observations are
translated into issues, then monitored, validated, and translated into speciﬁc
actions and responses? And, is there an approach that ensures that the data is
treated appropriately, and that individuals are responsible for responding to it
appropriately? This question drives scholars crazy. There is always a rationale
for individual views of what is happening locally – but this can be counteracted
when no centralized view of the “big picture” drives global thinking. The answer
is that both are needed – a concept we call “collective individualism.”
The essential ingredient driving LIVING federated supply chains to evolve
and grow is interactions and relationships between individuals within the net-
work of partners. Many recent views of supply chain technology emphasize the
“control tower” thinking – an approach that also dominates supply chain schol-
arship. These scholars propose that centralized organizations are the core ele-
ment in centralizing “big data” to drive and control what is happening around
the world. In this view, only “experts” should have access to this data, as this is
eﬀectively what will drive the right level of control. Decisions should be passed
down to the minions on the front lines, who take orders from their intellectual
superiors.
This linear, “dictatorial” view of organizational operations has had very neg-
ative consequences over time. In fact, the problem was identiﬁed more than 50
years ago by economist Jay Forrester, who discovered the “bullwhip eﬀect” of
inventory, which promulgated the radical idea that massive ineﬃciencies exist


The LIVING Supply Chain
in supply chains when decisions are made in a vacuum, based on individual
perceptions of what is happening in the world.
The bullwhip eﬀect (also known as the Forrester eﬀect), was one of the ﬁrst
major theoretical advances in supply chain theory. (In fact, the term supply
chain hadn’t even been invented yet). Forrester based his theory on his observa-
tions of odd outcomes in a retail supply chain. He noted that an organization’s
orders to its suppliers displayed greater variation than the original source of
demand for these orders.7,8 This relationship was ascribed to behavioral (albeit
rational) forms of decision-making associated with individuals’ lack of visibil-
ity into supply chain demand forecasts. In the pre-integration age, suppliers’
suppliers and customers’ customers were kept at arms’ length in terms of order
visibility. When orders arrived, it was always considered a “surprise,” and the
external environment that produced these orders was considered a mystery.
Order variability and volatility were considered business conditions that man-
agers just have to live with, and so the natural response was to use large amount
of buﬀer inventory to mitigate the risk of not “having enough” to meet this
level of variability. This paradigm drove traditional supply chain thinking, as
it enabled organizations to explain the underlying phenomena as part of the
bullwhip eﬀect.9
The central thesis of the bullwhip eﬀect is that each individual’s rational but
limited view of their environment led to “local” thinking, which in turn created
waste and sub-optimization in a multi-enterprise network. As managers were
incentivized to “never run out of product,” they bolstered inventory levels to
create safety stock, knowing they would be penalized if they ran out. As a result,
the further back one goes in the supply chain, the more the “extra” inventory
increases. Consequently, inventory escalated to enormous proportions, while
the level of transparency decreased.10 The only way to counteract the bullwhip
eﬀect, according to many scholars, is full transparency of in-coming current
orders, inventory, and forecasts across systems. A graphic of the bullwhip eﬀect
is shown in Figure 3.2. In addition, a real example from a medical products
company showing the amount of days of inventory in the supply chain is shown
in Figure 3.3.
Several recent books have also challenged the idea of a “centralized control
tower” – notably in the military sector. One of these is the military, described
in Team of Teams, a fascinating book by Gen. Stanley McChrystal. McChrystal
7 Forrester, J. W., Industrial Dynamics, Productivity Press, Portland, OR, 1961.
8 Lee, H. L., Padmanabhan, V., and Whang, S., “Information Distortion in a Supply Chain: The
Bullwhip Eﬀect,” Management Science, vol. 43, no. 4, 1997, pp. 546–558.
9 Lee, H. L., “Taming the Bullwhip,” Journal of Supply Chain Management, vol. 46, no. 1, 2010,
pp. 7–10.
10 Forrester, Industrial Dynamics.

3
INTERACTIVE! The Emergence of Federated Supply Chain Networks

Vendor
Overstock
Understock
Plant
Distribution
center
Customer
Inventory
forecast
Figure .The Bullwhip Effect
notes that in the old “control tower” structure, his top-notch military team in
Iraq felt they were superior in every respect to the enemy:
We were exemplary in our discipline. Our superior resources had not
bred complacency; we were pushing our assets harder than they had
ever been pushed. … But we also had to ask a deeper, more troubling
question: If we were the best of the best, why were such attacks not disap-
pearing, but in fact increasing? Why were we unable to defeat an under-
resourced insurgency? Why were we losing?
Supplier
124 
Sub
Assy
25 
Hybrid
19 
Assembly
3 
FP
0.5
Lead Time for Vitality DS  & Renewal DS 
Figure .Lead Time for a Medical Product Supply Chain. Source: Ben Martin et al.
Reproduced with permission of triz-journal.com


The LIVING Supply Chain
The answer came to the team when they began to understand that defeating
Al Qaeda in Iraq (AQI) necessitated learning from them, and adopting AQI’s
approach to leveraging the digitally interconnected world of social media to
their advantage. The enemy was connecting and developing battleﬁeld intelli-
gence at a much more rapid pace then the US forces, and were beating them
consistently as a result. McChrystal notes that in so doing, they were able to
combat Al Qaeda’s battle style by adopting its norms and weapons11:
In the course of this ﬁght, we had to unlearn a great deal of what we
thought we knew about how war – and the world worked … Speciﬁcally,
we restructured our force from the ground up on principles of extremely
transparent information sharing (what we called “shared consciousness”)
and decentralized decision-making authority (“empowered execution”).
We dissolved the barriers – the walls of our silos and the ﬂoors of our
hierarchies – that had once made us eﬃcient. … We became what we
called “a team of teams”: a large command that captured at scale the traits
of agility normally limited to small teams.
A foundation of the LIVING supply chain is based on disassembling the con-
trol tower structure, embracing instead decentralized decision-making and the
“democratization of data,” which utilizes a social-media-like technology to drive
data into the hands of individuals through mobile devices. Again, the idea of
collective individualism is important – in that people make decisions that drive
collective beneﬁts to the whole.
5. Speed in decision-making drives flow and drives out cost
Decentralized but informed data-based decision-making prevails in many
other successful organizations. One also sees it in the so-called “ﬂywheel eﬀect,”
which John Rossman describes in his book The Amazon Way. Recall that
the “bullwhip eﬀect” proposes that rational decision-making based on limited
human views of phenomena drives excess inventory in the chain. Amazon views
independent decision-making as essential to its culture, and the phrase “Yes it
is your job” implies ownership of decisions. The idea is that “Ownership means
not only mastering your domain, but also being willing to go beyond the bound-
aries of your role whenever it’s needed to improve customer experience or ﬁx
a problem.”12 Another concept – “invent and simplify” – also emphasizes that
when employees are empowered to act independently, their ideas can simplify
11 McChrystal, G. S., Collins, T., Silverman, D., and Fussell, C., Team of Teams: New Rules of
Engagement for a Complex World, Penguin, New York, 2015.
12 Rossman, J., The Amazon Way: 14 Leadership Principles behind the World’s Most Disruptive
Company, CreateSpace, North Charleston, SC, 2014, p. 28.

3
INTERACTIVE! The Emergence of Federated Supply Chain Networks

processes to drive out bureaucracy, solve problems, and ﬁnd innovative ways
of doing things that the rest of the company can adopt.
Rossman posits the ﬂywheel eﬀect as a core element in the rise of Amazon. He
notes, “Allen Mandelbrot founded the ﬁeld of fractal mathematics, which stud-
ies, among other phenomena, how patterns in nature have a tendency to repeat
themselves at diﬀerent scales – for example, the way spiral galaxies resemble
whirling sea shells which in turn resemble tiny unfurling fern fronds. In a sim-
ilar fractal fashion, the virtuous cycle is replicated throughout Amazon.com
at macro and micro levels. It generates a set of self-reinforcing energies that
continue to ﬂow even when the energy source is discontinuous – much like a
ﬂywheel, which is the favorite metaphor to describe the cycle for success for
Amazon.”
This “ﬂywheel” is a cycle that Internet pioneer JeﬀBezos initiated when he
founded Amazon. Bezos was adamant about driving lower retail prices and free
shipping to cultivate customer loyalty. Revenues were plowed back relentlessly
into the “holy trinity” of lower prices, improved customer selection (as more
sellers were attracted to the site), and availability of products, which led to
greater traﬃc to the website. Greater traﬃc led to growth, which drove lower
costs and lower prices, continually augmenting the customer experience.
Rossman points out that customers talking to each other produces a follow-
on eﬀect, and that the best customer service is no customer service. The best
experience happens when the customer never has to ask for help at all. As a
corollary, “The key to creating the most pleasant, frictionless customer experi-
ence possible was minimizing human involvement through process innovation
and technology” (p. 8).
Allen Mandelbrot, who founded the ﬁeld of fractal mathematics (“Mandel-
brot sets”), noted that many natural phenomena produce patterns that resemble
both whirling seashells and tiny unfurling fern fronds. The so-called “virtuous
cycle” is similar to fractal patterns in that it is replicated throughout Amazon
at macro and micro levels. This cycle generates a set of self-reinforcing ener-
gies that continue to ﬂow even when the energy source is discontinuous – much
like a ﬂywheel. This phenomenon supports the idea of a living supply chain net-
work which moves continuously, ﬂowing information and materials at a faster
and faster rate, keeping customers even more satisﬁed and driving funds and
materials quickly through the supply chain.
The ﬂywheel is the premise behind the Flex Pulse Center, which focuses on
ﬂow or speed over decision-making, and moves away from a control tower
structure. A key underlying analogy is the idea of ﬂow – an important premise
in “lean,” but which is not always well executed. Supply chains are like water,
in that they will always ﬂow to the point of least resistance. A Chinese proverb
states that cost is like water: it will always ﬂow to the lowest point if left to
the market conditions. In the same way, supply chains will always ﬁnd the
fastest way, if the free ﬂow of information enables managers to make natural


The LIVING Supply Chain
and responsive decisions. Route maps have evolved into works of lean archi-
tecture where time is treated as waste, and waste is emblematic of higher cost.
But by speeding up information ﬂows, logistics networks can also be resched-
uled and rerouted.
The “ﬂywheel” concept of continuous cycles of improvement that drive cost
structures down and improve customer experience is similar to the Flex Pulse
Center because the center focuses on ﬂow, visibility, and speed of decision-
making (the “anti-control tower” phenomenon), which leads to lower working
capital, which frees up cash, which improves share price, which allows Flex to
grow, acquire more companies, or invest in new technology that delights cus-
tomers and further drives down working capital.
Both the ﬂywheel at Amazon and the Pulse Center at Flex drive supply chains
to operate and ﬂow to the point of least resistance. Both operational structures
operate on organic principles, like water in the Chinese proverb. Supply chains
ﬂow because decisions are made rapidly and transparently, causing cost (like
water), to ﬂow to the lowest point.
Selﬁshness in Supply Chains Drives Non-zero Outcomes
Transparency is important between members of the same supply chain net-
work. But trust and open data sharing between competitors in the supply chain
has its limitations, especially when resource scarcity is an issue. Recall that in
the Serengeti, survival is the most important daily activity for creatures. Like-
wise, competition in the global business ecosystem lurks around every corner,
and competitive advantage is a daily activity. Supply chain executives in com-
peting organizations are always willing to share information about how to avoid
a major disruption before the disruption occurs. They will collaborate, share
best practices, and provide insights to one another. But once a disruption hap-
pens, it is every man for himself. In the aftermath of a major supply chain dis-
aster, or a major shortage of raw materials upstream, executives are much less
likely to share information with competing companies. Why? Because then,
they are ﬁghting for limited resources, just like in the Serengeti! Whoever gets
to those resources the quickest will feel the least pain and impact on their proﬁt
and competitiveness, will recover the quickest, will return most quickly to nor-
mal operations, and, critically, will have the least negative impact on customers.
The idea that selﬁshness drives healthy outcomes works both in the broad
context of evolution and survival, and in the, “non-zero”13 world view put for-
ward by Robert Wright. Wright argues that “In zero-sum games, the fortunes of
the players are inversely related,” as in tennis, boxing, and chess. “In non-zero
sum games, one player’s gain needn’t be bad news for the other” (p. 5). John
13 Wright, R., Nonzero: The Logic of Human Destiny, First Vintage Books, 2000.

3
INTERACTIVE! The Emergence of Federated Supply Chain Networks

Nash, the famous mathematician who discovered the ﬁeld of game theory, also
found that over the long run, equilibrium typically occurs when both parties
work together toward a non-zero sum outcome.
Nash notes, “… if we want to see what drives the direction of both human
history and organic evolution, we should apply this perspective more system-
atically. Interaction among individual genes, or cells, or animals, among interest
groups or nations or corporations, can be viewed through the lenses of game
theory.”
Wright posits that, as technology evolves, newer and richer forms of non-
zero-sum interaction are made possible, even as social complexity grows. He
also notes:
This isn’t to say that non-zero-sum games always have win–win out-
comes rather than lose–lose outcomes. Nor is it to say that the pow-
erful and the treacherous never exploit the weak and the naive; parasitic
behavior is often possible in non-zero-sum games, and history oﬀers no
shortage of examples. Still, on balance, over the long run, non-zero-sum
situations produce more positive sums than negative sums, more mutual
beneﬁt than parasitism. As a result, people become embedded in larger
and richer webs of interdependence.
This concept of non-zero-sum games directly supports the New Supply
Chain Rule 4: Collaborative competition ensures supply chains remain healthy.
In addition, the non-zero concept is also aligned with the healthy balance that
occurs when larger predators are sustained by smaller creatures in the Serengeti
ecosystem. Think of the parallel questions confronted by managers in supply
chains. Does selﬁsh behavior produce good outcomes in business? Does “look-
ing after my enterprise ﬁrst” after a major supply chain disruption produce the
best outcome for the supply chain? Resolving the apparent disparate nature of
acting selﬁshly (or on behalf of our enterprise) with the need to work collabora-
tively across the supply chain, is a question that confronts us in these situations.
The non-zero view of the world appears to suggest that collaborative competi-
tion is the natural state of the system, so long as organizations operate eﬃciently
and only consume what they need.
An example from Nonzero provides a good metaphor with which to illus-
trate the paradox of collaborative competition. Wright recounts the history of
the coastal Tareumiut Eskimos, who rely on whale-hunting to survive. Each
whaling boat is run by an umealiq – a boat owner – who recruits a crew which
includes specialists such as a helmsman and a harpooner. Boat owners must
band together to land a whale. And in a Tareumiut village, all boat owners have
created a joint “insurance policy”: “If any one owner has fallen on hard times,
he and his crew can draw food from other owners, with the promise of future
reciprocation. The Tareumiut say proudly, ‘We don’t let people starve,’ and if
one owner has had a banner whaling season, he invites boat owners from other


The LIVING Supply Chain
villages to attend a feast in which he shares surplus blubber and meat. However,
as Wright points out: “future reciprocation is de rigueur. Like insurance poli-
cyholders, the region’s boat owners are playing a non-zero-sum game, ﬁnding
in large numbers security against misfortune.”
In eﬀect, there are unspoken rules about the limits of trust. These people
know that an implicit “debt” is created when they share their good fortune with
others, and that if the same happens to them, others will help them. The same
behavior seen in these hunter–gatherer communities occurs in the highly com-
plex and sophisticated world of global supply chains.
Now, let’s relate this to a supply chain example: in this case, the great ﬂoods
that occurred in Bangkok, Thailand and severely disrupted the electronics sec-
tor in 2011. The majority of hard disk drives (HDDs)14 and upstream compo-
nentry, including motor assemblies, head assemblies and components, are pro-
duced in Bangkok by Seagate and Western Digital (WD), the largest suppliers
of hard disk drives. These two companies produce 90% of the world’s supply of
HDDs15 at their Bangkok factories.
In October 2011, the unthinkable happened. A major ﬂood hit Bangkok,
and the major supply impacts hit all major PC manufacturers in the middle
of November. (A picture of the damage caused by the ﬂoods, as well as the
resulting price of Seagate and Western Digital stock is shown in Figure 3.4).
Seagate and Western Digital were essentially shut down. As a result, a num-
ber of major computer manufacturers, including Apple, IBM, Lenovo, HP,
and Dell, witnessed massive shortages. Many companies use HDDs; they are
installed in every computer and DVR. Western Digital assembles all of the HDD
components into a ﬁnal assemblies; when they shut down as a result of the
ﬂoods, a massive worldwide HDD shortage resulted instantaneously. Because
all of WD’s customers relied on them to hold their inventory for them, there
were no safety stocks to cover the shortfall. This had a multi-quarter impact on
ALL upstream customers, who experienced massive component shortages and
cost increases that they were forced to pass on to customers.
A senior executive from a major electronics company noted:
We ﬁrst had to work through the realization of the impact and had to
convince customers and ourselves it was a major issue. As we began to
mobilize quickly we had to ﬁrst of all convince ourselves and then con-
vince others that this situation was WORSE than the Japanese tsunami
in terms of impact to our business. People challenged us – how could it
be worse? Floods happen all the time! We got through Japan so well –
we can do the same here. … The recognition of the severity of this dis-
ruption required us to mobilize and assess and get on the ground and
14 A hard disk drive (HDD) is a data storage device introduced by IBM in 1956 and is used for
storing and retrieving digital information.
15 Chick, G., and Handﬁeld, R., The Procurement Value Proposition, Kogan-Page, London, 2015.

3
INTERACTIVE! The Emergence of Federated Supply Chain Networks

Figure .Flooding in Thailand of Hard Disk Drive Manufacturers. Source: Reproduced with
permission of WSJ Market Data Group
send people there. Suddenly, this became a very competitive situation
for who would receive the highest global allocation of hard disk drives
that remained after the ﬂood.
We shifted immediately to a crisis management role and key supplier
relationships and leadership became key to our recovery. We had to go
in and establish knowledge of the situation, and establish communica-
tion with suppliers to truly understand the impact, bring it to a level of
credibility, which allowed us to be able to describe to the business and
to customers. This played out over several weeks – getting a handle on
what was happening. During this time, WD and Seagate were also trying
to ﬁgure out how to answer our questions and competitors’ questions!
Getting a handle on the facts and getting the business re-set was the
second phase – and once we understood the supply impact, cost impact,
and competitive response, we had to then determine the impact on our
customers.


The LIVING Supply Chain
Given the limited allocation of HDDs that remained in Thailand, which cus-
tomers ultimately received the best treatment from the HDD suppliers in this
situation? The driver that determined which customers received the “best” allo-
cation was ultimately determined by the strength of the relationships the major
electronics manufacturers had with Seagate and WD. Those that had a rep-
utation for “beating up suppliers based on price”… likely had a lower alloca-
tion than those that focused on long-term fair relationships. Although this was
never formally documented, our inside sources revealed that relationships were
key. In the end, a non-zero approach helped brand owners with supply alloca-
tion during a period of scarce resources.
Time and time again, companies that drive adversarial relationships with
their partners have learned this lesson the hard way. But only a few companies
truly understand non-zero behavior and practice it as a policy and a cultural
artifact. Trust and collaboration are essential for tying together organizations
in the interconnected supply chain, but a competitive element must underlie
this trust. In our experience, supply chain executives acknowledge the axiom
that “competition is essential for keeping the supply chain healthy while ensur-
ing that suppliers are marking enough to reinvest in their business and survive
in the ecosystem.” In this sense, collaborative competition is key to building the
healthiest supply chain possible.
Reacting to Disasters in Real Time
The roots of federated supply chains go back several decades, with companies
such as Honda, Chrysler, Motorola, and others who internalized this approach.
We cannot expect to see federated supply chains combined with the visibility
provided by emerging technology in the next decade. Those companies who
get this part of the equation right, stand to leapfrog their competitors, given
the growing complexity of our global economy and the routine threat of
natural and man-made disasters. Today, it is clear that the establishment
of the Internet has led to the explosion of information and the subsequent
procurement tools and applications that now harvest data. However, we
believe the true potential of the interactive federated supply chain is only just
beginning.
Traditional enterprise software systems accumulates silos of data. Managers
call upon this data to make decisions. Data provides information in chunks or
batches, which by deﬁnition is historical. In fact, almost all decisions in pro-
curement today are based on information about past events. Can you imagine
if your car speedometer told you how fast you were going yesterday? This is
our current scenario. We know how much we quoted, sourced, contracted, and
paid yesterday. What if we could make all our decisions in real time? What
would happen to our performance if we had data in real time? Now, imagine

3
INTERACTIVE! The Emergence of Federated Supply Chain Networks

that you have a federated supply chain with trusted partners, and that every-
one has access to that data and is empowered to act on it, as in the Amazon and
Flex models? This concept is extremely powerful, but we are only beginning to
witness its adoption. But it is deﬁnitely happening, and in some instances, it is
already here.



VELOCITY! Working Capital: The Overlooked Asset
Flex is a supply chain sketch to scale company, and basically everything we
do is around supply chain. The Pulse Center is basically Flex digitizing, if
you will, the supply chain globally.
—Gus Shahin, Chief Information Oﬃcer, Flex1
In seeking to improve Flex’s earnings per share in 2016, Tom Linton was conﬁ-
dent that working capital was the right pathway. He said so during his internal
leadership summit, and estimated that Flex could take up to 5 days of inventory
out of the supply chain. Each day of inventory represented roughly $60 million.
This proposal made Flex’s CFO, Chris Collier, sit up and take notice. Was this
possible?
In many cases, inventory savings within an enterprise are absorbed into the
business or shifted to another form of inventory or asset. Taking this inven-
tory out of its pipeline would present Flex’s CFO with a number of options. For
example, inventory savings would free up cash to enable Flex to buy back more
of its stock, sending its price up. This was something investors were acutely
interested in. Alternatively, Flex could use the cash generated to acquire an
emerging business, leading to further growth. Or it could pay dividends to
stockholders and/or reduce its debt. Any way you looked at it, the outcome
was good for investors. And a good reason to buy Flex stock. The ability to free
up cash due to the asset velocity of materials provides real value to investors,
something that is not always obvious to the public, or to internal senior
executives.
Collier was excited about the idea of this way of generating free cash ﬂow, but
could Flex really achieve this outcome?
1 http://www.forbes.com/sites/peterhigh/2016/03/21/cio-gus-shahin-leads-ﬂexs-digital-
transformation/˝5f0b58fb3e65
The LIVING Supply Chain: The Evolving Imperative of Operating in Real Time, First Edition.
Robert Handﬁeld and Tom Linton.
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.


The LIVING Supply Chain
Tom Linton recalled this moment with a grin.
You have to remember the fact that companies are ﬁnancial beasts.
Most people don’t want to hear the details about your supply chain
improvement – they want to know what it means in terms of ﬁnancial
outcomes! And I’m in a position where we have the CFO’s full attention,
because I am intensely focused on both the income statement and the
balance sheet of our company. Anything that produces cash from the
balance sheet is going to make a CFO happy.
Balance sheet-related working capital is an asset that most companies don’t
consider very often. Instead, supply chain executives focus much of their time
and eﬀort on reducing cost, which is primarily a P&L-focused activity, explicitly
reducing the cost of materials or labor. But the real value that remains unlocked
in the supply chain is working capital.
Deﬁnition: Working capital is commonly deﬁned as a measure of a company’s
liquidity, eﬃciency, and overall health. Because it includes cash, inventory,
accounts receivable, accounts payable, the portion of debt due within 1 year,
and other short-term accounts, a company’s working capital reﬂects the
results of a host of company activities, including inventory management,
debt management, revenue collection, and payments to suppliers. One of the
most signiﬁcant uses of working capital is inventory. The longer inventory
sits on the shelf or in the warehouse, the longer the company’s working cap-
ital is tied up. When not managed carefully, businesses can grow themselves
out of cash by needing more working capital to fulﬁll expansion plans than
they can generate in their current state. As a result, working capital shortages
cause many businesses to fail even though they may actually turn a proﬁt.2
In a sense, working capital refers to the life cycle of cash, from suppliers to
customers. Companies try to get cash as quickly as possible from customers
when they sell them products or services, or oﬀer them payment plans with
interest that creates a future revenue stream. On the other end of the supply
chain, CFOs love to extend payment terms to suppliers who provide them with
the raw materials and services for the end products and services they sell to
customers. A common strategy to extend the life cycle of cash is to extend
payments to suppliers beyond 30 days. Companies may use 60-, 90-, or even
120-day payment terms with suppliers, which not only causes suppliers undue
working capital problems, but also forces them to take terms to factor these
2 http://www.investinganswers.com/ﬁnancial-dictionary/ﬁnancial-statement-analysis/working-
capital-869

4
VELOCITY! Working Capital: The Overlooked Asset

Net inventory reduction = 5 days
= $300M in cash generated
Warehouse
Production
Inbound
receiving 
Customer 
Supplier
$550
$1100
Market
demand
$770
$880M
Safety
stock
inventory
Finished
goods
inventory 
Work in
process
inventory
Raw material
inventory 
$500
$1000
Market
demand
 
Safety
stock
inventory
Finished
goods
inventory
$700
Work in
process
inventory
$800
Raw material
inventory 
Buy back stock
Generate dividends
Acquire a new company
Cash
produced
$80M
$70M
$100M
$50M
Before
After
Figure .Working Capital Reduction Illustration
invoices that will often cut into their proﬁt margins and reduce their ability to
reinvest in their businesses.3
Figure 4.1 and Table 4.1 together demonstrate a ﬁctional example of how
working capital reduction can add value from a CFO’s point of view. In the
“BEFORE” situation shown here, inventory accumulates in the raw materials
(plastic, printed circuit boards, etc.), work in process (semi-ﬁnished goods),
ﬁnished goods (completed products), and safety stock (ﬁnished products used
as a “buﬀer” against volatility in customer orders). One of the eﬀects of increas-
ing velocity is that material moves through the supply chain faster, and doesn’t
sit around as long in inventory. This happens because of increased visibility to
material that isn’t moving. Tom notes that in taking inventory out of Flex’s sup-
ply chain, they discovered products in their “bone pile” that had been sitting
there for years! In such cases, eliminating this inventory if it isn’t needed may
result in a short-term write-oﬀ, but will also eliminate all the working capital
sitting around that isn’t used to serve customers proﬁtably. As shown in this ﬁc-
tional example, for a company that increases its velocity eﬀort, inventory can
3 Factoring is a ﬁnancial term meaning the supplier sells a business sells its accounts receivable
(i.e., invoices) to a third party (typically a bank, called a factor) at a discount. The discount is
typically 5–20% oﬀthe invoice amount.


The LIVING Supply Chain
Table .“Before and After”Impact of Velocity on Working Capital
Type of Inventory
BEFORE Inventory ($M)
AFTER Inventory ($M)
Raw material
$880,000
$800,000
WIP
$770,000
$700,000
Finished goods
$1,100,000
$1,000,000
Safety stock
$550,000
$500,000
$3,300,000
$3,000,000
Annual revenue
$21,600,000
$21,600,000
One day of inventory
$60,000
$60,000
55 days of inventory
$3,300,000
50 days of inventory
$3,000,000
Net cash generated
$300,000
be reduced by $300 million across all four areas of inventory. (Note that this is
not Flex’s data.)
Inventory is a monster that includes any material or product that ties up cash.
Material has an economic life, a fact that many managers don’t appreciate. Like
fresh ﬁsh that sits in the refrigerator for more than 3 days, the value of inven-
tory almost always shrinks over time, so it is not an investment into which a
company wants to sink cash. Yet many companies don’t think of inventory as
an asset that shrinks in value over time. Cash sunk into inventory is an invest-
ment that is not working for you. It’s like a bank account with zero interest and
enormous monthly checking fees. Inventory embodies everything a company
doesn’t need to satisfy a customer. It is not necessary to make a customer happy.
The customer doesn’t care how much inventory you have. Customers want their
product when they order it or make the purchase decision. Some would argue
that “buﬀer stock” is required to fulﬁll customer satisfaction – but in the world
of ﬂow and velocity, buﬀer stock is a bad phrase. Companies need to think, not
about stacking up inventory, but about asset velocity and ﬂow – which means
not having material sit in a warehouse, or on a shelf or receiving dock, but in a
constant state of purposeful ﬂow on its way to a customer.
As shown in this example, the real culprit of expanding working capital is
inventory. As shown in Table 4.1, reducing inventory by 5 days in this exam-
ple produced $300 million of cash! And what can you do with cash? Any-
thing you like! You can buy back stock, which will increase your share price.
You can provide dividends, which will attract new investors and keep current
ones happy. Or you can go out and acquire new companies! The point is not
what you do with the cash; the point is that in a ﬂat economy, working capital

4
VELOCITY! Working Capital: The Overlooked Asset

becomes the next source of cash generation, and this occurs through improved
velocity.
At FlexTM, everything in its mission statement focuses on achieving ﬂow and
asset velocity. The key metric that is used to gauge ﬂow is simple: days of supply.
This refers to the number of days sales outstanding as represented by the value
of inventory at the end of each quarter.4
Companies have traditionally employed systems such as “just in time” to pro-
duce materials only as often as needed. JIT often focuses on internal material
ﬂow, but doesn’t always consider the life cycle of cash. For example, one stan-
dard practice is called “vendor-managed inventory,” which requires a supplier
to hold a company’s assets, and deliver them when the company needs them
and is used a great deal in the automotive sector. The problem with this method
is that it pushes the material back onto the supplier – who then isn’t very lean
at all. The supplier is fat … it’s holding onto all the customer’s inventory, then
is threatened with high ﬁnes if it doesn’t deliver exactly what is needed when-
ever the customer wants it. And if the lead-time on those parts is 28 days, then
guess what – the supplier must hold that much inventory to be able to deliver
whenever the customer wants it (typically within 24 hours).
This is not to say that “lean manufacturing” doesn’t work. But the focus of lean
is on reducing waste – not adding value. Lean is typically applied to manufac-
turing, and it does in fact improve manufacturing performance and eﬃciency.
Lean doesn’t necessarily improve the performance of the overall supply chain,
and doesn’t ﬁt well with a Non-Zero view of the world. There is a diﬀerence
between waste and value. A good example is if you want to create a faster car,
you can reduce the weight, streamline the chassis, and boost up the engine. But
if your car is now stuck in traﬃc, and doesn’t have an intelligent system that
can route it to your destination in a faster path, the end result is that you aren’t
really going faster at all! The goal needs to be to design a car that gets you to your
destination faster, not one that is simply faster on an open road! Using the same
analogy, if you really want to increase value produced by supply chain, the best
idea would be to reduce lead times to produce and ship the parts, not making
the equipment more eﬃcient at set-up time reduction. Instead of a production
time of 30 days of inventory, what if production lead time was 5 days? Then the
entire planning cycle is shortened, there is lower inventory, and customers get
their stuﬀeven faster.
In the illustrative example shown in Figure 4.1 and Table 4.1, in March 2015,
suppose that Flex had 55 days of inventory in its supply chain. Taking 5 days
out of inventory across Flex’s12 businesses could generate excess cash from its
4 Inventory is typically measured in terms of days of sales outstanding. Thirty days of inventory
means that the company holds an amount of inventory that is equivalent to 30 days of its typical
annual sales volume, or 30/365 of its days sales outstanding.


The LIVING Supply Chain
Asset transparency
Faster decisions
Asset velocity moving
through the system
Lower working capital
Less obsolescence
& lower logistics costs
Faster customer delivery
lower delivery costs
Satisfied customers
Increased revenue and cost
Enterprise growth and investment
Figure .The Velocity Flywheel Effect
balance sheet, which would come out of its working capital. Note that the num-
ber of days of inventory will also depend on sales revenue. When sales revenues
drop or increase, the same amount of inventory reduction may produce more
or less inventory turns. But the point here is to generate free cash ﬂow across the
supply chain. The goal shouldn’t be just on inventory turns, but on cash ﬂow.
Tom recalled, “When I made the statement in front of our leadership team
to attack days of inventory as a way of generating free cash ﬂow beginning in
December 2015, some people were a bit dubious. I knew we could do it, because
we hadn’t really focused on freeing up cash in this speciﬁc way. And we did. Our
goal was to drive to this to ﬁve days of working capital reduction.”
Taking out working capital and freeing cash ﬂow is only part of the story
associated with ﬂow. The other “secret ingredient” is increased customer sat-
isfaction and company revenue and growth. This is equivalent to the Flywheel
Eﬀect discussed at Amazon in Chapter 1.5 In this case, we’ll call it the Velocity
Eﬀect (see Figure 4.2). The faster you cycle your business throughput, the more
likely you are to increase customer satisfaction. You will get your product to the
customer faster, and as you “lean out” your supply chain, you are accelerating
end-to-end supply chain processes. You will start to see logistics costs drop,
because a slow supply chain results in a lot of unnecessary movement. As your
inventory goes down, you will be able to expose excess, obsolete, and unneeded
buﬀer inventory, and can write oﬀor absorb this inventory. You won’t be spend-
ing time, money, and eﬀort on things that don’t support customers’ needs. And
customers will be happier because they are getting their products when they
5 Rossman, J., The Amazon Eﬀect, 2nd ed., CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, May
9, 2014.

4
VELOCITY! Working Capital: The Overlooked Asset

want them. This is the secret ingredient of asset velocity and speeding move-
ment through the supply chain. We have been so focused on the linkages that
we have forgotten about the need to increase movement through the linkages
in the supply chain.
It’s About Time: Speed Is the Theory of Everything
in Supply Chain
For many reasons, speeding up the supply chain (velocity) is at the root of every-
thing that is good: improved revenue, reduced working capital, higher prof-
itability, and less obsolete inventory. Conversely, slowing down the supply chain
is at the root cause of everything that is bad: working capital write-oﬀs, reduced
proﬁtability, and slowing revenues. Velocity can be used as the ROI driver for
any type of improvement or re-engineering activity that is worth investing in.
Take this example of planning a dinner. If you are planning a dinner for 10 peo-
ple, and your lead time is 10 days to purchase food ahead of time, not only is the
food going to be less fresh, but if two or three people cancel at the last minute
(which always happens!), you have too much food and it goes to waste. But if
you can purchase the food closer to the time of the dinner, say 2 days, you have
more ﬂexibility and order less food that reduces waste and reduces costs.
Traditional supply chain approaches focus on driving greater control over
processes, and driving cost eﬃciency. But the goal of improving ﬂow is not to
put in process controls, but to put in fewer controls so that material ﬂows more
quickly. By imposing more audits and more controls on the process, you are
slowing down speed, which slows down cash generation, as well as all the other
beneﬁts from free cash ﬂow. This is not to say you can’t have controls – only that
they need to be minimized as much as possible in the interest of free cash ﬂow.
So understanding the ﬂow of cost is more than just about improving proﬁtabil-
ity. It is also about revenue growth and working cash ﬂow as well. Speed drives
improvement in every aspect of the ﬁnancial statement: revenue, proﬁtability,
and working capital. How so?
Think about the following example. Assume there are four quarters in a year,
and the price of your products is dropping 2% every quarter. This is not an
unreasonable assumption, as cost pressure, and price reductions are common-
place, especially in the technology sector. So if you buy something on January
1 and ship it 90 days later, on the day you ship it, a consumer can buy the same
material or product for 2% less than the current price. In eﬀect, proﬁtability
is a function of time. So it follows that the faster you move product from pur-
chase to sales, you are not only reducing the time that your product is held as
inventory (working capital), but your proﬁtability is also higher. And because
you get it to customers faster, they are more likely to buy your product over


The LIVING Supply Chain
a competitor who takes longer to ship them what they want! If you can sell it
one day faster than your competitor, on day 89 versus day 90, you will make
2% more proﬁt. Supply chains that are faster also get products to market faster
to capture market share. So in the end, focusing only on the lowest cost, at the
expense of slower supply chains (as so many companies have done by outsourc-
ing to overseas countries) is a big mistake that may be costing you more than
you know!
Globalization Slows Asset Velocity
One of the biggest challenges in today’s global supply chain is balancing the
need to grow in new markets, which drives longer lead times as logistics routes
expand, which in turn keeps more assets tied up longer. As the distance between
entities in the supply chain grows, speed is impacted. A shipment from China
to the United States can take 12 days, but for it to be unloaded and delivered to
the East Coast can take up to 21 days. The entire time that material and prod-
ucts are on a ship or in transit, it is considered “working capital,” as it is an
asset that is tied up. Any asset that is not producing value is considered waste,
and a fundamental of “lean thinking” is that inventory is waste, and time is
money. And the idea was to put as much product into a container as possible,
to boost the density of value of the shipment. This made sense for a long time,
as China’s extremely low labor costs were able to justify the money tied up in
working capital, but this view has begun to change for all of the reasons we’ve
discussed in this book. Many executives are now thinking more about prox-
imity and velocity as key competitive dimensions. For this reason, the idea of
moving nodes in the supply chain closer together is starting to make sense. The
natural growth of global supply chains is linked to another of our “Serengeti
Rules.”
Serengeti Rule 5: Density: the regulation of some species depends on their
density. Some animal populations are regulated by density-dependence fac-
tors that tend to stabilize population size. This rule is based on the observa-
tion that populations of wildebeest, elephants, and buﬀalo tend to increase,
then decrease, then turn negative as their numbers shrink. Often, this occurs
due to poor nutrition, as the amount of food available decreases during the
dry season. The system’s natural balance point has the same eﬀect as a ther-
mostat that triggers cooling when temperatures exceed a set point.
The notion of a self-regulating system is appealing for many reasons. Nature
is constantly in a process of self-regulation, and animal populations expand
and shrink as the availability of natural resources ebbs and wanes due to nat-
ural cycles and weather patterns. This pattern of self-regulation also occurs in
LIVING supply chains.

4
VELOCITY! Working Capital: The Overlooked Asset

New Supply Chain Rule 5: The growth of enterprises in a supply chain
depends on their density, leading to globalization of markets, and
expanding localization of the supply chain. As enterprises operate and
absorb demand in a certain region, pricing pressure increases and growth
levels peak, then turn negative as competitors enter the market. This leads
many companies to seek global expansion as they pursue ongoing growth.
As companies enter these new countries, they are ﬁnding that localization of
the supplier and distribution network must also be developed. To succeed,
companies that expand globally must develop supply chains that are proxi-
mate to their new ecosystems, meaning they need to develop relationships
with new entities (suppliers and distributors) in the countries where they are
expanding.
Now look at the corresponding example of a “Supply Chain” network in
Figure 4.3. Notice the resemblance to the “trophic cascade” example that we
showed earlier. The supply chain is essentially a trophic cascade that we showed
back in Chapter 2. The only diﬀerence is that the “wildebeest” is the OEM man-
ufacturer that supports the customers (lions and cheetahs, etc.) The Distribu-
tors are the animals that also beneﬁt indirectly from the manufacturer (wilde-
beest), such as the aardvark and the mongoose. The Tier 1 Service Suppliers
represent the diﬀerent types of grass the wildebeest needs to survive, while the
Tier 2 suppliers represent other speciﬁcs that are also part of the entire ecosys-
tem (trees, hares, dung beetles, etc.) The point here is that all of these species
Information flows
Tier 2
Material supplier
Tier 1
Material supplier
Customer
Customer
Distributor
Distributor
Primary product flow
Primary cash flow
Upstream
Downstream
Manufacturer
(producer)
Customer
Customer
Tier 1
Material supplier
Tier 2
Material supplier
Tier 2
Material supplier
Tier 2
Service supplier
Tier 2
Service supplier
Tier 1
Service supplier
Figure .Supply Chain Trophic Cascade. Source: APICS, Supply Chain Management
Fundamentals, Version 2.2, 2011 Ed., pp. 1–6


The LIVING Supply Chain
in the end-to-end supply chain either thrive together or die together, and the
manufacturer in many ways is at the center of the entire trophic cascade.
Now think of what a typical “smart phone” supply chain looks like, and how
complex it must be with all the diﬀerent components. And think about what just
happened with the Samsung Galaxy 7 being dropped from the market due to
an exploding battery. How would you like to be one of the suppliers producing
memory, or the processor, or the display and touchscreen for the Samsung 7?
What about the foundries and component suppliers’ business? What happens
to these suppliers’ business volumes when Samsung dropped their phone from
the market? Your revenues and proﬁtability are erased in a single announce-
ment. And this is not due to anything wrong with your product – it is the impact
on the trophic cascade by the wildebeest (Samsung Galaxy 7 in this case) dying
oﬀ. This is a clear and troubling example of how dependent organizations in the
supply chain are on one another.
The other reason why working capital is becoming more important is due
to the globalization of the supply base. As companies outsourced to China,
India, and other low-cost countries, all their shipments went by ocean – espe-
cially for bulk products like furniture. Ocean steaming can be very slow, and
once a ship arrives at the port, products have to be unloaded, put on a trailer,
shipped to a distribution center (DC), unpacked, broken down, and shipped to
customers. This takes a lot of time! In the example shown in Figures 4.4 and
4.5, one can see what happened at a North Carolina furniture manufacturer as
it outsourced production of its products to China from domestic sources. In
this example, lead time went from 3 to 12 weeks, and safety stock went from
40% of a container to 2.74 containers. The inventory in the pipeline exploded,
and subsequently, so did the inventory in the warehouse, which became packed
with containers, causing massive chaos. The sawtooth graphs above assume
that demand is linear, so the graphs form in a straight line. But of course that
isn’t the case – demand is variable, so the actual lines should be crooked, just
like a heartbeat on a heart monitor.
This pattern of global expansion and localization can be best seen in the
automotive industry. Fifty years ago, the Big Three dominated American roads.
Today, every make of vehicle from every corner of the planet can be seen on the
roads, and Toyota has the biggest market share of all in the United States. But
American companies also have expanded to other regions in search of growth.
And as they do so, they expand their footprint. In 2000, I travelled with a con-
tingent of GM executives to Shanghai to meet with Shanghai Automotive exec-
utives. There I saw for myself, the rapid growth in that region as its joint venture
partner was selling Lincoln Continentals built at Shanghai Automotive facto-
ries to a domestic customer base eager to drive large American vehicles.
But as global expansion occurred, assets stretched across longer channels,
and inventories bloated as disruptions in the supply chain expanded inventory
across the chain. To combat this eﬀect, leading automotive companies such as
Honda and Toyota worked to create a “localized” supply base. For example,

4
VELOCITY! Working Capital: The Overlooked Asset

Depicts inventory usage and
replenishment over time.
Quantity
OP
Avg. inv.
SS
LT
DLT
LS
Time
Definitions:
OP (order point): An established inventory level, which when reached, signals the need to issue a
 
replenishment order.
SS (safety stock): A quantity of inventory planned to be on hand to protect against fluctuations in
 
supply or demand.
LT (lead time): The time required to replenish inventory. This is normally measured as the number
 
of days from when the order point is broken to receipt and putaway of the corresponding
 
replenishment order.
LS (lot size): An established lot size, or order quantity, representing an agreed-upon amount of
 
inventory in a replenishment orderd.
DLT (demand through lead time): The amount of inventory expected to be used during the
 
replenishment lead time.
Formulas:
OP (Order Promise) = DLT + SS
DLT = Average daily usage (pieces/day) x LT (days) = X pieces
SS = percent of DLT. (Note: Numerous methodologies exist for determining safety stock levels:
 
statistical, heuristic, and others. For simplicity in the following examples, we will assume SS is
 
set by company policy at 10 percent of demand through lead time.) Average inventory = SS +
 
1/2 DLT
Figure .Inventory Sawtooth Effect
when Honda constructed its automotive facility in Ohio in the late 1980s, 95%
of the components were initially built in Japan and shipped to the United States.
Over time, Honda began to work to develop local suppliers, through partner-
ships, training, and joint ventures with some of their Japanese suppliers who
also moved to the United States. This eﬀort was known as “supplier develop-
ment,” and is a common approach to building and creating a competitive local
supply base. Honda struggled at ﬁrst. US suppliers had a diﬀerent business cul-
ture than Japanese suppliers, and there were misunderstandings, language chal-
lenges, and many other diﬃculties. But over time they prevailed. Today, a vehi-
cle built at Honda’s Ohio facility (including the Odyssey, the Accord, and the
Civic) are built using 95% manufactured parts from the United States, produced
by local suppliers.6
6 Handﬁeld, R., Krause, D., Scannell, T., and Monczka, R., “Avoid the Pitfalls in Supplier Devel-
opment,” Sloan Management Review, vol. 41, no. 2, Winter 2000, pp. 37–49.


The LIVING Supply Chain
LS = 5 trucks
OP
Ave Inv
2.74 Trucks
SS = 0.24 T
LT = 12 wks
LT = 12 wks
SS = 0.24 T
DLT = 0.20 T/wk × 12 = 2.4 T
OP = 2.64 T
LS = 5 containers (5 T)
Ave Inv = SS + 1/2 LS = 2.74 T
DLT = 0.20 T/wk
2005 (80% Int’ I)
Bedroom, Dining, and Dinettes: Inventory Model
Time
2000 (80% domestic)
LS = 1 truck
OP
Ave Inv
0.4 Trucks
SS = 0.1 T
LT = 3 wks
SS = 0.1 T (10% of DLT)
DLT = 0.20 T/wk × 3 = 0.6 T
OP = 0.7 T
LS = 1 truck
Ave Inv = SS + 1/2 LS = 0.4 T
LT = 3 wks
DLT = 0.20 T/wk
Quantity
Figure .Global versus Local Inventory Effects
In fact, thinking about inventory as a heartbeat monitoring the health of the
supply chain is a great comparison. For example, a runner’s heartbeat pattern
can be graphed as shown in Figure 4.6.
Notice that the runner’s heartbeats per minute increases or decreases based
on the stress on the system. As the runner goes faster, the heartbeat responds
180
170
160
150
140
130
120
110
100
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Distance (miles)
145 bpm
8:18 pace
174 bpm
6:10 pace
154 bpm
8:48 pace
Heart rate (bpm)
Figure .Runner’s Heartbeat Pattern

4
VELOCITY! Working Capital: The Overlooked Asset

and moves more quickly, in terms of beats per minute. Can’t we do the same
with inventory, the lifeblood of supply chains? A healthy heartbeat for a runner
is one that increases in response to going faster, but which maintains a relatively
low resting pulse. But how does this apply to working capital in a global supply
chain?
Returning to our Honda example, when local suppliers are used, inventory
can be reduced to a minimum. Because suppliers are located typically within a
12 or 24-hour drive from Honda’s factories, they can deliver directly to the pro-
duction line, with only a day’s inventory.7 Problems can be solved immediately
in face-to-face meetings, instead of by Skype or conference calls in the middle
of the night. And individuals build a stronger person-to-person relationship, as
they see more of each other, and their trust in one another grows. They are more
likely to share information and be more transparent with one another. And this
is a healthier heartbeat than one that goes back and forth across oceans and
time zones.
The “Three Vs”of Information: Velocity, Volume, and Variety
It is well known that the value of business data quickly fades with the pass-
ing of time.8 In the Information Systems literature, data’s age is characterized
by a construct called latency, which is the interval between the time an event
occurs and the time it is perceived by the user. High-latency data is old or “stale;”
low-latency data is new or “fresh.” Low-latency Big Data and high-latency tra-
ditional data are diﬀerentiated using three characteristics: volume, velocity,
and variety known as the three Vs.9 Volume refers to how much data there
is to store, velocity refers to the speed with which this information is gener-
ated, and variety refers to the diversity of sources from which these facts are
collected.
The velocity, volume, and variety of information that occurs in real time also
drive the right set of activities and decisions more rapidly. Updates occur more
frequently, and managers have fresh data that reﬂect the newest set of con-
ditions. This enables rapid decision-making as close to the event as possible,
resulting in improve responsiveness, more ﬂexibility in decision-making, and
quicker movement of dollars through the supply chain pipeline. As an example,
consider Flex’s material visibility system that spans its end to end supply chain.
7 Handﬁeld, R., and Krause, D., “Think Globally, Source Locally,” Supply Chain Management
Review, Winter 1999, pp. 36–49.
8 Watson, H. J., Wixom, B. H., Hoﬀer, J. A., Lehman, R.-A., and Reynolds, A. M., “Real-Time
Business Intelligence: Best Practices at Continental Airlines,” Information Systems Management,
vol. 23, no. 1, 2006, pp. 7–18.
9 Russom, P., “Big Data Analytics,” The Data Warehouse Institute Research, 4th Quarter 2011.


The LIVING Supply Chain
The focus on velocity at Flex is largely driven by the times we live in. World
GDP has slowed, and we are experiencing historically low levels of slow growth.
Only a few companies are experiencing double digit growth. Many CFOs say
they need to cut costs – but doing so has a whole set of negative eﬀects, notably
loss of people, one of a ﬁrm’s most important resources. The real solution to a
low-growth environment is to focus on free cash ﬂow, to drive out slow-moving
materials, and free up assets. Cash thrown oﬀa balance sheet by reducing work-
ing capital can enable companies to do mergers and acquisitions, to integrate
the cash to drive up return on invested capital, or to buy back stock and raise
its stock price. CFOS are beginning to clue in on the secret of velocity and its
impact on ﬁnancial returns.
Transparency allows supply chain executives to drill down and identify the
sources of slow-moving assets. It exposes long lead times for materials, cus-
tomers, suppliers, production facilities – and slow-moving inventory.
Now let’s go back to the heartbeat concept. Tom pulled out his smart phone,
and showed me the pulse graph of inventory for one of Flex’s major customers
(Figure 4.7). The phone shows exactly what is going on with inventory in the
entire end-to-end system, combining raw material, WIP, ﬁnished goods, and
safety stock in the system. What is also unique about this level of detail is that
it allows Tom to see the level of inventory in diﬀerent segments of the supply
chain system, in real time, based on whatever view he wants to see. He can look
at the inventory pulse from several perspectives:
r Total inventory in the system
r Categorized by ﬁnished goods, work in process, or raw material
r Inventory for a speciﬁc customer
r Inventory at a speciﬁc facility
r Inventory in transit.
All this information can be viewed in real time – as well as historically. And to
make this even more real-time FlexTM is working on a technology that will also
track and locate any speciﬁc container or shipment anywhere in the world –
without a track and trace barcode scan.10 So if your shipment is sitting in a
warehouse, in customs, or in a port, you can pinpoint its exact location.
The interesting part of an inventory pulse is that it truly reﬂects the life-like
performance of the LIVING supply chain. As shown in Figure 4.7, when mate-
rial is “above the line” (of $0) you have material coming in. When the pulse
drops below the line, there is material going out. When inventory is at $0 for
a brief time, there is no activity – and this occurs on Saturdays and Sundays.
But the point is that this pulse is similar to a heartbeat – as blood comes in to
the heart and then is pumped back out to the body, the extremities of the body
10 Patent pending, property of FlexTM International.

4
VELOCITY! Working Capital: The Overlooked Asset

Figure .The Flex Inventory PulseTM – Illustrated Example (Patent Pending). Source:
Reproduced with permission of FlexTM


The LIVING Supply Chain
receive blood that drives the entire system. Inventory is in eﬀect the life-blood
of supply chains, and inventory turns are equivalent to the pulse of a heartbeat.
Leadership at Flex fully understands the role of inventory as the key to the
LIVING supply chain’s health. Francois Barbier, Group President of Operations
at Flex, emphasizes, “Inventory is everything we don’t need. The objective is to
drive all our operations with that goal in mind.” The inventory pulse is the key to
understanding patterns related to a company’s working capital and inventory
(LIVING assets). For example, the pulse graph on Tom’s mobile phone (Fig-
ure 4.7) showed that a major client’s inventory levels were rapidly increasing.
A quick check into trend revealed that this was a normal pattern for this cus-
tomer at this time of the year, and the warning of a rapid increase was thus a
“false alarm.” The transparency of data creates visibility that allows companies
to drive down space utilization, planned versus actual shipments, purchase exe-
cution, on-time delivery, and many other key business performance metrics.
The future of business process innovation will be driven by transparency into
key data and analytics everywhere in an organization’s extended end-to-end
supply chain. This also will merge into the area of predictive software that will
no longer just tell us what is happening in real time, but will be able to reliably
tell us what is going to happen tomorrow – or next week.
New concepts such as asset velocity will transform business balance and
income statements as processes defragment and accelerate. A good example
is dynamic pricing: with online shopping, prices can change in a second. Why
can’t businesses operate that way? As with online auctions, what if the entire
economy operated like an online auction: live, with prices changing based upon
the stock market? Brick-and-mortar stores would have to quickly reduce prices
based on what online retailers were oﬀering. This wave is emerging, but orga-
nizations are rapidly thinking through how this will jointly align ﬁnancial plan-
ning and strategic supply chain planning. For example, a large fast food retailer
has constructed an analytical total cost of ownership model that includes not
just a package of fried chicken, but all of the chicken farming operations,
including wages, feed, gasoline, energy costs, and transportation costs. But they
haven’t stopped there – analysts have extended their understanding to examine
corn and feed costs, which constitute more than 30% of the cost of chicken. By
hedging in these commodity feed markets, the company has essentially decon-
structed the total cost of ownership for a bucket of chicken to a ﬁgure they have
eﬀectively hedged against for the next 2 years!
As we increase machine-to-machine communications, it is not unthinkable
that the invisible hand of capitalism envisioned by Adam Smith will become
increasingly automated. Buyers and sellers will not reach a price agreement over
days or weeks but instantaneously. Data that forms a price derived from mate-
rials, demand, supply, labor, and location will form agreements. These agree-
ments, or the meeting of the minds, could be reached quickly and eﬃciently.
Business velocity will move more quickly, leading to increases in productiv-
ity and output. But to achieve true global integration, real-time visibility and

4
VELOCITY! Working Capital: The Overlooked Asset

transparency is a fundamental component ensuring that all parties are work-
ing toward the same global outcome, based on local event updates and a single
source of truth.
Speeding Up the Flow of Cash in the Pipeline:
Procure-to-Pay Systems
Tom sees many of today’s systems designed to deal with ﬁnancial accountability
as not only cumbersome, but often creating more complexity that in the end
reduces transaction visibility and ﬂow. This further muddies the waters and
works against ﬁnancial transparency and hence accountability. Purchase orders
are one of the biggest elements of friction today.
“Purchasing is simply too transactional,” Tom said. “The cycle of procure-
ment requires a tedious process, beginning with a requisition, an approval, a
purchase order, an invoice, and ﬁnally a payment. Organizations can’t seem to
conduct a commercial transaction without some kind of a purchase order every
single time. But what has happened is that we have created a proliferation of
purchase orders for every single order, and because the volume has escalated,
organizations have once again used labor arbitrage to move their PO process-
ing to China or India. And an entire industry has sprung up around processing
POs, which is a non-value-added function!”
In a recent interview, an executive working in a major electronics company
emphasized that its systems were creating massive problems for them – and
driving the exact opposite eﬀect of asset velocity. On the customer end, the
company had millions of dollars of orders that had already been delivered to its
customers in Brazil, but the ERP system they invested in was unable to gener-
ate the invoices in a format that complied with Brazil’s regulatory requirements.
As a result, customers were unable to pay the company, as doing so would vio-
late the law. The company had orders that had been delivered six months ear-
lier, but had not yet been paid for, or even invoiced properly. On the supplier
end, purchase order systems were so completely dysfunctional that several sup-
pliers of common items like utilities, contract manufacturing, and other ser-
vices had stopped performing against their contractual obligations until they
were paid, thereby halting operations and further delaying deliveries to cus-
tomers. What a nightmare! The company was eﬀectively shrinking its assets,
both on the customer and the supplier ends, due to a transactional systems
issue.
In general, disparate ERP systems create friction, which in turn slows down
the ﬂow of material and information in the supply chain. Data transparency
creates instantaneous knowledge and understanding of what is happening. As
in the laws of thermodynamics, the fewer obstacles in the path of ﬂow, the
faster the ﬂow. The new rules of supply chain advocate moving faster and this
is accomplished by improving ﬂow and reducing friction.


The LIVING Supply Chain
Another example of how typical supply chain processes can slow us down is
the proliferation of just-in-time and kanban production systems. The original
intention of these systems was to reduce inventory through multiple deliveries
by suppliers in small quantities. This method worked well in places like Japan,
where suppliers are located near the production facility. But in a country like
the United States, or in global supply networks, it is doing enormous harm to
the environment and is complicating transportation networks. There are more
trucks, more deliveries, and more boxes. Many procurement engines are blast-
ing out more POs per second than a machine gun, placing way too many orders,
and generating too many shipments of small quantities. This is just gumming
up the ﬁnancial channels and causing a lot of needless eﬀort.
To combat this problem, increase velocity and reduce system friction. FlexTM
launched a project aimed at purchase order reduction, in an eﬀort to enable
commerce to ﬂow more easily while maintaining the right ﬁnancial controls.
Tom describes the interesting outcome:
We recently went through a major part number / PO reduction, and
took a third of POs out of the system. We found that every time some-
one wanted to order something, they had to cut a PO. In a lot of cases,
they were cutting POs for 10 parts packaged in a box to be delivered.
So we did a sensitivity analysis on the cost of inventory versus the cost
of a PO. What we discovered is that PO engines are so drunk and disor-
derly that they are causing confusion in the context of trying to build eﬃ-
ciency using principles of just in time. And in the end, we were negatively
impacting our proﬁtability and our overall carbon footprint through
more frequent deliveries. Contrary to what you might think, just in time
is NOT an agile, responsive supply chain.
We took out a third of POs without increasing any inventory. But I also
have a proﬁtability requirement. I don’t want to spend a lot of money
ﬂying around a lot of stuﬀthat doesn’t have some sensitivity analysis and
which will impact my balance sheet. I believe that the whole focus on
kanban and JIT has gotten out of hand. We need to stop, back up, and
think about what it is we are trying to achieve. Purchasing has a lot of
impact on the total cost of the supply chain, and I believe that JIT metrics
have distorted the picture on what impacts end-to-end cost eﬃciencies.
It is also relevant to consider how purchasing is making decisions in the global
supply chain. Labor costs have ﬂattened out, so the only way to truly take out
cost is to reduce either the amount of labor through productivity improve-
ments, or the amount of material in the product, or to substitute material in
the product. If volume won’t grow in the “new normal” ecosystem, we have to
be creative about how to take out cost.

4
VELOCITY! Working Capital: The Overlooked Asset

An important development in the ﬂow of ﬁnancial transactions will be the
“blockchain.”11 In a typical deterministic supply chain, it is imperative to strictly
verify and audit the actions within the system as correct, including the inputs
and outputs of the system such as automated bank transfers, orders of com-
ponents from inventory, and shipment to locations. But this assumes that all
information concerning all inputs and outputs must be provided. A blockchain
is diﬀerent, as each individual operation or interaction is perfectly recorded
and archived using an agreed on business logic. Auditing is as simple as join-
ing the blockchain network, as one can “replay” the operations of the past to
build a correct model of the present. Blockchains are envisioned to be able to
provide absolute guarantees of authenticity for every transaction in the sup-
ply chain, and this will dramatically change the ﬁnancial supply chain of the
future.
Note that it is easy for procurement executives to remain complacent when
commodity costs are low. “Why worry? Prices are low and they will stay low!”
is a common attitude. People have grown so conﬁdent in 2013–2017 about the
cost of materials and oil. It is easy to get deluded into thinking that this is per-
manent, especially when 50 percent of COGS in manufacturing is in material
commodities, and prices for copper, gold, cotton are all going down. It is also
easy not to worry about transportation cost when oil is at $30/bbl. Many exec-
utives agree that we are in a golden age of low materials and low oil prices.
Material and oil prices will eventually go up. And then labor arbitrage will also
be oﬀthe table. So where will your procurement and supply chain go in search
of the next source of cost savings? Will you go to North Africa? Mexico? You
will not reap a big gain, and it is certainly not worth it. So where do you go?
To some extent, it depends on what you’ve done already – but if you’ve already
explored all these strategies, you have limited options.
The Financial Sphere12: Oblong Is Better Than Round
A good way to think about the risks and costs in a supply chain is to think
of them as a three-dimensional sphere populated with entities, much like the
Earth, shown in Figure 4.8. The Earth’s axis goes from the North Pole to the
South Pole; its equator crosses the circumference of the globe at its midpoint.
Think of the entire mass contained within the Earth as representing the supply
chain costs associated with an enterprise such as Flex. The vertical axis through
the poles represents the elements of risk. There are consumers of risk, and pro-
ducers of risk, with your company at the very core of the sphere. As you travel
toward the South Pole, you will encounter the producers of risk. These are those
11 https://www.provenance.org/whitepaper
12 © FlexTM International, patent pending.


The LIVING Supply Chain
Insurance
Consulting
services
Enterprise
Credit
Cyber
Business continuity intelligence
Commodity intelligence
Product
Design
Develop
Make
Move
Ship
Sell
Repair
Supply chain
velocity
Risk consumers and
customers
Impact costs
Geographic
environmental
political and social
operational
Risk suppliers
Markets and
investment banks
Logistic and
resource costs
Indirect costs
and capital
Mutual funds,
banks
Current costs
Future costs
Supply &
quality
Multi-tier
Total cost model
Integration
Device
Raw material
Figure .The Financial Sphere (Patent Pending)
companies that create events that produce risk, going back to supplier tiers 1, 2,
3. This would compromise the participants and integrators who assemble the
product, logistics providers who ship the product, individual devices, circuit
boards, and raw material manufacturers, all the way back to the silicon, resins,
and oil that comprise the raw material for the ﬁnal product. These parties are
the producers of risk – the companies you have to worry about failing. If some-
thing goes wrong in the supply chain, massive disruption occurs, which is what
the consumers of risk (the upper part of the globe) worry about.
The consumers of risk in the northern hemisphere include the banks, the
insurance companies, shareholders – all the parties concerned about what is
happening in the southern hemisphere, and which have to invest in, insure,
or feel the impact of risk on their own operations. As you travel toward the
North Pole, you move toward the commodity intelligence function, which seeks
to understand commodity behaviors, the investors evaluating your risk, credit
and banking institutions who trade your stock based on risk, insurance com-
panies who evaluate your risk premiums, credit agencies like D&B, and others.
These are the consumers of risk, who evaluate the riskiness of your supply chain.
When there is a disruption, they will downgrade your stock or raise your insur-
ance premiums. The deeper and longer the axis is, the longer your line through
the tiers – tier 5 suppliers through insurance companies – and all these parties
are impacted by supply chain performance.
There is a ﬁnite amount of risk in the universe. Like matter, risk cannot be
made to go away. It is either passed on or absorbed by parties in the sphere. If a

4
VELOCITY! Working Capital: The Overlooked Asset

party absorbs risk, then it does so at its own cost. But the horizontal axis from
equator to equator represents supply chain activities within the organization (in
this case, Flex). If Flex is able to reduce the lead time to design, develop, make,
move, sell, and repair products for customers, the equator shrinks, and the
sphere becomes more oblong. This also can condense risk, making the entire
sphere smaller. A smaller sphere has less mass, and thus lower cost.
Why is this? Well, if a company like Flex is able to “de-risk” its supply chain,
then insurers may well believe there is less risk, and thus insurance premiums
go down. Banks may believe the stock is worth more, which opens up lines
of credit, and charge lower interest. Retailers may buy more product, which
increases ﬂow and drives economies of scale. Either way, as risk is reduced,
somebody else in the ecosystem absorbs that risk – but Flex’s costs go down,
and the sphere shrinks.
Risk cannot be eliminated altogether, however. Let’s take Taiwan Semicon-
ductor Manufacturing Company (TSMC), a tier 3 or 4 supplier located in
Taiwan. If there is ever an earthquake in Taiwan, and TSMC goes down, only
16 weeks of inventory are left for the global electronics industry. Why? Because
TSMC produces 80% of the world’s semiconductors. As Charles Fine wrote in
his book ClockSpeed.13 “Supply chain disruptions don’t ripple – they roar!” The
implication is that if something occurs at a tier 3 or 4 supplier, it goes ripping
up through the supply chain and disrupts the entire sphere, including not just
the producers of risk but the consumers as well.
Longer, multi-tier supply chains that extend all over the world thus tend to
increase overall risk. This is one reason that companies are increasingly moving
to localization of supply. Doing so eliminates risk, speeds up velocity, reduces
cost (not the same thing as price), and simpliﬁes planning because of shorter
lead times. We see countless examples of situations where supply chains could
have been better managed, but the design of the supply chain resulted in major
disruptions. The Fukashima meltdown caused enormous risk for Japan and sev-
eral large manufacturers, with ripple eﬀects down the supply chain for automo-
tive and electronics. The Boeing Dreamliner had multiple ripple eﬀects because
of delivery problems and quality problems. In each case, consumers, banks, and
stakeholders also suﬀered.
The point of this analogy is that producers of risk make products, service
products, manage quality, and ensure that logistics channels work. And those
on the sidelines on the top half of the globe bet on whether the possible risks
will actually happen or not. How much do the people at the top know about
your risks? And how often do their predictions come true? The answer is – not
13 Charles, F., Clockspeed: Winning Industry Control in the Age of Temporary Advantage, Basic
Books, 1999.


The LIVING Supply Chain
Figure .Changing the Shape of the Sphere
very often. Why? Because the consumers of risk know very little about what is
happening in the world of risk producers.
There are clues, however. You can judge the health of a supply chain by the
shape of the sphere, as shown in Figure 4.9. One with a wider equator (lower
right) has long lead times, slow decision-making, and higher risk. A sphere
which is also vertically stretched (upper right) with multiple tiers in the supply
chain has higher risk, due to the diﬃculty of driving visibility into the supply
chain. But as you increase transparency (up and down the sphere) and velocity
(across the equator), what happens? Both dimensions get smaller, and the total
amount of risk in the ecosystem shrinks, so the entire sphere shrinks, as do the
costs. Thus organizations should strive to continue to not only shrink the size
of the sphere, but increase the speed at which it spins. The optimal sphere is a
small, round sphere that spins quickly. Any destabilization in the supply chain
can cause it to wobble and not spin eﬃciently. But when all tiers are working
together, the sphere is smaller and balanced and spins properly, driving the
right velocity and health of the entire planet!
But increasing visibility and velocity at the same time is tricky. I want a deep
view into my supply chain, but don’t want to make it resilient and slow down
decision-making. To return to the car analogy, I want visibility to my speed, and
quick braking response, but don’t want the brake on all the time. I also want it
to be safe, but don’t want safety features that slow me down. How do I make
things move faster, while reducing costs and driving visibility and shareholder

4
VELOCITY! Working Capital: The Overlooked Asset

returns? How do we remove people from the process and let machines make
decisions more quickly, but ensure that oversight and accurate data goes into
decision-making? These are the questions we need to ask about the LIVING
supply chain.
Shrinking the Sphere: Creating Transparency and
Disintermediating Supply Chain Networks
Executives often wrongly assume that the relationships and enterprise design in
their supply chains are immutable. We return to thinking about supply chains
as ecosystems, which brings up Serengeti Rule 6 and our corresponding New
Supply Chain Rule 6.
Serengeti Rule 6: Migration increases animal numbers. Migration increases
animals’ access to food (reducing bottom-up regulation) and decreases their
susceptibility to predation (reducing top-down predation). For example,
herds of wildebeest that migrate suﬀer only about one-fourth of deaths by
predation, whereas those that remain year-round near stable sources of water
suﬀer 87% of death by predation. Only 1% of migrating animals are taken by
predators in a year, while up to 10% of non-migrating animals are taken. This
is because non-migrating animals are easier for predators to locate and hunt.
New Supply Chain Rule 6: Enterprises that expand beyond their traditional
place in the supply chain become more competitive and survive. More
speciﬁcally, as organizations expand beyond the traditional ways of working
and roles in the supply chain, by exploiting the evolving digital ecosystem
and employing analytics, they will expand and survive. Organizations that
remain in their home markets, working in their traditional businesses, and
fail to adapt will end up ﬁghting for a shrinking market with less power as
competitors expand into their market. Eventually these businesses will enter
a death spiral as revenues shrink, proﬁts dry up, attracting less investment
and lowers their ability to recover and survive.
As globalization occurs, healthy organizations seek to move vertically into
new markets, and also to expand into new industries, as we saw in Supply Chain
Rule 5. But there is also another way that companies expand and migrate: in
the direction of vertical expansion up and down the supply chain. Companies
who begin to explore tier 2 suppliers and distributors begin to disintermediate
many traditional boundaries. In this manner, they begin to change the balance
of power, and deﬁne new ways of competing in the supply chain. Just as migrat-
ing animals have a better chance of surviving in the Serengeti, organizations
that move and grow will reach the key leverage point in their supply chain.
One of the biggest and often overlooked traditional boundaries in supply
chains is simple: who owns the data on supply chain activities and processes?
A simple example will explain this principle in more detail.


The LIVING Supply Chain
A major source of angst for people in supply chains is logistics. People get
paralyzed when logistics fail. That’s why FedEx, UPS, and DHL allow you to
track your package online. But who owns the data on the location of your pack-
age? They do! And in supply chains, the real gold is the data, not the physical
activity. When FedEx or UPS lets you see a tracking number, they are essentially
holding your data hostage. UPS tells you, “I will tell you when your package is
coming.” But they are the channel through which the data travels – from the
package barcode on the truck through the scanner, through the Internet, to
UPS’s website to your email inbox, where you have to go through their systems
to access information about your package!
Now imagine that you had a direct link to the box that contained your stuﬀ.
You don’t need the layers of opaqueness between the box, the barcode reader,
the driver, the truck, the distribution center, etc. You have direct access. In fact,
these other elements in the channel are like clots in your supply chain data
arteries – they just get in the way. Another way to think about this is through
what we call the transparency principle, a variation of New Supply Chain
Rule 6.
New Supply Chain Rule 6a (Transparency Principle): Direct ownership
of and access to data on objects and activities in the supply chain create
greater transparency and increased velocity, leading to quicker response and
increased survival rates.
In eﬀect, by focusing on barcodes transmitting data, we still rely on the wrap-
per, not the object itself. People will drop a box oﬀand tell FedEx, “I want to
get it to my location in 24 hours.” This is the wrong approach. The approach
should be to send a message that communicates, “I know where my box is in
the channel, because I can monitor it, and the delivery company that gets it
there quickest gets my business.” In this scenario, the focus is on the data that
tells you where it is.
A company’s ability to disrupt traditional supply chain participants and get
ownership of data in the extended supply chain is key to changing the dynam-
ics of traditional supply chain management. A Harvard Business Review arti-
cle on the electronics supply chain of LG Electronics (LGE), Qualcomm, and
TSMC illustrates how this works.14 Until recently, managers of large OEMs
assumed they could save money by outsourcing the design and production of
major supply subsystems. But when a company assigns considerable control
over a product’s bill of materials, the total costs of product ownership (includ-
ing such things as transportation and inventory management) become opaque
to the OEM. And, as some manufacturers found out the hard way during the
14 Linton, T., and Choi, T., “Don’t Let Your Supply Chain Control Your Business,” Harvard Busi-
ness Review, December 2011, pp. 112–117.

4
VELOCITY! Working Capital: The Overlooked Asset

2008 recession, that means the company has little leverage to reduce costs –
especially if it has handed over an entire subsystem to a single supplier and can’t
quickly stage a competition or switch suppliers. Similarly, lower-tier suppliers
can provide valuable information about the latest manufacturing advances and
technological innovations. In consumer electronics, for example, direct access
to the newest ideas of chip-design houses, which often are second- or third-tier
suppliers, is critical. Such access has enabled companies like Apple and LGE
to inﬂuence the development of emerging technologies, incorporate them into
products before their rivals do, and secure supplies at an advantageous price.
Conversely, companies that lack such access have found themselves reacting to
competitors’ innovations and struggling to match their features and prices.
By expanding vertically across multiple tiers in the supply chain, companies
can gain control and also stay close to vendors that can provide early infor-
mation on shifts in the economy. Firms with this capability, such as Taiwan
Semiconductor Manufacturing Company (TSMC), tend to serve a wide range
of industries. In January 2009, LGE bypassed top-tier supplier Qualcomm and
established a direct tie with TSMC, one of the world’s largest chip foundries.
Concerns that Qualcomm wasn’t passing on the savings or supply advantages
from then-plunging chip prices and uncertainty about what would happen to
the global economy that year prompted Tom Linton, then LGE’s chief procure-
ment oﬃcer, to take this step. In the ﬁrst quarter, LGE learned that TSMC’s
orders from a large number of industries were picking up, that its capacity was
tightening, and that lead times were increasing. These events all indicated that
the global economy would rebound in 2009, sooner than many anticipated. In
response, LGE rushed to negotiate deals with suppliers, and locked in cost sav-
ings before prices rose. Caught oﬀguard, many of TSMC’s competitors couldn’t
respond similarly.
The fact that Tom Linton and his CTO ﬂew to Taiwan to meet in person
with TSMC executives was a major disruption. Qualcomm, the intermedi-
ary, was very upset about what was seen as an aggressive action that disin-
termediated the supply chain. Up until this point, Qualcomm had controlled
all information about wafer supply, wafer pricing, and volume negotiations
with LGE, eﬀectively telling LGE what wafers they would deliver and when.
In eﬀect, Qualcomm controlled a core part of the product they assembled for
LGE, and thus was able “to set the terms for the deal.” Executives at Qualcomm
insisted that “TSMC is our supplier,” and LGE should have no direct contact
with TSMC. In a discussion with executives, however, Tom Linton made it clear
that TSMC’s wafers were in fact in LGE’s product, as they were the end user.
Qualcomm was merely an intermediary that integrated TSMC’s material in the
product it was selling to LGE. Tom’s intervention with TSMC served to signiﬁ-
cantly distintermediate Qualcomm’s control over supply, eﬀectively disrupting
the existing power triad. Afterward, LGE’s relationship with Qualcomm was
still strong, but it had changed. LGE no longer found itself on the defensive,


The LIVING Supply Chain
as they had much better control over information on supply, demand, pricing,
and other factors that directly impacted its revenue stream and product costs.
So what’s the lesson here? Simply this: Controlling data and understanding
what is happening in the supply chain is essential to visibility and transparency,
which leads to velocity and eﬀective decisions. This level of transparency must
be used to drive competitive behavior that keeps the supply chain in balance.
When there is imbalance, as discussed earlier, disruptions are sometimes nec-
essary to restore order.
The “Uber”Eﬀect of Supply Chain Disruption
Today “Uberization” is causing major disruptions in the supply chain. In eﬀect,
Uber took control of data channels in the service supply chain, creating a new
industry. Before Uber, taxicab service in San Francisco was horrible. Uber dis-
rupted taxicab companies, by connecting people who wanted point-to-point
transportation service with individuals who had the time and the nice vehicles
to provide that service. People no longer had to call taxi companies, wait for
a driver to come by (if one was available), and pay the fare at the end of the
ride. Instead, Uber customers could instantaneously get a price on their point-
to-point transportation requirement, get a driver in a couple of minutes, be
transported in a comfortable, clean vehicle, and communicate directly with the
driver, who knew exactly where to ﬁnd them.
This is upending the entire business. In fact, San Francisco’s biggest Taxi
Operator, Yellow Cab Cooperative, Inc., ﬁled for bankruptcy protection in
January 2016.15 The yellow cabs face a steep decline in ridership, along with
other ﬁnancial diﬃculties stemming from lawsuits. This is happening across
the country, with Chicago’s Yellow Cab taxi service ﬁling for bankruptcy
in 2015. New York’s yellow cab medallions needed to operate a cab plum-
meted from $1.3 million in 2013 to around $700 thousand last year. In
eﬀect, Uber (and its recent competitor, Lyft) have changed the landscape
forever.
In a sense, the Uber success story follows the Serengeti rules, which codify
the forces of nature. If one party in the chain becomes powerful, beyond its
ability to provide service or to survive, forces of disruption will rebalance the
ecosystem. If there are not enough wolves, the elk population will grow, trees
will die, and the system will reboot. This is why many Native nations emphasize
balance, killing only what they need to survive, and using “by-products” of their
kill for other purposes.
15 http://www.wsj.com/articles/san-franciscos-biggest-taxi-operator-seeks-bankruptcy-
protection-1453677177

4
VELOCITY! Working Capital: The Overlooked Asset

GPS technology, cloud computing, and mobile applications are key driving
forces in rapid supply chain disruption, and what is known as the “Uber Eﬀect”
will become much more prevalent in other industries as technology contin-
ues to drive disruption in the supply chain. For example, FedEx, DHL, and UPS
spend hundreds of millions of dollars every year or so redesigning or developing
logistics networks for their customers. Why? Because conditions have changed,
customer issues have arisen, legislative issues have cropped up, demand vol-
umes have changed – in fact, everything is constantly changing! Global Posi-
tioning Systems have created an entirely new form of real-time data, which is
being exploited in novel ways. For example, in India, TVS, a third-party logis-
tics provider, has installed GPS in most of its vehicles. Data is taken from the
tracking system and processed in order to help customers help TVS contin-
uously redesign customer routings. Virtually all information about total lead
times, supplier wait and load times, driving times, and delays can be quickly
downloaded and reviewed. This allows TVS to, say, identify troublesome roads
or high-traﬃc roads, reroute drivers and change schedules. In countries like
India, Brazil, and Vietnam, where urban traﬃc is notorious for holding up deliv-
eries, this capability can provide a competitive advantage. TVS is developing
and using optimization models that utilizes real-time GPS data to create real-
time trucking solutions. They also can obtain information from warehouses to
determine which parts are going out of stock or are aging.
A German fourth party logistics company, 4Flow, is also providing this capa-
bility to its customers. Information about the entire network, including inven-
tory, shipments, advanced ship notices, vehicle routes, GPS tracking data, and
others are uploaded in real time to its optimization algorithm. The algorithm is
rerun at the end of each day, and the entire set of vehicle dispatches, schedules,
and warehouse movements are reconﬁgured and deployed. This capability has
created massive beneﬁts for companies such as Volvo, which have used 4Flow
as its primary logistics management ﬁrm.
Now let’s think bigger: what happens when you expand this concept? Perhaps
something that is going on in logistics now: a disruptive event that companies
like FedEx and UPS are very much afraid of. Namely, the Uberization of logis-
tics. Why couldn’t Uber’s approach work for freight as well? Well, it is – right
in front of us. Premium freight service supply chains are evolving, and it won’t
be long before they will be “uberized.” It won’t be long before we have a “smart
box” – a package with a chip on it that sends a signal stating, “I am in Portland,
OR, and I need to be picked up and moved to Hong Kong.” (This could happen
anywhere in the world). What if this led to a bunch of boxes in a warehouse
all sending signals to trains, planes, trucks, and an entire network of poten-
tial transportation providers? Some providers may even be automated, with no
driver. And when a transportation provider picks up the signal that a delivery is
needed and communicates with a network of other providers also in the chain, a
truck could locate and load the shipment in less than a minute, take it to a port,


The LIVING Supply Chain
and put it on a ship to Hong Kong, where it could be unloaded and trucked
to its destination. This transportation system could be done not through a sin-
gle premium service, but by any number of Uber-like trucking, shipping, and
delivery services, responding to a chip emitting a GPS signal. The signal would
also broadcast to the customer This could all be done not by a premium service,
but through a chip with a GPS signal that will tell the customer exactly where
their shipment is on its route at any time of day. Is this crazy? We think it’s
not as far oﬀas you might think. Barcodes will be disrupted by GPS and Wi-Fi
everywhere – and these supply chains will evolve, if not exactly in this way, but
in some fashion. Why? Because supply chains always ﬂow to the point of least
resistance.
Real-Time Data Leads to Better Predictions
When decisions are made quickly, and people have access to real-time data,
prediction becomes easier. This is because we are reacting to information that
is more up to date. It is easier to estimate with reasonable certainty what is going
to happen next and react in a more agile manner when we have real-time data,
as opposed to data that is a week or a month old.
In May 2016, I met with Tom Choi from Arizona State University. Tom
recalled two simple prediction rules, based on time-honored forecasting rules:
In your forecasting classes, all you are really learning is a sophisticated
way to create mathematical expressions to capture the past, and trying to
extrapolate it into the future. And we always return to the two cardinal
rules that deal with the accuracy of forecasting.
The ﬁrst rule is that aggregated forecasts are always better then product-
speciﬁc forecasts. (Recently this has been made popular by the trend of
“crowd sourcing.”) The basic rule is that multiple points of view formed
by individual experts and respondents act as a synthesizing mechanism
to help us see what is going on at a macro level. They oﬀer opinions and
paint the future for us. If we can combine multiple insights, we can begin
to get a reasonable view of the future. For example, predicting between
whether the NFC or AFC will win the Super Bowl is easier than trying to
predict which team will win the Super Bowl – and forecasting the trend
for product families rather than individual products is likewise much
easier.
The second rule is that the longer you wait to develop forecasts, the more
accurate it will be… That is because forecasts for tomorrow are bet-
ter than forecasts for two months from now. We learn about accurate

4
VELOCITY! Working Capital: The Overlooked Asset

response methods, and as you increase standardization and reduce lead
time, you can get “ﬁrst market data,” which is the best predictor. Waiting
to get the very latest (and earliest) market response to your product oﬀer-
ing works best for product releases. So if you have a very ﬂexible supply
chain, you can aﬀord to wait until that last moment and your forecast
accuracy increases.
If you apply those ideas to the cognitive and analytics arenas, the implica-
tions are obvious. Access to real-time data occurring in the end-to-end supply
chain is the next big power grab that can provide better predictive capabili-
ties. More accurate prediction results in improved decisions, a better ability
to exploit market swings, eﬀective response to disruption, lower reliance on
“guesses and estimates,” and ultimately, lower costs and lower inventory. If you
can combine data control, real-time access, cloud-based computer algorithms,
mobile computing, and the right decision-making culture, you will have not
only a very powerful predictive analytics capability, but also an organization
with extreme velocity capabilities. You can aﬀord to wait until the last minute to
make a decision. You also can aggregate multiple sources of internal and exter-
nal data from both internal and external, unstructured sources (using natural
language processing). In the past, we made forecasts that were very linear and
that attempted to extrapolate the future based on the past. But now, with real-
time data, we are learning how to do this in smaller increments of time, using
machines that also are learning faster and faster. We are using a high “alpha”
value in our exponential smoothing models and weighting the most recent data
the highest. This is driving greater velocity of decision-making.
Prediction is still a relatively emerging and new capability in the supply chain
environment, but is increasing in importance, particularly in organizations that
have already been through the cycle of spend analytics, supplier leveraging,
segmentation, and consolidation. Predictive analytics requires a deep under-
standing of the technical and commercial attributes of the supply chain ecosys-
tem, as well as advanced statistical and modeling capabilities. Prediction is
based on identiﬁcation of the true indicators for predicting revenue, disrup-
tion, opportunity, or whatever outcome is sought. It is often built on a strategic
platform that provides data visibility and near real-time availability, as well as
advanced data warehouses for collection of relevant third party datasets. Such
insights also provide for visual representation of insights that provide a pro-
found view into supply chain operational outcomes that are not easily appar-
ent to executives in the business. Finally, prediction requires highly sophisti-
cated levels of procurement analytical modeling capability. This represents an
important opportunity for organizations – to harness the power of cognitive
computing systems that enable the convergence of data pulled from machines,
systems, and social media into a powerful real-time predictive system of the
future.


The LIVING Supply Chain
For example, if you are trying to decide whether to buy precious metal from
one location versus another, you can bring together data from both locations,
and combine it with the location’s record for production stability and market
performance, and make a solid decision. Your decision can reﬂect events that
occurred that very day. Regardless of how smart algorithms are, you are still
doing forecasting. Nobody has a crystal ball – we are just getting a little more
sophisticated in how we apply the two rules of forecasting, combined with rec-
ognizing on that owning the data is the magic ingredient that allows us to oper-
ate more eﬀectively in our ecosystem. Ultimately, this capability is what we need
to survive in today’s global economy.



INTELLIGENT! Linking the Genomes of Products
in Your Supply Chain
You can’t ﬁx what you can’t see.
—Tom Linton
Developing a capability for real-time data streaming from thousands of points
in the global supply chain is no easy task. Getting leadership at any company
to buy in to a new idea is always a challenge. At Flex, however, the leadership
team was open to investing in this new form of transparency from the outset.
Leaders determine the culture of an organization, and culture has everything
to do with the ability to adapt to the new rules of supply chain management
described in earlier chapters.
Flex’s culture is open to change for a number of reasons. First and foremost,
CEO Mike McNamara is open to any good ideas, and his oﬃce door is always
open. When Tom Linton proposed Flex Pulse (“literally on the back of a nap-
kin”), his response was, “Let’s do it!” Second, because Flex is in the business of
operating supply chains for other people, its own supply chain boss has a pretty
good soapbox to stand on when it comes to investing in new supply chain solu-
tions. Tom notes, “I am the chief supply chain oﬃcer in a supply chain solu-
tions company. That’s like being a chef in a high-end restaurant. Everybody else
is operating the cash register, buying the products, waiting on tables, but I’m
responsible for the material and its movement. If the food isn’t good, then the
restaurant is out of business!” The ﬁnal factor critical to Flex’s success in launch-
ing this initiative is CIO Gus Shahin, who was key in “building and making it
happen.” In fact, Gus came up with both the idea of touch screens on a massive
scale and the name “PulseTM.” A close working relationship between the CIO
and the CSCO is essential to driving your organization toward transparency
and real-time operation. Finally, a clear vision of the end-state capabilities that
are provided by the investments you are making in systems is essential to get-
ting there quickly. That vision is driven by President of Operations Francois
The LIVING Supply Chain: The Evolving Imperative of Operating in Real Time, First Edition.
Robert Handﬁeld and Tom Linton.
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.


The LIVING Supply Chain
Barbier, to whom the factories, the CIO, and CSCO report. This combination
forms a dynamic environment with a bias toward action and innovation.
The Pulse CenterTM required creating visibility to material in the end-to-end
supply chain. The process to implement the Pulse CenterTM took less than 6
months – but it required focus and top leadership support. Gus Shahin, the
CIO, recalls that:
[Tom] and I together basically put together the teams. IT provides all the
back-end infrastructure, all the data capture, the KPIs and so on. They
give us all the business requirements and what it is that they are looking
for. It is true collaboration. If IT were to do this on our own, it would not
have been successful. If Supply Chain tried to do it on their own, it would
not be successful. What we did basically was co-locate a bunch of IT folks
and a bunch of supply-chain folks and put them in a room together for
several months to work this out. Then we had the market segment team,
who give us a diﬀerent perspective, a customer perspective. And then
we had the procurement guys, who gave us the supply perspective. So, it
took lots of collaboration for sure.1
As Flex began to build the Pulse, creating the right culture was especially impor-
tant. It was key to think about what information people needed, and what infor-
mation had to be in real time. Organizations need to think carefully about the
design of real-time data visibility systems. They need to understand the key
nodes, not just in their own production system, but in their suppliers’ facili-
ties, which collect data points. Not every supplier may welcome having their
data broadcast to customers on the web! As noted in previous chapters, con-
trol over data in the supply chain is an essential advantage that can occur only
when the supply chain is truly federated. Its participants must be aligned by
a common purpose, such as social responsibility, and the ability to constantly
adapt as an ecosystem, just as in the Serengeti desert. Desert animals depend
on one another for survival. This delicate balance enables them all to thrive. As
we noted in Supply Chain Rule 1 in the ﬁrst chapter, enterprises in a supply
chain ecosystem depend on one another for survival. This relates to the idea of
federated supply chains.
In a federated supply chain, the “customer-end” of the chain determines
the behavior, requirements, and norms expected of every participant in
the chain from its earliest beginning to its end of life.
In a federated supply chain, a ﬁrm looks to the customer end, focusing on how
its actions will drive value and impact the customer. Think of a big, transparent
1 http://www.forbes.com/sites/peterhigh/2016/03/21/cio-gus-shahin-leads-ﬂexs-digital-
transformation/˝5f0b58fb3e65

5
INTELLIGENT! Linking the Genomes of Products in Your Supply Chain

pipeline, where everyone can see what is upstream and downstream in the sup-
ply chain. This requires mapping supply chains and understanding which data
should be broadcast in real time. This is a big challenge, and it occurs over
time. Not all data will be elevated to an “issue,” and classifying data as essen-
tial or nonessential through “noise cancellation” relies on human experience,
not machines. A deep domain knowledge of the supply chain developed by
tapping into subject matter experts who have worked in the ﬁeld for years is
an essential part of understanding the data control points that matter. These
individuals know what categories of components and parts to monitor, what
drives inventory, what the liability exposure factors are, what characteristics of
demand patterns by commodity are considered normal …, the list goes on and
on. All this knowledge is embedded between the ears of experts, derived from
years of “tribal knowledge” – this is the true source of understanding that drives
the right level of data “listening posts.” Just as an intelligence oﬃcer understands
who the reliable sources are, and who to talk to gather data, enterprise supply
chain designers must understand their end-to-end supply chain and the key
data listening posts. Once understood, these data points need to be collected
in a format that can be rapidly aggregated, summarized, and visualized so that
users can quickly scan and make sense of them.
The Pulse Center’s goal is to bring together multiple forms of the right data
in a singular visual format. In the Pulse’s early stages of development, deciding
what was critical to monitor was a massive task. But the task doesn’t end – in
fact, it needs to be continuous. This is because a LIVING supply chain implies
an ability to evolve. Supply chain networks are inherently organic, constantly
changing creatures. Suppliers are always being added or removed, material is
constantly ﬂowing, workers are coming and going, and machines are function-
ing and breaking down. An unhealthy supply chain goes dormant and static. If
you aren’t constantly changing, you aren’t healthy – and that is the end of your
business and your life.
Marcin Fic (Flex’s Vice President of Real Time) and his team are a breed often
referred to as “data scientists.” This employee role is an emerging requirement
for many organizations seeking to create a real-time analytic capability. A data
scientist understands the two parts of the world: (1) the data world (databases,
cloud servers, graphical user interfaces, algorithms, formulas, and all the pro-
gramming that underlies the systems of representing information) and (2) the
“real world” of complex, volatile supply chains and the needs of users. This dual
knowledge allows data scientists to navigate between the real world and the
data world to ensure that they are aligned and “jiving” with one another.
Research shows that in most companies, data scientists spend most of their
time cleansing and organizing data, not really doing any analysis of the data.
That has to change. While data governance is important, it is not essential that
all data in the company be “cleansed.” It is important rather to think about what
data is needed to create value, and to focus on ensuring that critical data is
cleansed, organized, and that a governance structure exists to manage that data.


The LIVING Supply Chain
Marcin leads a team of data scientists from around the world who special-
ize in applied mathematics and computer science. These ﬁelds, which involve
working with large datasets to extract implied relationships and automating
data collection and processing, are instrumental to the Pulse and to the capa-
bilities that drive real-time transparency.
To be truly eﬀective, however, data scientists not only need to understand
how to work and derive insights from large datasets, but also have a “hunch” of
what to look for. In fact, the single biggest misperception about “Big Data” is that
you run massive searches, and the correlated variables fortuitously produce an
answer that magically pops out of the analysis! But this isn’t how it really works.
In fact, data scientists need to develop hypotheses around where to look for
data, what the relationships are among types of data. This process eventually
leads to the right dashboard, visualization of data, and graphical interpretations
that make the data useful. Therefore, a strong foundation of ﬁeld experience
obtained by working in the “trenches” is one of the best ways to prepare data
scientists. They need to speak the “language” of supply chains, as well as the
“language” of data analysis.
For example, prior to arriving at the Pulse, Marcin had strong ﬁeld experi-
ence, working at a Flex factory in Poland for 14 years, moving from planning
manager to material director. Marcin was then recruited into the IT world,
supporting supply chain systems by connecting business processes in the
factory to information system tool sets for decision-making. He proved to be
so good at this that he was promoted to this function in the broader business
group handling all of Europe, then to handling all of Flex’s telecommunication
customer value streams. On a visit to Europe, Tom Linton oﬀered Marcin the
opportunity to come to San Jose, California and take part in one of the biggest
supply chain innovations in history: the Pulse Center. He became global lead for
all solutions at Flex, with the title Vice President of Real Time. When I spoke to
him in San Jose, he had been at Flex 2 1
2 years, and was responsible for systems
support for the end-to-end set of Flex’s global supply chain processes, from
customer demand and order fulﬁllment through procurement, logistics, and
warehousing.
To be sure, Tom Linton’s responsibilities at Flex are unheard of in most sup-
ply chains. Holding a single individual accountable for the end-to-end supply
chain is comparatively rare, as is hiring data scientists to work on an unproven
system. As discussed in Chapter 1, most organizations employ one individual in
each area: procurement, demand planning, logistics, manufacturing, etc. The
traditional view is that each function is a separate discipline, with diﬀerent per-
formance metrics and approaches. But leading organizations recognize that an
end-to-end view is critical to ensuring both the right alignment of performance
metrics and that everyone is “on the same team” and pulling in the same direc-
tion. At Flex, Marcin supports all customer-facing solutions. Customers ask
Flex for help with supply chain IT solutions, including ERP integration, pro-
cess improvement, advanced planning solutions, and supply chain analytics.

5
INTELLIGENT! Linking the Genomes of Products in Your Supply Chain

Because Flex is moving toward being a total solution provider, it will provide
a holistic solution that includes a conﬁguration to leverage Flex’s global data
standards, including parts coding and conﬁguration.
Marcin notes that the Pulse Center was (and still is) a massive undertaking.
“When I arrived here I recognized that the ﬁrst thing we needed to do was to
create a set of standards that would help us to understand how to view data,
keep it seamlessly synchronized across dozens of execution systems, and how
to connect the business process with the data,” he said. “You are never able to get
your data 100% correct, and the challenge for analytics is to ﬁgure out the ﬂows
of data, and mend the integrity issues so they are synchronized, and people can
trust the execution of the systems. The fact is that data integrity ﬂows are part
of our daily life.”
This may seem like mumbo-jumbo, but is critical to understand when con-
ceptualizing the role of analytics in the enterprise. All forms of data – whether
performance metrics, inventory and material information, GPS location data,
etc. – are visual representations of what is happening in the “real world.” Indi-
viduals will observe or hear the information, which travels to their brains, trig-
gering a decision or reaction. But what if the data that is being represented in
the report, on the screen, or on the mobile device, does NOT represent what is
happening in the world? What if it is outdated (a week old), or worse yet, claims
to be real but contains multiple computation errors, or is somehow “mangled”
when it is sucked up by the cloud system and broadcast to viewers? We tend to
interpret everything that shows up on a computer screen as “true,” but this is
often not the case. A small data error can touch multiple other components of
end-to-end supply chain systems, resulting in an escalation of errors that are
all tied to a single error made in one data element!
A key control mechanism for data monitoring in the supply chain is knowl-
edge, including knowledge tied to data. The assumption is that we need full
and open transparency to everything happening in our network. For example,
Salesforce (the software) has completely broken down the traditional realm of
business relationships. It used to be that salesmen were successful based on who
they knew in their client company, and the institutional knowledge they stored
as a result of their business relationships. Salesforce blew that open, allowing all
salespeople to understand who the decision-makers were in that organization.
Execution and the ability to close a deal determine the success of salespeople,
through fully democratized data.
Mapping the Genome of Products: The Life Blood of a
Supply Chain
A major technological development now underway that will enable true con-
nectedness among participants in the supply chain is the ability to map prod-
uct genomes. Here again, a reference to the biological, natural world is in order.


The LIVING Supply Chain
Figure .Mapping of a Genome. Source: Reproduced with permission of Circos
Product genomes are analogous to a living thing’s genetic material. The genome
includes the entire set of hereditary instructions for building, running, and
maintaining an organism, and passing life on to the next generation.2 In most
living things, the genome is made of a chemical called DNA. The genome con-
tains genes, which are packaged in chromosomes and which aﬀect speciﬁc
characteristics of the organism. A genome map helps scientists navigate around
the genome. Like a road map, a genome map contains a set of landmarks that
tells people where they are, and helps them get where they want to go. The
“landmarks” on a genome map might include short DNA sequences, regula-
tory sites that turn genes on and oﬀ, and the genes themselves. Often, scien-
tists use genome maps to help them ﬁnd new genes. A genome map is shown
in Figure 5.1 – they are truly beautiful images!
2 http://www.genomenewsnetwork.org/resources/whats˙a˙genome/Chp1˙1˙1.shtml˝genome1

5
INTELLIGENT! Linking the Genomes of Products in Your Supply Chain

Genome mapping, which grew out of the biotech industry, is proliferat-
ing, largely due to the dropping cost of genome sequencing. In 2001, genome
sequencing cost $100 million per sequence. By 2007, it cost $10 million; in 2016,
$1000. By 2020, the cost of genome sequencing is expected to be one penny!
In a similar fashion, digitization is driving us to better map product genomes.
Tracking products and pinpointing not only where they are today, but their
entire history through the chain, is emerging as a key enabler of transparency
and visibility in the supply chain.
Consider this: Can you connect the essential leverage points in your net-
work through cloud, mobile, and other media that provide a platform for ana-
lytics? Can you track the DNA of your global supply chain at a part number
level? Today, the answer to both these questions is no. Very soon, however,
new technology will permit anyone, whether a consumer, a manager, or a sup-
plier, to do this. As supply chains evolve, we need a structure for mapping their
genome. This means establishing part number tracking and coding capabilities
in the end-to-end supply chain. A big opportunity is to think about a vehicle for
encoding the genome, to help us understand where products come from and
where they go, a critical element for combating counterfeit and fraud. Supply
chain scholars rarely discuss waste due to counterfeit and fraud, even though
it is a large area of lost global proﬁts and revenues. The importance of tracking
and measuring all goods, including the possibility of counterfeit goods, must
be estimated using data tracking. But unlike the calls for “Big Data,” we must
demystify the view that Big Data is the answer to improving supply chains. Big
Data is static and useless by itself; it’s the questions you ask of the data that
change supply chain outcomes.
The digitization of products and things is a key technology development that
will drive the ability of individuals in supply chains to track their LIVING supply
chains. These digital signals are like our nerves, which transmit messages to our
brains, driving us to react when we put our hands too close to a stove burner,
or when we taste something delicious.
But we can’t process everything at once in a supply chain. There is just too
much data, which can lead to sensory overload: data is ﬂying at us, and we can’t
process it all. At some point, we need to relinquish our cell phones and sleep –
or play golf. So how is the digital LIVING supply chain going to work?
The key is to think about what data is critical at any given time. Human beings
can only focus on a limited number of inputs, so we need to deﬁne ahead of
time what we view as critical. If we need information on something that doesn’t
fall in that category, we also need to know where to look for it, and whether we
have to do a “deep dive,” which requires a system that allows a high level of gran-
ularity. But more than that, we need useful data. To be useful, data needs to be
current – ideally, it needs to be in real time! And to process it quickly, we need
visual data. That is, people understand pictures a whole lot better than tables or
ﬁgures. So visualizing your data, and portraying it so it can be easily processed


The LIVING Supply Chain
by any human being is key. That is what Steve Jobs understood immediately
when he designed the Apple as an interactive, visual device with a human
interface.
Flex’s system allows people to pull up data to a large screen, and to drill down
into it. Tom compares this to “defragging your hard drive on your computer.”
You can “pareto-ize” your data, and look at the buckets to see, for instance,
how much inventory you have, where it is, and its age. In a workshop situa-
tion, everyone is looking at the same data, and grinding into it, and can start
to see where the white space exists, what is causing high costs using the 80/20
rule, and where improvements should be made. The data will tell a story that
everyone can agree on in a democratic, completely objective fashion. Using
easy-to-visualize data leads people to make decisions more quickly, and to
improve slow-moving inventory. This ability drives improved customer satis-
faction: accessible data points everyone in the right direction.
A great example used by Tom is Waze, a traﬃc news crowd-sourcing appli-
cation. Tom is a frequent commuter between San Francisco and San Jose, and
a dedicated fan of Waze. Individuals contribute to Waze by reporting what is
happening on the highway; participants’ phone GPS digitally captures who is
online, and users can see traﬃc bottlenecks, construction slowdowns – even
speed traps! Sometimes Waze will take you down a side road for a mysterious
reason. If you trust the data, and follow it, you will likely avoid a major traﬃc
jam. This naturally increases your travel velocity.
Imagine using this type of real-time data, complemented by human insights,
to guide management of the supply chain. Cloud-based real-time systems have
enormous potential to coordinate unexpected events with human decision-
making. If you can drive your supply chain and pareto-ize data in a visual for-
mat, and allow decision-makers to access this data and take action against it,
working with one another in a federated manner, you will increase the velocity
of your entire end-to-end supply chain network.
One of the biggest barriers today to real-time supply chains is reliance on
“batch-based” systems, such as massive ERP systems. These systems allow us
to see only what happened in the past – not in the future. Also, these systems
often drive the wrong metrics, leading people to think only in terms of total
landed cost. When we focus only on buying things cheaply, we overlook what
customers require, so we may make the wrong decisions. If we can improve our
demand planning, and understand what the customer wants, we can design
what we need to support them. But we also may have to limit what customers
may request. Salespeople often jump through whatever hoops are required
without thinking about the cost. This can drive up inventory, which drives up
the balance sheet, and makes the company unproﬁtable. Thus, there is a need
to create better visibility of what is available and the costs to obtain it, and
to map this against what the customer wants, managing this delicate balance
using data.

5
INTELLIGENT! Linking the Genomes of Products in Your Supply Chain

Here’s an analogy: If you are on a river delta, and all kinds of junk is coming
down the river toward you – but not the stuﬀyou want or what you ordered –
you can’t just stand there and gripe about it. You have to go upriver to see what
is going on. Likewise, if you are upstream, you have to consider the impacts of
what you are doing on the people downstream. And the most important metric
of all is revenue and free cash ﬂow. Because a lower total landed cost is no good
if you have slower supply chain responsiveness.
What Data Do You Need? (Creating a Data Democracy)
One of the big problems associated with the massive amounts of data being
generated by supply chain systems is the need to focus on the right kinds of
data. This is more a people issue that a technological issue. People are tied to
the idea of running a supply chain based on an ERP system, using a tactical
picture that is downloaded into Excel and massaged into a form that can make
sense. And this promotes a diversity of views, because every location does it
diﬀerently, and you wind up with a list of big Excel ﬁles with lots of data which
are viewed by individuals. This causes delays and drives everyone to look at
diﬀerent information – which is the opposite of the democratization of data!
Ideally, your data is visual, available to everyone, can be interpreted quickly,
and will drive individuals to focus on decisions that matter. This is the idea
behind a data democracy. People have a limited amount of time; their attention
needs to be allocated to things that matter. The goal is to acquire data, plug data
sources into a system that can make it real time, and visualize it so that teams
and individuals can interpret it and make decisions. Everyone can buy into that
concept. Selecting what data is important and who needs to look at what is
no easy task. Wow! That’s the problem! The real question becomes, what are
the mechanisms for noise cancellation? What data can you ignore? What data
should not be tracked?
Here again, self-selection and democracy come to the rescue. The data
required is based on subject matter experts’ domain knowledge. These experts,
who work along the supply chain, have the “tribal knowledge” to know what
categories of parts are key, what logistics channels need to be measured, what
the critical nodes that determine performance are, etc. By tapping into these
individual’s knowledge bases, and peering into their Excel spreadsheets to see
what they look at each day, we can begin to derive business knowledge in every
domain, and begin to understand the ideal forms of visualization they require,
and when data should be pulled up. These individuals know what drives inven-
tory, what liability exposure factors are, and understand the characteristics of
inventory within each category.
The people running the business know what they are looking for, but using
current systems it takes them hours or days to accumulate this data. Flex seeks


The LIVING Supply Chain
to provide the data they need – but not in an Excel ﬁle! This means understand-
ing the ﬁrm’s priorities and requires an innovative approach that requires tap-
ping into their intellectual capital. This is the real innovation: prioritizing data
using tribal knowledge. This is not a technology issue. Flex and Elementum are
using commercially available systems. The real secret is how a ﬁrm connects
its data points. In short, intelligently visualizing information into a manage-by-
exception environment, for the right audience, and in real time, is the key to
success in building a LIVING supply chain.
Data Integrity
One of the biggest challenges to creating such a system is data integrity. There
are so many customers and entities with so many data nomenclatures, each with
its own way of presenting a bill of materials, a product, a statement of work,
etc. A ﬂexible approach to deﬁning the preferred nomenclature used to track
material by diﬀerent parties in the supply chain is essential for transparency.
This requires a data handbook which tracks the heritage and history of data
management and which includes the right “translations” between nomencla-
tures, allowing the system to interpret them. This is not easy – indeed, it is one
of the most challenging issues in SCM today. Data governance is important –
but by no means does it have to be 100% clean.
There will always be data that are not 100% perfect, and there are procedures
to deal with that. But the key is also to recognize which data do not have to be
100% clean to facilitate eﬀective decision-making. Data integrity is required to
run an ERP system – but not for a human being to make a rational decision.
For example, Twitter feeds and news stories do not have structured standard
data formats – but they can be extremely helpful in decision-making. A lot of
information can still be used from structured ERP systems that are contami-
nated with mistakes and mismatches between products and customer bases.
And data will always be a factor. The implication is that data managers should
focus on ﬁnding the critical data that need to be cleansed and in synch (e.g.,
trusted) – and how to interpret data from other parts of the system that does
not have a high level of integrity.
The Power of Product Genomes in Driving Transparency
Today, there has been a growing movement to track a product to its roots. In
Western countries, people are now very cognizant of the sources of their food.
They want to know where it was produced and under what conditions, how
it was manufactured, and even whether genetically modiﬁed organisms were
used. Toxin- and chemical-free organic food from certiﬁed producers is a huge
industry. And when companies fail to track food origins or make food-handling
errors (such as food poisoning incidents at Chipotle restaurants), consumers’

5
INTELLIGENT! Linking the Genomes of Products in Your Supply Chain

negative reactions are quick and lethal. Even in China, people want better lives
and better food. This return to organic roots and an interest in tracking the
origins of our food and other products is very much part of the LIVING supply
chain. In responding to customer demands like this, transparency is key. Recall
what we said about transparency in New Supply Chain Rule 6 in Chapter 4.
New Supply Chain Rule 6a (Transparency Principle): Direct ownership
and access to data on objects and activities in the supply chain creates
greater transparency and increased velocity, leading to quicker response and
increased survival rates.
Data transparency is a diﬃcult rule for many people – particularly the Baby
Boomer generation – to understand and buy into. For example, an executive
at a major pharmaceutical company wanted to extract details on one of the
company’s suppliers. A 62-year-old manager asked the executive, “Why do you
need to know that?” The simple answer was, “Because we want to know.” In
eﬀect, this cultural shift requires that we change the way we think. We need to
become more transparent because 25-year-old customers expect it. They want
to know.
So now the question becomes, “How do we do that?” Today, every single
object has a number. Pick up a water bottle – it has a bar code (Figure 5.2). That
bar code may even tell you the source of the water itself. Country of origin laws
Figure .The Supply Chain Gene.
Source: Courtesy of Mendota Springs
Water, Inc.


The LIVING Supply Chain
require this disclosure. We could think of bar codes as product genomes. And
increasingly, organizations will need to track that information for purposes of
labeling and marketing of products. That’s the world we live in.
Transparency also helps drive ﬁnancial accountability. Chief ﬁnancial oﬃcers
take a straightforward approach: they look at balance sheets and income state-
ments. Supply chain executives are responsible for making improvements and
positively impacting these numbers. Chief legal oﬃcers want to ensure that we
are compliant, and chief human resource oﬃcers want to make sure that people
are compensated fairly and rewarded, and that they have reasonable expecta-
tions. The challenge for supply chains, then, is to move the needle on the ﬁnan-
cial metrics without upsetting the CLO and CHRO, and to make sure people
are paid on time. Supply chain executives have to turn their dials in the context
of correct ﬁnancial accountability. This also includes things I don’t know about,
but which I could nevertheless be held accountable for. If I violate a labor law or
any other number of laws around Dodd–Frank, Sarbanes Oxley, OCEA, gen-
erally accepted accounting principles, or others, I may move the needle, but in
a manner that conﬂicts with the agendas of the CFO, CLO, or CHRO.
Tom recalls that during his years at LG in Korea, there were no major corpo-
rate policies. There was a guideline called “Jingdo” – which literally translates
as “do the right thing”. At the corporate level, doing the right thing implies that
because every situation is diﬀerent, everyone is responsible for doing what is
right in that context. There didn’t need to be an industry coalition, a statement
of corporate policy, etc. It was simply about simply acting ethically. Every com-
pany needs to take this to heart when they think about transparency. If some-
thing you did was reported in the New York Times, would you stand by it and
state that it was the right thing to do? That is the litmus test. If companies are
doing the right thing, transparency should come naturally, as there is nothing
to hide.
Counterfeiting: The Opposite of Transparency
A signiﬁcant problem facing many industries is the growing threat of illicit
trade in the supply chain. Of these, one of the most onerous is the problem
of counterfeiting. Counterfeiting is what the “bad guys” do to hide the true ori-
gin of the product genome from us. Counterfeiting has been taken on by the
food industry and many others. Counterfeited goods or services appear to be
same as the original goods or services but are often of inferior quality. These
goods or services result in various losses for companies producing the original
goods or services. Some of these risks include:
r Compromised product quality: Counterfeit goods in the market reﬂect
poorly on the company that makes the “real” product.

5
INTELLIGENT! Linking the Genomes of Products in Your Supply Chain

r Sales loss: Since counterfeiters often sell their goods at a lower price than
the original ones, industries lose product sales and revenue.
r Reputation loss: Industries suﬀer reputation loss because unsuspecting cus-
tomers who have purchased the inferior goods think that they have pur-
chased the original goods.
r Consumer safety risk: Counterfeit food or medicines may result in serious
legal implications for the industry if they aﬀect the health of consumers.
r Dislocation of legitimate jobs: The industries have to dislocate legitimate
jobs because it becomes diﬃcult to sustain employees owing to the counter-
feiting losses speciﬁed above.
The high-proﬁle examples below illustrate how problematic counterfeiting is.
r Mobile phones: When Argentine Customs (AFIP) seized 540,000 counter-
feit mobile phones at Buenos Aires and Cordoba airports in February 2013,
they discovered fake BlackBerrys, Samsung models including the Galaxy S
III, Nokia, Sony, and Motorola handsets. They also found counterfeit iPhone
5 handsets – a model that had been launched just 6 months ago, and which
had sold 5 million units in the United States on the day of the launch alone.
AFIP also seized mobile phone batteries, MP3 devices, and cameras. Alto-
gether, AFIP estimated that, if the seized items were sold at the manufac-
turers’ suggested retail price, their value would have been UYU 450 million
(USD 90 million).
r International drug counterfeiting: The US Food and Drug Administra-
tion commenced an investigation into the activities of Kevin Xu, a Chinese
national who was suspected of counterfeiting and distributing counterfeit
medicines to both the United Kingdom and the United States from China.
Xu owned Paciﬁc Orient International Ltd., based in China. US Immigration
and Customs Enforcement (ICE), the largest investigative arm of the Depart-
ment of Homeland Security, and the Food and Drug Administration Oﬃce
of Criminal Investigations (FDA-OCI), launched an undercover operation.
Xu discussed openly how he could supply 25 pharmaceutical drugs, includ-
ing drugs produced by such major pharmaceutical companies as Pﬁzer, Eli
Lilly, Hoﬀman La Roche, AstraZeneca, and Sanoﬁ-Aventis. Chemical analysis
revealed that although these drugs contained active ingredients, the ingre-
dients were not present in the same quantities shown on the packaging. The
drugs also contained unknown impurities. Investigators noticed that some of
the lot numbers on the drugs supplied by Xu were identical to those that had
been circulated by the United Kingdom’s Medicines and Healthcare products
Regulatory Agency (MHRA) in its recall notice – conﬁrming for the ﬁrst time
that these counterfeit drugs were produced in China.
In a recent survey, we found that a signiﬁcant 21% of respondents estimated
a loss of 1–5% of their total revenue due to counterfeiting. Thirteen percent of


The LIVING Supply Chain
respondents estimated a loss of 5–10% of their total revenue due to counter-
feiting, and 11% estimated a loss of 1% of their total revenue. More than 48% of
respondents felt that their most popular product is at risk for counterfeiting; sug-
gesting that if your organization experiences a decline in sales, there is a strong
possibility that at least part of this decline is due to counterfeiting or piracy.
Thinking Diﬀerently about Counterfeiting
Counterfeiting is a $1.77 trillion industry – which is equivalent to 5–7% of
world trade. One avenue to combat this involves track and trace technology
as a means to ﬁght revenue loss due to counterfeits and gray market activities.
Anti-counterfeit digital solutions are becoming very important in such scenar-
ios as recalls, criminal investigations, returns, supply chain optimization, part-
ner performance, and consumer insights. The United States alone loses about
$300 billion of IP loss every year. One expert noted that “When I started down
this road, I began checking out factories in China, and it became apparent to
me that if you invested in bricks and mortar, you were immediately susceptible
to a takedown. And I came to understand that China is employing hundreds of
thousands of people in counterfeiting products, which are in key infrastructure
industries like IT manufacturing products and routers.”
“But it is very clever how it is done. It is a hub and spoke system, with a cen-
tralized person coordinating the activity. People are in diﬀerent rooms, and are
never together producing the ﬁnal product. One person makes the PCB, the
other the chassis, and a third the software, and they use a network of individ-
ual shippers that are often sent out one at a time. They are ordered, assembled,
palletized and shipped to the US. In some regions, like Africa, up to 80 per-
centage of goods are imported and most are counterfeit. Africa doesn’t have a
lot of homegrown industries, and relies a lot on China and India for clothes,
medicine, and formula, and most of these are counterfeit.”
“The problem is that most large companies have no idea how much they are
losing to counterfeit, because they don’t track their product. Take for exam-
ple a low-end product that costs $2000. It may use a stolen version of operat-
ing software, and suddenly it becomes a $20,000 telecom switch. The hack is
tied to the upgrade, and that upgraded telecom switch may now be put into a
hospital, a communications network, an air traﬃc controller station, or a team
in Afghanistan. When the product failed, we go in and discover a counterfeit
upgraded product, and there is nothing we can do. They just got ripped oﬀ. And
there was no way to prosecute the people who did this.”
“Other forms of fraud include service abuse, sending in fake products, coun-
terfeiting cigarettes and not paying duty to bring them in, resulting in massive
amounts of tax revenue being lost. You can count on at least 7 percent of iPhone
sales going to counterfeiters. Java was losing 30 percent to counterfeiters, and

5
INTELLIGENT! Linking the Genomes of Products in Your Supply Chain

their board was simply shocked. And this is very easy to do on trading plat-
forms like Amazon and Alibaba. In China, people will even counterfeit hairy
crabs, and will laser-etch their shells to make them look like the real thing!”
“Counterfeiters are very sophisticated. We ordered 10 products from a major
international distributor, which consisted of ‘controlled products’ to sell to part-
ners with full traceability. These were all cash transactions. However, buyers
may choose to send it to Europe, as there is a stronger likelihood they will be
caught in the US. But they also know the install base for those distributors in
Germany, and can alter the serial number, and now that product can be sold as
a product that is under warranty, and sold at a premium! They had changed the
serial number and the upgrade was now a counterfeit!”
“Car parts are a big market. People will go to junk yards, pull brake pads from
cars, and spray paint the rubber and package it diﬀerently. This is a huge issue in
the automotive aftermarket, and many parts that are in legitimate distributors
may be counterfeit.”
A large telecom company spent $8 million on security labels, but they were
stacked, so counterfeiters could peel on one and put on another. Next the team
came up with the idea of a smart phone reader to authenticate the label, but
it was not tied to the product in any meaningful way. Estimates were that the
company was losing up to one billion dollars a year. But authentication codes,
like a QR code, will not work, especially for medication and smaller products.
And counterfeiters could send their codes to real phone numbers, which came
back as authentic – because the system itself was faulty.
The problem at many companies is that nobody wants to admit there is a
counterfeiting problem to begin with. The thinking is that if we come out with
this in the markets, everyone will think we have a problem, and analysts will
downgrade our stock! The problem is that everyone has a problem, and every-
one is in the position of not wanting to admit the problem. Pharmaceutical
companies have the same issue. Our expert noted that “I went to China and
met with a counterfeiter, and asked them to make a pharmaceutical product.
These were country farm boys doing this. I told them I wanted this product
replicated, and they said they could make it with the same viscosity, but did it
have to work? I told them no. They named a quantity and a price, and told me
they’d have it in three days!”
But what about customs oﬃcials? Isn’t it their job to stop counterfeit goods
from coming into the country? Unfortunately, the only time customs will make
a seizure is if they get a “tip.” There are simply too many containers and ship-
ments coming through the ports. And distributors and shipping partners can
check on products, but again there is no real chain of custody on track and trace,
and if any party loses visibility of a shipment on any point during its journey,
someone can bribe someone else. So there needs to be a combination of chain
of custody, track and trace, and authenticity, combined with a digital solution
that determines the true path of a product in the supply chain.


The LIVING Supply Chain
Even in cases when companies destroy products, like printed circuit boards,
counterfeiters ﬁgure out a solution. One company even took the measure of
cutting the edge of the board, making it non-functional. A guy in China ﬁgured
out how to put corners together so they would look whole, and even though
they wouldn’t function, he would resell them into the market! There are villages
in the country that make a business out of scavenging old chips from old PCBs
and scraping them oﬀ, cleaning the substrate, printing over it, and suddenly a
10-year-old chip looks brand new, and now it goes into a military installation!
Experts agree: counterfeiting can never be stopped. However, by building
transparency and product genomes that allow us to map and assign speciﬁc,
unique values to our products, we can create tools that will allow consumers
to easily spot a fake. Counterfeiting will always happen, and the bad guys will
always ﬁnd a way to copy stuﬀ, so the only solution is to empower consumers to
make informed decisions. The idea is simply that companies have to empower
people to authenticate end products if they choose to. It will also be important
to have safe harbor for liability. If you cannot authenticate, and haven’t given
people the ability to ensure whether the product they purchased is authentic,
there are grounds for a lawsuit. On the other hand, if you have put a legitimate
solution in place and have given an end user the opportunity to verify authen-
ticity, that provides a safe harbor.
“Is This What You See?”Authentication Technology
But what does an authentication solution look like? How do you create a “pass-
port” for a product? People have tried holograms, mass spectrometers, soil
samples for wines in Bordeaux, and many other solutions. People who haven’t
grown up in the world of counterfeiting will always have new, good products.
Counterfeiting is a seedy, dangerous world, where investigators are attacked.
But many inexperienced innovators aren’t thinking about what counterfeiters
will do to avoid detection.
The digital supply chain can leverage the power of mobile cloud software ﬂex-
ible and scaling, with a digital, real-time solution that allows analytics from data
feeds coming from manufacturers to be authenticated in the ﬁeld. The evolution
of this technology is a combination of a QR code and a 1D barcode. Almost 90%
of the infrastructure in distribution, channel partners, and warehouse facilities
already consists of 1D barcodes. There is a transition from 1D to 2D but it is
slow, and 9 out of 10 facilities have 1D barcode readers. A track and trace solu-
tion from contract manufacturing to channel partners to consumers should by
deﬁnition use existing 1D infrastructure that can scan the product, is scalable,
and can produce a ﬂat ﬁle with a list of all scans at the end of each day.
Some solution providers are exploring printing complex labels with covert
features – which makes sense, but only for certain types of industries, such as

5
INTELLIGENT! Linking the Genomes of Products in Your Supply Chain

automobiles, aerospace, and defense. To truly authenticate (as opposed to being
in the tag business), there needs to be a technology that can laser imprint on
products in milliseconds, and which is also easy to pick up downstream at the
customer. The QR code is unique, and has a DNA ﬁngerprint – a unique binary
code – which is a single product genome that the software can validate. Coun-
terfeiters don’t have the QR code initially, but will often try to alter the serial
number. But they will not have the unique code, which is where they can be
caught. If more than one QR code is authenticated in the ﬁeld, this is a warning
that the system has been breached. And the unique DNA of the QR code is very
hard to replicate – which is not something counterfeiters are usually able to do.
Increasingly the information associated with the product, the shoe, the
medicine, etc. will require engagement by the customer in some form to deter-
mine authenticity. But if the code does not match the product, additional ques-
tions occur: Where did you buy it? What was the price? These questions can be
used to drive additional analytics that can help the manufacturer identify the
leaks in its supply chain.
But this isn’t enough. Combating counterfeiting is one of the biggest chal-
lenges facing participants in the LIVING supply chain ecosystem. The promise
of combating counterfeit and other forms of fraud and criminal activity lies in
the ability of organizations to align strategies and seek multi-echelon vertical
and horizontal solutions that span multiple tiers in the supply chain. To truly
create a means of driving out counterfeit, we have to go back to our federated
supply chain. How do we get everyone in our supply chain to work together
to combat counterfeiting, theft, and gray markets? This is the best weapon but
remains elusive in many of the current supply chains we encounter.



NETWORKED! Co-evolution and Co-innovation in
Federated Supply Chains
The species that survive are not those that are the most intelligent; nor
are they those that are the strongest; the species that survive are those
that are best able to adapt to change.
—Charles Darwin, 1859
Evolution, Not Revolution: Grolar Bears, Coyowolves,
and MerLions
The ideas of federated networks presuppose that enterprises in the LIVING
supply chain have several characteristics that are often tossed around lightly
in conversation, but which in fact have very deep implications: words like
trust, collaboration, shared information, transparency, and alignment. How-
ever, many people don’t fully understand the meaning of these terms until they
are reliant on others in the network, and there are risks present that would
cause one or more parties to fail and fall into a perilous situation. Then the true
meaning of these terms becomes real.
In September 22, 2014, the prime minister of Singapore invited Tom Lin-
ton to speak at the GIC Futures Forum. The GIC represents one of the largest
investment banks in the world. As Singapore has done exceptionally well over
the last few years, growing its cash surplus signiﬁcantly, Tom was asked to speak
about his investment strategies for the future of technology. Tom wasn’t sure
what he should talk about. Singapore had evolved quickly, and investors were
wondering what the future held. The talk was attended by all of Singapore’s top
government oﬃcials, including the prime minister and his cabinet as well as
senior bank and investment executives.
The primary theme of Tom’s talk was to think about evolution, not revolution.
Early in the presentation, he discussed the concept of non-zero as an impor-
tant component of Singapore’s history and as an important element of LIVING
The LIVING Supply Chain: The Evolving Imperative of Operating in Real Time, First Edition.
Robert Handﬁeld and Tom Linton.
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.


The LIVING Supply Chain
supply chains. A core concept from the book Non-Zero: The Logic of Human
Destiny1 refers to memes as a way to think about Darwin’s genetic changes.
(Memes are referred to in the context of culture as “a unit of cultural transmis-
sion or a unit of imitation.”2)
Memes: Units of non-genetic cultural information transmitted from person
to person; a word, a song, an attitude, a belief, a ritual, an engineering concept.
Wright, the author of Nonzero, discusses the idea of memes further:
Don’t think of songs, movies, ideologies as passive bodies of information
that you, the active agent, choose. Think of them as competing for access
to your brain, which they use to propagate themselves.
After speaking about memes, Tom next put up a quote from JeﬀBezos, founder
and CEO of Amazon, in a 1997 letter to his shareholders written:
Word of mouth remains the most powerful customer acquisition tool
we have …
What do these quotes mean? What could they possibly have to do with invest-
ment strategies? The audience in Singapore looked puzzled, but continued
listening. “Mr. Linton must know what he is talking about, as he is a famous
executive,” was the thought probably going through their heads. But what Tom
put up next confused them even further: pictures of a bear and a wolf (shown
in Figures 6.1 and 6.2).
“The bear on your left is called a Grolar bear. As you can see, the white and
brown fur suggests that it is the product of mating between a grizzly and a polar
bear. This bear happens to be stronger and larger than either grizzlies or polar
bears, and is able to withstand a greater range of climates and feeding habitats.
How did this happen? As the world became warmer, grizzlies started to travel
up to the Arctic Circle, and began to mate with polar bears. A new species, the
grolar bear, was born.” (See Figure 6.1)
“The animal on the right is a coyote wolf (See Figure 6.2). Same story, diﬀerent
location. This animal is smarter than either species, and can survive in an urban
environment. It is bigger and better able to survive. It also evolved in response to
changes in its habitat that forced the two species to occupy the same landscape.”
Next Tom showed a picture of the Singapore symbol, the MerLion, evoked in
a statue of a hybrid between a mermaid and a lion (shown in Figure 6.3). “You
too in Singapore have evolved, as you have shown in the mermaid and the lion
coming together,” he said. “Singapore has the beautiful sound and softness of
a mermaid, as well as the strength and the courage of a lion. Your country has
1 Wright, R., Nonzero: The Logic of Human Destiny, First Vintage Books, 2000.
2 Dawkins, R., The Selﬁsh Gene, 2nd ed., Oxford University Press, 1989, p. 192.

6
NETWORKED! Co-evolution and Co-innovation in Federated Supply Chains

Figure .Grolar Bear. Source: Reproduced with permission of iStock
Figure .Coyote Wolf. Source: Reproduced with permission of Eastern Coyote Research


The LIVING Supply Chain
Figure .Singapore Merlion. Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Rear_
view_of_the_Merlion_statue_at_Merlion_Park,_Singapore,_with_Marina_Bay_Sands_in_
the_distance_-_20140307.jpg. Used under CC BY 2.0 https://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/2.0/deed.en
grown and become successful not through a revolution, but because of your
ability to EVOLVE, adapt to changes in your environment, and take on the best
qualities of both the mermaid and the lion. You have moved through diﬀer-
ent phases of industrial growth, beginning in low-value manufacturing, then
growing into pharmaceuticals and electronics, becoming an original design
manufacturer in the gaming industry, building your resort industry (Universal
Studios), and most recently becoming a tourist destination. So now you are
wondering what is the next vector, and what comes next. I urge you to consider
that things grow and are successful through evolution, NOT through revolu-
tion!” So how should you evolve?
This led to a story about the computer industry. “If you think about it, tech-
nology is constantly evolving. Although people say the ‘smart phone’ was a
revolution, it really wasn’t … it was more of an evolution.”
“I used to work in Burlington, Vermont as a purchasing and transportation
manager at IBM’s manufacturing site, where we were assembling large main-
frame computers. Eventually, computers were shrunk into something called the
personal computer that could sit on a desk and have the same computing power.
Apple created the Macintosh, which no one liked, but which used something
called a mouse. Later, that desktop was shrunk into a laptop computer, and then

6
NETWORKED! Co-evolution and Co-innovation in Federated Supply Chains

an even smaller and thinner laptop computer. The laptop eventually became a
tablet, and kept shrinking until it became a smart phone. So when people say the
smart phone was revolutionary, in reality it was nothing more than a computer
getting smaller and smaller. That happened over 20 years, and mobile devices
are now becoming integrated into vehicles, clothing, and other forms of prod-
ucts. So if you want to understand what will happen in technology, think about
how it will evolve, and what it will become in the next ten or 15 years, and then
invest along that vector.”
The point of Tom’s story to Singapore oﬃcials is that LIVING supply chains
can be seen as autonomous, evolving networks. They are like a circulation
system that adapts, and are constantly evolving, shifting, and growing. They
are the life blood of technology, the drivers behind globalization, the drivers
to lower-cost consumer goods, and arguably a major factor in global GDP. If
supply chains aren’t evolving, then like the seals or any species, they will slowly
die away. But in the right environment, supply chains can recover and ﬂourish.
Federated supply chains are in our view the next form of an evolution that
will distinguish the winners from the losers in the practice of supply chain man-
agement. Supply chain managers tend to be highly operational, often focused
on data; their single biggest everyday tool is Excel. This isn’t a bad thing, and
these skills will continue to be important. But this book puts forth the idea that
a new set of “supply chain rules” will shape how organizations work together.
They will be federated and transparent, will share data in real time, and will
be networked so that decisions will be made quickly with enhanced visibility
of velocity and ﬂow. As this occurs, machines will get smarter and smarter, will
leverage the genomes of product structures, and will perform much of the oper-
ational work done by human beings on Excel spreadsheets today. Human beings
will become curators, scanning information that is presented in real time in a
visual format, and working with other individuals in the supply chain on ways
to innovate, improve, and deal with issues and complexities as they arise. In
short, human beings will become much more involved in the management of
relationships and the alignment of corporate purpose within federated supply
chains.
The Power of Technology to Create Federated Supply Chain
Networks Driven by Shared Data
As human beings become more involved in creating and maintaining relation-
ships, shared data will become the primary vehicle for consensus-building. Data
that is real time, visible, and readily accessible in the Cloud will be the pri-
mary focal point for debate, discussion, problem-solving, and customer ser-
vice improvement ideas. The idea of global intelligence gathering being rapidly


The LIVING Supply Chain
Figure .Supply Chain Evolution. Source: Reproduced with permission of Flex
communicated and translated into decision-making applies more than ever on
the customer-facing side of the supply chain.
The biggest change in the last 3 years has been the rapid rise of technology as
an enabler to create real-time interactive relationships. As shown in Figure 6.4,
the “Intelligence of ThingsTM” will evolve so that by 2020, more than 50
billion devices will be connected over the Internet, making the Internet the
true utility for driving intelligence across networks. This will expand through
real-time information that becomes available through open sharing across
intercompany networks, the rise of mobile devices that allows anyone, any-
where, to share any information in open platforms, and the massive power of
Cloud computing, which can perform simultaneous machine-based activities
rapidly on servers that no one can see but which is pushed out to individuals as
needed.
One of the core elements in the Flex model for the LIVING Supply Chain is
the need for a virtual world in which individuals around the world are closely
tied together to make collective decisions. Flex’s future trajectory relies heavily

6
NETWORKED! Co-evolution and Co-innovation in Federated Supply Chains

on exploiting these changes, by embedding the technology vector of the Inter-
net of Things to three speciﬁc goals:
✓Building our entire company on mobility
✓Distributive decision-making
✓Real-time decision-making in the ﬁeld
A networked supply chain is not diﬃcult to imagine. Flex’s platform, the
PulseTM, is an interactive place and a mobile system that provides the focal
point for collaborative discussions. The key issue driving this is the ability to
engage in active tracking of issues, not batch processing, which delays the ability
to be real time, but instead ensures that it is driven by data that is LIVING and
alive. Throughout this book, we have alluded to the “natural” and “balanced”
nature of supply chain relationships that must accompany the technological
beneﬁts of the Pulse Center and other systems currently under development.
Evolution applies to supply chains, too.
The original thinker in this regard is of course Charles Darwin, the father of
“evolutionary” thinking. Charles Darwin wrote about the general principles of
evolutionary theory in a biological context in his book The Origin of Species
by Means of Natural Selection (1859). The phrase that most people associate
with this great work is “survival of the ﬁttest” and, it turns out, this is not a bad
metaphor to adapt in the realm of business. Before we explain how evolution
applies in a business context, it is helpful to outline the basics of the biological
story, because most readers will have some familiarity with it and we will be
using it below to draw parallels.
The process of evolution is explained by reference to three building blocks:
r a source of variation
r a selection process
r a means of retaining variations that are selected
These building blocks, variety-selection-retention (VSR), are referred to collec-
tively as “the evolutionary algorithm.” The modern interpretation of the Dar-
winian account of natural selection (neo-Darwinism) explains the evolution of
species as a result of blind random variations (mutations) in the genes of some
members of the species. If a random genetic mutation gives rise to a character-
istic that confers some advantage in the environment inhabited by the species,
the mutants will have a higher probability of survival. Members of the species
who do not possess the mutant gene will eventually diminish in number while
the mutants will become more numerous and pass on their genes, and there-
fore their advantage, to their oﬀspring. To illustrate some of the key features
of the process, consider the following highly stylized story of the evolution of
long-necked giraﬀes.


The LIVING Supply Chain
Assume that giraﬀes need to eat the leaves of trees in order to maintain their
strength and to have suﬃcient energy to outrun lions (who like to eat giraﬀes).3
Assume also that the most nutritious leaves can only be found at the tops of tall
trees. Now assume that the members of a herd of giraﬀes in a speciﬁc geograph-
ical region have relatively short necks and are unable to reach the highly nutri-
tious leaves. This means that competition or struggle for the leaves that grow at
the lower level will be intense and, as a result, most giraﬀes in the herd will be
malnourished and unable to outrun hungry lions. Now, if a mutant giraﬀe with
an unusually long neck is born (thus providing the ﬁrst building block of evo-
lution), it will reach the nutritious leaves that are out of the reach of the other
giraﬀes in the herd. As a result, the longer-necked mutant will not have to com-
pete with the other giraﬀes and will become strong and healthy and be able
to outrun the lions more easily than its malnourished short-necked cousins.
This mutant giraﬀe ﬁts the environment better than the other giraﬀes and, as a
result, it has a much better chance of survival. It is important to note here that
the mutant giraﬀe is relatively ﬁt rather than optimally ﬁt (i.e., the mutant only
needs to run faster than the other members of the herd). This is a crucial point,
for reasons that will become apparent.
The fact that the mutant ﬁts the environment so well gives the impression that
the environment has selected it for success (this is the second building block of
evolution). Of course, the environment is not a thinking entity that exercises
choices, so it has not deliberately selected the mutant giraﬀe at all; the giraﬀe
has in fact been “naturally selected.” If we assume now that the mutant giraﬀe
gives birth to baby giraﬀes, then at least some of the babies should inherit the
mutant gene and grow up to have advantages similar to their parent’s, and eat
leaves from the tops of trees. The parent will eventually die of old age; never-
theless, the long neck is retained in the herd because the gene that causes it has
been replicated and passed on from parent to child (the third building block of
evolution). In time, the oﬀspring of the original mutant will give birth to their
own oﬀspring, to whom they will pass the mutant gene. As a result, the pro-
portion of giraﬀes in this population who inherit long necks will increase. Note
that what has actually been retained in this process is the information carried
by the long-necked gene: in other words, the original long-necked giraﬀe no
longer exists, but the genetic information that caused it to have a long neck
does. Biological evolution is a story about how this “genotypical” information
is retained in and diﬀused through a system.
The meaning of the phrase “survival of the ﬁttest” should now be clear.
When evolutionary theorists talk about “ﬁtness,” they are referring not to
some abstract notion of good health and athletic ability, but to how well the
3 Example is drawn from a working paper: Cousins, P., and Handﬁeld, R., “Evolutionary
Economics and Supply Chain Management,” Manchester Business School, Manchester, UK.

6
NETWORKED! Co-evolution and Co-innovation in Federated Supply Chains

organism they are examining ﬁts its environment and, in turn, how well the
genotypical information it carries ﬁts the environment. Thus, an organism
cannot be declared “ﬁt” without reference to its context, or environment. As
time passes and the proportion of the herd enjoying the long-necked charac-
teristic increases, what constitutes an adequate standard of ﬁtness will increase
also. Thus, “sustainable co-evolution with one’s environment is a necessary
condition for ‘ﬁtness’ … ﬁtness [is] an emergent property …”4
Darwin (1859) himself noted:
The species that survive are not those that are the most intelligent; nor
are they those that are the strongest; the species that survive are those
that are best able to adapt to change.
The evolutionary comparison has been applied to the business community
through a body of scholarly work known as complex systems theory. For too
long, organizations have been managing based on transactional boundaries,
using simple deterministic ways of thinking. However, the network of ﬁrms in
the LIVING supply chain is more akin to the dynamics associated with complex
systems. Complex systems theory grapples with how organizations adapt in the
face of dynamic change over time, with those organizations best able to adapt
ultimately surviving.5 A further branch of thinking suggests that ﬁrms that sur-
vive essentially coevolve with those entities around them. This line of thought,
sometimes called the “resource-based view,” suggests that the changing rela-
tionship between a ﬁrm’s activities and entities in its competitive environment
creates whatever distinct capabilities it draws on for sustained competitive
advantage.6 In simpler terms, the organizational processes that occur with
other entities in the value chain together provide the “emergent” strategies
that shape how the organization survives.
As with Darwinian selectionist theory, which states that living things evolve
as their parts (organs, biomolecules, or genes) mutate, organization theorists
would suggest that organizations adapt as each of the supply chain compe-
tencies (representing microagents – the individual activities that make up the
entire organization) inﬂuence selective advantage for the ﬁrm as a whole.7
Again, translating this into operational thinking, organizations that drive
4 Epstein, J. M., and Axtell, R., Growing Artiﬁcial Societies: Social Science from the Bottom Up,
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1996, p. 63.
5 Aldrich, H., Organizations and Environments, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ, 1979.
6 Many scholars have contributed to this line of thought. A good summary of these references
is provided by McKelvey, B., “Avoiding Complexity Catastrophe in Coevolutionary Pockets:
Strategies for Rugged Landscapes,” Organization Science, vol. 10, no. 3, May/June 1999, pp. 294–
231.
7 Kauﬀman, S. A., The Origins of Order: Self-Organization and Selection in Evolution, Oxford
University Press, New York, 1993.


The LIVING Supply Chain
collaborative behavior with their key supply chain partners in their daily rou-
tines, contracting approaches, and relationships, coevolve to a higher level of
performance that allows all entities in the chain not only to survive, but to
adapt to the rapidly changing environment around it. More importantly, “… in
co-evolutionary processes, the ﬁtness of one organism or species depends on
the characteristics of the other organisms or species with which it interacts,
while all simultaneously adapt and change.”8 This evolution occurs even in an
environment characterized by rapid change, regulatory pressure, new tech-
nology, and other major challenges. As Kauﬀman notes, “A critical diﬀerence
between evolution on a ﬁxed landscape and coevolution is that the former
can be roughly characterized as if it were an adapt search on a ‘potential sur-
face’ or ‘ﬁtness surface,’ whose peaks are the positions sought. In coevolution,
there may typically be no such potential surface, and the process is far more
complex.”9
The implication is that organizations must begin not only to consider their
local environments in building their business strategies, but to extend these
strategies to consider all the participants in the supply chain network. All orga-
nizations evolve based either on applying rules or on following a certain set of
performance metrics that indicate progress toward those rules. The problem, of
course, is that adherence to these rules may lead to evolution, but not all evolu-
tions lead to successful adaptations to the environment!10 Many organizations
may be following the wrong set of rules, or the wrong set of performance
metrics to indicate whether adequate progress towards survival is being main-
tained! And even when progress is being made toward the right evolutionary
outcome, if organizations are not fast enough to adapt, the competition within
the ecosystem may extinguish them, meaning agility and velocity are key to
survival.
Richard Dawkins, in his book The Selﬁsh Gene went further, explaining how
natural selection is driven to the gene level and invisible decisions drive who
wins and who loses. In the same way, it is fair to assume that product supply
chains evolve in their own selﬁsh ways. Products that move faster to market,
at lower costs, win. Slower, less adaptable products lose. The “invisible hand”
(p. 572), ﬁrst articulated by Adam Smith in The Wealth of Nations (1776), allows
market forces to rule. The market in eﬀect drives the evolution of supply chains
so that the ﬁttest survive and the weak are destined to fail.
The genetic code of all things identiﬁes the DNA of materials in the LIVING
supply chain. The most ubiquitous of these in our system is the simple bar code.
8 Kauﬀman, 1993, p. 33.
9 Kauﬀman, 1993, p. 33.
10 Morel, B., and Ramanujam, R., “Through the Looking Glass of Complexity: The Dynamics of
Organizations as Adaptive and Evolving Systems,” Organization Science, vol. 10, no. 3, May/June
1999.

6
NETWORKED! Co-evolution and Co-innovation in Federated Supply Chains

This gene contains a wealth of information about the history and roots of the
product – in the future, it will contain even more information.
If there is one corollary to the LIVING Supply Chain, it is that supply chains
are selﬁsh. The proﬁt motive on each stakeholder or node in a supply chain
focuses on winning – surviving by supplying faster and better alternatives. Why
don’t all our products go by air transport? They would if it were cheaper. Why
did Panama announce a widening of the canal? So that bigger ships carrying
more goods can arrive days faster than any other route. Why is near-shoring
and regionalization gaining strength as labor costs climb in China? The total
landed costs including the evolving need for mass customization and time to
market are driving companies to shift.
Pretty heavy stuﬀ. But what are the practical implications for the LIVING
supply chain?
Co-evolution
Let’s get back to the Flex tour. One of my stops was a trip to the Flex Innovation
Center. We spent a good amount of time walking through a building, escorted
by Natalia Pena and Alexandra Coltman, who took us through a series of rooms.
One of the tour guides was a young man whose parents had emigrated from
China and who had an engineering degree from Stanford. He was very excited
about the work going on in these rooms. This was the world of “Co-.”
“Co-” applies to the great many parts of the supply chain that involve making
decisions in conjunction with others to drive the best outcomes. Elements in
the world of “Co-” include:
Co-planning: Creating aligned supply and demand planning views that allow
all parties in the chain to see the level of inventory, the level of demand, and
the likely trajectory of possible shortages, capacity imbalances, and excess
or slow-moving inventory. Averting problems due to mismatches between
supply and demand is simply a fact of life. Organizations that discover the
right way of working through these issues will drive increasing asset velocity.
Co-sourcing: Why does purchasing have the ﬁnal say on which suppliers are
likely to be awarded the business? “Because it is our right” is often the answer.
But in a true co-sourcing world, the decision is made through an ongoing
review of design objectives, cost objectives, technology roadmaps, stake-
holder requirements, and ongoing projections, as well as a review of who
has been the best partner. The latter element is often a function of nontra-
ditional measurements. For example, perhaps suppliers who are the most
honest about the lack of compliance or quality issues in their plants will be
rewarded with the most business. Encouraging honesty and transparency as
the ultimate basis for awarding business: this sounds like heresy in many


The LIVING Supply Chain
purchasing circles, but reﬂects the need for a diﬀerent model to drive the
right level of trust in a virtual environment.
Co-logistics: We need partners who understand how to operate in diﬀerent
parts of the world – and know how to ensure that products can cross borders
and countries with a minimum of hassle, extra taxes, and delays (all of which
are forms of friction in the supply chain). The implication? We need logistics
providers who know how to work with the government – who are now a
critical part of your supply chain. And we need seamless communication that
will allow people to reroute trucks, boats, airplanes, and ships mid-route, and
track their product anywhere in the world. This is still not possible on most
carriers, but will be a reality soon. Asset velocity will be a key driver of this
activity.
Co-materials: As we continue to work on new and emerging materials that are
more sustainable, we need to think about how to work with other partners in
the chain to discover reusable, recyclable, and renewable materials that will
perform better and at a lower cost than traditional products. For example,
bio-based products are a promising area of growth, as these products use
renewable raw materials such as biochemically derived molecules to replace
traditional petrochemical-based products.
Co-innovation: This is perhaps one of the biggest opportunities – ﬁguring out
how to work with partners in the chain who have greater technical insight
into our products. At Flex’s Innovation Lab in Milpitas, start-up companies
are encouraged to use the meeting space for engineering and design meetings
with Flex. Flex helps these companies set up a small space for pilot runs, most
of which use equipment for 100 pieces or less. These labs may go through up
to 60 engineering changes per day on the products, and across all products
the labs may oversee 15,000 engineering changes per year. Constant change
is the rule of the day. But this fosters an approach for experimentation, tech-
nology development, and new products. Tom Linton notes, “We recognize
that 80 percent of these projects will not work out. But for the ones that do,
we will be ready to take their products, scale up the production from these
labs, move it to one of our global factories, and begin commercializing these
innovator’s products. We know that the majority of innovations come from
small companies and individuals, not from big companies.”
As the nature of a company’s relationships with other companies in its supply
chain evolves, innovation in the form of new ways of collaborating will be one
of the ﬁrst elements that determine the strength of these relationships. Orga-
nizations that re-invent how they work with other companies in their supply
chains will be at the forefront of this evolution. This is called business process
innovation, and is about ﬁnding new ways to do business with others in the
network.

6
NETWORKED! Co-evolution and Co-innovation in Federated Supply Chains

Business Process Innovation Drives New Forms of
Human–Machine–Data Interaction
Innovation is integral to the transformation to a LIVING supply chain. It natu-
rally ﬁts into an enterprise-wide culture around innovation, and is an inherent
component of digitization of the supply chain and how companies work with
and respond to changes in their ecosystems. This is of course happening in tech-
nology industries – but it’s also happening in health care.
One key area of innovation focuses on how the “pulse” of the supply chain
mimics the “pulse” monitoring of patients in health care. Healthcare technol-
ogy allows a handful of nurses in a central area to monitor the heartbeat, oxygen,
and blood pressure of patients in 30 hospital rooms. The monitoring systems
make loud noises when a patient is experiencing an abnormal pulse. Maybe the
patient’s breathing is erratic, or their heartbeat is abnormal, resulting in a nurse
rushing to the bedside to check on the patient and see if this is an emergency,
in which case the nurse may call in others. We see this same type of “pulse”
monitoring systems emerge in such industries as automotive, electronics, heavy
equipment, oil and gas, and chemical facilities, where automated signals gen-
erate all sorts of events.
The world is becoming virtually vertically integrated. For years, large com-
panies have lightened their asset loads by exiting the manufacturing business
and integrating their supply chain. In the new ecosystem, companies that cul-
tivate innovation from sources outside their walls will be the ones to prosper.
Innovation won’t “walk into your door” – but must be virtually cultivated and
acquired. And supply chain executives may neglect to focus on business pro-
cess innovation. Earlier concepts of open innovation are falling victim to intel-
lectual property limits. How much can a company freely share? However, if the
solution is a joint project and involves the collective joining of capabilities, a
company’s willingness to co-succeed is greater, and is consistent with natural
laws of success.
Most of the interaction between business functions and IT information
infrastructures is functional. IT is not closely linked to the rest of most busi-
nesses. At Flex, a team of people sits in the supply chain, working directly on
the requirements of the business and with IT to build functionality – rather
than having IT tell it what it needs. This is a fundamental change – having the
business drive the technology requirements for the company, not the other way
around! This change is fundamental to business process innovation. The litmus
test should be, “Is the technology or tool I’m using giving me faster business
speed? Is it moving assets through the business faster?” If not, it’s not useful,
and is a form of friction.
Tom spoke to executives at a Procurement Leaders Forum in San Francisco
in June 2016 about the radical shifts in organizational culture that accompanied


The LIVING Supply Chain
the roll-out of the Pulse. “When I ﬁrst arrived, if I wanted information, I would
send an email to a guy who would give me the information,” Tom said. “That
just didn’t work for me. I drove the thinking that we all had to operate in real
time, and change the way that data and human beings interact together.”
“Look around. Everyone has a touch-based smart phone. The human–
machine interaction is a natural evolution that is occurring all around us,
whether we like it or not. We have to change our way of working to allow
machines to work with us. Even Apple and SAP are working together to create
apps that allow people to do transactions using a mobile app. We are moving to
big environments that are mobile- and Cloud-based, to allow for the acquisition
of data through mobile devices to allow people to act on information.”
“The Flex Pulse Center creates a mobile platform for pulling information in
a menu-driven format on material lead times, risk mitigation, and inventory,”
Tom said. He looked at his iPhone, and showed a picture of the inventory pulse.
He was able to pull it down for any customer, for any facility, as the sum of
raw material, WIP, and ﬁnished goods inventory. “The alert feature uses com-
ponents of statistical process control to identify aberrations in the data that
may lead to an alert,” he said. “Diﬀerent alert levels are established for diﬀerent
roles.” Tom may see one set of alerts for the whole company, while a director
may see alerts for a facility, and a buyer planner may see alerts for his category
of spending or his group of suppliers. And it is all available on the phone, to
create visibility.
“One of the key questions is what data needs to be in real-time and on alert.
Not all information needs to be monitored, just as not all human functions
are monitored electronically over time. But those elements that are brought
into an alert setting can foster a ‘workshop’ environment – where everyone
has access to the data. This is the opposite of a ‘control tower environment.’
Control implies decision-making: ‘I want a ﬂow tower that tells me when
things are going wrong – not when they are going right!’ I am 99 percent sure
they are right – and I want to manage by exception. Alerts can tell me that. Flex
Pulse, in the words of our CEO is actually an ‘anti-control tower’ as control
slows things down. It’s like tapping on the breaks when you are trying to go
faster.”
“As an example, last month someone placed a billion dollar purchase order.
This came up as an alert on my mobile phone. Who did this? Turns out it was
someone in Mexico who had ‘fat ﬁngers’ and made an error. This could have
quickly escalated into a major liability on the company – but the power of real
time allowed us to get ahead of it, and defrag the problem.”
“Many companies want to limit the number of IT vendors they work with,
to standardize and control their environment. We need to implement change
slowly, is the typical reason. We can’t inundate people with too many new sys-
tems changes or we will shut down … this is the exact opposite of the strategy
that Flex is using in deploying the Pulse Center capability.”

6
NETWORKED! Co-evolution and Co-innovation in Federated Supply Chains

Tom notes, “To create a true event-driven network, Flex is working with over
30+ applications across their supply chain, driven by the Elementum platform.
They are all focused on creating mobile solutions that are enterprise-wide. All
the innovations we work on must meet these two criteria. They can’t just be
functional. I am happy to work with as many vendors as needed to deploy new
apps that make us more productive as quickly as possible. The more people
we have involved, the faster we will get our business problems resolved, and
the faster we can make these solutions more widely available across our supply
chain network.”
“We decided to move to a multivendor environment based on how people use
apps on their smart phones. We don’t live our everyday lives in a one-solution
world, and one company can’t do it all. Look at the Apple iPhone – everyone
has multiple apps. Some people have 40, 50, or 60 apps they regularly use, until
they run out of memory. My philosophy is that the rope is stronger if you have
multiple forms of twine. The glue in the rope is the integration of platforms
that keeps all the solutions working together using the same data. We need to
become more comfortable with multiple business apps to deal with diﬀerent
types of problems, as we have so many issues on our plate.”
The Challenge of Trusting Your Data
One of the big challenges of driving true collaboration in a federated supply
chain is that people need to trust not only one another, but also the data they
are sharing. If the data isn’t trustworthy, people will always second-guess it. But
can people really trust information produced from a system under high-stress,
high-risk supply-chain-disruption situations?
This problem was indirectly explored by a group of researchers from NC State
University’s Laboratory for Analytic Science.11 These researchers asked, what
happens when human beings have to trust real-time data under the types of
high-stress, high-pressure environments typical of major supply chain disrup-
tion events? Human beings tend to rely on available information while complet-
ing complex tasks. But what happens when information is presented by humans
and automated sources? And what happens if those information sources con-
ﬂict? This situation occurs more than you might think. For example, in 2002, a
Russian passenger jet and cargo plane crashed mid-air. Automation told the two
planes to change elevation in diﬀerent directions, but so did an air traﬃc con-
troller; these messages directly conﬂicted. One pilot listened to the automation
11 Boettcher, W. A., Mayer, R. C., Mayhorn, C. B., Simons-Rudolph, J. M., Streck, S. M., Pearson,
C. J., and Welk, A. K., “In Automation We Trust? Identifying Factors that Inﬂuence Trust and
Reliance in Automated and Human Decision Aids,” Ph.D. Presentation made at LAS, March 23,
2016.


The LIVING Supply Chain
and the other pilot listened to an air traﬃc controller, and the planes collided.
In the LAS study, a series of tests with undergraduate students was carried out,
in which the students were presented with the following scenario:
“You will be performing as the leader of a vehicle convoy. Your mission is
to deliver critical supplies to a nearby warehouse. Your task will be to select a
delivery route. Participants must select a route for their military convoy from
three possible options.
You will be shown a map displaying three delivery routes. The map will iden-
tify the location(s) of past IEDs (improvised explosive devices), as well as areas
of insurgent activity. You will also receive information from a local intelligence
oﬃcer who will provide you with additional data about the area.
Consider the three routes and select one. Make your decision as quickly as
possible; you will have 60 seconds to complete this task.”
In this scenario:
r An automated tool provides a map that contains information regarding past
IED explosions and insurgent activity to illustrate one optimal route choice.
r The human being provides information that conﬂicts with the map and rec-
ommends a diﬀerent route.
Under this simulation, the ﬁndings were very interesting:
r Presentation order did not signiﬁcantly aﬀect reliance/trust in humans and
automated sources within risky decision-making tasks. In other words, there
may be more critical design choices worth considering when designing sys-
tems to promote reliance for this type of scenario.
r When presented with conﬂicting information from automation and human
sources in high-workload scenarios, operators may increase trust in human
sources. In other words, increased workload negatively aﬀected trust in
automation.
r When presented with conﬂicting information from automation and human
sources in high-risk scenarios, operators may decrease trust in automated
sources. Increased risk positively aﬀected trust in the human. This may be
due to the added load of assessing automation’s trustworthiness.
The implication of this research is that any real-time supply chain system must
have the following characteristics to be successful:
r The system itself must produce trustworthy data. In other words, the data
must represent reality.
r The information provided by the system must align with human perceptions
of what is happening. This suggests that combining human observations with
system data can augment the trust that others observing the information will
have in the data.

6
NETWORKED! Co-evolution and Co-innovation in Federated Supply Chains

r Under high-risk situations common in major disruptions, people will trust
human beings over system-produced data. This is an obstacle that may need
to be directly addressed.
r Under high workload stress, operators may trust more in human dialogue.
This suggests an important need for human-to-human communication in
these situations.
Because the emergence of real-time supply chain systems is so novel, many
such cultural artifacts may need to be overcome, even if the systems issues are
addressed.
Co-sourcing: Trusting Partners Based on Capability
Trusting partners to drive innovations is a big challenge today. So many issues
come up regarding whether partners can be trusted to do what they promise,
whether they will cheat you out of your IP, will follow through on agreements,
etc. Yet partnering with suppliers is one of the most important ways in which
large enterprises will be on the forefront of new technological innovation.
And this may involve looking in places where most companies haven’t
looked before: Small companies in industries that no one has worked with in
the past.
A great example of how driving innovation from unlikely sources was dis-
cussed in a great presentation I attended at the Sourcing Industry Group meet-
ing in April 2016, where SIG’s CEO Dawn Tiura had a “ﬁreside chat” with John
Sculley. Sculley was the legendary CEO of PepsiCo who was recruited to Apple
by Steve Jobs. John served as Apple CEO for 10 years increasing sales more
than 1000%. Under his leadership, the Macintosh became the largest-selling
personal computer in the world in December 1992.
John recounted an interesting story from those days:
“It’s 1978 and I’m CEO of Pepsi and we have been wildly successful in our
marketing campaign. The Pepsi Challenge has allowed us to pass Coke in sales
and market share. I was speaking at Harvard University, and at the end of
the class, a student comes up to me, and says ‘I created something knowing
you were coming here that I want you to look at, that I developed speciﬁcally
for you.’ ”
“So we go over to the other building and I see for the ﬁrst time in my life –
what looked like an Apple II personal computer. This was something this kid
had put together – before Steve Jobs and Wozniak – and it has rows and
columns on the screen.”
“‘What do you call it?’ I asked him. ‘I call it an interactive spreadsheet,’ he
said. The kid’s name was Dan Bricklin and he joined with Bob Frankson to start
a company called Visicorp that became Visicalc … and what he had just showed


The LIVING Supply Chain
me was the ﬁrst spreadsheet in the world, which eventually became the foun-
dation for Excel, one of the most applied tools in the world.”
“I was also there at the beginning of PowerPoint and HyperCard. I’ve watched
small teams create tools that change the way we work – companies like People
Ticker. We create tools that improve productivity that improve the workforce.
These are tools that improve productivity. Slack went from 0 to $4B in sales in
three years – because it is a great tool that improves productivity.”
“I’m a huge fan of tools for people. The most important development is that
we need to equip our workforce with better and better tools. Human beings
still have judgment and they can do things that are repetitive and they can pro-
cess things quickly. But if one provides people with the right tools, especially in
contingent-skilled labor situations, they will double their productivity.”
A question came from the audience:
Fundamentally, procurement is measured on cost savings as the primary
metric. But this can be destructive on the business. You set the require-
ments and set the solution that results from the requirements. Other
metrics are whether you agree oﬀpurchasing agreements in the com-
pany, and some customer satisfaction metrics – like whether internal
stakeholders are satisﬁed. If we are going to be truly strategic and not
just drive toward cost mitigation – what are the things we should look
for in terms of tools and sensory capabilities to help us evaluate more
strategically what we are buying to drive customer retention and top line
metrics? How do you see strategic sourcing leaders doing that?
Sculley replied with a very insightful comment:
“Here is how I think about it. I believe all technology commoditizes. What
is unique and valuable today will become aﬀordable at diﬀerent price points
tomorrow. The way I think about those various points I brought up – is you have
to judge how you are recruiting talent in the context of domain expertise – and
can’t focus just on the costs in isolation of the domain expertise issue. Strategi-
cally, when you are looking to staﬀa project, almost all work will be done with
project teams, inside of organizations and outside with contingent teams.”
“Let’s imagine we are back in 2007 – and Kodak was focused on a project
which sought how to compete with Walmart in a single-use camera taking mar-
ket share from their camera. They made a decision based on their expertise (and
their business was ﬁlm cameras) to double down and spend billions on addi-
tional vertical integration on ﬁlm processing to compete on a cost basis better
with Walmart. (And remember – Kodak was the one who invented the digital
camera!)”
“At the same time, Steve Jobs introduced the iPod and began to make the con-
nections around what was happening in the market around the development

6
NETWORKED! Co-evolution and Co-innovation in Federated Supply Chains

of digital components for consumer products. And he also understood that
another domain, which was wireless operators, were moving from 2G (text
sending) to emails and photos (3G). Apple understood that there were these
other domains that would impact consumer electronics, in terms of how to
take a photo from software to another mobile device. In 2007, Apple launched
the iPhone. Three years later – Kodak ﬁles for bankruptcy.”
“Strategically, when you look at recruiting talent, you need to look at domain
expertise beyond the domains that you have in your company, and a wider scope
of things you are looking at. We are all vulnerable and we have seen that in the
last 15 years. And at the same time one can get into a new domain by procuring
talent that may not already be in your organization.”
Sculley made an important point: Innovation takes place on the fringes. We
can draw a circle around domains and they are in motion – as they touch, they
start to collide and change things. This means that procurement can adopt
change to drive innovation and create new technologies by working on the
edges of diﬀerent technologies, where things touch. Innovation in supply chains
has to be done in the context of diﬀerent domains, which means developing tal-
ent in domains that you don’t currently have and recruiting talent that is not on
your full-time payroll. And in many cases, that domain involves working with
suppliers that we haven’t worked with before. This means working with more
contingent labor as well, as the economy continues to shrink and more people
are working on their own.12
Who Wants to Innovate with You?
A big issue in co-innovation is the sensitivity of supplier concerns when
working with companies. Companies assume that suppliers are open to
sharing their ideas, but this is certainly not always the case. In Chapter 7, we’ll
discuss details of the contentious relationship between a purchasing leader at
General Motors (Jose Lopez) and his suppliers, which resulted in worsening
relationships between the OEM and their manufacturing partners. I know for
a fact (because I spoke to them) that tier-1 suppliers during the 1990s had no
intention of sharing their innovations with GM, but were happy to do so with
Chrysler during this period, as they knew they would get a return on their IP
and that Chrysler would treat them fairly. The lesson is, it’s hard to innovate
with someone that you don’t trust.
So what do suppliers look for in a customer they can innovate with? The
big issue is indeed trust, but it goes beyond that. We’ve explored this ques-
tion in direct engagements and interviews with suppliers involved in product
12 https://scm.ncsu.edu/blog/2016/04/20/a-ﬁreside-chat-with-john-sculley-apples-former-ceo/


The LIVING Supply Chain
8.6
8.7
8.8
8.9
9
9.1
9.2
9.3
9.4
9.5
9.6
9.7
Ethical behavior–enterprise
Not treated as a “vendor”
Demonstrated commitment
Ethical behavior–pur
Concerned about profits
Open & honest
Rewards innovation
Recover R&D costs
Exclusive opportunities
Treated as team member
Top supplier concerns for product development
Figure .Supplier Concerns in Sharing IP with Buyers
development eﬀorts with big OEM companies. In a large global manufacturer I
interviewed, we interviewed a number of suppliers and identiﬁed their biggest
concerns in working with the customer. The elements associated with the
relationship that were the most important to suppliers are shown in Figure 6.5.
These discussions produced insights that demonstrate the delicate and sensi-
tive nature of the relationship between buyers and sellers that produce inno-
vations. Suppliers are legitimately concerned about loss of IP and recovery of
their investments, and buying companies must ﬁnd ways to navigate these dis-
cussions in an open manner and with full disclosure upfront. As shown in Fig-
ure 6.5, they also are concerned with being treated as not just another “vendor,”
but as a true partner in seeking new technical solutions to customer problems.
Suppliers are also looking for a demonstrated commitment to the relationship
from the buying company. They are looking for ethical behavior, return on their
innovation eﬀort, an open and honest dialogue, and recovery of their R&D
costs. Buyers need to ﬁnd a way to address these concerns, if they are truly
serious about co-innovation. Because suppliers are also good at ﬁguring out if
buyers are only giving them “lip-service” and not following up on their com-
mitments and words.
Criteria to Consider when Co-innovating with Supply
Chain Partners
Measuring innovation success is challenging at best, so it is important at this
stage to derive measures that ensure that the project is progressing as planned,
and that there are no major barriers to open dialogue. Exploring what both

6
NETWORKED! Co-evolution and Co-innovation in Federated Supply Chains

Shared risk
Cost management
Informa on sharing, NPD,
governance
Strategic alignment, operational
integrity, fairness
Increasing levels of
commitment and
challenge!
Figure .Characteristics of Customers Considered “Partners”
parties can do to operate as a “customer of choice” and a “supplier of choice” is
also critical. These discussions often can produce insights into what suppliers
believe are the critical dimensions of performance. Interviews with suppliers
from the aforementioned large OEM reveal that several dimensions of buyer
behaviors are important to suppliers, including the following, also shown in
Figure 6.6.
r Strategic alignment: Is the customer aligned with the supplier’s targeted
growth market, and is there alignment on the breadth of volume and team
synergies?
r Operational integrity: Does the customer demonstrate ethical behavior at
both the organization and team level? And does this inspire conﬁdence that
the supplier’s design idea and IP will not be “shopped around”?
r Fairness: Does the customer demonstrate fair play when it comes to sharing
commercial success and risks and rewards, and willingness to respect the
supplier’s innovation and IP?
r Information sharing: Does the customer provide consistent information,
ongoing communication of changes to the business, and a demonstrated will-
ingness to explore what is possible in cases when conﬂicts arise?
r Product development process: Is there a good project platform aligned
with the supplier’s product development process, as well as a forum for
obtaining direct customer feedback on product ideas and innovations?
r Strategic cost management: Does the customer have a demonstrated
record of not exploiting shared cost information? and is the customer legiti-
mately concerned that the supplier will make a fair return on its investment?


The LIVING Supply Chain
r Governance: Is there a forum for joint decision-making and a demonstrated
commitment to share risks and rewards over the longer term?
r Shared risks: Does the customer behave in an open and fair manner and
demonstrate a willingness to consider the supplier for future exclusive oppor-
tunities under the right conditions?
These measures can be tracked using a third party, neutral consultant, or survey
format, which guarantees anonymity.
Trust Goes Both Ways: How Do Suppliers Trust Big
Companies?
A supplier that does not fully trust the purchasing company to be “fair” about
rewarding them for their intellectual property (IP), is likely to hesitate and not
fully commit to the project. Personal integrity is one factor, but the upside of
working together needs to be emphasized so the supplier is fully aware of who
they are working with and the potential opportunity that lies ahead.
One executive at a Cloud-based services provider discussed how trust was
created, by not referring speciﬁcally to trust!
I don’t like to use the term “trust” – I prefer the term “Expectation.” Trust
comes and goes, and there is a lot of variation in the way trust evolves
across cultures. In the United States, people will trust you early but be
easily disappointed and not come back. In Europe, they may not trust
you at all, and only much later begin to approach something like trust.
In other cultures in Asia, trust may never really occur. By really under-
standing what it is you are buying, you are able to set the expectation
of the supplier that drives the relationship. Trust is a function of peo-
ple meeting expectations, which in turn builds the relationship, not the
other way around. You can look back at buyer–supplier relationships and
you trust those that met the expectation and the commitment.
In a large industrial manufacturer, we collected feedback from suppliers
involved in product design and innovation activities on behalf of the manu-
facturer. We compared these suppliers’ concerns to the assessment of a large
manufacturer’s performance relative to these factors to determine the biggest
gaps. At the top of the list is a concern as to whether the supplier would recoup
their innovation investment and proﬁt over the life of the product. There also
was concern as to whether the customer would reward the supplier for their
innovation and technology, and whether they would be able to recover their
engineering and R&D costs. And while suppliers were conﬁdent in the ethical

6
NETWORKED! Co-evolution and Co-innovation in Federated Supply Chains

behavior of purchasing, suppliers were less conﬁdent that the organization as
a whole would operate ethically when it came time to valuing its intellectual
property. As one supplier voiced:
“They are raising expectations for suppliers every year. They can’t
keep raising challenges without rewarding suppliers with new business.”
Indeed.
In a “Nonzero” world, beneﬁts have to ﬂow both ways, and driving collaborative
innovation is no diﬀerent. But rewarding innovation appropriately is also part
of being “Good”: the ﬁnal element in our LIVING supply chain evolutionary
model, discussed in Chapter 7.



GOOD! The Ability to Build Balanced Supply Chains
Press Release: Flex Releases Global Citizenship Report
Flex (NASDAQ: FLEX), the Sketch-to-ScaleTM solutions company that designs
and builds intelligent products for a connected world, has released its 2016
Global Citizenship Report. This report summarizes Flex’s worldwide social and
environmental activities, performance, and results for the calendar year 2015,
providing a look at how Flex employees contribute to a better world.
Key achievements cited in the report include:
r Reduced CO2 emissions by 20%, exceeding the company’s revenue-based
goal
r Reduced injury and occupational disease incidents by 15%
r Reduced electrical use by more than 25,700 MWh/year by installing Flex-
designed and built LED light ﬁxtures in facilities in 12 countries
r Recycled 647,000 m3 of water during 2015, equivalent to the annual water
consumption of 1170 homes
r Named to Fortune magazine’s “World’s Most Admired Companies” list
“This past year we expanded our sustainability program to include global corpo-
rate citizenship in addition to social and environmental leadership,” said Mike
McNamara, Flex CEO. “In one sense, this serves to formalize some central ele-
ments of our culture – which we believe is key to the strength and resiliency
of our organization – including our commitment to protect the environment,
treat our people with respect and dignity and improve the communities where
we live and work.”
The 2016 report includes plans for global citizenship activities, aligned with
the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals, and outlines Flex’s com-
mitment to 20 goals for 2020. Flex will report progress toward these goals twice
per year on its external website.
The LIVING Supply Chain: The Evolving Imperative of Operating in Real Time, First Edition.
Robert Handﬁeld and Tom Linton.
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.


The LIVING Supply Chain
Why Good?
Everyone acknowledges that we are in a global world – and that diversity is a
common element that we need to build into how we operate globally. When
we discussed the structure of this book, instead of focusing this chapter on a
global supply chain, we landed instead on the need to discuss a good supply
chain. (First, we needed something that started with a “G” … but “good” just
seemed like a better word than “sustainable,” which I think is highly overused!)
Why “good”? Because good reﬂects on some of the most important – and
sometimes implicit – elements that underlie how a supply chain should be oper-
ated with integrity that is the catalyst for building trust. One of the key elements
of “good” is the supply chain network having a balanced structure that promotes
diversity of competition, yet maintains harmony and balance among the con-
stituents. We think of something as “good” if it agrees with us or aligns with
our morals. Someone with integrity is a “good” person. Even a bar of soap from
Whole Foods labeled “good” implies it will make you clean, make you feel good,
and will provide some beneﬁts (Figure 7.1). The soap also has “good,” organic
ingredients that will not irritate your skin. These are all admirable qualities.
Figure .“Good”Soap. Source: Whole Foods Market Inc.

7
GOOD! The Ability to Build Balanced Supply Chains

But the concept of “good” also designates a current status that is stable (“How
are you?” … “I’m good!”). To return to the Serengeti Rules: the dominant theme
we have emphasized throughout our book is the need to establish balance in
supply chain ecosystems. These rules apply outside the Serengeti Desert, and
Carroll provides several illustrations of the importance of balance in many dif-
ferent ecosystems. For example, he discusses the wolves that were eliminated
from Yellowstone in 1926. This national park, with the largest concentration
of mammals in the 48 states, saved the population of bison and grizzly bears
from extinction. When the wolves were all killed oﬀin 1926, the elk population
erupted, and the larger herds took a heavy toll on the system’s trees and plants.
By 1984, 10 years after 31 wolves were reintroduced into Yellowstone, the pop-
ulation had grown to 301. In the years that followed, not only was the elk pop-
ulation reduced by half, but elks’ over-browsing of tree species, notably aspen,
cottonwood, and willow, ended. The resulting increase in the tree population –
known as a “trophic cascade” – also impacted the lives of beavers, which feed oﬀ
willows. The reintroduced wolves also reduced the number of coyotes, which
feed on young pronghorn antelope. Studies show that fawn survival rates of
antelope are four times higher in sites with wolves than without them.1
The rationale behind the idea of good, balanced environments is one that
everyone understands: Predators maintain balance in nature, and mankind
needs to seriously consider letting the natural rules of evolution play out in
their world as well. In the world of supply chains, the “natural rule” of evolution
emphasizes open and free trade and open forces of competition, which drive
naturally occurring outcomes. When wolf or elk populations are out of balance,
bad things start to happen to the natural ecosystem. By the same token, supply
chains should compete fairly within the guidelines of being “good.” Unbalanced
supply chains cause things to begin to go wrong.
What Are Characteristics of a Good Supply Chain?
Good supply chains balance performance, price, integrity, the environment,
and social and political factors, allowing free and open trade while not trans-
gressing the boundaries of integrity and human rights. This theme is most-often
called sustainability. It is interesting that the original concept of sustainability
also has ecological roots: sustainability is the property of biological systems
to remain diverse and produce indeﬁnitely.2 Sustainability can also be deﬁned
as a socio-ecological process characterized by the pursuit of a common ideal.3
Both concepts have an implicit reference to the idea of balance, endurance, and
1 Carroll, S., The Serengeti Rules, Princeton University Press, 2016, pp. 177–182.
2 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sustainability
3 Wandemberg, J. C., Sustainable by Design, Amazon, August 2015, p. 122. ISBN: 1516901789.
Retrieved February 16, 2016.


The LIVING Supply Chain
diversity of life. And this leads again to the idea of the trophic cascade in the
Serengeti Rules.
Perhaps the closest equivalent to a trophic cascade in the supply chain sphere
is the economic concept laid out by one of the earliest visionaries of our time:
Adam Smith.
Adam Smith, the Invisible Hand, and the Serengeti Rules
Adam Smith wrote one of the most important and enduring set of business
tomes of all time, The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) and The Wealth of
Nations (1776) over 240 years ago. Smith recognized that the “invisible hand”
of the market would create the right balance and outcomes for society in the
long run, if it were allowed to operate freely. He notes:
The rich … are led by an invisible hand to make nearly the same
distribution of the necessaries of life, which would have been made, had
the earth been divided into equal portions among all its inhabitants, and
thus without intending it, without knowing it, advance the interest of the
society, and aﬀord means to the multiplication of the species.4
In this manner, Smith makes a direct reference to the idea of diversity and bal-
ance in the natural order of civilization that maintains the sustainability of the
system. The guidelines of the “invisible hand” apply here to the idea of natural
competition in the supply chain. Open-source data and new cognitive tech-
nologies are enriching the invisible hand of the market and creating greater
diversity of competition by the day. An emerging concept is that companies
should go out and “mine” dark data, to “ﬁnd” the market and the best suppli-
ers, and in this manner explore markets to drive competition while establishing
stronger relationships with the most competitive supply chain partners. Doing
so makes the entire system healthier and more robust. Exploring vast quantities
of market intelligence data on the Internet, the thinking goes, allows businesses
to optimize cost and supply. This concept also prevails in the context of tra-
ditional “world-class procurement” principles, which dictate that one should
reduce the supply base to the “optimal” few. The assumption in many cases is,
“We have too many suppliers. We should pare our supply base to the qualiﬁed
and critical few.”
This marketplace is the essence of creating balance in the supply network.
Balance is an organic concept, found in nature. In The Serengeti Rules, Sean B.
Carroll documents how every living creature participates in and helps maintain
4 Smith, A., The Theory of Moral Sentiments, revised edition of the sixth edition published in
1790 (ﬁrst published in 1759), Penguin, New York, 2009, pp. vii–xxix.

7
GOOD! The Ability to Build Balanced Supply Chains

balance in the ecosystem, which helps the system to ﬂourish. If human beings
kill too many lions, the zebras starve. If there is not enough clean water, grass
dies and zebras starve. But if there are too many lions, they kill oﬀthe zebras, the
grass gets out of hand, and disease spreads. The point is a truly healthy system
is a balanced system. According to The Serengeti Rules, a system is either in
balance or out of balance; the same is true for a supply chain system.
The key to a “good” supply chain is balance among the following elements:
Integrity: Customers must believe a product’s advertising and trust its label.
They must be assured that no counterfeit elements or substitutions have been
made.
Environmental health: At worst, a supply chain should do no net harm to nat-
ural or social systems while still producing a proﬁt over an extended period
of time; a truly sustainable supply chain could, customers willing, continue
to do business forever.
Fair employee practices: Products are produced in safe environments with fair
wages, overtime, fair working conditions, and adult labor, that acknowledge
the rights of workers to form unions, and that do not bully, coach, or force
employees to do anything that is not within the normal requirements for
humane working conditions. (Note that this can cause conﬂicting issues in
some countries; for instance, India just passed a law allowing 15- to 18-year
olds to work in family businesses, in deﬁance of UN mandates).5
Politically and ethically sound policies: This includes appropriate gover-
nance over ﬁnancial and social dealings, free of corruption, bribery, and
fraud. Data is truthful, ﬁnancial results are not overstated, and share price
reﬂects the true value of the organization based on audited assessments of
revenues and costs.
Good supply chains include all these characteristics. When they are all in bal-
ance, open and free competition ﬂourishes, for all factors of labor, and all forms
of free trade, allowing value to ﬂow.
Open Competition Is “Good”
If open competition is good, it follows that one of the new rules of supply chain
management is not to limit the number of suppliers in a market, but to expand
the market to make it more competitive. We saw this in supply chain rules 4,
5, and 6. The more the suppliers (zebras) in a market, the healthier the buyers
(lions) and the more balanced the system. Supply chains are very much like the
5 http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2016/07/indian-parliament-passes-contentious-child-labour-
bill-160727073739213.html


The LIVING Supply Chain
Serengeti – by expanding the number of suppliers in a market, the more com-
petition you have, the healthier the ecosystem is, and the healthier the supply
chain is.
Similarly, continuing to work with a poorly performing supplier, and restrict-
ing competition in that market, aﬀects the health of the supply chain. If FedEx
and UPS cornered the delivery market, express delivery rates would no doubt
increase and service would fall oﬀ. So the new rule of supply chain goes against
traditional thinking – and instead suggests that companies should use systems
and tools to expand the number of suppliers they choose to work with. The sys-
tem will dictate through its internal dynamics and balancing mechanisms when
there are too many suppliers. And the job of an eﬀective supply chain manager
is to ensure a healthy supply chain, and a healthy ecosystem.
What happens if supply chain health is restricted and suppliers are limited?
Disease and hunger will follow in a system that is out of balance, according to
the Serengeti rules. The same can be said of supply chains, based on our rules.
General Motors and Supply Relationship Pyramids
Creating eﬀective relationships with other enterprises in the supply chain that
are ethical and fair, but also competitive, is at the root of being “good.” It also
relates to federation in the supply chain. General Motors learned this the hard
way. I visited General Motors in late 1999, when I was working with its senior
automotive team prior to an education session I was helping them organize in
China. At the time, I interviewed most of the major executives leading GM’s
supply chain. My arrival occurred just after the departure of the infamous
Jose Lopez.
The purchasing revolution occurred at GM in the early 1990s with the
appointment of Jack Smith as CEO, and Jose Ignacio Lopez as vice president
of purchasing. Despite his bad reputation, Lopez should get credit for raising
awareness around quality, service, and price (or QSP, a “mantra” at GM). By
creating an internal culture focused on driving improved internal integration
among purchasing, engineering, logistics, and operations, Lopez turned GM
around when it was on the verge of bankruptcy. During his 2-year tenure at the
head of GM’s purchasing organization, he established a diﬀerent mindset and
raised the importance of purchasing and supply chain management as a core
contributor to GM’s competitive success. In his wake, he left many strained rela-
tionships with suppliers, who felt Lopez had betrayed them. He served as a true
“shock” to the automotive system by instilling a level of competition that many
suppliers had never seen before, and in the process, signiﬁcantly improved the
quality and the cost of GM vehicles. His methods were, however, unscrupulous
and unethical, and caused many problems in the relationships that ensued. In
short, Lopez ruined the balance of the ecosystem.

7
GOOD! The Ability to Build Balanced Supply Chains

On my visit I also interviewed top-level purchasing executives at GM, includ-
ing Harold Kutner, Tom Fabus, Bo Andersson, Woody Williams, Bob Burkhart,
and John Calabrese, who described how they were working to “restore the bal-
ance” with suppliers. After leaving GM, Lopez was replaced by Harold Kutner.
Kutner extended Lopez’s concepts beyond the simple mantra of QSP, to include
T: Technology. Kutner and Jack Smith realized that for GM to be truly suc-
cessful, global integration across all of GM’s product lines and platforms was
required. To do so, they created a new purchasing organization, World Wide
Purchasing (WWP). WWP was a matrix-based structure developed across
product lines and commodity groups, which enabled vehicle platform teams
to scan the globe for leading-edge technologies at the best quality, service, and
price. A new measurement system for certifying and selecting suppliers along
four dimensions (Quality, Service, Technology, and Price, or “QSTP”) was insti-
gated. Purchasing category managers and product platform managers worked
hand-in-hand to manage supplier relationships. Every Friday morning, lead-
ing executives from all over the world would gather around a satellite camera
for a global teleconference. Information shared included updates to product
development eﬀorts, changes in market conditions, pricing updates, and other
developments. These meetings helped to ensure that on a weekly basis, all par-
ties throughout the world were up-to-date and equally knowledgeable.
During our interview, Bo Andersson, one of GM’s heads of procurement
helped me understand GM’s new perspective on supplier relationships. Bo
drew a triangle for me (shown in Figure 7.2), explaining that its three sides
represented three elements of supplier relationships: price, performance, and
place. Performance related to the QSTP dimension, and price was obvious –
but place referred to local relationships between suppliers and purchasing. Bo
emphasized that all three dimensions needed to be in balance, but that at GM
Place
Price
Performance
Place
Price
Performance
Unbalanced relationship
 
Balanced relationship
 
Courtesy of Bo Andersson, general motors
Figure .The Relationship Triad


The LIVING Supply Chain
the place dimension (e.g., the relationships between suppliers and purchas-
ing) had gotten too important, resulting in a “squashed” triangle (shown on
the right side of Figure 7.2). He emphasized that purchasing personnel often
got too comfortable with their suppliers, and developed personal relationships
with them that sometimes got in the way of price and performance.
“Competition is a good thing,” Bo told me. “Lopez was able to shake up these
relationships because we were getting too comfortable with our suppliers. They
needed to know that global competition was present, and that we needed to be
competitive in terms of cost and performance to succeed and grow.”
What Bo was emphasizing, again, was balance in the supply chain. In this
case, balance among price, performance, and place in the supply base was crit-
ical if GM was to survive. If any of these become too important in a supplier
relationship, the whole relationship becomes skewed and dysfunctional. Per-
haps the supplier grows too comfortable and doesn’t make enough eﬀort to
drive down costs, and the price creeps up. Or the buyer awards too much busi-
ness to local suppliers, who do not invest enough in remaining competitive,
consequently falling behind in technology, delivery, capability, and so on. Or the
buyer over-emphasizes price and chisels the supplier so that the supplier has no
margin for reinvesting in its business and performance suﬀers. In any of these
cases, an imbalance causes negative outcomes. The importance of maintaining
both competition and collaboration is a delicate balance, but requires all parties
to act in their best interest to survive while acting with integrity and purpose.
Fast-forward to 2016. A story in The Wall Street Journal announced that Bo
Andersson, who had become the CEO of Russia’s largest car maker, AvtoVAZ,
planned to step down. The Renault–Nissan Alliance is the majority owner of
the ﬁrm. According to the story, Andersson joined Renault in 2013 after he
helped turn around Russian truck maker GAZ Group. He started at AvtoVAZ
in early 2014 and slashed tens of thousands of jobs at its main Togliatti plant. He
also renegotiated contracts with local suppliers in a bid to cut costs. When he
arrived, the company was, in his words, “The biggest mess I’ve ever seen in my
career.” He encountered low morale, rampant corruption, theft of parts from
the plant, a reputation for poor quality and a Soviet-style employee culture that
rewarded seniority over job performance.
Things did not go over well, according to the story in the WSJ. “ ‘The cost-
saving moves angered many in Togliatti, a one-industry city some 500 miles
east of Moscow. Discontent trickled up to the highest echelons of Russia’s polit-
ical elite and prompted a warning shot last spring from an ally of President
Vladimir Putin.’ ‘You’re playing with ﬁre,’ Sergei Chemezov, a friend of Putin,
recalls telling Mr. Andersson. Mr. Chemezov runs a state-owned defense and
industrial company that holds a minority stake in the auto maker, OAO Avto-
VAZ. Industry experts note that ‘the Russian government wants it both ways –
AvtoVAZ as a social project and a competitive business in the modern era. It’s
impossible.’ ”

7
GOOD! The Ability to Build Balanced Supply Chains

Let’s see – what did Andersson do that was so horriﬁc that he deserved the
wrath of Putin?
Well, he made the horrible mistake of laying oﬀworkers, even though the
layoﬀs had been formally approved by the AvtoVAZ board. He then renego-
tiated contracts with suppliers to set a target of 5% cost reductions (a tar-
get that, by the way, is considered a year-over-year requirement for suppli-
ers in the global automotive industry). Such targets are typically discovered
through value analysis, productivity improvements, application of cost mod-
els, and material substitutions. Andersson also sought to improve quality.
(AvtoVAZ vehicles are known for spending more time in the shop than on the
road). He worked with Renault to invest another $448 million in new technol-
ogy in the company. He even required the ﬁlthy facility toilets to be cleaned
daily. In Bo’s words, “The only way we’ll become world-class is if we’re clean –
toilets and ﬂoors, too.” In eﬀect, he tried to create a competitive, “good” supply
chain.
The point of these examples? We believe that allowing supply chains to oper-
ate through competitive forces is key, and that, under the invisible hand pos-
tulated by Adam Smith, will produce a much healthier system, assuming that
price, place, and performance are balanced. The reason to have ethical, sus-
tainable supply chains is not to replicate the smarmy, self-righteous assertions
found on many sustainability web pages, but to create a healthy, competitive,
balanced supply chain. The reason to have good, ethical, healthy supply chains
that are environmentally and ﬁscally healthy is to allow the system to breath, to
operate freely, and to allow all to proﬁt. Those who try to cut corners, who say,
“We don’t need the safest meat or the strongest material for our products and
customers,” are destined to learn the hard way that this will come back to bite
them in the long run.
But we need to rethink globalization – and to acknowledge that we can’t over-
look the implications of a “good” LIVING supply chain. Everyone now knows
that our environment is global, which is a “given” for organizations that seek
growth. The diﬀerence, however, is that organizations with a LIVING supply
chain recognize that they must adapt to regional conditions and disparities,
and learn to exploit the capabilities of each region to derive global competi-
tiveness. Although the traditional view that “the world is ﬂat,” in that historical
and geographical divisions are not relevant, there nevertheless exist regional
disparities that must be accommodated and taken into account.
The focus on global process improvement across a global network by man-
agement teams began in the 1980s. However, with the birth of enterprise soft-
ware, its expansion in the 1990s and with the establishment of Internet-based
software, the process is about to be disrupted again. Business history is littered
with disruption. Industrial revolutions dating back to the 17th century are full
of examples in which one trigger started an avalanche of change: the printing
press, cotton gin, telephone, automobile, airplane, and computer. But what they


The LIVING Supply Chain
all have in common is that the trigger was often pulled decades before full-scale
adoption took place.
Our view of global process but local deployment is based on the simple thesis
that business leaders cannot standardize the entire world, and need processes
that will solve problems in 80% of cases, allowing for local adoption for the
remaining 20% of cases, (so long as the outcome meets the process playbook).
This requires a clearly deﬁned organization, with clear roles and responsibili-
ties, so that people can speak to the same processes with the same toolboxes.
This ensures that all parties are “speaking the same language” and are using
comparable metrics and plans.
To understand this apparent paradox, let’s examine some examples, starting
with the military understanding of how to operate in Iraq.
A Team of Teams to Create Local Insights
We already have mentioned Gen. Hugh McChrystal’s book Team of Teams,
which explains how the military in Iraq had to learn how to deal with an enemy
that was not organized, did not have an organized or regimented approach,
and relied on guerilla tactics and suicide bombers to create havoc. McChrys-
tal’s team sought to use traditional military-style intelligence to understand the
enemy, but learned that the information was also too little, too late. Eventually,
they moved toward a structure in which true openness, trust, and transparency
were not just important, but were the critical component in the battle against
Al Qaeda in Iraq. Faced by an adaptable and networked enemy, the General and
his team explored why traditional organizations aren’t adaptable to change. The
four fundamental elements that allowed McChrystal’s “Team of Teams” con-
cept included 1) transparency to ensure common understanding and aware-
ness, 2) changing personal behaviors to establish trust and foster collaboration,
3) creation of a shared context to enable decentralization and empowerment of
individuals to act, and 4) creating a broader environment of leadership instead
of micromanaging. McChrystal points out that all organizations should adopt
these approaches to ensure that they can survive in the years ahead. Sound
familiar?
What distinguished McChrystal’s new approach was that it empowered indi-
viduals closest to the front lines to act based on what they saw in front of
them. The implication is that enterprises should drive decision-making based
on ground-level intelligence – not just a centralized (“control-tower”) view. The
opposite of this approach was best described in a military context in the novel
Matterhorn by Karl Marlantes. One of the key insights in this book (which cov-
ers such topics as leadership, diversity, strategy, politics, and military tactics)
is the complete lack of ground-up intelligence present on the front lines in the
Vietnam War. Indeed, at one point in the book, a front-line infantryman cries

7
GOOD! The Ability to Build Balanced Supply Chains

in desperation when he is told that what he sees in front of him on the front
lines is incorrect, by a senior oﬃcer who is telling him this from a radio that is
miles away in a secure zone!
The military has reversed this model since the Vietnam war to enable
decision-making based on what is being seen on the ground. Today’s military
relies primarily on situation-speciﬁc decision-making, with generals and senior
leaders there only to provide support, NOT to call the shots. There is even
a term for it: situational intelligence. Situational intelligence combines tradi-
tional situational awareness (an individual’s cognitive interpretation of what is
happening around him/her) with the collective intelligence of those at the cen-
ter of many global situations, resulting in a dynamic process in which data is
gathered and interpreted and the information is shared.
I interviewed a former Marine who served in Iraq and who returned to take
my supply chain MBA class. He described some of the activities he performed
while serving in Iraq that emphasized the need for continuous communication,
feedback, and intelligence-sharing in the ﬁeld as the cornerstone of survival for
Marines.
We are trained to report continuously what is going on. To begin with,
we report the supplies we have on hand every day through a logistics
status report. This included bandages, batteries, and all diﬀerent classes
of material. A war ﬁghter on the ground at the company level sends up a
report on the status of water, chow, ammunition on hand, etc. That report
goes up to the battalion and up to a depot level. There is also a report
that is produced that shows how many bullets during combat operations
per Marine are required, versus the standard amount for each piece of
equipment, and this is compared against the actual on-hand inventory.
This goes up to regimental brigade and is briefed to the commander at
every level. And every commander knows immediately when a company
is within two days of being out of supplies. In a counter-insurgency envi-
ronment, this allows a pipeline to be established in theater when sup-
plies are hitting these units at diﬀerent points in time. When disruptions
occur, the battalion has plans to convoy materials at all times.
So how can organizations develop the same level of visibility and insight at the
supply and customer level? Communicating and coordinating using forms of
media besides planning systems is critical, and involves exploiting social media
and other forums will become more important in the future.
Now project this to a global economic scale. People are making decisions in
“control” towers to which data is transmitted in batches. People in mid-level
operations or global sites are being told what to do from a centralized opera-
tion, by people who do not understand the local situation. This is particularly
true in places like Nigeria, Indochina, and Angola, which is why some of the


The LIVING Supply Chain
big oil and gas companies have been kicked out of these communities. How-
ever, when decision-makers can collect information such as on-the-scene pho-
tos, Twitter messages, weather alerts and recipient responses in real time, the
quantity, quality, and speed of information available during a given event grows
exponentially. This leads to better decision-making and more eﬀective crisis
communication before, during, and after an incident.
The PEOPLE Part of the LIVING Equation
One concept mentioned throughout this book is the mindshift of the people
who work in the network. Real-time information that is live, interactive, vir-
tual, intelligent, networked, and good fulﬁlls a company’s need to create the
right mindset in people with the right skill set, enabled by a governance struc-
ture that allows, and even encourages, agile decision-making. As mentioned
in Chapter 1, people need to believe that velocity is key, and that, armed with
information, they may ﬁnd ways to rapidly discover the HOV lane and move
around the problem quickly.
Tom talked about how he is making this possible at Flex. “Many strategists
debate whether supply chain should be centralized, decentralized, or center-
led,” he said. “I’m a big proponent of a center-led supply chain. Centralization
allows aggregation of requirements and decision-making, but slows everything
down because it’s not possible to do this in real time. Decentralized organi-
zations don’t allow you to achieve the scale and alignment that is required to
drive a uniﬁed approach to supply chain decisions. A center-led supply chain
centralizes the major vectors of policy and procedure for the enterprise, but
leaves the ability to make decisions on the ground to the people who are closest
to the action … much like the “Team of Teams” concept. This is a critical com-
ponent of the real-time LIVING supply chain, and companies often stumble in
trying to implement this approach. Business history will tell you that center-led
organizations are much more nimble, and that this is a much more ﬂexible and
faster way to operate.” Tom notes the following:
It is also a big change from my early days in the profession. I grew up
working at IBM, a highly vertically integrated, centralized organization.
I was a commodity manager, but by 1985 I was in charge of purchasing
and transportation as part of my responsibility for that business. My
responsibilities were clear: reduce cost and don’t run out. But if you look
at companies like Apple, Google, Microsoft, Amazon and Facebook –
these companies have no manufacturing at all. They are 100 percent
virtually vertically integrated, and operate very diﬀerently than large,
centralized ‘big iron’ companies. They are asset-light and inventory-light
on their balance sheets.

7
GOOD! The Ability to Build Balanced Supply Chains

Companies are seeking a certain type of person that will ﬂourish in the cur-
rent supply chain environment. For example, one of my MBA students, who
had an electrical engineering background, had eight interviews before he was
hired by Apple. They wanted to make sure that he had the right mindset, ana-
lytical capability, and decision-making agility to operate in a rapidly changing
ecosystem.
Tracking Data to Create Transparent Supply Chains
One of the major challenges relative to risk is sustainability. Many industry
sectors that have “outsourced” their production networks to low-cost coun-
tries struggle with ensuring compliance to labor and human rights laws, as set
forth by UN International Labor Organization (ILO) conventions. A program
to audit suppliers across multiple tiers of the supply chain is an important ﬁrst
step. That process begins with a supplier code of conduct that provides a base-
line for evaluating a supplier’s basic labor and human rights policies. Based on
this code of conduct, supplier audits are used to target tier 1 suppliers to ensure
compliance with the code shown here. A scorecard can help quantify supplier
performance on social impacts. Metrics related to safety standards, discrimi-
nation, labor conditions, child labor, and wages also can be part of every sup-
plier assessment, as well as every business case. Countermeasures to react to
unacceptable values of these metrics also can be implemented. This includes
tier 2 suppliers, implying that the entire global supply chain from end-to-end is
beholden to a single global code of conduct. This standard also applies to busi-
ness ethics; increasingly, global consumer producers and retail companies are
adopting a “one standard” view of the world.
This new focus on corporate sustainability often calls for companies to
increase transparency in all aspects of their operations – and much more so
in the supply chain. Apparel and electronics companies that source all their
products from factories in emerging countries are especially targeted for
allegedly hiring contractors that push the boundaries of human rights labor
laws.
“Sustainability” is a word that became very fashionable about 15 years ago,
and which everyone is now promoting as a facet of “the new normal.” In fact,
sustainability is about nothing more than “doing the right thing” – and most
people would know what that means. If a 12-year old tells you that something
“isn’t right,” this is a good measure for whether consumers will ﬁnd it acceptable.
Try running the statement, “We are using suppliers that we audit to ensure they
are sustainable, but we can’t help it if they pollute or don’t pay a fair wage” by a
12-year old. The child’s response is likely to be something like, “But that’s still
wrong. Everybody knows that.” In short, focusing on what is naturally the right
thing to do is a good indicator of sustainable behavior.


The LIVING Supply Chain
But what happens when you can’t see what’s going on in factories? Does that
alleviate your responsibility, using the rationale that “We don’t know what goes
on in their factories because it isn’t our business, and we tell them not to do
it”? Nope. This rationale doesn’t stand up anymore. Sustainability is less about
multi-tier audits – it’s more about knowing who you are buying from, and the
implications of your behavior when you choose to purchase a product or service
from someone. We need to know who and what we are buying. When you walk
into Whole Foods, for example, you go to the meat counter and see a picture
of the farmer who raised the cow that became your steak. Or you go to the
produce counter and see a picture of the farmer who grew the tomatoes. Any
consumer will “get” this. So why can’t you also see the factory where your shirt
was sewn, and be able to check and see what the factory looks like, what the
bosses pay their workers, and what the working conditions are? Not only is this
possible, it is happening today.
I recently spoke with a chief procurement oﬃcer, who recalled driving
green manufacturing practices and labor conditions in the semiconductor
industry.
“Years ago the electronics industry aligned on an Electronic Industry Code of
Conduct,” he said. “We would do a heat map around auditing suppliers, essen-
tially a ‘check-the-box’ exercise, and then declare, ‘We are sustainable! Well,
we’ve gotten a bit better – we have people who do self-assessments in the sup-
ply base, and we still put out a heat map. We do a little more due diligence, so
we tell ourselves this is the best we can do. But in my mind, it’s not enough. It’s
the minimum acceptable level. Let’s not pretend that we can’t do better.’ ”
So what about if we base our sustainability on a label like “fair trade?” Isn’t
that visibility using a proven standard? With the introduction of labels, the
fair trade movement has created a de facto standard for consumers to recog-
nize that a product is “sustainable.” But, as Andrew Pederson points out in a
Supply Chain Management Review article we co-authored last year, the pro-
cess used to certify producers in order to get such a label is often ﬂawed.6
That’s not just Pederson’s opinion. It was validated in a recent study by the
Fair Trade, Employment and Poverty Reduction Project (FTEPR) team based
at SOAS at the University of London. The study identiﬁed three major points of
concern: First, wage employment in areas producing agricultural export com-
modities is widespread. Second, people who depend on access to wage employ-
ment in export commodity production are typically extremely poor. Third, in
the areas studied, there is limited evidence that fair trade has made a positive
diﬀerence to the wages and working conditions of workers producing certiﬁed
fair trade commodities for export. In fact, researchers found that wage-earners
6 Pederson, A., Wieland, A., and Handﬁeld, R., “Viewpoint: Ensuring Human Rights in the End-
to-End Supply Chain,” Supply Chain Management Review, November 2014, pp. 48–51.

7
GOOD! The Ability to Build Balanced Supply Chains

in areas with businesses certiﬁed by Fairtrade International were paid signiﬁ-
cantly less than wage-earners producing the same commodities in areas with-
out Fairtrade-certiﬁed businesses. Fairtrade International released a detailed
rebuttal to these ﬁndings, noting that the results are generalized and do not
adequately cover an appropriate sample.
This brings us back to the original issue. Being sustainable isn’t enough. We
have to be transparent to be clear about what is going on in our supply chains.
This may mean acknowledging that there are problems in diﬀerent parts of our
multi-tier supply chain, because a global supply chain will always be full of prob-
lems. Is there crime in Pittsburgh? Yes, of course, just as there is in any major
metropolitan area. Is there any city without crime? Highly unlikely! Does that
mean we should try to hide the fact that there is crime in cities? Of course not!
But if we have data that tracks the location and types of crime, and makes the
community aware of it, we can get the eyes and ears of people in the community
more aware of what is going on, and they can become part of the solution!
But audits aren’t enough. As one executive I interviewed noted, “One of the
biggest red ﬂags we see is when a factory worker who is interviewed has clearly
been ‘coached.’ Another red ﬂag is when we ask to see their books, and we get
comments such as ‘Well we don’t have those today,’ or ‘The accountant isn’t in
today.’ These are indicators that something is wrong.”
To augment audits, we must adopt technology to drive visibility, make real
changes, and improve communication. Labor condition violations are most
likely to happen in regions with poor infrastructure and with a limited ability to
invest in appropriate technology and systems that enable visibility. However, as
part of the investment in their supply chains, retailers can help suppliers estab-
lish IT systems that render supply chain processes more transparent. Although
a conventional IT network may not be in place in emerging regions, mobile
technologies are already prevalent in these markets. Those familiar devices can
be coupled with software that can cope with “big data,” combined with multiple
data feed devices. Together, they can create tracking capability of products from
raw materials to the ﬁnal consumers. Large organizations should think about
providing free software that will not only help improve low-cost supplier oper-
ations, but also can ensure transparency and access to potential malfeasance
and fraud, as well as potential ILO convention violations.
This is a very, very tricky thing to manage, however. According to Dana Mar-
tin of Elementum, “We have to also tie execution metrics as another dimension
to monitor malfeasance. Because in many cases, variability in delivery per-
formance or line output can indicate supply risk, which is ultimately linked
to other problems that exist in a factory.” Again, this relates to “mapping the
genome” of a product shipment. We have to think about compliance to auditing
standards from a manufacturer’s perspective, consider what they do to bypass
compliance requirements, and construct ways that make it diﬃcult for them to
get around these requirements.


The LIVING Supply Chain
One pervasive issue in human rights in the supply chain is the “shadow fac-
tory.” This means that one factory is set up as the “show factory” for audits.
Bills of lading show this factory as the point of origin for all shipments. In
fact, other, “shadow factories” which are either subcontractors or which are
supplier-owned but not compliant, but which produce lower-cost products,
and are hence more proﬁtable for the supplier. So you might receive a ship-
ment of 10,000 units, but only 6000 units come from the “show” factory and
4000 from a non-compliant factory. However, if you created digital tracking that
married production line output to shipment information data as it is received,
those 4000 non-compliant units would be much easier to spot.
An important element in ensuring compliance to fair working conditions
in supply chains is to “trust but verify,” until your relationship with the sup-
plier moves from its early stages to a fully trusting relationship. Even then,
performance measures and monitoring are required, if only to ensure that
performance is not compromised or achieved through unacceptable routes.
Manipulating line or machine data is very, very diﬃcult, particularly if line-
level scans of all inputs and outputs that pass through a factory are captured in
data ﬂows. Also, continuous audits are very expensive. Ultimately, what’s most
important is to capture diﬃcult-to-manipulate data.
Here’s an example: An executive from a large service-based company noted
that he would often monitor variance of on-time delivery data, where variance
was deﬁned as the degree to which a delivery referred to the number of days
before or after the scheduled delivery date. Both early and late delivery were
considered sources of variance. Delivery promptness was monitored in a chart,
and the trend (up or down) was tracked. If the variance level went outside of
the 3-standard-deviation limit, a call to the factory was merited. “Nine times
out of ten, when I called the factory after seeing an upward or downward trend
of three points in a row, or a point outside of the upper or lower control limits,
I would learn that something was going wrong in the factory,” the executive
explained. “The data was a clear indicator that something was amiss!”
Through ongoing monitoring of performance and production data, col-
lected through “free” software embedded in supplier factories, variance can be
detected and performance can be improved. The critical element of this cultural
change is to promote the philosophy, “We expect that deviations will occur, and
you will not be punished for discovery of these deviations. It is more important
to be open and transparent with your problems than to have minor problems
and try to hide them.” This emphasis on total transparency in the supply chain
will result in more business being awarded to open and honest suppliers, as
opposed to those with strong records who hide problems from their buying
partners. Implementing a system this transparent is a massive cultural change,
especially in low-cost countries where the attitude of “You don’t need to know
what happens behind closed doors” prevails in many business relationships.

7
GOOD! The Ability to Build Balanced Supply Chains

So how do we begin to apply visibility principles to identify what is going on
in our supply chains? Two examples come to mind. The ﬁrst is a project realized
by NagerIT, a German organization aimed at producing a fair trade computer
mouse. NagerIT understood that a product can only be sustainable if the end-
to-end supply chain is managed sustainably. A map of the mouse’s supply chain
is available on NagerIT’s webpage. However, even an organization like NagerIT
has to admit that when assessing raw materials and components from conven-
tional production, they cannot say anything about the labor conditions during
production. In other words, due to the lack of available data about such compo-
nents, today, it often still seems to be impossible for companies to create a fair
product. The solution? Centrally managed databases, provided to consumers
by producers and retailers to track sustainability are needed. Consumers may
access the data using various technological devices.
It’s time to start thinking about how to harness the strength of social media,
smart devices, and Web-enabled analytics to provide consumers with the power
to make their own decisions. This brings us to our second example. Switcher,
a Swiss company, manufactures T-shirts with an individual “Respect Code”
included (see www.respect-code.org) that enables consumers to view the entire
supply chain associated with the product they are buying. Visualization of the
supply chain, as shown in Figure 7.3 provides data to all supply chain tiers, and
others on the number of employees, dates of audits, and certiﬁcates. This case
shows that, contrary to statements by major brands, tracking the entire sup-
ply chain is indeed possible. This relates to the product genomes we covered in
Chapter 5, which allow anyone to see the entire history of a product. Ultimately,
Figure .Switcher’s “Respect Code”. Source: Reproduced with permission of Respect-Code


The LIVING Supply Chain
Figure .Nike manufacturingmap.com. Source: Used under manufacturingmap.nikeinc
.com/
transparency, “being good,” and product genomes are starting to merge in this
digitized world.
The simple fact is, NGOs like WRC, Sedex, and others are always going
to poke around in factories looking for ﬂaws. This is the new normal, which
is ultra-sensitive to worker rights (and rightfully so). Companies like Nike,
Adidas, and Under Armour need to address this reality head-on, and strive for
complete transparency. Nike’s approach is to open up its global manufacturing
network and be as transparent as possible. The company even created an open
website, manufacturingmapnike.com, which allows the public to see where all
of its products are produced, and even provides worker demographics (females,
migrants, etc.) in each factory (Figure 7.4).
Even countries such as China are being forced to drive toward sustainabil-
ity. Chinese citizens already are calling for better lives and better food, which
indicates a movement toward a more organic and transparent view of what is
happening to our environment, to our food, and to the products we purchase
and use every day, from vehicles, to medicine, to electronics, and to a healthier,
sustainable way of life.
To ensure that supply chains are good, however, competing ﬁrms in the
same industry must collaborate. Very few companies can manage a socially
responsible supply chain in low-cost regions on their own. For that reason, col-
laboration is critical. It can take a variety of forms. A ﬁrst step is to commit
to joint standards. One such standard relates to fair trade. For example, the
Fair Wear Foundation, a European nonproﬁt, aims at improving labor condi-
tions and provides rules for its member companies. The foundation ensures that
member companies comply. Another example is Nike’s sustainability index,

7
GOOD! The Ability to Build Balanced Supply Chains

which eventually became the Higg Index, adopted by the entire apparel indus-
try. Corporate social responsibility isn’t easy – no one said it would be.
Are you able to connect the essential leverage points in your network through
Cloud, mobile, and other media that provide a platform for analytics? Can you
track the DNA of your supply chain at a part number level, globally? These are
the big questions to consider when we think about how supply chains evolve.
We need a structure for mapping the genome of our supply chains. This means
establishing part number tracking and coding for the end-to-end supply chain.
One of the biggest opportunities is to create a mechanism for encoding the
genome, to help managers understand where products go and where they come
from; this information is critical to combating counterfeit and fraud. Counter-
feit and fraud waste, though rarely discussed by supply chain scholars, remains
one of the biggest and most overlooked areas of lost proﬁts and revenues in
the world. Thus, companies must not only track and measure all goods, but
also estimate the possibility of counterfeit goods. Executives would be wise to
demythologize Big Data as the answer for supply chain improvements. Big Data
is static and useless; it’s the questions you ask of the data that change supply
chain outcomes.
The Trans-Paciﬁc Partnership: Another Reason to be “Good”
Another important reason that executives need to pay more attention to being
“good” is the risk and unfortunate decline of the Trans-Paciﬁc Partnership
(TPP). The TPP was a regional trade agreement (RTA) between 12 mem-
bership countries around the Paciﬁc Rim. Those countries are (clock-wise
geographically): Canada, the United States, Mexico, Peru, Chile, New Zealand,
Australia, Brunei, Singapore, Malaysia, Vietnam, and Japan.7 More interesting
are the countries excluded from the TPP: China, South Korea, and India are
just a few. Excluded countries may join at a later date if they wish, and if the 12
membership countries agree.
After 7 years of negotiation, the TPP was signed on February 4, 2016 in Auck-
land, New Zealand. The next step for each member nation was to ratify the TPP
so it can come into force.
7 These 12 countries have a population of around 800 million people with an average GDP per
capita of $34,761. The TPP has 30 chapters covering areas from trade of physical goods (agri-
culture, IT systems, textiles and apparel, etc.), cross-border trade in services (ﬁnancial services,
cloud-based computer services, logistics, engineering, etc.), telecommunications, electronic
commerce, government procurement, intellectual property, state-owned enterprises, labor,
environment, and regulatory coherence. It also covers how partnership countries handle trans-
parency and anticorruption issues, disputes, technical barriers to trade, and sanitary and phy-
tosanitary uniform measurements. Thanks to Tim Barnes for these comments.


The LIVING Supply Chain
Following the US election in November 2016, President Donald Trump
announced that the United States would not support membership in the TPP.
This is despite the fact that if it had passed, the TPP would drive organizations to
focus even more on establishing and maintaining “good” supply chains, if they
want to be able to engage in global trade. This is because the TPP has speciﬁc
mandates that require participating enterprises to comply with human rights,
better working conditions, environmental regulations, and other factors that
will essentially “level the playing ﬁeld.” Some of these elements are described
next. Although it is unlikely that the TPP will be reconsidered in the United
States, the following issues will still need to be addressed in future political
cross-border trade negotiations and agreements to foster a “good” supply chain
in global trade.
Environmental Health
As the world’s business focus shifts to social responsibility, and speciﬁcally, to
environmental health, a number of newly minted free trade agreements have
been established. The TPP dedicated a whole chapter (Chapter 20) to the envi-
ronment. Its focus is to ensure that all member countries agree and adhere to
policies related to wildlife traﬃcking, illegal logging, illegal ﬁshing, and marine
pollution, all of which threaten human health, habitat, and biodiversity. The
chapter also establishes enforceable commitments, and allows for coopera-
tion among countries to ensure that environmental crimes are policed, both
within member countries and in countries and companies who do business with
TPP countries. These rules meant that companies would have had to ensure
a focus on environmental health when evaluating their global supply chains.
World trade shifts resulting from incentives provided by trade agreements, duly
enforces compliance to ﬁrst-world environmental manufacturing practices. As
countries grow and evolve, and as free trade molds key supply chain decisions,
adherence to environmentally sound practices is an absolute necessity.
Social Responsibility
Unfortunately, as a result of decades of business supply chain decisions made
on cost alone, numerous manufacturing and other aspects of the supply chain
have been mixed with undesirable labor practices in countries with very weak
or nonexistent human rights and labor safety laws. As a result, all recent US-led
free trade agreements, weather bilateral or regional, include language stipulat-
ing labor protections for all parties. The TPP devotes a chapter (Chapter 19) that
mandates that all 12 member countries adopt and maintain laws and practices
that comply with fundamental labor rights as recognized by the International
Labor Organization (ILO). These include freedom of association and the right
to collective bargaining, elimination of forced labor, abolition of child labor,

7
GOOD! The Ability to Build Balanced Supply Chains

and elimination of employment discrimination. These laws ensure that all TPP
countries practice socially responsibility. In conjunction with zero tariﬀincen-
tives, the laws provide further incentives for companies to take advantage of
the TPP and similar global free trade agreements.
Political, social, and business ethics: To ensure that global trade and business
is conducted without the interference of corruption, bribery and fraud, coun-
tries with histories of political and ethical corruption need incentives and
opportunities to eradicate corrosive practices. As a result, the TPP requires
the current 12 and any future members to adhere to agreed-upon rules and
policies, and to provide enforceable laws in each country. Chapter 26 of the
TPP, “Transparency and Anti-Corruption,” addresses the eﬀects of bribery
and corruption on trade, and delineates investment and government policies
designed to regulate trade and investment. It commits TPP parties to pass
and enforce anti-bribery laws, and promotes rules against conﬂicts of interest
in government. This is an add-on to previously created US-instigated poli-
cies, such as the OECD’s Anti-Bribery Convention in 1997 and its broadening
at the UN in 2005. In order to maintain a clean, reliable, and cost-eﬀective
supply chain, political and ethical policies are critical going forward, and the
focus of trade agreements like the TPP are a major step in providing incen-
tives for countries to adopt sound and ethical rules and policies.
The authors hope that these issues will be integrated and become part of future
international trade deals in the future.



The Future of Supply Chains
In writing this book, we hoped not only to get people energized about the
important developments converging in digitization, technology, collaboration,
trust, and co-development, but also to alert our readers to the art of the possi-
ble. We sought to connect the natural balance of ecosystems to balance supply
chains. Other analogous ideas include evolutionary supply chains, complex
adaptive networks, “non-zero” anthropological behaviors of human beings
through history, genome mapping, military intelligence, and “good” levels of
competition and integrity. This book came together as we started to see the
links and crossovers among themes.
We believe these themes are leading us in a new direction, one that will not
only be morphed by new technology, but also will result in a diﬀerent way of
operating globally in business. As we enter an era of post-globalization and set-
tle into an era of mass customization driven by regionalization, competitive
forces will continue to determine who will thrive and who will fail. In this chap-
ter, we take what we have observed, and make predictions about the future of
supply chain management. So far, these predictions have not yet fully materi-
alized or are in a very early stage in their evolutionary cycle.
Speciﬁcally, we will predict some major technological trends and global net-
work issues for the next decade. These projections will almost certainly become
a reality. As we wrote this book, these trends became increasingly self-evident.
They are:
1. Autonomous supply chains
2. Risk of supply chain hacking
3. Human rights management and illicit supply chains (drugs, slavery, stolen
goods, governments)
4. Chain of custody requirements
5. The new connectography and supply chain wars
6. The rise of real-time information and mobility
The LIVING Supply Chain: The Evolving Imperative of Operating in Real Time, First Edition.
Robert Handﬁeld and Tom Linton.
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.


The LIVING Supply Chain
Self-driven supply chains
Ano nuevo state park
Figure .Northern Elephant Seals. Source: Reproduced with permission of iStock
Trend : Living Supply Chains Will Become Autonomous
Let’s return to Tom Linton’s discussion about elephant seals in his Singapore
talk, discussed in Chapter 5.
Tom showed a large group of Singapore government oﬃcials and investors
a picture of a herd of elephant seals at Ano Nuevo State Park (shown in Fig-
ure 8.1). Tom pointed out that hundreds of thousands of northern elephant
seals that once inhabited the Paciﬁc Ocean were slaughtered for the oil ren-
dered from their blubber. By 1892, only 50–100 seals were left. After protec-
tion programs in Mexico and the United States, the seals began to recover and
to multiply exponentially, and extended their breeding range as far north as
Point Reyes. Today there are approximately 160,000 northern elephant seals.
If you want to see the elephant seals, you can visit them on a beach in Cali-
fornia that only a few tourists venture to, the Ano Nuevo State Park, north of
Santa Cruz. This is one of a few scattered beaches where you can see the seals –
the other signiﬁcant place is in the Aleutian Islands in Alaska.
Years ago, once the seals were reestablished after near-extinction, researchers
noticed that the once-plentiful seals disappeared for part of the year … but no
one knew where they went! They had drifted oﬀslowly, not all at once, so it
wasn’t a traditional migration. They wandered oﬀone at a time over a month
or so, until they were gone.
Finally, some University of Santa Cruz researchers attached GPS devices to
the seals to track and map their migratory habits. They found out that in the
summer, the seals went to a remote beach in the Aleutian Islands, oﬀthe coast

8
The Future of Supply Chains

of Alaska between the Alaska Peninsula and Russia’s Kamchatka Peninsula.
There they gave birth to and nurtured their pups, 6 months later returning to
California.
But this migration isn’t what makes northern elephant seals so interesting.
Most migrating animals do so in packs, ﬂocks, or herds. Penguins migrate as a
group, as do wolves, elk, salmon, antelope, and the like. Canada geese migrate
in their well-known V-formation, with the leader at the point of the V facing
the headwinds, allowing the rest to draft behind him, rotating to the back of
the ﬂock when he gets tired. These animals follow coastlines, rivers, and other
geographic landmarks.
But the elephant seals don’t migrate together. They migrate individually, on
their own. And when researchers tracked them on GPS, they learned that each
seal takes its own route to the beach in Alaska. These routes certainly do not
form a direct vector, as shown in Figure 8.2.
These elephant seals don’t follow a speciﬁc pattern and aren’t guided by land-
marks, rivers, or other features. The Paciﬁc Ocean is very deep at this point, and
the seals aren’t using navigational aids. So how do they all wind up on the same
Apr 15
Apr 10
Apr 5
Apr 1
Apr 25
July 5
July 9
San miguel island
July 1
June 25
June 20
June 15
June 10
June 5
Apr 20
Apr 23
June1
175°00.W
60°00.N
50°00.N
40°00.N
This male elephant seal was tracked with a geographic
location time-depth recorder. Location of the seal was
calculated using measurements of light intensity and
water temperature when the seal came to the sea
surface to breathe.
30°00.N
165°00.W
155°00.W
145°00.W
135°00.W
125°00.W
60°00.N
50°00.N
40°00.N
30°00.N
125°00.W
135°00.W
145°00.W
155°00.W
165°00.W
175°00.W
Figure .The Journey of an Elephant Seal. Source: Used under http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/
nmml/education/science/studymmsealexample.php


The LIVING Supply Chain
Figure .Elephant Seal Skull. Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Northern_
Elephant_Seal_Skull.jpg. Used under CC BY-SA 3.0 https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
sa/3.0/deed.en
two beaches every season? Various hypotheses are being pursued; one of the
most likely goes like this:
Elephant seal skulls (shown in Figure 8.3) have one of the most compli-
cated bone structures of any animal; they are exceptionally dense, with
complicated moving parts. Scientists believe that this structure enables
them to detect and follow sounds made by the earth. In eﬀect, the seals
are following the ‘song of the earth,’ which guides them not only to their
prey, but also to their beaches. This ability to learn the “song of the earth”
is genetic, enabling them to journey independently.
What does this have to do with supply chains and real time? If elephant seals
can follow the ‘song of the earth,’ could we teach inanimate objects to follow
imprinted instructions? What if we could create autonomous cars, boxes, and
packages, and embed them with devices like we ﬁnd in Uber devices, that
show us where the driver is, and tells him or her where we are, and the cost
to move to a location? What if we could track every shipment in the world

8
The Future of Supply Chains

through an autonomous, self-driving supply chain that was in constant com-
munication with other boxes and trucks on its way to its ﬁnal destination,
imprinted with a particular map or song guiding it to its destination? This “sup-
ply chain song” is not as far oﬀas you might imagine, and the implications of
such a capability are far-reaching. Perhaps, like seals swimming from one beach
to another, the future of supply chains might be autonomous, node-to-node
movement.
I witnessed a discussion of the future of autonomous vehicles at a BVL confer-
ence in Germany by Continental AG’s Elmar Degenhart, Executive Chairman
of the Board, in a presentation titled “Mastering Challenges through Trans-
parency and Individual Responsibility.” He started by noting a few interesting
facts: “Every German spends 50 hours per year in a traﬃc jam – a waste of
time and fuel. What we should try to achieve is to keep things ﬂowing and not
blocked. The roundabout is a good example of high eﬃciency, but we also ﬁnd in
our corporations that there are too many bottlenecks in warehousing and work-
ﬂow, our behavior, how staﬀand we deal with partners. We may work against
one another and waste time and resources.”
Dr. Degenhart shared his vision of the future – driverless vehicles – based on
technology that is being worked on by Continental. The corporation’s vision
emphasizes three crucial value streams: innovation, productivity, and proﬁtable
growth. Driving innovation means emphasizing to employees that we have to
learn how to manage businesses and be constantly exploring new concepts that
have been untested. Since hierarchies are toxic to innovation, the company has
established a network structure. Employees should be able to work and connect
with each other across hierarchies without informing their superiors. If they
want to move fast to drive innovation and industrialize new concepts, speed is
critical.
Continental is emphasizing networking, with vehicles connected with the
backend road network and the Internet. Cameras set up in major cities will
enable these vehicles to eﬀectively “look around the corner” as they approach an
intersection, and determine whether other vehicles are approaching. Their sys-
tems will increase visibility beyond what is immediately in front of the vehicle,
to seek and capture possible risks. Technologies will change the functions of the
car, controlling its speed, trajectory, and route. Continental envisages a three-
stage model for vehicle automation: semi-automated (2017), partly automated
(2020), and fully automated (2025). Running alone at a speed of 30 km/hour
will be the ﬁrst stage of automation. In this scenario, passengers will not have
to steer, and the vehicle will have automated start and stop sequences. Drivers
will be able to use their time in the vehicle more productively, to read, work
on the Internet, or be on their smart phone. This vision is not just a fantasy –
the technology is already available. The innovation in this case is already in the
industrialization process at Continental.


The LIVING Supply Chain
The capability of the elephant seals to navigate their way across the ocean to
their ﬁnal destination is not unique in nature. In his book The Homing Instinct,1
Bernd Heinrich provides multiple cases discovered in the natural environment
of living creatures that despite the minute dimensions of their brains, ﬁnd their
old homes after years of wandering in the vastness of oceans, unfamiliar woods,
and mountainous terrains. Humans are not equipped with the same abilities,
relying on maps, compasses, or GPS devices to do so when in unfamiliar ter-
ritory. Heinrich begins by sharing the story of a pair of cranes (that mate for
life) that travel from the southern reaches of Texas, 5000 kilometers away, to
Alaska, landing in a small pond that was the place of their birth. They make
this migration every year, perform the same mating dance, and give birth to
their young. He also describes the same homing characteristics found in Suri-
name frogs, honeybees, bar-tailed godwit birds, and Monarch butterﬂies. What
makes these creatures able to ﬁnd their way home?
What does that mean in terms of entities in supply chain networks? Intel-
ligent transportation services (ITS) will become a multi-billion-dollar market,
focused on mobile goods and interconnected logistics through communication
technology. A highly complex structure will emerge that will enable companies
to save costs and time, and will promote a more sustainable logistics value chain
that saves lives. Safety and security is critical to this innovation, which will be
designed for the supply chain of the future. Active tracking will become a way of
monitoring the movement of all things, in the same way we use enterprise and
Cloud software today. Over time, we believe that technologies will ﬁnd a way
to create “homing” devices that will enable packages, materials, and objects
to become self-directing, leveraging the ability of an open market willing to
transport and handle material that is bound for a speciﬁc destination, using
open source technology. Of course there are multiple issues related to security,
chain of command, and other factors, but the notion of a “homing instinct”
for supply chains is an appealing one that we believe will one day come to
fruition.
Trend : Supply Chain Hacking Will Increase
With the movement toward greater autonomy, an increasing number of deci-
sions and transactions will be made by computers, not humans. Adding to this
risk in machine-led transactions is an increased risk of hackers jumping into
the software and introducing malware and code that drives negative and even
dangerous outcomes. Loss of human autonomy must be countered by measures
that hunt down hackers.
1 Heinrich, B., The Homing Instinct: Meaning and Mystery in Animal Migration, Houghton
Miﬄin, New York, 2015.

8
The Future of Supply Chains

As the world becomes more and more connected electronically, a new sup-
ply chain challenge is born: combating data theft and hacking. According to
one estimate, some 80 terabytes of data per minute now enters and leaves the
United States, and servers are located in every country around the world. Fur-
ther complicating the issue, local laws governing data and code security change
according to individual countries’ laws.
Supply chain security will also prove to be a major challenge. Research sug-
gests that the likelihood of hacker entry points is directly related to human weak
points. Exhibit A is Edward Snowden, who leaked numerous NSA documents
to the public. As a result, security of individuals tasked with managing supply
chains will likely increase, and software vulnerabilities will become increasingly
important. Recently, the head of the Innovation Institute in the Department
of Defense visited the Pulse Center and noted the importance of addressing
the way in which products move in and out of ports. Emerging technologies
also will be able to actively track assets anywhere in the world, and measures
will be created to notify executives if containers or packages are going to the
wrong place. In addition, security measures related to logistics parties (DHL,
UPS, FedEx) will increase. Should these providers be somehow “knocked out,”
companies still will be able to track their shipments, whether they are in a ware-
house, in a customs house, or in a port, with no reliance on third parties.
Trend : Improving Human Rights and Combating Illicit
Trade Will Become a Core Goal of Supply Chain
Management
Pierre Mitchell of Spend Matters shared an interesting story:
An anthropologist proposed a game to the kids in an African tribe. He
put a basket full of fruit near a tree and told the kids that whoever got
there ﬁrst would win the fruit. When he told them to run, the kids all
joined hands and ran together, then sat together enjoying their treats.
When he asked them why they had run like that, as one child could have
had all the fruits for himself they said: “UBUNTU, how can one of us be
happy if all the other ones are sad?
Creating happiness may seem like an odd theme to bring up in a book on the
future of supply chains. However, for the same reason that we discussed the
importance of supply chains being “good” in Chapter 7, we emphasize here that
the “happy quotient” will become increasingly important to private companies
operating the supply chain. This means not just that you declare your intentions
on your website as do-gooders, it requires real action. In speciﬁc terms, it means
closer integration of the supply chain private sector with the international


The LIVING Supply Chain
intelligence community to work together to drive out non-compliant human
rights violations, and to combat the strength of illicit supply chains.
The evolution of global trade agreements such as those found in the Trans-
Paciﬁc Partnership (TPP) in the future will expand the eﬀort for combating
illicit global trade. Paradoxically, by creating the foundation for free trade,
agreements such as the TPP are not representative of the conventional think-
ing around free trade. Opposition to free trade and global trade agreements
typically is based on the belief that things need to be as they were, and that
we must recreate the past. One prime example of this is the argument against
NAFTA, which contends that many manufacturing jobs moved to Mexico due
to lower labor costs, and that Americans need to establish higher protections to
ensure that these jobs return. In reality, the major reasons for Mexican sourc-
ing decisions involve transportation costs and closer working relationships with
suppliers.
Future versions of the TPP will have major impacts on the evolution of the
LIVING supply chain.2 The goal of the TPP was to have a “comprehensive and
high-standard” agreement that eliminated tariﬀand non-tariﬀbarriers for trad-
ing goods (including agricultural) and services (including ﬁnancial), addressed
trade issues not present in existing FTAs, and established rules for economic
activities across the TPP partner countries. There is a need for a comprehensive
framework for bilateral, regional, or multilateral (e.g., WTO) negotiations.
Issues such as governance, dispute settlement, and due process will require
buy-in from various government and private organizations. Such frameworks,
although included in the TPP, will likely emerge in future trade deals in the years
to come.
Frameworks such as the TPP have major ramiﬁcations for supply chain per-
formance, especially in situations where supply chain components fall within
the participant countries. Further, policies related to government procurement,
state-owned enterprises, intellectual property rights, rules of origin, trans-
parency, competition, trade remedies, and regulatory coherence are all ele-
ments of the TPP that can be detrimental to supply chains, and which future
agreements must control for.
Future agreements, like the TPP, will also need to address cross-border data
and information ﬂows. A requirement of the TPP was to remove some nations’
requirement for servers to be located locally to supply citizens with data. This
requirement has led to the theft of servers and data due to poor security and
ineﬀective policing. Agreements may also remove some nations’ requirement
that servers share their highly secure code with the local government, a policy
which has created security issues in countries with a history of corruption. The
2 https://scm.ncsu.edu/blog/2014/02/21/what-is-the-trans-paciﬁc-partnership-tpp-guest-post-
by-arun-gupta-phd/

8
The Future of Supply Chains

TPP also allows for secure cloud-based IT services and controlled data access,
and provides the data owner with full authority over who gets access to the
data and what level of data users may access. These changes represent progress
on supply chain hacking; however, the ﬁght will continue to be tough as new
technology and better-equipped hackers enter the ﬁght.
But what happens now that the US government has publicly stated that the
United States will not ratify the TPP? Do things then remain in the status quo?
Absolutely not, and this is where a knowledge of global trade agreements is
critical.3 There are nations in southeast Asia that have been asked to join a
similar trade agreement called the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partner-
ship (RCEP), which is China-led that excludes all nations outside Asia. There
is an overlap of countries that are party to both the TPP and RCEP, however
for those nations, such as Japan, Vietnam, Malaysia, Australia, New Zealand,
Singapore, and Brunei, most have gone on the record saying that they see the
United States-led TPP as the most critical and inclusive, and will put the RCEP
on hold pending the decision on TPP. As the TPP dissolved, this has created a
great opportunity for China to take the lead in Asia trade via the RCEP, leav-
ing the United States on the sidelines. Supply chain leaders now need to relook
at their structure, to understand how the RCEP will further restrict trade with
Asia, both in manufacturing product, but also in exporting product from the
United States into Asia.
Today every company will do what it can to maximize the beneﬁts of free
trade. As the rules of global trade change, via free trade agreements or new
barriers to trade, each company will need to evolve its supply chain to maxi-
mize opportunities and protect itself. Individuals must make the same adjust-
ments. If free trade opens with Vietnam for textiles, for example, an individual
American who makes T-shirts will need to evolve his or her skill set to maxi-
mize income in the new environment. Those who don’t will be stuck in an ever-
challenging situation. The evolution of an individual and his or her skill sets
is well covered in Jason Schenker’s book Recession-Proof: How to Survive and
Thrive in an Economic Downturn. So, to embrace free trade and allow market
forces to identify the most eﬃcient ways to design supply chains will always
result in business growth and proﬁts at the expense of those who stand still and
ﬁght change.
One consequence of globalization is that counterfeiters may be able to
quickly ﬁnd a customer for a product that no one would suspect was faked.
A legitimate supply chain is a vital insurance against illicit goods. Neither
INTERPOL nor any other law enforcement agency, can achieve this in isola-
tion. Hence, INTERPOL has partnered with more than 40 industry sectors and
3 https://scm.ncsu.edu/blog/2016/06/16/why-global-trade-agreements-must-be-part-of-your-
supply-chain-planning-guest-post-by-tim-barnes/# ftn2


The LIVING Supply Chain
a number of cross-industry associations and representative bodies that oﬀer
ﬁnancial and operational support.
One of the most notorious forms of illicit supply chain management is human
traﬃcking. Immigration crises in Europe, the Middle East, and Latin America
are extending all over the world, giving rise to supply chains that are being
appropriated for moving human beings. Incidents of trucks and containers full
of people in horrible conditions leading to deaths and suﬀering are becoming
more prevalent. The private sector must work more closely not only with
INTERPOL, but also with NATO, the World Bank, and the United Nations to
combat these activities.
One of the most important innovations in supply chain management to
emerge in the last 40 years is outsourcing. Instead of just managing their own
organization, supply chain managers have focused on managing their end-to-
end supply chains, often relying on specialized companies to perform this task.
This shift constitutes an evolution from company thinking to supply chain
thinking. In the 1970s, Nike was one of the ﬁrst companies to embrace supply
chain management, and to recognize the beneﬁts of outsourcing production to
lower-cost country suppliers. Indeed, Nike also led the charge to sustainable
supply chains when they discovered the important impacts on the brand when
labor codes were violated.
While supply chain management was initially designed to make products
more eﬃcient, this transformation is now likely being repeated to make prod-
ucts more sustainable – and more transparent. For example, labels that were
linked to a single brand (company thinking) are being replaced by digital maps
that visualize the end-to-end supply chain (supply chain thinking). While con-
sumers have to trust the controlling body behind a label, supply chain thinking
enables consumers to become their own controlling body. This transformation
requires data about suppliers’ suppliers, but becomes realistic as transaction
costs to map the end-to-end supply chain are increasingly reduced due to
smarter technologies, newer standards, and improved analytical algorithms.
Will this transformation make fairer products more and more aﬀordable?
The implication is that supply chain managers also will need to become much
more analytical, and to employ individuals who understand the commercial
realities of supply chains, and who can interpret these insights to computer pro-
grammers. These individuals will need to construct non-relational databases
capable of storing many types of data that together can analyze control func-
tions in the supply chain that assure compliance to codes of conduct. These ana-
lytical control functions will require the capability to capture complex human
behaviors and measure them in a format that assures consumers that a com-
pany’s supply chain is more than a representation of what it intends. You can’t
get that from a label.
Such measures will undoubtedly require horizontal collaboration among
industries to establish standards that apply to industries such as apparel, food,

8
The Future of Supply Chains

electronics, and others that are migrating to least-cost countries. These stan-
dards require executives with deep insight into these issues, and who will estab-
lish norms that ensure that companies operate with integrity and can maintain
and improve competitiveness. Indeed, we may ﬁnd that companies at the van-
guard will establish a new form of competitiveness, especially if the customer
values it.
Trend : Chain of Custody Will Become a Dominant Force
for Designing Federated Supply Chains
With the natural increase in attention to where products and services originate,
combined with the need to become more aware of parties using our products
and services for illicit purposes, the chain of custody will become a require-
ment for doing business. The supply chain today is full of “gray areas” where
shipments disappear from sight; these black holes will become the focal point
for scrutiny.
A good example here was shared by a senior logistics executive who spoke in
my class on the roll-out of a new product such as an Apple iPhone:
Security is one of the most challenging components of a product roll-out,
because the manufacturer wishes to be able to deploy a product roll-
out simultaneously across the entire country, in California, New York,
Chicago, Shanghai, and everywhere in the world. This makes it extremely
challenging for logistics providers. Some companies emphasize the same
“experience” for all their products, and this was one of the toughest parts
of meeting their logistics requirements on new products. This can be
challenging as customs clearance becomes critical. One of the beneﬁts
our services is that we have our own people in customs, and they can get
the material through much easier than a third party can.
One of the biggest diﬀerentiators for us is that for demanding customers,
every transfer point has to be electronic and real time – and there is a cost
with the demands for the tracking and tracing of the shipment. Real-time
commitment is critical. If you can’t provide real-time tracking, you won’t
even be invited to bid. This is all done by real-time scanning with agreed-
on scan points, including the transfer from their dock at the plant, trans-
port to the airport, turnover to the carrier, loading onto the plane, and
another transmission on wheels-up (showing if the plane is behind), and
the technology wrapped around all these scans and systems has a cost to
be wrapped around that. Liability insurance is another issue: Will it be
for each container, product in the container, or the entire aircraft? If an


The LIVING Supply Chain
entire aircraft goes down, there is a cost to providing that insurance. If
we don’t use our own airline, we have to buy insurance.
Once the plane lands, we move the product from the airport to the fac-
tory, and in some countries, need to worry about security of drivers,
and prevention of hijacking. The route has to be approved, and in some
parts of the world, we provide chase vehicles with the trucks so there is
no hijacking. These kind of complications makes simultaneous product
release at stores very, very complicated!
A chain of custody for food and pharmaceuticals is even more critical. By some
estimates, as much as 80% of pharmaceutical products in remote regions of
Africa are deemed to be counterfeit. The recent set of events around food con-
tamination at Chipotle and other restaurant chains is causing consumers to be
that much more aware of the origins of what they ingest.
While companies have been talking about “integrating supply chains” since
the 1990s, this concept has limits. Integrated supply chains were largely a
combination of functions in companies that expanded the role of business-to-
business (B2B) and electronic data interchange (EDI) technologies, with stan-
dards and protocols that emerged in the 1980s. As companies become more
connected electronically through global communication standards, the abil-
ity to exchange information through the Internet has grown quickly, and most
companies have been integrated, with a few exceptions (hospitals and utilities,
for example).
But federated supply chains (FSCs) will dramatically improve the likelihood
of increased supply chain security. Why? Because having people on the lookout
for misdeeds is the single best way to prevent fraud and illicit trade. Federated
supply chains are composed of individuals linked in a common purpose. That
purpose may have a lot to do with the removal of undesirable elements from
the chain of custody, and to ensure that those suppliers and partners who are
part of the supply chain have a common set of morals, principals, and high
integrity aligned with the principles described in Chapter 7. Federated supply
chains are closely tied to being good global citizens, “doing the right thing,” and
driving to a common set of operating principles that is fostered by open trust
and dialogue. Suppliers and customers in a federated supply chain have high
transparency, which leads to greater trust. Indeed, if you are in an FSC, you
should have nothing to hide, and will gladly open your factory to customers
and to technologies that allow them to see what is going on in your facility. In
the end, people in a federated supply chain will win together, or alternatively,
die together. Think again about the trophic cascade, the Samsung Galaxy 7, and
what is happening to others in the supply chain who depend on one another for
their mutual survival.

8
The Future of Supply Chains

Much activity is being driven by increasing calls for government oversight
and corporate sustainability initiatives; not surprisingly, these federations are
composed of both parties. This reﬂects the increasing notion that governments
are indeed an integral part of the supply chain. Some choose to ignore this fact –
at their peril. Government regulation is an increasing force to be reckoned with.
Government integration is already happening. Federated supply chains that
include government entities extend collaboration, and may span several tiers
in both directions (up and down the chain). Apple, for example, requires its
suppliers to ﬁt its federation of global operating standards. Almost every For-
tune 500 company has something similar. Much of this activity started with
the EICC and the UN Global Compact, as well as the Dodd–Frank Act, the
California Transparency Act, and multiple UN and government rulings related
to human rights, conﬂict minerals, environmental performance, emissions
standards, use of bio-based products and biofuel, EU government rulings, trade
and customs regulations, and individual country rules. (For instance, the EU
has limited the use of genetically modiﬁed food, even though it is almost impos-
sible to trace source and origin of organic vs. GMO food in many food supply
chains). Other organizations, such as the Sustainable Apparel Coalition and
others, have emerged to promote industry-speciﬁc standards.
We are likely to see much more in the way of government–industry collab-
oration around federated supply chains in the years ahead, due to the need for
the industry to “get a seat at the table” when it comes to setting policy, regu-
lations, and supply chain standards. Executives need to be proactive to shape
government regulations, rather than sit back and react.
Trend : Supply Chain Wars
In the new book Connectography: Mapping the Future of Global Civilization,
Parag Khanna discusses the “new supply chain wars.” Khanna discusses how
multinationals have become deeply connected and exposed to the emerging
markets that have become their main competitors. But as countries like China
become wealthier and export more of their low-cost jobs, they too will favor
openness over protectionism and a level commercial playing ﬁeld.
Central to his argument is that global supply chains have become more com-
plex, but also have merged into a comprehensive whole. For example, America’s
import content of exports is relatively low (15%) but increases to 40% if one
takes a full-cycle view of downstream distribution and sales as being included
in the end-to-end supply chain view. Even World Trade Organization chief
economist Patrick Low describes these “hybrid value chains” as diﬀerent: “The
physical and the digital, the manufacturing and the services, and the value-
added from intangible factors such as competence and reputation are simply


The LIVING Supply Chain
not captured by today’s statistical methods.”4 Products should carry the label
“Made Everywhere.”
One of the best examples of this is Apple, which is often criticized for pro-
ducing too many of its products in China at FoxConn. Apple CEO Tim Cook
recently said, “I don’t think we have a responsibility to create a certain kind of
job. But I think we do have a responsibility to create jobs.”5 In fact, Apple is now
going to produce one of its iMac lines in Texas, but most of the parts for these
products will be imported from all over the world. Even China imports 34% of
its electronic components in producing its information technologies. The point
is that import and export is a key part of this global trade – but this pattern is
being threatened.
Khanna suggests that one of the single biggest threats to current global trade
is the combination of 3D printing and sharing economies in which goods will be
consumed as services. Moreover, he predicts that local prototyping and mass
production could bring about a severe long-term contraction in global ship-
ping, inventories, and warehouses. Replacement parts for airlines, equipment,
appliances, etc. could be produced essentially on demand. If this is the case,
technology won’t eliminate supply chains, but will “morph” them, as raw mate-
rials such as organic matter or plastics will need to “feed” 3D printing. In addi-
tion, the people who design the software and the printers will lead the market.
One of the most compelling insights of this future view of supply chain wars
is the formulation HORIZONTAL + VERTICAL = DIAGONAL. According to
a 2012 article in Bloomberg Businessweek, “Competitors want to be horizontal
nodes of production and distribution and vertical hubs of value creation –
together propelling themselves diagonally up the ladder of economic com-
plexity” (p. 158). In this formula, countries with no resources can become
transshipment points that smooth out supply chains. For example, Singapore
has no raw materials but generates massive proﬁts from its transshipment port.
When countries impose sanctions, higher royalties, port access restrictions,
anti-corruption witch hunts, and other “tug of war” tit-for-tat measures, the
global economy will be impacted by this “horizontal resource mercantilism.”
In the same manner, “vertical tug of war” occurs when countries grab the most
technologically sophisticated and ﬁnancially proﬁtable segments of strategic
industries. Eventually, countries that are lower on the food chain will expand
and ascend up the value chain to take over those industries now populated by
Western countries. In places like India, companies think of “copyright” as “right
to copy”! And keeping the “R” in “R&D” out of countries like China is not a
formula that Western companies have been able to work out yet.
4 Interview with Parag Khanna, July 18, 2016.
5 Tyrangiel, J., “Tim Cook’s Freshman Year: The Apple CEO Speaks,” Bloomberg Businessweek,
December 6, 2012.

8
The Future of Supply Chains

Companies need to pay more attention to the global dynamics emerging
around these supply chain wars. One of the most diﬃcult ways to “copy”
these forms of transgressions is creating a LIVING supply chain that functions
through collaboration, velocity, and adaptation. These are learned activities that
are diﬃcult to replicate.
Trend : The Rise of Real-Time Information, Digitization,
and Mobility
In 2016, the World Economic Forum, well known for its annual meeting in
Davos, Switzerland, selected “Mobility” as one of the cornerstone councils as
it looks toward the next 3 years. Technology and global connectedness is driv-
ing new forms of communication and movement. Whether it be emigration,
immigration, or the shifting fortunes of individuals, companies, or countries,
information and mobility are often drivers of change.
When we look at the state of supply chains today, we only need to look at
analogies in nature to see what they will become. Faster will win over slower,
better will succeed over corrupt, lower cost will lead over expensive, and com-
panies and countries that lead with sustainable and human-centered outcomes
will prevail. Nature has shown us the way.
Real-time information or information that is not batch- or report-based but
delivered immediately to users will drive dramatic productivity improvements.
Data latency caused by man or machine will be driven out and “the Cloud” will
live up to its promise of information everywhere – on mobile devices or in the
oﬃce.
New levels of automation will lead to labor needing new places to go. This
shift will lead to demand for technical skills to service the new economy and
“good” will drive demand for low-energy supply chains that will require shorter,
faster, and more compliant ways for moving goods.
The biggest change will be in the “Internet of Things,” which will drive
“computing at the edge.” This is also known as “distributed computing” and
“distributed analytics,” which involves computing data at the source of collec-
tion, which will increasingly be in machines and equipment. Smart sensors are
emerging in the sub-$5 range that will capture data on shipments’ temperature,
location, and velocity.
A great example to consider is the collection of tire pressure on a moving
truck. Sensors in the tires will capture tire pressure every millisecond – but
there is no need to dump all of this data into a centralized data center! Smart
sensors combined with distributed computing on the truck will collect ﬁrst-
pass data, and generate summary statistics, such as the fact that the tire will
last 362 miles before a ﬂat. Sensors combined with a local computer can pro-
vide key analytics, and when multiple sensors interact, they can provide clues


The LIVING Supply Chain
as to what is happening in the supply chain. For instance, vibration sensors
combined with the tire sensors may have a strong correlation with theft, and
analysts can determine that if they know what they are looking for. In another
case, a truck pulling up to a loading dock in a distributed computing model will
interact in the cloud with systems at the loading dock. A notiﬁcation will be sent
regarding the number of loads ahead of them at the dock, and the driver may
be notiﬁed to slow down, burn less diesel, or take a break for a meal, as their
slot at the dock has been pushed back. These types of interactions will require
that cloud edges need the ability to discover each other and communicate. For
this to occur, standards will need to be established, just like Ethernet cables and
Internet protocol standards were agreed on for telecommunications.
Such technological evolutions will create service provider niches that will
form the basis for commercial platform creation and evolution, but also the
potential for extinction of existing service providers through disintermediation
and reintermediation. New technology has the potential to drive innovation
and new platforms, but waves of digitization also can cause creative destruc-
tion of existing players that are too slow to keep up. In other cases, lawyers are
quick to object with security concerns – just as they were with personal com-
puters, personalized apps, and voicemail. Waves of digitization will continue to
reshape the environment we live in. So how will digitization change your life?
Many companies are in the forefront of driving analytic insight and trans-
parency throughout the supply chain. One of these is IBM’s Transparent Sup-
ply Chain (TSC), an analytics based platform that seeks to enable end-to-end
supply chain visibility, orchestration, and collaboration for the supply chain.
Internally, the platform has transformed how work is done in IBM’s globally
integrated supply chain by making it easier for colleagues to work together and
collaborate across multiple time zones. Through the TSC, all the teams have a
single trusted source of information, aggregated Key Process Indicators (KPIs),
Mobile alerts, analytics, and social collaboration tools to solve business chal-
lenges. Information and data from social media (Twitter, Facebook, etc.) is also
integrated to provide a powerful context based information source for a range
of supply chain decisions.
The current implementation touches all of IBM’s global hardware manufac-
turing sites providing a single view of one global hardware manufacturing team
rather than silo-driven activities in Poughkeepsie, New York; Singapore; V´ac,
Hungary; and Guadalajara, Mexico. It also extends to partner led operations
such as the Central Distribution Centers (CDCs) in Germany, and The Nether-
lands, where the logistics activities are predominantly led by IBM’s Third Party
Logistics provider (3PL). The current implementation can facilitate the receipt
of supplier and other partner provided information on the hardware products
as well as the movement of goods. The TSC initiative is using the Agile imple-
mentation approach and is 2.5 years into its approximately 5-year implemen-
tation plan.

8
The Future of Supply Chains

The TSC also is beginning to leverage the Watson cognitive analytics tech-
nology, which combines transparency with “big data” search methods. This
approach has several visionary goals:
Create a modern supply chain that is transparent, intelligent, and predic-
tive: Business expectations have changed, and by establishing greater vis-
ibility into supply chain data and processes and leveraging fast-emerging
cognitive technologies, supply chain organizations can both predict and mit-
igate disruptions and risks and deliver even greater value to the business.
Establish greater transparency and visibility: Develop greater transparency
and visibility by establishing a single, shared view of supply chain data and
intelligence across all suppliers, partners, systems, and processes. Such vis-
ibility should include both internal and external sources of data – and both
structured and unstructured data. Provide the supply chain organization
with data and intelligence that gives the complete context of and perspec-
tive on the impact of, business decisions.
Predict and proactively mitigate disruptions and risks: Leverage the lat-
est cognitive technologies to create greater transparency and comprehen-
sive visibility into supply chain processes – and potential disruptions and
risks – so that the organization can quickly and proactively mitigate those
events.
The capability and intelligence needed to deliver optimal performance:
Watson Supply Chain elevates the supply chain organization’s existing sys-
tems and capabilities to provide greater visibility, transparency, and insight
into supply chain data and processes. Watson Supply Chain embeds cog-
nitive capabilities to empower organizations to better predict and mitigate
disruptions and risks, as well as drive collaboration and innovation, while
reducing costs.
Beyond the LIVING Supply Chain
The LIVING supply chain and the imperative of operating in real time is a
requirement for the supply chain we know today and for the near future. The
supply chain of the future, or as we suggest, the federated supply chain circle of
the future, will incorporate technology with responsibility and provide trusted
transparency and eﬃciency way beyond what we have today.
Supply chains have remained unchanged since the dawn of industrialization.
Material has been transacted and moved distances to be assembled into varying
levels of products or structures. People have managed that process with experts
in planning, sourcing, logistics, and materials. Systems have been designed to
make that process increasingly eﬃcient and cost eﬀective. However, the truth is
that many of the processes that drive it are antiquated and built on 19th century


The LIVING Supply Chain
rules and processes. Processes that lead to successful mass industrialization and
military conquest will not work well in the future that lies ahead.
That is about to change.
The shift away from globalization, driven by mass customization of products
closer to the point of consumption, is changing the distances in supply chains.
The transactional component, driven by a need for greater transparency is look-
ing to “block chain” technologies pioneered by Bitcoin to provide the ‘trust but
verify’ solution missing in the multilayered world of business partners. A block
chain is a block of transaction that forms a common ledger of truth. In this new
world, everything can be known and the very idea of social and environmental
responsibility will be veriﬁed. In 2016, IBM launched this shift with Block chain
technology into supply chain.6
The notion of block chains is congruent with the focus on greater trans-
parency, especially regarding consumers’ need to understand the origins of
goods guaranteeing the integrity of certiﬁcates that claim to document the
source or origin of food and products, or documentation of “chains of custody”
remains rudimentary and diﬃcult to verify. As noted in a recent white paper, no
single organization “… can be trusted to broker all data about every product’s
supply chain … relying on one party (or even a small collection of cooperat-
ing parties) creates an inherent bias and weakness in the system.”7 However,
the emerging technology of “blockchains” present a whole new approach. The
blockchain platform is a recent development in the ﬁeld of computer science,
which uses a global peer-to-peer network to provide an open platform that can
deliver neutrality, reliability, and security. The origins of blockchains were orig-
inally as a solution underlying Bitcoin, but the approach now does not require
any particular behavior on behalf of participants, including honesty or integrity.
Instead, the idea of a blockchain is determined by consensus, or a deﬁned con-
vention for how to execute and administer business logic, which unambigu-
ously discovers the state of the system, including the current level of stock or
the origin of a particular certiﬁcate, not from a single authority by indepen-
dently applying common rules and publishing data openly. These new forms of
digital security will emerge as a critical foundation for assuring supply chain
sustainability and origins/traceability of products.
There is also a virtual reality emerging in supply chain where a product is
constructed across an extended enterprise that may include several companies
acting as one. If the ledger is common, why not have a common supply chain
organization? The commercial limits deﬁned by the Uniform Commercial
Code (UCC) of how buyers and sellers behave may need a new set of terms
6 http://www.wsj.com/articles/ibm-pushes-blockchain-into-the-supply-chain-1468528824
7 https://www.provenance.org/whitepaper

8
The Future of Supply Chains

and frameworks to deﬁne how collaboration changes responsibilities of diﬀer-
ent players in a supply chain. The root of how buyers and sellers work may
need a rethink, and standard legal contracts which emphasize indemniﬁca-
tion and limits of liability will need to be completed redesigned. If companies
co-source, co-manufacture and share a common system the traditional rules
that govern commercial relationships will need changing. New technologies
driven by emerging capabilities with Augmented Reality (AR) and Virtual Real-
ity (VR) will transform how we as humans interact with demand and supply
systems.
Likewise, with the rise of track and trace technologies8 in logistics, the
visibility into where things are continuously will change how we view inven-
tory, liability, and network design. Materials will move by autonomous trucks,
trains, and possibly planes (drones) as regulatory systems adapt to changing
technologies. Existing industries around premium transportation, third
party logistics providers, and distribution will need to adapt to this change.
Uberization and the rise of a shared economy are evidence that technology
disrupts established models. Uber single-handedly changed how people view
personal transportation. Will the same shift happen in the commercial world
of transportation? Will parties that distribute and manage supply chains for
others be disrupted when the core reason for their existence (managing net
working capital, supply, and support) is replaced by a common supply system
making their advantage obsolete?
As supply chains move past descriptive (what happened) and the diagnos-
tic (why did it happen), software, and systems will become more cognitive.
The thinking part of supply chains tools will allow for a more predictive (what
will happen) and ultimately prescriptive (what should I do) capability. As this
occurs, machines will replace people currently calculating and making trans-
actional decisions. The labor needed in supply chains will require increasing
and levels of skill as decision-making becomes reduced to choosing between
various ﬁnancial outcomes.
Prof. Klaus Straub has termed this next phase of change “Industry 4.0.” In this
era, the very construct of how things get made is predicted to change funda-
mentally. The rise of ubiquitous sensing objects, built by 3D printing machines
and operated by robots is now realistic.9 The bigger issue supply chain leaders
will face in the future may be around the ethics of what should be done versus
what can be done and how we decide what and how we want machines to make
decisions previously made by humans. Prof. Stephen Hawking, the renowned
8 http://blogs.gartner.com/it-glossary/track-and-trace/
9 https://scm.ncsu.edu/blog/2016/08/26/seeing-is-believing-debunking-the-myths-of-3d-
printing-at-materialise/


The LIVING Supply Chain
astrophysicist told an interviewer that artiﬁcial intelligence could “outsmart us
all” and that there is a “near certainty” of technological catastrophe.10
Supply chain management without human emotions may create the most
eﬃcient supply chains in the world, but if we don’t actively manage these tran-
sitions, supply chains may evolve into a system without the soul that supply
chains have today.
Conclusion
This chapter points to the current trajectory of technologies, which all point
toward a real-time, LIVING supply chain of the future. These trends are all
being experienced by Flex, as it is one of the most cutting-edge supply chain
companies working across not just a single vertical, but indeed across all the
major global industries, with the exception of ﬁnancial services. One of the
most important developments will involve looking at how autonomous supply
chains will evolve. Elephant seal migration is used to suggest that supply chains
are driven by a “song” that will direct all traﬃc and objects to their ultimate
home location. What will happen when a package or box embedded with a liv-
ing electronic chip enabled by Wi-Fi and GPS is embedded with a “song” that
drives it to its ultimate location? What if we can track every shipment in the
world, and teach objects to be in communication with other boxes, trucks, and
transportation vehicles, and to be programmed to achieve a ﬁnal destination?
What will be the impact of additive manufacturing, which will enable objects
to be produced on-site at a molecular level, and eliminate the need for trans-
portation altogether? And ﬁnally, how will this reshape the global network and
ﬂow of business, as we are able to produce products on demand anywhere in
the world, to drive out working capital and produce customized requirements?
The impact of these trends on the global economy will be massive, and are likely
to occur in a much shorter time horizon than anyone believes possible.
The following questions should drive strategic discussions and planning
workshops to engage not only SCM executives, but all parts of the business,
as organizations seek to develop future-driven business strategies.
1. What is the shape of your supply chain? Is it slow and not very visible? At
what key points is visibility is an imperative?
2. Do you have visibility of visualized data in your supply chain? It is impor-
tant to recognize that imperfect data visualized immediately is better than
perfect data processes in a batch environment that arrives too late or that is
not eﬀectively visualized to render a decision in time. Sometimes you just
have to get comfortable with changing engines while ﬂying! Launching the
10 http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/49c179b4-7ae8-11e4-b630-00144feabdc0.html#axzz4LZHnm5k6

8
The Future of Supply Chains

real-time information approach requires learning by doing, piloting, and
learning by trial and error. The adage of “You can’t ﬁx what you can’t see”
is critical here in creating velocity in the supply chain.
3. How many days of supply (DOS) does your supply chain have? Deep ﬁnancial
understanding of this measurement is necessary to improve asset velocity
and accelerate free cash ﬂow.
4. How much labor is in your supply chain end-to-end? Where can you take
out the need for manual labor and automate with new tools?
5. What is the speed of your supply chain? Asset velocity at each stage between
nodes must be understood to being disrupting time, as time is cost.
6. How many active part numbers are in your supply chain? Beyond SKU
reduction, managers need to kill oﬀ“vampire data” that slows everything
down.
7. How interactive is the data in your supply chain? Can you drill down into
your supply chain to see and visualize what is going on, which allows you
to repair it, manage by exception, and remove unnecessary “white space”
between your nodes?
By thinking through these questions and engaging in debates with your col-
leagues across your enterprise, you will be taking the ﬁrst steps toward adap-
tation to the emerging LIVING supply chain that is evolving and coming your
way, and which will be here sooner than you think!


Index
a
Ali Baba
5
Amazon
5
ﬂywheel eﬀect
13–14, 73
speed and velocity of
13–14
The Amazon Way
13
Andersson, Bo
159
Ano Nuevo State Park
176
anti-control tower
74
anti-counterfeit digital solutions
124
Apple
30, 40, 67, 105, 118
AR, see Augmented Reality
Arctic Island Food System
11
asset velocity
96
Augmented Reality (AR)
193
authentication technology
126–127
autonomous supply chains
175–180
AvtoVAZ
160–161
b
balanced supply chains
153–173.
See also supply chain
characteristics of
155–156
elements of
environmental health
157
fair employee practices
157
integrity
157
politically and ethically sound
policies
157
invisible hand of market
in
156–157
open competition in
157–158
Serengeti Rules in
156–157
Baldessari, Paul
33
Barbier, Francois
27, 96, 111–112
Bezos, Jeﬀ
32, 73, 130
Big Data
114, 117
biological communities, trophic levels
of
carnivores
10
decomposers
10
herbivores
10
producers
10
Blau, Peter
30
blockchains
99
block chain technologies
192
BlueHound
20
Boeing Dreamliner
101
Bowersox, Donald
8
Bricklin, Dan
145
bullwhip eﬀect supply chain
13,
69–71
Burkhart, Bob
159
business process innovation
141–143
c
Calabrese, John
159
Carroll, Sean
10, 156
The LIVING Supply Chain: The Evolving Imperative of Operating in Real Time, First Edition.
Robert Handﬁeld and Tom Linton.
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.


Index
Center for Advanced Purchasing
Studies
44
center-led organizations
36, 164
center-led supply chain
164
centralized organizations
36, 164
Choi, Tom
108
ClockSpeed
101
cloud-based real-time systems
118
cloud computing
18, 134
Coase, Ronald
30
co-evolution, in federated supply
chains
139–140
co-innovation
140, 147–148
fairness in
149
governance in
150
information sharing in
149
operational integrity in
149
product development process in 149
shared risks in
150
strategic alignment in
149
strategic cost management in
149
with supply chain partners, criteria
to consider
148–150
collaboration
63–64
tools of
65
collaborative supply chain
31, 75
collective individualism
69
Collier, Chris
81
co-logistics
140
Coltman, Alexandra
139
co-materials
140
complex systems theory
137
Connectography: Mapping the Future of
Global Civilization
187
consumers of risk
100
Continental
20, 179
contract manufacturing
28
control towers
15
Cook, Tim
188
co-planning
139
co-sourcing
139–140, 145–147
counterfeiting, in supply
chain
122–126
examples
123
risks
122–123
coyote wolf
130–131
Cramer, Jim
28
crowd-sourcing
57
Cummins, Tim
64
d
dark data mining
156
Darwin, Charles
135
Darwinian selectionist
theory
137–138
data
critical
117
democracy
119–120
governance
120
integrity
120
transparency
121–122
useful
117
visual
117, 119
data freshness
46
data integrity
120
data scientists
113–114
data sharing
31–33. See also
transparency
data trusting, challenge of
143–145
Dawkins, Richard
138
1D barcode
126
2D barcode
126
decentralized organizations
36, 164
Deere, John
20
Degenhart, Elmar
179
digitization of supply chain
15,
20–22. See also Internet of
Things
distributed analytics
189
distributed computing
189
drone technology
20
Drucker, Peter
60
e
Elementum
34, 36
TRANSPORT module
37

Index

elephant seal
177–178
Elton, Charles
10
email
47
end-to-end supply chain
5–7
end-to-end visibility
45
Enterprise Analytics Leadership
Council
20
enterprise resource planning
(ERP)
35, 97, 120
ERP, see enterprise resource planning
events monitoring, in supply
chain
42–43
evolution
building blocks of
135–137
in environment
138
evolutionary algorithm
135
evolving networks, in federated supply
chains
129–139
f
Fabus, Tom
159
Facebook
30
factoring, ﬁnancial term
83
Fairtrade International
167
federated supply chains
59–61.
See also supply chain
balanced competition in
64
chain of custody for
designing
185–187
co-evolution in
139–140
co-innovation
140
co-logistics
140
co-materials
140
co-planning
139
co-sourcing
139–140
data trusting, challenge of
143–145
decision-making, speed in
72–74
evolving networks in
129–139
global collaboration and
62
inter-company communication, legal
limits to
66–69
LIVING
69
multi-tier supplier management
in
64–65
natural competition in
64
networks driven by shared
data
133–139
as next frontier
61–74
optimal outcomes
69–72
reacting to disasters in real
time
78–79
selﬁshness in
74–78
suppliers trust in
150–151
technology for transparency
in
65–66
transparency in
65–66
visibility in
65–66
federation
63
Fic, Marcin
25, 113–114
ﬁnancial sphere, speed in
99–103
Fine, Charles
101
First Industrial Revolution
21
Flex
TM
1–5
business divisions of
2
business verticals of
2
as contract manufacturer
1–5
culture
111
employees and customers in
2
end-to-end supply chain
5–7
new business model
5–7
partners
3
products of
2–3
Tianjin explosion and
53–56
Flex Inventory Pulse
TM
94–96
4Flow
107
ﬂywheel eﬀect, Amazon
13–14, 73
food webs
10
forecasting rules
108–109
Forrester, Jay
69
Forrester eﬀect, see bullwhip eﬀect
Fourth Industrial Revolution
20–21
fractal mathematics
13, 73
Frankson, Bob
145
free cash ﬂow, across supply chain
86
friction, in supply chain
14–16


Index
g
GAAP, see generally accepted
accounting principles
Ge, Jeﬀ
59
generally accepted accounting
principles (GAAP)
34
General Motors
147
and supply relationship
pyramids
158–162
genome
116
mapping
117
product mapping of
115–119
global citizenship
33
globalization, velocity and
88–93
Global Positioning Systems
(GPS)
107–108
Global Procurement Benchmarking
Initiative group
8
GPS, see Global Positioning Systems
Grolar bear
130–131
Guanxi
31
h
hacking in supply chain, risk
of
180–181
Handﬁeld, Rob
8
hard disk drive (HDD)
76–78
Hawking, Stephen
193–194
HDD, see hard disk drive
Heinrich, Bernd
180
The Homing Instinct
180
Honda
16, 44–45, 61, 64–65
human–machine–data
interaction
141–143
human rights
management, illicit supply chains
and
181–185
in supply chain
168
i
ILO, see International Labor
Organization
industry 4.0, 193
integrated supply chains
186
Intelligence of Things
TM
22, 28,
134
intelligent transportation services
(ITS)
180
inter-company communication, legal
limits
66–69
International Labor Organization
(ILO)
165, 173
Internet of Things
20
goals
135
Introduction to Supply Chain
Management
1
inventory
84–85, 96
global versus local
92
savings
81
sawtooth eﬀect
91
visibility
35
invent and simplify concept
72–73
invisible hand of market
156–157
ITS, see intelligent transportation
services
j
Jingdo, guideline
122
JIT, see Just in time
Jobs, Steve
146
Just-in-time concept
8
Just in time (JIT) system
85
k
keystone species
11
Khanna, Parag
187
kill shot concept
44–45
Kodak
146
Kutner, Harold
159
l
latency, information systems
93
lean manufacturing
8
lean production systems
15
LG Electronics (LGE)
104–105
LinkedIn
32

Index

Linton, Tom
1, 5–6, 15, 17, 33, 48, 54,
81
LIVING supply chain
27. See also
supply chain
Amazon’s ﬂywheel eﬀect
and
13–14
business process innovation
in
141–143
changes in
16–20
characteristics of
22
digitization of products
117
Flex’s new business model and
5–7
foundation of
72
management, history of
7–10
new normal, new rules for
1–5
new rules of
10–13, 28–30, 40–41,
48–50, 59–61, 89, 103–104,
121
people part of
164–165
real time, need for
20–22
second rule of
28–30
supply chain management, history
of
7–10
velocity and
14–16
visibility and
14–16
workﬂow for unexpected
issues
47–50
Logistics Renaissance
8–9
Lopez, Jose Ignacio
158
Low, Patrick
188
m
Maersk
37
managed supplier relationships
(MSR)
64
Mandelbrot, Allen
73
mapping, in supply chain
43–44, 113
genome of products
115–119
Marlantes, Karl
162
Martin, Dana
41, 168
mass customization
4
material requirement planning
(MRP)
35
materials management
7–8
Matson Logistics
37–38
Matterhorn
162
McChrystal, Stanley
70, 162
McNamara, Mike
111
memes
130
Mendenhall, Michael
26
MerLion
130, 132
Mikhail, Nader
32, 34, 65
Mitchell, Pierre
181
mobility, rise of
189–191
Monczka, Robert
8
MRP, see material requirement
planning
MSR, see managed supplier
relationships
multi-tier supplier
management
64–65
multi-tier supply chains
101
n
Nash, John
74–75
Nelson, Dave
16
networked supply chain
135
New Rules of LIVING Supply
Chain
10–13, 28–30, 40–41,
48–50, 59–61, 89, 103–104,
121
nexus supplier
44
versus strategic suppliers
44
nexus supplier index (NSI)
44–45
Ng, Jeﬀ
62
Nike
184
non-zero-sum games
19, 63,
74–75
Nonzero: The Logic of Human
Destiny
63, 130
NSI, see nexus supplier index
o
opacity
14
open competition, in supply
chains
157–158


Index
The Origin of Species by Means of
Natural Selection
135
outsourcing
5
ownership
72
p
Pederson, Andrew
166
Pena, Natalia
139
planner
47
prediction, in supply chain
109–110
procurement, supply chain and
8
procure-to-pay systems
97–99
producers of risk
99–100
product genomes
mapping of
115–119
in transparency
120–122
product roll-outs
68
Pulse Center
TM
19, 26–28, 73–74,
112, 135
raising issues in, psychology
of
56–58
q
QR code
126–127
QSTP, see Quality, Service, Technology,
and Price
Qualcomm
104–105
Quality, Service, Technology, and Price
(QSTP)
159
r
RCEP, see Regional Comprehensive
Economic Partnership
real-time data, for
predictions
108–110
real-time information, rise
of
189–191
real-time supply chain
14–16
batch-based systems and
118
characteristics
144–145
need for
20–22
visibility systems in
43, 50
Recession-Proof: How to Survive and
Thrive in an Economic
Downturn
184
Regional Comprehensive Economic
Partnership (RCEP)
183
Renault
160
resilience
48
resource-based view
137
reverse auctions
8
Rib Software
3
risk management systems, in supply
chain
48–50
Rossman, John
13
s
Sales Force
115
schedule visibility
35
Schenker, Jason
184
Seagate
76
Second Industrial Revolution
21
Second rule, of LIVING supply
chain
28–30
The Selﬁsh Gene
138
selﬁshness in supply chain
74–78
Serengeti desert
39
Serengeti ecosystem
39–40
Serengeti Rules
10
in balanced supply chains
156–157
ﬁrst rule
11–13
second rule
29–30
third rule
39–40
fourth rule
59
ﬁfth rule
88
The Serengeti Rules
61
Shahin, Gus
28, 111
shipping, example of
46–47
old way of
47
Singapore Merlion
130, 132
situational awareness
163
situational intelligence
55, 163
Smith, Adam
138, 156
Smith, Jack
158

Index

speed. See also velocity
ﬁnancial sphere
99–103
ﬂow of cash in pipeline
97–99
issues follow from
17–19
in supply chain
87–88
Star Wars or Star Trek
movie
26
strategic sourcing
8
strategic suppliers, nexus supplier
versus
44
Straub, Klaus
193
supplier development
91
supplier for life
66
suppliers trust
150–151
supply chain
of Amazon
13–14
balanced
153–173
bullwhip eﬀect
13
business process innovation
in
141–143
challenges of
41
collaborative
31
connectography and
187–189
control towers in
15
counterfeiting in
122–126
data crosses functional silos
in
41–42
digitization of
15, 20–22
disintermediating
networks
103–106
end-to-end
5–7
evolution
134
free cash ﬂow across
86
friction in
14–16
functions
9
future of
175–195
genomes of products in, linking
of
111–127
globalization and
88–93
human rights in
168
management, history of
7–10
mapping activity in
43–44
monitoring small events in
42–43
networks
27
open competition in
157–158
optimization of
12
prediction in
109–110
procurement and
8
real-time transparency in
11–13
risk in
99–103
risk management systems in
48–50
selﬁshness in
74–78
speed for
87–88. See also speed
issues follow from
17–19
suppliers trust in
150–151
sustainability in
33
technological trends in
175–191
tracking data in
165–171
transparency in
35–38, 103–106
trophic cascade
89–90
Uberization, disruptions
in
106–108
velocity in
11–16, 81–110
visibility in
14–16, 45–46
visualization of
169–170
wars
187–189
workﬂow for unexpected
issues
47–50
sustainability
155–156, 165–166
t
Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing
Company (TSMC)
101,
104–105
Team of Teams
70, 162
Team of Teams concept
162–164
technological trends, in supply
chain
175
autonomous supply
chains
175–180
chain of custody
requirements
185–187
connectography and supply chain
wars
187–189
hacking, risk of
180–181
human rights management and illicit
supply chains
181–185


Index
technological trends, in supply chain
(Continued)
real-time information and mobility,
rise of
189–191
Theory of Constraints
8
The Theory of Firm
30
The Theory of Moral Sentiments
156
Third Industrial Revolution
21
Three Vs of information
93–97
variety
93–97
velocity
93–97
volume
93–97
Tianjin explosion
53–56
TPP, see Trans-Paciﬁc Partnership
tracking data, in supply
chain
165–171
transaction cost
30–31
Trans-Paciﬁc Partnership (TPP)
4,
171–174
cloud-based IT services and
183
controlled data access and
183
environmental health
172
goal of
182
for illicit global trade
182
political, social, and business
ethics
173
social responsibility
173
for supply chain performance
182
transparency
28–31, 65
administrative rights, designation
of
36–37
assumptions for
43–46
of data
121–122
in federated supply chains
65–66
in ﬁnancial accountability
34–35,
122
in real life
31–34
in supply chains
35–38, 103–106
as sustainability
33–34
technology for, in federated supply
chains
65–66
tracking data and
165–171
Transparent Supply Chain
(TSC)
IBM
190–191
TSMC, see Taiwan Semiconductor
Manufacturing Company
TVS
107
u
Uber
106–108
Uber Eﬀect
107
Uberization of logistics
107
UCC, see Uniform Commercial Code
Uniform Commercial Code
(UCC)
193
UPS
68–69, 104
v
variety of information
93–97
variety-selection-retention (VSR)
135
velocity
ﬂywheel eﬀect
86
globalization and
88–93
of information
93–97
in supply chain
11–16, 81–110
vendor-managed inventory
85
virtual reality (VR)
193
virtuous cycle
73
visibility
64–66
in federated supply chains
65–66
inventory
35
LIVING supply chain and
14–16
schedule
35
strategies, management principles
for execution
38–41
in supply chain
14–16, 43,
45–46
Visicalc
145
Visicorp
145
visualization, of supply
chain
169–170
volume, of information
93–97
VR, see virtual reality
VSR, see variety-selection-retention

Index

w
Walmart
29
Warner, Ben
68
Watson Buyer Assistant
20
The Wealth of Nations
138, 156
Western Digital (WD)
76–78
Williamson, Oliver
30
Williams, Woody
159
workﬂow for unexpected
issues
47–50
working capital
82
“Before and After” impact of velocity
on
83–84
deﬁnition
82
reduction, illustration of
83
world-class procurement
156
World Wide Purchasing (WWP)
159
Wright, Robert
63, 74
WWP, see World Wide Purchasing
y
Yellow Cab Cooperative, Inc., 106
YTwo Formative
3
z
zero-sum games
74

