
The Zimmermann 
Telegram


Naval Institute Press
Annapolis, Maryland
Intelligence, Diplomacy, and 
America’s Entry into World War I
The Zimmermann 
Telegram
Thomas Boghardt

Naval Institute Press
291 Wood Road
Annapolis, MD 21402
© 2012 by Thomas Boghardt
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any 
form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and 
recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission 
in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Boghardt, Thomas.
  The Zimmermann telegram : intelligence, diplomacy, and America's entry into  
World War I / Thomas Boghardt.
       pages cm
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 978-1-61251-148-1 (hardcover : alk. paper) — ISBN 978-1-61251-147-4 
(e-book)  1.  World War, 1914-1918—Diplomatic history. 2.  Mexico—Foreign 
relations—Germany. 3.  Germany—Foreign relations—Mexico. 4.  World War,  
1914-1918—United States. 5.  Zimmermann, Arthur, 1864-1940.  I. Title. 
  D619.3.B64 2012
  940.3'112—dc23
                                                           	 	
	
 2012026570
∞ This paper meets the requirements of ANSI/NISO z39.48-1992 
(Permanence of Paper).
Printed in the United States of America.
20  19  18  17  16  15  14  13  12             9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
First printing
This book has been brought to publication with the  
generous assistance of Marguerite and Gerry Lenfest.

To
Lori, Adam, and Jacob


vii
List of Illustrations----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ix
Acknowledgments------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ xi
Introduction---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 1
	
1	
The Zimmermann Telegram in History---------------------------------------- 9
	
2	
Arthur Zimmermann------------------------------------------------------------------- 23
	
3	
The Mexican Imbroglio-------------------------------------------------------------- 33
	
4	
The German Quest for Japan------------------------------------------------------ 48
	
5	
Drafting the Telegram ---------------------------------------------------------------- 59 
	
6	
“Blinker” Hall----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 80
	
7	
Interception and Decryption------------------------------------------------------- 90
	
8	
A Special Relationship--------------------------------------------------------------- 108
	
9 	
The Smoking Gun--------------------------------------------------------------------- 129
	
10 	
Congress Debates the Telegram------------------------------------------------ 145
	
11 	
The American Public----------------------------------------------------------------- 159
	
12 	
War-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 181	
	
13 	
Fallout in Berlin------------------------------------------------------------------------- 191
	
14 	
Scapegoat----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 205
	
15 	
Aftermath in Mexico----------------------------------------------------------------- 217
	
16 	
A German Reckoning---------------------------------------------------------------- 225
	
17 	
Hall’s Intelligence Legacy---------------------------------------------------------- 234
Conclusion-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 245
	Names and Terms---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 253
Chronology------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 257
List of Abbreviations----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 263
Notes	---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 265
Bibliography----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 291
Index----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 309
Contents


ix
Illustrations
Fig. 1	
The original, handwritten draft of the Zimmermann telegram	 68–70
Fig. 2 	 The start of Nigel de Grey’s handwritten decrypt of the 
	
Zimmermann telegram	
98
Fig. 3 	 The typed version of de Grey’s decrypt, annotated by Captain 
	
William Reginald Hall	
99
Fig. 4	
British intercept and decryption of Zimmermann’s telegram 
	
to Heinrick von Eckardt of February 5, 1917	
103
Fig. 5	
The start of de Grey’s handwritten complete decrypt of 
	
the telegram	
106
Fig. 6	
The typed version of de Grey’s decrypt, with annotation, 
	
probably by William James	
107
Fig. 7	
Copy of Johann Heinrich von Bernstorff’s Western 
	
Union telegram	
124
Fig. 8	
The first and last page of the Bernstorff decrypt	
126–27
Fig. 9	
William F. Kirby, “Exploding in His Hands,” World 
	
(New York), March 2, 1917	
167
Fig. 10	 “The Harmony Trio,” Evening News (London), March 2, 1917	 168
Fig. 11	 “Pie!” Atlanta Journal, March 2, 1917	
169
Fig. 12	 Clifford Kennedy Berryman, “For Myself,” attributed to 
	
the Evening Star (Washington, D.C.), March 1917	
170
Fig. 13	 “Some Promise!” distributed by the Press Publishing Company, 
	
likely originally published early March 1917	
171
Fig. 14	 “The Temptation,” Dallas Morning News, March 2, 1917	
172
Fig. 15 	 “Enlist!” poster issued by the Boston Committee of Public 
	
Safety, June 1915	
173
Fig. 16	 “Remember Belgium,” poster advertising U.S. war bonds, 
	
September 1918	
174


xi
Acknowledgments
Writing The Zimmermann Telegram: Intelligence, Diplomacy, and America’s 
Entry into World War I has been a journey, and I wish to express my gratitude 
to the people and organizations that helped me bring it to a successful con-
clusion. A generous scholarship from the Fritz-Thyssen-Stiftung enabled me 
to launch my project on the Zimmermann telegram and conduct extensive 
archival research in Europe and the United States. Special thanks are due to 
board member Frank Suder for his support during this important stage. A visit-
ing fellowship from Georgetown University’s BMW Center for German and 
European Studies allowed me to assess my research in the setting of a superb 
academic institution. Discussions with the university’s scholarly community 
provided valuable historical insight and intellectual stimulation. I am particu-
larly grateful to Georgetown University professor Roger Chickering for his 
advice during the early stages of my work and for sharing his expertise on 
imperial Germany and World War I.
Working for several years as the historian for the International Spy Museum 
in Washington, D.C., was a richly rewarding experience and helped me gain a 
deeper understanding of the world of intelligence. I would like to thank Execu-
tive Director E. Peter Earnest as well as the museum’s educational staff and 
advisory board for sharing so many aspects of the “secret world.” The U.S. 
Army Center of Military History provided me with an outstanding intellectual 
environment in which to complete this book. I wish to thank my fellow histo-
rians at the center for the numerous productive discussions on issues pertaining 
to World War I and American, German, and British military history.
Archives, libraries, and research institutes are the lifeblood of historians, 
and The Zimmermann Telegram could not have been completed without the 
resources of a number of such institutions and the assistance of their dedicated 
and expert staff. Over several years, Peter Grupp and Sabine Schafferdt of 
the German foreign office archives in Berlin patiently answered my numerous 

xii 
 Acknowledgments	
	
	
	
queries and pointed me toward important documents. The late John E. Taylor 
identified material pertaining to the Zimmermann telegram in the National  
Archives and Records Administration (NARA) in College Park, Maryland, 
and NARA’s Mitchell Yockelson provided a number of helpful suggestions. 
The University of Cambridge’s Churchill College, which holds the papers of 
Admiral Sir William Reginald Hall, Britain’s wartime director of naval intel-
ligence, permitted me to use and cite from Hall’s autobiography. I also must 
thank the staff of the German military archives in Freiburg, the Hoover Institu-
tion at Stanford University, the National Archives in London, and the Library 
of Congress in Washington, D.C., who assisted in my review of their primary 
source collections.
While completing this project, I have had the privilege of meeting and 
exchanging ideas with many exceptional historians, and it is my pleasure to 
express my gratitude to them for their suggestions and assistance. Nicholas 
Hiley of the University of Kent allowed me to tap into his unrivaled knowledge 
of Britain’s early intelligence community, and intelligence historian Phil Toma-
selli alerted me to important records in the National Archives in London about 
British intelligence operations in Mexico. Markus Pöhlmann of the Militärge-
schichtliches Forschungsamt in Potsdam generously shared with me records 
pertaining to German military cryptanalysis during World War I, and Johannes 
Hürter of the University of Mainz provided me with valuable information on 
Arthur Zimmermann’s career in the German foreign office. Christoph Jahr of 
the University of Heidelberg helped me obtain copies of files from the German 
foreign office archives in Berlin, and Jennifer Wilcox of the National Cryp-
tologic Museum at Ft. George G. Meade, Maryland, helped me navigate the 
terminology of cryptology. I also would like to thank the following scholars for 
their help and feedback on the telegram, intelligence history, and World War 
I: Holger Afflerbach, University of Leeds; Lisa M. Budreau, National World 
War I Museum, Kansas City; Silvia Daniel, University of Bonn; Cord Eber-
spächer, director of the Confucius Institute, Düsseldorf; John F. Fox, historian 
at the Federal Bureau of Investigation; Julia Hauser, University of Göttingen; 
Christoph Mauch, University of Munich; Klaus-Jürgen Müller, University of 
Hamburg; David S. Painter, Georgetown University; Bernard Porter, Newcastle 
University; and Gerhard Wiechmann, Oldenburg University.
I was fortunate to be able to consult many insightful studies on various 
aspects of the Zimmermann telegram, and I would like to thank a number of 
people for discussing their findings with me: Joachim von zur Gathen, Bonn-
Aachen Center for Information Technology; intelligence historian David Kahn; 

Acknowledgments 
 xiii
the late Friedrich Katz, University of Chicago; Martin Nassua, University of 
the Federal Armed Forces, Hamburg; and David Paull Nickles, historian at the 
U.S. Department of State. I also wish to express my gratitude to the late Peter 
Freeman, historian of Britain’s Government Communications Headquarters. 
Our dialogue allowed me to develop a deeper comprehension of British crypt-
analysis during World War I. Peter’s premature death was a severe loss to the 
community of intelligence historians.
The Naval Institute Press did a superb job in turning the manuscript into a 
book. I would like to express my gratitude to managing editor Susan Corrado, 
publicist Judy A. Heise, marketing manager Claire Noble, graphic designer 
Maryam Rostamian, director Rick Russell, and my copy editor, Robin O. 
Surratt.
Last but certainly not least, I would like to thank my family for their practi-
cal and emotional support while I was working on this book. My wife, Lori, 
patiently endured many hours of book writing instead of conversation and 
carefully reviewed the draft manuscript. My mother, Christiane Ebeling, helped 
me decipher dozens of documents in near-illegible old German Sütterlin hand-
writing. My children, Adam and Jacob, reminded me daily that there is indeed 
a world beyond libraries, archives, and history conferences. 


1
B
y the winter of 1916–1917, World War I had reached a deadlock. The Allies  
commanded greater resources and fielded more soldiers than the Cen-
tral Powers, but German armies had advanced deep into France and 
Russia and tenaciously held on to their conquered territories. Hoping to break 
the military stalemate on the western front, the Allies sought to bring the neu-
tral United States into the war. A golden opportunity to force U.S. intervention 
seemed at hand when British naval intelligence in January 1917 intercepted 
and decrypted a secret telegram detailing a German alliance proposal to Mexi-
co. In the message, Berlin’s foreign secretary, Arthur Zimmermann, offered his 
country’s support to Mexico for reconquering “the lost territory in Texas, New 
Mexico, and Arizona” in exchange for a Mexican attack on the United States 
should the Americans enter the war on the side of the Allies. The German for-
eign secretary also exhorted the Mexican leadership to approach Japan, with 
a view toward breaking Tokyo away from its alliance with Great Britain. The 
director of British naval intelligence, Captain William Reginald Hall, handed a 
copy of the telegram to the U.S. embassy in London in the hope that it would 
trigger America’s entry into the war. Apparently, he succeeded. On April 2, 
1917, President Woodrow Wilson asked Congress for a declaration of war, cit-
ing the Zimmermann telegram as one reason for intervention. The lawmakers 
consented, and on April 6, the United States formally entered World War I.
The telegram’s disclosure occurred at a critical moment in the conflict. For 
the first three years of the war, the United States had refrained from overtly 
supporting either group of belligerents across the Atlantic. Despite President 
Wilson’s exhortation to Americans to remain “impartial in thought, as well as 
introduction

2 
 Introduction	
	
	
	
action,” political, cultural, and economic ties lent U.S. neutrality a distinctly 
pro-Allied flavor.1 From the German perspective, the growing volume of arms 
sales by American companies to the Allied nations was especially troubling. 
The policies devised in Berlin did little, however, to reverse the United States’ 
pro-Allied tilt. German submarines roaming the North Atlantic, threatening 
American lives and goods, proved a particular source of irritation to Washing-
ton. In February 1917, U.S.-German relations took a drastic turn for the worse 
when the German leadership launched unrestricted submarine warfare, mak-
ing any ship traveling in the northern Atlantic subject to a potentially deadly  
attack. In response, Wilson formally broke diplomatic relations with Berlin, 
and Germany and the United States entered a kind of twilight zone, with 
American intervention being a distinct possibility, if not yet a foregone conclu-
sion. It was during this tense moment between peace and war, as Americans 
hotly debated the pros and cons of intervention, that news of the secret tele-
gram reached the United States.
Few historians would argue that the telegram alone pushed the United 
States into World War I, but most would agree that it constituted one of the 
factors that helped bring the country into the conflict. Indeed, several Ameri-
can and British decision makers involved in handling the telegram at the time 
regarded its disclosure as tilting the scales decisively in favor of American 
intervention. Secretary of State Robert Lansing wrote in his memoirs, “From 
the time that the telegram was published . . . the United States’ entry into 
the war was assured.”2 Likewise, Hall stated in his autobiography that in the 
wake of the telegram’s publication, “[W]ar was inevitable.”3 President Wilson, 
a man given neither to careless remarks nor to hyperbole, cited the telegram as 
a reason for his decision to abandon neutrality. In his war address to Congress, 
Wilson referred to the scheme laid out in the telegram as “eloquent evidence” 
of Germany’s intention “to stir up enemies against us at our very doors.”4
Because of its influential role in the war, the telegram has attracted the 
attention of journalists and historians alike. Many authors have looked at 
the telegram in the context of American intervention, others have examined 
the efforts of British naval intelligence to intercept and decrypt it, and a few 
have explored the German rationale behind it. Until recently, only one book, 
The Zimmermann Telegram by Barbara Tuchman, has sought to examine this 
subject by addressing developments in Germany, Britain, and the United States 
roughly in equal parts. Although the present study agrees with Tuchman’s  
implicit argument that the entire story of the telegram is indeed greater than its 
parts, it questions many of her conclusions.

Introduction 
 3
The primary flaw in Tuchman’s work lies in the author’s limited access to 
and use of government records. First published in 1958, her account draws 
on a number of U.S. State Department files, but she did not have access to 
U.S. and British intelligence records. Instead, she relied for the most part on 
contemporary published accounts, memoirs, and a few translated works. 
Her limited usage of pertinent intelligence records detracts greatly from her 
book. “[L]acking classified sources and also suffering from lack of cryptologic  
insight,” as a historian of the National Security Agency noted, the author 
bought into some of the deliberate disinformation planted by Hall.5 Barred 
from examining the relevant U.S. and British intelligence sources, Tuchman 
can hardly be blamed for succumbing to Hall’s yarns; she was far from the only 
author caught up in the old spymaster’s web of lies. As a result of her limited 
use of primary sources, however, her book is plagued by “errors, inaccuracies 
and obsolete theses.”6 Tuchman’s work was further undermined by the omis-
sion of German-language materials, including archival records, memoirs, and 
secondary sources. By not taking into account the detailed German foreign 
office records on the telegram that were available at the time of her writing, 
Tuchman misread the political decision-making process in imperial Germany 
and the basic motivations of individual German officials.
Primary sources, if available, should form the basis of any serious study 
in the fields of political, military, and intelligence history. In this respect, the 
declassification of virtually all relevant government records for the World War 
I period provides the opportunity to finally tell the full story of the Zimmer-
mann telegram, from its origins in Germany to its publication in the United 
States and its impact and perception in subsequent decades. The present study 
represents an endeavor to deliver the first comprehensive account of the tele-
gram, based in equal measure on key contemporary sources from Germany, 
Britain, and the United States.
Despite nearly a century of journalistic and historical research on the Zim-
mermann telegram, many new documents were discovered in preparation for 
this book. Several collections of official records proved particularly valuable. 
The files of the German foreign office (Auswärtiges Amt) illuminated the think-
ing and actions of Berlin’s diplomats on the eve of U.S. intervention. Of special 
importance is the hitherto overlooked personnel file of one of Zimmermann’s 
subordinates, Hans Arthur von Kemnitz, the official who first suggested the 
Mexican-Japanese alliance proposal and produced the original draft of the 
telegram. His multivolume file includes, inter alia, the only known firsthand 

4 
 Introduction	
	
	
	
account of the German foreign office conference at which the proposal was 
conceived and sanctioned.
For the chapters dealing with cryptanalysis, and the British decision to  
disclose the telegram, Hall’s autobiography remains a key source, but here 
his account is juxtaposed with British and U.S. intelligence and diplomatic 
records as well as with the memoirs of the British and American officials inti-
mately involved in the exposure of the German alliance scheme. The findings 
of recent pathbreaking research on the cryptanalytic work of British naval  
intelligence during World War I further helped to set the record straight on 
Hall’s operations.
On the American side, the records of the State Department’s Bureau of 
Secret Intelligence shed much light on the cooperation between U.S. and British 
intelligence agencies during the war, especially on their joint handling of Zim-
mermann’s diplomatic initiative. American nongovernmental sources yielded  
a wealth of information as well. This study is the first to examine a comprehen-
sive set of historical newspaper articles and op-eds in order to gauge American 
public opinion on the telegram. Moreover, the book draws on a large number 
of contemporary publications and memoirs in addition to unpublished personal 
papers scattered among archives and university libraries around the world, 
many of which are exploited here for the first time.
Neither the discovery of new documents nor the careful reexamination of 
already known records necessarily leads to reassessments of a particular his-
torical event, but in the case of the Zimmermann telegram, it does require new 
thinking in several respects. Regarding the rationale behind Zimmermann’s 
alliance proposal, this study concludes that it was neither the result of a care-
fully crafted, long-term German strategy to project power into the Western 
Hemisphere nor one “of history’s classic stupidities.”7 Rather, the telegram 
was the product of a particular historic situation in wartime Germany, when 
developments in the realms of domestic politics and foreign policy converged. 
Arthur Zimmermann had conducted intelligence operations for the German 
foreign office since the early twentieth century, and with the outbreak of war, 
he became Berlin’s point man for a global covert program designed to stir up 
trouble against the Allies in Europe, Africa, and Asia. When the Mexican-
Japanese alliance scheme was proposed to him by Kemnitz in January 1917, 
Zimmermann’s previous routine handling of covert activities biased him in 
favor of the scheme. Another policy strand woven into the telegram was Ger-
many’s intermittent pursuit of a separate peace with Japan, starting in 1915. 
In early 1917, Japan’s strained relationship with the United States led German 

Introduction 
 5
diplomats to believe that Tokyo might be amenable to resuming peace negotia-
tions via Mexico. The military’s growing influence over German policy making 
provided a further impetus to the Mexican-Japanese alliance scheme. In the 
wake of the declaration of unrestricted submarine warfare, the German supreme 
army command considered U.S. intervention highly likely and expected dip-
lomatic initiatives from the Wilhelmstrasse—shorthand for the foreign office 
because of its location on this narrow street in Berlin—to counterbalance the 
United States’ joining the Allies. Zimmermann could not ignore the military’s 
demands. The text of the telegram reflects this multitude of policies and agen-
das, which contradicted each other at times, and has posed significant inter-
pretational challenges for historians.
Furthermore, the book places interception, decryption, and disclosure to 
the U.S. government of the telegram firmly in the context of Captain Hall’s 
management of Room 40 and Anglo-American intelligence cooperation 
throughout the war. Beginning with his tour of duty as director of the Admiral-
ty’s intelligence division in late 1914, Hall went beyond his original mandate—
the collection of information—by repeatedly using the intelligence gathered by 
his agency to conduct covert actions in Europe and overseas. Time and again, 
he sidestepped his superiors in the government in these endeavors; they often 
learned of Hall’s operations only after the fact.
Long before the telegram incident, Hall had found American diplomats 
and intelligence personnel to be willing partners in the execution of his schemes. 
Beginning in 1915, the State Department’s diplomats and agents collaborated 
closely with the British secret services in an effort to compromise German 
diplomacy and to bring the United States into the war. Taking advantage of the 
Americans’ pro-Allied stance, Hall carefully developed relationships with intel-
ligence personnel at the U.S. embassy in London and confidentially involved 
the Americans in many of his plots. On several occasions during the period of 
U.S. neutrality, he traded classified information with his American contacts 
without first clearing these actions with his government. In early 1917, he 
shared knowledge of the telegram with his contact at the U.S. embassy before 
receiving authorization from the Foreign Office to do so. In retrospect, Hall’s 
modus operandi proved to be a mixed blessing for Britain. On the one hand, 
British naval intelligence scored a number of scoops under his leadership. On 
the other hand, Hall’s independence, obsessive secrecy, and habitual disregard 
for the chain of command contributed to the emergence of an intelligence 
community in Britain that came close to being a state within a state, and for 

6 
 Introduction	
	
	
	
political reasons turned against an elected British government during the inter-
war years.
As for the impact of the Zimmermann telegram in the United States, this 
study examines reactions to it on three levels: the Wilson administration, Con-
gress, and the public. After Germany’s declaration of unrestricted submarine 
warfare, virtually all members of Wilson’s cabinet advocated war, with the 
notable exception of the president himself. As a consequence of the telegram, 
Wilson abandoned all hope of reaching a negotiated settlement with Germany 
and aligned his thinking more closely with his pro-war cabinet. At the same 
time, however, the telegram exacerbated divisions in Congress and the public 
over the question of joining the Allies. A heated debate in the Senate on March 
1 pitted interventionists, who touted the telegram as a casus belli, against non-
interventionists, who questioned the administration’s motives behind the docu-
ment’s disclosure and suspected British involvement. Similar frictions emerged 
in the public debate. While many interventionists demanded a declaration of 
war in response to the German scheme, non-interventionists either ignored it 
or made light of it. Overall, this study concludes, the telegram failed to per-
suade Americans of the wisdom of intervention.
The Zimmermann Telegram approaches its subject conceptually through 
three thematic lenses. The first is geographical balance. The book contends that 
Zimmermann’s plot gained traction as a historically significant event through 
the interplay of German politics, British intelligence, and American interven-
tion, hence equal weight is given to all three areas. Because the scheme had no 
discernible effect on Japan and Mexico, the actions and reactions of represen-
tatives of Tokyo and Mexico City are referenced merely when necessary for 
understanding events.
The second lens is intelligence, defined as “secret, state activity to under-
stand or influence foreign entities.”8 This book treats intelligence as a key ele-
ment of the entire story, not only in terms of interception and decryption. The 
emergence of powerful intelligence organizations and techniques in Germany, 
Britain, and the United States created a new factor in governmental decision 
making and directly affected responses to the telegram. From the earliest days 
of the war, the Germans had employed covert action to instigate insurrections 
against the Allies, and the telegram fit neatly into this policy. On the other side 
of the North Sea, interception and decryption of the telegram by British naval 
intelligence ensured the scheme’s failure while significantly strengthening Hall’s 
position along Whitehall, the London road lined with British governmental 
institutions. Furthermore, the close collaboration of and trusting relationship 

Introduction 
 7
between British and U.S. intelligence personnel not only resulted in the timely 
publication of Zimmermann’s proposal in the American press, but also pre-
vented the American public and the German foreign office from learning by 
which means the Wilson administration had obtained it. Covert action, espio-
nage, and cryptanalysis all played into the telegram affair, making it one of the 
great intelligence stories of World War I.
The third lens is the telegram’s historical effect and long-term conse-
quences, what the Germans call Wirkungsgeschichte. The repercussions of 
Zimmermann’s alliance proposal profoundly affected perceptions, organiza-
tions, and individuals on both sides of the Atlantic for many years after the 
war, yet a systematic study of the scheme’s consequences has been conspicu-
ously absent. In an effort to fill this gap, The Zimmermann Telegram traces the 
ripples of the telegram through the twentieth century and beyond in Germany, 
Britain, and the United States.


9
Chapter One
the zimmermann 
telegram in history
T
he so-called Zimmermann telegram has intrigued contemporaries and 
historians ever since it made headlines in the United States on March 
1, 1917. The widespread coverage the telegram received at the time 
of its public release may partially account for the fact that the historiography 
of the telegram has been chiefly, though not exclusively, an American affair. 
Another reason may be that the telegram is inextricably linked to U.S. interven-
tion in World War I. For Great Britain and Germany, U.S. intervention marked 
merely one more turning point in their years-long struggle, but for the United 
States it was a watershed event that transformed the country from a satellite in 
the international system to one of its central players. Any historian researching 
the American entry into World War I is bound to stumble across news of the 
telegram.
Members of the Wilson administration were, not surprisingly, the first to 
frame the debate surrounding the telegram. As early as March 4, Secretary 
of State Robert Lansing claimed in a memorandum that the telegram’s dis-
closure had “created a profound sensation throughout the country.”1 With 
this assertion, the administration’s foremost champion of intervention laid the 
foundation for the persistent notion that Zimmermann’s telegram had rallied 
a hesitant public for war. By inference, this argument bolstered and vindicated 
Lansing’s own interventionist agenda.
President Woodrow Wilson, in his war address to Congress on April 2, 
1917, put forth another enduring theme of the telegram’s historiography. First 
he accused Berlin of having infiltrated “our unsuspecting communities and even 
our offices of government with spies and set[ting] criminal intrigues everywhere 

10 
 Chapter One		
	
	
afoot against our national unity of counsel.” He then concluded, “That [the 
German government] means to stir up enemies against us at our very doors, 
the intercepted Zimmermann note to the German Minister at Mexico City is 
eloquent evidence.” With these words, Wilson insinuated that the overture to 
Mexico by the German foreign secretary, Arthur Zimmermann, constituted 
merely one instance in a series of German plots in the Western Hemisphere. It 
was a far-fetched allegation, to be sure, but a potent one nevertheless. When-
ever members of the Wilson administration (and wartime authors supporting 
them) mentioned the Zimmermann telegram, they typically did so by describ-
ing it as a subplot in a broader German scheme directed against the entire 
hemisphere.2
Members of the Wilson administration continued to argue along the same 
lines during the postwar period. In his memoirs, published in 1935, Lansing 
referred to the telegram as an event that “caused the greatest excitement 
throughout the country and aroused the people against the German government 
even more, I believe, than the announced policy of submarine ruthlessness.”3 
In 1921 Wilson’s former personal secretary Joseph Tumulty cited the telegram 
as evidence that “German intrigue was busy in Mexico.”4 Yale University his-
tory professor Charles Seymour, who headed the Austro-Hungarian division of 
the U.S. peace commission to Paris in 1919, asserted that “nothing could have 
brought the . . . unfriendliness of Germany closer to the American public.”5
The Wilsonian interpretation of the telegram was tied closely to a popu-
lar belief in the righteousness of U.S. intervention, but when the fog of war 
had cleared, many Americans took account of the sacrifices made in joining 
the Allies yet could not see commensurate benefits. Americans suffered more 
than 100,000 casualties in making “the world safe for democracy,” as Wilson  
had postulated, but the postwar world that emerged looked uncertain and 
menacing, especially in view of the global economic depression and the rise 
of totalitarianism in Europe. Moreover, many Americans saw the Treaty of 
Versailles between the Allies and Germany as unnecessarily vindictive. In fact, 
the United States did not sign it, and U.S. relations with Britain and France 
deteriorated when the two nations balked at paying their U.S. war debts. Con-
sequently, many Americans began to question the wisdom of having gone to 
war in 1917 and advocated a policy of isolationism going forward.
This widespread sentiment among Americans found practical expression 
in several neutrality acts passed by Congress in the 1930s that sought to keep 
the United States out of overseas conflicts. In the same spirit, on the occa-
sion of the twentieth anniversary of the U.S. entry into World War I, Congress 

The Zimmermann Telegram in History 
 11
honored those members who had voted against the war in 1917. The many 
revisionist publications at the time generally deplored U.S. participation in the 
war, deemphasizing German aggression as a reason for intervention and instead 
stressing domestic factors or Allied policies, such as commercial interests or 
British propaganda, as the cause of it.6
The telegram fit neatly into the revisionists’ agenda as details about the 
interception and decryption of Zimmermann’s alliance proposal emerged. In 
1920 Johann Heinrich von Bernstorff, Germany’s wartime ambassador to 
Washington, informed the public in his memoirs that “a certain Englishman” 
had told him that British intelligence had intercepted and forwarded the tele-
gram to the U.S. government.7 Six years later, the journalist Burton J. Hendrick’s 
biography of Walter Hines Page, the wartime U.S. ambassador to London, lent 
additional weight to Bernstorff’s recollections. In response to revelations about 
Britain’s involvement in the telegram, American revisionists denounced the  
efforts by Captain William Reginald Hall, director of British naval intelligence, 
as a Machiavellian propaganda stunt to pull the United States into the war 
against the nation’s better interests. By the same token, they typically dispar-
aged American interventionists as naive British stooges, warmongers, or selfish 
profiteers while crediting Germany’s overtures to Mexico as a legitimate effort 
in preparation for U.S. belligerence.
An early product of revisionism, John Kenneth Turner’s Shall It Be Again 
(1922) delivers a powerful indictment of what the author considers the Wilson 
administration’s imperialist policies. So sympathetic to Germany was Turner 
that even the exiled kaiser cited him favorably in his memoirs. With regard to 
the telegram, Shall It Be Again exculpates Zimmermann by pointing to his alli-
ance proposal’s contingency on the United States joining the Allies. Moreover, 
Turner argues, Germany “would have been physically incapable of invading 
America even had she possessed no other enemies.”8
As the postwar world moved further and further away from the new global 
politics and ideals envisioned by Wilson, revisionism continued to blossom, 
and along with it revisionist interpretations of the telegram. The journalist C. 
Hartley Grattan wrote mockingly in Why We Fought (1929) that the telegram 
“was made available by the British out of the kindness of their heart” and  
argues that “[i]n the hands of the pro-war group, this cable became very useful 
propaganda. It will be observed that everything that Zimmermann proposed 
was contingent upon the failure of the German effort to keep the United States 
out of the war.” Like many other revisionist authors, Grattan ignores Zim-
mermann’s subsequent message of February 5, 1917, instructing the German 

12 
 Chapter One		
	
	
envoy in Mexico, Heinrich von Eckardt, to begin negotiations with the Mexi-
can president, Venustiano Carranza, even before the United States entered the 
war. Instead, he considered the telegram “a legitimate effort to obtain an ally 
in case of war with the United States” and compares Zimmermann’s offer to 
the promises of territory made by the Allies to Italy (at the expense of Austria), 
with a view toward inducing Italian intervention on their side.9
Walter Millis’ Road to War (1935), a popular bestseller, makes similar 
points. Like Grattan, Millis ridicules Wilson for being “profoundly shocked by 
this revelation of the fact that one could not go to war with Germany without 
having the Germans fight back.” He portrays the telegram as a purely defensive 
measure, comparing its terms to Allied territorial promises to Japan, Italy, and 
Romania. In the context of U.S. intervention, Millis wrote disapprovingly, the 
telegram served the unwholesome ends of “the Northeastern fire-eaters.”10
One of the weightiest revisionist tomes, Charles C. Transill’s massive Amer-
ica Goes to War (1938), as well as Alice Morrissey’s The American Defense of 
Neutral Rights, 1914–1917 (1939), addresses the telegram in less depth than 
do Grattan and Millis, but essentially argues in the same vein: the German 
overture to Mexico constituted no real threat to U.S. security and therefore did 
not warrant a serious response from the Wilson administration.11
In Propaganda for War (1939), Horace C. Peterson produces one of the 
most extensive revisionist analyses of the telegram. The author calls Britain’s 
handling of the telegram “their most successful propaganda maneuver” and 
dismisses American outrage as naive: “Most probably these American states-
men had never thought of the idea that by taking part in Europe’s wars their 
country’s territory would run the risk of being considered spoils of war.” Zim-
mermann, on the other hand, gets a free pass: “It was, of course, Zimmermann’s 
duty as Foreign Minister to arrange for the eventuality of American entrance 
into the war. He was not at fault in trying to secure an ally; he was at fault for 
being found out. The episode must be now considered as one of history’s clas-
sic stupidities—a blunder from which the British reaped great profit.”12
Even the respectable New York Times, long past its interventionist days, 
joined the revisionist chorus two decades later. In Zimmermann’s obituary of 
June 8, 1940, the Times portrays the former German foreign secretary good-
naturedly as “a big, broad-shouldered East Prussian, with a determined will, 
a jovial manner and a keen sense of humor.” As for the telegram, the Times 
reminds readers that many earlier accounts of the telegram had “failed to stress 
the words in the note which stated that Germany made the Mexican-Japanese 
alliance proposal only in case of America’s entering the war.”13

The Zimmermann Telegram in History 
 13
While Wilsonians cited the telegram as evidence of German conspiracies in 
the Western Hemisphere, thus justifying U.S. entry into war, revisionists by and 
large argued that the British had exploited a legitimate diplomatic German ini-
tiative in order to force Washington to engage in the conflict, a step that would 
serve Allied interests more than the United States’. Wilsonians and revision-
ists agreed, however, that the telegram’s publication had a decisive impact on 
American public opinion. If anything, revisionists emphasized this point even 
more strongly than Wilsonians. Grattan and Transill diagnosed “war hysteria” 
in the United States upon the telegram’s publication, and Millis observed that 
it “exploded with its maximum effect at precisely the point where it would 
do the Allies the greatest good.” Peterson contended, “Great indignation was 
immediately aroused throughout the country, and most important was the fact 
that the West and Middle West joined in the expressions of anger. The fact 
that the Central Powers were supposedly threatening the West naturally made 
Westerners ready to fight back. It brought the war home to them and com-
pletely defeated the work of the pacifist.”14
While American intervention in World War I remained controversial after 
the fact, the U.S. entry into World War II enjoyed near-unanimous approval. 
The Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, subsequent declarations of war by Ger-
many and Italy, and postwar revelations about Nazi horrors left little room 
for doubt about the justice of the cause. Early popular perceptions of the Cold 
War as a struggle between the totalitarian Soviet Union and the democratic 
West further shaped the memory of World War II as a battle of good versus 
evil. In the wake of the Second World War, contemporaries quickly projected 
this Manichean interpretation on World War I. Revisionism, which by and 
large had looked kindly upon imperial Germany, died practically overnight. 
In its stead emerged a stark, dichotomous worldview that depicted Germany 
under the kaiser as an evil empire, and its foreign policy as a harbinger of 
Nazi aggression. This paradigm shift directly affected perceptions of the Zim-
mermann telegram. Now, authors typically cast imperial Germany as a stra-
tegic threat to the United States, and Zimmermann’s overture to Mexico as a 
manifestation of a long-standing master plan to challenge the United States 
in the Western Hemisphere. Likewise, Cold War authors tended to applaud 
American interventionists as righteous and to scorn isolationists as naive or 
misguided.
Samuel R. Spencer’s Decision for War, 1917 (1953), the first monograph 
on the telegram, was an early example of this post–World War II school. Pub-
lishing less than ten years after the war’s end, Spencer uses the telegram to 

14 
 Chapter One		
	
	
draw a straight line from Wilhelm II to Adolf Hitler: “[I]t is reasonably safe to 
assume that even if actual military assault upon the western hemisphere had 
proved impracticable, he [the kaiser] would have attempted the same type of 
politico-military penetration which Hitler later effected. In any case, the threat 
to the United States was not imaginary.” At the same time, Spencer looks much 
more kindly on Hall than the revisionists had and explains Hall’s hesitation 
about conveying the telegram to the U.S. government as motivated by an 
understandable desire to protect British intelligence’s methods and sources. Yet 
Spencer concurs with previous authors about the effect of the telegram on 
American public opinion, comparing it to that generated by Pearl Harbor.15
Although Spencer’s book foreshadows an interpretational pattern that 
would soon emerge as the dominant Cold War take on the telegram, Barbara  
Tuchman’s Zimmermann Telegram (1958) stands out as the only major English-
language monograph on the subject. The strength of her book lies not in 
the discovery of significant new facts, but in weaving many already available 
strands of the story into a compelling narrative. Her book provides an accessible 
account that derives its appeal from the author’s considerable storytelling skills 
and a propensity to pass unambiguous moral judgment on the protagonists. 
Instead of focusing on historical processes, Tuchman hones in on individual  
actors and brings them to life with catchy descriptions—for example, the 
“clever Kaiser,” the “suave Count Bernstorff,” Hall’s “brilliant blue eyes,” 
and so on. Her inimitable style, dripping with irony and sarcasm, makes for 
a highly readable black-and-white tale that comes down harshly on represen-
tatives of imperial Germany and those Americans hesitant to join the war, 
while implicitly endorsing the interventionist cause and Hall’s handling of the 
telegram.
Like Spencer, though more vividly, Tuchman portrays the telegram as a 
veritable challenge to the United States in the Western Hemisphere: “But the 
Prussian invasion plot, as the newspapers termed it, was clear as a knife in the 
back and near as next door,” she wrote. “It was the German boot planted upon 
our border.” Tuchman also subscribes to earlier notions about the extraordi-
nary effect of the telegram on contemporary public opinion.16 To her lasting 
credit, she acquainted a large audience with an important aspect of American 
intervention in World War I. The commercial success of her monograph, which 
has sold hundreds of thousands of copies to date, is testimony to both the  
author’s narrative talent as well as the enduring appeal of her subject.
Few books manage to have the final word on a historical subject, and 
Tuchman’s work is no exception. Her limited access to and use of primary 

The Zimmermann Telegram in History 
 15
sources eventually undermined many of her conclusions. The first major study 
to make extensive use of official German records in examining the telegram 
was Friedrich Katz’s massive tome, Deutschland, Diaz und die mexikanische 
Revolution (1964), the product of a postdoctoral research project at Hum-
boldt University in Berlin. Due to its publication in communist East Germany, 
the volume is occasionally couched in Marxist slang. Katz’s study was later 
translated and expanded into The Secret War in Mexico (1981). Katz amends 
but largely supports and amplifies Tuchman’s findings. He argues that begin-
ning in the late nineteenth century, Germany had sought to expand its sphere 
of influence in Mexico. With the onset of World War I in Europe, Berlin wanted 
to provoke conflict between Mexico and the United States and, the author 
contends, from 1917 to 1918 sought to establish hegemony over Mexico. The 
telegram, Katz claims, represented “a new stage” in this escalating strategy of 
German domination over Mexico.17 Like most authors before him, he con-
cludes that the telegram “had its greatest impact in precisely those areas of 
the United States where isolationism and thus opposition to U.S. involvement 
in the war were particularly strong: the Southwest. People in this area,” the 
author opines, “found the German offer to Mexico of annexation of Texas, 
Arizona, and New Mexico especially offensive.”18 Other authors have made 
the same point with regard to the telegram’s impact in the United States.
Arthur Link, in Wilson: Campaigns for Progressivism and Peace, 1916–
1917 (1965), the fifth volume of his lengthy political biography of Woodrow  
Wilson, argues that the telegram greatly affected the president as well as 
American public opinion. “Wilson,” he wrote, “was shocked and angry. It 
was almost incredible, he must have thought, that any government could be so 
evil and intriguing.” Likewise, Link contends that the telegram’s publication 
resembled “a gigantic bolt [that] had struck from the blue across the American 
continent. No other event of the war to this point, not even the German inva-
sion of Belgium or the sinking of the Lusitania, so stunned the American people. 
. . . Excitement approaching panic raged all day in Washington.”19 Four years 
later, John Milton Cooper argued along similar lines. Zimmermann’s alliance 
scheme, he wrote in The Vanity of Power (1969), constituted “a direct threat 
to American territory. Editorial anger not only flared at the Zimmermann tele-
gram, but for the first time a large segment of the press called for war.”20
American authors dominated the historiography of the telegram, but 
the Cold War view of Zimmermann’s alliance scheme as a strategic threat to 
American security also found advocates on the other side of the Atlantic. Jür-
gen Möckelmann contended in his doctoral dissertation, “Das Deutschlandbild 

16 
 Chapter One		
	
	
in den USA 1914–1918 und die Kriegszielpolitik Wilsons” (1964), that the 
“Zimmermann Telegram seemed to prove the threat to the Monroe Doctrine 
and the direct threat to the USA posed by Germany.”21 The British author 
Patrick Devlin, in his study of Wilson’s wartime presidency, Too Proud to 
Fight (1974), likewise portrayed the telegram as a veritable military challenge, 
compared to which even German atrocities in Belgium and the sinking of the 
Lusitania paled.22
World War I narratives geared toward the larger public generally continued 
to adhere to the account popularized by Tuchman through the end of the Cold 
War and beyond. For example, the journalist Jules Witcover argues in Sabotage 
at Black Tom (1989) that Germany had been plotting for years to pit Mexico 
and Japan against the United States and that the telegram presented “clear-cut 
evidence that Germany meant to do harm to the United States in a direct and 
very tangible way.” He contends, “Here was something to fight about that 
could be understood by the average American not convinced that the rights of 
wealthier Americans to sail the Atlantic was worth going to war over.” By the 
same token, Witcover regards Hall’s hesitation in handing the telegram to the 
Americans as necessary to protect his sources.23 Another, more recent example 
of this trend is Gary Mead’s Doughboys (2000), a popular account of the 
American World War I experience. In it, the author argues that the “telegram 
was regarded as devastatingly treacherous. . . . The view of Germany by most 
Americans as utterly perfidious was now complete.”24
As the fall of the Berlin Wall, the reunification of Germany, and the col-
lapse of the Soviet Union brought the Cold War to a close, yet another inter-
pretation of World War I, imperial Germany, and the telegram emerged. While 
many Cold War authors had portrayed imperial Germany as an external threat 
to the United States, several post–Cold War authors began to try to understand 
why imperial Germany had pursued certain foreign policies. These historians, 
several of them Germans, made extensive use of German records, and their 
works appeared at a time when many observers assumed that Germany would 
expand its role in world politics. While these authors did not deny that imperial 
Germany’s foreign policy had posed challenges to other powers, their views 
of German actors were more complex and occasionally more sympathetic to 
them than portrayals in the preceding decades.
In the year of German reunification, Friedhelm Koopmann published 
Diplomatie und Reichsinteresse (1990), a dense study of German covert opera-
tions in the United States during the period of neutrality. While Koopmann 
never explicitly challenges earlier treatises on the telegram, he suggests that 

The Zimmermann Telegram in History 
 17
Zimmermann’s proposal should not be dismissed simply as short-sighted or as 
outright stupid. Rather, he argues that the foreign secretary’s initiative followed 
a certain logic if one accepts the premise—as the German military leadership 
had—that the United States by early 1917 had de facto joined the Allies and 
would be unable to provide significant additional support to Germany’s enemies 
if its leaders decided in favor of intervention. Germany’s gross underestimation 
of U.S. strength, he maintains, resulted from faulty intelligence about its mili-
tary potential. Koopmann therefore considers the telegram first and foremost 
an intelligence failure rather than a Machiavellian scheme for domination of 
the Western Hemisphere.25
Two years later, Martin Nassua expanded on Koopmann’s focus on Ger-
man domestic politics in Gemeinsame Kriegführung, Gemeinsamer Friedens-
schluss (1992), his published master’s thesis. Explicitly challenging Tuchman 
and Katz, Nassua argues that these two authors overemphasized the threat 
that the telegram posed to the United States. He portrays Zimmermann’s alli-
ance scheme as the result of domestic politics, rather than a vehicle for project-
ing German power into the Western Hemisphere. Nassua also offers the first 
methodical review of German American reactions to the telegram’s disclosure 
in the U.S. press.26
David Paull Nickles, in Under the Wire (2003), a study of the effect of 
telegraphy on diplomacy, examines the telegram largely from Ambassador 
Bernstorff’s perspective. The German envoy emerges as a tragic figure, a liberal 
at heart earnestly trying to keep the United States out of the war, while dealing 
with ever-more stringent directives from military-minded hardliners in Berlin. 
Nickles’ study sheds significant new light on Bernstorff’s work in Washington 
as well as State Department diplomacy vis-à-vis imperial Germany on the eve 
of U.S intervention.27
While Koopmann, Nassua, and Nickles examined the telegram from the 
perspective of German politics, and the motivations of German protagonists, 
another set of post–Cold War authors viewed the telegram against the back-
drop of contemporary U.S. military interventions in the Middle East. Like 
the original revisionists, these neo-revisionist authors doubted the wisdom 
of American engagements abroad, deplored their cost, and with a critical eye 
examined the domestic processes that led to war. Some explicitly compared 
President George W. Bush’s “freedom agenda” “to strengthen democracy and 
promote peace around the world” to Wilsonian notions of making the world 
“safe for democracy.” For example, Geoffrey Hodgson, in Woodrow Wilson’s 

18 
 Chapter One		
	
	
Right Hand: The Life of Colonel Edward M. House (2006), calls the Bush 
administration’s foreign policy “unmistakably Wilsonian.”28
In Propaganda for War (1996), Stewart H. Ross disparagingly likens 
American anti-German propaganda during World War I to U.S. propaganda 
during the Cold War and the Persian Gulf War. In all three conflicts, the author 
contends, human, material, and financial costs outweighed political or military 
gains: “Seventy-five years after Americans were assigned an alliterative ‘Beast 
of Berlin’ [Kaiser Wilhelm II], they were given a ‘Butcher of Baghdad’ [Iraqi 
president Saddam Hussein] as the hated-enemy symbol for the 1991 Persian 
Gulf war. As before, Americans were charged with fighting an enemy ‘now’ 
rather than ‘later,’ and the timeworn atrocities of ‘rape and pillage’ made head-
lines.” Echoing pacifist and isolationist arguments from World War I, Ross 
reveals his contempt for the power of the modern media and war profiteering: 
“Crushing wartime news censorship by the Pentagon mocked America’s press 
freedoms, and again, big-business communications media enthusiastically fol-
lowed Washington’s lead.” Also like the original revisionists, Ross regards the 
telegram as a legitimate, if harebrained, initiative: “Absurd though it was, the 
German foreign minister’s proposal was no less moral than the secret treaties 
already signed by the Allies to apportion conquered enemy territories among 
themselves.”29
In The Illusion of Victory (2003), a passionate tour de force of America 
during World War I, Thomas Fleming deals harshly with Woodrow Wilson’s 
policies, both domestic and foreign. He dismisses as illusory any advantages 
the United States might have gained from the war and deplores the more than 
50,000 dead and 150,000 wounded soldiers who were sacrificed in the pursuit 
of this illusion. Perhaps with the impending U.S. invasion of Iraq in mind, he 
asserts, “I could only shake my head and hope the men and women who guide 
America’s covenant with power in the world of the twenty-first century have 
the courage and the wisdom to manage our country’s often perplexing blend 
of idealism and realism. God helping us, we can do no other.” Though Fleming 
regards the telegram as an “effrontery,” like the revisionists he also views it as 
a minor offense that helped Britain pull the United States into the war. He care-
fully balances, and by implication justifies, Zimmermann’s initiative against 
U.S.-Allied arms deals in the period of American neutrality.30
The accounts reviewed above, from World War I into the twenty-first 
century, offer a wide range of assessments of the telegram’s historical signifi-
cance, yet they all approach the story within the framework of political history.  
Another group of authors has focused first and foremost on cryptanalytic  

The Zimmermann Telegram in History 
 19
aspects of the telegram, that is, modes and dates of transmission, codes and 
decryption, and the inner workings of Room 40, where the cryptanalytic work 
of British naval intelligence was done. There is necessarily an overlap between 
political and cryptanalytic aspects of the telegram, but overall the two kinds 
of studies have been conducted distinctly. While students of the cryptographic 
or intelligence elements have referenced political studies of the telegram, they 
have typically focused their analytic firepower on technical issues. Over the 
past decades, these historians have progressively unlocked virtually every cryp-
tologic secret the telegram once held.
The cryptologic study of the telegram began in earnest when some of those 
with firsthand knowledge, along with an investigative journalist, made pub-
lic some of the technical details of its encoding, interception, and decryption. 
Among the earliest are Ambassador Bernstorff in an account of his tour of 
duty in Washington (1920), Burton J. Hendrick in the third volume of his 
biography of Ambassador Page (1926), Hall in his affidavit before the Mixed 
Claims Commission (1926), and Alfred Ewing, Room 40’s first director, in a 
public lecture (1927).
Hall’s autobiography, written in the early 1930s, is another important 
source, but the text remained classified until long after World War II. Coming 
from the man at the center of the interception, decryption, and handling of the 
telegram, Hall’s manuscript is a fountain of information, although its reliability 
is occasionally devalued by minor and major inaccuracies. For example, Hall 
obviously confuses the German codes 0075 and 13040, probably because of 
his weak grasp of cryptologic basics. For political purposes, he deliberately per-
petuates the falsehood, first publicized by Hendrick (but based on information 
originally provided by Hall), that the Germans had relayed—and the British 
had intercepted—the telegram by multiple means, including radio and with the 
assistance of the Swedish government, rather than through U.S. State Depart-
ment cables alone.31 For all the insight Hall provides into the inner sanctum of 
Room 40, much of his memoirs must therefore be taken with a grain of salt.
In 1938 the American cryptanalysts William F. Friedman and Charles J. 
Mendelsohn produced the first systematic cryptologic study of the telegram, 
The Zimmermann Telegram of January 16, 1917. Commissioned by the War  
Department’s Office of the Chief Signal Officer, their work remained classified 
until 1965. Carefully sifting through the evidence then available, the authors 
reached several important conclusions. By pointing to the insurmountable dif-
ficulties of wiring messages directly between Germany and Mexico, the authors 
debunk Hall’s contention that the Germans had transmitted the telegram by 
wireless. They likewise dismiss Hall’s claim before the Mixed Claims Commission  

20 
 Chapter One		
	
	
that the British had decrypted the telegram by means of a captured German 
codebook. Perhaps most important, they reassess Hall’s hesitation in handing 
the telegram, intercepted between Berlin and Washington, to the U.S. govern-
ment: “To disclose the Berlin-Washington version of the Zimmermann tele-
gram, which it will be recalled was sent via State Department channels, would 
have necessitated revealing the fact that the British Intelligence Service was 
intercepting and solving not only German code messages but also intercept-
ing and perhaps solving diplomatic messages of the American government—a 
power whose aid they were desperately seeking at the time.” This revelation 
would have added plenty of grist to the revisionist mill had it not remained 
classified at the time.32
In 1955 William “Bubbles” Melbourne James published The Eyes of the 
Navy, a narrative of Hall’s intelligence work during the Great War. Hall had 
recruited James to run the day-to-day operations of Room 40 in 1917, based 
on Hall’s autobiography; Bubbles admired his chief greatly. Though James did 
not quote Hall’s (at that point still classified) autobiography, he followed it 
closely, occasionally verbatim. His book was the first to make Hall’s recollec-
tions of the telegram available to a broader public. James, however, reproduced 
Hall’s memoirs uncritically, and therefore perpetuated several inaccuracies, 
such as the alleged German usage of Swedish cables—the so-called Swedish 
roundabout—for transmission of the telegram to Washington.
In The Codebreakers (1967), a sweeping history of the usage and breaking 
of codes and ciphers, David Kahn presents the first systematic cryptologic study 
of the telegram by a non-government historian. Kahn goes to great lengths in 
describing the various German codes, and their decryption, and he clears up a 
number of then-prevailing misunderstandings about the telegram, such as the 
precise use of codes 0075 and 13040 and the techniques and timing of British 
decryption. Kahn was the first author to make use of the Göppert report, the 
German investigation of the telegram’s disclosure, and he was the first histo-
rian to cast doubt on the alleged use of the Swedish roundabout.33
Patrick Beesly’s Room 40 (1982) contains a chapter on the telegram that 
relies mostly on James’ Eyes of the Navy, and thus on Hall’s autobiography, 
but in addition, Beesly made use of several declassified British documents,  
including Hall’s correspondence with the British naval attaché in New York, 
Captain Guy Gaunt. While Beesly produced a readable overview of British 
naval cryptanalysis during World War I, he added little cryptologic insight to 
the story and, like James before him, perpetuated several of the inaccuracies 
originally introduced by Hall.

The Zimmermann Telegram in History 
 21
Although Nickles’ Under the Wire focuses on the diplomacy of Ambas-
sador Bernstorff, the author makes an important contribution to the crypto-
logic study of the telegram as well. Based on a careful examination of avail-
able sources, Nickles confirms and expands upon Kahn’s earlier doubts about 
the Swedish roundabout: “I have found no evidence,” Nickles states, “that 
the telegram traveled via the Swedish route, although many historians have 
claimed that it did. . . . I believe the claim probably testifies to the effectiveness 
of British misinformation. . . . Many historians have also repeated the claim 
of Hendrick and Tuchman . . . that the message went out on wireless. This is 
almost certainly incorrect.”34
With “The Zimmermann Telegram Revisited” (2006), Peter Freeman 
produced a penetrating and comprehensive account of British cryptanalysis of 
the telegram. Then a historian for the Government Communications Head-
quarters (GCHQ), Britain’s premier cryptanalytic agency, Freeman used his 
extraordinary command of British sources painstakingly to reconstruct the 
telegram’s journey from Berlin to Mexico City via Washington and the British 
interception and decryption of it. Among many important findings, this fine 
study produces solid documentary corroboration of Kahn’s supposition and 
Nickles’ hypothesis that the Germans had sent the telegram via State Depart-
ment cable alone. Joachim von zur Gathen, in “The Zimmermann Telegram” 
(2007), used German foreign office logs and the Göppert report to confirm 
Freeman’s conclusion about the telegram’s route. In 2008, David Ramsay pub-
lished a political biography of Hall. The author makes no bones about his 
admiration for the subject of his study, though his findings are mostly derived 
from previously published works. “Blinker” Hall draws amply on James’ biog-
raphy and especially on Beesly’s history of Room 40, but in incorporating Free-
man’s findings, the author omits many of the inaccuracies that plague these 
two earlier accounts.
The historiography of the telegram has shown a remarkable degree of 
fluidity and constancy. Research into the cryptology of the telegram has been 
largely progressive. It began in the 1920s on the basis of several false assump-
tions, most of which originated with several misleading claims made by Hall. 
Over the years, however, authors have peeled back layer upon layer of Hall’s 
disinformation. Freeman’s article on British cryptanalysis of the telegram may 
be considered definitive, but the debate over Hall’s management of Room 40 is 
bound to continue. While most authors have dismissed as minor or acceptable 
Hall’s transgressions in using the intelligence obtained by his code breakers, a 
case can also be made to the effect that Hall’s utter secrecy and disregard for 

22 
 Chapter One		
	
	
the proper chain of command were systematic and had long-term effects that 
proved detrimental to British democracy.
Assessments of the telegram’s content have fluctuated wildly over time. If 
interventionists in 1917 portrayed it as a sinister German plot, revisionists dur-
ing the interwar years regarded it first and foremost as an unpalatable British 
attempt to meddle in U.S. politics. World War II and the end of the Cold War 
produced additional interpretational swings back and forth. Often, judgments 
of the telegram’s content have been tied to assessments of the U.S. rationale for 
intervention in the war. Thus it seems that as long as the debate over the causes 
of and reasons for American intervention in the Great War continues, so will 
varying interpretations of the telegram.
Interpretations of several aspects of the telegram affair have remained 
virtually static. For example, from the time U.S. newspapers published Zim-
mermann’s scheme, contemporaries and other historians have contended that 
its disclosure mobilized the American public for war. This particular claim has 
become so widely accepted that many authors repeating it do not bother citing 
a source. Other assumptions about the telegram have also not received much 
historical scrutiny. To date, no work has examined the role of Hans Arthur von 
Kemnitz, the German foreign office official who conceived of the Mexican-
Japanese alliance proposal, and few studies have sought to understand Zim-
mermann’s reasons for embracing the project. Instead, both old and recent 
publications have been content to dismiss the German foreign secretary as “an 
archetypal Prussian bully,”35 rather than examine his actions and policies in the 
context of wartime Germany. Yet even interpretations that have held remark-
ably steady over time can easily crumble or may require significant readjust-
ment when checked on the basis of new evidence and a careful re-examination 
of available sources.

23
Chapter Two
Arthur zimmermann 
A
rthur Zimmermann was born on October 5, 1864, to a local tavern 
proprietor in Marggrabowa, a small town on the periphery of East 
Prussia near the Russian border.1 Growing up far away from progres-
sive urban centers like Berlin or Hamburg, Zimmermann spent his adolescence 
in a sheltered provincial environment that infused loyalty to emperor and 
empire. In the 1880s, when a rejuvenated German nationalism came into 
its own, he studied law at the University of Königsberg and the University 
of Leipzig. Like many of his fellow students, he joined one of the popular 
schlagende Verbindungen (fencing corps), patriotic fraternities whose mem-
bers battled each other with rapiers to prove their manhood. Having a scar 
(Schmiss) from such an encounter was considered a mark of honor, and Zim-
mermann always proudly sported his own.2
Zimmermann never entered the legal profession, having set his eyes  
instead on a career in the foreign service. This wish led him to apply for a job 
at the German foreign office, or Auswärtiges Amt, located at Wilhelmstrasse 
76, a narrow street running south from Unter den Linden, the axis of imperial 
Berlin. As a commoner, Zimmermann wisely chose to apply for the mundane 
consular branch rather than the elitist diplomatic section that staffed German 
embassies around the globe, preferably with aristocrats, and that might well 
have rejected the middle-class Zimmermann. If he performed well in the con-
sular service, he could expect eventual transfer to the diplomatic branch. In 
1893 he joined the consular service, and from 1896 to 1901 he served as vice 
consul in Shanghai, Canton, and Tientsin, where he distinguished himself dur-
ing the Chinese Boxer uprising.3

24 
 Chapter Two		
	
	
On his return from Asia to Germany, Zimmermann crossed the United 
States, from California to New York, spending two days in San Francisco and 
three days in New York City. This journey was his only firsthand experience of 
the United States. The American ambassador to wartime Berlin, James Gerard, 
claimed in his memoirs that Zimmermann “seemed to think that this transcon-
tinental trip had given him an intimate knowledge of the American character.”4 
Gerard personally disliked Zimmermann, and his antipathy probably inspired 
this disparaging remark. On the other hand, few of Zimmermann’s Eurocen-
tric colleagues had ever visited the United States, so Zimmermann may have 
prided himself in having seen the country for himself, albeit briefly.
Shortly after Zimmermann’s return to Germany, Foreign Secretary Fried-
rich von Holstein invited the young consul to join the diplomatic service. Zim-
mermann eagerly accepted and following his transfer rapidly ascended from 
the commercial section to the legal division. In 1905 he entered the presti-
gious political division as counselor. Only five years later, the Wilhelmstrasse  
appointed him director (Dirigent) of the division, and in 1911 he became 
undersecretary of state, the second-in-command at the foreign office.5
Many contemporary observers agreed that Zimmermann deserved his 
rapid series of promotions because of his hard work and dedication to the 
tasks at hand. His bosses, colleagues, and fellow diplomats valued his dili-
gence, attention to detail, and cooperativeness. Joseph Grew, a competent and 
perceptive diplomat at the U.S. embassy in Berlin who would be ambassador 
in Tokyo during the bombing of Pearl Harbor, wrote in a letter to Washington 
in 1916, “I think that Zimmermann may be regarded as a coming man and 
that he will rise high. He has been handicapped by not being of noble birth, a 
handicap which in Germany is difficult to overcome, but his personal ability 
and character have already brought him a great deal of influence.”6 Former 
foreign secretary Bernhard von Bülow, who liberally dispensed sarcastic com-
ments about German politicians after being sacked by Kaiser Wilhelm II in 
1909, remarked, “Zimmermann was still the best of the whole lot, audacious, 
an optimist, and an excellent worker.”7 In his postwar memoirs, an acerbic 
reckoning with imperial Germany’s leadership, Bülow still found a few good 
words for Zimmermann, describing him as a “workaholic” (Arbeitsbiene) 
who was “rather conscientious, unlike [Foreign Secretary Gottlieb von] Jagow 
or [Chancellor Theobald von] Bethmann [Hollweg], an enemy of intrigue, 
honest and loyal.”8
Good-humored and unpretentious, Zimmermann won over many of his 
official contacts with his willingness to bend the rules and cut through red tape. 

Arthur Zimmermann 
 25
“That favorite word of the average Prussian official—‘ausgeschlossen’ (Quite 
out of the question)—finds no place in his lexicon,” penned an American jour-
nalist enthusiastically.9 Grew wrote favorably of him,
it is always a pleasure to take things up with him at the foreign office. 
He is a great big blond-haired giant with a charming and cordial manner 
and a sunny smile which goes a long way in gaining one’s confidence; he 
speaks English well, works like a cart horse and shows a keen interest in 
everything which is taken up with him and a genuine desire to carry out 
one’s requests—quite to the contrary of some of his colleagues who seem 
to look for red tape and reasons why a thing can’t be done.”10
Theodor Wolff, the editor of the liberal Berliner Tageblatt, was delighted 
when Zimmermann offered him rare insights into Germany’s foreign policy, 
and the mostly non-aristocratic parliamentarians appreciated Zimmermann’s 
straightforward oratory and plebeian manners.11 Although one of Zimmer-
mann’s bosses, the reticent Jagow, lamented his subordinate turning his office 
into a “political barbershop,” his remarks may have been tinged with envy at 
the fact that Zimmermann had managed to become the center of attention at 
the Wilhelmstrasse.12
Ever since his university years, Zimmermann had been a social drinker 
who bonded easily with other men. He could be charming in the presence of 
women, who generally found him physically attractive, though he remained 
a bachelor all his life. Despite his congeniality, Zimmermann possessed traits 
that limited his effectiveness as a top diplomat. For one, he did not respond 
well to stress. Although generally polite and cordial, he cracked easily when 
under pressure or faced with conflicting demands. When Grew appeared at 
the foreign office to discuss reports of German submarine attacks on merchant 
ships with American citizens on board, Zimmermann “immediately lost his 
temper, banging his fist on the table and exhibiting the utmost petulance and 
nervousness. He said, approximately, ‘Do you dare to come to me, Herr Grew, 
believing these damnable Reuter reports which are aimed simply to stir up 
trouble between our Governments, and to tell me that you expect an immedi-
ate reply?’”13 While journalists and foreign diplomats valued his eagerness to 
divulge insider information from the Wilhelmstrasse, his boss, Jagow, com-
plained that Zimmermann spent far too much time socializing with all sorts 
of lobbyists, succumbed to their influence, and tended to spill the beans out of 
vanity and a propensity for indiscretion.14

26 
 Chapter Two		
	
	
Moreover, Zimmermann never quite outgrew his modest roots. Lacking 
the cosmopolitan background of many of his aristocratic colleagues, Zimmer-
mann failed to acquire their level of worldliness, despite his consular service 
in China. Hence, Bülow’s verdict may be exaggerated but can’t be dismissed 
altogether: “He didn’t comprehend European politics very well, and he didn’t 
know the relevant people in St. Petersburg and Paris, in London and Vienna. . . .  
He belonged to the category of those Germans who, for all their willpower and 
unquestionable diligence, still don’t understand that a diplomat must be, more 
than anything, skillful [geschickt], and has to know ‘how to do it.’”15
To his credit, Zimmermann was aware of his shortcomings. In 1912, 
when Foreign Secretary Alfred Kiderlen-Waechter suddenly died, two men 
were considered to succeed him: Zimmermann and Jagow. Then ambassador 
to Rome, Jagow did not want to exchange his pleasant posting to the eternal 
city for the minefield of Berlin. Jagow fought the prospect of his appointment 
tooth and nail, pointing out that he was not a gifted orator and thus unsuited 
for representing the Wilhelmstrasse to the Reichstag. At the same time, Zim-
mermann refuted his own candidacy by pointing to his fragile health, his lack 
of proficiency in foreign languages, and the fact that he was a commoner. In the 
end, Berlin casually dismissed Jagow’s objection about his lack of oratory—
“no problem . . . several of your predecessors have not been great orators, 
either”—and “morally forced” him to accept the appointment. When he asked 
the kaiser a year later why he hadn’t appointed Zimmermann instead, Wilhelm 
replied uncannily, “One should never make the scullion chef.” 16
Contemporary observers, especially Americans, made much of the fact that 
Zimmermann was a commoner and deduced that he must therefore be some-
what of a reformer. Even the skeptical Gerard considered him “at heart a Lib-
eral and violently opposed [to] a system which draws the leaders of the country 
from only one aristocratic class.” The New York Evening Post reminded its 
readers that Zimmermann was almost entirely surrounded by aristocrats who 
regarded him as a “rank intruder” and suggested that his advancement in 
the foreign office heralded fundamental, progressive changes at the Wilhelm-
strasse.17 The politically liberal former German ambassador to London, Karl 
Max von Lichnowsky, praised Zimmermann as “the only sensible man” at 
the foreign office.18 Yet Zimmermann’s supposed liberal leanings went only 
so far. Anyone pursuing a career at the imperial foreign office had to be a 
staunch monarchist, and Zimmermann was no exception. It is also true that 
the rising middle classes in imperial Germany tended to imitate the mores of 
the aristocracy, rather than challenge them; again, in this regard, Zimmermann 

Arthur Zimmermann 
 27
appears to have been a follower rather than a rebel. As Jagow later remarked 
acerbically, “[H]e always swam with the stream and with those who shouted 
loudest.”19
Though competent, Foreign Secretary Jagow was by nature retiring and 
sickly and thus inclined to leave his undersecretary significant room for maneu-
ver. Therefore, Zimmermann exerted considerable influence over the Wilhelm-
strasse even before he replaced Jagow in 1916. In fact, Zimmermann made 
several important decisions during the final years before the war and during 
the crisis in July 1914 that followed the assassination of Austrian archduke 
Franz Ferdinand in Sarajevo and triggered World War I. In October 1913, for 
example, Zimmermann defused a crisis between Austria-Hungary and Serbia 
that had pushed the two nations to the brink of war over Belgrade’s drive to 
the Adriatic. By refusing to back Germany’s old ally Austria unconditionally, 
and by negotiating furiously between Vienna, London, and Belgrade, Zim-
mermann eventually achieved not only a strengthening of the Austro-German 
alliance but also a confirmation of Albania’s independence, blocking a hostile 
Serbia from the Adriatic.20
During the early stages of the unfolding crisis in the summer of 1914, Zim-
mermann’s influence over foreign policy further increased because Jagow was 
absent from Berlin most of the time—first on his honeymoon and then at gen-
eral headquarters on the western front. Just as he had done in October 1913, 
Zimmermann reacted with restraint to the unfolding crisis, at least initially. 
The Austrians were pressing for a military solution to deal once and for all 
with the meddlesome Serbians, yet Vienna knew it could not proceed without 
unconditional German support. Neither the German ambassador to Vienna, 
Heinrich von Tschirschky, nor Zimmermann were prepared, however, to acqui-
esce to the Austrians; instead they counseled moderation. Had Zimmermann 
persisted, it is not inconceivable that his diplomacy might have defused the 
July crisis and avoided the outbreak of World War I, but the undersecretary 
lacked the stamina to stick to his guns under pressure. Carried away by the 
war fever that gripped so many German leaders in July 1914, the emperor 
brushed away Zimmermann and Tschirschky’s concerns, commenting curtly, 
“Tschirschky will be so good as to drop this nonsense. We must finish with the 
Serbs, quickly.”21 A frantic Zimmermann, eager to please his monarch, turned 
on a dime and henceforth emerged as one of the most strident warmongers at 
the foreign office.
Shortly thereafter, news leaked to the German press corps that Japan had 
demanded the unconditional surrender of Kiau-Chow, the German colony in 

28 
 Chapter Two		
	
	
China. The newspaper editor Theodor Wolff sought out Zimmermann to con-
firm the rumor, but the extremely nervous undersecretary pointed lamely to the 
possibility of U.S. mediation and refused to confirm or refute Wolff’s story.22 
These episodes are telling examples of the undersecretary’s style: As Europe 
plunged into war, Zimmermann failed to seize the initiative at the Wilhelm-
strasse and appeared overtaxed and clueless at critical junctures. Even though 
he had considerable leeway to implement his own ideas, he did so only hesi-
tantly and quickly abandoned them when exposed to criticism.
A similarly checkered pattern emerges with regard to Zimmermann’s posi-
tion on German war aims. As the German armies crushed the Russians in East 
Prussia and marched through Belgium and northern France, politicians and 
public figures outdid each other with fantastic territorial claims in expecta-
tion of imminent triumph. Notably, Zimmermann was not one of them. On 
September 1, 1914—before German reversals in France raised the specter of 
a drawn-out contest—he spoke earnestly of the “poor French” and expressed 
his concern that the military would make excessive claims in the West: “Mars 
rules the hour. Let’s not fool ourselves, the military and the Pan Germans are 
riding high.” He also warned against annexing French or Belgian territory, 
a demand very popular among the military and nationalists at this point in 
time.23 Likewise, Zimmermann counseled against the outright annexation of 
Russian-controlled Poland and generally against “blindly following a policy of 
annexations.” Instead, he urged the creation of a Polish buffer state and others 
in the east as a more viable and effective way to keep Russia at bay.24
Although Zimmermann appeared rather progressive on war aims, he held 
extreme views when it came to the conduct of the war. Vastly overestimating 
German capabilities, he rejected the possibility of a separate peace with either 
Britain or Russia in November 1914, advocating total victory over both. Natu-
rally, he could not uphold this position when it became evident that Germany 
would be unable to win a two-front war.25 Overall, there was little consistency 
in his views and decisions, other than his tendency to defer to strongly held 
views by colleagues or superiors.
Yet one theme runs through Zimmermann’s career at the Wilhelmstrasse 
like a red thread. From his earliest days in the diplomatic service, he was 
involved in intelligence operations and covert activities. While on assignment 
in China, long before the war, Zimmermann had participated in a covert net-
work of German consuls who used money in slush funds to bribe Chinese 
officials in order to procure classified government documents. Back in Berlin, 

Arthur Zimmermann 
 29
he and his colleague Wilhelm von Stumm successfully pushed to allow the 
German navy’s intelligence division to recruit agents from the Wilhelmstrasse’s 
worldwide consular network.26
German intelligence expanded its operations significantly during World 
War I, and Zimmermann’s involvement in covert actions grew with them. When 
war broke out, the Germans quickly devised a policy of fostering insurgen-
cies as a means of creating distractions for the Allied powers, especially Great 
Britain. These efforts included activities in Ireland, India, North Africa, and 
Russia. Early on, Berlin displayed particular interest in an Islamic uprising in 
the Middle East and successfully lobbied the sultan of the Ottoman Empire for 
a declaration of a holy war (jihad), involving all Muslims, against the Allies. 
Zimmermann emerged as one of the chief executives of this policy. In a let-
ter drafted by the undersecretary shortly after the outbreak of war, the kaiser 
asserts grandiloquently to the emir of Afghanistan, “It has long been . . . my 
wish to see the Mohammedan nations independent and to achieve for their 
states the maximum of free development.”27 The text amounted to a thinly 
veiled promise of support for Afghan endeavors to push back British influence. 
In late August 1914, Zimmermann took charge of an operation to infiltrate 
German agents from the Ottoman Empire into Egypt and Sudan to incite the 
native populations against British rule, liquidate the British officer corps in the 
Egyptian army, and block the Suez Canal by demolishing locks and water-
works, telegraph offices, railway bridges, barracks, and port installations in 
Suez, Port Said, and Alexandria. The plan ultimately disintegrated as a result of 
wrangling over competencies between Ottoman and German authorities and 
British countermeasures.
Zimmermann then turned his eyes to Russia. In August 1914, two Russian 
armies invaded East Prussia, but numerically inferior German forces decisively 
defeated the Russians at the battle of Tannenberg. Subsequently, the German 
forces began their invasion of the vast regions of the Russian Empire that 
included large numbers of non-Russian minorities. The Germans intended 
to exploit anti-Russian sentiment in these areas they sought to conquer. One 
group the Germans hoped to win over were Russian Jews, who had endured 
many years of discrimination and pogroms under the tsars. The German consul 
in Bucharest contacted Jewish agents who promised him “a rising in Bessara-
bia [today’s Moldova] within ten days and later a general revolution against 
Russia.” While the consul made substantial payments to the Jewish agents, 
Zimmermann, on behalf of the foreign office, issued a statement endorsing  
and approving Jewish emancipation in Russia. It did more harm than good, 

30 
 Chapter Two		
	
	
however, as it provoked the Russians to take immediate countermeasures. The 
Russian government cracked down hard on the Jewish population, while 
nationalist mobs took out their anger at the perceived enemy within. German 
troops were not within reach of areas of Jewish concentrations. This intel-
ligence failure notwithstanding, Zimmermann continued to support revolu-
tionary action against the tsarist regime, a policy that would ultimately lead to 
German support of Vladimir Ilyich Lenin, a Russian exile in Switzerland who 
would mastermind the Bolshevik Revolution in the fall of 1917.28
Zimmermann’s support of covert action schemes extended to the Western 
Hemisphere as well. Early in the war, he had established contact with Ameri-
can Jews to elicit their support for Germany’s cause. In the winter of 1914–
1915, Zimmermann boasted to Ambassador Gerard of 500,000 fully trained 
German reservists in the United States and threatened the ambassador with the 
prospect of a combined German and Irish American uprising if Washington 
pursued an anti-German policy. In his memoirs, Gerard wrote that Zimmer-
mann “worked himself up to a passion and repeatedly struck the table with 
his fist. I told him that we had five hundred and one thousand lamp posts in 
America, and that was where the German reservists would find themselves if 
they tried any uprising.”29 
Zimmermann’s actions sometimes went beyond mere threats. In Decem-
ber 1914, the undersecretary urged the German ambassador to Washington, 
Johann Heinrich von Bernstorff, to lend financial support to a scheme of Ger-
man military intelligence to destroy the Canadian Pacific Railway. Further-
more, the undersecretary had a hand in German schemes to support U.S.-based 
revolutionaries from British India, and he served as the Wilhelmstrasse’s liai-
son between the German military and Irish revolutionaries. In this capacity, 
he drafted an official German declaration of support for Irish independence, 
published in November 1914.30 Zimmermann also met with Captain Franz 
Rintelen von Kleist, an agent of the German military. In 1915 Rintelen spent 
several months in the United States organizing sabotage operations against the 
country’s armaments industry.
Zimmermann’s appointment to the top job at the Wilhelmstrasse occurred 
virtually by default. Foreign Secretary Jagow, as an old school diplomat, found 
himself increasingly at odds with military leaders during the war. In particular, 
Jagow resisted the pursuit of unrestricted submarine warfare by the German 
navy. If German submarines were given a free hand to sink any vessel they 
encountered in the North Sea and the Atlantic, the navy argued, Great Britain 
would quickly be starved and sue for peace. Unrestricted submarine warfare did 

Arthur Zimmermann 
 31
not, however, distinguish between neutral and Allied ships, and Jagow feared 
U.S. intervention as a possible consequence. As the jingoistic press, national-
istic politicians, and military and naval leaders pressed ever harder to unleash 
the submarines, Jagow grew increasingly despondent. He resigned as foreign 
secretary late in November 1916, following a demeaning scolding from the 
kaiser over a bagatelle. Indicating the true reason for his departure, Germany’s 
top diplomat remarked at the time that he was annoyed at the interference of 
the supreme army command with his work.31 As Jagow’s second-in-command, 
Zimmermann was his natural successor.
In the eyes of the German leadership, Zimmermann brought many desir-
able qualities to the table. Jovial and gregarious, he could be expected to handle 
the press more skillfully than the introverted Jagow, and his jaunty manner and 
unadorned oratory were popular, especially among influential right-wing par-
liamentarians and politicians. The kaiser, who appreciated a manly demeanor 
and forthright talk, liked the straightforward Zimmermann, who happened to 
be on friendly terms with the empress as well. Unlike the refined Jagow, the 
pushy Zimmermann had managed to impress the kaiser’s rough-edged mili-
tary entourage. Notably, Zimmermann had made some rather coarse remarks 
about submarine warfare, which military men regarded as an indicator of his 
likely support for such a war measure: In May 1915, a German submarine 
had sunk the British liner Lusitania off the coast of Ireland, killing more than 
a hundred Britain-bound American passengers. The attack provoked outrage 
in the United States, but not so in Germany. On his way to the Wilhelmstrasse, 
Zimmermann bumped into a journalist and remarked cheerfully, “Now, this 
will have quite an effect! The hatred towards us can’t possibly increase, they 
will always hate us, but in this situation the only thing we can do is lash out at 
all sides, we have no room for any consideration whatsoever.”32 Such bellicose 
remarks gained the undersecretary respect within military circles. Jagow later 
wrote that Zimmermann “was in his heart always pro-U-Boat,” but privately 
he acknowledged that Zimmermann was unsteady on this subject, shifting  
positions depending on whose advice he had just heard.33 At any rate, the 
chancellor considered Zimmermann’s popularity an asset for the government 
and appointed him foreign secretary on November 22, 1916.34
Zimmermann received accolades from all sides upon his appointment. The 
military cherished the prospect of working with a like-minded spirit at the helm 
of the Wilhelmstrasse, and moderate politicians found reason for rejoicing as 
well. Jagow told Hugo von Lerchenfeld, the Bavarian envoy to Berlin, that 
“the policy of the foreign office will probably remain the same since he [Jag-

32 
 Chapter Two		
	
	
ow] and his successor always shared the same opinion.”35 American observers, 
too, expressed satisfaction, and sometimes enthusiasm, at Zimmermann’s  
appointment. The U.S. embassy regarded him “as a warm and true friend of 
America,” as an American diplomat put it in a report to the State Department. 
The journalist Gilbert Hirsch published a complimentary article titled “Our 
Friend Zimmermann” in the Evening Post on November 25, 1916.36
Popularity with the military, politicians, American diplomats, and journal-
ists would appear to be an asset for the new foreign secretary. If the German 
leadership remained united and maintained good relations with the United 
States, Zimmermann could be expected to play his part well. In this ideal sce-
nario, he would serve his superiors as an efficient facilitator domestically and 
goodwill ambassador vis-à-vis Washington in foreign affairs. But what if Ger-
man leaders diverged on military strategy and foreign policy, and the United 
States adopted a hostile posture toward Berlin? In this case, the Wilhelmstrasse 
would need a resolute and principled leader to steer the nation with a steady 
hand through the crisis. Unfortunately for Germany, Zimmermann was neither.

33
Chapter Three
the mexican imbroglio
T
he Mexican Revolution erupted in 1911, when a thirty-seven-year-
old idealist, Felix I. Madero, ousted Mexico’s octogenarian dictator, 
Porfirio Díaz, who had ruled the country with an iron fist for more 
than thirty years (the so-called Porfiriato). Though reform minded and well 
intentioned, Madero failed to establish effective control over the nation. Con-
sequently, he called on a tough regular army officer, Victoriano Huerta, to 
suppress armed rebellions against his shaky regime by reactionary and revolu-
tionary forces. Cunning and ruthless, Huerta scored several military victories 
over Madero’s enemies, but in the process he developed an appetite for power. 
In February 1913, he forced Madero to resign and assumed the presidency 
himself. Four days later, Madero was shot in what Huerta’s men described as 
an attempt to escape prison. Many contemporaries, however, held that Huerta 
had Madero killed.
The freshly minted president quickly set up a de facto military dictator-
ship and throughout his brief reign battled armed opposition in the south, led 
by Emiliano Zapata, and in the north, led by Venustiano Carranza and Fran-
cisco “Pancho” Villa. Carranza’s forces called themselves constitutionalists, in  
reference to the Mexican constitution, which Huerta had violated by deposing  
Madero. With U.S. support, Carranza ousted Huerta in July 1914, and a Ger-
man warship evacuated the fallen dictator. In Mexico, Carranza assumed power 
as the “first chief” and like his predecessors faced armed opposition from his 
erstwhile allies, Zapata and Villa, in the south and north. As World War I 
enveloped Europe, the Mexican Revolution entered another bloody stage.

34 
 Chapter Three	
	
	
	
The revolution continued and reinforced Mexican foreign policy trends 
initiated in the waning years of the Porfiriato. Economic development under 
Díaz had led to an influx of foreign capital, especially from the United States. 
As a result, Washington’s leverage south of the Rio Grande grew. Díaz then 
sought to counter American influence by forging closer commercial ties with 
European powers, principally Great Britain and Germany. This policy, in turn, 
irritated the United States, which decided to back Madero against Díaz. As the 
Great War caused increasing friction between the United States and Germany, 
the Mexican government, under Carranza, turned to Berlin in its continuing 
effort to check U.S. influence.1
Germany appeared to have little interest in Mexico. The Eurocentric Wil-
helmstrasse traditionally had treated Mexico as a diplomatic backwater and 
in 1911 appointed a retired naval officer, Rear Admiral Paul von Hintze, as 
envoy to Mexico City. Hintze had never held a diplomatic post, but his assign-
ment turned out to be a stroke of luck. During his tenure, Hintze impressed his 
superiors in Berlin as a shrewd and wily diplomat. A Japanese military attaché 
described him as “a man of clever diligence.”2 Although a novice to the foreign 
service, the perceptive Hintze quickly grasped the dire political situation in 
Mexico and wisely counseled the Wilhelmstrasse against entanglement with 
any of the warring factions. After the outbreak of war in Europe, Berlin reas-
signed Hintze to what the foreign office considered to be a more important 
post, in China. In Mexico City in early 1915, Hintze left his assistant, Arthur 
Magnus, in charge until the new envoy, Heinrich von Eckardt, arrived.3
Previously minister to Cuba, Eckardt had a reputation as a mediocre 
diplomat; the confusing political environment in Mexico further undermined 
his effectiveness. In late 1914, German warships withdrew from the Western 
Hemisphere, leaving the new envoy with little force to back up his authority. 
The cutting of Germany’s transatlantic cables by the Royal Navy early in the 
war complicated Eckardt’s communications with Berlin. The distance between 
Mexico and Berlin prevented direct transmission by radio, so Eckardt com-
municated with the Wilhelmstrasse mostly through the German embassy in 
Washington or with the help of the friendly Swedish minister in Mexico City. 
Either way, the process of sending and receiving transatlantic messages proved 
lengthy and insecure. When Eckardt’s reports did reach Berlin, they offered 
little to encourage the Wilhelmstrasse to pay more attention to the lands south 
of the Rio Grande. In early 1916, for example, he relayed the following bleak 
assessment of the Carranza regime: “Today’s Mexico under the regime of the 
‘Constitutionalistas’ presents a picture of unfathomable depredation, miser-
able ruins.”4

The Mexican Imbroglio 
 35
At times, Mexico’s turmoil affected German officials directly. In December 
1913, for instance, the governor of Mazatlán ordered the arrest of a German 
businessman, Gustav Eimbcke, who had been doubling as a naval agent for the 
admiralty staff. The governor accused Eimbcke of supporting revolutionaries, 
confiscated his property, and threw him into jail.5 Magnus, too, experienced 
the disintegrating law and order at first hand, reporting the following incident 
to Berlin: “Last night, 11 p.m., on my way home in the diplomatic quarter, 
about 150 meters from the Imperial Ministry, I was assailed by an individual 
who tried to steal my watch and chain.” However, Magnus’ ample body mass 
provided sufficient armor against the attacker: “Probably due to the lack of 
success and the beatings I administered with my stick, the individual thrust 
a knife at my heart, but [I sustained] only a laceration, three centimeters in 
length, four deep, midriff uninjured; neither danger nor fever; recuperation 
within two weeks. Diplomats use this incidence to point their governments 
once again to the untenable circumstances [in Mexico].”6
At the Wilhelmstrasse, Foreign Secretary Gottlieb von Jagow and his under- 
secretary, Zimmermann, spent much of their time dealing with the European 
neutrals and the United States, and it fell to Adolf Maximilian Maria von 
Montgelas, the foreign office counselor for American and Mexican affairs, 
to handle issues pertaining to Mexico. Montgelas hailed from a distinguished 
aristocratic Bavarian family of French descent. His grandfather, Maximilan 
de Garnerin de la Thuille, Comte de Montgelas, had fled France during the 
revolution at the close of the eighteenth century, settling the family in Bavaria, 
where he became the king’s grand chamberlain, his most trusted confidant, 
counselor, and prime minister. Putting down firm roots in Bavaria, numerous 
members of the Montgelas family served their new home country as adminis-
trators and diplomats. Count Adolf was no exception.
Born in Munich in 1872, Montgelas studied at the local university, and 
when barely thirty years of age, joined the diplomatic service. After a brief 
stint in Constantinople, he served as third secretary of the German embassy 
in Washington, from 1900 to 1903, while his later boss, Zimmermann, was 
plugging away as vice-consul in China. Montgelas moved on to fill, in rapid 
succession, posts at key German legations in Bucharest (1904–1905), St. Peters-
burg (1906), and then in a variety of functions at the German embassy in  
Tokyo until 1911.7 In March 1911, he reported on the improbability of a for-
mal Mexican-Japanese alliance, a matter of some concern in the United States 
at the time.8
In Berlin, Montgelas rubbed shoulders with various American officials, 
most of whom held him in high regard. One diplomat of the U.S. embassy in 

36 
 Chapter Three	
	
	
	
Berlin, Joseph Grew, described him as “one of my best friends . . . and I have a 
very high opinion of him. He has been in Washington, speaks English perfectly 
and might well be a future Ambassador to the United States.” The count and 
his wife were frequent guests of Ambassador James Gerard, who valued him 
as “an extremely agreeable man.” Montgelas would be one of only a hand-
ful of Wilhelmstrasse officials at the train station to see off the U.S. embassy 
staff after diplomatic relations between Germany and the United States were 
severed in 1917.9
Like so many other German officials, Montgelas was on summer vacation 
when the Great War erupted. On July 29, 1914, the foreign office informed 
him that there was no need to cut short his holidays in upper Bavaria, but in 
the evening he received a follow-up message, urging his return to Berlin.10 As 
the drama of the war unfolded, the United States, though not Mexico, was 
very much on Montgelas’ mind. “I only pray that America doesn’t come in. If 
she does, we are lost,” he reportedly told Ludwig Stein, foreign policy editor of 
the Berlin Vossische Zeitung, on the outbreak of war. Specifically, Montgelas 
worried about the consequences of unrestricted submarine warfare, and the 
sinking of the Lusitania by a German submarine in 1915 greatly disturbed 
him. Stein, who saw Montgelas shortly after this incident, “found him in a 
state of complete collapse with the tears streaming down his eyes. I said: ‘This 
is a second Marne [a reference to the German reversals in France in September 
1914].’ He replied, ‘It is far, far worse. I know American psychology, both  
because I lived in Washington three years and because my wife is American. 
She shares my grief and I hers. Personally and politically I am heartbroken.’”11 
Gerard had a similar impression: “I think [Montgelas] at all times had correct-
ly predicted the attitude of America and had been against acts of frightfulness, 
such as the torpedoing of the Lusitania and the resumption of unrestricted 
submarine war.”12
Behind the scenes, Montgelas actively participated in the wrangling over 
unrestricted warfare, and the tug-of-war found him firmly on the side of its  
opponents. In August 1915, when a German submarine sank the Arabic, 
another merchant ship with American citizens on board, Montgelas strongly 
urged the issuance of restrictive orders to U-boat commanders: “[As of now] a 
U-boat commander can at will cause a break between Germany and America. 
. . . This state of affairs is, in my opinion, untenable.” In an insightful memo-
randum on the upcoming American presidential elections of 1916, Montgelas 
doubted whether U-boat war could be expanded without antagonizing Wash-
ington: “Whether the ‘new measures’ adopted by the navy will bring us such 

The Mexican Imbroglio 
 37
military advantage as to justify the risk of a break with the United States, seems 
rather doubtful to me.”13
During the course of 1915, the United States began to tilt toward the Allies, 
and Montgelas developed an interest in scenarios that would create a diversion 
in Mexico and avert American attention from Europe. Against the backdrop 
of the Mexican civil war, such considerations did not appear unrealistic. On 
June 2, 1915, for example, President Woodrow Wilson sent a sharply worded 
note to the belligerent Mexican factions calling on them to come to terms as 
quickly as possible, otherwise Washington would be “constrained to decide 
what means should be employed to help Mexico save herself.” Contemporary  
observers interpreted Wilson’s note as a veiled threat of intervention, and 
the German ambassador in Washington, Johann Heinrich von Bernstorff, 
who relayed the remarks to Montgelas, made exactly this point: “Should [the 
Mexicans] refuse, intervention is threatened.” Montgelas underlined this 
sentence.14
A large-scale American intervention in Mexico suddenly appeared at hand 
when more than 400 heavily armed Mexican horsemen crossed the U.S. bor-
der and raided the small town of Columbus, New Mexico, on March 9, 1916. 
The Mexicans torched the business district and attacked a detachment of the 
13th U.S. Cavalry, garrisoned at Camp Furlong. After about two hours of fero-
cious fighting, including several instances of bloody hand-to-hand combat, the 
American soldiers drove the invaders back across the border. The Americans 
quickly identified the man in charge of the raiding party as “Pancho” Villa, the 
notorious leader of a constitutionalist faction in the Mexican civil war at the 
time opposed to the country’s de facto leader, Carranza. Less than a week after 
the Columbus raid, President Wilson dispatched the famous “punitive expedi-
tion,” a contingent of 4,000 men under General John J. “Black Jack” Pershing, 
to find Villa and disperse his forces.
Villa’s cross-border raid had a strategic purpose. By 1916 he had lost 
ground against Carranza, who enjoyed U.S. support. By attacking the United 
States, he hoped to boost his popularity among Mexicans and provoke a U.S. 
intervention, which would, in turn, embarrass his rival, Carranza. His gambit 
bore fruit, at least in the short term. Over the next twelve months, Villa’s suc-
cessful evasion of Pershing’s forces turned him into a Mexican folk hero of 
sorts. Although Villa had perfectly good reasons of his own to raid Columbus, 
rumors quickly spread to the effect that he had acted at Berlin’s command. 
On March 29, Ambassador Bernstorff reported to Chancellor Theobald von 
Bethmann Hollweg: “It is not surprising that an attempt has been made to 

38 
 Chapter Three	
	
	
	
blame Villa’s incursion on German intrigues, and to portray Germany as the 
real troublemaker. A substantiation of this nonsensical allegation is, of course, 
not forthcoming.” One official scribbled the cynical comment “unfortunately” 
next to the word “nonsensical.”15 Since Mexico-related messages typically 
landed on Montgelas’ desk, he was probably the person who added the “un-
fortunately.” The written comment reveals two facts: first, some German 
officials would have been happy to support Villa’s Columbus raid; second, 
Germany had had no hand in it.
Just a few days later, Captain Fritz Prieger, the director of the foreign divi-
sion of German naval intelligence, forwarded a lengthy top secret report by 
one of his agents to the Wilhelmstrasse. The agent, apparently based in Lon-
don and with access to Reuters journalists, waxed lyrical on Villa’s prowess 
and pronounced, “What was going on in Mexico now, is not only an insur-
rection, but the beginning of a war between Mexico and the United States.”16 
Montgelas’ initials on this communication show that he avidly read incoming 
intelligence reports on the fallout of Columbus throughout March and April. 
He added a question mark next to the agent’s bold prophecy, and on March 
23, he put his thoughts on the Mexican situation in writing:
There is little point, in my opinion, in sending “money” to Mexico. To 
the extent that anything can be achieved there with money, the Americans 
will always be able to outbid us easily, since they simply have more money 
and moreover because they have infinitely more channels at their disposal 
than we do, since the Americans have been working in this way for a 
long time in Mexico. It would be something quite different if we could 
get arms and ammunition (preferably of American origin) to Villa and his 
bands surreptitiously. This is, however, complicated by the fact that com-
munications with northern Mexico from Veracruz are currently poor.17
At first glance, it may seem surprising that Montgelas—married to an 
American citizen and generally opposed to measures that might provoke 
Washington—sought to escalate the U.S.-Mexican crisis. If his overriding con-
cern was the preservation of American neutrality in the European conflict, 
however, his hawkish proposals regarding Mexico appear quite rational. After 
the Lusitania and Arabic incidents, U.S.-German relations reached a nadir, and 
American intervention seemed a real possibility. If Wilson could be tricked into 
a Mexican adventure, however, the likelihood of U.S. intervention in Europe 

The Mexican Imbroglio 
 39
would decrease because Washington would be reluctant to wage war in two 
theaters simultaneously. In other words, Montgelas considered a U.S.-Mexican 
war the lesser of two evils. Not surprisingly, one of America’s leading interven-
tionists, Secretary of State Robert Lansing, held a diametrically opposing view. 
“Germany desires to keep up the turmoil in Mexico until the United States is 
forced to intervene,” he noted in his diary on October 10, 1915. “[T]there-
fore,” he concluded, “we must not intervene.”18 In Berlin, the excitement over 
Villa’s Columbus raid and Pershing’s punitive expedition blew over quickly. 
Other German officials read Montgelas’ suggestion of sending money and ma-
teriel to Villa with interest, but without acting on it.19
The Columbus raid was not the only incident beckoning the Wilhelm-
strasse to engage more directly in Mexican affairs. In December 1914, New 
Orleans–based Felix Díaz, the nephew of the toppled dictator, had approached 
German officials in Spain through a middleman who said that his boss planned 
an uprising to reestablish law and order. Capitalizing on his name, Díaz claimed 
backing from his exiled uncle and inquired whether Germany was willing 
to support him with $5 million. The German envoy, Hintze, had previously 
dismissed the younger Díaz as a theatrical personality incapable of organiza-
tion, and a Wilhelmstrasse official—probably Montgelas—now jotted a curt 
“NEIN” (no) on the request.20 That was the end of Díaz’s quest for German 
support, but other Mexicans soon came knocking on Berlin’s door.
Arnold Krumm Heller, also known as Arnoldo, was born in Salchendorf, 
Westphalia, in 1872. He left Germany at the age of eighteen, lived in Mexico 
and Chile, and traveled to Peru as an assistant to an American Inca scholar. 
Krumm Heller later touted the title “doctor” and claimed to have studied 
medicine in Paris. When the Mexican revolution erupted, he joined Madero, 
and after his murder enlisted with Carranza’s forces, where he attained the 
rank of colonel. In early 1916, Carranza appointed him military attaché to 
Germany for one year, a move designed to capitalize on Krumm Heller’s eth-
nic background and fluency in German, as well as his widely known ardently 
pro-German views. Eckardt, the German envoy in Mexico, drafted a glowing 
letter of introduction to the German chancellor, pointing out cheerfully that 
Krumm Heller was more interested in disseminating German propaganda in 
Latin America than in his official mission to study German military medical 
institutions.21
Krumm Heller’s mission got off to a rocky start. British officials in New 
York (probably the naval attaché) learned about his trip before he embarked 

40 
 Chapter Three	
	
	
	
and informed London. When his ship, the SS Oscar II, passed through Kirk-
wall, British authorities seized him and brought him to London, where Scot-
land Yard’s Special Branch director personally grilled him about the purpose of 
his trip. Compounding his misery, the Mexican minister to London denied any 
connection to him.22 Fortunately for Krumm Heller, he had managed on board 
the Oscar II to pass off Eckardt’s letter of introduction to a Swedish diplomat. 
The diplomat delivered it to Swedish officials, who, in turn, forwarded it to 
the German embassy in Stockholm. Although British officials remained igno-
rant of this potentially incriminating document, they nevertheless decided that 
Krumm Heller’s “real mission was undertaken purely in the German interest” 
and sent him back to America. In Berlin, Montgelas noted that Krumm Hel-
ler’s mission had become “irrelevant” due to his arrest, but the Wilhelmstrasse 
had not reckoned on the Germanophile attaché’s persistence.23
In early September, Krumm Heller showed up at the German ministry in 
Berne and announced his imminent voyage onward to Berlin. Despite Eck-
ardt’s effusive commendation, the Germans remained wary. As foreign secretary 
Jagow cautioned the German envoy in Berne, “due to political considerations, 
anything has to be avoided that might provoke the impression in the United 
States that the Imperial Government supports directly or indirectly Mexico’s 
anti-American tendencies.”24 Moreover, questions arose about Krumm Hel-
ler’s credibility. The German envoy to Berne considered him “honest if a little 
bizarre.” Others felt less ambivalent. A German diplomat formerly attached 
to the ministry in Mexico City warned that “the so-called ‘Dr.’ Krumm Hel-
ler had a very bad reputation in the German colony, and had no access to 
the higher classes of the Díaz regime. He called himself a medical doctor, but 
people deny he has medical knowledge. Utmost caution is warranted.” Still, 
Krumm Heller’s enthusiasm for Germany appeared authentic. As soon as he 
entered the country of his birth, he cabled the German envoy in Berne: “Hav-
ing gladly arrived on German soil, I send you my innermost thanks. Long live 
Kaiser and Fatherland. Colonel Krumm Heller.”25
After he set up shop at the Mexican ministry on Berlin’s Kurfürstendamm, 
the new military attaché requested an interview with the foreign secretary. 
Jagow referred him to Montgelas, who met with Krumm Heller on October 
30. Montgelas reported that according to Krumm Heller, Carranza wished to 
avoid war with the United States “as in the long run Mexico would come off 
second-best although it might take the Americans years—K. said ten years—to 
conquer Mexico.” He added, “Carranza is awaiting confidently the victory of 
the German arms.”26

The Mexican Imbroglio 
 41
At the same time, Krumm Heller made contact with German military  
officers to pursue the study of “military medical institutions,” his official task. 
In December, he called on the director of the department for prisoners of war at 
the war ministry (Kriegsministerium), and in January 1917, a series of visits to 
various prisoner camps was arranged. The officer who accompanied Krumm 
Heller reported delightedly that “the basic streak of his character manifests 
itself in fanatical hatred for England and unlimited enthusiasm for Germany . . .  
therefore, Colonel Dr. Krumm-Heller seems very well suited to combat anti-
German and promote pro-German propaganda. . . . It appears advisable to get 
to know his personality better, not least because, in pursuit of his goals he tends 
to give in to subjective exaggeration over objectivity, and therefore I don’t feel 
that everything he says should be taken at face value.”27
Krumm Heller did not stop at anti-British rants. On January 7, he dis-
cussed with a German naval officer the question of closer German-Mexican 
cooperation. Emphasizing his position as Carranza’s “confidential man,” 
Krumm Heller proposed the establishment of radio stations sufficiently power-
ful to enable direct contact between Germany and Mexico; sabotage of the sea-
port of Tampico to block the Royal Navy from access to Mexican oil; and the 
establishment of a German submarine station in Soto la Marina as a basis for 
anti-British operations. The naval officer reported, “The Mexican government 
would like to conclude an alliance with Germany as Mexico seeks backup 
against the United States. To this end, the Mexican government has already 
concluded an alliance in the form of an oral agreement with Japan. Our [Ger-
many’s] position vis-à-vis the United States would be substantially improved 
if we could come to an agreement with Japan.” Krumm Heller suggested he 
sail to Mexico on board a German vessel in order to promote Germany’s cause 
there.28
It is unclear whether Carranza had really instructed his military attaché 
to go this far. Given Krumm Heller’s personality, and his naive enthusiasm for 
all things German, he may well have been carried away and in the moment  
exceeded his instructions. The German naval officer who drafted the memo-
randum did not explicitly state that Krumm Heller’s proposal was an official 
initiative by Carranza’s government. Be that as it may, the memorandum indi- 
cates the kind of discussions that Krumm Heller conducted with German 
officials. Although German authorities did not pursue any of his proposals, 
they must have taken note of the fact that Mexico’s military attaché considered 
Japan’s detachment from the Allies feasible and a German-Mexican alliance 
advisable.

42 
 Chapter Three	
	
	
	
During the following months, Krumm Heller completed his metamorpho-
sis from Mexican military attaché to German propagandist. “One completely 
loses sight of the fact that he is officially a representative of a neutral power 
because of his strongly asserted interests in Germany,” noted a German mili-
tary officer in early January. When his one-year tour of duty ended, Krumm 
Heller was recalled to Mexico, in July 1917, but before his intended departure 
he asked Zimmermann how he could best “serve the German cause” at home. 
Zimmermann referred him to the intelligence division of the foreign office.29
Unable to return home by sea due to the British naval blockade, Krumm 
Heller remained attached to the Mexican ministry “on a special mission,”30 
advocating stronger German-Mexican bonds and lecturing widely on “the 
general prosperity of Mexico, and on the wonderful fertility of Mexican soil 
and the abundance of its harvest. The result is that his audience believes that 
Mexico is a kind of ‘earthly paradise.’”31 The German authorities were delighted, 
and in April 1918 arranged a visit for him to a German submarine in Bremen.32 
Just a few days before the war’s end, Krumm Heller was invited to the resi-
dence of the industrialist Krupp family where he explained the long-range gun 
used in bombarding Paris.33 The Americans and Allies were by now routinely 
intercepting cables from the Mexican ministry in Berlin and must have been 
particularly amused to read Krumm Heller’s assessment, dated September 7, 
1918: “The triumph of the Central Powers is certain; hence we must continue 
to remain neutral.”34 Eight weeks later, Germany surrendered, and Krumm 
Heller’s “special mission” came to an end.
Krumm Heller was not the only Mexican emissary who aggressively 
pushed for a Mexican-German alliance. Early in the war, Franz von Papen, 
the German military attaché to Washington, met with a certain Gonzalo C. 
Enrile. Born in Guanajuato in central Mexico in 1867, Enrile passed himself 
off as a colonel, claimed to have a large following in Mexico, and offered the 
Germans advantages—“oil wells, etc.”—in Mexico in exchange for German 
support against Carranza. Papen issued Enrile a letter of recommendation as 
an introduction to other German authorities.35
In 1915 Enrile moved on to Havana. In Cuba, as the Mexican consul in 
Havana reported, Enrile and a Spanish friend—probably a man called Hum-
berto Islas—boasted about their plan to travel to Germany “in order to acquire 
money and support for the purpose of disrupting at any price the existing 
relations between Mexico and the United States.” In February 1916, Enrile 
appeared at the German embassy in Spain, touting Papen’s letter and request-
ing a passport to Berlin “for negotiations about . . . the relations between 

The Mexican Imbroglio 
 43
Mexico and Germany.” Ambassador Maximilian von Ratibor forwarded 
Enrile’s request to the Wilhelmstrasse, where Montgelas and Zimmermann 
read it. They consulted Papen (by now back in Germany), who advised against 
Enrile’s proposed trip to Berlin but also suggested that Enrile not be dismissed 
entirely. Hence, Zimmermann instructed Ratibor to string the Mexican along: 
“Here no interest in Enrile. Please inform him kindly that visit ‘currently’ not 
opportune, but hint at possibility that this may later be convenient.”36
Unperturbed, the industrious Mexican headed for Berlin. On April 10, 
Enrile and Islas entered Germany from Switzerland and three days later took 
up residence in the Central Hotel on Berlin’s Friedrichstrasse, just a few blocks 
from the Wilhelmstrasse. Over the next six days, Enrile and Islas penned their 
thoughts on a proposal for German-Mexican alliance. On April 19, they fin-
ished their memorandum, and Enrile began to besiege the German authorities 
for an audience. Islas, on the other hand, stuffed a copy of the memorandum 
into one of his boots, along with some other papers, and headed for Switzer-
land, in all likelihood to keep their middlemen in Spain abreast of develop-
ments in Germany. German authorities apprehended him on April 29 at the 
Swiss border, searched his belongings, and retrieved the documents. When  
informed of the find, Zimmermann requested that Islas be relieved of the 
papers but otherwise permitted to proceed with his voyage to Switzerland and 
Spain, which he did.37
Meanwhile, Captain Rudolf Nadolny, the director of the army’s sabotage 
and covert action department, Sektion P, had gone through the reports on  
Enrile and informed the Wilhelmstrasse that he was not interested in working 
with the Mexican.38 The foreign office, however, did not dismiss him as read-
ily. With Papen’s letter of recommendation in hand, Enrile showed up unan-
nounced at Wilhelmstrasse 76 on June 15, met briefly with Montgelas, and 
handed him a lengthy memorandum, dated June 14. Montgelas told Enrile to 
return in two days to discuss its contents. The memorandum, as well as the 
papers seized earlier from Islas, purported that Enrile represented a “national-
ist party,” including such diverse leaders as Díaz, Villa, and Zapata, and out-
lined in intricate detail proposals for German support of this nebulous group 
to take over Mexico. In return, Enrile’s junta would grant major concessions 
to Berlin, and notably operate as a spearhead against the United States. The 
April 19 memorandum offered Germany “an alliance or secret treaty against 
the United States of America.” As a first step, Germany was to help end the 
“terror regime” of Carranza. In return, Enrile promised Berlin 

44 
 Chapter Three	
	
	
	
1. A Mexican policy favorable to Germany and aimed against the inter-
ests of the United States.
2. The creation of a strong army, which would invade American territory 
at a time propitious for Germany and Mexico.
[ . . . ]
5. Support for the separatist movements existing in several southwestern 
states: namely—Texas, Arizona, New Mexico and the south of Upper 
California.39
Enrile also noted, “The total sum, required partially in cash, partially in 
arms, ammunition and other war material needed to get the movement well on 
its way and to invade the United States, amounts to c. 300 million marks.”40
In the June 14 memorandum, Enrile elaborated on some of the above 
points. He argued that U.S. intervention was probable, in which case Mexico 
would be in a position to entangle American forces and keep Washington busy, 
as evidenced by Pershing’s ongoing punitive expedition. Should the United 
States attack Germany in spite of its exposed southern flank, “the participa-
tion of the Mexican army, which can easily be augmented to 200,000 men, 
deployed on American territory, along an open border of 2,000 km, etc., will 
help seal the defeat of the States.” Enrile closed his memorandum by pointing 
out that Mexico would prefer the German option but had an alternative with 
Japan which “for some time and also recently has made proposals to Mexi-
co to aid our position through support of our aspirations against the United 
States.” Montgelas carefully read the memorandum and its three appendices, 
underlining Enrile’s request for German “support of Mexico” and “modern 
weapons and war materiel” and his insistence that Mexico required “purely 
financial” aid.41
Enrile did not know it, but his mission was doomed. Even if the foreign 
office had been interested in his scheme, the Germans couldn’t be sure whom, 
if anyone, Enrile represented. It seemed highly unlikely that Díaz, Villa, and 
Zapata would have agreed to send an emissary collectively, and Enrile had 
no bona fides as proof that he spoke for any of them. Moreover, his own 
credentials were shaky; Montgelas wrote of “the somewhat strange ‘military 
career’ of Colonel Enrile.” Also, Berlin harbored no hostility toward Carranza 
and had no intention of toppling him. Montgelas conferred with Jagow and 
Zimmermann, and when Enrile returned to the Wilhelmstrasse on June 17, the 
counselor told him, “German-U.S. relations are currently quite normal. Our 
interference in American-Mexican disputes is—at this point in time, at any 
rate—out of the question.”42

The Mexican Imbroglio 
 45
From that point on, Enrile’s career as a Mexican emissary went downhill. 
German military intelligence considered using him as a spy in France, but then 
balked when questions about his military career arose. To make matters worse, 
the military began to suspect him of being an Allied spy. In June, the Berlin 
police received a notice from a suitcase manufacturer that Enrile had ordered a 
piece of luggage with a hollowed-out compartment. The detective in charge of 
the investigation discovered that the Mexican intended to use the secret com-
partment to conceal a copy of his alliance proposal for his party in Mexico, as 
well as “pictures of the emperor, von Hindenburg, Tirpitz and letters from von 
Papen.” The Berlin police concluded that Enrile was credible, and not a spy, so 
they released him.43 Free to go but empty-handed, Enrile proceeded to Spain 
and pitched his project of a “Mexican revolution against the United States” 
one more time to the German ambassador in Madrid, Ratibor, who informed 
Berlin of Enrile’s claim that he could “win over the Japanese for Mexican 
cause and sever them from Entente.” Montgelas’ colleague Hans Arthur von 
Kemnitz, the department chief (Referatsleiter) responsible for Latin American 
and East Asian affairs, delivered Zimmermann’s verdict to “amicably decline”  
Enrile’s offer.44
Having exhausted his funds, Enrile then began to besiege Ratibor for reim-
bursement of his various expenses. Zimmermann promptly forwarded the  
request to the war ministry because, he argued, Enrile’s trip had originated with 
the German military attaché to Washington. When the war ministry contacted 
Papen, he replied that he had suggested “economic and political negotiations” 
to Enrile, not military discussions. Therefore, the war ministry concluded, it 
would not reimburse the Mexican. Montgelas wired Ratibor that the Wilhelm-
strasse had consistently expressed their disinterest in Enrile’s project and would 
therefore not reimburse him either. In February 1917, Enrile made a last, des-
perate attempt to excite the Germans about his project—“in view of the break 
with America”—but Zimmermann replied coolly, “No interest in Enrile’s offer 
since he has no leverage with current Mexican government.” Enrile returned 
to Havana. Several months after Cuba’s declaration of war on Germany, on 
April 7, 1917, local authorities arrested him and confiscated all documents in 
his possession.45
Evidently, Enrile was a Mexican adventurer who may have been in touch 
with various revolutionary factions but truly represented no one but himself. 
He used his various German documents—Papen’s letter of recommendation 
and his own memoranda that Islas tried to smuggle out of Germany—to aug-
ment his own standing with revolutionaries and counterrevolutionaries at 

46 
 Chapter Three	
	
	
	
home. Had Papen not issued him a letter of recommendation, Enrile may have 
never made it to Germany. The Wilhelmstrasse was well advised to keep him 
at arm’s length. On the one hand, Enrile’s trip to Germany amounted merely 
to a cloak-and-dagger story of little importance to the course of the war. On 
the other, his proposals introduced influential German officials to the notion 
that Mexico might be interested in an anti-American alliance in exchange for 
financial support and U.S. territory and the possibility of incorporating Japan 
in this alliance.
If Enrile did not represent the Mexican leadership, another Mexican over-
ture demonstrated the Carranza regime’s interest in closer ties with Germany. 
In October 1916, the constitutionalists approached Berlin, “seeking from Ger-
many a declaration in Washington according to which an armed intervention 
in Mexico would not be viewed with favor. In return, the Mexicans offered 
extensive support for the German U-boats, should they desire to attack English 
oil tankers leaving the port of Tampico.”46 The Germans did not pursue this 
offer, but on November 3, 1916, the Mexican envoy to Berlin, Rafael Zubáran 
Capmany, submitted a memorandum to the Wilhelmstrasse with suggestions 
for closer ties between the two countries. In particular, he proposed the dis-
patch of German military instructors to Mexico, German assistance in setting 
up munitions factories in Mexico, Mexican acquisition of German submarines, 
and the construction of a powerful radio station on Mexican soil to establish 
direct contact with Berlin.47
In view of constant U.S. pressure and Pershing’s ongoing military expedi-
tion to Mexico, Carranza’s desire for German support was understandable, 
but the Mexicans had little to offer the Germans in return. Zimmermann, 
about to become foreign secretary, replied that his government viewed the pro-
posals with sympathy and would look at them in detail, “however, the current  
moment does not appear to be the best for the conclusion of new, specific 
agreements. As soon as peace comes, we would energetically push for them.” 
The Mexican envoy appeared satisfied with Zimmermann’s dilatory response 
and added that he, too, thought the arrangement should be postponed until the 
end of the European war.48
Evidently, some Mexicans displayed a genuine interest in closer coopera-
tion with Berlin in 1916, especially after U.S. troops under Pershing had begun 
operating on Mexican territory. The Wilhelmstrasse did register repeated calls 
for assistance from Carranza, but what precisely they sought was not always 
obvious, and not all of the emissaries could claim to speak on behalf of the 
“first chief” or another significant political faction. Berlin invariably rejected 

The Mexican Imbroglio 
 47
all advances in this regard or deferred the emissaries to the end of the war, since 
Germany stood little to gain from these offers.
While Carranza could hope to strengthen his hand against the United 
States with German backing, the foreign office was rightly afraid of jeopardiz-
ing its delicate relationship with Washington by dabbling in domestic Mexi-
can affairs. The Germans’ attitude would change only when relations with 
the United States appeared damaged beyond repair, and little would be lost by 
taking a more aggressive stance in the Western Hemisphere. Yet the various 
Mexican proposals were significant in that they left a paper trail in the Wil-
helmstrasse, and familiarized a number of key officials with putative Mexican 
foreign policy goals, which the Germans would pick up on when the political 
situation changed due to the impending U.S. entry into the war. In this regard, 
they became an important building block of the alliance proposal Zimmer-
mann would make to Carranza in early 1917.

48
Chapter Four
the German Quest  
for japan
T
hough first and foremost a European conflict, the Great War touched 
nations and peoples around the globe. One such area was the Pacific, 
where Germany had carved out a colonial empire of archipelagoes 
and footholds in Papua New Guinea and mainland China. After war broke out 
in Europe in July 1914, Japan saw an opportunity to expand its sphere of influ-
ence in Asia and the Pacific at Germany’s expense. Bound to Great Britain by 
a bilateral alliance concluded in 1902, the Japanese government sent a harsh 
ultimatum to Berlin in August 1914 demanding German withdrawal from the 
Pacific. The Germans left the ultimatum unanswered, and on August 23, Japan 
declared war on Germany. 
In the course of the next few months, Japan conducted a predatory military 
campaign against the numerically small and widely dispersed German colonial 
forces in the Pacific. In the process, Japan gobbled up much of Germany’s far-
flung possessions in the Far East, including the strategically valuable Chinese 
port city of Tsingtao, after a two-month siege. On November 7, 1914, the last 
German colonial forces in the Pacific surrendered to Tokyo.
Japan’s conquest of the German possessions in the Far East removed a key 
motivation for Tokyo’s participation in the war. When early German military 
victories against France and Russia appeared to portend a quick and compre-
hensive defeat of the Allies in Europe, Japan’s allegiance to the Allied cause 
began to waver. In the spring of 1915, Japan’s officially inspired press assumed 
an anti-British tone, while affording broad coverage to Germany’s military 
victories. Pro-German military leaders as well as some intellectuals publicly 
voiced their preference for Japan to come to an agreement with the Central 

The German Quest for Japan 
 49
Powers. Peace with Germany, these advocates hoped, would enable Japan to 
penetrate deep into China, a goal strongly resented by the Allies.1
Berlin duly took notice of Japan’s vacillation. Fearing the transfer of Japa-
nese troops to Europe and concerned about the growing volume of Japanese 
arms deliveries to Russia, the Wilhelmstrasse began to consider avenues for 
detaching Tokyo from the Allies. Less than two weeks after the fall of Tsingtao, 
the Wilhelmstrasse exhorted the German envoy to China to initiate negotia-
tions for a separate peace with his Japanese counterpart. On January 12, 1915, 
Foreign Secretary Gottlieb von Jagow expounded his thinking vis-à-vis Japan 
in a lengthy memorandum to his deputy, Zimmermann. Tokyo had fulfilled 
its treaty obligations to Great Britain, and Japan was neither contractually 
obliged nor did it appear willing to send troops to Europe in support of the 
Allies. The war played to Japan’s advantage, the foreign secretary argued, as  
it weakened and distracted the Entente powers from Asia. Germany could 
take advantage of this development if it accepted the loss of Tsingtao. Jagow 
regarded the precarious state of Japan’s finances as a promising basis for future 
German-Japanese negotiations.2
From the very beginning, institutional and cultural peculiarities shaped the 
German quest for a separate peace with Japan. On an institutional level, the 
Wilhelmstrasse’s department (Referat) handling East Asian affairs exerted an 
unusual degree of influence over Berlin’s approaches to Tokyo. Two reasons 
accounted for the department’s outsized importance. First, neither Chancel-
lor Theobald von Bethmann Hollweg, nor Jagow, nor Zimmermann was well 
versed in Japanese politics. Second, Japan did not figure prominently in the 
Germans’ thinking when compared to Europe or the United States. As a result, 
German leaders tended to rely on the foreign office experts for information 
and advice on East Asia. This delegation of authority gave particular influence 
on foreign policy to the men heading the East Asian department during the 
war: Adolf von Montgelas (until early 1916), Hans Arthur von Kemnitz (until 
late 1917), and Edmund Rhomberg (through the rest of the war).3
A condescending, not to say racist, attitude toward the Japanese also per-
meated German policy. A good number of Berlin policy makers and diplomats 
seemed to think that Japan “owed” Germany because Tokyo had modeled its 
modern bureaucracy and army partly on their German counterparts. Some 
German officials habitually used pejorative terms—such as “yellow peril” or 
“yellow fellows (Gelbe Kerle)”—in internal references to Japanese diplomats 
and policy. A German negotiator in Stockholm portrayed the local Japanese 
envoy’s alleged “self-satisfaction” as “easily explainable, since one has to bear 

50 
 Chapter Four		
	
	
in mind that in earlier years he was general consul in New York, where he 
certainly had to endure countless minor insults [Taktlosigkeiten] on account 
of his short stature.” The Japanese, in turn, sought to play these prejudices to 
their advantage. In February 1915, for example, the Japanese envoy to Swe-
den informed the Germans via his Austrian counterpart that “we admire this 
powerful country and its titanic battle, as well as its splendid army, which 
continues to serve us as model.” The Wilhelmstrasse erroneously interpreted 
these remarks as a genuine Japanese desire to quickly strike a separate peace 
agreement with Germany.4
It is noteworthy that diplomats who had served in Japan, such as Montge-
las and Rhomberg, by and large avoided succumbing to such stereotypes. They 
generally displayed a realistic grasp of the limits of Japan’s willingness to reach 
a separate agreement with Berlin and repeatedly advised the political leader-
ship against placing too much hope in these negotiations. Others, among them 
Zimmermann and especially Kemnitz, pursued Tokyo much more aggressively. 
Neither of the two had extensive or firsthand knowledge of Japan, and they 
readily based their assumptions about Japanese politics on platitudes rather 
than hard analysis. Kemnitz, for example, explored at great length the alleged 
importance of “the emotional” in Japanese politics in a 1916 memorandum. 
His recommendations, based on such pseudo-analysis, were therefore the 
result of wishful thinking rather than Realpolitik.5
German overtures to Japan began in earnest in early 1915. In January, 
Paul von Hintze, then ambassador to China, informed his Japanese coun-
terpart of Germany’s willingness, under certain conditions, to let Japan keep 
Tsingtao and the Pacific islands and to give Tokyo a free hand in China. Hintze 
launched several initiatives to lure the Japanese into peace negotiations, but 
he eventually failed, leaving neutral Sweden as the main venue for German-
Japanese peace talks.
Tokyo’s main protagonist in Stockholm was its envoy, Sadatsuchi Uchida. 
Uchida was an excellent tactician whom the British envoy described as an “ac-
tive minded man who felt restive at lack of work.” He would soon find a suit-
able challenge in his talks with the Germans who, characteristically, tended to 
underestimate him. One German negotiator who met Uchida dismissed him 
as a second-rate personality.6 In January 1915, Uchida told a Swedish news 
agency that “Japan considered the war against Germany ended.” In response 
to this ambivalent statement, Jagow drew up the above-mentioned memo-
randum for Zimmermann outlining Germany’s position vis-à-vis Japan. In it, 
the foreign secretary envisioned a joint German-Japanese administration of  

The German Quest for Japan 
 51
Tsingtao, or even complete cession of the territory to Tokyo, and carte blanche 
for Japan in the Far East in return for a separate peace. The chancellor sanc-
tioned Jagow’s proposals, and the German envoy in Stockholm, Hellmuth 
von Lucius, received instructions to contact Uchida through the Austrian and 
Ottoman envoys, Maximilian von Hadik and Mustafa Chekib Bey, whose 
nations were allied to Germany but not at war with Japan.7
Like Montgelas in Berlin, Lucius did not place high hopes in these negotia-
tions, and he treated Jagow’s instructions dilatorily. Zimmermann prompted 
him several times to make contact with Uchida.8 When Lucius finally did so, 
Uchida expressed his interest in the German proposal. He also indicated that 
Japan would not send troops to Europe. Encouraged, Lucius communicated 
Uchida’s statements to Berlin, and pursued his diplomatic endeavors through 
the services of his Austrian colleague. Shortly afterward, he reported that Uchi-
da had told the Austrian envoy, Hadik, that Japan had been forced to take 
Tsingtao as the result of its obligations under the Anglo-Japanese alliance, but 
that this obligation had now been fulfilled. When Hadik suggested that Russia 
and Great Britain were Japan’s real enemies, Uchida wholeheartedly agreed. A 
few days later, Uchida expressed his country’s general admiration for Germany 
and his hope for the restoration of good relations between the two nations.9
The German leadership initially jumped at the bait. On May 15, 1915, 
the chancellor informed the Wilhelmstrasse of his intention to “conclude peace 
as soon as possible with Japan” and offer Tokyo Tsingtao as well as German 
support for Japanese ambitions in China. When Bethmann’s memo reached 
Montgelas, however, the East Asian division chief balked. He pointed to the 
existing Japanese-British alliance as a formal obstacle to a separate peace and 
insisted that Germany had nothing tangible to offer, save Tsingtao (which the 
Japanese already had). He also reminded the German leadership of the pro-
British proclivities of Japan’s foreign minister, Takaaki Kato, who might imme-
diately share the secret German terms with the Allies. Eventually, Jagow agreed 
with Montgelas and for the time being considered a separate peace with Japan 
neither possible nor feasible.10
Montgelas had accurately assessed the Japanese position. Since Tokyo 
already de facto possessed the German territories in the Pacific, Berlin had little 
with which to bargain. Japanese officials pursued the German overture chiefly 
in an effort to play off the Germans against the Allies and extract maximum 
concessions from the latter. The Japanese government communicated Hintze’s 
as well as Lucius’ proposals to the Allies, causing considerable consternation 
in Europe and sparking concern in the United States about German schemes. 

52 
 Chapter Four		
	
	
As James Gerard, Washington’s ambassador to Berlin, noted in his diary, “I 
think from underground rumours that the Germans and the propagandists 
will endeavour to embroil us with Japan.”11 Western insecurity over Japan’s 
allegiance made the Allies much more amenable to Tokyo’s demands in the 
Far East, precisely as Japanese policy makers intended. Japan’s leaking of Ger-
many’s proposals to the Allies ultimately helped Tokyo secure a series of agree-
ments with Russia, France, and Great Britain supporting Japanese claims to 
the former German possessions in China and the Pacific north of the equator.12 
As a result of Tokyo’s double-dealing and Berlin’s doubts about Japanese sin-
cerity, the Japanese-German peace talks in Sweden petered out in late 1915.
While Foreign Secretary Jagow and Chancellor Bethmann grew disen-
chanted with the Japanese, German military leaders continued to call for a  
rapprochement with Tokyo. In December 1915, Admiral Henning von Holt-
zendorff, chief of the German naval staff, advocated a separate peace with 
Japan that, he argued, would undermine the Allies and compel Britain to  
divert precious naval forces from the North Sea and the Atlantic to the Pacific.13 
Holtzendorff and others who supported renewed efforts to engage the Japa-
nese diplomatically soon found a valuable ally in Hans Arthur von Kemnitz,14 
who assumed responsibility for the foreign office’s East Asian division in April 
1916 and would play a leading role in events surrounding the Zimmermann 
telegram. 
Born on August 17, 1870, in Charlottenburg, now a west Berlin neigh-
borhood, Hans Arthur von Kemnitz hailed from a conservative, Protestant 
military family. His father, Albert von Kemnitz, was a Prussian officer, and 
respect for the military became a deeply ingrained trait of the younger Kem-
nitz. Seventy-five years of age at the end of World War II, Arthur still revered 
“our old Prussian and German military forces and the spirit they had. . . .  
[T]hat spirit was a spirit of Christianism [sic] and honor.”15 Politically, he sym-
pathized with the chauvinistic Pan-German movement, and his narrow, ultra-
nationalist views would remain basically unchanged throughout his life.16
Kemnitz attended prestigious public secondary schools (Gymnasien) in 
Charlottenburg and Tilsit, a town at the extreme northeastern tip of East Prus-
sia, and then studied law and political science at universities in Freiburg, Berlin, 
and Leipzig. In 1890 he served one year in the elite Royal Prussian 2nd Guards 
Ulan Cavalry Regiment and eventually acquired the rank of cavalry captain of 
the reserve. In 1901 he entered the consular service and served briefly with the 
Prussian ministry at the Vatican. Like Zimmermann, he managed to transfer  
to the more prestigious diplomatic service two years later, in 1903. The two 

The German Quest for Japan 
 53
men developed close ties, and Kemnitz would eventually become Zimmer-
mann’s protégé.17 In 1909, Kemnitz married Laura née Freiin von Rosenberg, 
the daughter of another aristocratic Prussian officer.
A federal salary typically did not cover all the costs incurred by a member 
of the diplomatic corps, and Kemnitz later complained that the switch put  
a heavy financial burden on his parents.18 During his prewar career, he com-
pleted tours in Constantinople (1904), Lisbon (1905–1906), Beijing (1906–
1908), and Madrid (1910–1912). In January 1913, he took over the South 
and Central America department at the Wilhelmstrasse while holding the title 
of permanent assistant (Ständiger Hilfsarbeiter). The department’s responsi-
bilities included Mexican affairs.19 
By most accounts, Kemnitz’s performance as a diplomat was subpar. In 
1905, for example, a group of German politicians sought to open a casino on 
the Portuguese island of Madeira, in the Atlantic. Designed to rival the famed 
Monte Carlo, the project was to include gambling halls, hotels, parks, and 
swimming pools. Investors put significant funds into the scheme, but the land 
for the envisioned complex belonged to an Englishman who refused to sell. 
When local authorities threatened the English landlord with dispossession, he 
turned to the Portuguese government, which vetoed the looming expropriation 
and halted the project altogether. German investors and politicians then pulled 
some strings at the Wilhelmstrasse, and soon thereafter the German legation 
in Lisbon received a letter from Berlin with instructions to put pressure on the 
Portuguese government to withdraw its veto. The chancellor had not signed 
the instructions and probably was unaware of the situation. An experienced 
diplomat doubtlessly would have asked for clarification on this delicate affair, 
especially since Germany had just sustained a major diplomatic defeat at the 
hands of France and Britain at the Algeciras conference, whose participants 
agreed to turn Morocco into a French protectorate, against Germany’s wishes. 
A clash with London over a casino in Madeira was the last thing Berlin needed 
at this point.
The German envoy in Lisbon was absent when the fateful foreign office 
dispatch reached Portugal, and Kemnitz happened to be the official in charge 
in his stead. Without further consultations, he immediately demanded from 
the Portuguese government the withdrawal of its veto, triggering a minor inter-
national crisis. Annoyed, Lisbon contacted Washington and London, and  
the infuriated British ambassador to Berlin demanded an explanation from the 
chancellor. The latter denied knowledge of the affair, effectively burying the 
casino project and exposing Kemnitz as naive and careless. When subsequently 

54 
 Chapter Four		
	
	
discussing the subject with a member of the German embassy in London, Brit-
ain’s King Edward VII merely shrugged and smiled as if to say, “By God, what 
a small horizon that diplomat [Kemnitz] had!”20
In the summer of 1914, the Wilhelmstrasse chose Kemnitz to succeed Hin-
tze as envoy to Mexico. However, the routine medical checkup performed in 
preparation for this posting revealed a heart condition that made him unfit for 
permanent residence and work in the high altitude of Mexico City. Kemnitz, 
therefore, remained at his desk job in Berlin. When war broke out, the armed 
forces enrolled all foreign office permanent assistants of appropriate age, and 
Kemnitz rejoined his old regiment, the 2nd Guards Ulan Cavalry. He served in 
the army for nearly two years, saw frontline duty, and received two medals, the 
Iron Cross, First Class, and the Iron Cross, Second Class. Eventually, the for-
eign office requested his return to Berlin, and he reassumed his job, now with 
the title Referatsleiter (department chief) of the Latin American division, on 
April 8, 1916. The geographical responsibility of this department had slightly 
changed, however. It now included East Asia but explicitly excluded Mexico, 
which was part of the North American division under Montgelas.21
Kemnitz’s return to the Wilhelmstrasse coincided with the resumption of 
Japanese-German negotiations for a separate peace. The Germans had never 
entirely abandoned hope for an agreement with Japan. In 1915 the negotia-
tions in Stockholm had been conducted exclusively by an intermediary, but 
when the Japanese envoy to Stockholm, Uchida, indicated his willingness to 
meet in person with his German colleague, Lucius, the Wilhelmstrasse forged 
ahead. On April 1, 1916, Uchida and Lucius met for a two-hour session at the 
Grand Hotel in Stockholm. The meeting had been arranged by Hugo Stinnes, 
a wealthy German industrialist, who also attended the meeting.22 The three 
participants wrote diverging accounts of the discussions, but their statements 
agree on two points. First, Uchida explained that Japan did not want to con-
clude a separate peace because of its alliance with Britain. Second, the partici-
pants nevertheless discussed the possibility of initiating talks between Russia, 
Japan, and Germany. Whatever Uchida told the Germans, his remarks were 
sufficiently ambivalent to stoke hopes in Berlin for severing Japan, and possi-
bly even Russia, from the enemy alliance. The chancellor’s secretary expressed 
admiration for the “delightful brutality” of the negotiating skills of the “yel-
low fellows.”23 The Japanese envoy reinforced German expectations when he 
met with Lucius for a second time, on April 24, at the residence of the Japa-
nese consul in Stockholm. As Lucius reported to Berlin, Uchida was much less  
reserved at this meeting than he had been three weeks earlier.24

The German Quest for Japan 
 55
Kemnitz did not initiate this second round of talks, but he wholeheart-
edly endorsed them and pushed them forward. Picking up on Uchida’s tan-
talizing hints about a far-reaching agreement between Berlin, Tokyo, and St. 
Petersburg, Kemnitz on May 17 drafted detailed territorial concessions in 
the Pacific that Germany should make to Japan and Russia in an effort to 
pry both nations from the Allies.25 Zimmermann agreed with Kemnitz. In his 
opinion, Germany’s colonial possessions in the Pacific were a liability due to 
the difficulty of defending them in the case of war. Instead, “Africa must be our 
goal. . . . May the Japanese and Americans be left to themselves in the Pacific, 
England’s days there should also be numbered.”26
Yet the Japanese were up to their old game of playing the Germans off 
against the Allies. While encouraging the Germans to make concrete propos-
als, Tokyo leaked the substance of the talks to London in order to raise the 
Japanese bargaining position vis-à-vis the Allies. As they were not interested 
in a formal agreement with the Germans, the Japanese prevaricated in their  
negotiations with German diplomats, frustrating the Wilhelmstrasse, and led 
the exasperated foreign secretary to lament the difficulty of getting anything 
out of “these lying and taciturn Japanese.” Sensing Tokyo’s double-dealing, 
Jagow warned political and military leaders in early May that Japan would 
“seize the present opportunity, while the European powers’ hands are tied by 
the war,” to realize “its ambitious plans” in the Far East.27
Jagow was right on the mark. A few days after he had issued his warning, 
Tokyo instructed Uchida to inform the Germans orally that Japan could not 
enter into peace negotiations with Berlin and that any German peace proposal 
would have to be directed jointly to Japan, France, Russia, and Britain. Uchida 
informed Lucius accordingly. Infuriated, the Wilhelmstrasse terminated the  
negotiations, and Kaiser Wilhelm II, in one of his infamous outbursts, noted 
that there was no point in negotiating with the Japanese because “[o]ne can 
get more by thrashing them!”28 Not all German officials drew the same conclu-
sion, however.
Kemnitz noted that he had “expected” this response from Tokyo.29 In 
hindsight, he laid the blame for the failure of the Stockholm talks at Berlin’s 
doorstep rather than Tokyo’s. “We were partially responsible” for the rup-
ture, he wrote. “In spite of my continuous urging, our side had pursued [the 
talks] far too tepidly, and when Japan consequently declared that it could not 
conclude a separate peace, but that it would be ready, as the least involved  
Allied power, to bring about a general peace, this proposal was rejected by us, 
without even hearing me, ‘because we did not need Japan for this purpose, but 

56 
 Chapter Four		
	
	
could have this every day cheaper from England.’” Had the Wilhelmstrasse 
only followed his counsel of pursuing Japan more vigorously, Kemnitz argued, 
the war could have been ended in 1916.30
In fact, some German officials continued to chase the Japanese mirage 
even after Uchida’s notification of May 1916 and the conclusion of a separate 
Japanese-Russian agreement in July 1916. Military and naval leaders antici-
pated U.S. intervention in response to Germany’s unrestrained use of U-boats, 
and they hoped that Japan could be used to neutralize the looming American 
threat.31 While the chancellor and foreign secretary cautioned against the over-
estimation of Japanese power and the political consequences of unrestricted 
submarine warfare, not every foreign office official concurred with the civil-
ian leadership. Kemnitz, for one, remained steadfast in his conviction that an 
agreement with Tokyo was the key to “a satisfactory conclusion of the war” 
and kept urging his superiors to restart negotiations with the Japanese.32
In a July 1916 memorandum, Kemnitz argued that Tokyo’s next goal 
would be Japanese domination in the Pacific or the implementation of an  
“East Asian Monroe Doctrine.” If Germany permanently abandoned all politi-
cal aspirations in the Pacific, he reasoned, “we would over time become the 
wooed and it would be in our hands to side either with Japan or with England. 
I would recommend the former.”33
In spite of the earlier frustrations of negotiating with the Japanese, the 
German leadership endorsed Kemnitz’s proposal. In preparation for yet anoth-
er overture to Tokyo, Berlin directed the German press to tone down criticism 
of Japan, omit racist buzzwords, such as the ubiquitous “yellow peril,” and 
avoid taking China’s side when reporting on Japanese activities in East Asia. 
Not surprisingly, these steps yielded no tangible results. By late 1916, Berlin 
realized the failure of its press campaign and appeasement policy vis-à-vis 
Tokyo and abandoned both.34
Stubborn as ever, Kemnitz remained undeterred. When his mentor Zim-
mermann succeeded the cautious Jagow as foreign secretary in November 1916, 
he saw yet another opportunity to resurrect his pet project. In view of the fail-
ure of the talks with Uchida in Stockholm, Kemnitz began to focus on neutral 
Mexico as an alternative route for engaging Tokyo. Even though Mexico did 
not officially fall into Kemnitz’s purview, he had developed a certain expertise 
on it during the prewar years, and he continued to exhibit an interest in Mexi-
can politics. Kemnitz’s persistent pursuit of a separate peace with Tokyo now 
joined his old area of responsibility to his new one. As he explained in 1918, 
he was bent on “correcting” the Wilhelmstrasse’s supposed bungling of the 

The German Quest for Japan 
 57
German-Japanese talks: “[S]ince my repeated suggestions to approach Japan 
directly did not fall on a fertile soil with my superiors, because they did not 
want to ‘chase after’ Japan, I proposed to go through Mexico, which for over 
ten years had close relations with Japan.”35
Indeed, Japanese-Mexican relations had traditionally been close and were 
molded by a mutual suspicion of the United States. As early as 1910, the Ger-
man military attaché to Washington had reported that Mexican-Japanese rela-
tions had grown noticeably more cordial in response to alleged U.S. schemes 
to annex all of Mexico. A year later, Montgelas, then attached to the German 
embassy in Tokyo, discounted the possibility of such an alliance, but in May 
1914, the German naval attaché to Washington, in a dispatch titled “Fear of 
Japan,” reported American rumors that “the entire U.S. Navy strike force has 
been assembled in Mexican waters as a precaution against a third power. The 
country usually named is Japan, occasionally Germany.”36 Moreover, Japanese 
companies had developed certain economic interests in Mexico in the early 
twentieth century, and when the Mexican Revolution broke out, Tokyo called 
for a strong central government to stabilize the country. The Japanese also 
had to take into account the presence of a growing number of its citizens in 
Mexico, many of whom had ended up south of the Rio Grande due to restric-
tions imposed on Asian immigrants by the United States.”37
It was Mexico, however, not Japan, that pushed for closer political ties 
between the two nations. In May 1916, shortly after General John Pershing’s 
troops had entered Mexico, the Carranza regime approached Japan, probing 
for a possible alliance, the purchase of arms, and mediation with Washington. 
The Japanese chargé d’affaires, Tamekichi Ohta, remained non-committal to 
Carranza’s foreign minister, Cándido Aguilar, and forwarded his inquiry to  
Tokyo. On May 13, the Japanese foreign ministry responded that Tokyo would 
neither arbitrate between Mexico and the United States nor provide arms to 
the Carranza regime.38
Undeterred, Venustiano Carranza assembled a secret military mission,  
under the direction of Colonel Rafael Vargas and Lieutenant Angel Guitiérez 
Astraege, and tasked them to travel to Japan for large-scale arms purchases. 
They arrived there in late July and received a mixed welcome. While the Japa-
nese ministry of the navy went to great lengths to accommodate the Mexicans, 
the foreign ministry gave them the cold shoulder. Eventually, Vargas signed 
contracts with several Japanese companies for the purchase of 30 million car-
tridges as well as machinery for manufacturing gunpowder and a cartridge 

58 
 Chapter Four		
	
	
factory. The New York Times concluded that these purchases would ensure the 
Carranza regime’s independence from foreign ammunition suppliers.39
As the New York Times coverage of the “secret” Mexican military mis-
sion’s endeavors in Japan indicates, its operations remained hardly covert. As 
the desk officer responsible for handling Japanese affairs at the Wilhelmstrasse, 
Kemnitz closely followed this Mexican mission in Japan. He also simultane-
ously tracked the “mission” of the self-styled Mexican emissary Gonzalo 
Enrile in Germany, and thus became familiar with his proposals regarding an 
alliance with Japan. At the time, Kemnitz terminated Enrile’s endeavors with 
the words, “no interest in Enrile here. Please decline amicably.”40  However, 
Enrile’s various proposals evidently struck a chord with Kemnitz for he would 
subsequently use elements thereof in a diplomatic initiative of his own.
In reality, a formal Mexican-Japanese alliance against the United States 
remained as unlikely as Germany’s quest for a separate peace with Japan 
proved elusive, yet both Mexico and Japan continued to loom large in the 
imagination of German officials. The kaiser himself suggested to Zimmermann 
that Germany approach Mexico in order to stir up trouble against the United 
States,41 and military leaders continued to believe in the feasibility of a German-
Japanese alignment. Kemnitz shared these views. Moreover, Japan was the 
only country within Kemnitz’s regional responsibility at the foreign office that 
potentially allowed him to influence German war policy. The resumption of 
unrestricted submarine warfare in early 1917 would open a window for Kem-
nitz to turn his pursuit of a separate peace with Japan into a formal diplomatic 
initiative and override earlier objections to this scheme by the foreign office 
leadership. 

59
Chapter Five
drafting the telegram
B
efore the outbreak of war, the German navy had high hopes for its 
vaunted surface battle fleet, arguably the most modern of its day and 
second only to Britain’s in size. German and British vessels had occa-
sional skirmishes in the North Sea and across the globe during the first months 
of the war, but London and Berlin were reluctant to risk their fleets in an all-
out engagement for fear of irrevocably losing control of the sea to the enemy. 
Instead, the Royal Navy imposed a distant blockade on German seaports, with 
the goal of suppressing Germany’s trade with neutral nations outside Europe. 
With their high seas fleet effectively bottled up in the North Sea, the Germans 
turned to the submarine to strike at British commerce. German naval leaders 
hoped that by attacking merchant ships sailing to and from British seaports, 
the U-boats would be able to throttle British trade and starve London into 
surrender.
Tactically, the submarine worked most effectively when U-boat command-
ers were given permission to attack indiscriminately and without forewarning, 
regardless of whether a ship was armed or the flag it flew. The unrestrained 
employment of U-boats would eventually be termed “unrestricted submarine 
warfare.” Such stealth attacks, however, frequently resulted in the loss of neu-
tral ships and lives and provoked angry protests from neutral nations. Hence, 
during the first years of the war, a debate unfolded in Germany over the pros 
and cons of unrestricted submarine warfare. Chancellor Theobald von Beth-
mann Hollweg, Foreign Secretary Gottlieb von Jagow, and Johann Heinrich 
von Bernstorff, German ambassador to Washington, consistently pointed out 
the political hazards of this tactic, especially its potential for antagonizing the 

60 
 Chapter Five	 	
	
	
United States. Naval officers, on the other hand, routinely brushed aside the 
civilians’ concerns, arguing that the submarines would vanquish Britain before 
U.S. intervention could become effective.
In late 1916, the debate over unrestricted submarine warfare entered its 
final stage. Whipped up by a skillful navy propaganda campaign, a war-weary 
public began to regard the submarine as a miracle weapon that promised to 
bring “perfidious Albion” to its knees and end the war in a few months’ time. 
The new leadership of the army’s supreme command (Oberste Heeresleitung, 
OHL) unreservedly embraced their naval colleagues’ arguments, putting tre-
mendous pressure on the chancellor and foreign secretary. With Bernstorff’s 
encouragement, Bethmann floated the possibility of reaching a negotiated 
peace in a speech delivered to the Reichstag on December 12, but the Allies 
promptly rejected it. When, six days later, President Woodrow Wilson’s offer 
of mediation between the warring parties also fell flat, the final showdown 
over unrestricted submarine warfare was at hand.1
The absence of a clear decision-making process at the top echelon of impe-
rial Germany’s leadership significantly aggravated the political crisis brought 
about by the debate over unrestricted submarine warfare. According to the 
German constitution, the kaiser had the final word on all issues of overriding 
strategic and political importance, but this seemingly impressive concentra-
tion of power in the hands of one man existed largely on paper. Even in times 
of peace, Kaiser Wilhelm II was neither a competent nor a strong monarch. 
Though intelligent and progressive in some respects, he was also insecure,  
arrogant, erratic, and enraptured by the medieval pomp and pageantry of his 
imperial court. His impulsiveness and saber rattling had contributed markedly 
to Germany’s growing international isolation in the years preceding the war.
The war further diminished Wilhelm’s standing. In late 1914, the kaiser 
took up residence variously at general headquarters at Charleville-Mézières, in 
northern France, or at the picturesque Pless castle, in Upper Silesia, an hours-
long train ride from Berlin. He thus distanced himself from the political scene 
in Berlin and compounded his isolation from meddlesome politicians at times 
by refusing to receive civilian leaders and high-ranking diplomats—because 
they “made him nervous,” as Gottfried zu Hohenlohe-Schillingfürst, the Aus-
trian ambassador to Berlin, remarked.2 Cut off from independent counsel, the 
kaiser grew increasingly detached from reality and more willing to bow to the 
military’s wishes. By early 1917, monarchical rule relied de facto, if not de jure, 
on the military.
By law and by temperament, Chancellor Bethmann was ill-equipped to 
counterbalance the growing power of the military. Talented and somewhat of 

Drafting the Telegram 
 61
a progressive, he was also indecisive and prone to brooding. The constitution 
gave him no authority over the military, and he could not always count on 
the kaiser for support. In the absence of a mechanism to settle the differences 
of opinion that inevitably arose over tactics and strategy, the chancellor and 
military leaders sought to resolve issues by letter or, on important occasions, by 
conference. While a forceful personality might have been able to use these face-
to-face meetings to retain some control over the military, the men in uniform 
more often than not upstaged the introverted Bethmann.
Military power in wartime Germany resided in the OHL, the highest 
echelon of command of the German armies. In August 1916, Field Marshall 
Paul von Hindenburg and his quartermaster general, General Erich Luden-
dorff, were appointed to direct the OHL. They proved a powerful combina-
tion. While Hindenburg, an old-school officer with a formidable mustache and 
crew cut, provided gravitas and respectability, the kinetic and pushy Luden-
dorff injected drive and energy. The two men had won a brilliant military vic-
tory over vastly numerically superior Russian forces invading in East Prussia in 
1914 and were widely regarded as heroes in Germany.
General Ludendorff was the driving force of the OHL. If Hindenburg typi-
fied the traditional Prussian army officer, Ludendorff represented a new breed 
of technocratic soldiery, interested less in romantic heroism than in military 
hardware, less in loyalty to the crown than in logistics on the battlefield. Tak-
ing and turning on its head Clausewitz’s dictum of war as the extension of 
politics by different means, Ludendorff advocated the subordination of poli-
tics to warfare, insisting that during wartime all resources of the nation must 
be made available to the military, a concept that would become infamously 
known as total war.
By most accounts, Ludendorff was not a likeable individual. People gener-
ally found him “tense, cold as a fish, a monocled humorless eye staring from 
a heavily jowled red face as he barked orders in a high, nasal voice, his sec-
ond (later third) chin quivering from the effort. He was rigid and inflexible in 
thought, given to sudden rages, a table banger, frequently rude to subordinates, 
often tactless to superiors.”3 At the OHL, Ludendorff displayed little tolerance 
for opinions that differed from his own, especially if they came from civilians.
This was the toxic political environment that Zimmermann entered when 
he succeeded Jagow in November 1916. Even though the foreign secretary 
answered to the chancellor, the impatient Ludendorff expected Zimmermann 
to serve as a compliant tool of the OHL. After all, Zimmermann had earlier 
given the impression of sharing the military’s viewpoint, especially with regard 

62 
 Chapter Five	 	
	
	
to unrestricted submarine warfare. Ludendorff was to be disappointed. On 
October 28, 1916, a German U-boat torpedoed and sank the British merchant 
ship Marina to the west of Ireland, killing several Americans. As Bethmann 
consulted with the chief of the admiralty staff, Admiral Henning von Holtzen-
dorff, about the appropriate response to American protests, Ludendorff tried 
to insert himself into the talks. Zimmermann shut out the general by inform-
ing him pointedly that the text of the note to Washington had already been  
approved, leaving an irate Ludendorff exasperated by the new foreign sec-
retary’s abrasiveness.4 Shortly thereafter, Zimmermann throttled the general 
again. On December 20, Ludendorff insisted that in view of British coolness 
toward a German peace initiative, “the U-boat campaign must now be inau-
gurated in full force.” Zimmermann replied coolly, “At the moment there are  
serious objections to the unrestricted submarine campaign, not only on account 
of America, but with regard to European neutrals also.”5
Bethmann, too, continued to express his reservation about the wisdom of 
unrestricted submarine warfare, but the relentless military pressure took its toll 
on the chancellor. As early as March 1916, a parliamentarian observed that 
the chancellor “was tense, tired, and nervous. He smoked one cigarette after  
another to quiet his nerves. To judge from the tempo at which he smoked 
during the committee proceedings, he must consume five or six dozen daily. 
His hair has become white, his face is lined with deep furrows. He seems the 
personification of despair.”6 An American diplomat gained a similar impres-
sion during an interview on November 22, with Bethmann “sitting at his desk, 
speaking slowly, deliberately and sadly of the horrors of war. He seemed to 
me a man broken in spirit, his face deeply furrowed, his manner sad beyond 
words.”7 By the end of December, events weighed so heavily on Bethmann that 
he largely withdrew from the decision-making process.
In early 1917, the military mounted its final push for unrestricted sub-
marine warfare. On January 8, Holtzendorff met with Hindenburg and 
Ludendorff at Pless, and the three men reached an agreement. Should Beth-
mann continue to resist unrestricted submarine warfare, they would advo-
cate for his replacement with a more compliant politician. After the meeting, 
Holtzendorff easily won over the kaiser at a personal audience, while Hinden-
burg informed Bethmann in a curt telegram that unrestricted submarine war-
fare could and therefore should be commenced on February 1. The chancellor 
immediately boarded a Pless-bound train. Suffering from a stubborn bout of 
bronchitis, he arrived the worse for wear after a tiring night journey. The chief 
of the naval cabinet, Admiral Georg von Müller, a friend of Bethmann and 

Drafting the Telegram 
 63
an erstwhile opponent of unrestricted submarine warfare, received him at the 
train station with the bad news that everything had already been settled in 
favor of U-boat war. A depressed Bethmann then headed for the castle where 
the determined military leadership awaited him.
The Pless crown council that convened at 6 p.m. on January 9 rubber-
stamped the decision already made by the military men.8 As Bethmann entered 
the room, the pale and distraught-looking kaiser, surrounded by his three cabi-
net chiefs, stood with one hand resting on a large table around which Holtzen-
dorff, Ludendorff, and Hindenburg were gathered. Holtzendorff laid out 
confidently how the submarines would strangle England within six months, 
without a single American soldier reaching Europe. Thereafter, Hindenburg 
expressed his hope that the U-boats would restrict U.S. ammunition deliveries 
to the Allies. At last, Bethmann was permitted to say a few words. Agitated, 
he expressed his concern about American intervention, but he withdrew his 
opposition to unrestricted warfare in view of the navy’s confidence in victory. 
The emperor listened impatiently to his chancellor and concluded that unre-
stricted submarine warfare was thus agreed upon. He went on to say that 
“it would be the diplomats’ task to explain the necessity of this measure to 
America and the remaining neutrals.” One participant commented succinctly 
in his diary: “Finis Germaniae.”9
The decision for unrestricted submarine warfare taken at Pless left Zim-
mermann in an uncomfortable position. The political defeat of the chancel-
lor heralded the final victory of the military over the civilian leadership that 
would dominate government decision making in imperial Germany for the 
remainder of the war. This was bad news for Zimmermann, who evidently 
had backed the wrong horse by siding with Bethmann on the question of  
U-boat warfare. Indeed, Ludendorff made no bones about his contempt for the 
new foreign secretary. On January 11, Ludendorff declared in a meeting with 
Hindenburg and Valentini that “in the long run they didn’t think they could 
work with Bethmann and people like [Vice Chancellor Karl] Helfferich and 
Zimmermann.” Evidently, Ludendorff very much associated Zimmermann 
with obstructionist “people like” Bethmann and Helfferich, the latter being 
one of the staunchest opponents of unrestricted submarine warfare among top 
government officials.10
Zimmermann reacted to the news of Pless by abruptly endorsing the new 
government policy. His radical turnaround failed, however, to appease the mil-
itary and managed also to erode his standing with moderate civilians. A parlia-
mentarian discussing the question of submarine warfare with Zimmermann at 

64 
 Chapter Five	 	
	
	
the time said he thought the foreign secretary acted “totally confused.” Editors 
of several major Berlin newspapers began to describe him as a poor choice for 
foreign secretary,11 and the chancellor’s secretary, Kurt Riezler, privately lam-
basted him as a “frat boy and boor [Korpsstudent und Prolet].”12 The liberal 
shipping magnate Albert Ballin, a personal friend of the kaiser, complained 
that Zimmermann “had not succeeded in breaking the aristocratic clique that 
now completely dominated him.”13
One should not underestimate the psychological impact of such a sudden 
fall from grace on someone who thrived on working harmoniously with his 
superiors. Zimmermann’s stress was on public display. On January 6, 1917, 
Zimmermann attended a reception with the Austro-Hungarian foreign min-
ister, Ottokar Czernin, at the Austrian embassy, followed by a gala dinner at 
the Adlon Hotel for the U.S. ambassador, James Gerard, who had recently 
returned from the United States. At both events, Zimmermann’s edginess got 
the better of him. At the Austrian embassy, he yelled and gesticulated wildly 
with his arms. Asked afterward about his impression of the foreign secretary, 
Czernin replied, “Well, we were always afraid that he would spit somewhere 
in the room.”14 By the time Zimmermann reached the Adlon, he was slightly 
inebriated. Toasting his friendship with Gerard, he praised their nations’ good 
relations and added that he had always been convinced the ambassador would 
return “to the barbarians,” a self-mocking reference to Germany.15 Gottlieb 
von Jagow, who observed his successor’s antics that evening with growing  
apprehension, called the dinner “inexpedient” and Zimmermann’s toast “fool-
ish,” since Gerard was bound to feel let down when unrestricted submarine 
warfare—at this point a foregone conclusion—would be declared shortly 
thereafter.16 Zimmermann’s need to be in good standing with everyone, and 
his inability to steer a clear course, now turned against him, and the mental toll 
on him showed. A photograph taken at the Adlon dinner shows the foreign 
secretary looking haggard, aged, and weary.17
One historian observed that “the actions of some German leaders during 
these hectic days suggest nervous breakdown.”18 Evidently, the foreign secre-
tary was one of these leaders, and his mental state must be considered a critical 
factor in his decision making during this time period.19 When Zimmermann 
learned of the impending declaration of unrestricted submarine warfare, he 
had less than three weeks to prepare diplomatically for the measure. He needed 
to inform German envoys worldwide about the decision and send them instruc-
tions on how to deal with the political fallout from neutral powers, which 
would be severe. The Wilhelmstrasse awaited the American response with 
particular concern.

Drafting the Telegram 
 65
The facade of a united civilian leadership crumbled in the wake of the 
Pless decision. While Bethmann in Berlin resigned himself to his fate of play-
ing second fiddle to the OHL, Bernstorff in Washington engaged in a round 
of desperate last-minute diplomacy to avert U.S. intervention. At the Wilhelm-
strasse, an overtaxed Zimmermann relied mostly on his staff to hammer out 
instructions to German diplomats in the remaining neutral nations about the 
imminent submarine campaign.
The Zimmermann telegram was conceived amid this frantic scramble of 
German diplomats to prepare for the official announcement of unrestricted 
submarine warfare, set to begin on February 1. Although no official records on 
the origins of the telegram have survived, one participant—Hans Arthur von 
Kemnitz—left a detailed personal account, drafted a decade after the event, in 
1927. Kemnitz’s memorandum must be read with caution because it was com-
posed with hindsight and for the purpose of putting the author in a favorable 
light. Since it remains the only firsthand account of the origins of the telegram 
and provides valuable insights into the foreign office decision-making process, 
it deserves to be quoted at length:
In early 1917, a decision was reached, initially in secret, in favor of 
unrestricted submarine warfare. Due to my familiarity with the prevail-
ing sentiment in the United States, I could not doubt that the implemen-
tation of this decision would provoke war with America, and I realized 
that we were drifting into a political situation amounting to the epitome 
of the impossible: not only would our old enemies Russia and England 
fight against us as allies, now, also Japan and America, who were no less 
antagonistic towards each other, were supposed to oppose us in the field 
as allies. Therefore, I was considering options to approach Japan in the 
last hour.
	
It so happened that Mexico had proposed an alliance against the 
United States to us some time before, an offer that had been treated dila-
torily until then. Since our relationship with America couldn’t get any 
worse, I suggested at our daily joint conference of political advisors with 
the foreign secretary that we now accept this proposal in principle, and 
simultaneously tell the Mexicans that this offer would be significantly 
more valuable if they succeeded, in view of their 10-years old, intimate  
relations with Japan, to interest the latter in this issue. Even if I was not 
very optimistic for this initiative to succeed at this late hour, I still con-
sidered it my duty to leave no stone unturned in order to ameliorate our 
desperate military situation through diplomatic means.

66 
 Chapter Five	 	
	
	
	
I was instructed to conceptualize such a telegram, and did so. The 
draft was then submitted to Count Montgelas who . . . was responsible 
for Mexico.20
The document gives several important clues about the origins of the tele-
gram: it was Kemnitz who came up with the idea for the Mexican-Japanese 
alliance scheme; he did so during a routine conference at the foreign office that 
took place shortly after the decision at Pless to proceed with unrestricted sub-
marine warfare; his principal goal was not an alliance with Mexico, but with 
Japan; and he was aware of and made use of the earlier Mexican proposals to 
Berlin.
No minutes of this fateful foreign office conference have survived, but 
other contemporary sources confirm Kemnitz’s central part in the scheme. 
In reaction to news reports about the telegram in American newspapers on 
March 1, 1917, Bethmann’s secretary, Riezler, noted in his diary: “Kemnitz, 
this fantastic idiot, has done this.”21 Eleven days later, a foreign office official 
wrote to a colleague: “The father of this issue is Kemnitz, who pushed his idea 
through, against the resistance of the [foreign] office.”22 An internal foreign 
office report, completed shortly after the armistice, also confirmed Kemnitz’s 
authorship.23 Last but not least, Kemnitz himself repeatedly affirmed his intel-
lectual ownership of the idea as well as his primary objective of the scheme, 
i.e., an alliance with Japan rather than Mexico.24
As instructed, Kemnitz drafted a proposal for alliance along the lines dis-
cussed during the conference (see Fig. 1). A careful study of this document 
corroborates and expands upon Kemnitz’s 1927 memorandum. The text of 
Kemnitz’s handwritten draft, with comments by several Wilhelmstrasse offi-
cials, translates into English as follows. Marginal comments, not included in 
the final draft, are indicated by brackets [ ]; italicized words indicate text sub-
sequently added to the original draft; explanatory comments by this author are 
indicated by braces { }.
Berlin, 13 January 1917.
Minister {Heinrich} von Eckardt
Mexico
Most secret. Decipher yourself.
	
We intend to begin on the first of February unrestricted submarine 
warfare. We shall endeavor nonetheless to keep America neutral.
	
In the event of this not succeeding, we propose to Mexico an alliance 
on the following basis: Conduct war jointly. and Conclude peace jointly. 

Drafting the Telegram 
 67
Substantial financial support and consent [No guarantee is expressed 
hereby] on our part for Mexico to reconquer lost territory in Texas, New 
Mexico, Arizona [California should be reserved for Japan]. Defense trea-
ty after conclusion of peace provided Mexico succeeds in drawing Japan 
into the alliance. The settlement in detail is left to your Excellency.
	
Your Excellency will present to the President {Carranza} immediately 
the above most secretly as soon as the outbreak of war with the United 
States is certain, and add the suggestion that he should, on his own initia-
tive, invite Japan to immediate adherence, and at the same time mediate 
between Japan and ourselves.
	
Please call the President’s attention to the fact that ruthless employ-
ment of our submarines now offers the prospect of compelling England 
in a few months to make peace. . . . 
{Initialed by Arthur Zimmermann, January 13; Wilhelm von Stumm, Jan-
uary 13; Baron Ernst Langwerth von Simmern, January 12; Count Adolf 
von Montgelas, January 12; Hans Arthur von Kemnitz, January 11.}25
The initials at the bottom of the text indicate that Kemnitz finalized his 
draft on January 11, two days after the fateful Pless meeting. It therefore took 
him only forty-eight hours, or less, to complete and submit the document. 
Given that the Wilhelmstrasse was comsumed with the diplomatic implica-
tions of unrestricted submarine warfare, one might assume that his idea was 
not the central item on the meeting’s agenda and did not receive the careful 
attention it otherwise would have.
More interested in an alliance with Japan than with Mexico, Kemnitz was 
careful to explain that “California should be reserved for Japan.” Moreover, 
he wanted to reward Mexico with a postwar defense alliance only if Carranza 
succeeded in bringing about a German-Japanese alliance, but another official 
subsequently deleted this provision. Kemnitz did not regard Mexico, unlike 
Japan, as an equal partner for Germany. Thus, he pointed out that the foreign 
office expressed “no guarantee” in promising financial support and consent 
for Mexico to conquer U.S. territory. In short, Mexico’s main function was 
to build a bridge to Tokyo and attack the United States, but unlike Japan, it 
could not expect a binding wartime alliance or even financial guarantees from 
Germany in return.
Just as Kemnitz indicated in his 1927 memorandum, he almost certainly 
mined some of the Mexican papers at the Wilhelmstrasse for his proposal. In 
fact, there are striking textual similarities between his original draft and Enrile’s 

Figure 1. The original, handwritten draft of the Zimmermann telegram. (page 1 of 3)
(Courtesy of the Politisches Archiv des Auswärtigen Amtes, Berlin) 

The original, handwritten draft of the Zimmermann telegram. (page 2 of 3)

The original, handwritten draft of the Zimmermann telegram. (page 3 of 3)

Drafting the Telegram 
 71
request for German financial support in exchange for a Mexican attack on 
the United States and the cession of U.S. territory to Mexico—specifically, 
Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas.26 Enrile had also envisioned cession of “the 
southern part of Upper California” to Mexico, but Kemnitz preferred using 
this territory as bait for Japan.
The chronological sequence of initials at the bottom of the text indicates 
how the draft moved up the chain of command at the Wilhelmstrasse. Kemnitz 
passed it first to Montgelas, who signed it on January 12, and then again on 
January 15 (in its final form).27 The draft gives no indication of Montgelas’ 
take on the scheme, so one can only speculate based on circumstantial evi-
dence. It is true that, in the wake of Pancho Villa’s raid on Columbus, New 
Mexico, Montgelas had vainly urged the Wilhelmstrasse to intervene more  
aggressively in Mexico in order to distract Washington from Europe. How- 
ever, the international framework had changed significantly since then, with 
the U.S. punitive expedition winding down and unrestricted submarine war-
fare about to commence. Most likely, Montgelas spent little time on the scheme 
as he was at this time hammering out an all-important note on behalf of the 
chancellor, who on January 16 would send it, along with the telegram, to Bern-
storff in Washington, issuing the ambassador instructions in preparation for 
unrestricted submarine warfare.
The draft then passed to Ernst Langwerth von Simmern, who directly 
supervised Kemnitz and Montgelas. The scion of an aristocratic family from 
the Rhineland, Langwerth had entered the foreign service in 1899, working at 
the German legations in Athens, Lisbon, Tangier, and Berne before the war. In 
1916 he became director of the political division of the foreign office.28 Several 
contemporary sources report that Kemnitz’s proposal met resistance as it trav-
eled through the foreign office hierarchy, and Langwerth appears to be one of 
the critics.29 While Kemnitz’s original draft would have instructed Eckardt, the 
envoy in Mexico, to “immediately” approach Carranza, that is, even before an 
American declaration of war on Germany, Langwerth objected to this aggressive 
provision, deleting and replacing it with the phrase “as soon as the outbreak 
of war with the United States is certain.” Thus, he gave the scheme a defen-
sive character that Kemnitz had not envisioned.30 Langwerth signed the draft 
on January 12, the same day he received it, and passed it on to Wilhelm von 
Stumm, who had succeeded Zimmermann as undersecretary of state.
“Reticent, conservative, but with lots of brains,” according to the Ameri-
can ambassador, the eccentric Stumm was somewhat of a maverick.31 In his mid-
fifties, he had just become engaged to a twenty-year-old countess. A seasoned 

72 
 Chapter Five	 	
	
	
diplomat, Stumm had served in London, Washington, Paris, Vienna, and St. 
Petersburg prior to the war, but some of Stumm’s colleagues considered him a 
malevolent éminence grise. A former German ambassador to London deplored 
his influence and described him as “forceful and a fantast.”32 A former foreign 
secretary denounced Stumm as “an evil spirit, a pathological human being 
who completely dominates Jagow.”33 Perhaps because of Stumm’s alleged ten-
dency to “dominate” his superiors, Zimmermann put him on a tight leash and 
excluded him from critical decision making.34 Kemnitz’s draft appears to be a 
case in point, as there is no indication that Stumm added much, if anything at 
all. According to the chancellor’s secretary, Stumm simply “said yes,” signed 
the document on January 13, and passed it on to Zimmermann.35
Like Stumm, Zimmermann spent hardly any time considering the scheme. 
He left no comment on the draft and signed off on the document the same 
day he received it. It remains unclear why the foreign secretary sanctioned this 
improbable alliance offer and what he hoped to achieve by it. The kaiser had 
suggested some sort of Mexican alliance scheme to Zimmermann earlier, and 
the foreign secretary, ever keen to please those in authority, naturally would 
have been eager to follow up on Wilhelm’s suggestion when the possibility pre-
sented itself.36 The idea of approaching Japan also likely appealed to Zimmer-
mann, who in 1916 had supported Kemnitz’s push for a separate peace with 
Tokyo. In the context of German domestic politics, the scheme could serve as 
tangible proof of the Wilhelmstrasse’s commitment to supporting unrestricted 
submarine warfare, and Zimmermann may have hoped to take the edge off of 
Ludendorff’s wrath against him by endorsing it.
Likewise, the idea of embroiling the United States in a guerrilla war along 
its southern border must have intrigued Zimmermann. As a long-standing pro-
ponent of Berlin’s worldwide covert action program, and given his past man-
agement of such operations, Zimmermann would have been naturally drawn 
to the idea of tying up U.S. troops in this way. In fact, Wilhelmstrasse officials 
had avidly read intelligence reports about the failure of the U.S. punitive expe-
dition to catch Villa, and Zimmermann thought Carranza could pull off a simi-
lar feat. “Mexico is not to be underestimated as an enemy,” he declared before 
the Reichstag’s budget committee on March 3, shortly after the alliance pro-
posal had been published in the American press. Two days later, he elaborated 
“that the instruction aimed at prompting Carranza to attack after the outbreak 
of war in order to tie up the American mercenaries in America.” At the same 
time, Zimmermann was careful to stress that Berlin incurred no obligations in 
return: “A proposal is not yet a treaty,” he added. Hence, if Carranza attacked 

Drafting the Telegram 
 73
the United States, and the latter eventually prevailed, Germany would have no 
legal obligation to come to its partner’s rescue.37 To think that Carranza would 
fall for this ploy appears naive in retrospect, but Zimmermann was not alone 
in considering this possibility. The British envoy in Mexico, for one, noted 
in mid-February that Carranza “is contemplating taking Germany’s side in 
case of war between US + Germany. All Carranza’s generals besides being pro- 
German [are] ignorant enough to believe that they could defeat the United 
States + they are likely to be exceptionally confident if they have received prom-
ises of active support from Germany.”38
Last but not least, Zimmermann’s inability to perform well under stress 
and his frantic efforts to prepare diplomatically for unrestricted submarine 
warfare probably prevented him from reviewing Kemnitz’s draft carefully. His 
lack of interest at the time is evidenced by both the short amount of time he 
took to sign off on it as well as the absence of original input. Yet, by sign-
ing it, he endorsed and assumed political responsibility for the scheme. The 
final document differed somewhat from Kemnitz’s original draft in that the 
scheme’s emphasis had tilted from Japan to Mexico and envisioned an alliance 
in response to, rather than in anticipation of, American intervention. The text 
as finalized on January 13 comprised four key elements:
First, the German envoy to Mexico was instructed secretly to propose an 
alliance to Mexico as soon as the United States’ entry into the war on the Allied 
side was considered imminent. The precise moment was left vague, and the 
German envoy was given considerable leeway—“The settlement in detail is 
left to your Excellency”—probably because the Wilhelmstrasse anticipated the 
closing of the German embassy in Washington and, consequently, a commu-
nications breakdown between Berlin and Mexico City. The alliance proposal 
reveals that Zimmermann considered Washington’s declaration of war in the 
near future possible, albeit not necessarily probable. Yet rather than try to pre-
vent it, he began to plan for its eventuality.
Second, the Germans sought to lure Mexico with the prospect of unspeci-
fied financial assistance and conquest of U.S. territory. The text did not, how-
ever, name a specific sum of money, and Kemnitz’s marginal note stated, “No 
guarantee is expressed hereby.” The nature of German support for Mexico’s 
conquest of Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas remained equally obscure. For 
one, the text spoke of “lost territory in Texas, New Mexico, Arizona,” being 
non-committal about the extent of U.S. territory Berlin was willing to help 
Mexico conquer—be it a strip of land along the border or the entirety of the 
three mentioned states. Moreover, the text employed the non-committal phrase 

74 
 Chapter Five	 	
	
	
“Einverständnis unsererseits, dass Mexico . . . zurückerobert” (consent on our 
part for Mexico to reconquer), though contemporary English translations, 
and subsequent authors, have given this passage a subtly different slant. For  
example, the text published in many American newspapers on March 1, 1917, 
read “it is understood that Mexico is to reconquer.”39 Barbara Tuchman, in 
her classic account, translates it as “an understanding on our part that Mexico 
is to reconquer.”40 Such faulty translations suggest erroneously that Germany 
encouraged Mexico to attack the United States, whereas the original document 
merely expressed Berlin’s non-committal consent to what the Wilhelmstrasse 
perceived as Mexican ambitions.41 Before the Reichstag’s secret budget com-
mittee on March 5, Zimmermann made it clear that the three U.S. states were 
merely a carrot to egg on Carranza to attack the United States: “That the Mex-
icans were not in a position to make conquests in the United States, is clear to 
me, too. I merely wanted to prompt the Mexicans through this encouragement 
to invade the said provinces [i.e., states] in order to tie up American troops and 
thus prevent them from being sent to Germany.”42
Third, the Wilhelmstrasse encouraged the Mexican president to approach 
Tokyo with a view to create a German-Japanese alliance. This had been Kem-
nitz’s principal goal, and Zimmermann certainly did not rule out the possibility 
of a Japanese attack on the United States: “I do not know whether Japan has 
given America assurance that she will not stab her in the back. It is rumored, 
and I do not believe that it is impossible,” he opined to the budget commit-
tee on February 22, 1917.43 However, in his explanations before the budget 
committee on March 5, he clearly designated Mexico the main addressee of 
the proposal, with Japan merely an afterthought: “I considered the mention-
ing of Japan necessary since the Mexican-Japanese relations are old and well-
founded. On the basis of top secret information on Japanese-German attempts 
to come to an agreement I concluded that an agreement with Japan cannot be 
ruled out entirely.”44
Fourth, the German envoy was to emphasize his nation’s confidence in 
a quick, victorious end to the war, thanks to unrestricted submarine warfare. 
The document’s concluding statement that “ruthless employment of our sub-
marines now offers the prospect of compelling England in a few months to 
make peace” may have been addressed as much to Carranza as to Ludendorff 
and the German military, in an effort to reestablish their confidence in Zim-
mermann. The foreign secretary probably had the same domestic audience in 
mind when he explained before the budget committee on March 5 that “it was 
important to me not to set new enemies on our brave field gray troops, and at 

Drafting the Telegram 
 75
least ensure that the American mercenaries . . . will immediately be employed 
against Mexico.”45
When Zimmermann signed off on the draft, two practical issues needed to 
be resolved: Whom should he inform of the scheme outside the Wilhelmstrasse, 
and how should the text be conveyed to Eckardt in Mexico City? The foreign 
secretary was constitutionally required to consult the chancellor on major for-
eign policy initiatives. The telegram certainly fell within this category. Chancel-
lor Bethmann maintains complete silence on the subject in his memoirs, but his 
secretary, Riezler, notes in his diary on March 4, 1917, “and the chancellor has 
approved the matter only orally.” Riezler, however, later crossed out this sen-
tence.46 Why did he initially write that Bethmann had been informed, but later 
delete the statement? Evidently, Riezler was somewhat confused about when 
the chancellor had become aware of the scheme, but at some point he learned 
that Bethmann had not been informed of the matter before the Wilhelmstrasse 
had sent the telegram.
An anonymous German article, published shortly before the end of the war, 
sheds further light on this issue. In the Nürnberger Nachrichten, the author—
obviously well connected in the foreign office—suggests that Zimmermann 
had informed Bethmann after the telegram had been dispatched, but before 
it was published in the American press on March 1.47 In his memoirs, Jagow 
recalls that Zimmermann tended to execute “minor political business without 
asking me,” and at this point, Zimmermann may well have considered the tele-
gram “minor political business,” as compared to the diplomatic preparations 
in advance of unrestricted submarine warfare.48 Zimmermann’s negligence in 
informing Bethmann immediately may have been encouraged by the chancel-
lor’s reclusion in the days following Pless. If so, the foreign secretary’s failure 
to clear the proposal with the chancellor was less an act of deliberate disobedi-
ence than of sloppiness. The available evidence suggests that Zimmermann did 
inform Bethmann of the telegram before the American press reported on it.
What about the military? Constitutionally, Zimmermann had no obliga-
tion to inform Ludendorff or any other top military officer of a diplomatic 
initiative by the foreign office. Yet, this is what he did. Franz von Papen, Ger-
many’s wartime military attaché in the United States, wrote to his former naval 
colleague, Karl Boy-Ed, in 1919: “General Ludendorff personally reassured me 
that he was informed of the idea of the alliance proposal to Mexico only after 
the fact. State Secretary Zimmermann talked to him only of financial authori-
zation regarding the insurgent war. This plan therefore stems exclusively from 
the brain of the then-adviser for Mexico and State Secretary Zimmermann. 

76 
 Chapter Five	 	
	
	
Perhaps Mr. [Erich] Hossenfelder, on account of his in-depth knowledge of the 
American situation, advised Zimmermann in favor of this initiative.”49
A military man loyal to Ludendorff, Papen understandably sought to 
distance the general from the unpopular telegram. His acknowledgment that 
Ludendorff had discussed insurgent warfare in Mexico with Zimmermann 
must therefore be taken as evidence that the foreign secretary did mention the  
Mexican scheme to the general, if only in passing. It appears that in the hectic 
days following the decision to launch unrestricted submarine warfare, Zimmer- 
mann relayed much of the information on this risky project orally and frag-
mentarily. That Zimmermann decided to inform Ludendorff at all about the 
scheme highlights his resolve to put himself in good standing with the general.
There remained the question of communicating the text to Carranza. 
An obvious channel would have been Carranza’s envoy to Germany, Rafael 
Zubáran Capmany. However, Zubáran Capmany was in Switzerland at the 
time. Even if he had been in Berlin, Zimmermann probably would not have 
availed himself of his services because the envoy spoke no German, and the 
Wilhelmstrasse did not fully trust his translator.50 Consequently, the Germans 
had to come up with another channel for communicating with Carranza.
This task initially fell to Kemnitz. His pertinent instructions on the original 
draft read as follows: “By U-boat on the 15th via Washington. To the cipher 
bureau: Document 1 is to be encrypted with code 13040, which is available 
in Mexico and, as far as is known, is not compromised.”51 In other words, 
Kemnitz wanted the document delivered by submarine to Washington, where 
Ambassador Bernstorff’s staff would encrypt it, using code 13040, and wire it 
to Mexico City. A note, dated January 13, on the original document indicates 
that an official had indeed removed the document with the intention of taking 
it on board a U-boat, the merchant submarine Deutschland, at Bremerhaven. 
The Deutschland had already crossed the Atlantic twice, circumventing the 
British naval blockade, delivering diplomatic mail and a codebook to the Ger-
man embassy in Washington, and carrying dyestuffs, chemicals, and medicines 
to Germany on its return. The boat was scheduled to sail for the United States 
a third time, but the formal decision in favor of unrestricted submarine war-
fare threw a wrench into its projected third voyage. The navy was considering 
requisitioning the Deutschland for war duty, so on January 20, the chief of the 
admiralty staff ordered preparations for the journey suspended. Shortly there-
after, the navy requisitioned the boat, outfitting it for combat.52
Kemnitz’s plan to send the proposal by sea provides insight into the politi-
cal considerations of the Wilhelmstrasse vis-à-vis unrestricted submarine war-

Drafting the Telegram 
 77
fare and the United States. As it would have taken the Deutschland roughly 
three weeks to cross the Atlantic, it would not have reached U.S. shores before 
mid-February. By this time, unrestricted submarine warfare would have been 
in full swing, therefore the foreign office did not consider a consequent rup-
ture of diplomatic relations (let alone war) probable because the diplomats ex-
pected the German embassy in Washington to still be functioning normally in 
mid-February, enabling Bernstorff’s staff to collect the document and forward 
it to Eckardt in Mexico City.
With the Deutschland out of the picture, the foreign office needed an  
alternative route. It was Montgelas who decided to attach the document to 
top secret telegram no. 157, containing instructions for Bernstorff regarding 
the imminent declaration of unrestricted submarine warfare.53 The attached 
telegram received the running number “telegram no. 158,” and an explana-
tory sentence for Bernstorff was added, asking him to encode and forward the 
message to Eckardt in Mexico City. Still, how were the two messages to be 
conveyed securely to Washington? The Wilhelmstrasse displayed both ingenu-
ity and chutzpah in finding a solution.
Early in the war, the Royal Navy had severed Germany’s transatlantic sub-
marine cables, complicating communications between Washington and Berlin. 
At the instigation of Edward M. House, adviser to President Woodrow Wil-
son, the State Department then began to allow the transmission of enciphered 
German messages on its diplomatic cables between Washington, London, 
Copenhagen, and Berlin. Trusting in the Germans’ good faith, the Americans 
accepted numerous encrypted messages without being knowledgeable of their 
actual content. The Wilhelmstrasse would submit an encrypted message in 
Berlin to the American ambassador, who would transmit it to Copenhagen 
to the American legation, which would then forward it to the State Depart-
ment in Washington via the U.S. embassy in London. In Washington, the State 
Department would hand the encrypted message to the German embassy. The 
Germans used this route in both directions. Bernstorff availed himself of this 
option as early as November 12, 1914, and the volume of messages increased 
greatly in 1915, when the sinking of the Lusitania and the resulting high vol-
ume of diplomatic notes between the Wilson administration and the German 
government made a reliable means of communication for both governments 
imperative.54
Montgelas suggested the Machiavellian idea of using the U.S. diplomatic 
service to convey the instructions on unrestricted submarine warfare as well as 
the telegram to Bernstorff. The Wilhelmstrasse rolled the two messages into 

78 
 Chapter Five	 	
	
	
one encrypt, using the recently introduced diplomatic code 0075. On January 
16, Montgelas forwarded the encrypt to the American ambassador, Gerard, 
who noted that he would only send it to Washington if the Wilhelmstrasse dis-
closed the content. Without missing a beat, Montgelas replied that the encrypt 
“included merely an instruction for Count B. for his personal information.” 
He then advised Zimmermann and Stumm to toe the same line vis-à-vis the 
U.S. ambassador. This assurance was good enough for Gerard, who, bliss-
fully unaware of the diplomatic bombshell in his hands, immediately had 
the encoded text wired to Copenhagen and on to London.55 On January 19, 
the telegram reached the German embassy in Washington. On the same day, 
Ambassador Bernstorff’s staff deciphered it, re-enciphered it in code 13040, 
and sent it to Eckardt in Mexico City, using the commercial cable company 
Western Union, which charged the embassy the princely sum of $85.27, more 
than $1,000 in today’s dollars.56
Following dispatch of the telegram on January 16, the Wilhelmstrasse for 
more than two weeks did nothing to develop the Mexican or Japanese angle 
of the project. Zimmermann’s failure to follow up on his original proposal 
indicates its low priority among the German diplomats. Only the rapidly dete-
riorating German-U.S. relationship prompted the foreign office to take up the 
scheme once again.
Despite the decision on unrestricted submarine warfare, key German play-
ers did not consider a diplomatic break, or war, with the United States a fore-
gone conclusion. On January 12, the Bavarian military representative at gen-
eral headquarters reported to Munich that his colleagues did not think “that 
forceful submarine warfare will automatically trigger the break of relations 
with America.”57 Zimmermann shared this naive assessment. On January 30, 
he informed the American ambassador about the imminence of unrestricted 
submarine warfare and added cheerfully, “But as you will see, everything will 
be all right. America will do nothing, for President Wilson is for peace and 
nothing else.”
After the war, Zimmermann claimed that Gerard had not been upset about 
the declaration of unrestricted submarine warfare.58 In fact, Gerard protested 
strongly against the German decision. A German parliamentarian who saw 
Zimmermann shortly after his January 30 meeting with Gerard described the 
foreign secretary as “completely shattered.”59 Still, Zimmermann continued to 
delude himself. When on February 3 the United States severed diplomatic rela-
tions with Germany, the foreign secretary was genuinely astonished. He broke 
down and wept in front of reporters and reacted with violent language and 

Drafting the Telegram 
 79
great emotion when Gerard informed him of his recall to the United States. On 
his way home to the United States, Gerard told the British envoy to Switzer-
land that there could be no doubt that Wilson’s action took Zimmermann and 
the German government by complete surprise.60
Caught off guard, the Wilhelmstrasse reacted to the break of diplomatic 
relations as precipitously as it had to the decision for unrestricted submarine 
warfare. On the very same day of the break’s announcement, Kemnitz sug-
gested to the dejected Zimmermann the revival of the original idea of propos-
ing an alliance to Carranza at once, rather than waiting for American inter-
vention. Still reeling from Wilson’s blow, Zimmermann and Montgelas both 
immediately signed off on Kemnitz’s proposal, and on February 5, the foreign 
office sent instructions to Eckardt to “submit the proposal of an alliance to 
the President [Carranza] already now.”61 Once again, confusion at the foreign 
office and Zimmermann’s inability to handle stress allowed Kemnitz to push 
through a reckless proposal.
In the same fashion, Kemnitz may have used the break in diplomatic rela-
tions to restart German-Japanese peace talks, his long-standing pet project. 
Likely prompted by Kemnitz, Zimmermann on February 17 instructed the 
German envoy in Stockholm, Hellmuth von Lucius, to resume his talks on a 
separate peace with the Japanese envoy, Sadatsuchi Uchida. Perhaps in a sign 
of a rapprochement between Zimmermann and Ludendorff over the telegram, 
the general on February 26 emphatically endorsed these talks from a military 
perspective in a memo to the chancellor. It is highly doubtful that the instruc-
tions to Eckardt and Lucius stood a reasonable chance of success even under 
more favorable circumstances. As it was, the disclosure of the telegram in the 
American press on March 1 buried both. On March 3, the chancellor replied 
to Ludendorff’s memo, reminding the general of Japan’s double-dealing in the 
past and counseling caution in approaching Tokyo once again on this subject.62

80
Chapter Six
“Blinker” Hall
W
orld War I witnessed the emergence of large, permanent intelli-
gence organizations in many of the belligerent countries. Great 
Britain established and expanded several secret services, with 
varying fields of responsibility. MI5 (military intelligence, department no. 5) 
conducted counter-intelligence operations in the United Kingdom. Scotland 
Yard’s Special Branch was in charge of arresting enemy agents, while MI6 (also 
known as SIS, Secret Intelligence Service) took the lead on espionage opera-
tions abroad. The War Office and the Admiralty both ran their own crypt-
analytic or “code breaking” services. It was the Admiralty’s agency—called the 
Naval Intelligence Division (NID), or naval intelligence—that would gain fame 
for its role in bringing the Zimmermann telegram to light.
In order to decrypt enemy messages, the British first had to intercept them. 
Due to a combination of good luck and skill, the Royal Navy quickly gained 
access to German naval communications. At the outbreak of war, an Admi-
ralty wireless station sent a stack of coded signals to Rear Admiral Henry 
Oliver, the director of NID whose taciturnity had earned him the unflattering 
nickname “Dummy.” The signals were believed to be of enemy origin. Not 
knowing what to do with them, Oliver handed them to Alfred Ewing, the 
soft-spoken, Scottish-born director of naval education (DNE) and an expert 
in radiotelegraphy.
As Ewing took charge of the Admiralty’s fledgling cryptanalytic efforts, 
the stream of intercepted enemy encrypts expanded rapidly. On August 5, 
the British cable ship Telconia cut Germany’s overseas telegraph cables in the 
North Sea, forcing the German foreign office to resort to the use of wireless 

“Blinker” Hall 
 81
messages to communicate with its overseas legations. The British could now 
simply pluck these messages from the ether. Two amateur radio hams and per-
sonal friends of Ewing informed the DNE that they were intercepting German 
radio signals, so Ewing obtained permission for them to establish a W/T (wire-
less telegraphy) station at Hunstanton. This arrangement eventually led to the 
establishment of fourteen intercept stations across the British Isles, all with 
direct landlines to the Admiralty.
Like all major powers, the Germans encrypted their military and diplo-
matic messages. Interception of enemy messages was one thing for the Admi-
ralty, decryption quite another. The German encrypts proved too hard a nut 
to crack for Ewing alone. Therefore, he hired a handful of assistants, mostly 
mathematicians and German linguists. Ewing’s team struggled initially but 
eventually made a breakthrough, when the British obtained several German 
naval codebooks, captured by British and Allied navies from German vessels 
in various places. Ewing handed these to Fleet Paymaster Charles J. E. Rot-
ter, NID’s foremost German expert, and asked him to work on the intercept-
ed German encrypts. In November 1914, Rotter delivered the first decrypts.  
Although the German navy would change its method of encryption many 
times over the next four years, Rotter’s initial success had opened a window 
into German cryptologic thinking, and British code breakers would produce a 
stream of German decrypts throughout the war.1
One of the first British politicians to grasp the significance of cryptanaly-
sis was the young Winston Churchill, at that time first lord of the Admiralty. 
Enthusiastic about the possibilities of this comparatively new form of intelli-
gence gathering, and keen to put the naval code breakers on a firm institutional 
footing, he issued the following directive on November 8, 1914:
An officer of the War Staff, preferably from the ID [Intelligence Division], 
should be selected to study all the decoded intercepts, not only current but 
past, and to compare them continually with what actually took place in 
order to penetrate the German mind and movements and make reports. 
All these intercepts are to be written in a locked book with their decodes, 
and all other copies are to be collected and burnt. All new messages are to 
be entered in the book, and the book is only to be handled under direction 
from COS [chief of staff].
Churchill’s directive provided the code breakers with a legal framework. 
It also foreshadowed two major characteristics of naval intelligence during the 
war: centralization and utter secrecy. Nobody informed the war cabinet of the 

82 
 Chapter Six	 	
	
	
unit’s existence, and it is unclear whether Churchill even bothered to apprise 
the prime minister.2
Three weeks later, on November 29, Churchill issued further instructions 
regarding the handling of decrypts: “The telegrams when intercepted will go 
direct and exclusively to COS who will mark them 1st Sea Lord, [and Admi-
ral] Sir A. K. Wilson, it being understood that deliveries are not to be delayed 
through the temporary absence of any addressees.”3 In other words, it was 
not up to the Admiralty’s Director of the Intelligence Division (DID) to decide 
who should receive certain intercepts or when. Once decrypted, a message was 
to go straight to the next higher authority. This rule would soon be bent and 
eventually broken.
In contrast to Churchill’s enthusiasm for cryptanalysis, military and naval 
officers typically did not regard intelligence as a desirable assignment. Service 
with the army in the field, or on board a battleship, promised quicker pro-
motions than an obscure desk job in a stuffy office in London, and it was 
no coincidence that several wartime secret service directors received their ap-
pointments by default. Captain Vernon Kell became director of MI5 following 
his resignation from active service in the army because of severe asthma, and 
Captain Mansfield Smith-Cumming assumed control of SIS after being placed 
on the Royal Navy’s retired list as “unfit for service”; the hapless Cumming 
had developed severe seasickness during his years of active naval duty. It was 
this type of “bad luck” that would bring about the consequential appointment 
of a new director of British naval intelligence.
Like his colleagues at MI5 and MI6, Captain William Reginald Hall had 
entered the intelligence business somewhat by chance. Born in 1870 as the 
son of Britain’s first director of naval intelligence, Hall chose a naval career, 
specializing in gunnery. A reformer who thought outside the box, he intro-
duced numerous innovations, at times crossing more traditional naval officers. 
His subordinates remembered him as a stern yet humane superior. In 1913 he 
reached the pinnacle of his seagoing career when the Admiralty assigned him 
captain of the new battle cruiser HMS Queen Mary. Hall participated in the 
August 1914 battle of Heligoland that inflicted heavy casualties on the German 
navy, but in October his days at sea came to an abrupt end. Since childhood, 
Hall had struggled with his weak physical condition, and in the early weeks of 
the war he became so ill that his executive officer feared for the captain’s life. 
Hall had to give up command of HMS Queen Mary, which, incidentally, may 
have saved his life: German gunfire sank the ship during the Battle of Jutland 
in 1916. Realizing Hall’s permanent unsuitability for life at sea, the Admiralty 
made him DID in November 1914.4 (Oliver moved on to become chief of 
the Admiralty war staff.) One of Hall’s earliest acts as DID was to provide 

“Blinker” Hall 
 83
the naval cryptographers with a proper office, Room 40 in the Admiralty’s 
Old Building. Those few in the know would soon refer to the organization as 
Room 40 OB, or simply Room 40, a name that stuck.5
Hall was a conspicuous man, though not handsome. Prematurely bald 
with a dome-shaped head and a large hooknose, he “looked like a demonic 
Mr. Punch in uniform.”6 His false teeth clicked audibly as he spoke. When 
excited, his face began to twitch, and underneath a pair of bushy eyebrows, his 
piercing eyes took to frequent blinking, a habit that earned him the enduring 
nickname “Blinker.” Hall put his peculiar physical features to effective use. 
When making a point, he clicked his false teeth horridly, and his icy stare and 
wiggling eyebrows were said to work wonders in negotiations, confrontations, 
and interrogations.
Those who knew Hall invariably described him as a charismatic man with 
an almost hypnotic personality, which seemed to be particularly attractive to 
the Americans. The young Franklin D. Roosevelt, then assistant secretary of 
the navy, met Hall in 1918 in London and continued to marvel about him 
a war later. The admiration of Walter Hines Page, American ambassador to 
London, was virtually boundless as evidenced by a letter to President Wood-
row Wilson in 1918: “Hall is one genius that the war has developed. Neither 
in fiction nor in fact can you find any such man to match him. . . . I shall 
never meet another man like him; that were too much to expect. For Hall can 
look through you and see the very muscular movements of your immortal 
soul while he is talking to you. Such eyes as the man has! My Lord!” Hall’s 
subordinates at the intelligence division also revered their chief: “When blink-
ing incessantly, exuding vitality and confidence, he spoke to you, you felt that 
you would do anything, anything at all, to merit his approval,” recalled one. 
Another remembered, “He was indeed an admirable chief to work for. He held 
us all together and kept the peace.”7
While Oliver had been happy to let Ewing build and run the Admiralty’s 
cryptanalytic unit, the ambitious Hall quickly moved to bring it under his  
authority. Churchill’s memorandum of November 8 failed to define the exact 
relationship between the DID and Room 40, and over the next months a silent 
struggle for control over the organization pitted Ewing against the cunning 
newcomer. Engaging, winsome, and a master of intrigue, Hall gradually side-
lined the DNE. In 1916 Ewing accepted the inevitable and then assumed the 
principalship of Edinburgh University, in Scotland. Hall thus became the undis-
puted master of Britain’s naval cryptanalysts.
Having gotten rid of Ewing, Hall gradually expanded Room 40’s staff to 
around thirty. Many of the code breakers were Eton, Oxford, or Cambridge 

84 
 Chapter Six	 	
	
	
graduates or were affiliated with these institutions at the time of their joining 
Room 40. Typically, they were academics specializing in German or classic 
philology and had a penchant for math. Many had a distinguished, upper- 
middle-class background, including Nigel de Grey, an Eton graduate who 
joined Room 40 in 1915 from the Royal Naval Air Service. Slightly built, good-
looking, with dark hair and chiseled, movie star features, de Grey descended 
from the distinguished family of the fifth Baron Walsingham (no relation of Sir 
Francis Walsingham) and had worked for the prestigious William Heinemann 
publishing house prior to the war. He would become something of a favorite 
in Hall’s Room 40.8
One of the cryptanalytic unit’s first recruits was thirty-one-year-old Alfred 
Dilwyn “Dilly” Knox, the second son of the bishop of Manchester. An Eton and 
Cambridge graduate, Knox had written a dissertation on the prose rhythms of 
Thucydides and taught classics at King’s College, Cambridge. Extremely for-
getful, he reportedly kept his spectacles in his tobacco case to remind himself 
that he had put the tobacco in the spectacle case but had then exchanged the 
tobacco for a ham sandwich in case he should forget that he was hungry. He 
did some of his best thinking soaking in a bathtub, claiming that codes were 
most easily cracked in an atmosphere of soap and steam. Knox found profes-
sional as well as romantic fulfillment in naval intelligence, marrying a member 
of “Blinker’s Beauty Chorus,” the group of women hired by Hall for secretarial 
duties shortly after the war.9
Knox was not the only eccentric in Room 40. In fact, a pronounced quirk 
was as likely to be found on a Room 40 cryptanalyst’s resume as a degree 
from Oxford or Cambridge. One code breaker delighted in wearing his naval 
cap back to front, and another entertained his colleagues as a comic actor and 
produced a humorous history of Room 40, Alice in I.D. 25 (as the facility was  
officially named in 1917). Their somewhat childish behavior and idiosyncrasies 
render these otherwise rational men humane and likable. In those early days, 
the British intelligence services recruited their members exclusively through the 
“old boys’ network,” not by means of a transparent hiring process. Those 
on the inside of intelligence recommended former classmates and fellow stu-
dents, who inevitably hailed from the same elite background. As a result of 
this restrictive hiring process, Britain’s spooks represented an extremely small 
sector of upper-middle-class society and tended to share a narrow range of 
views. “This was reflected in trivial ways,” as one historian observed, “like 
the silly names they used for each other: Woolly, Buster, Biffy, Bubbles, Blinker, 
Barmy, Tin-Eye, and so on; which reads rather like a roll-call of Snow White’s 
Seven Dwarfs. This was normal public school practice, even when the former 

“Blinker” Hall 
 85
public schoolboys had become fully grown men. They liked ‘japes,’ ‘wheezes’ 
and ‘mad-cap adventures,’ which is another characteristic which to an outsider 
might be mistaken as arrested development, but was normal for that set.”10
This upper-middle-class self-selection process produced a competent staff 
that could be relied upon to keep secrets among their small circle of like-minded 
fellow cryptanalysts. Yet Hall also used class and personality effectively to 
create an impregnable esprit de corps that kept outsiders and rivals at arm’s 
length. His struggle with, and ultimate defeat of, Ewing was a case in point. 
As Knox remarked, Room 40’s staff “was lent or, more accurately, stolen by 
Hall.” And de Grey recalled, “Blinker had made a compact with a few of the 
‘research party’ that if ever we dug out anything of real importance we were 
to take it direct to him without showing it to Ewing whom he mistrusted as a 
chatter-box (and rightly).”11 In other words, the cryptanalysts’ loyalty lay first 
and foremost with the great man, not with the institution of naval intelligence, 
and they asked no questions about process and procedure. As the only mean-
ingful link between his code breakers and the government, Hall assumed a 
critical position vis-à-vis his nominal superiors, who were, at best, dimly aware 
of Room 40’s range of activities, if even knowing of its very existence.
As soon as he took over as DID, Hall took a series of steps that elevated 
him from mere officeholder to a political player in his own right. First, he 
expanded his purview from interception and decryption of wireless messages 
to intelligence gathering by the means of human agents or spies. This process 
started early in the war. In autumn 1914, Hall and Basil Thomson of Scotland 
Yard’s Special Branch staffed the American yacht Sayonara with Royal Navy 
officers masquerading as pro-German Americans and sent the ship on a cruise 
along the Irish coast to gain the confidence of disloyal Irishmen and gather 
information about (nonexistent) German submarine bases. They informed 
neither the Irish authorities nor the admiral commanding Queenstown. The 
Sayonara venture produced no intelligence of any value, but it stoked a spy 
scare that had seized the United Kingdom at the outbreak of war.12
Despite its failure as an intelligence gathering operation, the Sayonara 
episode set an important precedent. Shortly thereafter, Hall began to build 
up an intelligence network in neutral Spain, a hotbed of Allied and German 
spies. Hall’s man on the ground was Gibraltar-based Colonel Charles Thoro-
ton, known by his colleagues as Charles the Bold. Thoroton’s DID-sponsored 
network eventually extended to the Baleares, North Africa, and Greece and 
“became immensely powerful,” according to Edward Bell, Hall’s liaison at 
the U.S. embassy in London. Thoroton’s operations remain somewhat murky  
because he destroyed most of his papers, but his reasoning for retaining a few 

86 
 Chapter Six	 	
	
	
select items gives an idea of his gloves-off methods: “[I retained] those [papers] 
which I thought necessary to defend myself in case of an attack being made on 
me for some of my more questionable activities.”13
Moreover, Hall made a number of useful connections with British officials 
inside and outside the Navy. He carefully developed relationships with British 
naval attachés around the globe, most notably with Captain Guy Gaunt, in 
New York. Under Hall’s direction, Gaunt directed intelligence and propaganda 
activities against the Germans, quite often without the ambassador’s knowl-
edge. Hall also established personal ties with his colleagues at MI5 (Vernon 
Kell), SIS (Mansfield Smith-Cumming), Scotland Yard’s Special Branch (Basil 
Thomson), the War Office (Colonel George Cockerill, director of special intel-
ligence and in charge of censorship), the press, and the U.S. embassy. All of 
these connections would come in handy over time.14
In the summer of 1915, Hall made the momentous decision to let Room 
40 attack encrypted German diplomatic messages in addition to naval mes-
sages, their original target. For this purpose, he set up a diplomatic section 
within Room 40, headed by George Young, a Middle East expert who reported 
directly to Hall. Ewing was cut out of the loop completely. Hall assigned to his 
brainchild some of his most competent code breakers, including Knox and de 
Grey. Initially, Room 40’s diplomatic cryptanalysts found German diplomatic 
encrypts more challenging than their naval counterparts, but eventually they 
hit their stride and provided Hall with a regular stream of messages to and from 
the German foreign office. When Room 40 discovered in September 1916 that 
the Swedish foreign ministry and the U.S. State Department allowed Berlin  
occasionally to use their transatlantic cables to communicate with the German 
embassy in Washington, they began to attack German messages embedded in 
intercepted Swedish and U.S. diplomatic traffic as well. By late 1916, the Brit-
ish regularly intercepted and decrypted communications between the German 
embassy in Washington and the Wilhelmstrasse.15
These diplomatic encrypts were, in the words of Admiral William “Bub-
bles” James, Hall’s wartime deputy and biographer, “the sole concern of the 
Foreign Secretary.” In the spirit of Churchill’s instructions of November 29, 
1914, they should have gone “direct and exclusively” to the Foreign Office, 
but from the outset, Hall retained the right to distribute the resulting dip-
lomatic intercepts as he pleased.16 Although he forwarded many of “his” 
decrypts to interested government branches (after omitting references to his 
sources), he frequently made judgment calls as to when and with whom inter-
cepts were to be shared.

“Blinker” Hall 
 87
Hall’s propensity to use decrypts for his own purposes manifested itself 
in early 1916, when Edward M. House, President Woodrow Wilson’s adviser, 
visited Europe. House had convinced the president to send him on a trip to 
London, Berlin, and Paris to promote the idea of a peace conference under 
U.S. aegis. Though in line with Wilson’s desire to end the war, House’s plan 
had a distinctly pro-Allied flavor. If each nation responded favorably to his 
initiative, “we would then have accomplished a masterstroke of diplomacy,” 
House noted in his diary, but if “the Central Powers refused to acquiesce, we 
could then push our insistence to a point where diplomatic relations would 
first be broken off, and later the whole force of our Government, and perhaps 
the force of every neutral—might be brought against them.”17 Getting carried 
away in the course of his mediation mission, House told the French foreign 
minister that “inevitably, America will enter the war, before the end of the year, 
and will align herself on the side of the Allies.”18
House spent nearly two months shuttling among the three European capi-
tals, but he passed most of his time in London, where he discussed his project 
at length with British foreign secretary Edward Grey. As a result of these talks, 
House returned to the United States with the so-called House-Grey memoran-
dum for the president. In it, Grey states, “Colonel House told me that President 
Wilson was ready, upon hearing from France and England that the moment 
was opportune, to propose that a Conference should be summoned to put an 
end to the war. Should the Allies accept this proposal and should Germany 
refuse it, the United States would probably enter the war against Germany.” 
The document goes on to reveal that “if such a conference met, it would secure 
peace on terms not unfavorable to the Allies; and, if it failed to secure peace, 
the United States would leave the Conference as a belligerent on the side of 
the Allies, if Germany was unreasonable.” In the end, House’s efforts came to 
naught. Wilson effectively defanged the memorandum by inserting the modi-
fication “probably” before the words “leave the Conference.”19 The British 
government never asked Wilson to launch his mediation offer.
Hall had little use for a peace conference, even if the United States promised 
to throw its diplomatic weight behind the Allies. Instead, he mused that “there 
is a satisfactory killing of Germans” on the western front, “but it takes a long 
time to kill two million, and I do not see much chance of peace until we have 
done it.”20 Therefore, he followed House’s moves in Europe with great inter-
est and a considerable amount of suspicion. In all likelihood, the cryptanalytic 
bureau of military intelligence, MI1(b), intercepted and decrypted telegrams 
sent by House to Washington via the U.S. embassy. The bureau’s director, Cap-
tain Malcolm Hay, then probably handed the decrypts to his naval colleague, 

88 
 Chapter Six	 	
	
	
Captain Hall.21 In turn, Hall appears to have shown the House decrypts selec-
tively to other British officials with a view to mobilizing fellow hardliners and 
nip the American initiative in the bud.22 As Maurice Hankey, secretary of the 
war cabinet, noted in his diary in early 1916: “I saw Captain Hall again first 
thing in the morning. He showed me more of [President Wilson’s adviser] Col. 
House’s telegrams sent from Berlin . . . I found that Hall had not shown these 
telegrams even to the First Lord [of the Admiralty, then Arthur J. Balfour]. This 
information is of course priceless.”23
Many Foreign Office officials resented Hall’s handling of intelligence. As 
Herbert Yardley, an American cryptologist on wartime liaison duty in Britain, 
observed, the “Foreign Office was extremely jealous of [Hall’s] position for 
it was almost wholly dependent on him for information revealing the secret  
political intrigues of enemy and neutral governments. . . . It is no wonder 
then that he was feared by the Foreign Office.”24 Even Admiral James, a great  
admirer of his former boss, conceded that Hall “had no right to handle the 
political messages himself and that he should have sent them without comment 
to the Foreign Office.”25
The crafty Hall did not stop at hogging intelligence and dispensing it as 
he saw fit. He also deployed his secretly collected information in covert oper-
ations aimed at discrediting London’s foes and swaying the war in Britain’s 
favor. Often, he did so on his own authority, as was the case during the ill-fated 
Gallipoli campaign of 1915 aimed at opening a sea route to Russia. Early that 
year, Hall had sent secret emissaries to Constantinople with instructions to  
offer up to £4 million to secure the passage of the Royal Navy. He did so 
without consulting the Foreign Office, the cabinet, or the Admiralty.26 In his 
memoirs, Hall left a candid account of the ensuing interview with Churchill 
and Jackie Fisher, the first sea lord of the Admiralty:
[Churchill] was frowning. “Who authorised this?” he demanded.
[Hall replied:] “I did, First Lord.”
“But—the Cabinet surely knows nothing about it?”
“No, it does not . . .”
It was one of the moments when dropped pins are supposed to be heard. 
Then Mr Churchill turned to Lord Fisher. . . . “D’you hear what this man 
has done? He’s sent out people with four millions to buy a peaceful pas-
sage! On his own!”27
Hall also did not hesitate to exploit his access to intelligence for personal 
vendettas when it suited him. Though the following account is probably too 

“Blinker” Hall 
 89
good to be true, it nevertheless accurately reflects Hall’s attitude toward his 
sense of entitlement to the intelligence produced by Room 40: Sometime during 
the war, a British judge allegedly handed down a light sentence for a German 
spy in whose arrest Hall had played a part. The judge ruled on the grounds 
that the agent had only reported to his spymasters in Germany the location of 
British factories that the judge considered to be “targets of no military impor-
tance.” Furious, Hall reportedly sent a report to Germany in the spy’s name, 
giving the position of the judge’s country house as the site of another factory. 
Shortly thereafter, Hall ended up at dinner next to the judge, who told him and 
the other guests that Zeppelins had bombarded his house and that he had only 
narrowly escaped with his life. To this Hall supposedly replied with delight, 
“Well, it was not a target of any military importance, was it?”28 
A reshuffling of the British government in 1916 greatly strengthened Hall’s 
position. In December 1916, the then-secretary of state for war, the Liberal MP 
David Lloyd George, formed a coalition government. The new prime minister 
appointed the first lord of the Admiralty and eminent Tory, Arthur J. Bal-
four, foreign secretary. Although Balfour’s appointment added much-needed 
gravitas and expertise to Lloyd George’s cabinet, political, generational, and 
temperamental differences caused latent friction between the two men. For 
Hall, Balfour’s nomination to the top spot at the Foreign Office was a stroke 
of luck. As the first lord of the Admiralty, Balfour had been one of the DID’s 
immediate superiors, and Hall, who preferred to work along personal rather 
than institutional lines, had collaborated harmoniously with Balfour, whose 
conservative political views he shared and whose laissez-faire style suited him 
well. Their disdain for Lloyd George further bound the two men.29
Balfour’s appointment as foreign secretary allowed Hall to consolidate 
the invisible empire he had created over the preceding two years. His power 
derived from the procurement, exclusive access, and arbitrary dispensation of  
secret information. Hall was the first British executive official to read inter-
cepted diplomatic messages between Washington and Berlin, and he alone  
decided when and with whom to share the decrypts. “He had unbounded con-
fidence in his ability to decide how much of the information in the messages 
should be passed on to other Government departments,” wrote his biogra-
pher.30 Hall’s information monopoly gave him a degree of leverage over British 
foreign policy that far exceeded the authority formally vested in him as DID. 
As Edward Bell of the U.S. embassy in London remarked: “So powerful did 
Admiral Hall become, that he was often in a position to influence the conduct 
of Great Britain’s foreign policy in the most important matters, and actually 
did so on several occasions.”31

90
Chapter Seven
Interception and  
Decryption
H
ow did the British intercept the Zimmermann telegram? Finding the 
answer begins with German transatlantic communication.
Following the cutting of Germany’s submarine cables by the Royal 
Navy early in the war, Berlin had developed a number of alternative techniques 
for contacting its diplomats in Washington. These included by submarine, by 
courier, by inserting secret text into ordinary news dispatches, by radio, and 
by using Swedish and American cables. The Wilhelmstrasse had planned ini-
tially to send the Zimmermann telegram via the submarine Deutschland, but 
the German navy then requisitioned the vessel for its own purposes, before it 
launched for the United States.1 Delivery by courier would have been lengthy 
and uncertain, and insertion of the secret text into ordinary news dispatches 
seemed impractical. Wireless communication, on the other hand, represented 
a viable option for the German foreign office.
The Wilhelmstrasse and the German embassy in Washington frequently 
used the powerful long-range radio stations in Sayville, Long Island, and Tuck-
erton, New Jersey, as well as in Nauen, outside Berlin, to send transatlantic 
telegrams. During the war, however, the Germans were unable to fully mas-
ter the technical challenges of sending and receiving wireless messages over 
such a long distance. Moreover, the U.S. government supervised the two sta-
tions on U.S. soil and insisted that the Germans hand them a copy of the code 
used for wireless telegrams sent to and from Sayville and Tuckerton. Hence, in 
the words of the German ambassador to Washington, “[t]his course was not 
suitable for handling negotiations in which the American Government was 
concerned.”2

Interception and Decryption 
 91
The pro-German Swedish government offered a more reliable means of 
wireless communication across the Atlantic. Shortly after the outbreak of war, 
Stockholm had agreed to assist the Wilhelmstrasse in maintaining contact with 
its overseas legations. The German foreign office would give an encrypted mes-
sage to the Swedish foreign ministry in Stockholm, which would then relay it 
to its envoy in Buenos Aires. There, the Swedish envoy would hand it to his 
German colleague, who, in turn, would forward it to the addressee, for example, 
the German embassy in Washington. British cryptanalysts referred to this route 
as the “Swedish roundabout.” The British Admiralty discovered and began 
plucking telegrams from the Swedish roundabout in early 1915. Room 40 
started decrypting the intercepts in late 1916.3
One other option was the U.S. State Department.4 Beginning in late 1914, 
the Wilhelmstrasse began sending encrypted telegrams to the German embassy 
in Washington via U.S. diplomatic cables. The German foreign office continued 
to use this route intermittently until diplomatic relations were broken in Febru-
ary 1917. All the messages sent across the Atlantic passed through London, 
giving British intelligence ready access to them. Room 40 began eavesdrop-
ping on the cables to and from the U.S. embassy in London in May 1915, or 
perhaps earlier, intercepting U.S. diplomatic messages as well as the occasional 
embedded German messages.5
The German foreign office files indicate that the Wilhelmstrasse sent the 
Zimmermann telegram through the State Department channel. An official Ger-
man report from April 1917 states that Berlin handed the encoded telegram 
“to the American ambassador [to Germany], with the request of conveying 
it to the imperial embassy in Washington.” The report goes on to reveal that 
the “American ambassador received the dispatch from the foreign office on 
January 16 at three o’clock in the afternoon and sent it immediately by way 
of the American legation in Copenhagen.” On January 19, “the State Depart-
ment handed the Telegram to the German embassy in Washington,” which 
forwarded it to Mexico.6
The German records mention neither the Swedish roundabout nor long-
distance radio with regard to the telegram. Yet in 1926, William Reginald Hall, 
since retired from British naval intelligence, filed an affidavit for the German-
American Mixed Claims Commission settling wartime compensation claims 
by Americans against the German government. In it, the former director of 
naval intelligence states that the telegram was “sent from Berlin to Washing-
ton by cable via the Swedish foreign office. It was intercepted by us en route 
to Washington.”7 Hall repeated this claim in his unpublished autobiography, 

92 
 Chapter Seven	
	
	
	
adding that the Germans “probably use[d] other routes as well.”8 He does 
not say what those “other routes” might be, but Hall does refer readers to the 
journalist Burton Hendrick’s multivolume biography of Walter Hines Page, the 
U.S. wartime ambassador to London. In the third volume, published in 1926, 
Hendrick claims that the Wilhelmstrasse had indeed used three routes for the 
Zimmermann telegram: the Swedish roundabout, a radiogram to Sayville, and 
the U.S. embassy in Berlin. For confirmation, Hendrick points readers to the 
proceedings of an official German parliamentary investigation into the causes 
of Germany’s defeat. There was indeed such an investigation in 1920, but its 
records make no mention of the Swedish roundabout or long-distance radio. 
Instead, the investigation stated merely that the Wilhelmstrasse had sent the 
telegram “through the offices of the American Embassy in Berlin . . . to Count 
Bernstorff [German ambassador in Washington] by way of the State Depart-
ment in Washington.” 9
If not from the records of the German investigation, where had Hendrick 
picked up the notion that the Wilhelmstrasse had sent the telegram by way of 
Sweden and long-distance wireless? In preparing his biography of Ambassador 
Page, Hendrick collaborated closely with Hall. The old spymaster generously 
provided Hendrick with background material, and the latter boasted to the 
American diplomat Edward Bell in 1921, “Admiral Hall has given me the 
complete story of the Zimmerman [sic] Mexico telegram. He has . . . given 
all details about the ways [it was] sent, decoded, etc.”10 Although Hendrick 
does not state explicitly that Hall had told him that the Germans had sent the 
telegram via Sweden and by wireless, his statement to Bell strongly suggests it. 
If so, Hendrick’s claim about the Germans’ use of three different channels for 
sending the telegram originates with Hall.
For quite some time, the Page biography provided the main source for 
research on the Zimmermann telegram, and it took historians years to refute 
Hendrick’s, and thus Hall’s, assertions about the Wilhelmstrasse’s use of mul-
tiple routes. In 1938 two American cryptanalysts, William F. Friedman and 
Charles J. Mendelsohn, argued that technical difficulties would have prevented 
the Germans from sending the telegram as a transatlantic cablegram. 11 Their 
findings did not reach the public until 1965, when the government declassified 
their study, and they did not question Berlin’s use of the Swedish roundabout. 
Only in 1967 did cryptology historian David Kahn question the Germans’ 
use of this route, for the first time. Kahn noted that the German foreign office 
records gave “only the American route for the message, which may mean that 
the Zimmermann telegram did not go by the Swedish roundabout.”12 Nearly 

Interception and Decryption 
 93
four decades later, in 2003, State Department historian David Nickles cast 
further doubt on the use of the Swedish roundabout.13 Subsequently, historian 
Peter Freeman, in 2006, and mathematician Joachim von zur Gathen, in 2007, 
confirmed Kahn’s and Nickles’ suspicions, based on British and German records, 
respectively.14
Despite painstaking historical and cryptologic research, and a gradual 
correction of Hall’s disinformation, myths about the Zimmermann telegram’s 
transmission have persisted. Barbara Tuchman’s popular account of the tele-
gram, in particular, has cast a long shadow over this issue.15 Tuchman uncriti-
cally accepted and reproduced the falsehood of the Wilhelmstrasse’s use of 
three routes, and several subsequent in-depth studies of the telegram failed to 
correct her. Friedrich Katz, in The Secret War in Mexico (1985), reiterates the 
claim of the telegram’s threefold delivery by quoting Tuchman and Hendrick, 
as does Martin Nassua in his master’s thesis on the telegram, published in 
1990.16 A popular history of cryptography claims as recently as 1999 that 
“Zimmermann was forced to send his encrypted telegram via Sweden and, as a 
back-up, via the more direct American-owned cable.”17 All of these erroneous 
claims go back ultimately to disinformation originating with Hall.
Why did Hall produce this smoke screen about the method by which Brit-
ish naval intelligence intercepted the telegram? The British were understand-
ably loath to reveal to their American allies the interception and decryption 
of State Department cable traffic by Room 40 during the period of U.S. neu-
trality, but why did Hall continue to obfuscate the truth long after the war 
even though the German parliamentary investigation and Hendrick disclosed 
it in 1920 and 1926, respectively? The reason for Hall’s persistent refusal to 
acknowledge British eavesdropping on U.S. communications lay in the longev-
ity of these operations and their continuity long after the United States had 
entered World War I.
The British found U.S. codes easy to break. The American cryptanalyst 
Herbert Yardley had also found U.S. diplomatic codes shockingly simplistic 
when he joined the State Department as a code clerk in 1913. When he tried 
his hand at an encoded message from adviser Edward M. House to President 
Woodrow Wilson about a meeting with the kaiser in Berlin in 1914, he man-
aged to decrypt it, without key, in less than two hours. “Imagine my amaze-
ment,” he recalled. “This message had passed over British cables and we al-
ready knew that a copy of every cable went to the Code Bureau in the British 
Navy. Colonel House must be the Allies’ best informant! No need to send spies 
into Germany when they have Colonel House’s reports of interviews with the 
Emperor, Princes, Generals, leading industrial leaders.”18

94 
 Chapter Seven	
	
	
	
Over the next years, the British continued to prey upon the State Depart-
ment’s diplomatic communications. In early 1917, Yardley’s boss told him, 
“We already know by our telegrams from London that England maintains 
a large bureau for solving diplomatic correspondence.” He asked Yardley 
whether he believed the British could solve the State Department’s code. Yard-
ley replied in the affirmative, and a few weeks after the U.S. declaration of 
war, he handed his boss a stack of messages he had solved. His boss, however, 
“seemed content to let the matter drop, assuming the hopeless view that noth-
ing is indecipherable.”19
The United States’ entry into the war did not change British attitudes toward 
attacking U.S. diplomatic communications, as evidenced by several intercepted 
messages in the British archives dating from August 1917.20 In other words, 
His Majesty’s code breakers not only read State Department messages dur-
ing the period of U.S. neutrality, they continued to do so after the U.S. inter-
vention. This appears to have been Hall’s main rationale for continually and 
falsely playing up Berlin’s use of the Swedish roundabout and long-distance 
radio for the transmission of the telegram. For fear of losing an important intel-
ligence source and antagonizing a critical ally, Hall sought to obscure his agen-
cy’s eavesdropping operations on U.S. diplomatic cables even after the United 
States entered the war. American cryptologists nevertheless suspected the truth. 
On liaison duty in London in August 1918, Yardley “did not dare communicate 
with Washington, since the British would decode every word I sent.”21
The British continued their cryptanalytic campaign against the United 
States without a hitch into the postwar period. In 1921 a U.S. Senate hearing 
revealed that the British were eavesdropping on all American cable communi-
cations, commercial as well as governmental.22 When called upon to assess the 
security of American diplomatic messages in 1926, Yardley once again found 
them highly vulnerable.23 As late as 1944, in a posthumously published account 
of Hall’s war work and postwar career, the former director of naval intelligence 
failed to acknowledge the fact that the British had obtained the telegram by 
spying on U.S. diplomatic cables.24 It is a fair guess that Hall did so in order not 
to complicate his successors’ ongoing interception and decryption of Ameri-
can messages. Indeed, there are indications that the British intercepted and 
decrypted U.S. communications during World War II, and a history of post–
World War II American cryptanalysis, published in 1982, claims that British 
eavesdropping on U.S. diplomatic messages “continues to the present.”25
Whatever the scope of British snooping on U.S. communications after 
April 1917, London began intercepting U.S. diplomatic traffic early in the war, 
and British intelligence started decrypting the intercepts in the spring of 1915.26 

Interception and Decryption 
 95
Hence, by the time the telegram crossed the Atlantic on State Department 
cables, the British had been reading American diplomatic messages for two 
years. The telegram’s interception was therefore a matter of routine. As soon 
as British eavesdroppers had plucked the encoded message from the ether, they 
needed to decide where to send it for decryption.
The task of sorting U.S. intercepts to the appropriate cryptanalytic  
agency—naval or military—fell to MI8, the War Office agency in charge of  
cable censorship. Since Room 40 was responsible for attacking German 
encrypts, and the army’s cryptanalytic unit, MI1(b), for all non-German 
encrypts, MI8 first had to determine whether an intercepted U.S. cable con-
tained an embedded German message. The identification of an encrypt’s prov-
enance was easy because the Americans used letter codes, whereas German 
codes were numeric. When MI8 procured Ambassador James Gerard’s lengthy 
message to the State Department that included the Zimmermann telegram on 
the morning of January 17—two days before Ambassador Johann Heinrich 
von Bernstorff would receive his copy in Washington—the censors immedi-
ately recognized that the embedded numerical code groups were German and 
forwarded the message to Room 40 for decryption.27
The message Gerard forwarded on behalf of the Wilhelmstrasse consisted 
of about a thousand numerical code groups. Date (January 16) and addressee 
(the German ambassador in Washington, Bernstorff) were given en clair, but 
the main body of the text was encrypted by means of a highly sophisticated 
codebook that the Germans called 0075 and the Americans and British referred 
to as 7500. Berlin had first distributed the code in July 1916 to its missions 
in Berne, Bucharest, Constantinople, Copenhagen, Kristiania (Oslo), Lugano, 
The Hague, Sofia, Stockholm, and Vienna. In November 1916, the merchant 
submarine Deutschland delivered the code to the German embassy in Wash-
ington; Room 40 began intercepting messages to the embassy encoded in 0075 
in the same month. The British code breakers learned from their analyses that 
0075 was a two-part, four-digit code. Its numerical groups consisted of two 
zeros and two digits, the two digits always showing an arithmetical difference 
of 2. The groups were allocated entirely randomly to the vocabulary. Due to 
this deliberate randomness, the Germans called 0075 a Lotteriechiffre (lottery 
cipher). A fifth digit was prefixed to some groups to indicate the definite article 
and one or two other grammatical reflections.28
“Dilly” Knox, the cryptanalyst who first attacked the encoded message, 
did not get very far. He therefore turned to his colleague Nigel de Grey, argu-
ably Room 40’s most talented cryptanalyst. With Knox’s assistance, de Grey 
went to work.29 Since Room 40 knew only a few elements of code 0075, the 

96 
 Chapter Seven	
	
	
	
task resembled solving a puzzle without all the required pieces and without 
knowing what the final product would look like. Yet de Grey and Knox quickly 
realized that the message consisted of two German telegrams, no. 157 (inform-
ing Bernstorff of the impending unrestricted submarine warfare) and no. 158 
(the actual Mexican dispatch). Since no. 158 was shorter, and therefore more 
quickly solvable, the cryptanalysts tackled it first. De Grey recalled:
We could at once read enough groups for Knox to see that the telegram 
was important. Together he and I worked solidly all the morning upon it. 
With our crude methods and lack of staff no elaborate indexing of groups 
had been developed—only constantly recurring groups were noted in the 
working copies of the code as our fancy dictated. Work therefore was 
slow and laborious but by about mid-day we had got a skeleton version, 
sweating with excitement as we went on because neither of us doubted 
the importance of what we had in our hands. Was not the American-
German situation our daily bread?30
Beaming with excitement, de Grey took this skeleton version to Hall (see 
Figs. 2 and 3). In his autobiography, Hall vividly recalled the moment when he 
first learnt of the telegram: “I am not likely to forget that Wednesday morn-
ing, January 17th, 1917,” he wrote a little more than ten years after the event. 
“There was the usual docket of papers to be gone through on my arrival at the 
office, and [Hall’s assistant] Claud Serocold and I were still at work on them 
when at about half-past ten de Grey came in. He seemed excited.” A dramatic 
exchange ensued. “‘D.I.D.’, de Grey said, ‘d’you want to bring America into 
the war?’ ‘Yes, my boy,’” Hall replied. “‘Why?’” De Grey explained: “‘I’ve got 
something here which—well, it’s a rather astonishing message which might 
do the trick if we could use it. It isn’t very clear, I’m afraid, but I’m sure I’ve 
got most of the important points right. It’s from the German Foreign Office to 
Bernstorff.’” De Grey then handed Hall the message.31
Since Hall did not read German, the cryptanalysts had translated the par-
tial decrypt into English. This is the text of the message de Grey showed Hall 
that morning:
W. 158
16th Jan. 1917
Most secret for Your Excellency’s personal information and to be handed 
on to the Imperial Minister in ? Mexico with . . . . . . by a safe route.
Tel. No. 1.

Interception and Decryption 
 97
	
We propose to begin on the 1st February unrestricted submarine 
warfare. In doing so however we shall endeavour to keep America neutral 
. . . . . ? If we should not (succeed in doing so) we propose to (?Mexico) 
an alliance upon the following basis.
	
(joint) conduct of war
	
(joint) conduct of peace
	
Your Excellency should for the present inform the President secretly 
(that we expect) war with the U.S.A. (possibly) (. . . . . . Japan) and at the 
same time to negotiate between us and Japan. . . . .
(Indecipherable sentence opening please tell the President) that. . . . .our 
submarines. . . . . . will compel England to peace in a few months. Acknowl-
edge receipt.
Zimmermann32
This fragmentary decrypt does not mention Germany’s consent for Mexico 
to reconquer U.S. territory, but it still contained several bombshells, including 
the imminence of unrestricted submarine warfare, the possibility of a German-
Mexican alliance directed against the United States, and evidence of Germany’s 
intention to pry Japan away from the Allies.
Room 40’s standing orders required Hall to promptly share the message, 
or its content, with the Admiralty and the Foreign Office so that the govern-
ment could take appropriate military and diplomatic action. In this case, appro-
priate measures might have included naval preparations for the onslaught of 
German submarines, securing British interests in Mexico, and ensuring Japan’s 
loyalty to the Allied cause. Hall, knowing full well that he was acting counter 
to instructions, did the opposite of his orders. “This,” he told de Grey, “is a 
case where standing orders must be suspended. All copies of this message, 
both those in cypher and your own transcripts, are to be brought straight to 
me. Nothing is to be put on the files. This may be a very big thing, possibly the 
biggest thing of the war. For the present not a soul outside this room is to be 
told anything at all.”33
Be it deliberate disinformation, a guilty conscience, or simply a faulty 
memory, Hall claimed a quarter of a century later that he had sent the telegram 
“promptly upon its interception to the British Prime Minister with a notation 
written across its corner calling to its importance in the relations between the 
Allies and the United States.”34 This statement is demonstrably incorrect. As 
noted, when Room 40’s code breakers showed Hall a partial decrypt of the 
telegram, the DID told his staff that “not a soul outside this room is to be told 
anything at all.”35 Furthermore, neither the British archives nor Hall’s auto-

Figure 2. The start of Nigel de Grey’s handwritten decrypt of the  
Zimmermann telegram. (Courtesy of the National Archives, London)

Figure 3. The typed version of de Grey’s decrypt, with annotation by Captain  
William Reginald Hall across top left: “main line—not exposed.” The term main line 
refers to Germany’s use of the U.S. State Department route, and the term not exposed 
means “not published.” (Courtesy of the National Archives, London)

100 
 Chapter Seven	
	
	
	
biography nor David Lloyd George’s memoirs nor any other relevant source 
contains any reference to Hall’s informing the prime minister of the telegram. 
Indeed, Lloyd George is known to have received only one decrypt during his 
time as wartime prime minister, and it was an American diplomatic message 
in 1916.36
If Hall had followed the normal chain of command, he would have  
informed the Foreign Office of the telegram, not the prime minister. Why, then, 
Hall’s reluctance to inform the diplomats immediately of the telegram? In 1926 
he explained his hesitation to the Daily Mail: “If I had disclosed the actual 
wording of the Zimmermann telegram the Germans would have suspected 
something at once. I had to wait until we got a copy of the telegram actually 
sent, which was differently worded from the one in Berlin.”37 Hall’s interview 
with the Daily Mail is noteworthy for two reasons. First, it reveals that he evi-
dently considered sharing the telegram with the Foreign Office as equivalent 
to disclosing it to the Germans. In other words, he did not trust the Foreign 
Office to keep the telegram secret or to disclose it only after taking proper 
precautions. Consequently, he took it upon himself to handle the telegram as 
he saw fit.
Second, his statement contains an untruth. His mentioning to the Daily 
Mail of getting “a copy of the telegram actually sent, which was differently 
worded” refers to the telegram forwarded by Ambassador Bernstorff to Hein-
rich von Eckardt, the German envoy in Mexico City, on January 19, as opposed 
to the one sent by Zimmermann to Bernstorff on January 16. Hall’s efforts 
to obtain a copy of Bernstorff’s telegram in Mexico are described below, but 
suffice it to say here that the main bodies of these two telegrams were iden-
tical. From reading the text eventually published in the American press, the 
Germans had no way of knowing whether it was based on the telegram sent 
by Zimmermann to Bernstorff or the one forwarded by Bernstorff to Eckardt. 
Hall’s assertion in the Daily Mail about the supposed difference between the 
two telegrams was therefore disingenuous.38
A few years later, in his autobiography, Hall still regarded giving the tele-
gram to the Foreign Office as equivalent to making it public: “Why, then, run 
the smallest risk of [the telegram’s] contents becoming known to somebody 
[i.e., the Foreign Office] who, not being familiar with every branch of our 
activity, might all unwittingly compromise some part or all of the work in 
Room 40?”39 This time, however, he makes no reference to the alleged differ-
ences between the two telegrams. Instead, he explains his hesitation to inform 
the Foreign Office by citing his concern that publication of the telegram might 
alert the Germans to the existence of Room 40 and cause them to change their 
codes. Furthermore, he wrote, he had not yet obtained sufficient proof to con-

Interception and Decryption 
 101
vince President Wilson that the telegram was genuine, and not “a British-made 
hoax.”40 These justifications ring hollow, as well. The Germans were bound 
to wonder how the telegram ended up on the front pages of U.S. newspapers, 
regardless of when the disclosure occurred. When Hall eventually informed the 
Americans of the telegram, on February 19, he told them that the British had 
obtained it through cryptanalysis.41 Yet this information he could have given 
them already in January.42
In fact, Hall did not worry that the Americans would consider the telegram 
a British hoax or that the Germans would find out about Room 40’s activities. 
Rather, he feared that the Americans might discover Room 40’s eavesdropping 
on their communications. If he had informed the Foreign Office of the tele-
gram as soon as Room 40 had produced a partial decrypt on January 17—and 
per his unspoken assumption, the diplomats would carelessly share this intel-
ligence with their American colleagues—the British would have been hard-
pressed to explain their source—U.S. diplomatic cables—to the Americans.
If the Americans had made an educated guess, the telegram would not 
only have caused a diplomatic scandal between Washington and London, but 
the State Department would probably have changed its codes, depriving Room 
40 of an important intelligence source. If, on the other hand, Hall held on 
to the telegram for a few weeks, he could be reasonably sure that he would 
eventually be in a position to provide the Americans with the complete text 
of the telegram and a safe explanation as to how the British had obtained it. 
Hall knew from the partial decrypt of Zimmermann’s telegram to Bernstorff 
that the German ambassador would forward the alliance offer to his colleague 
in Mexico City, Eckardt. From past experience, Hall also knew that Bern-
storff would have to use an older, more vulnerable code to communicate with 
Mexico, since Eckardt did not possess a copy of codebook 0075. If Hall man-
aged to obtain a copy of Bernstorff’s telegram to Eckardt, he could expect his 
staff to decrypt the encoded message in toto and fill in the remaining lacunae. 
If he then decided to share his intelligence with the Americans, he would be in 
a position to tell them that the British had obtained it in Mexico rather than 
from U.S. cables. In short, this ruse would enable him to conceal British eaves-
dropping operations from the Americans as well as afford Room 40 continued 
access to U.S. diplomatic messages.43
Prompt U.S. intervention in response to Germany’s public declaration of 
unrestricted submarine warfare would have relieved Hall of his dilemma. In 
this case, which he considered likely, Hall reasoned, “the Zimmermann tele-
gram need never be used at all.”44 In expectation of Washington’s impending 
entry into the war, Hall sat on the partially decrypted telegram for more than 
two weeks, patiently awaiting the submarine deadline, while his government, 

102 
 Chapter Seven	
	
	
	
ignorant of the bombshell in Hall’s possession, struggled to bring about U.S. 
intervention on the Allied side. After the war, Hall asked self-critically, “What, 
then, was there to prevent me from immediately handing it [the telegram] over 
to the Foreign Office authorities?” In response, he conceded that a “naval of-
ficer is not trained for foreign politics, and surely there were those who were 
far better able to deal with the matter than myself. Yet, so far, it would seem, 
from taking the obvious course, I deliberately withheld [the telegram] from 
those best entitled to receive it until a dangerously late date, and assumed a 
responsibility which ought never to have been mine.”45
Hall’s stated intention to keep the telegram permanently under wraps, in 
case the United States responded to Germany’s declaration of unrestricted war-
fare by joining the Allies, conjures up an interesting alternate historical scenario. 
The telegram’s non-disclosure would have meant that Zimmermann’s alliance 
scheme probably would not have been exposed in the press in March 1917. 
This, in turn, would have given the Germans time to make headway with their 
Mexican alliance scheme, while at the same time the United States would have 
remained utterly ignorant of these efforts. Whether Carranza would have even-
tually joined the Germans and attacked the United States remains hypothetical 
of course, but Hall’s decision to keep the telegram secret in case Washington 
entered the conflict in response to unrestricted submarine warfare potentially 
exposed the United States to an attack on its southern flank.
In the event, the United States did not precipitously enter the war. When 
Germany declared unrestricted submarine warfare, President Wilson decided 
to sever diplomatic relations with Berlin, rather than join the Allies. Still, the 
rupture took Zimmermann by surprise, and on February 5, he followed up 
the original telegram with another message, instructing Eckardt to enter into 
negotiations with Carranza “even now,” that is, without awaiting American 
intervention (Fig. 4). The Wilhelmstrsasse encrypted this message in an old 
code, 13040, and sent it by way of the Swedish roundabout. On the evening 
of February 8, the message passed through London, and Room 40 decrypted it 
two days later. Its content indicated a radicalization of German strategy, but it 
remains unclear when Hall forwarded Zimmermann’s February 5 dispatch to 
the Foreign Office or whether he did so at all.46
British naval intelligence learned of Wilson’s decision to sever diplomatic 
relations with Germany through private channels even before the British For-
eign Office or the U.S. ambassador in London did. On February 2, Wilson’s 
adviser, House, informed Captain Guy Gaunt, the British naval attaché in New 
York, that the administration had decided to send Bernstorff home. Exhila-
rated, Gaunt relayed the news to Hall, and added, “I’ll probably get soused.” 
The next morning, Hall showed up at the U.S. embassy, at Grosvenor Square, 

Interception and Decryption 
 103
and proudly reported the news of the imminent rupture of diplomatic relations 
between Berlin and Washington to Ambassador Page. In a celebratory mood, 
the embassy staff promptly invited the DID for “generous whiskies and soda.” 
Though effusive on the outside, deep down Hall was disappointed because 
he had hoped for an American declaration of war. His decision to personally  
appear at the U.S. embassy may well have been the opening gambit to relay 
the telegram to the Americans in order to put pressure on Wilson. Before he 
Figure 4. British intercept and decryption of Zimmermann’s telegram to  
Heinrich von Eckardt, German envoy in Mexico, sent February 5, 1917, via 
Sweden. (Courtesy of the National Archives, London)

104 
 Chapter Seven	
	
	
	
could share the telegram with the embassy, however, Hall needed to ensure that 
the Americans would remain unaware of the ongoing British eavesdropping  
operation on their diplomatic cables.47
Getting his hands on the Washington-Mexico version of the telegram 
now became the cornerstone of Hall’s strategy, and he moved with habitual 
alacrity and independence. On Monday, February 5, he cabled Gaunt in New 
York “to try and get copies of all telegrams from German Embassy Washing-
ton to German Minister Mexico since Jan 18th. If procurable wire in origi-
nal to me.”48 Gaunt then contacted the British envoy in Mexico City, Edward 
Thurstan, whose predecessor, Thomas Hohler, reportedly had exploited the 
predicament of a fellow countryman to recruit a spy in the Mexican telegraph 
office: In 1916, Hohler claimed, a fellow Englishman had asked for help in 
saving his brother from a firing squad. The Mexican government had accused 
the brother, a printer in the Mexican telegraph office, of forging banknotes, 
a crime punishable by death. Hohler managed to get the sentence annulled, 
and in return asked the printer to furnish him copies of all the German and 
Swedish telegrams, which Hohler, in turn, forwarded to Hall. Apparently, 
Thurstan arranged to extend this service when he took over from Hohler.49 No 
independent source confirms Hohler’s story, but the Mexican telegraph office 
by no means posed insurmountable security barriers to those seeking access.  
According to a British-German double agent, the German legation in Mexico 
regularly procured American messages from it.50
Apparently, Hall activated Thurstan without Foreign Office approval. 
Hall informed Charles Hardinge, his liaison at the Foreign Office, about the 
telegram on February 5. On the same day, he instructed Gaunt to procure 
a copy of Bernstorff’s message in Mexico. Hall’s message to Gaunt was dis-
patched at 10 a.m. To have been sent out so early, it must have been drafted, 
typed, and encoded at daybreak, leaving very little, if any, time for discussion 
with and approval by the Foreign Office. Hence, it is possible that Hall sent 
his request to Gaunt and Thurstan and then sought retroactive approval from 
Hardinge. Hall’s recollections in his autobiography suggest that he activated 
Thurstan on his own initiative. After Hardinge had informed him that the 
Foreign Office would take no immediate decision on sharing the telegram with 
the Americans, Hall wrote, “but for this I had been prepared. On the other 
hand there was no reason why steps should not now be taken to obtain the 
additional evidence which we should require in the event of an exposure, and 
on the following day T[hurstan] was asked to secure copies of all telegrams 
sent by Bernstorff to Eckhardt [sic] since Jan. 18th. These were to be sent on to 
Gaunt, who was to forward them on to me as he received them, but put into 
our own cypher.”51

Interception and Decryption 
 105
Per Hall’s instructions, Thurstan procured a copy of the encoded telegram 
from the Mexican telegraph office on February 8 and sent it to New York. 
From there, Gaunt forwarded a copy to London. It arrived at Room 40 on 
February 19.52 As Hall had anticipated, the German embassy in Washington  
had used an obsolete code, 13040, for encryption. This code consisted of about 
25,000 plaintext elements with a fair number of homophones and proper 
names, each of which was assigned a four- or five-digit code group. The Wil-
helmstrasse had introduced 13040 to its missions in Central America and 
South America between 1907 and 1909 and to Washington and New York in 
1912. The German embassy in Washington replaced code 13040 with 0075 
in 1916, but Bernstorff had to use the older 13040 code for communications 
with the German legation in Mexico, which had not received code 0075 from 
the Wilhelmstrasse.53
In historiography, the decryption of code 13040 by the British has long 
been the stuff of mystery and lore. In one popular story, the British managed 
to capture the baggage of a German secret agent in the Middle East that con-
tained a copy of the relevant codebook. The story involved an actual wartime 
event in Persia—the narrow escape of Wilhelm Waßmuß, the “German Law-
rence of Arabia,” from his British pursuers54—but Waßmuß did not carry a 
German codebook with him, and his colorful adventures had no bearing on 
the breaking of 13040.55 Another account asserted that an Austrian wireless 
engineer in German employ smuggled a copy of the codebook to the British 
military attaché in The Hague. Later in the war, Hall supposedly arranged to 
have the engineer silenced: “I paid £1,000 to have that man shot,” he alleg-
edly said.56 This story, too, cannot be corroborated. Ruthless as Hall may have 
been, his bag of tricks did not include assassination.
The prosaic truth is that the British broke 13040 not by means of a fanci-
ful cloak-and-dagger operation, but through tedious, painstaking cryptanaly-
sis. Room 40 had received German messages encoded in 13040 from early on 
in the war and therefore had a wealth of German crypto-material to practice 
on. Eventually, the code breakers reconstructed this German codebook,57 and 
by 1917, Room 40 was routinely and quickly decrypting messages encoded in 
13040.58 Thanks to Room 40’s fluency in 13040, de Grey was able to receive 
a copy of the Bernstorff-to-Eckardt cable on February 19, produce a complete 
decrypt of the telegram, and hand it to Hall on the same day (see Figs. 5 and 
6).59 On this day, a little over a month after the Wilhelmstrasse had sent the 
telegram, Hall had assembled all the elements he needed in order to inform the 
Americans about the Mexican-Japanese alliance scheme without revealing to 
them the ongoing British eavesdropping on U.S. diplomatic communications.

Figure 5. The start of de Grey’s handwritten complete decrypt of the Tele-
gram. (Courtesy of the National Archives, London)

Figure 6. The typed version of de Grey’s decrypt, with annotation, probably by Wil-
liam James, Hall’s wartime deputy, across top left: “Inland cable on American soil—this 
was the one handed to Dr. Page and exposed by President.” (Courtesy of the National 
Archives, London)

108
Chapter Eight
A Special Relationship
G
iven its size and significance as the last remaining major neutral pow-
er, the United States was the prime target of Captain William Regi-
nald Hall’s various covert action schemes as director of British naval 
intelligence. Indeed, Hall ran so many influence operations in the United States 
that his liaison in New York, the British naval attaché, Guy Gaunt, referred to 
their work as “the Intelligence-cum-propaganda line.”1 German officials were 
no less active than the British in covertly and overtly seeking to influence U.S. 
policy and public opinion, but London possessed an asset that Berlin could 
never match: the British could count on the active assistance of high-ranking 
pro-Allied officials in the State Department and in President Woodrow Wil-
son’s inner circle (although the president himself always kept London’s agents 
at arm’s length). In the years leading up to the United States’ entry into the 
war, Hall and his agency took advantage of these pro-Allied sentiments among 
leading U.S. officials to lay the foundation for a special relationship in intelli-
gence that would become a cornerstone in Hall’s handling of the Zimmermann 
telegram.
Beginning in 1915, Hall worked a two-track strategy to cultivate sympa-
thetic U.S. officials. In London, he established a close personal relationship 
with the U.S. embassy, while in the United States he availed himself of the 
services of the Australian-born Captain Gaunt. The naval attaché operated out 
of the British consulate at 44 Whitehall Street in New York City. He reported 
to Ambassador Cecil Arthur Spring Rice in Washington as well as to Hall 
in London. Flamboyant and bohemian, but also vain and egocentric, Gaunt 
was well-connected in American society and quickly developed a range of  

A Special Relationship 
 109
influential contacts, including former president Theodore Roosevelt, Assistant 
Secretary of the Navy Franklin D. Roosevelt, J. P. Morgan partner Edward 
Stettinius, and General Lionel Wood of the U.S. Army.2
Two of Gaunt’s most important contacts were the journalist John R. 
Rathom and President Wilson’s confidential adviser, Edward M. House. 
Rathom, the editor of the Providence Journal, had volunteered his services 
to Gaunt early in the war. Subsequently, the two men met almost daily. While 
Gaunt gave Rathom the details about secret German operations in the United 
States, the editor reciprocated by regularly publishing stories embarrassing to 
the Germans. Rathom also occasionally managed to get his fare into the pages 
of his old employer, the New York Times. Rathom, it seems, was motivated 
both by patriotism—like Gaunt, he was an Australian by birth—as well as dis-
like of President Wilson.3
Gaunt met regularly with House beginning in 1915. He flattered the 
American by imparting confidential (although mostly inconsequential) infor-
mation to him, soliciting his opinion on many matters, and generally making 
him feel important. Gaunt’s ego would occasionally get the better of him, such 
as when he boasted to House that “the British Intelligence Service is marvel-
lously [sic] good. They have reports of everything going on in Berlin.”4 Such 
hyperbole notwithstanding, House generally appreciated Gaunt’s efforts, and 
he even commended him warmly to First Lord of the Admiralty Arthur J. Bal-
four: “I want to express my high regard and appreciation of Captain Gaunt. I 
doubt whether you can realize the great service he has rendered our two coun-
tries. His outlook is so broad and he is so self-contained and fair-minded that I 
have been able to go to him at all times to discuss, very much as I would with 
you, the problems that have arisen.”5
Hall could also count on pro-Allied sympathies in the State Department 
and its intelligence branch. An amorphous organization during the early years 
of the war, the department’s secret service was formally set up as the Bureau 
of Secret Intelligence (BSI) in April 1916. Tasked with collecting information 
by nontraditional means and coordinating intelligence activities of other U.S. 
agencies, the extralegal BSI had a permanent staff of two officials in Wash-
ington. Counselor Frank K. Polk, a former New York lawyer and distant rela-
tive of President James K. Polk, headed the bureau, reporting directly to the 
secretary of state, while day-to-day operations were handled by Special Agent 
Leland Harrison, “positively the most mysterious and secretive man I have 
ever known,” according to a colleague.6 The bureau did not run independent 
agents or spies outside the United States, but drew on the vast network of  

110 
 Chapter Eight	
	
	
U.S. embassies and consulates. Numerous embassy secretaries, consuls, and 
customs officials doubled as intelligence gatherers and liaisons for special  
operations on behalf of BSI.7
Virtually all the top positions in the State Department were held by 
ardent interventionists, starting with the secretary, Robert Lansing. A Yankee 
corporation lawyer with a compact figure, dapper dress, silver hair, and immac-
ulately trimmed moustache, Lansing had concluded as early as 1915 that a 
German victory was not in the United States’ interest. Polk, Harrison, and 
American diplomats around the globe shared Lansing’s sentiment. Not surpris-
ingly, the department’s pro-Allied bias colored its intelligence operations. Dur-
ing the period of U.S. neutrality, the BSI utilized American diplomats posted  
to Allied nations as well as diplomats serving with embassies in nations affili-
ated with the Central Powers. The intelligence assignments of diplomats in 
Allied and Central Power nations were diametrically opposed. American dip-
lomats reporting to BSI from Germany and its allies generally worked against 
their host nations, while those assigned to Allied countries liaised closely with 
local intelligence agencies. For example, Allen Dulles, Lansing’s nephew and 
later CIA director, was posted to the U.S. embassy in Vienna in 1916 with the 
assignment to covertly work for Austria’s detachment from its alliance with 
Germany. On his way to Austria, Dulles probably met with British intelligence 
officers in London and received rudimentary training in basic spycraft.8 On 
the other hand, the U.S. embassy in London and its BSI component became a 
citadel of pro-Allied sentiment and support.
Located in an elegant building at Grosvenor Square, behind Buckingham 
Palace, the U.S. embassy in London surpassed all other American legations 
in importance and size. By 1915 it employed eighty staff, several of whom 
worked for the State Department’s intelligence branch. One of the embassy’s 
most active BSI agents was the second secretary, Edward “Ned” Bell. Born in 
1882, Bell hailed from an old New York family and attended Harvard, where 
he became good friends with the young Franklin Roosevelt. After entering the 
diplomatic service, he worked in Tehran and Havana before joining the U.S. 
embassy in London in 1913. A man of average height, brown eyes, and dark 
hair, Bell also had a quick mind; his enthusiasm and likeability endeared him 
to his British friends, who called him “Eddie.” Bell had a penchant for cloak 
and dagger stories that predisposed him for intelligence work. A colleague 
of his later recalled that Bell held a conspiratorial view of the world, noting,  
“[H]e seemed to feel that sinister forces were at work to undermine the United 
States.” In London, Bell was assigned the task of liaising with British intelli-
gence. Hall quickly became his most important contact.9

A Special Relationship 
 111
On intelligence matters, Bell reported directly to Special Agent Harrison 
in Washington.10 In London, he worked with several embassy staff members. 
Third Secretary Eugene Shoecraft, a career Foreign Service officer in his early 
twenties, often helped Bell with routine matters, and Bell’s superior, the compe-
tent if finicky first secretary and later counselor Irwin B. Laughlin, was also in 
the know about Bell’s special assignment. Most important, Bell had the whole-
hearted support of Ambassador Walter Hines Page.
Page was a particularly striking example of an unabashedly pro-Allied 
American diplomat, even by Lansing’s standards. Page had assumed his post 
before the war, and like for most prewar U.S. ambassadors, his assignment 
had stemmed from his personal friendship with the president and donations 
to the Democratic Party, not his professional qualifications. A large, rawboned 
North Carolinian with a homely, big nose, Page was intelligent and articulate, 
and in the early stages of the war was closer to Wilson than perhaps any other 
ambassador in Europe. As the war progressed, Page identified ever more closely 
with his host country. As early as September 6, 1914, he warned Wilson that 
the Germans were “another case of Napoleon—even more brutal; a dream of 
universal conquest.” After the sinking of the Lusitania, he came out openly for 
American intervention. The result of Page’s unconcealed, fervent partisanship 
was a rapid decline in his standing in Washington. By fall 1915, Wilson and 
House considered Page “utterly hopeless.” Even the staunchly pro-Allied State 
Department leadership began to have doubts. In November 1915, Polk told 
House that Page was “so pro-British that his judgment is of no value”; Lansing 
sought his recall. Disappointed and disenchanted, Page considered resigning at 
the beginning of Wilson’s second term in March 1917, but in the end stayed 
on, mainly for lack of a suitable alternative.11
The British relished the fact that the top U.S. representative in London 
supported them so vigorously, yet they could not fail to notice Page’s declining 
fortunes in Washington. “If President is angry at Page, can we do anything 
to help the latter?” the foreign secretary asked his staff in January 1917. A 
seasoned diplomat replied, “I am afraid not: The accusation against Mr. Page 
is that he is too pro-British + anything we say will only I fear strengthen this 
impression.” His faltering reputation in Washington notwithstanding, Page’s 
blatant pro-Allied leanings made him a first-rate conduit for Hall to channel 
pro-Allied and anti-German material to the U.S. government.12
The detection of German plots in the United States constituted one of the 
main foci of the British-American intelligence axis. The exposure of German 
naval captain Franz Rintelen von Kleist was an early example of such a joint 

112 
 Chapter Eight	
	
	
operation. The “Dark Invader,” as Rintelen styled himself in his postwar mem-
oirs, was a dashing naval officer in his mid-thirties, sent to the United States by 
the German war ministry in April 1915. There, he was to interrupt the flow of 
U.S. arms and munitions to the Allies by purchasing large quantities of mate-
riel to prevent the Allies from buying them or by sabotage.
Rintelen’s can-do attitude quickly revived the German covert action pro-
gram in the United States. He and his men set up a scheme to foment strikes in 
ammunition factories, and they ran a dangerous but highly successful opera-
tion of placing time-delayed explosive devices on board vessels leaving New 
York Harbor with cargo for the Allies, sending many of them to the bottom of 
the ocean. But Rintelen’s arrogance and his reckless exploitation of the limited 
covert funds at the disposal of German officials in the United States antago-
nized the German military and naval attachés, Captain Franz von Papen and 
Captain Karl Boy-Ed. Only four months after Rintelen’s arrival in New York, 
the two attachés had so successfully lobbied Berlin for Rintelen’s recall that on 
August 3 the “Dark Invader” embarked for Holland under the name Emile 
Victor Gaché.13
Since Room 40 routinely intercepted and decrypted German transatlantic 
diplomatic traffic, the British knew about Rintelen’s return trip beforehand. 
British officials quickly identified and arrested him during a routine search 
of his ship off Ramsgate on August 13 and delivered him to Hall. The British 
also seized Rintelen’s papers, which revealed many of his covert schemes in 
the United States. On August 23, Hall informed Bell, of the U.S. embassy, of 
his findings, and Bell promptly forwarded them to his superiors. The Rintelen 
papers provided documentary proof to the Wilson administration of several 
illegal German covert operations in the United States, and they implicated 
the naval and the military attachés (but not the German ambassador, Johann  
Heinrich von Bernstorff).14
Only a few days after Rintelen’s arrest, British-American intelligence  
cooperation scored another success. With Hall’s knowledge and approval, the 
British naval attaché in New York ran a spy ring of Czech Americans under 
Emmanuel Voska. Some of Voska’s men were Austrian citizens who had man-
aged to find employment with the Austrian embassy. There they discovered 
that German and Austrian officials in the United States occasionally used the 
American journalist James F. J. Archibald as a courier, to carry confidential 
correspondence to Europe. In the summer of 1915, they learned that Archibald 
was planning a trip to Europe and would later that year embark on a Dutch 
steamer, carrying top secret Austrian documents with him. (On a hunch, the 

A Special Relationship 
 113
German ambassador had declined to entrust documents to Archibald, but the 
German military attaché exerted less caution.)
Gaunt informed Hall of Archibald’s impending voyage a month before 
his departure, giving the Royal Navy ample time for preparations. On August 
30, British naval officers searched Archibald’s ship at Falmouth, arrested the 
startled journalist, and sent him to London for interrogation. They also 
impounded the papers in his possession and delivered them to Hall, who imme-
diately recognized their value as a propaganda tool. One document implicated 
the Austrian embassy in a scheme to instigate strikes among workers of Hun-
garian descent in U.S. arms munitions factories. In another paper, the Austrian 
ambassador, Constantin Dumba, describes President Wilson as obstinate. The 
German military attaché Papen, in a letter to his wife, refers to Americans as 
“those idiotic Yankees.”15
Hall wanted to share the papers immediately with the U.S. embassy, but 
the Foreign Office balked for diplomatic reasons. Hall got into a major fight 
with the Admiralty (then under Balfour as first sea lord) over the issue. With-
out awaiting formal authorization from either department, Hall forwarded 
copies of the pertinent documents to Bell. Later, he nonchalantly informed 
the Foreign Office that the Americans already had the papers; he also had an 
altercation with Balfour, insisting that the first sea lord give a press conference 
to American journalists on certain naval issues touched upon in the Archibald 
papers. Balfour refused.16
The Rintelen and Archibald papers caused quite a commotion in the United 
States. The U.S. government released excerpts of the Archibald papers to the 
press, causing public outrage and stoking American concerns over German 
espionage and sabotage operations in North America. The State Department 
declared Austrian ambassador Dumba persona non grata, and Vienna recalled 
him in September 1915. The Rintelen and Archibald papers also eroded the 
standing of the German service attachés, Papen and Boy-Ed, and the U.S. gov-
ernment declared them personae non gratae in December 1915.17 When Papen’s 
ship called at Falmouth on January 3, 1916, Hall had his papers confiscated, 
Papen’s protests of diplomatic immunity notwithstanding. The papers revealed 
further evidence of German plots in the United States, and Hall promptly 
handed copies to Page, who forwarded them to Lansing in Washington.18
The U.S. embassy also played an important role in Hall’s efforts to destroy 
the reputation of Roger Casement in 1916. Casement was an Irishman with 
a distinguished career in the British colonial service. In the years leading up to 
World War I, he had become involved with the Irish independence movement 

114 
 Chapter Eight	
	
	
and on the outbreak of war had traveled to Germany to lobby for German 
military support of an armed Irish uprising. In Berlin, he met with military 
officers as well as Undersecretary Zimmermann and Chancellor Theobald von 
Bethmann Hollweg. As the Irish Easter rebellion gained steam, Casement asked 
the Germans to send him to Ireland, and on the evening of April 20, 1916, the 
German submarine U-19 dropped him and two companions at Tralee Bay, an 
isolated coastal strip on the western tip of Ireland.19
Casement’s mission was doomed before he even set foot on Irish soil. 
Room 40 had intercepted and decrypted several German messages about his 
impending return. British authorities arrested him on the morning after his 
landing and transferred him to London. There, Hall and Basil Thomson of 
Scotland Yard’s Special Branch interviewed him. Casement demanded publi-
cation of his capture in order to call off the rebellion and avoid unnecessary 
bloodshed in Ireland, but Hall refused, quite possibly because he wanted the 
rebellion to proceed so the government could crush it and deal with the Irish 
question once and for all.20
British forces subdued the ensuing uprising on Easter Monday after heavy 
fighting in Dublin. Casement was tried for high treason, found guilty in July 
1916, and sentenced to death by hanging. The case, however, presented a seri-
ous perception problem for London. Casement had a large number of support-
ers, especially in the United States, where the execution of Irish insurrectionists 
following perfunctory courts martial generated widespread disapproval. As a 
distinguished novelist and leading Anglophile wrote, “Nothing more lamenta-
ble in the course of the war now raging has come to pass than this act of bloody 
vengeance by the English Government.”21 London’s determination to carry out 
the death sentence against Casement antagonized President Wilson, and the 
U.S. Senate adopted a resolution appealing for clemency. Aware of Casement’s 
high moral standing in the United States, Hall and Thomson hatched a plot to 
destroy the Irishman’s reputation and blunt objections to his execution.
Casement was homosexual and kept detailed diaries of his amorous  
encounters. The entries were interspersed with graphic details about his sexual 
adventures.22 Upon his arrest, these explosive documents fell into the hands of 
Hall and Thomson. Neither man had much tolerance for anybody who strayed 
from his set of values. (Thomson was an anti-Semite who called humanitarians 
“sub-human.”)23 Both men strongly disapproved of Casement’s homosexual-
ity, but more important, they recognized the diaries’ potential for destroying 
Casement’s public image as a valiant servant of a just cause. As early as April 
23, Hall and Thomson copied some of the most graphic extracts of Casement’s 

A Special Relationship 
 115
diaries and began circulating them in London clubs.24 Copies also reached mem-
bers of the cabinet, Foreign Office, and the Admiralty.
Since Casement had many sympathizers in the United States, Thom-
son and Hall set about spreading the news to America. Thomson discreetly 
showed some of the excerpts to Ambassador Page, who professed to be suit-
ably shocked: “Forgive me, but I have a luncheon engagement today and, if I 
read any more, my host and his other guests will think that I have been taken 
seriously ill! One needs a strong stomach to eat anything after reading this.” 
Despite his ostensible discomfort, Page did not miss a beat in adding, “Still I 
suppose that it will be my duty to send it to the State Department.”25
Meanwhile, Hall showed extracts of Casement’s diary to Ben Allen of the 
Associated Press and forwarded copies to Gaunt, who released them to Ameri-
can newspapers. By June 30, when Foreign Secretary Edward Grey ruled that 
no further distribution should take place, friend and foe were already well 
acquainted with Casement’s “sins.” The U.S. Senate passed a motion of regret 
about Casement’s death sentence in July 1916, but the Foreign Relations Com-
mittee judged it too critical of the British government and sent a blander version 
to the White House. There, it was “unaccountably” held up for several hours, 
and thus did not reach London in time to affect the prisoner’s fate. Casement 
was executed on August 3.26
When it became obvious that the United States would not enter the war in 
response to Germany’s declaration of unrestricted submarine warfare in Febru-
ary 1917, Hall activated his connections with pro-Allied American officials to 
place an explosive piece of information in the American press. This time Hall 
decided to inform the U.S. government of Zimmermann’s Mexican-Japanese 
alliance scheme, with a view to “rouse the whole of the United States and . . . 
force the President to declare war.”27
In order to execute this operation, Hall needed the help of Arthur Balfour, 
even if the foreign secretary would play no more than a supporting role. As 
Hall wrote in his autobiography, “I wanted Mr. Balfour’s assistance, whether 
in his official capacity as Foreign Secretary or privately as the impeccable ‘elder 
statesman’ I did not mind.”28 On February 5, nearly three weeks after he had 
first learned of the telegram, Hall informed his liaison at the Foreign Office, 
Permanent Undersecretary Charles Hardinge, of the telegram in general terms 
and recommended that Balfour personally hand over a copy to the Americans. 
Hardinge, a seasoned old-school diplomat who had just returned from his post 
as viceroy of India, “remained his usual cool self, interested but cautious. He 
asked for my views and promised to lay them before Mr. Balfour. No immedi-
ate decision, he thought, could be taken, but for this I had been prepared.”29

116 
 Chapter Eight	
	
	
About a week later, Hall began seeing Hardinge’s secretary, Ronald Camp-
bell, on a daily basis to discuss the feasibility and possible pitfalls of sharing 
the telegram with the Americans. For every suggestion Hall made, the Foreign 
Office raised an objection. Apparently, the Foreign Office feared that the U.S. 
government might surmise the source of Hall’s intelligence. As Hall conceded 
in his autobiography, Hardinge “very properly” shunned “any step which 
could possibly convey the impression to Washington that there was a chambre 
noire in the Foreign Office [eavesdropping on American communications] or 
that the British Government was endeavouring to influence a neutral State in 
its favour.”30
Following his meeting with Hall, Hardinge immediately informed Balfour 
of Germany’s covert overtures to Mexico and Japan, and the foreign secretary 
promptly took steps to ascertain Tokyo’s loyalty to the Allies and prepare for 
the eventuality of Mexico joining the enemy camp. On February 13, Balfour 
sounded out the Japanese ambassador who emphasized that “there were not 
any relations of interest between Japan and Mexico and that the Japanese had 
been most anxious to remove suspicions which Americans were always ready 
to entertain of Japanese intrigues in Mexico.”31 The Japanese ambassador to 
Washington assured his British colleague in the same vein that Tokyo “had no 
intention of disturbing [U.S.-Japanese relations] in order to please the Mexi-
cans or to seek chimerical advantages in a country in which Japan has no vital 
interests.”32
Although Balfour could feel reasonably certain about Japan’s loyalties, 
he was rather anxious about Mexico’s position. “In the opinion of the For-
eign Office,” Balfour wrote to the Admiralty, “if the United States go to war 
with Germany, the last vestige of restraint on [Mexican leader Venustiano] 
Carranza’s action will be removed, and the [British-owned] oilfields will be in 
greater danger than ever.”33 Britain’s envoy to Mexico, Edward Thurstan, reit-
erated these fears in late February,34 and Ambassador Spring Rice in Washing-
ton regarded the telegram as proof that “a real practical danger is imminently 
threatening.”35 The diplomats’ growing concern about the possibility of a hos-
tile German-Mexican combination added to the Foreign Office’s interest in 
giving Hall carte blanche on all issues regarding the telegram.
While the Foreign Office deliberated, Hall acted. Immediately after he had 
informed Hardinge of the telegram on February 5, he instructed Gaunt in New 
York to procure a copy of the telegram in Mexico City.36 Hall also took the 
momentous decision to inform the U.S. embassy about the telegram before 
the Foreign Office authorized him to do so. On February 19, he called Bell at 

A Special Relationship 
 117
the embassy and invited him over to his office. Bell arrived half an hour later, 
and Hall showed him a decrypt of Ambassador Bernstorff’s relayed telegram 
to Heinrich von Eckardt, the German envoy in Mexico City. Bell received the 
message in the spirit in which it was provided, and Hall gleefully listened to 
his infuriated American colleague: “Mexico to ‘reconquer the lost territory’! 
Texas and Arizona?” He added, according to Hall’s autobiography, “Why not 
Illinois and New York while they were about it?”37 The American diplomat 
wondered briefly whether the telegram might be a hoax, but quickly came 
around to accepting its authenticity.38
In the course of their conversation, Hall candidly told Bell that the Foreign 
Office had not authorized him to share this information with him:
I explained that the Foreign Office had not yet been able to come to a 
decision. There were difficulties in our way. Information which I had 
no objection to giving him privately would have to be given officially to 
his Government. It had still to be settled whether the dispatch should be 
shown only to the President or given to the American public. “What I 
want you to do . . . [i]s to tell your Ambassador what you have seen and 
beg him to make no use of the information until Mr. Balfour has made a 
decision.”
Bell agreed to “sit tight . . . for as long as you say.”39 Both Hall and 
Bell surely understood, however, that it was highly unrealistic to expect the 
embassy not to inform Washington of the telegram, even if Balfour sub- 
sequently refused to authorize Hall’s initiative. In other words, the director of 
naval intelligence had unilaterally made the decision to share a highly sensitive 
piece of information with a foreign power without proper authorization from 
his own government.
Why did Hall inform the Americans of the telegram before the Foreign 
Office gave him the green light to do so? According to his memoirs, he simply 
sought to ensure “that at the first possible moment our friends at the American 
Embassy should share, unofficially, in what was so essentially an ‘American’ 
secret.”40 This was not a convincing argument coming, as it did, from someone 
who had professed his intention not to disclose the telegram at all if the United 
States joined the war in reaction to Germany’s declaration of unrestricted sub-
marine warfare.
Hall’s true motivations for proceeding as he did were threefold. First, Hall 
had concluded that President Wilson would not respond to Berlin’s declaration 

118 
 Chapter Eight	
	
	
of unrestricted submarine warfare by declaring war on Germany and therefore 
required further prodding. Second, Hall finally possessed a full (rather than 
a partial) decrypt, and he could truthfully tell the Americans that the British 
had intercepted the telegram between Washington and Mexico, rather than 
Berlin and Washington. Avoiding reference to the Berlin–Washington inter-
cept would divert American attention from possibly contemplating that Brit-
ain might be eavesdropping on U.S. transatlantic cables. Third, by bypassing 
the Foreign Office, Hall retained control of an operation that was shaping up 
to be his greatest intelligence coup and one of the most consequential of the 
war. Although he could be reasonably sure that Balfour, eager to bring in the 
United States, would approve the operation, he effectively forced his govern-
ment’s hand by informing the U.S. embassy of the telegram’s full text before 
the Foreign Office chose to do so. If the Foreign Office were to drag its feet for 
diplomatic reasons, Hall could drop a hint to the Americans, and Page would 
take up the issue directly with Balfour.
After Hall had shared the telegram with Bell, he “felt that the time had 
come for immediate action, and formally pressed for a decision” in a discus-
sion with Campbell, Hardinge’s secretary. On February 20, Campbell sent 
Hardinge a memo putting forth Hall’s suggestion that the telegram be given to 
the Americans. This could be done, in Hall’s opinion, by giving the telegram 
to the American government or by leaking it directly to the American press. 
Either way, the memo explained, Hall expressed confidence that he could keep 
Britain’s role secret. Rather than inform Campbell about his meeting with Bell 
the day before, Hall created the false impression that he was still waiting for 
Foreign Office authorization to go ahead: “[Hall] would suggest that he be  
authorized to give the substance to Mr. Bell of United States Embassy who 
after informing the Ambassador would see that it reached the President.”41
At this point, things could have gone seriously wrong for Hall, because 
Hardinge expressed strong reservations about sharing the telegram with the 
Americans. The seasoned British diplomat pointed to the central dilemma of 
Britain’s continued eavesdropping on U.S. cables: “it seems to me that it would 
be difficult to explain to Mr. Bell how we came to be in possession of this 
news, and how to convince him of its authenticity.” Furthermore, Hardinge 
maintained that the telegram should only be released to the U.S. press if Brit-
ain’s role could be effectively concealed. 42 Hardinge did not advise a decision 
one way or the other to Balfour, but he had raised two important issues. In the 
event, Balfour brushed all objections aside. “I think Captain Hall may be left to 
clinch this problem. He knows the ropes better than anyone,” he determined.43 

A Special Relationship 
 119
With Balfour’s retroactive approval, Hall’s gamble had paid off, and he was 
free to wrap up the greatest intelligence coup of his career.
Hall lost no time. On February 20, he visited the U.S. embassy, this time 
“officially” to hand the telegram to Bell’s boss, Irwin Laughlin. As Laughlin 
read the text, he started patting his bald head, a nervous habit he exhibited 
when excited. Obviously more concerned with a pretext for war than the seri-
ousness of the Mexican or Japanese threats to the United States, he exclaimed, 
“This is wonderful!” The two men then went to see Page, who read the tele-
gram several times, banged his fist on the desk, and reportedly declared that 
the document must be sent immediately to Washington.44 The ambassador 
appears to have put on a show to obscure the fact that the preceding day, Bell 
likely had bypassed his immediate supervisor, Laughlin, and informed Page of 
the telegram.45
Over the next three days, Hall, Page, Bell, and Laughlin discussed the most 
effective method of delivering the telegram to Washington. Hall used this ex-
change primarily to plant red herrings as to how the Germans had sent the tele-
gram. He insinuated that the German foreign office had used several methods 
of transmission, rather than a single route (that is, the American transatlantic 
cable), and that the British had decrypted the telegram by means of a captured 
German codebook, rather than through the efforts of a team of skilled cryptan-
alysts (which might make the Americans wonder what else these people did).
Page, for one, was completely taken in by Hall’s yarns: “What a story is 
here!” he noted in his diary on February 24. Much of his esteem for, and even 
idolization of, Hall originates from this period. “If there be any life left in me 
after the war,” he wrote to President Wilson about a year later, “and if Hall’s 
abnormal activity and ingenuity have not caused him to be translated, I wish 
to spend a week with him at some quiet place, and then spend a year in writing 
out what he will have told me. That’s the shortest cut to immortality for him 
and for me that has yet occurred to me.”46 Page and Hall quickly agreed that 
the most effective method of relaying the telegram was for the widely respected 
Balfour to officially hand it over to Page. Both sides regarded Balfour’s role in 
the scheme as largely ceremonial. Nigel de Grey, who had deciphered the tele-
gram, referred to the foreign secretary as Hall’s “mouthpiece,” and Bell called 
Page and Balfour “intermediaries” who were subsequently to be dispensed 
with. It was almost as if the Anglo-American intelligence community had 
assumed a life of its own.47
Following the prearranged script, Page met with Balfour in the foreign sec-
retary’s office on the afternoon of Friday, February 23. Balfour ceremoniously 

120 
 Chapter Eight	
	
	
handed Page an English translation of the telegram, emphasizing that it had 
been “bought in Mexico” and omitting the fact that it had first been inter-
cepted on the American transatlantic cable.48 Balfour expressly authorized the 
Americans to publish the telegram, but in the excitement of the moment he 
apparently failed to impress on Page the necessity of keeping certain aspects 
of the operation strictly secret; the Foreign Office reminded the American  
ambassador in a brief note to this effect shortly afterwards.49 Both Balfour and 
Page were deeply moved by the scene. “As dramatic a moment as I remember 
in all my life,” the British foreign secretary later recalled.50 Page returned to 
the embassy “with blood in his eye.”51 Even though the two diplomats were 
evidently overcome with emotion, their encounter at the Foreign Office had a 
farcical element to it since both Balfour and Page had known for several days 
exactly what to expect.
At the embassy, Page began furiously crafting an accompanying note for 
Lansing and Wilson. This task took him longer than anticipated, and in order 
to ensure proper attention to his message, he sent off a telegram at 2 a.m. on 
Saturday morning, announcing his forthcoming scoop: “In about three hours 
I shall send a telegram of great importance to the President and Secretary of 
State.”52 Meanwhile, Bell and the embassy’s third secretary, Shoecraft, spent 
all night encoding Page’s message,53 which was finally dispatched at 1 p.m. 
on February 24. The ambassador transmitted an English translation of the 
telegram, adding, “The receipt of this information has so greatly exercised the 
British Government that they have lost no time in communicating it to me to 
transmit to you, in order that our government may be able without delay to 
make such disposition as may be necessary in view of the threatened invasion 
of our territory.” (As we have seen, “the threatened invasion” of U.S. territory 
was the furthest thing from Hall’s mind when he plotted his coup.) Page also 
reiterated the misleading story about sole procurement of the telegram in Mex-
ico and pointed out Britain’s request to keep the telegram’s source confidential. 
However, “they put no prohibition on the publication of Zimmermann’s tele-
gram itself,” which was precisely what both the British government as well as 
the U.S. embassy wanted. Finally, Page asked that Balfour be thanked officially 
“for the service his government has rendered us.”54
With the dispatch of the telegram to the State Department, the initiative 
shifted to Washington. British politicians, intelligence officers, and the U.S. 
embassy staff in London now largely assumed the role of anxious observers. 
As Hall recalled in his memoirs:

A Special Relationship 
 121
After [the dispatch of the Telegram to Washington], I suppose, there came 
what was for me personally the most anxious time of the whole war. I 
had assumed this new responsibility: would it be justified? Had we done 
all that was possible to safeguard Room 40? Even so, was there a chance 
that the Zimmermann Telegram would misfire? I was, I admit, dreadfully 
worried. America’s entry into the war within the next few weeks was of 
the greatest possible importance to the Allies. I was, indeed, staking every-
thing upon it. But suppose there were further delays: suppose something 
went wrong! Both Dr. Page and Eddie Bell were confident, but I confess 
that for about three days I lived in a kind of nightmare.
Hall does not explicitly state the source of his concern, and what he meant 
by the telegram “misfiring” or “something [going] wrong!” Yet his anxiety 
during these three days has never been sufficiently explained. He nebulously 
pointed to the possibility that Room 40 might be compromised and that the 
telegram would fail to bring America into the war, but in fact, his anxiety was 
closer to home. Although he had done his level best to make the Americans 
believe that the British had procured the telegram in Mexico, he could not 
count on the Americans drawing the desired conclusion. President Wilson, who 
tended to take personal offense at diplomatic slights and was extremely sensi-
tive to allegations of being influenced by others in his political decision mak-
ing, surely would not have appreciated the fact that the British were regularly 
reading his messages. Also, untimely revelations about the British connection 
in the American press could take away the telegram’s propagandistic thunder 
and might even cause it to boomerang on the Allies. Hall was therefore under-
standably relieved when Page informed him on February 28 that the U.S. admin-
istration had thanked Balfour for information “of such inestimable value” and 
announced Washington’s decision to publish the telegram on March 1.55
Some loose ends remained. In order to convince the Americans of the gen-
uineness of the telegram, and to further divert attention from the fact that Brit-
ish naval intelligence had first intercepted it by eavesdropping on the United 
States’ transatlantic cable, the British advised the Americans to procure a copy 
of the Bernstorff–Eckardt telegram in Washington. Since Bernstorff’s message 
was encrypted, and therefore illegible to the Americans, the British provided 
Page with information as to how to identify the relevant copy. Page relayed this 
information to Lansing in his message of February 24: the telegram “was sent 
via Washington and relayed by Bernstorff on January 19. You can probably 
obtain a copy of the text relayed by Bernstorff from the cable office in Wash-

122 
 Chapter Eight	
	
	
ington. The first group is the number of the telegram 130, and the second is 
13042, indicating the number of the code used. The last group is 97556, which 
is Zimmermann’s signature.” The British also provided Page with a complete 
copy of the encoded text of the telegram, which Page promised to send by 
mail, so that the State Department could compare it to any encrypted telegram 
obtained from the Washington office of Western Union, which the German 
embassy used to send telegrams to Mexico.56
The State Department sought to avail itself of this opportunity not only 
to confirm the British information about the telegram but to procure other 
German diplomatic messages from Washington to Latin America as well.57 
Lansing’s deputy, Polk, took the lead in obtaining these messages from pri-
vately owned American commercial telegraph companies. After applying con-
siderable pressure on the company’s director, Polk managed to hector Western 
Union into handing over several copies of telegrams from the German embassy 
to Mexico City, including a decrypt of the telegram.58 In mid-March, Polk 
confidentially requested copies of German diplomatic cable traffic from his 
personal friend, Clarence Mackay, the director of the Commercial Cable and 
Commercial Pacific Cable companies. Despite reservations, Mackay eventu-
ally agreed to pass the telegrams to the State Department. Among these were 
messages sent by Bernstorff to Cuba, Guatemala, Haiti, and various South 
American countries in January and February 1917.59
All the Western Union and Commercial Cable dispatches obtained by Polk 
were encoded, and the Americans had no means of decrypting them. Hence, 
Lansing sent Page three encoded telegrams from Bernstorff to German lega-
tions in Latin America (not including Zimmermann’s) on February 28 and 
instructed the American ambassador to “endeavor to obtain copy of German 
code from Mr. Balfour, decode the following messages and telegraph transla-
tions.” Lansing sought to encourage British cooperation by adding, “Contents 
of messages decoded here would of course be communicated to the British 
Government.” 60 The British refused, however, arguing “the actual code would 
be of no use to us as it was never used straight, but with a great number of 
variations which are known to only one or two experts. They cannot be spared 
to go to America.” Instead, the British would “gladly decipher” any of Bern-
storff’s messages given to them by the Americans.61
The British reply was disingenuous. It was true that the cryptanalytic pro-
cess was more complex than the Americans imagined, because the German 
embassy in Washington employed at least three different codes (13040, 5950, 
7500) and often used superencipherment, enciphering an already encoded 

A Special Relationship 
 123
message. Yet the telegram was not superenciphered and could have been read 
by anyone in possession of a reconstructed 13040 codebook. The actual rea-
son for Hall’s declining the Americans’ request was his categorical refusal to 
transfer any cryptographic intelligence to Washington.62 As Hall wrote in his 
autobiography, “My views, however, remained unchanged. Any decyphering 
which had to be done must be carried out in London and under my immediate 
supervision.”63
The question of verification assumed additional urgency when American 
newspapers published the text of the telegram on March 1. On the evening of 
that day, Lansing informed Page that members of Congress were (accurately) 
charging that the British had provided the telegram to the Wilson administra-
tion as a way to influence U.S. policy. Lansing therefore asked Page to obtain 
British permission for the ambassador or one of his staff to personally decrypt 
a copy of the encoded telegram (obtained from Western Union) and send the 
decrypt to Washington (Fig. 7). As he explained: “[T]this course will materi-
ally strengthen [the U.S. government’s] position and make it possible for the 
Department to state that it had secured the Zimmermann note from our own 
people.”64
On Friday, March 2, Bell took an encoded copy of the telegram to the 
Admiralty, where de Grey awaited him with the reconstructed 13040 German 
codebook. The two men retired to Hall’s office and got to work. According 
to Bell, he “did the job myself and it was all correct, and Eugene [Shoecraft] 
and I sent back the true reading (in German) of the decode by telegraph much 
to the Department’s joy.”65 Hall supports this version of events: “And there in 
the presence of de Grey, Claud Serocold and myself, an American citizen [Bell] 
decyphered for himself the message as received from his own Government.”66 
De Grey, on the other hand, gives a more flowery account of the episode. 
Though lengthy, de Grey’s recollection bears reprinting in full because it differs 
from Bell’s and Hall’s accounts in that he claims that he deciphered the tele-
gram all by himself, with Bell merely looking on:
Being in a hurry I grabbed my own version of 13040 without thinking 
and went off to the D.N.I.’s room. There Edward Bell produced a copy 
of the telegram and invited me both to decypher it in his presence and to 
explain the system as I went along. I gaily proceeded and all went well 
with the first few groups but then on coming to the next I found my book 
blank and realized with horror that I hadn’t done my homework. I had 
not written up my book and this was by way of being a demonstration 

Figure 7. Copy of German ambassador Johann Heinrich von Bernstorff’s Western Union 
telegram obtained by State Department counselor Frank Polk. (Courtesy of the National 
Archives and Records Administration, College Park, Maryland)

A Special Relationship 
 125
to the Americans of the absolute castiron certainty of our story, good 
enough to carry firm conviction to their hesitating hearts.
	
If I stopped and fetched another book he would suspect at once that 
we had faked it up for his benefit. If I let him see that I was writing it 
down out of my head he would not have believed me. If he did not believe 
me we should fail and have lost the greatest opportunity ever presented to 
us. Several seconds of bloody sweat. Then I bluffed. I showed him all the 
groups when they had been written in my book and passed quickly over 
those that were not, writing the words into the copy of the telegram by 
heart.
	
Edward Bell, most charming man, was thoroughly convinced—the 
more easily I think that he wanted to be convinced and anyhow regarded 
the whole thing as black magic. A more unconvincing demonstration 
could never have been given.67
Who decrypted the telegram—Bell or de Grey? The truth may be some-
where in the middle. The first page and a few pages of the second of the original 
decrypt produced that day are in Bell’s handwriting, but the remainder is in de 
Grey’s (Fig. 8).68 This would suggest that Bell started the process but quickly 
deferred to the more experienced de Grey, who professionally decrypted the 
rest.69 
“That’s torn it,” Bell said according to Hall when the full decrypt was 
produced.70 Page cabled the State Department at 4 p.m. that day: “Bell took 
the text of the German message contained in your 4494 of yesterday to Admi-
ralty and there, himself, deciphered it from the German code which is in the 
Admiralty’s possession.”71 The Wilson administration was now fully equipped 
to parry potentially embarrassing questions about the telegram’s origins or a 
German denial of its authenticity.
The British wrapped up their coup by seeking to maximize the telegram’s 
effect in the United States and to prevent exposure of their own role in its 
interception and communication to the U.S. government. The Foreign Office 
sought to accomplish the former by stoking American concerns about Mexi-
can intrigue. Thomas Hohler, having transferred from Mexico to the British 
embassy in Washington, where he pursued propaganda and liaison duties, 
warned Chandler Anderson of the State Department that the Germans had  
obtained such a strong influence over Carranza that armed conflict with Mex-
ico might be unavoidable, even if Washington refrained from declaring war on 
Germany.72 On February 27, Balfour asked Britain’s envoy in Mexico, Edward 

Figure 8. The first and last page of the Bernstorff decrypt produced in London on March 
2, 1917. Note the different handwriting on page 1 (Bell’s) and 4 (de Grey’s). (Courtesy of 
the National Archives and Records Administration, College Park, Maryland)


128 
 Chapter Eight	
	
	
Thurstan, whether he could confirm “strong rumours” about German activity 
in Mexico. The foreign secretary specifically requested information on “suspi-
cious concentration of Germans” in that country.73 On the same day, Thurstan 
replied that he felt “no doubt as to German movement” and would enquire 
further.74
This was good enough for Balfour, who on March 1 informed Page that 
Thurstan “has telegraphed that the Germans in large numbers are arriving 
there daily from the United States and that he has good reason to fear impend-
ing German activities in that country.”75 The foreign secretary thus reported 
a mere rumor as hard fact to Page since Thurstan had never confirmed that 
Germans were crossing the U.S.-Mexican border in large numbers. Two weeks 
later, Balfour sent a telegram to Thurstan inquiring whether New York press 
reports were correct in stating that up to 150,000 Germans had already arrived 
in Mexico. A Foreign Office official scribbled in the margin of Balfour’s mes-
sage: “well under 10000, that very liberal.”76
Other Foreign Office officials were prepared to go further than merely 
providing the Americans with inflated estimates of German citizens in Mex-
ico. Both Ambassador Spring Rice and Hohler suggested to the U.S. adviser 
Edward House that a Mexican faction acceptable to the United States and 
Britain be provided with arms and money so they could overthrow Carranza’s 
government. “Such a method would be far cheaper and promised far better  
results than a policy of intervention,” Spring Rice concluded.77 House appeared 
interested but remained noncommittal.78 A few Foreign Office diplomats con-
tinued to contemplate a coup against Carranza to, in the words of Thurstan, 
bring to power “white men by blood and education.”79 Only later in the war 
were such covert action plans definitively shelved.
As Hall’s operation unfolded across the Atlantic, the director sought to 
restrict knowledge of his agency’s involvement to a tight circle of confidantes. 
He even kept the British naval attaché in New York out of the loop, until 
Gaunt learned about the telegram from House. On February 26, Gaunt inquired 
whether Hall could provide “any information which would make announce-
ment fuller and more decisive.”80 The next day, Hall outlined the telegram’s 
content to Gaunt, adding, “Do not use till Aaron [Hall’s code name for Presi-
dent Wilson] announces it, premature exposure fatal.”81 Three days later, 
when the telegram was published in the American press, Hall warned the naval 
attaché “that knowledge of this affair shall never be traced to British sources.” 
Yet for all his talk of secrecy, Hall could not help boasting to Gaunt: “Alone I 
did it.”82

129
Chapter Nine
The Smoking Gun
O
n January 19, 1917, the State Department delivered an encoded tele-
gram from the German foreign office to the German embassy in  
Washington. The Americans had agreed to send this message on 
behalf of the Wilhelmstrasse because the Germans had assured them that it 
contained instructions of a harmless and personal nature for Ambassador 
Johann Heinrich von Bernsdorff in Washington.1 Nothing could have been 
further from the truth.
The encrypt consisted of two separate dispatches: a lengthy telegram (no. 
157), consisting of 856 cipher groups, and a short annex (no. 158). Seven Ger-
man embassy clerks immediately began deciphering the encoded text. When 
they were done, they had produced two plain texts—in telegram no. 157, 
Chancellor Theobald von Bethmann Hollweg informs Ambassador Bernstorff 
of Germany’s intention to declare unrestricted submarine warfare and issues 
instructions for Bernstorff to inform the U.S. government of this decision on 
February 1 (which the Germans would subsequently change to January 31); in 
telegram no. 158, Zimmermann makes the German offer of alliance to Mexico 
and Japan and gives instructions for Bernstorff to forward the proposal to the 
German envoy in Mexico City. Two German clerks re-enciphered the second 
message and on the same day dispatched it through Western Union to Mexico.2
In his memoirs, Bernstorff emphasizes that his embassy served merely as an 
intermediary for the telegram, adding that he “disapproved of its contents.”3 
There is no reason to doubt the sincerity of the ambassador, whose primary 
goal had always been the preservation of peace with the United States, not 
preparation for war. At the same time, Bernstorff had very little time to consider 

130 
 Chapter Nine	
	
the German alliance offer to Mexico. Telegram no. 157 was of far more im-
mediate concern to him since the imminence of unrestricted submarine warfare 
was bound to have major and immediate repercussions on U.S.-German rela-
tions. The ambassador realized that this decision left him little room to maneu-
ver and would in all probability push the United States into the Allied camp. 
“War inevitable in view of the proposed action,” he cabled back to Berlin on 
the same day while urging postponement of unrestricted submarine warfare.4 
On January 26, he again strongly counseled against unleashing the U-boats, 
adding perceptively “that we will now reach a better peace through confer-
ences than if the United States joins our enemies.” The German leadership 
dismissed Bernstorff’s advice out of hand. “Regret suggestion impracticable,” 
Berlin informed Bernstorff curtly on January 29.5 Two days later, on the af-
ternoon of January 31, Bernstorff proceeded to Robert Lansing’s office at the 
State, War, and Navy Building (today’s Eisenhower Executive Office Building) 
and with a heavy heart handed the secretary of state the text of Germany’s 
declaration of unrestricted submarine warfare.6
The note did not come as a complete surprise to Lansing and the State De-
partment. On January 8, the American ambassador in Constantinople, Abram 
I. Elkus, had reported that Germany was planning for “pitiless submarine 
warfare” by the end of February.7 Two days later, the American ambassador 
to Berlin, James Gerard, submitted a similar report.8 On January 24, Lan-
sing drafted a “[N]ote on the Probable Renewal of Submarine Warfare.” This 
report was apparently partially based on information derived from wiretaps 
at the German embassy, since Lansing references a conversation in which a 
prominent member of the German embassy berates a friend, telling him that 
he should not have let a mutual acquaintance sail for Europe “now.”9 Lansing 
later noted that he was merely surprised at the early start of the submarine 
campaign, not the announcement itself.10 Lansing immediately informed Presi-
dent Woodrow Wilson of Bernstorff’s note. The secretary of state hoped that 
unrestricted submarine warfare would trigger U.S. intervention, but the presi-
dent’s verdict was not a foregone conclusion, as Wilson’s political decisions 
were closely intertwined with his complex personality.
Wilson was a man of many contradictions. Tall, slim, with angular facial 
features, a square jaw, and piercing gray eyes, Wilson projected an aura of 
determination and authority, but underneath his constitution he was fragile; 
his failing health would cloud the final years of his presidency. He was a deeply 
religious and well-educated idealist, yet he could be remarkably stubborn, pet-
ty, and vengeful. Wilson believed profoundly in the democratic process but had 

The Smoking Gun 
 131
little patience for those who failed to see things his way. “[H]e does not seem 
to have the slightest conception that he can ever be wrong,” the French ambas-
sador, Jean Jules Jusserand, acerbically remarked.11 While he encouraged his 
advisers to share their thoughts with him, at the end of the day, he preferred to 
make decisions alone.12
The one person who had a certain degree of influence on U.S. foreign 
policy was the president’s only close male friend, “Colonel” Edward Mandel 
House.13 A wealthy Texas Democrat, House was in many ways Wilson’s 
opposite. Small, pale, self-effacing, and frail, the “colonel” loved to operate and 
manipulate behind the scenes. House understood that Wilson craved affection 
and gave it to him in abundance. Wilson, in turn, rewarded House with his 
trust: “Mr. House is my second personality,” the president once said.14 Though 
House gained Wilson’s trust chiefly by acting as the president’s sounding board 
and amplifier, not by persuading him of his own views, his unparalleled access 
to and understanding of the president made him one of the most influential 
men in Washington. House’s penchant for operating behind the scenes and his 
closeness to Wilson provoked resentment in some corners; the son of Secretary 
of the Navy Josephus Daniels referred to House crassly as “that devious son-
of-a-bitch” and “a porcelain chamber pot full of shit.”15 Like Lansing, House 
sought to steer Wilson to the side of the Allies, albeit in a more discreet manner.
Germany’s announcement of unrestricted submarine warfare amounted to 
a severe blow to presidential policy. Although philosophically and emotionally 
Wilson had long felt closer to Britain than to Germany, his overriding interest 
for the first couple of years of the conflict had been the restoration of peace, not 
the United States joining the Allies. In fact, he was reelected in November 1916 
on the slogan “He kept us out of the war.” With his second term secured, and 
no end of the war in sight, Wilson launched a carefully prepared peace initia-
tive. On December 18, he sent identical peace notes to the Central Powers and 
the Allies, asking them to state their war aims, with a view toward kick-starting 
negotiations. Wilson’s initiative was stillborn, since neither side was ready to 
settle for less than total victory. The British, recognizing their dependency on 
the United States, wisely chose not to reject Wilson’s overture outright. In stark 
contrast, the German leadership in effect told Wilson to mind his own busi-
ness, brusquely informing him that only direct negotiations between the bel-
ligerents would do. Still, the president did not give up. On January 22, 1917, 
he criticized the war aims of both sides, drawing no moral distinction between 
the Central Powers and Allies, and called for a “peace without victory.”

132 
 Chapter Nine	
	
As Wilson persisted with his goal of bringing about peace, he swam against 
a rising tide of war fervor inside his administration, much of the Republican 
Party, and the East Coast elite. The most ardent interventionist in his cabi-
net was Lansing. Frustrated about the United States’ continued neutrality and  
being shut out of major foreign policy decisions, Lansing acted in a way that 
bordered on insubordination. When Wilson’s peace missive appeared in the 
newspapers, Lansing called in a group of journalists and told them, in complete 
contradiction to Wilson’s intentions, that the “sending of this note will indicate 
the possibility of our being forced into the war.” According to House, Wilson 
came close to demanding Lansing’s resignation, and the president’s leading  
biographer asserts that the president “should have fired [Lansing] on the spot.” 
Instead, Wilson merely ordered Lansing to tell reporters that his statement 
“had been radically misinterpreted.”16 Germany’s declaration of unrestricted 
submarine warfare a few weeks after this incident further strengthened the pro-
war parties and threatened to box in the president.
Confident that Germany’s note meant war, an elated Lansing conferred 
with the president on the evening of January 31 from 8:45 p.m. to 10:30 p.m. 
During their meeting, Wilson expressed resentment at the German note, but 
he also bristled over British disregard for neutral rights, such as London’s 
refusal to allow commerce with the Central Powers and the blacklisting of U.S. 
companies suspected of trading with Germany. In a somewhat bizarre aside 
he noted that “white civilization” and its domination over the world would 
rest largely on the ability of the United States to rebuild the ravaged European 
nations after the war; in other words, he still deemed neutrality the best policy. 
Yet he agreed to have Lansing tentatively draft a note informing Ambassador 
Bernstorff of a break in diplomatic relations.
The next morning, House found Wilson “sad and depressed” at the White 
House. Disappointed about Berlin’s forceful step, the president spoke of Ger-
many as “a madman that should be curbed,” but when House asked whether 
it was fair to let the Allies do the curbing, Wilson allegedly winced but insisted 
he would not go to war if it were humanly possible.17 Later in the morning, 
the two were joined by Lansing, who harangued Wilson about the necessity of 
establishing democratic institutions throughout the world and extirpating the 
evils of Prussian militarism. As soon as the three men parted, the secretary fired  
off two more letters to Wilson, one indicting Germany’s “merciless and inhu-
man” submarine warfare, the other outlining two policy options for the admin-
istration: a mere break with Germany or a break accompanied by an appeal to 
Congress for a declaration of war. Lansing clearly advocated the latter.18

The Smoking Gun 
 133
For the time being, however, Wilson withstood the pressure of the pro-war 
advocates. On February 2, the cabinet met for a little more than two hours to 
discuss a response to Germany’s declaration of unrestricted submarine war-
fare.19 When asked by one of the participants which side he wished to see win, 
Wilson replied bluntly “that he didn’t wish to see either side win—for both 
had been equally indifferent to the rights of neutrals—though Germany had 
been brutal in taking life, and England only in taking property.” The president 
went on to ask whether he should sever diplomatic relations with Berlin, but 
he prejudiced the question by telling his surprised cabinet that U.S. inaction 
would keep “the white race or part of it strong to meet the yellow race.” Wil-
son thus made it clear that he preferred continued neutrality. Several cabinet 
members disagreed, and Secretary of Agriculture David F. Houston made an 
impassioned plea for a declaration of war on Germany.20 At the end of the 
session, Lansing, too, came out openly for intervention, pleading “that it was 
for our interest and the interest of the world that we should join the Allies.” 
Wilson rebuffed him coolly: “I am not so sure of that.” The president argued 
that greater justice would be done if the conflict ended in a draw.
Although Wilson eventually agreed to breaking off relations with Ger-
many—Bernstorff was handed his passports the next day—his decision came 
with a twist. The president observed that Germany had hitherto not commit-
ted an “overt act,” and unless this happened, nothing else should be done. 
In the context of submarine warfare, the term overt act implied the sinking 
of an American ship, but the term was sufficiently flexible to include a range 
of interpretations, such as non-naval forms of aggression. For the time being, 
Wilson had shifted responsibility and initiative back to Berlin. As long as Ger-
man submarines steered clear off U.S. vessels, it seemed, a U.S. entry into war 
would be postponed.21
It quickly became evident that Wilson had maneuvered the United States 
into a blind alley by yielding the initiative to Berlin. The Germans had, of 
course, no intention of sparing American ships, but the mere declaration of 
unrestricted submarine warfare quickly cleared the Atlantic of U.S. vessels. 
Insurance for Europe-bound ships skyrocketed, and transatlantic commerce 
slowed to a trickle, with cargoes and vessels clogging East Coast seaports. By 
mid-February, Anglo-American trade was down by 75 percent—without the 
Germans having fired a single torpedo at an American vessel.22 The pro-Allied, 
interventionist Washington Post grudgingly conceded in an editorial, “The 
merchant marine of the United States has been terrorized and driven from the 
seas. To all intents and purposes Germany has put into effect an embargo on 

134 
 Chapter Nine	
	
American exports and passenger traffic with England and France. So long as 
our shipping is suspended the submarine campaign is as successful as if Ameri-
can vessels had been torpedoed.”23
The economic consequences of the German navy’s threat caused the  
administration great concern. At a cabinet meeting on February 6, Secretary 
of War Newton D. Baker urged Wilson to arm or convoy American vessels, 
otherwise “Germany would have us effectively locked up by her threat.”24 
Three days later, the cabinet observed that the U.S. merchant fleet showed  
every sign of internment. By mid-February, several cabinet members had 
grown desperate.25 Houston told Baker that the United States should join the 
Allies at once: “I would rather see this nation side with the Allies, go down to 
destruction with them if necessary, and disappear from the map as a nation, 
than to see it exist and prosper subject in the slightest degree to the dictation of 
an arrogant maediaeval [sic] tyrant and his supporters.”26 Baker agreed. Even 
Wilson eventually became concerned about the decline in transatlantic trade 
and the spectacular initial accomplishments of the U-boats against Allied ship-
ping; in February 1917, German submarines destroyed nearly half a million 
tonnage of Allied shipping.27 
Wilson worried about the Royal Navy’s refusal to escort merchant ships 
by convoy (a tactic that would eventually thwart the submarine threat), but 
without an “overt act,” the president had neither the option nor the inclination 
to join the Allies. Instead, he began to contemplate the arming of American 
merchantmen as an alternative to, not a stepping stone toward, intervention. 
“[Wilson] will avoid war as long as possible,” cautioned Cecil Arthur Spring 
Rice, the British ambassador, to his government in London.28 In fact, “armed 
neutrality” quickly became the rallying cry of anti-interventionists. While the 
economic and strategic situation of the Allies rapidly deteriorated, the Ameri-
can public began to sink back into indifference over Germany’s latest campaign, 
which did not seem to threaten American lives after all. For the time being, the 
collapse of commercial profit affected merely a small community of business-
men and bankers who had long favored intervention anyway. Thus Wilson 
proceeded along his course of neutrality in the face of growing pressure from 
the hawks in his administration.
Matters came to a head at a cabinet meeting on February 23. Secretary 
of the Treasury William McAdoo emphatically demanded the arming of mer-
chant ships so they could venture into the war zone. “[S]omewhat nettled by 
McAdoo’s insistence and emphatic manner and language,” Wilson sharply 
rebuffed him.29 Others equally incurred the president’s wrath. In an obvious 

The Smoking Gun 
 135
attempt to vilify Germany, Secretary of the Interior Franklin K. Lane asked if 
reports were true to the effect that the wives of American consuls upon leav-
ing Germany had been stripped naked, given an acid bath to detect writing on 
their flesh, and subjected to other indignities. Lansing replied in the affirma-
tive. Lane then suggested that if Americans knew of this, they would favor 
intervention. Wilson asked Lane brusquely if he was recommending that they 
“work up a propaganda of hatred” against Germany. Lane denied this but 
maintained that in a democracy the people were entitled to know the facts. 
Other cabinet members supported him. At this point, Wilson ended the dis-
cussion by categorically ruling out such a campaign. Furthermore, he insisted 
that the country was not willing to risk war. After the meeting, several cabinet 
members considered resigning.30
For all intents and purposes, the administration had reached an impasse. 
Wilson had committed the United States to continued neutrality, but the initial 
success of the U-boat weapon began to conjure up the possibility of an all-out 
German victory, precisely the opposite of what Wilson had hoped to achieve 
by remaining neutral. Wilson had pinned the possibility of American interven-
tion on an overt act, but in the absence thereof he was hard-pressed to change 
his policy. As the public stoically accepted Germany’s latest campaign, the 
momentum for the United States’ entry into the conflict seemed to have passed. 
This was the political equation in Washington when the administration learned 
of Zimmermann’s secret Mexican alliance proposal.
Ambassador Walter Hines Page’s message, including the text of the tele-
gram, reached the State Department on Saturday, February 24, at 8:30 p.m., 
but the decoding process took the staff some time. Only the next evening, at 
6:00 p.m., did the acting secretary of state, Frank Polk—Lansing was vacation-
ing in Sulphur Springs—show the telegram to the president.31 Neither Wilson 
nor Polk left testimony of the president’s immediate reaction. According to 
Lansing, Polk told him a few days later that “the President . . . had shown 
much indignation and was disposed to make the text public without delay, 
[but] Polk had advised him to await my return which he had agreed to do.”32 
That Wilson, who had recently been negotiating for peace with Berlin, should 
have been offended by the contents of the telegram sounds reasonable enough, 
but Lansing’s suggestion—that the president nearly lost his head and would 
have published the telegram immediately but for Polk’s advice to await Lan-
sing’s wise counsel—sounds preposterous and self-serving. For all his moral-
ity and emotionality, Wilson was a shrewd politician who hardly would have 
implemented such a far-reaching decision without due consideration. Wilson 

136 
 Chapter Nine	
	
may well have said something to Polk to the effect that the telegram should be 
published—which, in the end, it was—but it seems unlikely that Polk exerted 
decisive restraint on the president. On February 26, Polk told House merely 
that the president “was much disturbed over this development and a plan is be-
ing considered as to what is best to do.”33 Polk’s sober statement seems closer 
to the truth than Lansing’s dramatic account.
Polk made several key decisions prior to Lansing’s return. First, he sought 
an avenue to corroborate the telegram’s authenticity. So far, the administration 
had only the word of Captain William Reginald Hall, British director of naval 
intelligence, to rely on. Page had conveyed Hall’s suggestion for the Americans 
to procure a copy of the telegram forwarded by Bernstorff to Mexico. As direc-
tor of the State Department’s Bureau of Secret Intelligence, Polk knew that the 
key to verification lay in the offices of Western Union. The German embassy 
routinely used the company’s services to send telegrams to the German envoy 
in Mexico City, so if Zimmermann’s alliance proposal to the Mexican leader 
Venustiano Carranza was in fact made, an encoded copy would be in Western 
Union’s files. By February 27, he had pressured Western Union into turning 
over the encrypt. Apparently, he took this action on his own initiative, and 
Lansing endorsed Polk’s efforts when he returned to Washington.34
Moreover, Polk sought to determine whether Japan or Mexico was inclined 
to respond favorably to Germany’s proposal. On Monday morning, February 
26, he informed Ambassador Henry P. Fletcher in Mexico City of the telegram 
and instructed him to confront Carranza or his foreign minister, Cándido Agu-
ilar, and tell him that the telegram would soon be published in the American 
press. Fletcher was to suggest to the Mexicans that they issue a statement of 
their disinterestedness.35 On the same day, Fletcher responded that with Car-
ranza being away in Jalisco, he had talked to Aguilar, who denied any knowl-
edge of Germany’s alliance offer.36 Aguilar’s statement was untrue (see chapter 
15), but a message from Lansing to Page on February 27 indicates that the 
Americans believed him.37 Only after the telegram’s publication on March 1 
was Fletcher able to meet with Carranza, in Guadalajara. The first chief disin-
genuously denied having received an alliance offer from Berlin, but he avoided 
saying directly that such a proposition would be rejected. Fletcher concluded 
that Carranza’s and Aguilar’s sentiments “inclined somewhat toward Ger-
many,” although he did “not think Mexico would under any circumstances 
accept alliance referred to.”38 Although Mexico’s position seemed somewhat 
ambivalent, the Americans swallowed the Mexican leadership’s key contention 
that they had not received Germany’s alliance proposal prior to Fletcher’s inquiry. 

The Smoking Gun 
 137
Secrecy was, of course, a key component in Zimmermann’s proposal, and it 
was hardly conceivable that Carranza would now contemplate an alliance with 
Berlin, knowing full well that the United States was aware of the plot.
The threat from Japan appeared smaller still. The Japanese ambassador to 
Washington, Sutemi Chinda, repeatedly assured his British colleague, Spring 
Rice, that rumors about Japanese clandestine activities were groundless, and 
Spring Rice told Polk that he believed Tokyo’s envoy.39 On Lansing’s instruc-
tions, Polk sent for the Japanese ambassador on February 28 and read him 
the telegram’s portions concerning Japan. The ambassador “expressed great 
amusement and said it was too absurd to take seriously.”40 Likewise, after 
the telegram was published, the Japanese foreign ministry denied previous 
knowledge thereof and refuted an alliance with Germany as “absurd” and 
“preposterous. . . . This plot shows what mental delusion Germany is laboring 
under.”41 In short, within a few days of the telegram’s arrival in Washington, 
the administration could be reasonably sure that the plot posed no security 
threat at all.
Polk also informed House, to whom he owed his appointment as coun-
selor two years earlier. On February 26, Polk called Colonel House in New 
York and imparted the news of the telegram to him, albeit apparently without 
mentioning Germany’s offer of U.S. territory to Mexico.42 On the same day, 
Wilson sent House a copy of the telegram and told him that the administra-
tion intended to publish it.43 House immediately tipped off the British naval 
attaché and then replied to Wilson the next day that he was “not surprised to 
read the dispatch concerning the German proposal,” a comment replete with 
irony since he had, indeed, already heard about it from Polk. House went on 
to urge immediate publication as it would “make a profound impression both 
on Congress and on the country.”44
House’s recommendations to the president represent an example of inter-
ventionists close to Wilson viewing the telegram first and foremost as a useful 
tool in the struggle over the U.S. role in the war. Neither Polk nor Lansing 
nor House expressed genuine concern about a German threat to the Western 
Hemisphere, but all emphasized the propagandistic potential of Zimmermann’s 
message. Wilson, too, has been accused of using the telegram as a political tool, 
to push his armed ships bill through Congress. As early as March 1, 1917, 
Senator Thomas Hardwick, an agrarian progressive Democrat from Georgia, 
argued, “[T]he real purpose of it [the telegram’s publication], simply giving 
my opinion, was to hasten the passage of certain legislation during the closing 
hours of this Congress.”45 Yet, Wilson had told Lansing as early as February 

138 
 Chapter Nine	
	
22—that is, before Hall had informed the Americans of the telegram—that he 
would ask Congress for powers to arm merchantmen in four days. The presi-
dent had the constitutional authority to do so without congressional approval, 
but Wilson viewed the vote as an important indicator of public attitude toward 
intervention. This, and not knowledge of the telegram, prompted him to intro-
duce the armed ships bill.46
As noted earlier, when Wilson made the decision to ask Congress for a 
vote, he had viewed the arming of merchantmen as an alternative to interven-
tion, rather than a step toward it. By the time Wilson addressed Congress, 
on February 26, however, he had learned of the telegram and of the likely 
explosive effect its disclosure would have on Congress and the public. In addi-
tion, while he was delivering his address, news of the German attack on the 
British liner Laconia, resulting in the death of two American women, reached 
the Capitol. These two factors—the telegram’s impending publication and the 
death of American citizens at sea—inevitably cast the president’s call for defen-
sive measures against German submarine attacks in a much more belligerent 
light.47 Given the sequence of events, Wilson cannot be accused of deliberately 
using the telegram to force Congress’ hand, but he certainly must have antici-
pated increased pressure on Congress due to the telegram’s publication, and 
he could not have been oblivious to the possibility that mixing his request for 
arming merchantmen with Zimmermann’s alliance proposal might push the 
nation closer to war. In fact, he shared with House his concern that the tele-
gram might bring about a crisis that he could not control.48 Senator William F. 
Kirby, a Democrat from Arkansas, verbalized precisely this point in the Senate 
debate about the telegram on March 1: “[I]s not war the thing we are discuss-
ing now . . . ?”49
In fact, the telegram significantly accelerated the administration’s drift  
toward war. On the morning of Tuesday, February 27, Lansing returned from 
his long weekend at Sulphur Springs. At 9:10 a.m. he arrived at his office in 
the State, War, and Navy Building and began going through his personal mail, 
but Assistant Secretary of State William Phillips soon interrupted him with the 
news of Zimmermann’s “amazing message.”50 Phillips later recalled that the 
telegram caused “a decided change in Lansing’s attitude.”51 Since the secretary 
of state had long been a leading hawk in the administration, Phillips’ comment 
probably referred to Lansing’s newly invigorated determination to push the 
president toward intervention. Later on that morning, Polk showed up and 
reported his delivery of the telegram to Wilson and the president’s anger. Polk 
also mentioned Wilson’s intention to make the scheme public, and Lansing took 

The Smoking Gun 
 139
the liberty to instruct Polk to inform Democratic senator Furnifold McLendel 
Simmons of North Carolina, a leader of the white supremacist movement, of 
the telegram and its intended publication. Lansing then proceeded over to the 
White House, where he met with Wilson at 11:30 a.m.52
For fifty minutes, the two men discussed the content of the telegram and 
the appropriate way of handling it. Voicing concerns about the telegram’s  
authenticity, Wilson wondered how Bernstorff had received the message, given 
the absence of secure communications between Berlin and the German embassy 
in Washington. Lansing must have relished answering this one. In early Janu-
ary, he explained, the State Department had granted the Germans access to 
their transatlantic cables in order to allow them to negotiate directly with 
Washington on possible peace terms. Lansing added that the State Department 
had granted this access very reluctantly and only at the insistence of House, a 
thinly concealed jab at the man who kept the secretary’s role in foreign policy 
firmly subordinate to his own. On January 17, Lansing continued, the Ger-
man foreign office had filed an exceptionally long message for Bernstorff, who 
received it one day later. Lansing inferred correctly that this message included 
Zimmermann’s alliance proposal to Carranza. While listening to Lansing’s no 
doubt persuasive account, Wilson exclaimed several times “Good Lord” and 
said he agreed with the secretary’s conclusions. Overall, the president “showed 
much resentment at the German Government for having imposed upon our 
kindness in this way and for having made us the innocent agents to advance a 
conspiracy against this country.”53
Although one has to rely entirely on Lansing’s account of Wilson’s reaction 
to the news that the Germans had abused American assistance, the president’s 
subsequent change of mood vis-à-vis Germany is confirmed by other sources. 
On February 27, the cabinet decided to send a division of American soldiers to 
Cuba to prop up the government there against insurgents. Probably with the 
telegram in mind, Wilson argued that “so many things are happening we can-
not afford to let Cuba be involved in G[ermany’s] plots.”54 The next day, the 
president met with representatives of several peace societies. After one of them, 
William I. Hull, a former student of Wilson’s, exhorted the president to pursue 
additional peace efforts with Germany, the president responded, “Dr. Hull, if 
you knew what I know at this present moment, and what you will see reported 
in tomorrow morning’s newspapers, you would not ask me to attempt further 
peaceful dealings with the Germans.” Jane Addams, another peace activist, 
later recalled that the “president’s mood was stern and far from the scholar’s 
detachment as he told us of recent disclosures of German machinations in 

140 
 Chapter Nine	
	
Mexico and announced the impossibility of any form of adjudication.”55 Both 
comments suggest the telegram’s considerable effect on Wilson’s thinking: “It 
was almost incredible, he must have thought, that any government could be so 
evil and intriguing,” concluded one historian.56
Yet the strongest response the telegram elicited from Wilson was not 
heightened presidential concern over a German threat to the Western Hemi-
sphere, but a feeling of personal insult over Germany’s nonchalant disregard 
for his peace efforts and Berlin’s chutzpah in using U.S. cables to transmit an 
anti-American alliance offer. In itself, the telegram did not convince Wilson of 
the necessity of intervention, but it left little doubt that Germany anticipated 
war and thus destroyed his remaining hopes of working with the German gov-
ernment. Since the president was the last significant holdout in political Wash-
ington contemplating continued neutrality, the consequence of the telegram’s 
disclosure was significant. From that point on, Wilson’s decisions would move 
the nation progressively closer to war.
Although House and Lansing notably urged immediate publication of 
Zimmermann’s note, the decision had originated with Wilson. Keeping the 
message under wraps was hardly an option, as numerous officials on both 
sides of the Atlantic already knew about it. An eventual leak to the press was 
probable and would have subjected the administration to charges of deception 
by the Republican opposition. At any rate, Wilson never considered the pos-
sibility of keeping the telegram secret. It will be recalled that he had mentioned 
his inclination to publish it to Polk when first confronted with the telegram, 
before Lansing or House knew about it. His comments to the peace delegation 
on February 28 demonstrate that he had all but given up on any hope of reach-
ing a peaceful agreement with Berlin. The only remaining questions were when 
and how the telegram would be made public.
In his conference with the president on February 27, Lansing advised 
against having the State Department issue the telegram officially, as this method 
might be construed as an attempt to influence opinion over the armed ships 
bill. Instead, he suggested making it public “indirectly,” by leaking it to the 
press. This method, Lansing explained, “would avoid any charge of using the 
document improperly and would attract more attention than issuing it offi-
cially.” The president concurred, and on Wednesday morning, February 28, 
he called Lansing to suggest a conference with Treasury Secretary McAdoo 
and Postmaster General Albert S. Burleson to discuss the most suitable venue 
for publication. Later in the morning, according to Lansing’s account, Wilson 
again called him to report that Burleson and McAdoo could not be reached, 

The Smoking Gun 
 141
because they were at the Capitol attending to pending bills.57 This seems odd 
given that the president surely had the authority to pull members of his cabinet 
from meetings. Barbara Tuchman has argued that Wilson deliberately did not 
try very hard to summon Burleson and McAdoo because he preferred to act 
alone.58 If true, it demonstrates the president’s growing determination to con-
trol the telegram affair personally, to the exclusion of anybody else. He notably 
did not ask Lansing for advice.
Shortly before 4:00 p.m. Wilson called Lansing again and told him to have 
the telegram appear in the next morning’s papers. The president also ordered 
Lansing to summon Nebraska senator Gilbert M. Hitchcock and read him the 
telegram.59 This was a clever move on Wilson’s part. A member of the Senate 
Committee on Foreign Relations, the aloof, dandyish Hitchcock was in charge 
of the armed ships bill. He was also considered a pacifist. Although himself not 
of German extraction, he had studied in Germany in his youth, had introduced 
a resolution to ban American munitions exports to Europe in December 1914, 
and was considered close to the large German community in his state. Yet, he 
was also known as a party loyalist. If Hitchcock’s principled opposition to war 
could be weakened by sharing news of the telegram with him, congressional 
isolationism would be dealt a severe blow.60
Lansing called the senator, who arrived within twenty minutes, read him the 
telegram, and vouched for its authenticity. The shocked Hitchcock responded 
“that it would cause a tremendous sensation to make public such a dastardly 
plot.” Lansing added that Hitchcock might inform Democratic senator Wil-
liam J. Stone of Missouri, the chairman of the Committee on Foreign Rela-
tions, who had temporarily stepped down due to his opposition to the armed 
ships bill. Based on Lansing’s memorandum and diary notes, it appears that 
he told Hitchcock to contact Stone without Wilson’s knowledge. If so, Lansing 
doubtlessly made this move to further weaken the isolationists.61
According to Lansing’s desk diary, the secretary of state and his deputy, 
Polk, discussed the “method of making [the telegram] public.”62 Although 
Lansing insists in his March 4 memorandum that he advised Wilson to use the 
AP for leaking the telegram to the press,63 his desk diary entry leaves open the 
possibility that the idea of using AP correspondent Edwin Milton Hood for this 
purpose had originated with Polk. Ever the loyal informant, Polk immediately 
called House in New York to report the telegram’s forthcoming publication via 
AP the following day.64 Meanwhile, Lansing prepared a publishable adapta-
tion of the telegram for Hood, who visited the secretary’s home at 6:00 p.m. 
“[B]inding him to secrecy as to where he obtained it,” Lansing handed Hood 

142 
 Chapter Nine	
	
a paraphrase of the telegram. The AP correspondent agreed not to release it 
before 10:00 p.m. so that reporters would not learn the news before midnight, 
and Lansing would not receive any late night phone calls.65 At 9:20 p.m., Wil-
son called Lansing about the secretary’s conversation with Hitchcock. Whether 
the secretary informed the president that he had advised Hitchcock to inform 
Stone about the telegram is not known.66
The text published in virtually every major American newspaper on the 
morning of March 1, 1917, did not wholly conform to the original telegram. 
For one, Lansing had stripped the intercepted text of anything not content 
related, such as the telegram number and Zimmermann’s instruction to “con-
firm receipt.” Also, the published version was not dated January 13 (the date 
of the original telegram intercepted by the British) but January 19 (the date of 
Bernstorff’s message to Heinrich von Eckardt, the German envoy in Mexico). 
Furthermore, the published text made no mention of Bernstorff, thereby sug-
gesting that the telegram was sent directly by Zimmermann to Eckardt. By ob-
scuring the fact that the telegram was sent via Washington, Lansing sought to 
conceal the administration’s source of the telegram, an issue that would soon 
roil the Senate. Furthermore, the AP version erroneously spoke of “general 
financial support” rather than “generous financial support” from Germany 
to Mexico. Since Room 40 had provided the U.S. embassy in London with 
the correct translation, and Page had in turn forwarded the text accurately 
to Washington, Lansing or Hood must have unintentionally introduced this 
textual error. Moreover, the AP version perpetuated a subtle but significant 
inaccuracy in translation committed by Room 40. In the original telegram, 
Zimmermann had merely consented (Einverständnis unsererseits) to Mexico’s 
reconquest of territory in Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas, but Room 40 had 
turned this rather weak endorsement into the more aggressive “an understand-
ing on our part.” The published version read, “it is understood that Mexico 
is to reconquer the lost territory,” implying Germany’s active goading rather 
than passive consent.67
An explanatory note by AP, based on Lansing’s conversation with Hood, 
put the telegram in context and was meant to amplify its effect. It reviewed var-
ious German espionage and sabotage operations and proclaimed that the tele-
gram provided the “missing link” to a number of rumored German schemes, 
such as Berlin’s alleged goal to establish submarine bases in Mexico, which was 
never proven. This was vintage Lansing.
Although State Department agents in Mexico had repeatedly failed to cor-
roborate hearsay of German plots in Mexico,68 the secretary stubbornly insisted 

The Smoking Gun 
 143
that the Germans had hatched a series of anti-American schemes south of the 
border. The telegram, he now claimed, proved this point: “I have said that for 
a year and a half I have been receiving these rumors of German activities in 
Mexico and other places. Occasionally a definite fact would come and these 
we have been patching together, keeping them very secret so as not to cause 
German apprehensions and close our sources of information. Only the Zim-
mermann telegram was proved beyond question.”69 Thus, Lansing portrayed 
the telegram as the proverbial “smoking gun.” As such, it assumed far more 
sinister proportions than Zimmermann’s half-baked, ad hoc diplomatic initia-
tive warranted.
Worried that the press might find out about the British connection, Lan-
sing immediately embarked on a disinformation campaign to deflect suspi-
cions about the administration’s source for the telegram. In an interview with a 
journalist, the secretary insinuated that a daring spy had obtained the telegram, 
and he flatly refused to elaborate since further probing would “endanger the 
lives of those concerned.”70 Speculation in the press exploded. From London, 
Hall watched with delight:
[I could not] help smiling at some of the tall stories about the acquisition 
of the Telegram which I was at some pains not to contradict. Secret codes, 
it was hinted, had been stolen in the unlikeliest places and bought by the 
Americans for the most colossal sums. Heroic backwoodsmen from Ari-
zona searching for excitement in France had broken through the enemy 
line disguised as Church Army padres, obtained jobs in Brussels, discov-
ered ‘the German cipher-book’ in the Governor-General’s own house, and 
hurried back with the precious code to astounded officials in Washington. 
There were weird stories of German submarine captains being robbed on 
Broadway and Mexican revolutionaries who had captured wireless sta-
tions which never existed, and even one of a German agent in New York 
who . . . successfully burgled the German Embassy.71
Overall, publication of the telegram constituted a major triumph for the 
pro-war lobby. Polk told Lansing on the morning of March 1 that he did not 
see how the president could now avoid asking for a declaration of war.72 A sat-
isfied Colonel House noted in his diary that journalists “have called and tele-
phoned constantly because of the exposé of the Zimmermann cable.”73 More 
than any other person in Washington, Lansing could claim responsibility for 
the telegram’s orderly disclosure in the American press. His agents had ably 

144 
 Chapter Nine	
	
collaborated with Hall in London, and the secretary had guided the president 
in choosing an appropriate venue for publication of the explosive document. 
At the same time, Lansing had effectively managed to conceal Britain’s role 
from the public. No doubt, there was much to be proud of, and in his memoirs, 
Lansing waxes lyrically about the consequences of his contribution to Hall’s 
coup: “The proposed alliance with Mexico and possibly with Japan, if it mate-
rialized, would affect the entire West. It needed but some disclosure of this sort 
to transform popular indifference into intense hostility to Germany, to convert 
pacifism and a desire for continued inaction into demands for war.”74

145
Chapter Ten
Congress Debates  
the Telegram
I
n the presidential elections of 1912, Woodrow Wilson and the Democratic 
Party triumphed over a Republican Party divided into a progressive ren-
egade faction, led by Theodore Roosevelt, and its traditional base, under 
Howard Taft. As a result, the Democrats captured not only the presidency that 
year, but they also built solid majorities in the House of Representatives and 
the Senate, allowing Wilson to push through an ambitious agenda of domestic 
reform during his first term. As the Republican rift healed, however, the Demo-
crats’ electoral advantage evaporated.
In 1916 Republican presidential candidate Charles Evans Hughes lost 
only narrowly to Wilson, and the Democrats’ majority in Congress decreased 
significantly. In the Senate, Wilson’s party lost two seats, shrinking its major-
ity to twelve. In the House, the losses were steeper. Going into the election, 
the Democrats had held a solid majority in the House, but they lost sixteen 
seats, while the Republicans gained nineteen. In the final tally, the Republicans 
outnumbered Democrats by one representative—215 to 214—but with some 
horse-trading involving Progressives and the defection of a few Republicans, 
the Democrats retained control of the House, though only barely.1 The emer-
gence of a distinct isolationist bloc in both chambers further complicated Presi-
dent Wilson’s already tenuous relationship with Congress.
Isolationism transcended party lines, and as the United States edged closer 
to war, the movement grew more pronounced and became more vocal. When 
the administration severed diplomatic relations with Germany, legislators from 
both parties expressed distinctly isolationist sentiments. For example, Rep. 
Henry Stanley Benedict, a Republican from California, warned that America 

146 
 Chapter Ten		
must not surrender its position as “the hope of the oppressed and the refuge 
of all liberty-loving people” for the sake of “fighting to maintain the oppres-
sion of monarchies.” Rep. George Huddleston, a Democrat from Alabama, 
charged that big business was seeking to push the country into the war “for its 
promotions, its profits, and its influence on our social and political life.”2
How did isolationist lawmakers react to the publication of the telegram? 
In his memoirs Robert Lansing, Wilson’s secretary of state, claimed that its 
“effect on Congress was marked.”3 It is true that, initially at least, the disclo-
sure appeared to sideline congressional isolationists, as it railroaded the House 
of Representatives into approving Wilson’s bill to allow American merchant 
ships to be armed in order to defend against possible German attack. The 
House passed the bill by an overwhelming margin of 403 to 14 after a few 
hours of debate. Half of the bill’s opponents had previously voiced isolationist 
sentiments; most of them were Progressives or radicals who preferred social 
reform at home over military intervention overseas. Nine of the opponents 
were midwestern representatives whose constituencies included strong Ger-
man American (Wisconsin) and Scandinavian American (North Dakota and 
Minnesota) populations.
The landslide vote resulted largely from a lack of time for reflection on the  
lawmakers’ part. A subsequent House vote quickly revealed cracks in the seem-
ingly united patriotic front. An amendment to the armed ships bill introduced 
by Republican Henry Allen Cooper of Wisconsin proposed to prohibit armed 
American merchant vessels from transporting munitions to belligerent countries. 
The pro-German lobby had long lamented munitions shipments to the Allies, 
and the amendment would have defanged Wilson’s original bill. Although 293 
representatives voted against it, 125 voted in favor, a manifestation of growing 
congressional opposition to intervention. The supporters included nearly all 
the Progressives, half of whom represented midwestern districts with signifi-
cant German American or Scandinavian American constituencies. Nearly two-
thirds of those approving the amendment were Republicans.4
Isolationist senators resisted the armed ships bill more forcefully than 
House representatives did because they had the benefit of more time to reflect 
on the bill as well as on the Zimmermann telegram. As Oscar W. Underwood, 
a Democrat from Alabama, noted, “I must say for the moment that I thought 
with those who were about me, we were swept off our feet, but since the hours 
have gone by and I have had the opportunity to think and analyse [sic] and 
read the note [the telegram] that is in discussion, I am not so sure that it is as 
serious as we imagine it is in itself.”5 In the end, twelve senators voted against 

Congress Debates the Telegram 
 147
the armed ships bill. Most of them did so on isolationist grounds, though one 
or two may have been motivated by sympathy for the Central Powers. Many 
represented midwestern states; seven were Republicans. Several of the bill’s 
opponents perceived a link between intervention and big business. One of the 
most committed and eloquent isolationists, Wisconsin Republican senator 
Robert M. “Fighting Bob” La Follette, argued, “[W]e should not enter an 
aggressive war for humanitarian ends, much less for commercial profits, in 
carrying munitions.”6
Anti-interventionist senators were determined to filibuster the bill until 
Congress adjourned on March 4. In a tactical alliance, they received tacit sup-
port from the pro-war party and the Republican leadership, which did not 
want to leave Wilson in sole control of foreign policy either, for fear he would 
further postpone the United States’ entry into the war. Following the telegram’s 
disclosure, many isolationists viewed the armed ships bill as a vote about inter-
vention, so the bill became a rallying point for the antiwar movement inside 
and outside Congress. Under La Follette’s leadership, twelve senators—seven 
Republicans and four Democrats—began to filibuster the armed ships bill. 
With an isolationist victory in sight, Republican senator George W. Norris of 
Nebraska exulted on March 3, “We’ve got them beaten. We can hold them 
now: we’ve got enough speakers to filibuster from tomorrow on.”7 Indeed, 
Congress adjourned without a vote on the armed ships bill, and the successful 
filibuster ensured that the president would not be freed from congressional 
supervision. In a fit of temper, Wilson branded his opponents “a little group of 
willful men, representing no opinion but their own.”8 In fact, the filibusterers 
had strong backing from their constituencies. Their offices had received hun-
dreds of letters of support, and Norris was greeted with an enthusiastic recep-
tion when he returned to Nebraska in late March to explain his position. On 
March 9, Wilson issued an executive order to arm American merchant ships 
anyway.9 Although the isolationists failed to thwart the arming of ships, they 
had become a force to be reckoned with, as evidenced in a Senate debate about 
the Zimmermann telegram on March 1. 
The Wilson administration did not officially comment on the telegram 
when U.S. newspapers published the document. Seeking to exploit this fact, 
Senator Henry Cabot Lodge, a hawkish Republican from Massachusetts,  
requested confirmation of the telegram’s authenticity from the president on 
the same day. Though ostensibly concerned with the telegram’s authenticity, 
Lodge was really trying to tie Wilson to his interventionist agenda. As he wrote 
his friend Theodore Roosevelt, “As soon as I saw it I felt sure it came from 

148 
 Chapter Ten		
the Administration. I felt that it would arouse the country more than anything 
that has happened, that it would widen the breach with Germany and drive us 
toward the Allies. The one thing lacking was a declaration from the President 
as to its authenticity, and with his endorsement on it I knew the country would 
be bound to accept it and that he would be tied up. It seemed to me of almost 
unlimited use in forcing the situation.”10
On the Senate floor, Lodge declared, “We must not act on a newspaper 
publication. . . . [W]e ought to have the authentic statement of the President of 
the United States. He is asking for great powers, and I for one think he ought 
to have them; but we ought to know the evidence on which we are proceed-
ing.” Kicking off a lengthy Senate debate, Lodge then submitted a resolution 
asking the Senate to resolve that “the President be requested to inform the 
Senate whether the [Zimmermann] note . . . is authentic and in the possession 
of the Government of the United States, and when it came into possession of 
the United States, and if authentic to send to the Senate, if not incompatible 
with the public interest, any further information in the possession of the Gov-
ernment of the United States relative to the activities of the Imperial German 
Government in Mexico.”11
According to Barbara Tuchman, the ensuing debate unfolded exactly as 
Lodge would have wanted, with all “pacifist senators promptly” voicing “the 
most sinister suspicions as to the origins of the telegram” and several of them 
denouncing the telegram as a lie. “There was no lack of senior statesmen,” 
Tuchman concluded, “to thus rush in who were soon to wish they hadn’t.”12 
This, however, is a serious mischaracterization of what really occurred. As the 
Senate nominally discussed the telegram’s authenticity, few senators actually 
voiced doubts in this regard. Two senators, Republican William E. Borah of 
Idaho and Underwood of Alabama, stated in the course of the debate that 
they initially had considered the telegram a forgery but now accepted it as 
genuine, early evidence of the telegram’s transient effect. Only two senators 
went on record explicitly condemning the telegram as a forgery. Democrat 
Michael Hoke Smith of Georgia argued cautiously that “up to this point,” he 
“preferred” to believe “that this so-called letter is a forgery and a sham, born 
in the brain of a scoundrel and a tool.” Only the last speaker, Democrat “Pitch-
fork Ben” Tillman of South Carolina contended that “we have wasted a great 
deal of valuable time here in discussing a lie—a forgery.” Since “Japan hates 
Germany worse than the devil is said to hate holy water,” Tillman considered 
a Berlin-Tokyo axis inconceivable. The seventy-year-old Tillman, a notorious 
leader of the white supremacy movement with no expertise in foreign relations, 

Congress Debates the Telegram 
 149
stood virtually alone with his unconditional declaration that the telegram was 
a forgery.13 The debate in the Senate would not only upend Lodge’s resolution, 
but would come dangerously close to revealing Britain’s hand in the telegram’s 
disclosure as some isolationists had hoped to do.
Lodge and his supporters sought to emphasize the seriousness of the Ger-
man threat and yoke the publication of the telegram to the administration in 
the hope that Wilson would then have to bend to public pressure to go to war.14 
Lodge himself claimed boldly during the course of the debate, “If the President, 
of his own motion, were to send those papers [the telegram] in to the Senate 
without comment, according to our precedents, it would mean that we could 
do nothing diplomatically, and he wrote to Congress for war.”15 Democratic 
senator Charles S. Thomas of Colorado, an isolationist turned interventionist, 
seconded Lodge by asserting that since the telegram was probably authentic, 
it should be viewed in the context of a pending Army and Navy bill. In other 
words, the telegram should be regarded as an act of German aggression to 
which the United States ought to respond by preparing for war. Democratic 
senator Atlee Pomerene of Ohio claimed that the telegram constituted the first 
documented instance of a German plot—as opposed to earlier rumors—in the 
Western Hemisphere and that if true, “it creates a very grave situation.”16
Others downplayed the significance of the telegram. Republican senator 
Miles Poindexter of Washington argued that the telegram hardly constituted 
news: “I have been reading in the newspapers for a month about the very situ-
ation of which this Zimmermann letter would be a mere incident. . . . [W]hat 
is the occasion for excitement about it? What change in the situation is it going 
to make?”17 He added quite plausibly “that it is impossible for Germany to 
send an army to Mexico at the present time, or to send a navy there.”18 Sena-
tor Gilbert M. Hitchcock, wavering between loyalty to Wilson and Nebraska’s 
German American voting bloc, pointed out that the telegram was a defen-
sive, not an offensive measure, since the Mexican government was not to be 
approached until after the United States and Germany were at war. Senator 
Underwood argued in the same vein, asserting “that the Imperial Chancellor 
of Germany would have been derelict in his duty to his own Government if he 
had not carefully informed his minister abroad what he should do in the hap-
pening of every contingency.”19
Others raised questions about the intentions behind the telegram’s publi-
cation. On March 1, the Associated Press (AP) had erroneously reported that 
the administration had been in possession of the telegram for a month.20 At the 
beginning of the debate, La Follette demanded to know “exactly how long the 

150 
 Chapter Ten		
Government of the United States, or any branch of it, has been in possession 
of such information.” The Wisconsin senator suggested that Wilson had coolly 
kept the telegram under wraps until it was politically opportune to release it, 
a thinly veiled suggestion that Wilson had used the telegram to try to push 
his armed ships bill through Congress. Senator John D. Works, a progressive 
Republican from California, drove his colleague’s point home by accusing the 
president of playing politics with national security. Because the Senate was 
being asked, Works expounded, “to place in the hands of the President the 
power to determine practically whether or not we go to war,” the administra-
tion should have informed Congress before Wilson submitted his bill. Later on, 
Democratic senator Thomas Hardwick of Georgia asked why the State Depart-
ment had released the telegram, and then he provided the answer himself: “I 
think the real purpose of it, simply giving my own opinion, was to hasten the 
passage of certain legislation during the closing hours of Congress.”21
Lodge’s resolution was referred to the Committee on Foreign Relations, 
which adopted a slightly revised version and then submitted it to the full Sen-
ate. Lodge boasted to Roosevelt that since the “militant party was in complete 
control of the committee . . . we brought out a resolution entirely in accord 
with the one I introduced.” When Democratic senator Claude A. Swanson of 
Virginia informed Lodge that Wilson had confirmed to him the note’s authen-
ticity, and that the president would be happy to respond to the resolution,22 
the pro-war lobby appeared to head for an easy victory. Instead, however, the 
debate took an ominous turn for the interventionists. The one countermeasure 
the isolationists could adopt to blunt, and even turn, Lodge’s resolution into 
an instrument against intervention, was to shift the focus of the debate to the 
administration’s source for the telegram. They did precisely that.
Senator William J. Stone emerged as the leading isolationist voice during 
the ensuing debate. A Democrat from Missouri, Stone was a professional poli-
tician who had earned the nickname “Gumshoe Bill” for his effective behind-
the-scenes maneuvering in Missouri politics. A pragmatic reformer, Stone had 
loyally supported Wilson until he broke with the president over the armed 
ships bill and, subsequently, the United States’ entry into the war.23 There is 
no record of the deliberations of the Committee on Foreign Relations, but 
according to Stone, the possible involvement of a third government—read, 
Great Britain—and the method of the telegram’s interception had been at the 
core of the committee’s debate. In the full Senate debate, he put the spotlight 
on these issues. As soon as the committee’s resolution had been read, Stone 
dropped a bombshell amendment that would completely reframe the Senate 

Congress Debates the Telegram 
 151
debate. It asked the president “also to inform the Senate as to whether the infor-
mation in his possession respecting the letter signed ‘Zimmermann’ originated 
with any Government or official of any Government engaged in the present 
European war, and if so, to inform the Senate as to the facts relating thereto.” 24
Interventionists and isolationists alike realized that Stone was referring to 
Great Britain, without saying so explicitly. Stone’s move threatened the objec-
tives of Lodge and his supporters, because it would taint the cause of interven-
tion, as well as those of the Wilson loyalists, for it might cast the president as 
a British pawn and the United States’ entry into war as having been master-
minded by London. As a consequence, the two factions joined in an unusual 
alliance to blunt the impact of Stone’s amendment. While Lodge and other 
interventionists insisted time and again that only the telegram’s authenticity 
mattered, Democrats close to the administration categorically repeated their 
mantra that Stone’s amendment was “likely to be embarrassing to the Presi-
dent,” as William Hughes of New Jersey cautioned.25
Stone plowed ahead, nonetheless. First, he noted, “Reading the newspaper 
accounts of the sources of information they had, the inference is unavoidable 
that it was obtained from the executive officials of this Government.”26 Though 
he still refrained from naming Great Britain explicitly, he contended that “it 
was given publicity to affect either public opinion or legislative opinion, or 
both, in the United States. We are passing through strenuous and dangerous 
days just now. A publication of this nature is calculated, however intended, to 
excite public opinion and to inflame the public mind of the country, and thus 
develop a tendency toward working up a spirit of belligerency on our part.”27 
He then moved in for the kill:
It must have been derived from some outside, independent source. It is 
not to be presumed that this Government, as a neutral power, has been in 
such close touch with the Government of any of the belligerent powers as 
would justify it in sending its special agents to confer confidentially with 
any such Government and to collaborate with it. I hear some Senator ask, 
“Why not?” Why not? Because I hold, and I hope truly hold, that the  
attitude which we have declared on more occasions than one, of absolute 
and impartial neutrality between the warring powers, would make confi-
dential and secret cooperation of that kind impossible. Mr. President, the 
news, so called, which comes to the United States from Europe is filtered, 
as we all know, through the London news bureau presided over and man-
aged by Lord Northcliffe, supplemented by the exacting censorship of 

152 
 Chapter Ten		
the British Government, the managing Government of the entente allies.  
. . . For example, did this information come from London? Was it given 
to us by that Government? I want to know about that, and that is all I am 
asking at this time.28
Even with that, Stone was far from finished. When George Sutherland, a 
Republican from Utah, questioned the wisdom of asking the president to name 
the source of the telegram, “because if he answers that question the effect of it 
may be to close that particular source in the future,”29 Stone brushed him aside, 
arguing that one could “easily differentiate between asking the President as to 
the source of information in cases wherein he secured his information through 
instrumentalities of his own, for the employment of which the Congress has 
granted its authority, and cases like this, wherein I ask to ascertain whether 
this particular information was derived from a belligerent power.”30 In order to 
lend force to his argument, Stone elaborated on his source for Britain’s alleged 
involvement: “I never heard of it until last night, or late yesterday afternoon. 
At that time some news reporters came to me and told me about it, as, I have 
no doubt, they told others of you. I could give them no information, for I had 
none; but I turned interviewer, being deeply interested, and asked them what 
they knew about it, and some of them told me that they understood that this 
letter came from high officials of the British Government to the Government 
of the United States.”31
Here was another remarkable revelation. Throughout the war, Washing-
ton and London would officially maintain that the United States had obtained 
the telegram through its own efforts, but on the day of the telegram’s publica-
tion, Stone named not only Britain as the source, but he also revealed that this 
knowledge was apparently well known to a number of American journalists. 
This leads one to speculate about what information, other than the text of the 
telegram, Lansing might have given Edwin Milton Hood, the AP journalist, 
on February 28. Stone concluded his remarks by elaborating on the double 
standard applied by his interventionist colleagues to information coming from 
the Central Powers and the Allies, respectively:
Mr. President, let us reverse the case. Suppose the Imperial Government 
of Germany had made a charge of something done by England which 
would have been offensive to the United States, and which would of itself 
have strained the diplomatic relations of the United States with that coun-
try, would the Senators who are urging the adoption of this resolution 
without amendment have been willing to accept the facts relating to the 

Congress Debates the Telegram 
 153
charge on the mere assurance even of so exalted a personage as the Presi-
dent that he thought the information to be correct? Would you not have 
said: “Before we act upon that we want information as to the sources; at 
least we want to know whether the information which you convey to us 
came from Berlin, from the Kaiser, to Washington”? And I would be with 
you on that with the same zeal and insistence that moves me now. Mr. 
President, I have said enough. I think there can be no harm in asking the 
President to tell the Senate whether his information respecting this letter 
came from a foreign Government engaged in this war. If the information 
conveyed to me by the news purveyors here, that it came from the British 
Government to us, is accurate, I think we are entitled to know that fact 
officially.32
When Stone had finished, Wilson’s loyal lieutenant, Senator Hitchcock 
of Nebraska, swung into action with an attempt to thwart the amendment 
by contending that national security trumped the public right to know certain 
facts. By doing so, he subtly sought to create the impression that the telegram 
had been procured directly by American intelligence, not by the British:
[President Wilson] has in his hands more information than anyone else 
could possibly secure. Much of the information which comes to the Presi-
dent of the United States through the Diplomatic Service and through 
secret agents is in its very nature confidential. Our country is not alone in 
gathering this confidential information. Every great nation in the world 
makes it a regular business to gather it; every Government in the world 
places a secret fund at the disposal of its authorities for gathering it, and 
our own Government places at the disposal of the President of the United 
States a secret fund to pay for gathering secret information. For this rea-
son the President is in a better position than anyone else to express an 
opinion as to whether or not information which has come to him or the 
Department of State is authentic. . . . [I]t is very evident that it would be a 
gross indiscretion on the part of the Senate of the United States, which is 
brought in close contact with international affairs, even to ask the source 
of the information that the President may have secured. 33
Hitchcock’s argument cut no ice with the isolationists. Senator Hardwick 
of Georgia asked him point-blank: “Does not the Senator think that if it is true 
in point of fact, that this note came to our Government from the Government 
of one of the belligerents that fact also ought to be called to the attention of 

154 
 Chapter Ten		
the Senate and of the country in weighing this note and in deciding whether 
or not it really is authentic and genuine?”34 In response, Hitchcock, who had 
earlier admonished his colleagues about their duty to protect America’s sources 
of intelligence, accidentally came close to revealing the method by which the 
telegram was obtained:
No. . . . I believe that the simple question for the Senate to decide now is 
whether to ask the President for a definite statement as to the authentic-
ity of that note, and I say this because we have some knowledge of the 
methods adopted by which information of this sort is secured. If that note 
was sent it was sent by telegraph. If that note was sent it was sent in code. 
There are a number of different ways in which the information involved 
in establishing the authenticity of that note might have been gathered. 
There are telegraph records, there is the wireless telegraph, there are code 
books which sometimes get lost.35
Both Stone and Hitchcock had been informed by administration officials 
about the telegram, before it was published, and both probably knew details 
about how it was obtained. Curiously, Stone, who was keen on exposing Brit-
ain’s manipulative hand, was always careful to avoid references to interception 
and decryption, whereas Hitchcock, who sought to thwart Stone by stonewall-
ing, came close to revealing just those intelligence sources.
When Hitchcock had finished, John Sharp Williams, a Democrat from 
Mississippi, rose to speak. A member of the Committee on Foreign Relations 
and a loyalist of the Wilson administration, Williams, like Hitchcock and Stone, 
surely knew a great deal about the telegram’s origins, and he cleverly used his 
speech to draw attention away from the fact that it had been obtained by the 
British through interception and cryptanalysis. Like Hitchcock and Lodge, he 
emphasized the importance of content over origins:
The sole question is this: Is there a letter like this signed by Zimmermann, 
the German secretary of foreign affairs, in existence in the possession of 
our Department of State, and secondly, is that letter authentic? The 
instrumentality whereby the United States got possession of the letter does 
not bear in the remotest degree either upon its authenticity or its exis-
tence. The two questions simply are, Does it exist, and is it authentic? . . .  
It is totally irrelevant how it got out of [the] German Embassy—how it 
got into the hands of the American Government. Somebody might have 

Congress Debates the Telegram 
 155
stolen it. Some careless fellow in packing up some day the papers for the 
files might have left a copy out. Some man who makes money out of such 
things might have gotten it and found that it was valuable. . . . You can 
suppose a thousand ways of its getting there. Suppose that it was caught 
upon the body of a German spy by the British Government and sent to us 
to hurt Germany. It seems to be rather a difficult supposition under the 
circumstances; but suppose that was the case, then the question is still not 
either the character of the spy or the character of the captor; the question 
is, “[I]s it an authentic letter, and did it proceed from the secretary of state 
of the Royal Imperial German Government?” You may suppose that it 
was caught coming on its way by wireless to Sayville, where Ambassador 
[Johann Heinrich von] Bernstorff received his communications, and that 
it might have been caught by a naval officer of the United States or by a 
Secret Service man of the United States who was watching.36 
While seeking to shield the Wilson administration from attempts to reveal 
the source of the telegram, Williams simultaneously rebuffed the intervention-
ists, who emphasized the alleged threat to the United States posed by Zimmer-
mann’s alliance offer. According to Williams, the telegram “will be but one of 
the many other circumstances tending to corroborate a belief that [Germany] 
has been at least careless about whether she would have war with us or not, 
and that she—while diplomatizing with us—has been making preparation to 
strengthen her hand when the war should come, if it should come. Gentlemen 
will notice that this letter itself, if it be authentic and true, was not to be 
delivered to the Mexican Government ‘until there was a break with the United 
States,’ but they were merely preparing their way.”37
At this point, the debate had veered far off the course Lodge had intended 
it to take. The senator from Massachusetts therefore thought it necessary to 
jump into the fray with a speech of his own, though he was unable to add 
anything of substance to the points made earlier by Hitchcock. Lambasting 
Stone’s amendment, Lodge reiterated his two key contentions—the German 
alliance proposal posed a veritable threat to the United States, and establish-
ing the telegram’s authenticity was all that mattered: “In that [news]paper was 
disclosed, if it is authentic, a plan on the part of one great Government to join 
with two other Governments in war on the United States. It went so far as 
to suggest parceling out some of our territory. It seems to me a very serious 
thing.”38 Citing a distant historical precedent, he argued against revealing the 
government’s sources:

156 
 Chapter Ten		
I think nothing would be more unfortunate than to inquire of the Presi-
dent the sources of his information. . . . The President is charged with the 
duty of preserving the interest of the United States. We give him a large 
fund to be spent on the voucher of the Secretary of State alone. Those 
sources of information would be cut off if he were to disclose them; and in 
a newspaper of this afternoon it is said that Mr. Secretary Lansing stated 
to the newspapers that under no circumstances could the sources of the 
information be disclosed, for it might involve the lives of those concerned. 
No Government can possibly make such a disclosure.39
By referencing Lansing’s allusion to “the lives of those concerned,” Lodge 
sought to throw off his isolationist colleagues whose line of questioning threat-
ened to disclose the hand of the British code breakers. Predictably, he failed. 
Senator James A. O’Gorman, a Democrat from New York of Irish back-
ground, expansively reviewed past British propaganda activities in the United 
States and, with a view to the telegram, asked whether “this information [was] 
derived from one of the belligerent nations involved in this European war? The 
value of any evidence in any court of justice is dependent more or less upon 
the source from which it comes.” He continued: “Suppose, Senators, in this 
situation you were satisfied that officers of the British Government handed this 
alleged document to the United States Government, would you not want some 
further evidence of its authenticity? Might it not be a fabrication? Might it not 
be a forgery? More than once in the history of our own country a belligerent 
nation has resorted to deceit and forgery in an effort to induce us to become 
involved in a contest in which we were not concerned.”40 By suggesting that 
the telegram might be a forgery, O’Gorman dared his opponents to prove him 
wrong by disclosing the method by which the administration had obtained it. 
But he also knew that if the administration admitted Britain’s role in order to 
prove the telegram’s authenticity, British intelligence and propaganda operations 
vis-à-vis the United States would become the focal point of public attention.
By now, the debate had settled into a predictable back-and-forth between 
those who wanted to expose Britain’s role and those who sought to keep 
the focus on the telegram’s content. In this contest, the latter group clearly 
had the weaker hand, because all they could do was reiterate their emphasis 
on authenticity and source protection. Anytime an interventionist or Wilson 
loyalist made these points, an isolationist would follow up by expanding on 
Britain’s propaganda activities in the United States and suggest London’s hand 
behind the telegram. Keeping Britain’s involvement a secret was essential for the 

Congress Debates the Telegram 
 157
administration as well as for the interventionists, but each verbal exchange in 
the Senate chipped away at the mystery surrounding the telegram’s origins.
While prolonging the exchange initially had served the isolationists’ cause, 
after a while neither side was able to offer anything substantially new to their 
arguments, and the debate reached an impasse. Since Stone’s amendment, 
asking the administration specifically for its source of the telegram, evidently 
was anathema to the interventionist cohort as well as administration loyalists,  
Michael Hoke Smith, the Democrat from Georgia, offered the following more 
general amendment as a substitute: “That the President be requested to furnish 
to the Senate whatever information he has concerning the note published in 
the press of this date, purporting to have been sent January 19, 1917, by the 
German secretary for foreign affairs to the German minister in Mexico, which, 
in his opinion, is not incompatible with the public interest.”41
Stone responded at length. First, he openly came out in favor of continued 
neutrality, while refuting charges of disloyalty to the administration that had 
been raised by the Wilson loyalists: “Mr. President, I am against this country 
entering into this war—I do not disguise that—and shall use whatever power 
I have to prevent it until I feel that the honor and vital interests of this country 
and people have been assailed in such a way and to such a degree that there 
is no honorable escape from the dernier resort to war. . . . Do I assail the 
President in saying that? Do I insinuate aught [sic] against the President by 
that statement? No.” Having made his point, Stone concluded his speech by 
endorsing Smith’s amendment on the ground that it “asks for all information 
the President has respecting this matter which he thinks he can send to the Sen-
ate compatible with the public interest.”42
Eventually, Smith’s amendment was incorporated into the resolution from 
the Committee on Foreign Relations and agreed to. It completely changed the 
thrust of Lodge’s inquiry. While the original resolution had asked only for “any 
further information in the possession of the Government of the United States 
relative to any activities of the Imperial German Government,” the amend-
ment asked the administration “to furnish to the Senate whatever information 
he [the president] has concerning the note.” During the debate, Stone and his 
supporters had made it abundantly clear that they intended this passage to be 
understood as a reference to British involvement.
The administration responded promptly. Lansing instructed Ambassador 
Walter Hines Page in London to have the telegram deciphered by a member 
of the embassy to enable the administration to claim that the German alliance 
offer was procured from an American source (see chapter 7). On the same 

158 
 Chapter Ten		
day, March 1, Wilson sent the Senate a statement from Secretary Lansing to 
the effect that “the Government is in possession of evidence which establishes 
the fact that the note referred to is authentic, and that it is in the possession 
of the Government of the United States, and that the evidence was procured 
by this Government during the present week.” In the same statement, Lansing 
invoked national security in order to stop the hemorrhaging of further infor-
mation: “[I]t is, in my opinion, incompatible with the public interest to send to 
the Senate at the present time any further information in the possession of the 
Government of the United States relative to the note mentioned in the resolu-
tion of the Senate.”43
It should be noted that although State Department counselor Frank L. Polk 
had indeed obtained a copy of the telegram from Western Union on February 
27, Second Secretary Edward Bell in London, with significant assistance from 
Nigel de Grey of British naval intelligence, deciphered the German encrypt 
only on March 2. Lansing was therefore stretching the truth in his statement 
of March 1, but evidently the administration felt the need to respond quickly, 
even precipitously, to the Senate, so as to preempt further embarrassing prob-
ing of the method by which the telegram had been obtained.
Still, the Senate debate of March 1 came dangerously close to exposing 
Britain’s hand. Anyone who cared to attend the Senate session could make 
an educated guess about the source (British intelligence) as well as the means 
(cryptanalysis) by which the telegram had been purloined from the Germans. 
The debate also showed how quickly and widely knowledge of these facts had 
spread. British and American officials knew about the origins of the telegram, 
but so did several senators and journalists. British intelligence and the Ameri-
can pro-war lobby had to consider themselves fortunate that Bernstorff had 
left Washington on February 14, for the perceptive German ambassador surely 
would have used his connections to reporters and politicians to get to the bot-
tom of the story.
Moreover, congressional debates on March 1 were an indicator as to 
how quickly the effect of the telegram’s disclosure would dissipate, and they 
revealed strong crosscurrents in Congress regarding the U.S. position vis-à-vis 
the European war. The House passed the armed ships bill, but the Senate failed 
to follow suit, and then isolationists quickly turned an attempt by interventionist 
senators to use the telegram for their cause into a debate over Britain’s meddling 
with U.S. neutrality. In the case of Congress, the telegram failed to become a 
unifying factor. As the Wilson administration edged ever closer to intervention, 
the issue became whether the telegram would rally the public for war.

159
Chapter Eleven
the american public
B
y early 1917, interventionists on both sides of the Atlantic were claim-
ing that the Zimmermann telegram’s disclosure was galvanizing Ameri-
cans for war. On March 4, Secretary of State Robert Lansing wrote of 
“the profound sensation” the telegram had created “throughout the country.”1 
In a much-quoted passage from his memoirs, he elaborated that the publica-
tion of the telegram had “resulted in unifying public sentiment throughout 
the United States against Germany, in putting the people solidly behind the 
government and in making war inevitable.”2 Wellington House, the British 
propaganda arm responsible for the United States, reported in the same vein 
on March 7: “The timely revelation of the proposed German alliance with 
Mexico, and the gift to Mexico of these states of the Union, appears to have 
aroused feeling considerably, and it seems to have stirred precisely that part 
of the country which was most indifferent to American rights at sea.”3 In his 
autobiography, William Reginald Hall, director of British naval intelligence, 
stated that the publication of the telegram on March 1 had “created, as we 
hoped and expected, the most tremendous sensation.”4
Most historians agree with these contemporary voices about the enormity 
of the telegram’s effect on the American public. For example, Barbara Tuch-
man contends, “[t]he kick that did it, to the people whether or not to the Presi-
dent, was the Zimmermann telegram. It awoke that part of the country that 
had been undecided or indifferent before. . . . It was not a theory or an issue  
but an unmistakable gesture that anyone could understand.”5 Others have 
argued along similar lines. Arthur Link, in his monumental political biography 
of Woodrow Wilson, asserted, “[i]t was as if a gigantic bolt had struck from 

160 
 Chapter Eleven	
	
the blue across the American continent. No other event of the war to this point, 
not even the German invasion of Belgium or the sinking of the Lusitania, so 
stunned the American people.”6 For German historian Martin Nassua, “the 
public effect, which was caused [by the publication of the telegram] constitutes 
its historical significance.”7 John Milton Cooper concluded in his sweeping 
biography of Woodrow Wilson that the telegram “stirred up the furor that  
the British hoped for. . . . Editorial indignation flared across the country. 
Many newspapers called the Zimmermann Telegram an act of war, and some 
called for war in response.”8
Cooper’s reference to newspaper editorials points to an ongoing challenge 
for students of public opinion in the World War I era. No scientific polls exist 
that gauged Americans’ attitudes toward the war. Therefore, historians must 
consult a range of contemporary records for this purpose, and newspapers are 
the most significant and abundant source material in this regard. In an effort to 
measure the telegram’s effect on public opinion, a sample of twenty-one English-
language and ten German-language newspapers has been examined here.9 The 
sample represents all major regions of the United States, covers urban and 
rural areas, and includes papers that advocated intervention as well as those 
that favored continued neutrality in early 1917. Democratic- and Republican-
leaning newspapers are both included in the sample. Contemporary reports 
and memoranda by politicians and embassy personnel, as well as memoirs, 
also have been reviewed to round out the picture derived from the analysis of 
the newspapers.
During the period of American neutrality, public opinion did not tilt grad-
ually and inexorably toward war. Rather, interventionism ascended in fits and 
starts. Revelations about German espionage and sabotage in North America 
as well as the antics of the German military attaché, Captain Franz von Papen, 
offended many Americans in 1915, and Britain’s disregard for U.S. interests in 
1916 had a similar effect on American perceptions of the Allies. In particular, 
London’s blacklisting of U.S. companies trading with Germany and its brutal 
repression of the Irish uprising enraged many Americans. Ambassador Cecil 
Arthur Spring Rice captured the effect of these events in late December when 
he expressed his worries about a decline of pro-Allied sentiment and suggested 
measures to reverse the trend: “Feeling on the whole is becoming less favorable 
to the allies and more favorable to the germans [sic] and I am continually being 
asked why the British do not organise a more intensive propaganda.” In this 
memorandum, Spring Rice suggests that even unrestricted submarine warfare 
might not suffice to reverse this trend: “The feeling of the country is so pacific 

The American Public 
 161
that it is very difficult to see how the country could consent to go to war on the 
question of sinking a foreign ship.”10
In the event, Berlin’s declaration of unrestricted submarine warfare on 
February 1, 1917, temporarily overrode public reservations about interven-
tion. Initially, newspaper editors reacted forcefully to the German declaration. 
Twelve of the twenty-one sampled newspapers condemned Germany’s decision 
in the most sweeping terms. Newspapers from the pro-Allied Eastern Seaboard 
predictably produced the most outspoken editorials in this regard. The New 
York World declared, “If Germany wants war with the United States, let Ger-
many have war with the United States.” The New York Times wrote, “[T]his 
is a declaration of war upon the trade, the rights, the sovereignty of all neutral 
nations.”11
Seven papers adopted a middle ground. Acknowledging Germany’s wrong-
doing, they either counseled caution or emphasized that Berlin’s declaration of 
unrestricted submarine warfare did not inevitably mean war. Most urged that 
nothing be done until the United States “is specifically injured,” as the San 
Francisco Chronicle put it, unknowingly prefiguring the “overt act” policy 
that Wilson would soon announce. William Randolph Hearst, the owner of 
the powerful Hearst newspaper chain, which included the New York Ameri-
can, cautioned, “Notes are better than bullets; ink is cheaper than blood, and 
if there had been more writing in Europe there would have been less fighting.” 
Two Texas dailies, the Dallas Morning News and the Houston Post, adopted 
stands similar to the Chronicle, even though their rhetoric was less sympathetic 
to Germany. Remarkably, the largest German-language U.S. newspaper, the 
New Yorker Staats-Zeitung, also belonged to this group. Far from defending 
Berlin’s latest move, the Staats-Zeitung wrote that Germany’s declaration had 
come “quite unexpected” and withheld judgment until it became evident what 
“the practical execution of the announced measure will look like.”12
Only two papers challenged the conventional wisdom that Germany had 
put itself in the wrong. Favoring continued U.S. neutrality, both argued that 
unrestricted submarine warfare was merely a reaction to, and morally no dif-
ferent from, the British naval blockade. The Milwaukee Sentinel concluded, 
“A Boston brand of Americanism that bristles up over the Belgian deporta-
tions (which we are by no means upholding) and at the same time is as meek 
as Moses when Mother England treats our cargoes and our mail sacks as if 
they belonged to a dependency does not strike one as the sort that animated 
the great ‘tea party’ in 1773 America first!” The Florida Times-Union of Jack-
sonville editorialized that “both parties of the European belligerents have been 

162 
 Chapter Eleven	
	
guilty of breeches of law heretofore accepted.” The editor pointed to his news-
paper’s long-standing advice “that our safety must consist in a proclamation 
of embargo and non-intercourse; the contrary policy has brought us nearer 
to war after a waiting of two years.” While the Sentinel’s stance reflected the 
sentiments of Milwaukee’s sizable German American population, the Times-
Union’s editorial may be regarded as an indicator of southern reservations 
about intervention.13
Given the telegram’s reference to Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas, news-
papers from these states deserve special attention. With regard to Germany’s 
declaration of unrestricted submarine warfare, their reaction differed little 
from the interventionist attitude of the Northeast press. Five out of the seven 
sampled southwestern papers denounced the German declaration strongly. 
The Tucson Citizen wondered if the remaining neutral nations were “going to 
sit idly by and let their women and children die, the victims of ruthless slay-
ers, or are they going to be drawn into the war?” The Santa Fe New Mexican 
asked, “[w]ill the United States run for cover before a bandit?”14 The similarity 
of editorial opinions from the East Coast and Southwest highlight the latter’s 
dependence on the Associated Press (AP) and United Press (UP) agencies for 
foreign news. New York–based editors dominated AP and UP, and the two news 
agencies composed their reports first and foremost for the largely pro-Allied 
newspapers of that city. Whoever controlled the New York press therefore also 
exerted strong influence over the foreign news in the rest of the country.15 The 
Southwest was no exception.
Throughout February, pro-war editors lambasted Germany’s submarine 
war—and the administration’s supposed inertia—while a smaller group of 
anti-war papers urged continued neutrality. The pro-interventionist Washing-
ton Post maintained on February 20 that the “attempt by Germany to deny 
the use of the high seas to neutral nations is essentially an act of war,” while 
the Florida Times-Union editorialized on February 25, “[W]hen two outlaws 
are fighting neither should be favored.” The sinking of the Laconia by a Ger-
man submarine on February 25 hardened the position of the pro-war parties. 
The Washington Post editor made a case for the Laconia being the “overt 
act” that President Wilson had cited earlier as a necessary precondition for 
intervention. The Arizona Republican declared, “[i]t’s War or Nothing.” The 
war opponents stuck to their guns, however, with the San Francisco Chronicle 
expressing the hope that Wilson’s drive for armed neutrality “will not lead to 
war if he can help it,” and the Florida Times-Union professing its continued 
advocacy of neutrality and comparing Germany and Britain to “two struggling 
cocks in a barnyard.”16

Arthur Zimmermann, 
German foreign secretary. 
(Courtesy of the Politisches 
Archiv des Auswärtigen 
Amtes, Berlin)
Hans Arthur von Kemnitz, 
director of the East Asian 
and Latin American 
division of the German 
foreign office. (Source: 
Bureau des Reichstags, 
Reichstags-Handbuch III: 
Wahlperiode 1924 
[Berlin: Nordeutsche  
Buchdruckerei, 1925]) 

Photograph taken after a banquet given by U.S. ambassador James W. Gerard  
in Berlin in early January 1917. Sitting, left to right: Adolf Wermuth, mayor 
of Berlin; Ambassador Gerard; Zimmermann; Reinhold von Sydow, Prussian 
minister of commerce. Standing, left to right: Unknown; Consul General Julius 
G. Lay; Lt. Cdr. Walter R. Gherardi, U.S. naval attaché; Joseph C. Grew, first 
secretary; unknown; Adolf von Montgelas, director of the North American and 
Mexican division of the German foreign office; Wilhelm von Solf, German  
colonial secretary; General Emil von Friedrich, in charge of prisoners of war; 
Isaac Wolf, president of the American Association of Commerce and Trade; 
John B. Jackson, former U.S. envoy to Cuba; unknown. (Source: James Gerard,  
Face to Face with Kaiserism [New York: Doran, 1918]) 
Otto Göppert, the German 
foreign office official tasked with 
investigating the Zimmermann 
telegram’s disclosure. (Courtesy 
of the Politisches Archiv des 
Auswärtigen Amtes, Berlin)

Johann Heinrich von Bernstorff, German ambassador to Washington. 
(Courtesy of the Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.)
From left to right: Field Marshall Paul von Hindenburg, Kaiser Wilhelm II,  
General Erich Ludendorff. (Courtesy of the Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.)

Theobald von Bethmann Hollweg,  
German chancellor. (Courtesy of the  
Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.)
Heinrich von Eckardt, German envoy  
to Mexico. (Courtesy of the Politisches 
Archiv des Auswärtigen Amtes, Berlin)
President Woodrow Wilson.  
(Courtesy of the Library of  
Congress, Washington, D.C.)

Robert Lansing, U.S. secretary of state. (Courtesy of the Library of Congress, 
Washington, D.C.)
Edward Bell, second secretary of the  
U.S. embassy in London. (Courtesy of the 
Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.)
Walter Hines Page, American ambassador 
to London. (Courtesy of the Library of 
Congress, Washington, D.C.)

Senator William J. Stone.
(Courtesy of the Library of Congress, 
Washington, D.C.)
“Colonel” Edward M. House, 
President Wilson’s advisor  
and confidant. (Courtesy of  
the Library of Congress,  
Washington, D.C.)
Frank L. Polk,  
counselor of the U.S. 
Department of State. 
(Courtesy of the 
Library of Congress, 
Washington, D.C.)

Captain William Reginald Hall,  
director of British naval intelligence. 
(Courtesy of the Library of  
Congress, Washington, D.C.)
Nigel de Grey, British cryptanalyst. 
(Source: Colin Simpson, The Lusitania  
[Boston: Little, Brown, 1973]) 
David Lloyd George, British prime  
minister. (Courtesy of the Library of  
Congress, Washington, D.C.)

Captain Guy Gaunt,  
British naval attaché  
to Washington. (Source: 
Colin Simpson, The  
Lusitania [Boston: Little, 
Brown, 1973]) 
Arthur James Balfour, 
British foreign secretary. 
(Courtesy of the 
Library of Congress,  
Washington, D.C.)

The American Public 
 163
As the editorial war of words bogged down, the public gradually became 
accustomed to the notion of continued neutrality in spite of Germany’s naval 
campaign. The pessimistic reports of Ambassador Spring Rice captured well 
the waning public anger over unrestricted submarine warfare. One day after 
the German ambassador, Johann Heinrich von Bernstorff, had informed the 
State Department of the impending submarine campaign, Spring Rice noted 
confidently that public opinion had changed much in favor of the Allies, and 
that indignation at Germany’s latest measure was greater even than it was over 
the sinking of Lusitania.17 Only one week later, he cautioned Foreign Secretary 
Arthur J. Balfour that the country “certainly does not desire war.”18 On Febru-
ary 23, Spring Rice conjured up a subsequently much-quoted metaphor to the 
effect that the situation in the United States “is much that of a soda water bot-
tle with the wire cut but the cork unexploded.” Most historians quoting this 
line forget, however, to add that the ambassador himself had serious doubts 
about the cork popping off. In the same letter, he cautioned that there would be 
no war without a major incident. In fact, he observed “an immense amount of 
indifference in the country” and concluded that it would be extremely unwise 
to count on the United States entering the war.19 By late February, Spring Rice 
had reverted to his habitual pessimism, writing to the Foreign Office that 80 
percent of the population did not want war, that the West and Midwest were 
not growing more warlike, and that the administration would face great dif-
ficulty in unifying the country for war.20
President Wilson’s interventionist advisers shared Spring Rice’s pessimism. 
William Durant, director of the General Motors Co., reported to House that 
he had met but one war enthusiast on a trip from California to New York.21 
House, in turn, told Spring Rice on February 23 that the West and Midwest 
were “difficult to get in line.”22 Four days later, Lansing wrote to a friend that 
the “psychology of the situation is the real problem which has to be solved.”23 
Such comments indicate that by the end of February, the public was divided 
and tense, rather than determined and eager to go to war. One historian has 
argued that political isolationism had crystalized precisely in response to the 
threat of intervention posed by the resumption of unrestricted submarine war-
fare.24 If so, the pendulum of public opinion was swinging toward neutrality, 
rather than war, when Americans learned of the telegram in early March.
The Zimmermann telegram made front-page news across the nation on 
March 1. At first glance, the media sensation created by its disclosure appears 
to suggest a dramatic turnaround in public opinion in favor of war. Accord-
ing to Barbara Tuchman, the telegram “brought down neutrality like a dead 

164 
 Chapter Eleven	
	
duck.”25 Indeed, the majority of editorials during this time condemned Zim-
mermann’s alliance proposal, and several declared it a casus belli. Under the 
headline “An Infamous Alliance,” Wilson’s mouthpiece, the New York World, 
editorialized, “Germany under a desperate and criminal autocracy has made 
itself the enemy of mankind, and in such circumstances there is only one course 
for a Nation to take which is strong enough to assert its own rights and which 
retains sufficient moral courage to appreciate its responsibility toward its own 
civilization.” The Los Angeles Times fumed, “There is no longer any doubt of 
Germany to make war upon us—and the proposed alliance with Mexico and 
Japan is no dream. The thing long dreaded has come. We are virtually at war 
today.” Back on the East Coast, the Boston Globe announced defiantly, “[w]e 
can never be made to bow before threats.” Altogether ten from the sample here 
concurred that Zimmermann’s alliance proposal constituted a hostile act.26
The implications of this analysis should not be pushed too far. Nine out 
of these papers had previously issued strongly worded anti-German editorials, 
in early February. Therefore, it would be inaccurate to state that the telegram 
had caused them to change their opinion. The disclosure merely pushed them 
further in the direction of intervention. Moreover, the remaining papers of 
the sample responded much less unequivocally to the news of Zimmermann’s 
Mexican alliance proposal. The typically warmongering New York Times 
uttered little surprise at the plot—“precisely what might have been expected”—
but in view of Washington’s fairly satisfactory relations with Mexico’s gov-
ernment, the Times advocated a wait-and-see policy. The Arizona Republican 
responded similarly, recalling that rumors of German plots south of the bor-
der had been in circulation for some time and therefore labeling the telegram 
“interesting rather than momentous.” In view of the impracticability of a 
German-Mexican-Japanese axis, the paper argued, “[W]e have nothing imme-
diately to fear from such an alliance not because the supposed parties would 
not in any circumstances enter it, but because in the present circumstances they 
cannot.”27
A second group of papers focused on Zimmermann’s ineptitude rather 
than the content of his scheme. For the Houston Post, the telegram revealed 
a hitherto unsuspected “degree of stupidity” in Berlin, and under the headline 
“Germany’s Proposed Suicide Pact,” the Washington Post likewise proclaimed 
the project a product of Germany’s “incurable stupidity” and “sheer lunacy.” 
In a rare expression of appreciation of the departed Ambassador Bernstorff, 
the Post observed, “One may imagine with what disgust such an intelligent 
man as Ambassador Bernstorff was forced to participate in the harebrained 
German effort to spur Mexico into an attack upon the United States in the 

The American Public 
 165
hope of recovering Texas, New Mexico and Arizona.” Far from justifying the 
telegram, the New Yorker Staats-Zeitung, too, expressed utter bewilderment at 
Zimmermann’s project—it was “beyond human comprehension.”28
A small but vocal group of isolationist papers remained unimpressed by 
the telegram and dismissed the implied territorial threat as chimerical. In an 
editorial titled “Working Up the War Fever,” the San Francisco Chronicle, the 
biggest West Coast paper, argued that the Germans had picked up the idea of 
separating Japan from the Allies from the American anti-Japanese press, and 
contended that the scheme posed no threat to the United States: “[I]t must not 
be forgotten that American newspapers and magazines have for a long time 
been printing articles, the object of which has been to create the impression 
in this country that the Japanese are itching to embroil themselves with us 
and that the Mexicans are ready to make common cause with them. . . . If the 
German Foreign Office seriously encouraged the implied intrigue, it argues a 
degree of desperation hitherto not suspected.” The Florida Times-Union, the 
staunch southern advocate of neutrality, dismissed the telegram in the same 
vein: “[T]he most insulting suspicion of all is that Japan, in alliance with Eng-
land against Germany, would attack the United States if our country should 
become involved in a war with Germany. It is unworthy of consideration.”29
A number of contemporaries and historians have claimed, as exemplified 
in the words of Friedrich Katz, that “the note had its greatest impact in pre-
cisely those areas of the United States where isolationism and thus opposition 
to U.S. involvement in the war were particularly strong: the Southwest.”30 In-
deed, most of the southwestern papers examined here condemned Zimmer-
mann’s scheme unequivocally, and some considered it a casus belli. The Santa 
Fe New Mexican editorialized on March 1 under the headline “Unmasked!”: 
“The last utterly convincing demonstration and irrefutable proof of the villain-
ous treachery of Germany has come to light. The United States of America has 
been handled by Germany like an innocent child. We have been the fatuous 
dupe of her ‘diplomacy’ while she has planned to stab us in the back. This is 
the last warning. If any considerable element of the population of the United 
States desires to parlay and vacillate longer we might as well abandon any  
attempt to be a nation. Sooner or later we are going to have to face this inter-
national desperado and criminal.” All of the examined Texas, New Mexico, 
and Arizona newspapers that denounced the telegram had displayed strong 
pro-interventionist tendencies before March 1, so their critiques after the tele-
gram’s publication do not mark a change in opinion. Their reactions were in 
line with the rest of the American pro-Allied and interventionist press.

166 
 Chapter Eleven	
	
A few southwestern papers put the telegram in a local context. The Arizona 
Republican pointed out on March 1 that “[r]econquered Arizona [is] to be 
part of Mexico’s reward for participation in dark plot.” On the same day, in 
“Dangers Nearby,” the Houston Post reminded its readers that “Texas has 
already felt called upon to use State means for the protection of its people 
against the raids from Mexico. It is not likely that should such means be 
employed again, the State troops will be as careful to avoid complications with 
the Mexican government as the United States troops have been. The fact is,  
Texas has about enough of that trouble on the border; and if the war depart-
ment desires that present policies be continued there it would be well for Uncle 
Sam to keep a sufficient number of United States troops there to maintain 
order.” The Tucson Citizen opined on March 3, “[a]ll of those who live on 
the border well know that German agents have been busy in Mexico and that 
[Mexican leader Venustiano] Carranza would only too eagerly grasp an oppor-
tunity to join a strong alliance of foreign powers against the United States.”
By and large, however, southwestern papers framed the telegram in a  
national rather than local context. The majority of the examined Arizona, 
New Mexico, and Texas dailies denounced the telegram for the same reasons 
that interventionist editorials in the rest of the nation did—for German duplic-
ity and as evidence of American naiveté. Several used it to lambast the paci-
fist movement, which hardly constituted a key element in local southwestern 
politics. Even the Houston Post, which on March 1 had warned its readers of 
“dangers nearby,” partially retracted its alert one day later: “Foreign Minister 
Zimmermann must have been utterly ignorant of conditions in Mexico to have 
assumed that the flimsy Carranza government was able to conduct a campaign 
for the reconquest of Texas, New Mexico and Arizona. While the temptation 
of money might make an eloquent appeal to Carranza, nevertheless the old 
man has not quite gone crazy.”
In general, the southwestern newspapers’ commentary on the telegram 
strongly resembled national coverage. The similarity between southwestern 
and eastern editorial opinions in particular serves, as noted above, as a reminder 
of the former’s dependence on the latter for international news, but it must also 
be regarded as evidence of southwestern editors’ reluctance to see the telegram 
as a particular regional threat.
A review of contemporary cartoons regarding Zimmermann’s alliance 
proposal confirms the findings from editorials and news reports on the tele-
gram’s shallow and transient effect on Americans. For example, a caricature 
entitled “Exploding in His Hands,” depicts a dumbfounded Kaiser Wilhelm II 

The American Public 
 167
(metaphor for Germany) with a bombshell (the telegram) prematurely going 
off in his hands (Fig. 9). The emphasis of the image is on the Kaiser’s baffle-
ment, not the threat posed by the telegram. The cartoonist notably omits any 
reference to Mexico or the notion of Mexico invading the United States.
“The Harmony Trio,” published in Britain, focuses as well on German 
ignorance, rather than the Mexican peril (Fig. 10). Zimmermann, the kaiser, 
and Field Marshal Paul von Hindenburg are singing “another little war won’t 
do us any harm”—a reference to the looming entrance of the United States 
into the conflict. Reminding readers of earlier derogatory comments about 
Americans by Papen, the German military attaché in Washington, the back 
side of their sheet music displays the sentence “War Plot Against Those ‘Idiotic 
Figure 9. William F. Kirby, “Exploding in His Hands,” World (New York), 
March 2, 1917. 

168 
 Chapter Eleven	
	
Yankees.’” Wearing evening suits rather than military uniforms, and perform-
ing on a stage, the three Germans appear comical, rather than menacing. As in 
“Exploding in His Hands,” the drawing omits any reference to Mexico.
The cartoon “Pie” depicts a burlesque kaiser offering a plate with sliced 
pie in the shapes of Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas to a clownish-looking, 
diminutive Mexican (Fig. 11). While pointing to an imposing Uncle Sam in the 
background, the kaiser says, “All y’got to do is beat the stuffin’ out of that old 
guy there an’ the pie is yours!” This illustration conveys no threat at all, but 
rather a message of German insincerity and ignorance, for it is inconceivable 
that the tiny Mexican would be capable of “beating the stuffin’” out of the 
towering Uncle Sam—and receiving the proffered reward in return.
Figure 10. “The Harmony Trio,” Evening News (London), March 2, 1917.

The American Public 
 169
Clifford Kennedy Berryman’s cartoon, likely published in the Washington 
Evening Star in early March 1917, depicts a hand inside an imperial glove carv-
ing up the southwestern United States (Fig. 12). At first glance, the illustration 
appears to cast the telegram as a direct territorial threat to the United States, 
Figure 11. “Pie!” Atlanta Journal, March 2, 1917.

170 
 Chapter Eleven	
	
with Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas marked “For Mexico” and Califor-
nia labeled “For Japan (?).” The feasibility of the kaiser’s plan is undermined, 
however, by the utterly unrealistic designation of the rest of the United States 
as “For Myself.” The point of Berryman’s cartoon is the grotesqueness of the 
telegram, not any territorial threat posed by it.
“Some Promise!” a cartoon distributed by Joseph Pulitzer’s Press Publish-
ing Company, depicts the kaiser and his potential Mexican partner-in-crime in 
a less cartoonish manner than the previous images (Fig. 13). While whispering 
conspiratorially in the ear of his prospective ally, the kaiser shows the Mexican 
the written alliance offer, “Join with Germany and you get a bit of United 
States.” Although the Mexican is pondering the German offer, the serious-
ness of the situation is undercut by the cartoon’s title—“Some Promise!”—
which emphasizes the unfeasibility, and perhaps the insincerity, of the kaiser’s 
scheme.
With “The Temptation,” the Dallas Morning News produced the only 
political cartoon of the sample that does not in some way poke fun at Germany 
and Mexico (Fig. 14). The kaiser is depicted as the devil offering an undecided 
Figure 12. Clifford Kennedy Berryman, “For Myself,” attributed to the  
Evening Star (Washington, D.C.), March 1917.

The American Public 
 171
Mexican a sack of gold in return for the states of Arizona, New Mexico, and 
Texas. As in “Some Promise!” the Mexican appears to ponder the offer seri-
ously, but here its effect is not mitigated by the title or some other humorous 
detail. Of the reviewed cartoons, “The Temptation” comes closest to casting 
the telegram as a serious territorial threat to the United States.
But even “The Temptation” appears tame in comparison with the numer-
ous American propaganda images about the “rape” of “little Belgium” (Fig. 
16) or those depicting the sinking of the Lusitania and the horrors of subma-
rine warfare (Fig. 15). While American propagandists drew liberally on these 
two subjects throughout the war, they made virtually no use of the telegram 
after March 1917. The absence of a telegram theme in American wartime pro-
paganda suggests that Zimmermann’s Mexican overture did not have a pro-
found emotional impact on the American psyche.
Figure 13. “Some Promise!” distributed by the Press Publishing Company, 
likely originally published in early March 1917.

172 
 Chapter Eleven	
	
According to Lansing, many Americans doubted the telegram’s authentic-
ity until Zimmermann admitted his authorship on March 3. He also contends 
that many anti-interventionists and pro-Germans denounced it as a British forg-
ery. Consequently, Lansing argues, Zimmermann’s admission deeply embar-
rassed and politically eviscerated those who had earlier staked their reputation 
on the telegram being a forgery.31 If this were the case, the telegram would have 
played a significant part in crushing pro-German and anti-interventionist senti-
ment. Indeed, many historians have followed the secretary’s line of argument, 
portraying the telegram as the death knell of anti-interventionism.32 Interest-
ingly, not a single newspaper from the sample dismissed the telegram outright 
as a forgery.
Figure 14. “The Temptation,” Dallas Morning News, March 2, 1917.

Figure 15. “Enlist!” poster issued by the Boston Committee of Public Safety, 
June 1915.

Figure 16. “Remember Belgium,” poster advertising U.S. war bonds, 
September 1918.

The American Public 
 175
The San Francisco Chronicle saw “no good reason to challenge the authen-
ticity of the letter signed ‘Zimmermann.’” For the Houston Post, Lansing’s 
vouching for the telegram’s authenticity “duly established” its genuineness. In 
the same vein, the Dallas Morning News commented that the “President has 
certified to the authenticity of the Zimmermann note which betrays one of the 
intrigues of the German Government against the peace of the United States. 
But such a certification could hardly have been needed by any one who has 
observed the methods of the German Government with any attentiveness.” 
The New York Times opined, “We need not recount every unverified rumor of 
German machinations in the countries south of us to show that the proposal 
of the German Foreign Minister, so far as it concerns Mexico, is precisely what 
might have been expected.”33 Other English-language papers did not even  
debate the question of authenticity, choosing to only discuss the telegram’s 
political implications.
Although the vast majority of American newspapers cast no doubt on the 
telegram’s authenticity, the British naval attaché in New York, Captain Guy 
Gaunt, reported to Hall on March 6 that “nineteen out of twenty men believed 
it was a forgery, and had not Zimmermann come out with his statement [ac-
knowledging responsibility] on Saturday [March 3], I think it would have done 
us a great deal of harm.” To illustrate this contention, Gaunt recounted his 
visit on March 2 to the select Round Table Dining Club, “the hottest stuff in 
New York in that line.” Chaired by former U.S. ambassador to Britain Joseph 
Hodges Choate, the approximately eighteen attending members that evening 
included former attorney general George Wickersham, lawyer-cum-businessman 
John G. Milburn (at whose house President William McKinley had died in 
1901), Senator Elihu Root, “and other men of that type.” In sum, the roll call 
read like a who’s who of prominent interventionist Republicans.
As the men gathered around the fire after dinner, Choate cornered Gaunt 
and bluntly denounced the telegram as a forgery. Virtually everybody present 
concurred with the former ambassador. When Gaunt pointed out that Presi-
dent Wilson had given his word to vouch for its genuineness, Choate retorted 
that a committee of representatives and senators should be given proof. Gaunt 
countered that it was unwise to give any details to “men like [anti-interven-
tionist senators] Stone, [La] Follette, O’Gorman etc.,” especially where “men’s 
lives were involved.” This jibe at the anti-war party immediately satisfied  
everyone, and the inquisition took a new turn. In a thinly veiled reference to 
Britain’s involvement, Root asked Gaunt whether he personally considered 
the telegram genuine, and Choate asked him “point blank whether [he] knew 

176 
 Chapter Eleven	
	
anything about it.” Gaunt “objected to the latter question,” and his evasive-
ness left everybody present “fairly convinced that [he] did know.” The naval 
attaché hastened to add that “information had been conveyed to me by U.S. 
authorities” (not by the British government), and he asked in apparent indig-
nation why they were cross-examining him and not the president. According 
to Gaunt, this side blow at the Democratic president closed the ranks and “car-
ried the day completely.”34
To the extent it can be trusted, Gaunt’s account casts a revealing light on 
the thinking of the conservative pro-war faction in early March. Although ex-
pressing skepticism about the telegram’s authenticity, the Round Table Dining 
Club members quickly threw their doubts overboard at Gaunt’s generic replies. 
The ease with which they came around suggests that they did not harbor sus-
picions about the telegram’s authenticity in the first place and that their main 
interest lay in discovering more about the administration’s source of the tele-
gram—a natural reflex if the British naval attaché is the guest of honor. That 
they suspected Britain’s involvement was not unusual. Numerous journalists 
and politicians knew about the British role, and Senator Stone had made exactly 
this charge the previous day in the Senate. Unlike Stone, however, Choate and 
his fellow interventionists had no problem with the notion of Britain pulling 
the Wilson administration into the war by conspiratorial means. To the con-
trary, they shared with Britain’s representatives a disdain for the isolationists 
and the president’s perennial hesitation and wavering. The Round Table dinner 
of March 2 represented a dialogue between two parties that essentially wanted 
the same thing—the United States’ entry into the war—but could not say so 
openly to each other for political reasons.35
How did German Americans respond to the telegram? Assessments of Ger-
man American reactions to the telegram have long focused on one individual, 
the outspoken German American propagandist George Sylvester Viereck.36 An 
ardent believer in the German cause and purportedly the offspring of an ille-
gitimate son of Emperor Wilhelm I, the young Viereck had joined the propa-
ganda staff of the German embassy as early as 1914. An accomplished writer 
fluent in German and English, he brought passion and literary skill to the job. 
Throughout the period of U.S. neutrality, he heralded the Germans and blasted 
the British in his outspoken weekly titled the Fatherland, which was partially 
funded by the German embassy. Viereck’s radical editorials and biased reports 
made the Fatherland unattractive to moderate Americans, and his increasing 
radicalization embarrassed the embassy. In October 1916, the German ambas-
sador informed the Wilhelmstrasse that the Fatherland “has proved a failure” 
and that he would like to free himself from this noisy publication.37

The American Public 
 177
To his own subsequent regret, Viereck took a “shoot first, ask questions 
later” approach to the telegram. On the day that American newspapers dis-
closed Zimmermann’s scheme, Viereck fired off an open letter to Postmas-
ter General Albert Sidney Burleson, newspaper publisher William Randolph 
Hearst, and leading editors across the nation. His missive left no room for 
ambivalence: “The alleged letter of Alfred [sic] Zimmermann published today 
is obviously faked; it is impossible to believe that the German Foreign Secretary 
would place his name under such a preposterous document. The letter is unques-
tionably a brazen forgery planted by British agents to stampede us into an alli-
ance and to justify violations of the Monroe Doctrine by Great Britain.”38
The American press immediately picked up on and reprinted Viereck’s 
statement on March 2, but no newspaper of significance endorsed it. Several 
years after the war, Viereck nevertheless claimed that his brash dismissal of the 
telegram as a forgery was “adopted by the Hearst newspapers, and re-echoed 
by every foe of war in the United States.”39 This statement amounted to a 
gross exaggeration, if not an outright lie. Although Hearst himself privately 
expressed doubts about the authenticity of the telegram on March 2,40 he pub-
lished an editorial on the same day in all his major newspapers urging his read-
ers to “prepare” for war, but without actually advocating intervention.41 No 
Hearst paper endorsed Viereck’s dismissal of the telegram as a British forgery 
nor did any other American English-language paper of significance.
When Zimmermann confirmed his authorship of the telegram on March 
3, Viereck was greatly embarrassed and abruptly ceased his pro-German agi-
tation. Still reeling from his public humiliation more than a decade later, he 
suggested that a large number of German Americans in early March 1917 had 
dismissed the telegram as a forgery and abruptly turned their back on Berlin 
when Zimmermann acknowledged its authenticity. In other words, many oth-
ers had shared his folly, therefore perhaps making it pardonable. “Zimmer-
mann’s admission ended pro-Germanism in the United States,” he wrote.42 
Viereck’s claim to be one of many German Americans who suddenly lost faith 
in Berlin has been taken at face value by some,43 but was his personal embar-
rassment and overnight disillusionment truly representative of German Ameri-
can reactions to the telegram at the time?
According to British historian Patrick Devlin, the “German-American 
press of course was unanimous in denunciation” of the scheme as a forgery.44 
Indeed, German Americans made up the only segment of the population that 
initially expressed a degree of skepticism about the telegram’s authenticity. On 
March 1, a prominent German American from New York called it “bunk.” 

178 
 Chapter Eleven	
	
Another opined that “it was forged for the purpose of driving this country 
into war with Germany. There are thousands of paid English propagandists 
in this country who would do anything to drive the United States into war 
with Germany and thus earn their pay.”45 These were not isolated voices. A 
careful review of coverage in German American papers reveals a complex and 
occasionally contradictory response to the publication of the Mexican alliance 
proposal on March 1 and to Zimmermann’s confirmation of its authenticity 
two days later.46
When the Associated Press released news of the telegram on March 1, 
all of the surveyed German American newspapers expressed doubts about its 
genuineness. Some did so more forcefully than others. For example, on March 
2 Der Deutsche Correspondent of Baltimore argued, “[j]udging by the choice 
of words, this document was not composed by a German official; he would 
never have permitted himself to promise possession of Texas and Arizona to 
the Mexicans.” The New Yorker Staats-Zeitung, on the other hand, merely 
noted that hard evidence was lacking. Only two papers, the Volksblatt und 
Freiheitsfreund of Pittsburgh and the Germania Herold of Milwaukee, openly 
contested the telegram’s authenticity.
While several German American editors initially withheld judgment on 
the content of the telegram, two papers conceded that American criticism of 
the alliance offer was justified—if in fact the document were genuine. Under 
the headline “Wenn!” (“If!”) the Illinois Staats-Zeitung wrote on March 2 
in English: “Germany is fighting for her national existence . . . BUT THAT 
WILL NOT BE SUFFICIENT TO PERSUADE AMERICANS THAT GERMANY 
IS JUSTIFIED IN PROPOSING AN ALLIANCE WITH MEXICO TO THE 
INJURY OF THE UNITED STATES OR THE VIOLATION OF THE MONROE 
DOCTRINE” (emphasis in the original). The Telegraph und Tribüne made the 
same point but cautioned its readers that “external and internal evidence sug-
gests that this is a malicious fabrication of British cowardice.”
Zimmermann’s admission of his authorship on March 3 provoked a range 
of reactions. One of the most despondent came from the New Yorker Staats-
Zeitung, the nation’s largest German American paper. With a nod to non-
German readers, the paper commented in English on page 1 of its March 4 
edition: “Dr. Zimmermann’s instructions to the German Minister in Mexico 
constitute a mistake so grave that it renders the situation almost hopeless.” 
With a view to German-language readers, the paper denounced the plan as 
“absurd” and “rubbish” and accused Zimmermann of “completely miscon-
struing the situation on this side of the Atlantic.” The socialist New Yorker 

The American Public 
 179
Volkszeitung issued an even more scathing assessment on March 3, asking 
sarcastically, “when did Herr Zimmermann commit a greater stupidity: back 
then, when he dispatched this narrow-minded, idiotic ‘letter’ across the ocean 
or now, as he solemnly acknowledged his authorship yesterday?”
Other papers combined criticism of Zimmermann with sympathy for cer-
tain aspects of his scheme. The Telegraph und Tribüne argued on March 7 that 
the imminence of American intervention justified Berlin’s quest for potential 
allies, although the paper conceded that Mexico would have been too weak 
for this purpose and that the telegram’s disclosure had damaged Germany’s 
case in the United States. Der Deutsche Correspondent called Zimmermann’s 
alliance offer “ridiculous” and “a bad joke.” At the same time, the Correspon-
dent expressed understanding for Germany’s attempt “to cause difficulties for 
the United States on this continent.” The Tägliche Volkszeitung, in its March 
5 edition, called the telegram an “unpardonable stupidity” but contended that 
some good might yet come of it, for the threat to their southern border would 
make Americans think twice before going to war with Germany.
Several papers that on March 1 or 2 had voiced strong skepticism of the 
telegram’s authenticity sidestepped taking a position on Zimmermann’s admis-
sion by reporting it without further comment. This group included the Volks-
blatt und Freiheitsfreund and the Abendpost. A couple of papers went so far 
as to endorse the position of the foreign secretary. On March 3, the Germania 
Herold uncritically and extensively reported Zimmermann’s depiction of the 
Mexican scheme as a fully justified protective action (gerechtfertigte Schutz-
maßnahme). The strongest endorsement of Zimmermann’s stance came from 
the Volksblatt und Freiheitsfreund on March 4. Under the headline “Right 
of Self-Defense!” the article argued that the “Germanophobe American in-
trigues” justified “German preventive measures.”
Judging from this newspaper sampling, the telegram strained German 
Americans’ goodwill for their homeland, but it did not cause a sudden collapse 
of German American support for Germany, as Viereck claimed. Like their 
English-language colleagues, German American editors dropped coverage of 
the telegram after a few days. By mid-March, references to Zimmermann’s 
Mexican scheme in the German American press had virtually disappeared. The 
debate about the telegram, as tempestuous and agonizing as it was for Ger-
man American newspapers, proved short-lived and left no discernable mark 
on their coverage of the European war.
In the final analysis, there is little evidence to support Lansing’s conten-
tion about the “profound sensation” the telegram supposedly provoked. While 

180 
 Chapter Eleven	
	
the American press hotly debated the implications of Zimmermann’s scheme, 
this controversy passed quickly and did not fundamentally alter the stance 
of any editor of significance vis-à-vis the European war. Even after Zimmer-
mann’s acknowledgment of the telegram’s authenticity on March 3, several 
English-language newspapers continued to advocate non-intervention. Like-
wise, numerous German-language newspapers retained their hope for peace, 
and a small group continued to endorse Berlin’s policies. The limited impact of 
the telegram on American public opinion is further evidenced by the fact that 
by mid-March, coverage of Zimmermann’s scheme had virtually disappeared 
from all American newspapers. When the United States went to war, few if 
any editors cared to quote the telegram as a justification for intervention. If the 
U.S. press can be taken as a reflection of public opinion, the telegram’s effect 
on American attitudes vis-à-vis intervention was ephemeral.
 

181
Chapter Twelve
war
W
hen the American press released the text of the Zimmermann tele-
gram, the director of British naval intelligence, William Reginald 
Hall, felt certain that the United States would immediately enter 
the war. On March 1, he cabled Captain Guy Gaunt, the British naval attaché 
in New York, to inquire whether Gaunt had access to a secure channel of 
communication with the U.S. chief of naval operations in the event of a U.S. 
intervention.1 Gaunt replied on the same day that Hall’s was “a very difficult 
question,” but in his opinion, the Americans were “so badly scared and aware 
of their ignorance and incompetence that if I had information and arrange-
ments to trade I believe I could shift any doubtful character.” He added that 
“[Assistant Secretary of the Navy] Franklin Roosevelt I know well and thor-
oughly trust and can speak very plainly to him.”2 The British naval men’s plan-
ning proved premature, however. It would take the United States more than a 
month following the telegram’s disclosure to join the Allies.
Why did the United States not join the Allies in early March? The basic 
answer is because the telegram failed to quash Americans’ doubts about inter-
vention. Citizens, members of Congress, and even President Woodrow Wilson 
continued to question the wisdom of going to war in spite of the alleged Ger-
man threat described in the telegram. As a report for Wellington House, the 
British propaganda arm targeting the United States, observed in April 1917, 
“Travelling through the country one discovers an extraordinary ignorance and 
confusion of thought about the war prevailing in the masses.”3 The telegram 
had left the controversy over the United States’ role in the European war 
unresolved. The closer the United States moved to the brink of war, the more 
obvious these fissures became in the fabric of American society.

182 
 Chapter Twelve	
	
President Wilson arrived neither promptly nor easily at his eventual deci-
sion to take the United States to war. Germany’s launch of unrestricted sub-
marine warfare presented Wilson with a stark choice—(1) do nothing and let 
Anglo-American relations wither as a result, which would have amounted to 
an abdication of three years of benevolent neutrality toward the Allies, or (2) 
keep the sea lanes open by force, which would inevitably lead to war. Before 
the telegram’s release, Wilson had sought to steer a middle course by arming 
American merchant ships, but the realities of unrestricted submarine warfare 
and the disclosure of the telegram on the day the armed ships bill was intro-
duced turned this policy into a step toward intervention. Even when taken 
together, Germany’s declaration of unrestricted submarine warfare in addition 
to the telegram could not convince the president of the necessity of immedi-
ate intervention. These events, however, provoked presidential decisions that 
would ultimately lead to war, despite Wilson’s persistent pangs of conscience.
A little more than a week after the press had first reported the existence of 
the telegram, Wilson took his first decisive step toward intervention. Suffering 
from a severe cold, on March 9 he issued an executive order from his sickbed 
to arm merchant vessels with navy guns and crews, regardless of the Senate 
filibuster led by Robert La Follette of Wisconsin against a bill doing the same 
and the absence of German submarine attacks on American ships. Although 
Wilson had originally intended this measure to serve as a means for support-
ing continued American neutrality, he surely realized that encounters of armed 
U.S. vessels and German submarines would inevitably lead to a clash at sea 
and eventually to war. In the event, the order had no practical significance. 
Before it could be implemented, the Germans sank four American ships—the 
Algonquin, the City of Memphis, the Vigilancia, and the Illinois—in rapid suc-
cession, on March 12, 17, 18, and 19, respectively. In the last three cases, the 
loss of American lives compounded the destruction of U.S. property.
Still, Wilson hesitated. To the despair of Secretary of State Robert Lansing, 
the president told him on March 19 that he did not consider the German sub-
marine attacks a cause for war.4 On the same day, Wilson, allegedly using stark 
language, expressed to Frank Cobb, editor of the New York World, his mis-
givings about the United States’ likely entry into war. Historians disagree on 
whether this interview actually took place,5 but it is true that the proponents 
of war deplored Wilson’s lack of enthusiasm. Theodore Roosevelt wrote to his 
friend, the interventionist senator Henry Cabot Lodge, that Wilson’s foreign 
policy was unworthy of support as it was “99 per cent wrong,”6 and Thomas 

War 
 183
Hohler of the British embassy in Washington wrote to Charles Hardinge, per-
manent undersecretary at the British Foreign Office, around the same time that 
the president was “the most agile pussy-footer ever made, and when any seri-
ous decision is taken, always tries to unload the responsibility on to someone 
else, and has been doing so this time again.”7
In mid-March, several weeks after learning of the telegram, Wilson came 
around to fully accepting the idea of intervention. On March 20, he told his 
cabinet that he abhorred Germany’s militarism on land and England’s milita-
rism at sea. When he then solicited the thoughts of his advisers, Wilson could 
hardly have expected them not to advocate intervention. As it turned out,  
every single speaker, including the pacifist Secretary of the Navy Josephus Dan-
iels, advised him to declare war on Germany. “Well, gentlemen, I think that 
there is no doubt as to what your advice is,” Wilson stated, concluding the 
meeting without voicing an opinion of his own.8 The following day, Wilson 
requested that Congress convene for a special session on April 2. Most observ-
ers accurately predicted that on that date the president would announce to the 
world his decision to go to war.9
Even at this point in time, Wilson remained a reluctant interventionist. On 
March 27, he asked his adviser Edward M. House whether he should request 
from Congress a declaration of war or tell Congress that a state of war existed  
and ask lawmakers to grant him adequate means to respond. Fearing an  
acrimonious debate in Congress, House counseled in favor of the latter. When 
Wilson went on to say that he did not think he was fit for the presidency in war, 
House privately agreed. War, he wrote in his diary, called for a man of “coarser 
fiber and one less of a philosopher” than Wilson.10 In the same vein, Secretary 
of the Interior Franklin K. Lane recorded on April 1 that Wilson went to war 
unwillingly.11 On April 2, the president reportedly “sobbed as if he [were] a 
child” over his decision to go to war.12
With the choice for war made, even if reluctantly, Wilson sought to give 
the U.S. intervention direction and meaning. His war message to Congress 
on April 2, including his famous appeal that the “world must be made safe 
for democracy,” has been hailed as one of the finest presidential orations ever  
delivered.13 As Congress listened in complete silence, the president reviewed 
U.S. policy during the period of neutrality and the various reasons for his deci-
sion to ask legislators for their concurrence that a state of war existed between 
the United States and Germany. In Wilson’s catalogue of grievances against 
Berlin, the telegram did not occupy a central position. He did, however, men-
tion it explicitly in the third part of his speech:

184 
 Chapter Twelve	
	
One of the things that has served to convince us that the Prussian autoc-
racy was not and could never be our friend is that from the very outset of 
the present war it has filled our unsuspecting communities and even our 
offices of government with spies and set criminal intrigues everywhere 
afoot against our national unity of counsel, our peace within and without 
our industries and our commerce. Indeed it is now evident that its spies 
were here even before the war began; and it is unhappily not a matter 
of conjecture but a fact proved in our courts of justice that the intrigues 
which have more than once come perilously near to disturbing the peace 
and dislocating the industries of the country have been carried on at the 
instigation, with the support, and even under the personal direction of 
official agents of the Imperial Government accredited to the Government 
of the United States. Even in checking these things and trying to extirpate 
them we have sought to put the most generous interpretation possible 
upon them because we knew that their source lay, not in any hostile feel-
ing or purpose of the German people towards us (who were, no doubt, 
as ignorant of them as we ourselves were), but only in the selfish designs 
of a Government that did what it pleased and told its people nothing. 
But they have played their part in serving to convince us at last that that 
Government entertains no real friendship for us and means to act against 
our peace and security at its convenience. That it means to stir up enemies 
against us at our very doors the intercepted Zimmermann note to the 
German Minister at Mexico City is eloquent evidence.14
The fact that Wilson mentioned the telegram explicitly only in one sen-
tence of his war address indicates that he did not regard it as a chief rationale 
for going to war. That he included it at all, however, proves that he considered 
it to be one of several reasons for going to war. Given that the war message was 
a comparatively short presidential speech—less than 3,500 words, delivered 
in only thirty-six minutes—and that long-standing American grievances, such 
as the sinking of the Lusitania and atrocities in Belgium, were not included, 
Wilson’s brief reference to the telegram cannot be dismissed as insignificant. It 
is also noteworthy that Wilson chose to conclude his litany of German plots 
with a reference to the telegram and that he called it “eloquent evidence” of 
Germany’s mischievousness. In thus structuring his accusations against Berlin’s 
plotting in the United States, he implicitly endorsed Lansing’s contention that 
the telegram was a smoking gun and confirmed allegations about a host of other 
conspiracies. As such, the telegram’s inclusion in the war message represents an 
alignment of Wilson’s thinking with that of his bellicose secretary of state.

War 
 185
If the president had eventually come to accept intervention, citing the tele-
gram as one reason for going to war, the same could not be said for all of Con-
gress. When Wilson concluded his address by asking Congress to endorse the 
status of a belligerent nation, Supreme Court Justice Edward Douglass White 
began cheering hysterically, and most of the chamber rose to its feet, screaming 
and applauding wildly.15 Senator La Follette of Wisconsin, among those who did 
not join in the celebration, stood by motionless, arms folded tight and high on  
his chest, chewing gum with a sardonic smile. Others shared his defiant stance.
When the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations convened to discuss 
Wilson’s war message on April 3, Chairman William J. Stone startled everyone 
by casting a negative vote. Once Wilson’s faithful lieutenant, Stone now refused 
to follow the president. The senator from Missouri was convinced that a cabal 
of newspapers and “big money” had pushed the United States into war, and 
he said so openly. When Stone’s colleague, Gilbert M. Hitchcock, asked for 
a unanimous vote to have the war resolution presented to the full Senate, La 
Follette objected to his request. Fuming pro-war senators could do nothing 
but adjourn for several days before voting on the resolution, as La Follette had 
made use of Senate rules established to prevent precipitous votes on important 
topics such as the one at hand.
The pro-war party lambasted La Follette for his recalcitrance. Participants 
of a local war rally responded to his name with hisses, and students from the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology burned him in effigy. A newspaper from 
Wisconsin declared his home state “disappointed, chagrinned, indignant” and 
wondered, “Is La Follette mad?”16 The Senate reconvened on April 4 in an 
angry mood, but even in the face of almost toxic adversity, the anti-war party 
did not fold. Explaining his stance, James K. Vardaman of Mississippi gravely 
doubted that “organizing the parliament of man” was worth sacrificing mil-
lions of American lives and spending billions of dollars.17 Stone bluntly declared 
U.S. involvement in the war “the greatest national blunder in history.” Repub-
lican George W. Norris from Nebraska lambasted Wilson for the pro-Allied 
nature of U.S. neutrality and denounced the war profiteers as the driving force 
behind current policy: “We are going into this war on the command of gold.  
. . . I feel we are putting the dollar sign on the American flag.”18 
Shortly before four o’clock came La Follette’s turn.19 Point by point, he 
picked apart Wilson’s war address. If Germany’s unrestricted submarine warfare 
was “a war against all nations,” why was the United States the only neutral 
nation that objected to it? If the United States intervened to make the world 
safe for democracy, how did this premise square with the fact that its principal  

186 
 Chapter Twelve	
	
ally-to-be, Great Britain, had not shown the slightest inclination to extend  
democracy to Egypt, India, Ireland, or even tens of millions of its own citizens 
who were denied the right to vote by the oligarchy that ran the country? Wil-
son’s distinction between Germany’s government and its people made little 
sense, La Follette argued, since far more Germans seemed to back the kaiser 
than Americans did the president, and so on. At 6:45 p.m., La Follette stopped 
speaking, tears streaming down his cheeks. In the audience, the journalist Gil-
son Gardner said to the reformer Amos Pinchot, “That is the greatest speech 
we will either of us ever hear.”20 Later in the evening, at 11:11 p.m., the Sen-
ate voted. Six lawmakers came out against war: Republican Asle Jorgenson 
Gronna of North Dakota and Democrat Harry Lane of Oregon joined Varda-
man, Stone, Norris, and La Follette. Of the eight absentees, Democrat Thomas 
P. Gore of Oklahoma sent word that he also would have voted “no.” When the 
clerk announced the final tally of 82 to 6, no one cheered, in marked contrast 
to the enthusiastic response to Wilson’s speech in the Capitol just two days 
earlier. As La Follette returned to his office, a man handed him a rope.
The House met to discuss Wilson’s resolution the following morning at 
11 a.m. Fred A. Britten, a Republican from Ohio, caused a ruckus when he 
claimed that 75 percent of the representatives secretly opposed the war but 
were afraid to say so openly. Regardless of whether his estimate was exagger-
ated, a number of representatives spoke out against war. Illinois Republican 
William Ernest Mason declared, “I am against this war because I know the 
people in my state are not for it.” To great and general surprise, the Demo-
cratic majority leader, Claude Kitchin of North Carolina, joined him, denounc-
ing Wilson’s failure to maintain even-handed neutrality toward the two hostile  
alliances. A parade of pro-war speakers sought to rebut the non-interventionists, 
and at one point the debate degenerated into a shouting match between the 
two sides.21
The Zimmermann telegram played virtually no role in the congressional 
debates on President Wilson’s war message. It surfaced merely once, when 
Clarence B. Miller, a pro-war Republican from Minnesota, read a supposedly 
unpublished paragraph of Zimmermann’s alliance proposal: “Agreeably to the 
Mexican government, submarine bases will be established in Mexican ports, 
from which will be supplied arms, ammunition and supplies. All [German] 
reservists in the United States are ordered into Mexico. Arrange to attack all 
along the border.”22 None of Miller’s fellow representatives picked up on his 
claim. Four days later, the German foreign office’s intelligence service reported 
Miller’s remarks to the Wilhelmstrasse, where a German official, probably 

War 
 187
Zimmermann or the department chief responsible for Mexico, Adolf von 
Montgelas, scribbled the word “rubbish” (Quatsch) in the margin.23
One of the most emotional testimonies in support of the antiwar position 
occurred when the lawmakers were asked to announce their vote. Represen-
tative Jeannette Rankin of Montana, the first woman elected to Congress, 
remained mute and virtually paralyzed when her name was called the first time 
around. On the second call, she struggled to her feet and said, “I want to stand 
by my country, but I cannot vote for war. I vote no.” Sinking back into her seat, 
she began to sob. The final tally was 373 to 50 in favor of war.24
Although both chambers of Congress had given Wilson a firm mandate, 
legislative support for American participation in World War I was by no means 
rock solid. In times of crisis, legislatures tend to rally behind their elected leader, 
so a block of fifty-six congressional antiwar votes out of a total of five hundred 
eleven, or more than one out of ten, therefore constitutes a remarkably high 
number. By comparison, only one member of Congress (Jeannette Rankin) 
would vote against war in 1941. Until the Iraq War resolution of 2002, no 
other U.S. military engagement saw as many dissenting congressional voices 
as World War I. Opposition to intervention was concentrated in several geo-
graphical areas. While the Northeast produced a single negative House vote 
(the Socialist Meyer London from New York City), more than half of the nays 
came from the Midwest, including nine of Wisconsin’s eleven representatives. 
In the South, four Democrats from Mississippi voted “no.” Several observ-
ers reported in early April that Wilson could have carried majorities in both 
houses for any foreign policy he chose. Either way, he would have offended the 
hard core of lawmakers on the opposite end of the political spectrum. 25
Public opinion regarding intervention mirrored the divisions in Congress. 
On the surface, interventionists had won a brilliant victory with the United 
States’ entry into the war. The triumphant pro-war party dominated the public 
discourse, and many Americans had contracted war fever in the heady days 
of early April. Former president Theodore Roosevelt articulated the war enthu-
siasm on public display when he observed with relief that the United States 
wasn’t “quite as anaemic” as he had feared.26 Pro-war rallies attracted thou-
sands while anti-interventionists appeared hesitant and dejected. Staunchly 
anti-war papers like the San Francisco Chronicle and the Chicago Tribune 
resigned themselves in late March to intervention. In Thermopolis, Wyoming, 
a local mob hung a man who had allegedly shouted, “Hoch der Kaiser” (long 
live the emperor), cut him down, revived him with cold water, forced him to 
kiss the American flag, and finally kicked him out of town.27

188 
 Chapter Twelve	
	
In private, American politicians and British observers expressed concern 
about the extent and depth of Americans’ enthusiasm for war. In late March, 
Secretary of State Lansing fretted about the peace movement, and Wilson 
feared a lack of support on the West Coast.28 The British ambassador, Cecil 
Arthur Spring Rice, stated bluntly, “[T]he vast majority of the country desire 
peace.”29 Also in March, Edward House and William Wiseman, the freshly 
minted station chief of the British foreign intelligence service in New York City, 
prepared an ominous memorandum for Prime Minister David Lloyd George. 
According to this document, only a slim section of the population supported 
the Allied cause while the mass of the people “wish to be entirely neutral as far 
as the European war is concerned.” By praising the administration’s “sympa-
thy” with the Allies, the memo implicitly acknowledged the growing division 
between the president and the public over the question of intervention.30
The pro-war parties’ concerns were by no means unwarranted. In early 
April, hundreds of antiwar protesters rallied in Washington, D.C. One group 
marched down Pennsylvania Avenue to the Capitol, led by a young woman 
carrying a banner with the inscription, “Is This the United States of Great 
Britain?”31 Another group ventured into the Senate Office Building, and half 
a dozen activists from Massachusetts managed to find the offices of their 
senior senator, the interventionist Henry Cabot Lodge. They insisted on speak-
ing to him, and eventually the sixty-seven-year-old politician relented. The 
ensuing meeting resulted in a shouting match, followed by fistfights between 
the pacifists and the senator and his aides. Eventually, the pro-war contingent 
badly mauled one of the pacifists. As the Capitol police carried the injured 
man into custody, Lodge basked in the glory of personally having beaten up a 
“German.”32
Meanwhile, many antiwar congressional representatives could count on 
support from their constituencies, as isolated opinion polls from North 
Dakota, Wisconsin, and Minnesota indicate. Numerous letters expressed simi-
lar sentiments to antiwar Representative Kitchin of North Carolina.33 Even 
after the United States had entered the war, Ambassador Spring Rice cautioned 
the Foreign Office, “There is no doubt that this country desires peace” and 
joined the Allies “with the greatest reluctance.”34 To what extent these dispa-
rate voices can be generalized is difficult to say, but several historians doubt 
that the majority of Americans wholeheartedly embraced war in April 1917. 
Some have argued that war enthusiasm significantly diminished between the 
time of the publication of the Zimmermann telegram and the U.S. entry into 
the war, and a recent study on this subject concludes that a sizable portion 

War 
 189
of the southern rural population resisted the war as much as many immi-
grants, German Americans, leftists, pacifists, and isolationists did.35 Therefore, 
one historian opines, the “concept of overwhelming public support for the war 
becomes less and less tenable.”36
In retrospect, the public response to the prospect of intervention appears 
confused and contradictory rather than uniformly supportive. The president 
probably could have carried public opinion either way amid this general uncer-
tainty, just as he could have done so in Congress.37 The reverse side of this 
observation is, of course, that Wilson would have faced opposition no matter 
what course he chose. The division of public opinion gave the president several 
options, but each was fraught with risk.
Unlike Wilson, most Americans failed to see the telegram as an argument 
in favor of war. If the U.S. press is an indicator of public opinion, Americans 
had by late March 1917 largely forgotten about the telegram. By that time, 
no major newspaper mentioned the telegram more than in passing or in the 
context of some other aspect of German intrigue. One of the last articles in 
a major U.S. newspaper to make the telegram a centerpiece of its reporting 
before intervention was a March 16 editorial in the pro-war, pro-Republican 
Washington Post. Under the heading “Plotting in Mexico,” the paper reported 
uncorroborated allegations about German reservists streaming into Mexico 
and attempts by Berlin to stir up trouble for the United States across Latin 
America. As to Zimmermann’s alliance offer, the Post contended, “[Mexican 
leader Venustiano] Carranza is evidently under the thumb of the German Min-
ister to Mexico, and Germany is now financing the de facto government. Herr 
Zimmermann’s attempt to make an alliance with Mexico, although exposed, 
seems to be going forward swimmingly.”38 The Post offered no evidence for its 
assertions and did not follow up on them.
To the extent that the Zimmermann telegram contributed to the United 
States’ entry into the war, its effect was twofold. First, it appears to have prod-
ded the president in the direction of war and helped to accelerate intervention, 
if only by a few weeks. Even though this had no discernible impact on the out-
come of the conflict, it held important implications with regard to the United 
States’ relationship with the cash-strapped Allies. From May to September 
1916, the British treasury spent on average $207,500,000 (more than $3 bil-
lion in 2011 dollars) each month for war-related purchases in North America, 
and by the end of the year, British reserves were heading quickly to the point 
of exhaustion.39 Fully aware of the perilous state of affairs, Prime Minister 
Lloyd George discussed Britain’s delicate financial situation with members of 

190 
 Chapter Twelve	
	
his war cabinet during their first formal meeting on December 9. Sir Robert 
Chalmers of the treasury explained that Britain was at that point spending an 
unsustainable $60 million a week (more than $1 billion in 2011 dollars) in 
the United States, so the war cabinet resolved to quietly curtail orders to avert 
financial collapse.40 U.S. intervention in early April 1917 saved London from 
bankruptcy, or at least from fully disclosing its financial plight to the United 
States, a situation that may have tilted the relationship between the two Anglo-
Saxon powers during the following years decidedly in favor of Washington.
Second, by pushing the country closer to war, the telegram helped muffle 
the controversy about intervention rather than resolve it. As a consequence, 
the United States entered World War I less unified than Britain, France, or Ger-
many had in August 1914. Also, unlike the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor 
in 1941, the telegram in 1917 failed to persuade Americans of the moral righ-
teousness of the cause. If the telegram did not gain traction with isolationists 
while at the same time pushing the administration closer to war, it contributed 
to a widening rift between the president and a large segment of the population. 
Hence, turning on its head Secretary of State Lansing’s statement about the 
impact of the telegram, it resulted not in “putting the people solidly behind the 
government,” but in further separating the administration from many of them. 
To be sure, when the United States entered the war, discussion in Congress and 
the press over the pros and cons of American participation largely ceased, but 
the underlying rifts in society by no means disappeared. A sense of patriotic 
duty muted skepticism about the war, but doubts festered beneath the surface. 
As the Florida Times-Union concluded on the day the United States entered 
World War I, “The adoption by congress of the resolution declaring that a state 
of war exists between the United States and Germany closes all discussion. 
Prior to the passage of the resolution Americans had a right to entertain any 
opinions on the subject that appealed to them, and to express their opinions. 
. . . The one object [now] is success and a debating society is not conducive to 
success.”41
 

191
Chapter Thirteen
Fallout in Berlin
N
ews of the Zimmermann telegram’s disclosure quickly crossed the 
Atlantic. On March 2, newspapers in the neutral Netherlands 
reported on Zimmermann’s scheme, and a Rotterdam-based staff 
member of the Berliner Lokalanzeiger called foreign office counselor Adolf 
von Montgelas in Berlin. The journalist relayed the published text of the Mexi-
can alliance proposal as well as the contextual comments of the Associated 
Press (AP), including Secretary of State Robert Lansing’s disinformation that 
the press could not publish all the pertinent facts for fear of endangering the 
lives of those involved in obtaining the telegram.1
The disclosure came as a complete surprise to the Germans. While British 
intelligence and the U.S. government had weeks to ponder the implications 
of making public the alliance scheme, and devise an appropriate policy, the 
Wilhelmstrasse needed to make a series of rapid decisions on how to deal with 
the political fallout. Zimmermann faced a stark choice as foreign secretary. 
He could either refute the story as a forgery and challenge the Wilson admin-
istration to back up its claim in the hope that the Americans would be unable 
to do so, or he could own up to his authorship and explain the rationale for  
approaching Mexico. Within a matter of hours, he settled on the latter. On the 
evening of the same day, Zimmermann issued a statement to Wolff’s Telegraph 
Bureau, the semi-official German news agency run by Bernhard Wolff, admit-
ting his authorship and defending the scheme:
The American press contains reports about instructions from the ministry 
of foreign affairs to the German minister in Mexico City, in the event 

192 
 Chapter Thirteen	
	
that Germany, after the proclamation of unrestricted submarine warfare, 
failed to keep the United States neutral. These reports are based on the 
following facts:
	
After the decision had been taken to begin unrestricted submarine 
warfare on February 1 we had to reckon, in view of the previous atti-
tude of the American government, with the possibility of conflict with the 
United States. That this calculation was right is proved by the fact that the 
American government severed diplomatic relations with Germany soon 
after the proclamation of a barred zone and asked other neutrals to fol-
low her example.
	
Anticipating these possibilities it was not only the right, but also the 
duty of our government, to take precautions in time—in the event of a 
military conflict with the United States—in order to balance if possible 
the adhesion to our foes of a new enemy. The German minister of Mexico 
therefore was instructed in the middle of January that in the event of the 
United States declaring war he should offer to the Mexican government 
an alliance and arrange further details. These instructions, by the way, 
expressly directed the minister to make no advances to the Mexican gov-
ernment unless he knew for a certainty that America was going to declare 
war. How the American government received information of the instruc-
tion sent by a secret way to Mexico is not known. It appears, however, 
that the treachery—and it [surely] must have been treachery—was com-
mitted on American territory.2
Contemporaries and historians alike have dismissed Zimmermann’s imme-
diate and blunt admission as unstatesmanlike and naive. Secretary of State 
Lansing called it a “blunder” in his memoirs, and Barbara Tuchman referred 
to it as a “historic boner.”3 However, the foreign secretary had little choice. 
When he learned of the disclosure, Zimmermann was in no position of know-
ing how the Americans had obtained the telegram, and he had to consider the 
possibility that the U.S. government would be able to back up its claim with 
further evidence if he denounced it as a forgery. Thus, he would be exposed not 
only as a plotter but also as a liar. Remaining silent, on the other hand, would 
have been taken as an implicit endorsement of the AP story, while accom-
plishing nothing in the way of deflating mounting public pressure in Germany. 
At British naval intelligence, Captain William Reginald Hall, who at the time 
probably grasped the complexity of the telegram better than anybody else, had 
fully appreciated Zimmermann’s decision. His admission was “by no means 

Fallout in Berlin 
 193
the stupid move that some people held it to be,” judged Hall. “He took what 
in my opinion was the wisest course.”4
Contemporaries and historians also have claimed that a clever journalist 
coaxed the foreign secretary into admitting his responsibility. According to this 
thesis, Hearst’s pro-German press correspondent in Berlin, William Bayard Hale, 
suggested to Zimmermann on March 3 either at a press conference or one- 
on-one in front of the foreign office that he should deny his involvement. Zim-
mermann reportedly responded matter of factly, “I cannot deny it. It is true.” 
The story may contain a kernel of truth in that Zimmermann did confirm his 
authorship vis-à-vis an unspecified member of the German Overseas News 
Agency on March 3. In any case, this conversation, or any other Zimmermann 
may have had with Hale or another journalist on the telegram, occurred after 
the foreign secretary’s initial statement to Wolff’s Telegraph Bureau on March 
2. Also, whatever Hale’s relationship with Zimmermann, the foreign office’s 
first response to the disclosure was the above-quoted written statement, not a 
news conference. In all likelihood, the Wilhelmstrasse chose this course pre-
cisely to avoid probing questions.5
Zimmermann’s prompt admission amounted to more than a mere acknowl-
edgment of responsibility. In fact, the foreign secretary had already begun to 
put a very careful spin on the emerging controversy over the telegram. First, 
he stressed the defensive character of the plot by claiming that he had instruct-
ed Heinrich von Eckardt, Germany’s envoy in Mexico City, to approach the 
Mexican leader Venustiano Carranza only after the United States had declared 
war on Germany. This contention was true with regard to the original telegram 
but ignored Zimmermann’s follow-up message of February 5, exhorting the 
envoy to start negotiations “even now.” In London, Hall could have easily 
called Zimmermann’s bluff by publishing the secretary’s intercepted February 
5 telegram. The director of naval intelligence had not, however, released this 
message to the Americans, so Zimmermann’s contention went unchallenged at 
the time, handing advocates of his scheme in Germany and abroad an argu-
ment for defending the plot.6
Second, Zimmermann omitted any reference to Japan. In all likelihood, 
the foreign secretary sought to focus the public debate exclusively on Mexico 
because at this point in time the Germans still held out hopes for an understand-
ing with Tokyo. On February 17, Zimmermann had instructed the German 
envoy in Stockholm to resume discussions of a possible separate peace with his 
Japanese counterpart, and nine days later, General Erich Ludendorff informed 
Chancellor Theobald von Bethmann Hollweg that a German understanding 

194 
 Chapter Thirteen	
	
with Japan was desirable from a military standpoint.7 On March 3, Bethmann 
reminded the general of earlier frustrations in negotiations with Tokyo, but 
he agreed that Berlin would be well advised to remain receptive to Japanese 
feelers in this regard.8 In the summer of 1917, Wilhelmstrasse counselor Hans 
Arthur von Kemnitz would successfully push for another diplomatic overture 
to the Japanese.9 German-Japanese negotiations petered out eventually, but 
Zimmermann achieved his short-term goal in that the public debate over the 
telegram would largely ignore the issue of Japan.
Third, even before an investigation into the affair had been initiated, Zim-
mermann, in his admission, endorsed Lansing’s suggestion that the telegram 
had been revealed to the Americans by a traitor, rather than through an insecure 
code. It amounted to a veiled attempt to blame the German embassy in Wash-
ington, and therefore Ambassador Johann Heinrich von Bernstorff. Although 
the U.S. secretary of state and the German foreign secretary were in pursuit of 
separate agendas, both men found it convenient to implicate Bernstorff. While 
Lansing sought to divert attention from the British connection, Zimmermann 
sought to find a scapegoat for the bungled plot.
On all three counts, Zimmermann’s spin helped establish a framework in 
which the telegram would be discussed for many years. The initial phase of 
this debate played out in the pages of German newspapers in March 1917 and 
was remarkably frank. By and large, the liberal and socialist press, which had 
opposed unrestricted submarine warfare, denounced the telegram. “We can-
not accept it. . . . [W]ith the methods of state policy used up to now, which are 
being so drastically illustrated by the German-Mexican affair, only a further 
intensification of the war and a further extension of the world conflagration 
is to be attained,” wrote the radical socialist Leipziger Zeitung. Of note, the 
Leipziger chose not to include Japan in its reference to the “German-Mexican 
affair.”10
The mainstream socialist Vorwärts called the telegram a “highly explosive 
bomb” that made a perfect gift to American hawks. The paper professed to 
be “astonished” by the offer of U.S. territory to Mexico and the notion of 
Carranza as mediator to Japan. It also criticized that the offer was made at a 
time when, according to the foreign office, relations with the United States had 
been excellent and admonished that the note should never have been sent if the 
diplomats could not guarantee secure transmission. The Social Democrats, the 
front-page article concluded, “decline any responsibility for this sort of foreign 
policy.”11 In the same vein, the editor Theodor Wolff, in the liberal Berliner 
Tageblatt, denounced the telegram as “naïve beyond belief” and took Zimmer-

Fallout in Berlin 
 195
mann to task in a scathing, sarcastic editorial: “No gem of statesmanship has 
been lost between Berlin and Mexico.”12
A particularly insightful critique appeared in the liberal Frankfurter Zeitung. 
First, the Frankfurter stated that it was far too early to point to any specific 
person for betraying the note, and regardless of the individual(s) responsible 
for the telegram’s disclosure, secure transmission remained the responsibility 
of the foreign office in Berlin. Second, if unrestricted submarine warfare prom-
ised to bring Britain to its knees within a few months, as Zimmermann had 
claimed repeatedly in public as well as in the note to Carranza, why would 
Germany burden itself with an alliance with Mexico as a U.S.-Mexican war 
surely would drag on for years? Third, Carranza effectively ruled only a small 
part of Mexico, diminishing his value as a potential ally. Fourth, the paper 
noted the absence of Japan in the foreign office’s official acknowledgment and 
questioned Tokyo’s willingness to switch sides in the war. Fifth, the Frankfurter 
argued that Mexico, weak and torn as it was, would be unable to tie up a sig-
nificant amount of U.S. forces. Overall, the editorial delivered a perceptive and 
damning analysis of Zimmermann’s scheme.13
Several key German officials shared the Frankfurter Zeitung’s critique. 
The chancellor’s secretary, Kurt Riezler, noted in his diary, “What rubbish  
regarding Mexico. It would have been better, even if the scheme is not betrayed, 
to do without this minor [Mexican] assistance, and let the Americans, if they 
are bent on war, deal with their strong domestic opposition” (and not provide 
the Wilson administration with an excuse for intervention). Riezler also cor-
rectly identified the scheme as originating with this “fantastic idiot” Kemnitz 
and harshly criticized Zimmermann as a spineless “yes man.”14
Hugo Phillip von Lerchenfeld, Bavaria’s representative to Berlin, was 
equally taken aback by Zimmermann’s initiative. When the chancellor and the 
foreign secretary visited him on March 20, Lerchenfeld expressed his “surprise” 
about the initiative. Zimmermann replied that the alliance would have taken 
effect only in the event of war with the United States. He further explained that 
Carranza had been seeking a rapprochement with Germany for some time and 
that it would have been irresponsible on his part not to look for ways to stir up 
trouble on the Mexican border in the eventuality that the United States joined 
the Allies. Zimmermann’s lengthy justification of the telegram left Lerchenfeld 
unconvinced. He regarded the incident as evidence that “people at the foreign 
office still cannot resist using completely unsuitable means. What have our 
operations [Agitation] in India, Ireland, Morocco and with the Senussis cost us 
in terms of men and money, without yielding any results. How badly have the 

196 
 Chapter Thirteen	
	
attacks on munitions factories in America affected public opinion there, and 
how insignificant was the result. These examples should have advised against 
an operation in Mexico.”15
Even Ernst zu Reventlow, a nationalist politician and opinion maker, ini-
tially condemned the telegram. In an editorial in the conservative Deutsche 
Tageszeitung, he wrote that the alliance proposal would have had a 95 percent 
chance of failure even if it had not fallen into American hands because Mexico 
was far too weak either to win over Japan or capture and hold U.S. territory. 
Reventlow ascribed the flawed alliance offer to a lack of expertise on Mexican-
American affairs at the foreign office. At the same time, he conditioned his 
critique by contending that only those hoping to keep America neutral would 
brand Zimmermann’s note a “policy of a fuse to a powder keg.” He thus left 
himself the option of reversing his stance in case conservative opinion swung 
behind Zimmermann.16
It is worth noting that none of Zimmermann’s critics publicly called for his 
resignation. Theodor Wolff and Colonial Secretary Wilhelm von Solf agreed 
privately that Zimmermann should have stepped down, and Lerchenfeld con-
sidered the lack of repercussions on Zimmermann’s political career “strange.”17 
Preferring graphic language, Franz Friedrich Andreae, brother-in-law of the 
liberal industrialist Walther Rathenau, asserted that “the whole nation feels 
like throwing up.”18 At the same time, moderates who had come to feel uneasy 
about Zimmermann due to his propensity of kowtowing to the military sensed 
there was no alternative to him. The leadership of the comparatively liberal 
state of Bavaria concluded that the liberal parties feared that his dismissal 
would only lead to replacement by a more conservative aristocrat.19
On the other side of the political spectrum, Zimmermann’s supporters 
jumped into action. Most of the conservative, nationalist, and government- 
affiliated press quickly endorsed the telegram. The National-Zeitung contend-
ed that “Mexico is quite capable of mobilizing five hundred thousand men in 
an emergency, while the United States has previously been incapable of raising 
even a third of that number.” The article continued, “The mood in Mexico 
during the war has been extremely pro-German. The students, for example, 
wore emblems with little pictures of Kaiser Wilhelm in their buttonholes to 
show their sympathies. The mood was such that it can be said that people were 
generally expecting an alliance with Germany.” In the same vein, the semi-
official Kölnische Zeitung wrote that it “was simply self-evident that we would 
make an effort, in the event of a war with the United States, to bring the natu-
ral enemies of the Union over to our side and to prompt them to attack.”20

Fallout in Berlin 
 197
As the nationalist press rallied behind Zimmermann, Reventlow, too, 
quickly rejoined the flock and abandoned his earlier criticism of the telegram. 
On March 6, he wrote in the Deutsche Tageszeitung that his earlier comments 
had only expressed the opinion of those “who were placing great hopes on 
the maintenance of peace with the United States.” He went on to express his 
unreserved support of Zimmermann’s Mexican alliance scheme.21
For the popular national-liberal Vossische Zeitung, the telegram served not 
so much as evidence of Zimmermann’s ineptitude as of his energy and drive. 
The real problem, the paper suggested, was not the telegram’s content but 
its detection; it mused whether the German cipher key or the document itself 
had been purloined in Washington. Ambassador Bernstorff was, the editorial 
suggested ominously, not the epitome of diplomatic wisdom, and it reminded 
its readers of the carelessness that led to the loss of secret documents by other 
members of the German embassy in Washington, notably by Heinrich Albert 
and military attaché Franz von Papen.22 The editorial fed directly into Zimmer-
mann’s strategy of shifting public discourse from the wisdom of his Mexican 
policy to the technical issue of communication security.
How well Zimmermann’s blame-shifting strategy worked became evident 
in the secret sessions of the Reichstag’s budget committee.23 On March 3, Zim-
mermann read the telegram aloud before that body. He incorrectly stated that 
Eckardt was to open negotiations only in the event of war with the United 
States and claimed that Mexico was potentially a valuable ally. He said he 
regretted the “inexplicable” disclosure of his instructions. Disregarding the 
outrage over the telegram in the American press, he argued that actually some 
good would come of its publication since the American people now knew how 
perilous a war with Germany would be for them. Whether Zimmermann really 
believed his preposterous statement or whether he counted on his audience’s 
ignorance of American affairs remains an open question.
The debate about the telegram during the budget committee session on 
March 5 demonstrated that the foreign secretary’s strategy of damage con-
trol and blame shifting had worked. Only two speakers—both Social Dem-
ocrats—came out against the telegram. Eduard David criticized the lack of 
secure communication, questioned Mexico’s ability to seize U.S. territory as well 
as Japan’s willingness to switch sides, and concluded that thanks to the tele-
gram, peace prospects with the United States were now practically zero. After 
politely thanking David for his “calm and objective” speech, Zimmermann 
launched into a lengthy explanation of his ostensible motives, concluding once 

198 
 Chapter Thirteen	
	
again that his plan had been feasible, had it remained secret, and that he could 
not be blamed for the disclosure. In a not-so-subtle maneuver to shift the de-
bate to Bernstorff’s responsibility, Zimmermann stated maliciously, “How the 
indiscretion was committed, I can today still not say. I cannot imagine that the 
Imperial Ambassador, as I read in a newspaper yesterday, gave the instruction 
to his valet in order that he might deliver it to Mexico. I cannot believe Count 
Bernstorff has acted so carelessly.” He implied, of course, precisely that. David 
ventured no reply. His colleague Georg Ledebour lamented that Mexico could 
not be considered a valuable ally. Furthermore, Ledebour pointed out, the 
offer of U.S. territory to Mexico was incompatible with the self-determination 
of peoples, as postulated in an earlier German note to President Woodrow 
Wilson.
Zimmermann did not respond to Ledebour’s brief speech, and the remain-
ing seven speakers endorsed the telegram either partially or in its entirety. Six 
of them pointed to the disclosure of the telegram as the key weakness of the 
project and picked up on Zimmermann’s red herring regarding Bernstorff’s  
alleged role. Deputy Adolf Gröber of the Catholic Center Party demanded 
that the official responsible for the telegram’s disclosure be identified and that 
the German embassy in Washington receive particular scrutiny. Deputy Sieg-
fried Heckscher of the left-of-center Progressive People’s Party flatly stated  
his belief that the German embassy in Washington bore responsibility for the 
disclosure.24
When the Reichstag discussed the telegram in an open session a few days 
before the United States’ entry into the war, the debate developed along similar 
lines. Deputy Gustav Noske of the conservative wing of the Social Democratic 
Party lamented that thanks to the telegram, “for a while the war mongers 
in the United States were able to stir the passions of the American people, 
which has so much German blood in it, to the boiling point.” Taking a jibe 
at Zimmermann, he called the telegram “not exactly a master piece.” In short 
order, Kuno von Westarp, leader of the Conservative Party, came to the foreign 
secretary’s aid. He and his political associates, Westarp explained, approved 
of Zimmermann’s initiative because the foreign secretary needed to look for 
allies in the face of “America’s threatening steps. I cannot judge the effect of 
the publication of the note negatively, as regrettable it is that it became known. 
Because of it, America was able to realize the seriousness of the situation, and 
the seriousness of our determination not to bow unconditionally to her com-
mands.” This was precisely the argument Zimmermann had used in the secret 
session of the budget committee on March 3.25

Fallout in Berlin 
 199
While Zimmermann’s dealings with parliamentarians were key to manag-
ing perceptions of the telegram, his political survival depended on the con-
tinued goodwill of his political masters, Kaiser Wilhelm II, Chancellor Beth-
mann, and General Ludendorff of the OHL. He handled all three of them well.  
The Austrian ambassador to Berlin, Gottfried zu Hohenlohe-Schillingfürst, 
reported on March 3 that the kaiser had requested the foreign secretary “to 
account for this affair, and Herr Zimmermann [did so] in a fairly long presen-
tation.” Zimmermann successfully blunted reproaches about the fallout of the 
telegram by reminding the monarch that the Mexican alliance initiative was 
in line with the kaiser’s earlier suggestions for such a scheme: “It had been his 
self-evident duty,” Zimmermann told the monarch, according the ambassador, 
“to attempt to secure Mexican aid for the eventuality of war, which the Kaiser  
himself had previously suggested to him.”26 Zimmermann’s justification 
apparently carried the day.
Having assuaged the emperor, Zimmermann on the same day proceeded 
to Bethmann’s residence, where he conferred with the chancellor and top 
foreign office officials.27 Since Bethmann in all likelihood had known about 
the telegram before its disclosure, the principal purpose of this meeting was 
probably for Zimmermann to report on his conference with the kaiser and to  
engage in damage control rather than assignment of responsibility. If Beth-
mann had wanted to fire Zimmermann over the telegram, this would have 
been an appropriate occasion to do so. The fact that the two men continued 
to work together for several months implies that Bethmann had no major dis-
agreement with Zimmermann on the issue or that he considered the telegram 
too insignificant to let his foreign secretary go.
There was no need for Zimmermann to discuss the telegram with Luden-
dorff. Since he had informed the general about the Mexican alliance offer 
before its disclosure, at least in general terms, Ludendorff should not have been 
surprised when he learned of the precise content from the press. In fact, the 
general may have welcomed it as evidence of Zimmermann’s support for unre-
stricted submarine warfare, a policy that the chancellor and foreign secretary 
had earlier criticized.28 In his memoirs, Ludendorff is careful not to mention 
Zimmermann by name when dealing with the telegram. He acknowledges the 
telegram’s detrimental effect on American public opinion but also contends 
that the United States was bound to join the Allies anyway, especially after Ger-
many’s declaration of unrestricted submarine warfare. His description of the 
telegram as an “attempt on the part of the Foreign Office to establish military 
relations with Mexico” cast the project as a reasonable endeavor. Ludendorff 

200 
 Chapter Thirteen	
	
criticized the foreign office for its lax cipher security, a point the military made 
repeatedly in the months following the telegram’s disclosure, but the gen-
eral did not take issue with the substance of the Mexican-Japanese alliance 
scheme.29 Several months after the telegram’s disclosure, Lerchenfeld, the Bavar-
ian representative, noted that Zimmermann continued to be in good stead with 
Ludendorff, a fact that would appear to imply the general’s tacit approval of 
the foreign secretary’s alliance proposal.30
When Zimmermann resigned in the fall of 1917, Wilson’s adviser Edward  
M. House congratulated Captain Hall in London on “the great work” he 
had done and expressed his belief that the foreign secretary’s “downfall 
was brought about by the exposé of his note to the German Ambassador in 
Mexico.”31 In fact, Zimmermann resigned over an entirely different issue. On 
July 19, 1917, a majority in the Reichstag consisting of Social Democrats, left-
wing liberals, and the Catholic Center Party had passed a peace resolution. 
“The Reichstag strives for a peace of understanding and the permanent recon-
ciliation of the peoples,” it announced. “With such a peace, forced acquisitions 
of territory and political, economic, or financial oppression are inconsistent.” 
The resolution flew in the face of Ludendorff’s policy of military conquest and 
territorial expansion. Although Bethmann opposed Ludendorff’s imperialist 
goals, he worked hard to block the resolution in order to maintain an outward 
facade of a united government. When it became clear that a majority in parlia-
ment would pass the declaration, Bethmann gave in to Ludendorff’s pressure 
and resigned. He was replaced with a political nonentity, Georg Michaelis, a 
Prussian aristocrat closely aligned with the supreme army command.
Zimmermann did not outlast Bethmann by much. In the summer of 1917, 
he had loyally supported Bethmann in opposing the OHL’s ever-growing ter-
ritorial demands, thus alienating the political right and the military, the very 
groups that had seen him through the aftermath of the telegram scandal. Hav-
ing earlier disappointed the liberals, the foreign secretary now found himself 
stuck between all the chairs.32 Behind his back, his opponents criticized him as 
incompetent,33 and the day before Bethmann stepped down, he had privately 
expressed his desire to resign.34 His political fate was sealed ultimately when 
a German covert action in a neutral country was disclosed and traced to the 
foreign office.
In the summer of 1917, Norwegian police had discovered a number of 
explosive-filled boxes in the homes of suspected German agents. Since the 
boxes bore the insignia of the German embassy, the Wilhelmstrasse could 
hardly deny its involvement. The ensuing investigation revealed that German 

Fallout in Berlin 
 201
intelligence had run a scheme of planting explosives on Allied ships in Norwe-
gian seaports. The findings led to the roll-up of German agent networks in Nor-
way, multiple espionage trials, a marked deterioration in German-Norwegian 
relations, and the resignation of the German ambassador to Christiania. Zim-
mermann assumed political responsibility for the affair and, almost with relief, 
stepped down as secretary of state on August 5, 1917.35 He was never again to 
hold public office.
Zimmermann’s retirement brought about a turn for the worse for Kem-
nitz, his protégé at the East Asian and Latin American division. With Zim-
mermann gone, the foreign office had reassigned Kemnitz from his cushy desk 
job in Berlin to the German-occupied territories of Russia, where he served 
as liaison with the military’s supreme command of the East. Just prior to his 
reassignment, Kemnitz made another push for the pursuit of a separate peace 
with Japan, his pet project. He would not return to the Wilhelmstrasse until 
the end of the war.36
As a retiree, Zimmermann played no political role in the turbulent days at 
the end of World War I, which toppled the monarchical system in Germany, 
saw the kaiser flee into exile in the Netherlands, and sent Ludendorff scram-
bling to Sweden. Yet the German revolution had an immediate effect on the 
former foreign secretary, because the new republican government opened an 
investigation into the causes of Germany’s defeat. Its principal legal instrument 
was the Commission of Inquiry, established by the German national assembly 
on August 21, 1919. The commission was divided into four subcommittees, 
addressing the origins of the war, opportunities for a negotiated peace, war 
measures that violated the laws of nations, and economic war measures that 
violated the laws of nations.37
The second subcommittee investigated President Wilson’s peace overtures 
of 1916–1917 and in the process subpoenaed Bernstorff, Bethmann, Zimmer-
mann, and other imperial officials. If there ever was to be a wide-ranging offi-
cial investigation into the origins of and political responsibility for the telegram, 
this would have been it. In fact, the text of the dispatch was appended to the 
transcript of the proceedings. Zimmermann’s alliance proposal never became 
a subject of discussion, however. Two eminent historians have suggested that 
this was the case because “German leaders all seem to have joined a conspiracy 
of silence about the subject in their memoirs.”38 It is an attractive hypothesis, 
but the subcommittee probably glossed over the telegram for more mundane 
reasons. For one, the subcommittee correctly identified unrestricted subma-
rine warfare, not the telegram, as the primary reason for the United States’ 

202 
 Chapter Thirteen	
	
declaration of war. This conclusion did not call for scrutinizing the telegram. 
Also, the foreign office had already identified and dealt with the official who 
originally proposed the Mexican alliance scheme, Hans Arthur von Kemnitz 
(see chapter 15). Why, then, waste precious time grilling Zimmermann on an 
issue of secondary importance?
It is also worth noting that of the four investigatory subcommittees, the 
one addressing peace overtures was the most critical of the old regime. Social 
Democrat Eduard David minced no words when accusing Zimmermann to his 
face as having been disloyal to Bethmann.39 Aware of the subcommittee’s incli-
nations, Zimmermann appeared harried and agitated on the stand, according 
to one observer. Solf, the former colonial secretary, noted that the “democrats’ 
darling” Bernstorff received much more favorable treatment than the former 
imperial chancellor, Bethmann.40 At the end of the hearings, the subcommittee 
de facto censured Zimmermann by resolving that the imperial government had 
missed an opportunity for peace by not responding more positively to Wilson’s 
peace initiative. Given the subcommittee’s critical distance from the old regime, 
its members are unlikely to have tried to protect the imperial government by 
circumnavigating the telegram. Rather, the dispatch was not central to its pro-
ceedings and therefore not investigated.41
In the following years, Zimmermann discussed his involvement with the 
telegram on several occasions. Visitors from the United States displayed a par-
ticular interest in this issue. The German American journalist and World War I 
propagandist George Sylvester Viereck, who interviewed Zimmermann some-
time in the late 1920s or early 1930s, asked the former foreign secretary why 
he had not denied his role after the American press disclosed the telegram. 
Since Viereck had immediately declared the disclosed telegram a forgery, Zim-
mermann’s confirmation of its accuracy had been a lingering source of embar-
rassment for the writer. Zimmermann told Viereck that he had had no other 
option since the “Allies had the goods on him.” Viereck was evidently not 
satisfied with this explanation, because in his subsequently published memoirs, 
The Strangest Friendship, he continued to consider the telegram as well as 
Zimmermann’s admission of its authenticity “a stupidity.”42
A few years later, Zimmermann penned a brief exposé on the telegram 
in response to the memoirs of former foreign secretary Bernhard von Bülow, 
who had portrayed Zimmermann’s handling of the scheme as naive and inept. 
Zimmermann argued that Germany’s declaration of unrestricted submarine 
warfare, not the telegram, had provoked the U.S. entry into the war. As soon 
as the German leadership had taken this decision, “all that remained for me 

Fallout in Berlin 
 203
to do was, true to Count Bismarck’s maxim, to make an attempt to create 
difficulties for our prospective new enemy. That my relevant instructions [the 
telegram] fell into enemy hands, was a misfortune, for which I cannot be held 
responsible.”43 By this time, the revelations about British wartime code break-
ing had established the fact that the telegram had been intercepted through 
cryptanalysis, not through lax security at the German embassy in Washington. 
Since cipher security fell into the purview of the foreign office, one can take 
issue with Zimmermann’s flat-out refusal to accept responsibility.
A couple of years later, the American journalist David W. Hazen inter-
viewed Zimmermann. Hazen, who visited Berlin in the summer of 1933,  
expected to find a “very stern, inflexible man,” but he was pleasantly surprised 
to meet with “a delightful gentleman, so kind and amiable that I wondered 
how Americans could have thought so harshly about him in those furious days 
of 1917.” Zimmermann let off some steam over prewar Chancellor and For-
eign Secretary Bülow but otherwise engaged in small talk and proudly showed 
Hazen his rose and vegetable gardens. After the exchange of pleasantries,  
Hazen broached the subject of the telegram. Once again, Zimmermann por-
trayed the telegram as a defensive measure in the face of the United States’ 
impending entry into the war. He compared his offer of Arizona, New Mexico, 
and Texas to the Allies’ territorial promises to Italy. Both were equally legiti-
mate, Zimmermann argued: “All fair [sic] in war and love.” Elaborating, he 
once again ascribed the scheme’s failure to the telegram’s premature disclosure, 
not to inherent deficiencies of the project:
I told my colleagues in the cabinet we should make Mexico our friend so 
it would make war with the United States and that would keep the Ameri-
can soldiers busy fighting Mexico so they could not come and fight us. I 
knew Mexico was not a strong military country, but I was sure it would 
take a very large army to conquer her and that America would have to 
keep very large patrol forces on the border. Then I thought if Mexico was 
at war with the United States, maybe America would hesitate about going 
into the war in Europe. I sent the message to Von Eckardt, our minister 
in Mexico, by code over the wireless but the English copied the message,  
deciphered the code and gave it to your government, so our plan failed.44
As the interview wound down, the discussion turned to the current political 
situation in Germany, and Zimmermann offered exuberant praise for Chan-
cellor Adolf Hitler: “He is a great political leader, and a very fine orator. And 

204 
 Chapter Thirteen	
	
since he has become chancellor, we see he is a statesman as well as a politi-
cian.” Zimmermann’s unabashed admiration of the Führer was, of course, not 
uncommon in those days, but it betrayed his intrinsic tendency to go with the 
flow, as well as a lack of political reflection and critical distance that had been 
so characteristic of him throughout his career.45 Zimmermann’s interview with 
Hazen was one of the last occasions for the former foreign secretary to go on 
the record about the telegram. Seven years later, on June 7, 1940, he died of 
pneumonia in Berlin.46 

205
Chapter Fourteen
Scapegoat
W
hen the United States severed diplomatic relations with Berlin, the 
German embassy in Washington shut down, and the ambassador, 
his family, and the German staff began preparing for their depar-
ture to Germany. On the morning of February 14, Ambassador Johann Hein-
rich von Bernstorff and his party boarded the Norway-bound Danish liner 
Frederik VIII in New York City. A large crowd of curious onlookers, journal-
ists, and personal friends of the Bernstorffs and other embassy personnel made 
for a friendly atmosphere, and the daily press published several benign farewell 
articles. Bernstorff’s final press release expressed “heartfelt gratitude” for the 
“cordial hospitality” he had received in the United States. A testimony to the 
goodwill that Bernstorff had generated in the United States, the warm send-off 
raised eyebrows in Germany, where sentiment toward the United States had 
long ago turned hostile. Bernstorff’s popularity in the United States thus played 
into the hands of Zimmermann and other German officials who were looking 
for a scapegoat in the telegram affair.1
In Halifax, Canada, where the Frederik VIII called in order to obtain 
Royal Navy clearance for its journey across the Atlantic, Bernstorff’s German 
detractors received unexpected assistance from the British. Vastly overestimat-
ing Bernstorff’s cache in Berlin, the British feared that the ambassador might be 
able to halt the United States’ slide toward war by making a last-ditch appeal 
to Berlin for accommodation with Washington after his return to Germany. 
They resolved therefore to delay his return to Germany as long as possible. 
Through a mix of lengthy examinations, personal searches, and other chica-
nery, such as the careful sifting of the vessel’s coal supplies for contraband, 

206 
 Chapter Fourteen	
	
the British held up the Frederik VIII for twelve days. They also impounded a 
trunk with diplomatic papers from the Swedish minister to Washington and 
forwarded it to the Admiralty and Captain William Reginald Hall, director of 
naval intelligence, in London.
The confiscated trunk contained perfectly legitimate Swedish diplomatic 
correspondence, but Hall quickly realized its propagandist value. He leaked 
the news of a trunk with secret documents seized on board the Frederik VIII to 
the press, and when American journalists confronted him with the theory that 
the U.S. secret service had found the telegram in this mysterious trunk, Hall 
slyly responded that he “had to admit that all the evidence pointed to the seals 
having been broken before we took the chest.”2 His ambivalent reply planted 
yet another red herring, pointing to lax security at the German embassy in 
Washington as the source of the telegram’s disclosure. Possibly as a result of 
Zimmermann’s innuendo, the kaiser himself came to believe that the telegram 
had been purloined from this box and blamed Bernstorff.3
Bernstorff first learned of the telegram’s disclosure on March 2 through a 
New York World radiogram requesting a comment from him.4 He declined to 
respond, but upon arrival in Christiania (Oslo) on March 10, he told the Ger-
man ambassador to Norway, Gustav Michahelles, that the telegram had been 
disclosed through betrayal in Mexico or through a compromised cipher, pre-
cisely the two venues through which the British had intercepted and decrypted 
the telegram.5 Fully aware of the scapegoating campaign being waged against 
him in Germany, Bernstorff tried his best to defend himself at his next stop, in 
Copenhagen, where he stayed one night with his cousin, Ambassador Ulrich 
von Brockdorff-Rantzau. Bernstorff insisted vis-à-vis Brockdorff-Rantzau that 
none of his employees at the embassy had disclosed the telegram.6 During his 
sojourn in Denmark, he also gave a candid interview to the National Tidende, 
stating with considerable accuracy, “In what way the American Government 
gained possession of these instructions I do not know: I can only assume that 
somehow or other the English or American secret police obtained knowledge 
of the key whereby the message was decoded.”7 This was not what the Ger-
man foreign office wanted to hear.
On March 7, while Bernstorff was still at sea, Counselor Hans Arthur 
von Kemnitz prepared an “interview” that Bernstorff would “grant” the cor-
respondent of the Hamburger Fremdenblatt in Copenhagen.8 There can be 
little doubt that Kemnitz, a minor official, was acting at the behest of his boss, 
Zimmermann. According to the prepared text, the German ambassador would 
justify the telegram as an act of self-defense and denounce Americans’ outrage 

Scapegoat 
 207
as hypocritical. An official from the foreign office, possibly Counselor Adolf 
von Montgelas, considered Kemnitz’s draft a bit extreme and deleted two par-
ticularly outrageous statements: a description of the telegram’s disclosure as a 
“monstrous act of betrayal” and a reference to President Woodrow Wilson’s 
“pathetic peace talk.” Although these two items did not make it into the re-
leased version of the “interview,” they reveal how the foreign office sought to 
maneuver Bernstorff into a corner.
Bernstorff could hardly refuse to sign off on the prearranged piece, but he 
let the American ambassador to Copenhagen, Maurice F. Egan, know that the 
“interview was a concoction made by his Government for him.” Egan wrote, 
“The only part intended for American consumption was his denial that he had 
been involved in any plots. Privately he denies the Carranza note. Bernstorff 
feels that he would have been candidate for the Vice Chancellorship if the note 
had not come out. He is very bitter about this. He is accused of disloyalty 
in not preventing the publication of the note. Until Washington can explain 
whether the note was obtained in Mexico or in Washington, he thinks that his 
usefulness in Germany is ended.” 9 Unfortunately for Bernstorff, the intended 
recipients of Egan’s message in Washington had no interest in coming to his 
defense.
By the time Bernstorff arrived in Berlin, on the evening of March 13, the 
whisper campaign against him had ensured his near-total isolation politically. 
One of the few officials who extended the returning diplomat a warm welcome 
was the colonial secretary, Wilhelm von Solf, who had privately condemned 
unrestricted submarine warfare as “desperado politics.” The melancholy Solf 
wielded little influence with the kaiser or the military.10 Chancellor Theodor 
von Bethmann Hollweg cordially received Bernstorff on March 14 and contin-
ued to conceal his own doubts about the submarine warfare policy for the sake 
of presenting a unified leadership to the outside world. Although the United 
States had not yet entered the war, Bethmann did not solicit detailed informa-
tion from Bernstorff about the state of American politics or political thinking. 
Instead, he raised the prospect of sending Bernstorff on an official mission to 
Sweden, perhaps in an honorable attempt to remove him from Berlin in order 
to avoid further controversy.11
Kaiser Wilhelm II kept Bernstorff at arm’s length. Accusing Bernstorff of 
democratic leanings and holding him responsible for the telegram’s disclosure, 
Wilhelm flatly denied him the Swedish mission and refused to receive him until 
May 4. By then, American neutrality was of purely historical interest, and the 
monarch used his brief one-on-one with Bernstorff mostly for non-political 

208 
 Chapter Fourteen	
	
small talk. “With his customary skill,” Bernstorff recalled, “the Kaiser steered 
clear of any attempt to enter deeply into the political problems of the hour, and 
behaved towards me, for the rest, just as affably as he had been wont to do in 
the past.”12
Bernstorff’s encounter with Germany’s strongman, General Erich Luden-
dorff, took place in a decidedly less friendly atmosphere. Ludendorff received 
the diplomat with the words, “In America you wanted to make peace. You 
evidently thought we were at the end of our tether.” To this, Bernstorff replied, 
“No, I did not think that; but I wanted to make peace before we came to the 
end of our tether.” Ludendorff then ended the conversation with a harsh rep-
rimand of the ambassador: “We, however, did not want to. Besides, it would 
not have been surprising if you had thought that we had come to the end of 
our resources. The communications you received, which I read from time to 
time, certainly led to that conclusion.”13 Disillusioned, Bernstorff accepted the  
ambassadorship to Constantinople later that year. As he told the editor The-
odor Wolff, “What else am I to do here?”14
Bernstorff served in Constantinople for about a year. In late October 
1918 he returned to Berlin, where revolution was in full swing. When the new 
German president, Friedrich Ebert, offered him the post of foreign secretary, 
Bernstorff declined, pointing to his negative reputation abroad as Germany’s 
last imperial ambassador to Washington. Instead, Bernstorff chose to end his 
diplomatic career and enter politics as a member of the left-of-center German 
Democratic Party (DDP). In 1921 he was elected to the Reichstag as a DDP 
deputy. A staunch supporter of the republic, he endorsed the government’s dif-
ficult and unpopular stance of fulfilling the enormous financial demands the 
Versailles peace treaty had placed on Germany. When right-wing extremists 
murdered the gifted industrialist and politician Walther Rathenau, a Jew and 
supporter of the republic, Bernstorff publicly expressed his disgust at the rising 
tide of anti-Semitism.15
His unequivocal pro-republicanism and stance against anti-Semitism and 
the nationalist challenge won him the lasting odium of the political right. By 
the mid-1920s, Bernstorff had few illusions about the future of German 
democracy. He termed Paul von Hindenburg’s election as president in 1925 
the “death warrant of the Republic.” Still, a couple of years later, the two men, 
who had been political opponents for many years, met in person and reached 
reconciliation. “I like a man to speak his mind with candor and clearness,” 
Hindenburg told Bernstorff, who, in turn, acknowledged and appreciated the 
president’s human traits. When Bernstorff was appointed German representa-

Scapegoat 
 209
tive to the League of Nations commission on disarmament in 1926, Hinden-
burg allegedly said, “If I had known that the Americans would get across [the 
Atlantic], I would not have decided for the U-Boat war. But I relied on the 
assurances of the Navy.”16
In 1928 Bernstorff resigned his Reichstag seat and dedicated himself full-
time to the League of Nations, whose goals he supported wholeheartedly. 
Internationalism, however, was not high on Berlin’s agenda when the Nazis 
seized power in 1933. Politically defeated, Bernstorff went into exile in Geneva, 
thus escaping certain persecution under the Third Reich. On the occasion of 
the publication of his memoirs in 1936 in Switzerland, the Nazi press dispar-
aged Bernstorff as hopelessly pro-Western and philo-Semitic. On October 6, 
1939, a few days after the German invasion of Poland, Bernstorff died largely 
forgotten and alone in Geneva. The only obituaries for him appeared outside 
Germany.17
In Berlin after Bernstorff’s return, Zimmermann worked diligently to 
freeze the ambassador out of the political process. On March 17, 1917, he 
established a commission under the counselor Otto Göppert to investigate 
the telegram’s disclosure. Göppert’s mandate focused solely on the technical 
question of communication security, not on the policy rationale behind the 
telegram. Of particular note, one of the main actors, Bernstorff, would not be 
called upon to participate in the investigation.18
The forty-five-year-old Göppert was a lawyer and a foreign service veteran 
of nearly two decades. He completed short tours of duty in Russia and Switzer-
land before the war, but spent most of his time in the legal division of the for-
eign office. After serving briefly in the army at the outbreak of war, he rejoined 
the foreign office and worked for two years at the embassy in Constantinople. 
In early February 1917, he returned to the Wilhelmstrasse, where he was  
assigned to head the telegram investigation. Göppert’s legal background as 
well as his prolonged absence from Berlin made him a suitable candidate to 
head an investigation in need of an aura of independence.19
Göppert spent less than three weeks reviewing the evidence. He conducted 
interviews with staff members of the German embassy of Washington (except 
for the ambassador), all of whom vehemently insisted that the security breach 
could not have occurred there. The embassy cashier, Josef Schmid, provided 
this valuable piece of information: “We handed all our telegrams for Mexico 
to the Western Union Telegraph Company. They collaborated closely with the 
Mexican Telegraph Company, a line which was almost completely in Eng-
lish hands.”20 Although Schmid’s testimony should have alerted Göppert to 

210 
 Chapter Fourteen	
	
the likelihood of British access to the telegram (and all other German corre-
spondence with Mexico), the investigation largely ignored it. Instead, Göppert 
quickly zeroed in on the treachery hypothesis.
As the Göppert investigation gathered steam, the foreign office inquired at 
the German mission in Mexico about its security measures. Probably based on 
information provided by Göppert, the Wilhelmstrasse on March 27 went so 
far as to inform Heinrich von Eckardt, the German envoy, that “various indi-
cations suggest that treachery was committed in Mexico. The greatest caution 
is indicated. Burn all compromising material.” An outraged Eckardt denied 
any wrongdoing, wiring back on March 30 that his assistant, Arthur Mag-
nus, had immediately burned the original telegram and that “the ashes” had 
been “scattered.” In a follow-up message on the same day, Eckardt elaborated,  
“[g]reater caution than is always exercised here would be impossible. The text 
of the telegrams which have arrived is read to me at night in my dwelling house 
by Magnus in a low voice. My servant, who does not understand German, 
sleeps in an annex. Apart from this, the text is never anywhere but in Magnus’ 
hand or in the steel safe, the method of opening which is known only to him 
and myself.” Adding more gist to the mill for those seeking to blame Bern-
storff, Eckardt added that according to Richard Kunkel, a staff member who 
had recently transferred to Mexico from the defunct Washington embassy, “in 
Washington even secret telegrams were known to the whole Chancery. Two 
copies were regularly made for the Embassy records. Here there can be no 
question of carbon copies or waste paper.” Eckardt concluded by demanding 
official exculpation or an independent judicial investigation by a German con-
sul. It speaks volumes for the foreign office’s prejudice against Bernstorff that 
Eckardt’s pathetic, denunciatory ultimatum produced the desired result. “After 
your telegram it is hardly conceivable that betrayal took place in Mexico,” 
cabled the Wilhelmstrasse reassuringly to Eckardt on April 4. “No blame rests 
on either you or Magnus.”21
Göppert submitted his final report on the same day that the foreign of-
fice absolved Eckardt.22 In it, he discussed three possibilities for the telegram’s 
disclosure: that the Americans were in possession of code 0075 (used for Ger-
man telegrams between Berlin and Washington), that they were in possession 
of code 13040 (used between Washington and Mexico), or that a traitor had 
disclosed the telegram. Although Göppert mentioned, and quickly discounted, 
the possibility of the British having provided the Americans with German cipher 
material, he did not acknowledge the possibility that the British might have 
obtained the telegram and given it to the Americans. Moreover, he considered 

Scapegoat 
 211
American knowledge of either code unlikely. Had they been able to break 
0075, he argued, the U.S. embassy in Berlin would have been in a position 
to decrypt the telegram and probably would have refused to convey it. At the 
least, the U.S. ambassador in Berlin would have informed Washington of its 
contents. The Germans were routinely intercepting and decrypting the U.S. 
embassy’s diplomatic traffic and thus knew that Ambassador James Gerard 
remained unaware of the telegram’s content.23
Göppert conceded the vulnerability of code 13040, but he considered its 
compromise unlikely. If Germany’s opponents had broken this code, surely 
they would have published other German messages encrypted in 13040 as 
well. He did not contemplate the possibility that British naval intelligence was 
even then reading virtually all of Germany’s transatlantic traffic—including 
the back and forth between the Wilhelmstrasse and Eckardt—but managed to 
keep it secret.
Lending considerable weight to Secretary of State Robert Lansing’s decep-
tive tale about the involvement of a German traitor or an American spy, Göp-
pert concluded that betrayal explained the telegram’s disclosure most convinc-
ingly. His conclusion thus left the German missions in Mexico and Washington 
to take the blame. The foreign office, however, had already formally excul-
pated Eckardt. Göppert, too, had concluded that the leak did not occur in 
Mexico because Zimmermann’s March 5 follow-up message—which did not 
go through Washington and in which he exhorted Eckardt to immediately con-
tact Carranza—had not been published. For Göppert, that the message was 
not made public was a “certain” indicator that it had not been intercepted. 
(The British had, in fact, intercepted the message, but Hall had chosen to 
withhold it.)
In Washington, on the other hand, sloppy security procedures suppos-
edly prevailed, leaving an inordinate number of mid-level embassy officials 
with alleged access to cipher material. Without saying so explicitly, Göppert 
suggested that Bernstorff’s failure to put his embassy in order had led to the 
telegram’s betrayal.24 A couple of months later, the foreign office identified 
the chief suspect—the former Washington embassy employee Richard Kunkel, 
who had earlier informed Eckardt about the supposedly lax security situation 
in Washington. When queried a month later, Bernstorff said he did not believe 
Kunkel was a traitor.25
The conclusion of Göppert’s report is particularly astounding in view of 
the fact that so much evidence collected in the course of the investigation should 
have pointed Göppert in the right direction. Bernstorff had opined as early as 

212 
 Chapter Fourteen	
	
March 10 that cryptanalysis, not betrayal, was at the root of the problem. The 
former ambassador stuck with his conviction and repeated it in his memoirs 
and before a postwar investigative committee, several years before the role 
of British naval intelligence would become public knowledge. Yet Göppert 
declined to interview Bernstorff in the course of his investigation.26
Truly mind-boggling is Zimmermann’s private admission to Hugo Phil-
lip von Lerchenfeld, the Bavarian representative in Berlin, that code 13040 
was probably compromised and that the foreign office would have preferred 
to change it but had been unable to do so due to the war.27 In other words, 
the foreign office was fully aware how risky it was to send the telegram to 
Mexico via Washington, where the local embassy was bound to use 13040 
for transmission to Eckardt. The director of the foreign office’s cipher bureau 
wrote in a memorandum shortly after the publication of the telegram that he 
did not possess definitive proof that 13040 was compromised, but in the same 
breath he warned that Allied intelligence worked feverishly to break German 
ciphers.28 Since Göppert himself conceded (and stated in his report) that 13040 
was breakable if sufficient encoded messages were amassed, the director’s 
statement that the Allies were working on breaking Germany’s codes should 
have given him further pause.
Other sources also pointed toward compromised communications. The 
German military and its intelligence agencies had picked up hints early in the  
war suggesting the vulnerability of Berlin’s wireless communication. On Septem- 
ber 23, 1914, a military intelligence officer had reported that German radio 
messages were being intercepted on a daily basis. He cited information from  
captured enemy records as evidence.29 Another military intelligence officer 
reported on November 3, 1914, that papers found on a captured British officer  
indicated that the British were able to decrypt encoded German wireless mes-
sages.30 A few days later, a German spy reported on November 17, 1914, that 
the French were capturing German messages by way of an interceptor mount-
ed on the Eiffel Tower and that they were in possession of a German naval 
code book (Marinesatzbuch).31 
In March 1917, Sektion IIIb (military intelligence) informed the foreign  
office in two reports that the British were in possession of the German diplo-
matic code used in the Netherlands, that the Americans could read German 
encrypts, and that “the German plan regarding Mexico has been discovered 
by ‘the intelligence and enterprising spirit of the English.’ The German secret  
political code is no secret for England.”32 Even the Swedish government 
warned the Wilhelmstrasse on March 13, 1917, that its codes were not secure. 

Scapegoat 
 213
After the war, Kemnitz claimed that by the time the Wilhelmstrasse had dis-
patched the telegram, “there was a suspicion that the American government 
was in possession of our cipher.”33
Why was Göppert’s report so widely off the mark? For one, he apparently 
fell hook, line, and sinker for Hall’s and Lansing’s carefully placed red herrings 
that pointed toward betrayal, as opposed to a broken code. Also, the evidence 
in support of a compromised code was fragmentary and dispersed. Presum-
ably working mostly by himself and conducting his investigation in rapid time, 
Göppert may simply have failed, in modern parlance, to “connect the dots.” 
It is remarkable, however, that his settling for betrayal rather than a compro-
mised code dovetailed so well with Zimmermann’s domestic agenda. This may 
not be a mere coincidence. After all, Göppert was Zimmermann’s subordinate 
and would implicate his boss at his own peril. Given his lack of professional 
independence, it would have been naturally tempting for Göppert to support 
Zimmermann’s well-known opinion, especially since only circumstantial evi-
dence pointed the other way.
The Göppert investigation had no effect on foreign office communications 
security, even though the compromise of the German codes should have been 
apparent by then even to a casual observer. Göppert had considered it “unlike-
ly” but not inconceivable that the Americans had broken code 13040. Various 
German officials, including Bernstorff and Zimmermann, had conceded this 
possibility as well. Even if codes 13040 and 0075 had been secure in the past, 
the foreign office ought to have inferred that they were now compromised, 
regardless of how the Americans had obtained the telegram. Anybody who 
could get their hands on the encrypted text of the telegram sent from Washing-
ton to Mexico would have been able to compare it with the clear text and thus 
break code 13040. Moreover, the Germans had committed the cryptologist’s 
“capital crime” of sending the same message in two different codes, 13040 
and 0075. Since the older code was compromised, the same would be true for 
the newer code as well, because any foreign cryptanalyst with access to the 
telegram encoded in 0075 would be able to decrypt it, and thus break the code, 
by comparing it with the already broken 13040 code. This was exactly what 
Room 40 had done. The telegram thus provided the British with a Rosetta 
stone for the decryption of Germany’s diplomatic traffic in the future, should 
the foreign office continue to use their compromised codes.34
By and large, the Wilhelmstrasse failed to draw appropriate cryptanalytic 
lessons from the telegram’s disclosure. The foreign office considered code 0075 
secure and continued to use it. While the diplomats partially withdrew code 

214 
 Chapter Fourteen	
	
13040, they by no means wholly discarded it. The foreign office informed Eck-
ardt in Mexico on March 23 that “cipher 13040 is compromised and must not 
be used for secret communications,”35 but two weeks later, Göppert’s report 
suggested that 13040 was secure. Göppert also correctly described another 
code, 5950, as compromised, yet in mid-March diplomats began to replace 
code 13040 with 5950.36 Evidently, the Wilhelmstrasse had no standing policy 
on communications security.
The German army and navy, which used foreign office channels to com-
municate with their overseas agents, were so dismayed by the sloppiness and 
confusion that they began to intercept and decipher German diplomatic tele-
grams exchanged by radio between Madrid and Berlin and present them to 
the foreign office to prove that diplomatic communications security was in 
dire need of reform.37 Alas, their efforts were in vain. After reviewing the com-
munications security situation as late as September 1917, Kemnitz feebly con-
cluded, “[o]f course, it would have been warranted to change the ciphers used 
by the overseas missions after the betrayal of the Mexico dispatch. To this 
hour this has not been feasible; however, attempts to find a way to do this are 
continuing.”38 In other words, the foreign office realized that the enemy was 
eavesdropping on German communications, but the diplomats proved unable 
or unwilling to do anything about it. With most overseas missions physically 
out of reach for Berlin, introducing new codes and ciphers may have been a 
daunting task, but if the Wilhelmstrasse considered this course of action 
impractical, it should at least have alerted its diplomats abroad that any of 
their Germany-bound messages were prone to enemy interception and decryp-
tion. In the absence of such basic precautions, the next diplomatic disaster was 
just a question of time.
On September 8, 1917, the British Reuters news agency in Washington 
released three telegrams sent by Karl von Luxburg, German minister to 
Argentina, to the German foreign office in May and July of that year.39 In the 
messages, Luxburg exhorted Berlin to either spare Argentinean ships bound 
for Europe, force them to return home, or sink them “without a trace” in 
order to conceal German responsibility. He also described the Argentinean 
deputy foreign minister as a “notorious ass and an anglophile.” Luxburg had 
communicated with the Wilhelmstrasse with the help of Sweden’s pro-German 
government, which had agreed to transmit encrypted German messages from 
Berlin to Buenos Aires and vice versa. Room 40 had broken Sweden’s dip-
lomatic code, and since the Wilhelmstrasse and Luxburg used compromised 
codes for their exchange, British cryptanalysts routinely decrypted German 

Scapegoat 
 215
messages embedded in Swedish telegrams. Just as he had done in the case of 
the Zimmermann telegram, Hall handed the Luxburg telegrams to the State 
Department for disclosure, with the caveat that Britain’s role not be mentioned 
in public. He also alerted the Americans to the existence of the so-called Swed-
ish roundabout (see chapter 7). This revelation would later fuel speculation 
about the telegram having taken this route.
Hall showed an excellent sense of timing with the release. Relations between 
Berlin and Buenos Aires were strained over the sinking of an Argentinean ship 
by a German submarine, and Sweden was just two weeks away from parliamen-
tary elections that threatened to topple Stockholm’s pro-German, conservative 
government. When the Swedish press published the Luxburg telegrams, the 
government felt compelled to admit its part in the affair and drew considerable 
fire from the opposition for its clandestine collaboration with Berlin. The ensu-
ing elections duly swept the conservative party out of office, replacing it with 
a pro-Allied coalition of liberals and social democrats who quickly closed the 
Swedish roundabout, thus further limiting Berlin’s options for communicating 
with its overseas missions. Consequently, Germany’s transatlantic telegraphy 
became slow and cumbersome. Although the Germans could rely on a power-
ful radio in Mexico, it was primarily a receiving station. For transmission of 
communications to Germany, Eckardt had to go through the German embassy 
in Madrid, but it could take messages more than a month to reach Berlin.
With regard to Argentina, the Germans dodged a bullet. The Wilhelm-
strasse informed the Argentinean government that Luxburg had expressed a 
personal opinion not shared in Berlin. The foreign office recalled the minister, 
a brash, swashbuckling career diplomat, and the Argentinean government was 
sufficiently assuaged to remain neutral for the remainder of the war, contrary 
to British and American hopes. In his post–World War II memoirs, an unre-
pentant Luxburg maintained obstinately that the Argentinean ships he referred 
to “had to disappear so they would do no mischief.” The crews—“although 
they were assorted riff-raff”—should have been spared, he wrote, without  
explaining how submarines with standing orders to fire without warning 
would have accomplished this feat. He stubbornly proclaimed to be proud 
of having served “as a target on behalf of my people” and at the same time 
accused the foreign office of gross negligence for its continued use of com-
promised codes. As unqualified as Luxburg may have been for his posting in 
Buenos Aires, his last statement contained more than a kernel of truth.
In the wake of the Luxburg scandal, the foreign office charged Kemnitz, 
of all people, with conducting a damage assessment. In his final report of 

216 
 Chapter Fourteen	
	
September 24, the counselor cynically dismissed American outrage at Sweden’s 
telegraphic assistance to Germany as “mere bluster.” Washington had acted no 
different than Stockholm, he argued, when Wilson had agreed to put the State 
Department’s network at Berlin’s disposal to convey messages to Bernstorff 
during 1916–1917. Kemnitz failed to mention that the Americans’ offer was 
made for the express purpose of peace negotiations and that the foreign office 
had crassly abused it by sending war instructions to Bernstorff and Eckardt. 
Kemnitz conceded that it “would have been smarter” on Luxburg’s part to 
express himself more cautiously, especially in view of the preceding telegram 
debacle, but he quickly blunted this mild criticism by asserting that Luxburg 
had merely voiced a personal opinion, and at any rate, British diplomatic cables 
certainly contained equally strong language. Once again, the foreign office  
appeared not so much concerned about what its officials had said but rather 
how the information was disclosed.
In Luxburg’s case, the Wilhelmstrasse realized that its messages had been 
compromised through cryptanalysis, not through betrayal or theft. Kemnitz 
surmised that disclosure of the telegram in January 1917 had provided the 
Americans with the cryptanalytic tools to attack subsequent encrypts. Although 
he continued to ignore the possibility of British involvement, and clung to the 
notion that a traitor had disclosed the telegram, his conclusions were closer 
to the truth than Göppert’s had been. Kemnitz ended his report by conceding 
that Germany’s overseas diplomatic codes were probably compromised, but 
for technical reasons could not be substituted for the time being.40
Given the Wilhelmstrasse’s lackadaisical attitude regarding communica-
tions security, it comes as no surprise that the foreign office did not completely 
overhaul its codes until after the war. By this time, London had come to take 
access to German diplomatic messages virtually for granted, and British code 
breakers sounded almost piqued at the sudden closure of their chief source 
of information. Alastair Denniston, director of Britain’s postwar cryptanalytic 
organization, wrote in his memoirs, “Although Germany was a beaten nation, 
nothing appeared in the terms of Armistice concerning their diplomatic ciphers. 
Consequently their mission came to [the] Paris [Peace Conference] provided 
with entirely new books and methods. We obtained all the traffic between 
Paris and Berlin but failed to produce anything of any value. How could we? 
Germany knew well we had read her diplomatic traffic for the last three years 
(e.g. Zimmermann Letter), and no one prevented Germany from replacing her 
compromised codes by the safest methods she could devise.”41

217
Chapter Fifteen
Aftermath in Mexico
M
aintaining secrecy about the alliance proposal outlined in the Zim-
mermann telegram was a key element of the plan, so its premature 
disclosure in the American press sank any chance of success the 
scheme may have had. Despite the telegram’s publication, German, Mexican, 
and Japanese officials still discussed the proposal at some length. In accordance 
with Zimmermann’s instructions of February 5 to begin negotiations imme-
diately, on February 20 Heinrich von Eckardt, Berlin’s envoy in Mexico City, 
communicated the German proposal to Cándido Aguilar, foreign minister for 
the government of Venustiano Carranza. Aguilar appeared sympathetic but 
remained non-committal. Four days later, the foreign minister asked a lowly 
employee of the Japanese embassy, Kinta Arai, how Japan would respond to 
a U.S. intervention on the Allied side. Arai replied that Japan would probably  
remain in the Allied camp. Aguilar had asked Arai for his personal opinion, 
but on February 27, the subject came up again in a conversation between the 
two men; this time Arai reported officially that Japan would stick with the  
Allies regardless. Interestingly, Aguilar then told Eckardt that he had talked 
with the “Japanese chargé d’affaires,” not a lowly employee. He did not 
convey Arai’s unpromising reply to Eckardt.1
While withholding Japan’s lackluster response to Aguilar, Carranza’s gov-
ernment asked Eckardt on or shortly after February 20 whether the Germans 
were in a position to provide them with arms.2 This question, coupled with 
Aguilar’s lack of commitment to a German alliance, his misleading claim about 
discussing the subject with the Japanese chargé d’affaires, and his failure to 
report Arai’s negative response to Eckardt, suggests that Aguilar regarded the 

218 
 Chapter Fifteen	
	
possibility of an anti-American alliance with Germany chiefly as a bargaining 
chip, not a realistic option for Mexico. He sought to extract maximum con-
cessions from Germany in return for a minimal, at most, commitment from 
Mexico.
On March 2, Aguilar told the Japanese chargé d’affaires disingenuously 
that Mexico had never received Zimmermann’s alliance offer. The government’s 
official newspaper, El Pueblo, printed an article to the same effect, stymieing 
discussion of the telegram in the Mexican press. The Japanese foreign minister, 
Ichiro Motono, replied that Japan had not received such a proposal either. He 
added that at any rate, driving a wedge between Japan and the United States 
would be a futile endeavor.3
Whether Carranza learned of the telegram through the press in early 
March or earlier through Aguilar is unclear, but like his foreign minister, the 
president came to view Germany’s ostensible interest in closer cooperation as a 
bargaining chip for arms and funds, rather than a viable policy option. When 
he formally declined Zimmermann’s offer on April 14, Carranza was careful 
to leave open a backdoor to future talks: “If Mexico is pulled into the war  
regardless, we will have to see. The alliance has been frustrated but will become 
necessary at a later point in time.” In the same breath, Carranza affirmed his 
continued interest in ammunition and money. An eager Zimmermann under-
lined the first sentence of Carranza’s message.4
Meanwhile, German officials were busy discussing Mexico’s request for 
material support. On March 3, shortly after the telegram’s disclosure in the 
press, the foreign office conveyed Carranza’s request for arms to Captain Ernst 
von Hülsen, the director of Sektion P, the general staff’s sabotage department. 
Five days later, Hülsen reported the willingness of the supreme army command 
to provide 30,000 repeating rifles with 9 million rounds of ammunition; 100 
machine guns with 6 million rounds of ammunition; six mountain cannons, 
7.5 cm caliber with 2,000 shells each; and four howitzers suitable for moun-
tain transport, 10.5 cm caliber with 2,000 shells each.5
Several historians have noted that this limited amount of military hard-
ware would have been woefully inadequate to put Carranza’s forces in a posi-
tion of taking on the United States. Therefore, they considered Hülsen’s offer 
variously “symbolic” or “fraudulent” in that it did not correspond with the 
“generous” support promised in the telegram.6 At first glance, this assessment 
may seem accurate, but it is worthwhile bearing in mind that the military had 
not been involved in the preparation of Zimmermann’s alliance scheme and 
can therefore not be blamed for delivering less than the telegram had promised. 

Aftermath in Mexico 
 219
Also, Hülsen’s proposal was comparable in scale to German material support 
provided for similar covert operations during the war. Whenever the Germans 
clandestinely supported anti-Allied insurgents—be it in India, Ireland, or the 
Middle East—their material assistance was only limited. In late 1916, for  
example, Hülsen envisaged the one-time delivery of 30,000 rifles and 10  
machine guns to Irish rebels to spark renewed unrest.7 Presumably, Carranza’s 
arms were to come from the same stock. Sektion P’s limited commitment in 
Ireland, Mexico, and elsewhere was rooted in logistical challenges as well as 
political calculations. Throughout the war, the OHL remained focused on the 
European theater. Military intelligence considered covert action overseas a use-
ful supportive measure, but always subordinate to the exigencies on the eastern 
and western fronts.
Even though limited in scope, Zimmermann found Hülsen’s offer politi-
cally valuable because it demonstrated the military’s support of the Mexican 
scheme. Should the proposal fall apart, Zimmermann could still point to the 
fact that Germany’s most powerful faction had supported his project. Indeed, 
on April 4, Hülsen relayed a message from General Erich Ludendorff to Hans 
Arthur von Kemnitz, who had become the Wilhelmstrasse’s point man for  
covert action in Mexico. In it, the general formally endorsed military support 
for Mexico against the United States. It was the stamp of approval that Zim-
mermann had sought.8
Hülsen realized that shipping war materiel across the Atlantic posed  
serious logistical problems, so he advised that Mexico be supplied with funds 
to purchase arms in Japan or South America instead.9 Interdepartmental dis-
cussions between Sektion P, the foreign office, and the admiralty staff ended 
with an endorsement of Hülsen’s recommendation, and in March the Germans 
dropped the original plan of shipping arms to Mexico in favor of sending only 
money.10 Kemnitz and Hülsen then hammered out the details, and on March 
28 presented a proposal, subsequently approved by Ludendorff, to provide 
Carranza with 30 million marks for arms purchases in Japan and to strengthen 
German influence in Mexico.11 It is unclear how much, if any, of this money 
reached Carranza’s coffers. The German treasury had earlier been reluctant to 
provide money for Sektion P’s operations and recommended that the general 
staff not be given a free hand since earlier covert action schemes had produced 
dubious results.12
Sektion P eventually tasked Vincent Kraft, one of its agents (Vertrauens-
mann) in Mexico, to travel to Japan to purchase arms for Carranza. Kraft, a 
man apparently of Dutch extraction, was an ill-fated choice for this mission. A 

220 
 Chapter Fifteen	
	
former Krupp employee, he was “living the high life” in Mexico, according to 
one source. In addition to being a big spender, he was also a double agent who 
provided the British chargé d’affaires, H. Cunard Cummins, with a wealth 
of information on German intelligence activities. According to Cummins, 
“Money is [Kraft’s] principal object.” Some of the intelligence he provided to 
the British appears to have been exaggerated or far-fetched, for example, that 
Germany had offered Carranza 300,000 marks (rather than 30,000) and that 
German agents had orders to burn Seattle, destroy elevators, wood yards, and 
airplane factories in North America, and spread “sedition amongst negroes in 
the United States and against recruiting.”
Much of Kraft’s information proved fairly accurate, however. Inter alia, 
he gave the British the names or cover names of at least two fellow Sektion P 
agents, Albert Delmar and Dr. Gehrmann; particulars about German sedition 
plans for India; information on German communication methods, including 
types of invisible inks, secret codes, and the local Swedish legation’s role in 
relaying German messages; details about German penetration of the local U.S. 
embassy and the Mexican telegraph office; and his own instructions for his trip 
to Japan. When the Germans submitted another proposal for closer coopera-
tion with Carranza in the summer of 1917, Kraft informed the British about 
it as well. In October 1917, Kraft left Mexico, probably headed straight for 
the Dutch East Indies, rather than Japan. He certainly never purchased any 
weapons for Mexico.13 Only in July 1918 did another Sektion P agent record 
that “apparently Kraft never reached Japan.” Thus, Carranza never received 
his Japanese arms.14
British penetration was not the only problem for Germany’s secret ser-
vices in Mexico. As the United States geared up for war, a number of U.S.-
based German secret agents slipped across the border into Mexico. This influx  
potentially strengthened Berlin’s covert capacities south of the border, but the 
agents took with them many of the problems that had previously plagued Ger-
man intelligence in the United States, in particular, the absence of a clear chain 
of command and, consequently, intense interservice rivalries. The competition 
between military and naval intelligence was personified in Sektion P’s principal 
agent, Kurt Jahnke, and the admiralty staff’s principal agent, Anton Dilger, 
who went by the alias of Albert Delmar.15 Both arrived in Mexico in the spring 
of 1917. Their rivalry appears to have been personal as well as professional 
in nature. With a doctoral degree in medicine from Heidelberg University, the 
American-born Dilger was urbane, suave, and darkly handsome, while the 
poorly educated Jahnke was sallow and pockmarked, sported a memorably 

Aftermath in Mexico 
 221
vulgar gold front tooth, and spoke “German like a barber.” Both men had a 
long record of covert action in the United States. While operating a germ labo-
ratory in the Chevy Chase neighborhood of Washington, D.C., Dilger had cul-
tured anthrax and glender bacilli designed for Europe-bound cattle and horses. 
For his part, Jahnke had run a string of daring sabotage operations on the West 
Coast from his headquarters in San Francisco. As Jahnke and Dilger plotted 
against one another in Mexico, Eckardt sought authorization from Berlin to 
have both men subordinated to himself, but Hülsen rebuffed him.16 Eckardt 
repeated his request in February 1918, but his plea once again fell on deaf 
ears.17 German operations were further complicated by Eckardt’s pursuit of 
his own conspiracies. Fearing that Carranza might buckle under U.S. pressure 
to join the war against Germany, Eckardt in April 1917 initiated secret talks 
with several Mexican generals to overthrow Carranza.18 In the end, the scheme 
proved unnecessary, as Carranza managed to keep Mexico neutral throughout 
the war.
Things threatened to get out of hand when a desperate Dilger vowed to 
make a last-ditch effort to bring Mexico into the war. Under the impression 
of ever-increasing American troop levels in Europe, Dilger proposed to “sacri-
fice” Mexico by persuading General Plutarco Elías Calles to attack the United 
States across the border from the state of Sonora.19 By this time, however, the 
foreign office had concluded that Mexico was far more valuable to Germany 
as a partner in peace than in a futile war and explicitly rejected Dilger’s scheme. 
Undersecretary of State Wilhelm von Stumm explained to Major Hans 
Maguerre, a sabotage expert of Sektion P, that he doubted Dilger’s ability to 
trigger a U.S.-Mexican war, but the Wilhelmstrasse’s chief concern was of a 
political nature: “In an armed conflict between Mexico and America, the for-
mer would sooner or later succumb. The responsibility for this conflict, and its 
outcome, would be assigned to us. Consequently, not only our friendship with 
Mexico would be shattered, but we would give America a reason for dominat-
ing Mexico, a country important to us as an eventual source for raw materials. 
From a political and economic perspective, therefore, a war between Mexico 
and America is against our interests.”20
With Germany on the brink of defeat in Europe, Sektion P endorsed the 
foreign office’s view, and the German intelligence services wound down their 
operations in Mexico. Jahnke received orders to discontinue his activities,21 
and Dilger returned to Europe, where he died shortly thereafter, in Spain, dur-
ing an influenza epidemic.22 Eckardt did not remain in Mexico much longer 
than Jahnke and Dilger. When the war ended, the U.S. government successfully 

222 
 Chapter Fifteen	
	
pressured the Wilhelmstrasse in recalling him on account of his involvement 
with the telegram and other German conspiracies in Mexico. In early 1919, 
an anxious Eckardt traveled with his wife and three children across the United 
States to New York for embarkation to Europe. An agent of the Department of 
Justice, William Neunhoffer, accompanied the party. To Neunhoffer, Eckardt 
appeared tense and dispirited due to his professional downfall. “I was once 
ambitious,” the disillusioned former envoy told Neunhoffer, “but now I am a 
man without ambition.”23 In a formal statement to Neunhoffer after he had 
reached New York, Eckardt sought to downplay the significance of the Zim-
mermann telegram and his involvement in German-Mexican alliance talks:
The Zimmermann note has undoubtedly been an interesting document, 
but it has never been more than a document, without the slightest practi-
cal consequences. With this all is said. . . . I am no more connected with 
the Zimmermann note than a bootblack. The instructions were addressed 
to me but they were of no consequences. It is not possible for me or any-
one who knows the conditions to suggest such an impracticable thing. If 
I at that time could have answered Berlin on that suggestion which was 
contained in the Zimmermann note, I would have said it was impossible 
or impracticable.24
Eckardt had also sought to downplay the telegram and his role in it in 
conversations with Neunhoffer during the trip from the Mexican border to 
New York:
Mr von Eckhardt [sic] thinks he should not be blamed by the United 
States for the Zimmermann note, because it was simply a note of instruc-
tions from the Berlin government addressed to him, and was in no way 
inspired by him; in fact he claimed if he had been able to communicate 
with Berlin he would have advised his government that the scheme was 
impracticable and impossible. He further declared that the inception and 
exposure of the note terminated the plans enunciated, and that he could 
have only considered carrying out of instructions if he could have been  
assured of Japan’s friendship. In another conversation he stated to me 
that if the note had not been exposed he was not prepared to say what he 
would have done in furtherance of the plan suggested.
Of note, Eckardt appears to have been completely oblivious as to how the 
telegram had fallen into American hands. Neunhoffer reports that Eckardt

Aftermath in Mexico 
 223
was most anxious to learn how the Zimmermann note was secured and 
several times asked me (with the statement if I could not answer him he 
would not expect me to do so) how the Zimmermann note was inter-
cepted, being particular[ly] anxious to know if it came into the possession 
of this government in the course of ordinary investigation (which would 
include, according to his interpretation “legitimate theft”) or whether its 
exposure was the result of traitorous conduct of a German officer, adding 
if a German had sold it for money it must have been an officer, and that 
he suspected a certain German officer. I stated to him I was not in a posi-
tion to answer his query.25
Eckardt returned to the Wilhelmstrasse, where he briefly headed the Mexi-
can section. In the early 1920s, the foreign office sent him on various occa-
sions as a delegate to international conferences. He retired in 1926, having 
reached the mandatory retirement age of sixty-five for federal employees.26 
Eckardt’s wife passed away in the early 1930s, adding to his growing isola-
tion and feelings of loneliness, but he kept in sporadic contact with his former 
boss, Zimmermann. When David Hazen interviewed Zimmermann in 1933, 
the former foreign secretary asked the American journalist whether he would 
like to meet with Eckardt. A delighted Hazen sought out the former German 
envoy to Mexico and found a small man, enfeebled by years of sorrow. Bitter 
and lonesome, the former envoy eked out an existence in a one-bedroom flat 
on the fifth floor of a Berlin apartment building. When Hazen expressed his 
condolences on the recent death of Eckardt’s wife, the latter replied sadly, “Ah, 
yes, she is gone, money is gone, all is gone.” He was happy, however, to have 
a visitor and eager to chat.
Eckardt still had strong feelings about the telegram. Unlike Zimmermann 
and Kemnitz, he dismissed the German alliance proposal as foolish, but sug-
gested improbably that a “stronger man in the government than Dr. Zimmer-
mann wanted it sent, and so did the war party—and the note went forth.” To 
Hazen’s surprise, Eckardt still had not learned that the British had intercepted 
and decrypted the telegram, although the third volume of the biography of for-
mer American ambassador Walter Hines Page had disclosed this information 
in 1926. Instead, Eckardt blamed Ambassador Johann Heinrich von Bernstorff 
for his alleged failure to forward the telegram in a secure manner to Mexico. 
He vehemently insisted, “He is finished, he is out! Bernstorff is a sick man, he 
is finished!” As the interview wound down, Eckardt pleaded plaintively with 
Hazen, “I hope you can come back and chat with me again; it’s lonesome 
here.” He died on March 3, 1944.27

224 
 Chapter Fifteen	
	
Eckardt’s fall from grace proved to be another man’s luck, at least for 
a short period. Adolf von Montgelas, the foreign office’s Mexican division 
chief until 1917, was one of the few German officials involved in the telegram 
who received a promotion after the war. During the conflict, conservatives had 
viewed him with suspicion, due to his comparatively liberal political outlook 
and his French background. When the United States entered the war, his mar-
riage to an American rendered his position in Berlin untenable, so he asked 
for a transfer to the German legation in Berne, Switzerland, where he worked 
as counselor on American affairs throughout the remainder of the war. His 
personal liabilities metamorphosed into assets with the ascent of the new Ger-
man republic. When the foreign office recalled Eckardt, Montgelas emerged 
as Berlin’s natural choice as a replacement. His professional competence and 
familiarity with Mexican as well as American affairs made him the ideal per-
son to be envoy to Mexico, and in spring 1920 the Wilhelmstrasse appointed 
him Germany’s official diplomatic representative there. Unfortunately for Ger-
many, Montgelas was unable to hold the post for long. In the spring of 1924, 
he suffered a nervous breakdown and returned to Berlin. There, he died on 
April 23, 1924, barely fifty years of age.28
Few of the German players involved in the telegram fared well after the 
war, and the same was true for several of their Mexican counterparts, includ-
ing Carranza and his rival, Pancho Villa. As his presidential term drew to a 
close, Carranza fell out with General Álvaro Obregón and other influential 
members of his regime. Following an unsuccessful assassination attempt by 
one of Obregón’s aides, Carranza was forced to flee Mexico City. As he made 
his way to Veracruz, forces of his political rivals killed him on May 21, 1920. 
Obregón stepped in to claim the presidency for himself. Pancho Villa did not 
survive much longer than his archrival. Politically sidelined and with his forces 
decimated, Villa ended his insurgency in 1920, but many a Mexican retained  
a grudge against the former revolutionary. On the morning of July 20, 1923, 
seven men gunned down Villa and five of his followers in Parral, in the prov-
ince of Chihuahua. Villa’s assassins were never apprehended, but evidence 
points firmly in the direction of domestic enemies he had made during his 
ruthless campaign.29

225
Chapter Sixteen
A German Reckoning
W
ith Germany’s military fortunes in stark decline, Berlin on October 
3, 1918, approached President Woodrow Wilson with the intent 
of exploring possible peace terms. Wilson, however, made it clear 
that he considered the current German government an autocracy and there- 
fore not a suitable partner for negotiations. Shortly thereafter, the political  
leadership in Berlin installed a liberal government under a new chancellor, 
Prince Max of Baden, to transition the nation from war to peace. Prince Max 
appointed Colonial Secretary Wilhelm von Solf as his foreign secretary. Though 
not a revolutionary, Solf hailed from a liberal Berlin family and was decidedly 
less conservative than most of his peers in the imperial leadership. One of the 
first to congratulate him on his new job was former ambassador Johann Hein-
rich von Bernstorff.
Solf did not wait long to make his mark. Bent on pursuing negotiations 
with Wilson, he was not coy about his opinion that General Erich Ludendorff’s 
dismissal would make a positive impression in the United States. Not surpris-
ingly, his suggestion earned him the wrath of the military establishment.1 Solf 
followed up his critique of the military with an effort to clean his own house, 
the Wilhelmstrasse. On October 25, 1918, the Nürnberger Nachrichten, a  
northern Bavarian newspaper, published an anonymous article about the 
Zimmermann telegram, identifying Hans Arthur von Kemnitz as its author. 
Kemnitz, the piece stated, had suggested the idea of the alliance proposal to 
Zimmermann, who, in turn, had dispatched the telegram without prior consul-
tation with Chancellor Theobald von Bethmann Hollweg. The article revealed 
considerable insider knowledge of the foreign office. Since only a very small 

226 
 Chapter Sixteen	
	
circle of officials knew of Kemnitz’s role, the author or source of the story was 
most likely one of the few foreign office officials directly involved in the origi-
nal decision to draft and send the telegram.2
Regardless of whoever authored or inspired the piece, the foreign office 
quickly took note. Kemnitz had left Berlin in December 1917 to serve as for-
eign office representative to the German military administration in the Baltic 
territories. Shortly after the armistice of November 11, 1918, he returned to 
the Wilhelmstrasse,3 and a few days later, on November 22, Solf queried him 
about his part in the telegram affair. Kemnitz sent Solf a written defense of his 
actions a couple of days later. While not outright denying his authorship, he 
pointed out that Adolf von Montgelas had been adviser for Mexican affairs 
at the time. Kemnitz then essentially reiterated Zimmermann’s earlier defense 
by insisting that the alliance offer per se had been a sound idea: If the Mexi-
can leader Venustiano Carranza had accepted the German proposals, Mexico 
could have tied up significant U.S. forces, with Germany incurring few obliga-
tions. If Germany had succeeded in splitting Japan from the enemy alliance, the 
war “could have been brought to a satisfactory conclusion 2 ½ years ago.” If, 
on the other hand, Carranza had declined the offer, no harm would have been 
done. Only through its disclosure, Kemnitz averred, did the telegram damage 
Germany’s cause. He placed responsibility in this regard squarely on his former 
colleague Montgelas, who, Kemnitz claimed, bore responsibility for sending 
the telegram via Washington and thereby exposing it. He, Kemnitz, would 
have sent it via Stockholm, “a route that was entirely secure back then. It fol-
lows that I bear no guilt at all regarding the telegram’s disclosure.”4
The time for subterfuge and scapegoats was, however, over. Solf instructed 
Edmund Rhomberg, an expert on British affairs, to check the foreign office  
records for verification of Kemnitz’s various claims. On November 29, 
Rhomberg submitted a devastating report. The telegram’s original draft and 
the instructions to encrypt it in code 13040 were in Kemnitz’s handwriting, 
Rhomberg wrote. Responsibility for using an obsolete code therefore rested 
with Kemnitz, not with Montgelas. Rhomberg also pointed out that Kemnitz 
had suggested sending the Mexico dispatch by U-boat to Washington and 
thence to Mexico, and he concluded that this method would have equally  
exposed the telegram on its way from Washington to Mexico City. Rhomberg 
dismissed Kemnitz’s claim to the effect that a separate peace or alliance with 
Japan was a viable option. As the world had learned through the Bolsheviks’ 
publication of secret tsarist documents, Japan had immediately informed the 
Allies of Germany’s overtures. In short, the Rhomberg report exposed Kemnitz 

A German Reckoning 
 227
as a liar with bad political judgment who sought to blame one of his colleagues 
for his own mistakes. Solf acted promptly. On December 11, 1918, the foreign 
office forced Kemnitz into temporary retirement [einstweiliger Ruhestand].5
Kemnitz spent the following decades seeking reemployment at the foreign 
office. In April 1919, he spotted a key official, Edmund Schüler, in the corri-
dors of the Wilhelmstrasse, but could not muster the courage to talk to him in 
person. A few days later, he wrote Schüler a lengthy letter, requesting an inter-
view and explaining that under normal circumstances, his years-long service 
would have guaranteed him a diplomatic post in Europe, but that he would 
now “in the changed circumstances” be content to serve in China in order to 
help rebuild Germany’s position in the Far East, although this task would be 
“twice as painful for someone who had witnessed Germany’s earstwhile posi-
tion of power” there.6 Schüler did not respond, and Kemnitz reiterated his 
request a couple of months later. This time, he added his willingness to serve 
even under the new, “socialist” (that is, Social Democratic Party of Germany, 
SPD) government, repeated his desire for a post in Beijing, and asserted that he 
had never been a proponent of an annexationist policy in China—an improb-
able claim for someone who had come up with the idea of offering pieces of 
the United States to Mexico.7
While expressing sympathy for Kemnitz’s situation, Foreign Secretary 
Hermann Müller responded unequivocally that the Wilhelmstrasse could not 
afford to assign foreign posts on the basis of seniority alone and that “your 
stance regarding questions of foreign policy in the past precludes your assign-
ment to a leading position in the foreign service.”8 Three years later, Kem-
nitz assailed the Wilhelmstrasse again, this time complaining that his early 
retirement had unduly diminished his pension. In a typed, four-page letter, he  
detailed his case and asked for a nominal promotion in order to receive a 
higher pension.9 By 1923 the brief revolutionary phase of the Weimar Republic 
had ended, and it was perhaps a sign of the changing times that the foreign 
office did not dismiss Kemnitz’s request out of hand but forwarded it to the 
treasury, along with the plea to examine it favorably.10 Still, nothing came of 
it. Also, for the time being, Kemnitz had dropped the matter, for he had turned 
his eyes to politics.
As soon as he was dismissed from the Wilhelmstrasse, Kemnitz joined 
the right-of-center German People’s Party (DVP), which was led by wealthy 
notables but lacked a significant mass following. As a long-standing member 
of the respected diplomatic service, and with the coveted “von” before his 
surname, Kemnitz impressed the party leadership, who selected him to run in 

228 
 Chapter Sixteen	
	
his hometown, Frankfurt an der Oder, as a candidate for the national assem-
bly in 1919. He did not get a seat, but the party nominated him again for the 
upcoming Reichstag elections in 1920.11 Kemnitz’s candidacy attracted press 
scrutiny, and barely four weeks before election day, the liberal Vossische Zei-
tung published “The Envoy v. Kemnitz: A Strange Candidacy,” a scathing edi-
torial by Georg Bernhard. In it, Bernhard reminded readers that Kemnitz had 
recently been identified as the “spiritual father” of the Zimmermann telegram 
and therefore bore some share of responsibility for the U.S. declaration of war 
on Germany. He pointed out with gusto that Gustav Stresemann, leader of the 
DVP, had been one of the fiercest critics of the telegram during the war and 
expressed his bewilderment at the DVP’s decision to nominate Kemnitz.12
Clearly jolted and concerned about the political fallout, Kemnitz responded 
a few days later with a lengthy article in his hometown paper, the Frankfurter 
Oder-Zeitung. He reiterated the arguments he had used vis-à-vis Solf in 1918 
virtually verbatim. While omitting his earlier accusations against Montgelas, 
Kemnitz maintained that the alliance proposal to Mexico and Japan had been 
based on sound political strategy; only its disclosure had led to international 
embarrassment. Last but not least, the foreign office could have averted the 
telegram’s disclosure had it only adopted Kemnitz’s suggestion to send the 
message via Stockholm.13 Quoting Kemnitz’s statement at length, Bernhard 
dismissed it as a “harrowing document of the state of mind of German diplo-
macy” during the war. He pointed out that any document could potentially 
fall into the enemy’s hands in wartime, and even if the telegram had reached 
Mexico without being compromised, Carranza’s shaky, faction-ridden govern-
ment might have leaked it anyway. Kemnitz’s statement, Bernhard concluded, 
therefore betrayed naiveté as well as ineptitude, and his candidature “sadly” 
demonstrated that little had been learned from wartime mistakes.14
The Vossische Zeitung, an influential newspaper, appealed to the liberal 
and conservative middle class that Kemnitz needed to sway in order to get 
elected. In his response to Bernhard, distributed by the DVP, Kemnitz adopted 
a conciliatory tone, praising Bernhard’s editorials on foreign policy and point-
ing to the many positions he had in common with the Vossische Zeitung, par-
ticularly their shared goal of collaborating with Russia, rather than the Western 
powers.15 Somewhat assuaged, the Vossische Zeitung stood by its dismissal of 
the Mexican-Japanese alliance as absurd but henceforth significantly tempered 
its attacks against Kemnitz. Since votes were cast for parties, rather than indi-
vidual candidates, a damage assessment of Bernhard’s attack is difficult. On 
election day, June 6, the DVP tripled the number of its deputies, easily sweep-
ing Kemnitz into the Reichstag. 

A German Reckoning 
 229
The exchange did not go unnoticed among Reichstag deputies. When the 
parliament debated the issue of establishing economic and political relations  
with Soviet Russia, Kemnitz delivered a bombastic speech in favor of repudiat-
ing the Treaty of Versailles and obtaining more favorable terms for Germany. 
Uttered by any other right-of-center politician, the speech would have been 
unremarkable since fulminations against Versailles were a common staple of 
nationalist rhetoric. Kemnitz’s involvement in one of imperial German diplo-
macy’s major wartime blunders, however, offered the political Left an oppor-
tunity. During a parliamentary debate, Rudolf Breitscheid of the Unabhängige 
Sozialdemokratische Partei (USPD), the radical left independent social demo-
crats, recalled Kemnitz’s authorship of the telegram and claimed that he “even 
appeared to be proud of” it. Breitscheid’s pugnacious concluding remarks to 
Kemnitz are worthwhile quoting in full as they invoke a larger issue, namely 
concerns regarding the Weimar Republic’s failure to break with the imperial 
past and the republic’s supporters’ despair over this troublesome political real-
ity: “It is characteristic that people who played such a calamitous role during 
the war, now speak up and issue guidelines for the German government’s future 
foreign policy. Yes, because you have money to run for parliament, because 
you have a nice suit and because you belong to the upper ten thousand who 
still feel entitled to holding the fate of the German republic in their hands.”16 
As Breitscheid fired his broadside, deputies from the SPD and USPD ap-
plauded frenetically. In his pathetic response, Kemnitz vainly sought to turn 
the tables. After complaining about Breitscheid’s ad hominem attack, Kemnitz 
reiterated his well-worn defense: The Mexican-Japanese project made sense, 
only disclosure had compromised the scheme. Since he had advised a differ-
ent route for the telegram, he could not be held responsible for its disclosure. 
Predictably, this line of argument cut no ice with his opponents. “Exhilaration 
from the left,” as the official transcript puts it, repeatedly interrupted Kemnitz. 
His fellow party members, on the other hand, remained silent. At some point, 
a deputy shouted, “A stupid idea, this dispatch.” When Deputy Georg Lede-
bour, who had criticized the telegram in the Reichstag in 1917, interjected, “It 
was the greatest stupidity ever committed by a German government,” Kemnitz 
lost his cool and yelled back, “The greatest stupidity that was ever committed 
by a German government was the order for demobilization of the army by 
the people’s representatives”—that is, the political Left. The debate ended in 
“great turmoil and shouting from different sides.”17
Kemnitz’s star in the DVP firmament soon began to wane. He rarely 
spoke up in parliament, and when he did, even his political allies expressed 

230 
 Chapter Sixteen	
	
astonishment at his lack of nuance and expertise. He annoyed other DVP depu-
ties by needlessly prolonging caucus deliberations with empty rhetoric, and  
his parliamentary colleague Siegfried von Kardorff bluntly called him an “ass.” 
In 1924 a faction within the DVP unsuccessfully attempted to remove him from 
the party list for the upcoming elections. As the DVP grew disenchanted with 
Kemnitz, he gravitated further toward the political Right. In 1923 he joined a 
militant veterans’ association, the Stahlhelm (Steel Helmet). He also began lob-
bying vigorously for a political alliance between the DVP and the monarchist 
German National People’s Party (DNVP) but ended up being the only member 
of his party to support a DNVP vote of no confidence for the new government, 
of which his own party, the DVP, was a part. It was the final straw. Kemnitz  
officially switched to the nationalists, and although DVP members pleaded  
with him to resign his seat in parliament, he took his mandate with him. The 
DNVP received him with some reservations, which turned out to be justified.18
Kemnitz spoke up only six times in parliament for his new party, and refer-
ences to the telegram remained a sure way to derail him. When he attacked the 
foreign policy of the government in 1927, Hermann Müller, an SPD deputy 
and former foreign secretary, sarcastically denied “such an exceptional dip-
lomat as the author of the Mexico dispatch, Mr. von Kemnitz” the right to 
speak about foreign policy. Piqued, Kemnitz responded with a personal attack 
on Müller and went on to reiterate, again, that the alliance scheme itself had 
been commendable and that he could not be held responsible for the telegram’s 
disclosure. While his nationalist colleagues kept utterly silent, Social Demo-
crats chuckled and cheered. Kemnitz became more and more agitated, finally 
bursting out, “Deputy Müller is one of the leaders of the Social Democratic 
Party. (Hear! Hear! And laughter on the left.) It is responsible for Germany’s 
collapse. (Shouts from the Social Democrats.) It commits treason even on the 
platform of the Reichstag. (Inquietude among the Social Democrats—bell of 
the president.) Denigrations from such people will be a high honor for me 
in the future.” At this point, the Reichstag’s vice president called Kemnitz 
to order and gave Müller the opportunity to make a personal comment. A 
bemused Müller concluded the debate by saying, “I am especially grateful to 
Mr. Deputy von Kemnitz for giving me the opportunity, through his personal 
comments, to ascertain before this high house that the charge of diplomatic  
ineptitude was completely justified. (Very well! And exhilaration among the 
Social Democrats.)” 19 During Reichstag elections in 1928, the DNVP sus-
tained steep losses, and Kemnitz failed to hold on to his parliamentary seat.
Deprived of his income as a deputy, Kemnitz quickly resumed his quest 
for reemployment at the foreign office.20 When the Wilhelmstrasse declined his 

A German Reckoning 
 231
request once again,21 Kemnitz embarked on another lengthy campaign to enlist 
prominent politicians to lobby for his cause.22 Those he solicited included for-
eign office officials, like Ernst von Weizsäcker; prominent DNVP politicians, 
such as Kuno von Westarp, Friedrich von Winterfeld, and Alfred Hugenberg; 
Kemnitz’s former boss, Arthur Zimmermann; the exiled kaiser’s brother, Crown 
Prince Friedrich Wilhelm; and even President Paul von Hindenburg. While 
the crown prince wholeheartedly supported Kemnitz’s request, advising the 
foreign office to reactivate “such a patriotic and excellent man like Kemnitz,” 
others expressed markedly less enthusiasm. Zimmermann wrote meekly to 
the Wilhelmstrasse that “the hapless Kemnitz is pursuing me” in his quest for  
reemployment. Zimmermann recommended a review of Kemnitz’s request but 
was keen to wash his hands of the matter once and for all: “A reply to me [by 
the foreign office] is completely unnecessary.”23
In his campaign, Kemnitz put forth a variety of reasons for his reemploy-
ment. In a six-page letter to the foreign secretary, dated 1930, Kemnitz men-
tioned the difficult situation he found himself in financially, having to support 
his new wife and his only son through university. He also repeatedly justi-
fied his participation in the telegram affair and insisted that his reemployment 
would only be fair because he was allegedly sent into early retirement due to 
his patriotic leanings. State Secretary Konstantin von Neurath, himself a man 
of strong national convictions, explicitly rejected this contention: “this is not 
true,” he scribbled in the margins of a letter by a Kemnitz supporter, arguing 
this point.24 Time and again, the foreign office rebuffed Kemnitz, who showed 
up repeatedly in person at the Wilhelmstrasse to plead his case. Foreign office 
officials found him increasingly difficult to deal with. One of them described 
him as “extremely bitter” and “not open to any reasoning.”25
In January 1933, President Hindenburg—following the recommendation 
of Franz von Papen, his principal adviser and former military attaché to Wash-
ington—appointed Adolf Hitler chancellor of Germany. Ludendorff, in one of 
his more lucid moments, recognized Hindenburg’s ominous choice for what it 
was. “By appointing Hitler Chancellor of the Reich,” he wrote his former boss 
in a prophetic telegram, “you have handed over our sacred German Fatherland 
to one of the greatest demagogues of all time. I prophesy to you this evil man 
will plunge our Reich into the abyss and will inflict immeasurable woe on our 
nation. Future generations will curse you in your grave for this action.”26
Kemnitz, on the other hand, was delighted at the National Socialists’ 
ascendancy as the new regime appeared to offer him the opportunity of rejoin-
ing the foreign service. In 1933 he unleashed another avalanche of missives 

232 
 Chapter Sixteen	
	
to the Wilhelmstrasse and assorted politicians, begging for reemployment. He 
argued that he should be reemployed since he had been let go in 1918 due to 
his “patriotic beliefs” and in order to “make space for the beneficiaries of the 
new [republican] system.”27 In a lengthy letter to the foreign office, dated Sep-
tember 22, 1933, Kemnitz went out of his way to highlight his long-standing 
right-wing credentials, denigrate the “Novemberlings” (a reference to the revo-
lution of November 1918) and “red traitors” and demonstrate his affinity to 
the Nazis: His son, he pointed out, was a platoon leader in the Sturmabteilung 
(SA, Storm Troopers or Brownshirts). Kemnitz also stated in unambiguous 
terms what he thought of Hitler’s rise: “Nobody was happier than me about 
the victory of the national movement [the Nazis], and that they cleaned house 
and sent the Novemberlings and political appointees [of democratic parties] 
packing.” In the same letter, he wrote that he had already applied for member-
ship in the National Socialist German Workers’ Party (NSDAP).28 These lines 
are worthwhile bearing in mind in light of statements Kemnitz would utter 
after World War II about his alleged opposition to the Nazi regime.
As the Wilhelmstrasse continued to rebuff him, Kemnitz solicited the help 
of the arch-Nazi Wilhelm Kube, governor of Berlin Brandenburg. As a member 
of the SS (Schutzstaffel), Kube would work briefly at the Dachau concentra-
tion camp in 1940. He would also serve as governor (Generalkommissar) of 
Nazi-occupied Belarus during the war, overseeing the large-scale extermina-
tion of the local Jewish population. Despite Kube’s impeccable Nazi creden-
tials, his pleas on behalf of Kemnitz to Hitler and his deputy, Rudolf Hess, led 
nowhere.29 In December 1934, the Wilhelmstrasse advised Kemnitz to “bury 
his hopes” of ever rejoining the foreign office.30 Still, Kemnitz did not let go. In 
July 1939, he asked another high-ranking foreign office official for a meeting 
to discuss his case. The letter was signed, “Heil Hitler.” The official politely 
declined any assistance.31
Germany’s invasion of Poland on September 1, 1939, prompted Kem-
nitz to give it one last shot. On September 2, he showed up in person at the 
Wilhelmstrasse to volunteer his services, signing his request once again, “Heil 
Hitler.”32 The foreign office replied that due to the war, they had earmarked 
him for possible reemployment,33 but apparently the Wilhelmstrasse never  
revisited the issue. As Europe descended into the horrors of World War II, even 
the obstinate Kemnitz had to acknowledge that his quest for reemployment 
had come to an unsuccessful conclusion.
By the end of World War II, few Germans remembered or showed an 
interest in the Zimmermann telegram, the more so as most protagonists by 

A German Reckoning 
 233
1945 had passed away. Not so for Kemnitz, who was as keen as ever to dis-
pense political advice, even if there was hardly anyone listening. In May 1945, 
he authored “Are We Liberated?” a lengthy memorandum on Germany’s 
political situation. Written in English and probably intended for an American 
acquaintance, the piece is stunning testimony to Kemnitz’s self-delusion. The 
pamphlet begins by claiming that he and his “political friends have detested the 
Nazis from the beginning” and goes on to interpret recent history essentially 
as a conspiracy against Germany: the rise of the Nazis occurred “because our 
nation felt to be suddenly attacked in 1914, cheated by Wilson’s 14 points in 
1918, unjustly robbed by the treaty of Versailles, and economically ruined by 
the socalled [sic] inflation.” The present Allied occupation of Germany meant 
that “[w]e change the interior servitude against the foreign.” Kemnitz then 
recommends reintroduction of the imperial constitution, rather than a “pure 
democracy.” The military, he argues, stood morally unblemished, and should 
therefore remain intact as an institution.34 In several subsequent memoranda, 
addressed to no one in particular, Kemnitz drives home and refines these points 
in stilted, grandiloquent prose: the German army was the epitome of heroism; 
only Hitler introduced a “southern German,” criminal spirit into the armed 
forces; the Allies were responsible for starting World War I and therefore for 
Hitler’s rise and his misdeeds. In a remarkable act of self-deception, he unabash-
edly portrays himself as an “anti-fascist” who had sought to overthrow the 
Nazis during the war.35
As Kemnitz was never called upon to account for his activities during the 
Third Reich, and since he wrote most of his memoranda for his own edifica-
tion, one must conclude that he earnestly believed in the veracity of his various 
utterances. His political delusion reveals him to be exactly what his politi-
cal opponents during the Weimar Republic accused him of being: a narrow- 
minded, spineless, arch-conservative nationalist who was neither able nor  
willing to learn from past mistakes, be they his own or those of the govern-
ment he served. He was certainly unaware of the irony inherent in one of the 
observations he expressed in his 1945 memorandum, when he opined, “Politi-
cal sense . . . is not the strongest part of our character.”36 It is tempting to read 
this statement as a characterization of its author. Kemnitz died in Freiburg on 
August 1, 1955.37

234
Chapter Seventeen
Hall’s Intelligence legacy
W
orld War I transformed the British secret services and their role in 
the state. For four years, British intelligence recruited and trained 
thousands of staff members in espionage, counterespionage, and 
cryptanalysis. Due to personnel reduction after the war, a good number of 
these spies rejoined civilian life, but many stayed in touch with their former 
colleagues. Class and education strengthened these informal connections, as 
British intelligence officers typically shared an elite background, had attended 
the same boarding schools and universities, frequented the same clubs, and 
occasionally married the sisters or daughters of their colleagues. After the war, 
many of these former secret service men (they were always men) found them-
selves in key positions not only in the world of intelligence but also in the 
press, in banks, and in key governmental departments. Together, they formed 
a “para-intelligence” network that was as socially narrow as it was mutually 
supportive.
Promoted to rear admiral in April 1917 and knighted six months later, 
William Reginald Hall emerged as a central actor in this twilight world. In 
May 1917, the Naval Intelligence Division formally incorporated Room 40, 
giving Hall complete control over the division’s naval and diplomatic elements. 
The Royal Navy’s cryptanalytic organization, renamed section 25 (ID 25 for 
short), was run by Hall’s loyal subordinate and later biographer, Commander 
William “Bubbles” James.1
Hall’s management of the interception and decryption of the telegram as 
well as his various promotions served to reinforce his sense of infallibility and 
self-importance. On October 9, 1917, in a memorandum to the first sea lord, 

Hall’s Intelligence Legacy 
 235
he wrote that he considered his immediate superior, Foreign Secretary Arthur 
Balfour, “entirely out of touch” with public opinion at home—a cheeky com-
ment that reveals how independent Hall considered himself to be from Foreign 
Office supervision. In the same spirit, Hall in May 1918 refused to collaborate 
with the chief secretary for Ireland, who had asked him to make available 
certain intercepts that would strengthen the government’s case against several 
leading Sinn Fein members awaiting trial. “This was one of the many occa-
sions when Hall’s refusal to disclose the purport of intercepted messages led to 
friction with other Government departments,” commented James.2
Emboldened by the telegram operation, Hall continued to run naval intel-
ligence as a personal fiefdom, high-handedly choosing when and how to share 
his intelligence with others. In February 1918, he sent an intercept regarding 
Austrian peace feelers to the U.S. embassy. In a procedure eerily reminiscent 
of his handling of the Zimmermann telegram, Hall did so before showing the 
intercept to the prime minister.3 There was no reprimand from the Foreign  
Office. An American cryptanalyst serving as liaison with British naval intel-
ligence in London at the end of the war commented, “[d]iplomatic procedure 
would require that such sensational information be transmitted by the Foreign 
Office to Ambassador [Walter Hines] Page, but Admiral Hall did as he pleased. 
It is no wonder then that he was feared by the Foreign Office.”4
Meanwhile, Hall displayed a growing interest in domestic politics. Like 
many of his secret service colleagues, toward the end of the war Hall shifted his 
attention from the German threat to the rise of the political Left in Britain. Dis-
missing his colleague Vernon Kell, the director of MI5, as “short-sighted and 
timorous,”5 Hall and his assistant, Claud Serocold, devised a plan to earmark 
£1 million for a peacetime political police force, a job that typically would  
have belonged to MI5 and Scotland Yard. When the cabinet defanged the proj-
ect by adopting a watered-down version of the plan, Hall decided to pursue the 
idea of a private intelligence agency that would stand up to the Left. Early in 
1919, Hall and a number of leading industrialists founded an organization 
to function as a “dirty tricks” department for big business. Called the Eco-
nomic League, this innocent-sounding organization quickly gained notoriety 
for blacklisting known communists and agitators to keep such so-called sub-
versives out of employment; providing intelligence on upcoming strikes and 
providing strikebreakers on a large scale; and sending agitators to communist 
meetings to heckle and throw stink bombs.6
Hall’s short-lived involvement with the Economic League portended his 
political ambitions. Shortly after the war, Hall retired from the navy. The 

236 
 Chapter Seventeen	
	
circumstances of his departure from naval intelligence have been the subject of 
considerable debate. His tenure was certainly not uncontroversial. The Times 
commented upon his retirement, “No doubt Admiral Hall made mistakes.”7 
James conceded that Hall had made enemies during the Casement affair and 
suggested that his boss’s insistence on participating in the Paris Peace Confer-
ence proved his undoing.8 Permanent Under-Secretary Charles Hardinge of the 
Foreign Office in a farewell letter to Hall referred to “differences of opinion.”9 
Sir Rosslyn Wemyss, chief of the naval staff, wrote Hall in January 1919 and 
offered that he didn’t “believe the rumours which were put about the other 
day, and have no recollection of our intercourse during the last 18 months that 
are not altogether pleasant.”10 Wemyss did not expound on these rumors, but 
his and Hardinge’s comments might be a veiled reference to Hall’s criticism of 
Balfour in 1918.11
While recriminations against him abounded, Hall retired chiefly out of a 
desire to enter politics. He evidently was a political animal, a character streak 
that he fully developed during the course of the war. As director of naval intel-
ligence, he deliberately maneuvered himself into a position where he would 
not only provide information to policy makers, but actually influence foreign 
policy. The Zimmermann telegram was a case in point. As the war came to an 
end, however, the influence of active military and intelligence officers would 
inevitably shrink. If Hall wished to stay involved in politics, a switch to civilian 
life would be the logical next step.
On October 30, 1918, Hall informed his superiors that the Unionist (con-
servative or Tory) Party had asked him to stand for parliament in the upcom-
ing general elections and requested permission to run while retaining his job 
as director of naval intelligence (DNI).12 Navy officials went back and forth 
on whether he could become a member of parliament (MP) as a sitting DNI. 
If they granted Hall permission, he could in theory become a conservative MP 
serving a Liberal or Labour government as DNI. In the end, Whitehall decided 
that a number of formal objections stood in the way of Hall’s request, and the 
first sea lord informed him accordingly.13
On November 11, Germany and the Allies signed an armistice. Shortly 
thereafter, Hall’s retirement was officially announced and scheduled for mid-
January 1919. At the same time, Hall publicly declared his intention to run as a 
Unionist candidate as soon as an opportunity presented itself.14 He gave some 
indication as to what platform he would run on in his farewell speech to his 
colleagues in naval intelligence: “I want to give you a word of warning. Hard 
and bitter as the battle has been, we now have to face a far, far more ruthless 

Hall’s Intelligence Legacy 
 237
foe. A foe that is hydra-headed and whose evil power will spread over the 
whole world. That foe is Soviet Russia.”15
Although Hall had to forgo the opportunity to run for Parliament in  
December 1918, in his retirement he was presented with another chance when a 
Tory MP from Liverpool moved up to become lord chancellor, received a peer-
age, and switched to the House of Lords, necessitating a by-election in March 
1919. Hall beat the Labor candidate—albeit by a significantly reduced margin 
as compared to the general elections four months earlier between the Tory and 
Labor candidates—and entered Parliament as a Unionist MP.16 As a conserva-
tive backbencher, Hall fought against treasury cuts to the secret services and 
quickly associated himself with the small but vociferous group of Unionist  
“diehards,” who stood firmly on the extreme right of social, economic, and 
political issues.17 In particular, the diehards fervently opposed any accommoda-
tion with Moscow (and its supposed Trojan Horse, the Labour Party), which 
put them at odds with Prime Minister David Lloyd George, who thought some 
of his ministers had “bolschevism on the brain” and pursued a more pragmatic 
policy toward Soviet Russia.18
Hall’s loyalty to the British government was put to the test when Ramsay 
MacDonald became Britain’s first Labour prime minister in January 1924. The 
Labour government quickly stumbled over a political scandal, and general elec-
tions were called for October 29, 1924. The ensuing campaign unfolded in an 
ideologically charged atmosphere, and the para-intelligence network snapped 
into action. On October 2, the Riga, Latvia, station of Britain’s Secret Intel-
ligence Service (SIS or MI6) dispatched to headquarters in London the copy 
of a letter allegedly signed by Grigory Zinoviev, president of the Communist 
International (Comintern), and Arthur MacManus, British representative at 
the Comintern. Addressed to the British Communist Party (CPGB), the letter 
called for intensified communist agitation in Britain. If the public learned of the 
letter before the elections, MacDonald’s campaign would face trouble, because 
his government had normalized diplomatic relations with Moscow and pro-
posed a commercial treaty with the Soviet Union.19
The Zinoviev letter was, in all probability, a forgery produced by Russian 
émigrés in Berlin who were loyal to the czarist regime and sought to drive 
a wedge between the Soviet Union and Great Britain.20 For Britain’s Labour 
government, the question of authenticity became purely academic when the 
conservative Daily Mail obtained and published a copy of it. On October 25, 
four days before the elections, the Mail’s headline screamed, “Moscow issues 
order to the British Communists . . . British Communists in turn give orders 

238 
 Chapter Seventeen	
	
to the Socialist Government which it tamely and humbly obeys.” A day later, 
the paper declared in bold letters, “THE ONLY THING LEFT TO DO IS VOTE 
CONSERVATIVE.” Just to make sure its readers got the point, the Mail exhort-
ed them to “get rid of our shifty Prime Minister.”21 Three days later, Labour 
suffered a catastrophic defeat at the polls, and the Tories formed a government 
under Stanley Baldwin. MacDonald expressed his frustration over the letter’s 
premature disclosure in a campaign speech in Cardiff on October 27: “[H]ow 
can I . . . avoid the suspicion . . . that the whole thing is a political plot?”22
If the letter was, indeed, a plot, who had leaked it to the Daily Mail? 
Thomas Marlowe, the staunchly conservative long-time editor of the Mail, had 
first heard of the letter on the morning of October 23, when he found on his 
writing table a telephone message that had arrived the previous night. It was 
from “an old and trusted friend” and read, “There is a document in London 
which you ought to have. It shows the relations between Bolsheviks and the 
British Labour leaders. The Prime Minister knows all about it, but is trying to 
avoid publication. It has been circulated today to Foreign Office, Home Office, 
Admiralty, and War Office.”23
In 1928 Marlowe stated that “three friends” had offered him copies of the 
letter. The identities of these three friends have been the subject of consider-
able speculation, but most historians agree that all three belonged to the para-
intelligence network. One person who knew of the letter and eagerly sought to 
get it published was Donald im Thurn, a former MI5 officer. In his papers, im 
Thurn identified the “old and trusted friend” who had left the mysterious tele-
phone message for Marlowe that triggered publication of the letter in the Daily 
Mail—it was none other than “R. Hall.”24 Im Thurn’s note is the only piece of 
evidence that identifies Hall by name as the person responsible for leaking the 
letter to the Daily Mail, and his account is not always wholly reliable. As intel-
ligence historian Christopher Andrew points out, however, Hall’s action would 
have been “entirely consistent with his earlier career.”25
Indeed, as a former director of naval intelligence, and a prominent Tory 
politician, Hall was ideally placed to obtain and leak a copy of the Zinoviev 
letter to the press. A study of the Zinoviev letter by a group of British jour-
nalists argues that the former DNI “had personal experience of the effect of 
an intelligence coup on a political situation: his department’s brilliant work 
deciphering the Zimmermann telegram, and Hall’s careful timing of its release 
to the Woodrow Wilson Administration in Washington had been the most 
significant single episode in the process which brought America into the war in 

Hall’s Intelligence Legacy 
 239
1917.” The journalists concluded that the “Zinoviev letter arrived at exactly 
the right moment to influence another Governmental decision which seemed 
crucial to the Conservative Party: whether Britain should forge close links with 
the Bolshevik revolutionaries or dismiss them as a Red rabble whose existence 
threatened Conservative democracy in Britain.”26
Understandably, Hall and his supporters never sought to clarify the for-
mer DNI’s potentially embarrassing role in the Zinoviev letter disclosure, but 
the Zimmermann telegram was another matter altogether. According to U.S. 
diplomat Edward Bell, the British “were always furious that we got the (unde-
served) credit.”27 Therefore, the British set out to put the record straight when 
the war ended. Probably shortly after the armistice, London’s wartime naval 
attaché, Captain Guy Gaunt, informed Lieutenant Colonel Hugh Cabot of the 
Harvard Surgical Unit (which served with the British army in France) about the 
role of British intelligence in the telegram affair. Cabot subsequently delivered 
a lecture at the annual Bunker Hill Monument Association, where he asserted 
that the telegram “was received by the British Intelligence Department in code 
and decoded.”28 The revelation did not have a significant impact.
Hall corroborated the role of British naval intelligence in intercepting 
and decrypting the telegram in 1921, when the American journalist Burton 
J. Hendrick was compiling material for a biography of the recently deceased 
American ambassador to London, Walter Hines Page. Hendrick may have first 
learned about Hall’s part in the telegram’s disclosure from Irwin Boyle Laugh-
lin, who during the war had been first secretary at the U.S. embassy in London. 
Laughlin advised Hendrick on the Page biography about the wartime opera-
tions of the embassy in London.29 In the summer of 1921, Hendrick traveled 
to London and met with Hall, who proved to be exceedingly helpful. “At the 
direction of the Foreign Office,” Hendrick later wrote Bell, “Admiral Hall has 
given me the complete story of the Zimmermann Mexico telegram. He has 
supplied me with all the telegrams themselves—about twelve in number—and 
has given all details about the ways they were sent, decoded. etc. The Foreign 
Office has given its consent to the publication of all this matter in my forth-
coming book.”30 Apparently, Hall had simply taken these documents home 
with him while he still had access to them as DNI. Back in the United States, 
Hendrick showed this dossier to a surprised Laughlin and asked him for more 
information on the U.S. side of the operation. Taken by surprise, Laughlin con-
firmed and expanded on the intelligence work conducted by the U.S. embassy 
during the war.31

240 
 Chapter Seventeen	
	
When Hendrick approached Bell to learn more about his part in the story, 
the latter was not amused. Bell informed Hendrick that “it would be against 
the public interest that the record of it should become public property for 
many years to come, if ever.” He also told Hendrick that even if he had ob-
tained the British government’s permission to proceed, the U.S. government 
had not granted its approval.32 To Laughlin, Bell wrote bluntly, “I only wish 
to Heaven that when this man [Hendrick] approached you had hit him with 
a sand-bag.”33 Most of all, Bell was furious at Hall: “Whatever Blinker could 
have been thinking about beats me altogether but at any rate he seems to have 
spilt the beans,” he wrote to William Lee Hurley, the head of the State Depart-
ment’s intelligence section, renamed U-2. In the same letter, Bell accused Hall 
of a “breach of confidence. The arrangement regarding the Z. telegram was 
not unilateral: it was entered into between the two Governments.”34 “I hope 
to Heaven,” Bell added a month later, “that you will be able to get this mad 
man to cut this stuff out.”35 Hurley agreed wholeheartedly. “I am aghast as 
also are others at this method of making public information which we have 
kept secret,” he wrote L. Lanier Winslow at the U.S. embassy in London.36 In a 
separate message, Undersecretary of State Henry Fletcher instructed Winslow 
to “discreetly ascertain whether Hall secured the consent of the Admiralty or 
of the Foreign Office to make public this information.”37 
According to Hendrick and Laughlin, Hall had previously insinuated that 
the Foreign Office had given its consent to publishing the telegram and related 
material, but William Tyrrell of the Foreign Office informed the Americans 
that the British government had never done so.38 Tyrrell served as deputy of 
the permanent undersecretary Eyre Crowe, who was responsible for intelli-
gence. When Hall sensed growing resistance to his initiative from all corners, 
he quickly backpedaled. Disingenuously, he wrote Hendrick “that approval of 
British and American governments must be obtained before publication of any 
of our conversations or documents.”39 On August 13, Hall informed Winslow 
that he wanted to ensure that everything published had the U.S. government’s 
“consent and approval.”40 This, too, was a somewhat misleading statement 
as the story was already out and could be expected to leak even if Hendrick 
did not obtain governmental approval to go ahead. Just how awkward Hall’s 
position had become was further evidenced by his request to Hendrick not to 
mention his name anywhere in Page’s biography since “I have a great horror 
of appearing in print, and although my relations with Dr. Page were on a most 
confidential footing, I am not clear in my mind that he would have wished that 
anything I did should be connected with him.”41 This, of course, was a request 

Hall’s Intelligence Legacy 
 241
that Hall should have made before giving Hendrick material on the telegram. 
It is also curious for a sitting MP to express “horror” at the idea of having his 
name appear in print.
When he heard of the controversy, Walter Page’s son Arthur wrote to 
Fletcher, asking for approval to have Hendrick’s section on the telegram pub-
lished,42 but apparently Fletcher asked Page not to go ahead with the project.43 
In May 1922, Bell made a final effort to prevent publication of Hendrick’s 
book. In a lengthy letter to Leland Harrison, now assistant secretary of state, 
Bell concluded that Hendrick had received his information on the telegram 
from Hall and Tyrrell, and cited three reasons for the State Department to 
withhold consent to publication. First, Hall broke a mutual agreement when 
handing over the telegram to Hendrick without consulting Bell. Second, pub-
lication of the British role in the telegram’s disclosures would suggest that the 
U.S. government had obtained other intercepts, such as the Luxburg telegrams, 
in the same manner. Bell was particularly worried about the case of Joseph 
Caillaux, a French socialist politician accused of treason and imprisoned in 
1918. In the run-up to his trial, the Americans had provided the French with 
intercepts implicating Caillaux, but they did not inform Paris that these had 
originated with the British. This hitherto publicly unknown fact could poten-
tially cast a shadow over U.S.-French relations, not least as Caillaux was still 
alive. Third, Bell argued, Hendrick’s account of the telegram episode was “stiff 
with inaccuracies.” For all of the above, Bell strongly urged Harrison to help 
thwart publication of Hendrick’s book. Harrison concurred and recommended 
as much to the new secretary of state, Charles Evans Hughes.44
As Woodrow Wilson’s unsuccessful Republican challenger in the 1916 
presidential elections, Hughes apparently took little interest in a subject con-
cerning the bygone Wilson administration. In the end, Hendrick went ahead 
with the publication of Page’s biography, and the U.S. government made no 
attempt to keep him from doing so. Published in 1926, the third volume of 
Hendrick’s The Life and Letters of Walter H. Page for the first time informed 
a broader audience of the British angle of the telegram’s disclosure. Although 
the biography did not mention Hall by name, it mentioned British naval intel-
ligence, and Hall’s affiliation with this agency during the war was no secret. 
Anybody could therefore easily infer Hall’s role. In the same year that the third 
volume hit the bookshelves, Hall also testified publicly before a German Amer-
ican Mixed Claims Commission regarding German sabotage operations in the 
United States during the war. In the course of the trial, he acknowledged his 
role in the famous intelligence operation.45

242 
 Chapter Seventeen	
	
Buoyed by public recognition of his role in the telegram’s disclosure, Hall’s 
political career experienced a second spring. In 1925 he was reelected to Par-
liament for the constituency of Eastbourne. Ill health compelled Hall not to 
seek reelection in 1929, and his frailty kept him from playing an active role in 
political or intelligence affairs for the rest of his life. He was confined to the 
role of an observer during the early years of World War II and died on October 
22, 1943.46
Hall’s legacy in the realm of foreign intelligence was less ambivalent than 
that in domestic intelligence. Thanks to the diligent wartime work of London’s 
code breakers, and in particular to Hall’s telegram scoop, no British politician 
could henceforth afford to ignore the value of cryptanalysis. Rather than dis-
band the services’ cryptanalytic services after the war, the government consoli-
dated and put them on a sure institutional footing. In 1919 Britain’s secret ser-
vice committee fused the nation’s naval and military intelligence organizations, 
creating the Government Code and Cypher School (GC&CS), and in 1939 
GC&CS moved to an estate called Bletchley Park, located outside London, 
roughly between Oxford and Cambridge.
Following Britain’s declaration of war on Germany in September 1939, 
GC&SC expanded rapidly, and the agency rehired several cryptanalysts who 
had worked for Room 40 during World War I, including Frank Birch, “Dilly” 
Knox, and Nigel de Grey, who in 1917 had decrypted the Zimmermann tele-
gram. By then, their services were in urgent need. On the eve of World War 
II, the German military had introduced a sophisticated cipher machine called 
Enigma. Berlin considered messages generated by Enigma unbreakable, and 
some leading British cryptanalysts were inclined to agree. Birch, as head of the 
naval section at Bletchley Park, noted that many of his subordinates believed 
“all German codes were unbreakable.” As in World War I, however, methodi-
cal cryptanalysis enabled the British to decrypt a large volume of German inter-
cepts. The continual interception and decryption of secret enemy messages 
opened a window for the Allies into German political decision making and 
military strategy and may have significantly shortened the war.47
Also as in World War I, cooperation with foreign intelligence became a 
cornerstone of Britain’s secret services in World War II. After Hitler’s invasion 
of France in 1940, Britain stood virtually alone against the Axis powers. The 
United States under President Franklin Delano Roosevelt, Woodrow Wilson’s 
assistant secretary to the navy in World War I, was eager to support London 
but had to tread carefully in the face of strong isolationist sentiments at home. 

Hall’s Intelligence Legacy 
 243
Whereas Wilson had always been ambivalent about the work of Allied agents 
on U.S. soil, Roosevelt privately encouraged British intelligence operations in 
the United States in order to thwart Nazi fifth columnists as well as isolation-
ists. As he wrestled with domestic discontent over the prospect of intervention, 
Roosevelt grew eager for any assistance the British might be able to provide. 
Perhaps in a calculated provocation to replicate the telegram scoop, the presi-
dent teased Admiral John Henry Godfrey, Hall’s successor at GC&CS, “Of 
course, Hall had a wonderful intelligence service, but I don’t suppose it’s much 
good now.”48
British intelligence set out to prove the president wrong and launched what 
a historian has aptly called “the search for a second Zimmermann Telegram.”49 
The original telegram had been an authentic document, whose disclosure was 
meant to influence U.S. policy. In modern parlance, the British were practicing 
“covert action.” Had the telegram not been authentic, who is to say that a clev-
er forgery would not have accomplished similar goals? Early in World War II, 
British intelligence in Buenos Aires had obtained a map of South America with 
redrawn borders dividing the subcontinent into five Nazi vassal states.50 The 
map probably originated with a local Nazi activist who had put his fantasies 
about Nazi domination of South America to paper. The British touched up the 
map a bit before presenting it as an authentic German document to William J. 
“Wild Bill” Donovan, Roosevelt’s intelligence coordinator. Donovan, in turn, 
showed the map to Roosevelt on October 21, 1941, as evidence of Berlin’s 
designs on South America. The president made no attempt to verify the map’s 
authenticity, a question that was of secondary importance to him. Roosevelt 
had long warned Americans of German designs on the Western Hemisphere, 
so he gladly availed himself of the map to drive home his point. At the annual 
Navy Day dinner on October 27, he touted this questionable find as evidence 
of Hitler’s megalomaniac designs:
I have in my possession a secret map, made in Germany by Hitler’s gov-
ernment—by planners of the New World Order. . . . It is a map of South 
America and a part of Central America as Hitler proposes to reorganize 
it. . . . The geographical experts of Berlin have ruthlessly obliterated all 
the existing boundaries; they have divided South America into five vassal 
states. . . . And they have also so arranged it that the territory of these new 
puppet states includes the Republic of Panama, and our great lifeline—
the Panama Canal. This map, my friends, makes clear the Nazi design not 
only against South America but against the United States as well.51

244 
 Chapter Seventeen	
	
Nazi spokesmen denounced Roosevelt as a “liar” and a “faker,” and Hit-
ler sought to reassure the public by stating that “as far as I’m concerned . . . 
South America is as far away as the moon.”52 Yet few people outside Germany 
were inclined to believe the führer. With the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor 
in December 1941, the debate over U.S. intervention became moot, but the 
map had served its purpose by ostensibly corroborating Roosevelt’s assertions 
about the German threat to the United States’ security.
World War II formalized and strengthened the ties that a small cadre of in-
telligence men on both sides of the Atlantic had woven along personal lines in 
World War I. The British-U.S. Communication Intelligence Agreement of 1943 
provided for the large-scale exchange of highly sensitive signals intelligence 
between American and British cryptanalysts. The United Kingdom–United 
States of America Agreement of 1947 extended and expanded this exception-
ally close cooperation into the Cold War, and it remains in force today.53 This is 
the “special relationship” in intelligence that Winston Churchill, the champion 
of the British secret services in both wars, evoked shortly after World War II 
when touring the United States.54 Hall may rightly be regarded as one of this 
relationship’s founding fathers.
 

245
conclusion
I
n 1972 the mathematician Edward Lorenz delivered a paper titled “Pre-
dictability: Does the Flap of a Butterfly’s Wings in Brazil Set Off a Tor-
nado in Texas?”1 In his lecture, Lorenz laid out the idea that a butterfly’s 
movement created tiny changes in the atmosphere that could ultimately alter 
the course of a tornado. His theory gave birth to the popular concept of the 
butterfly effect—that is, that minor actions might have major consequences. 
Whatever the scientific merits of Lorenz’s theory, the butterfly effect seems 
an appropriate metaphor for the Zimmermann telegram. The alliance scheme 
constituted a minor subplot in the war, but due to the telegram’s interception, 
decryption, and eventual publication, it generated significant turbulence from 
its place of origin, all the way across the Atlantic, and back again in ways com-
pletely unforeseen and unintended by its authors. The telegram’s inextricable 
links to several major trends at the time, including the struggle between civilian 
and military leaders over political control, the rise of public opinion as a factor 
in decision making, and the emergence of modern intelligence make its study 
especially instructive.
The idea of a Mexican-Japanese alliance originated with a minor German 
foreign office official, Hans Arthur von Kemnitz. His proposal would not have 
gained traction, however, were it not for the convergence of two aspects of 
imperial German politics. One was the absence of a central decision-making 
body or an individual decision maker at the highest level of government. The 
inability of Kaiser Wilhelm II to execute his constitutional role as supreme 
military commander and head of state left a void that was never adequately 
filled. The other was the struggle between civilian and military leaders over 

246 
 Conclusion	 	
the course of the nation at war. By early 1917, the supreme army command 
(Oberste Heeresleitung, OHL) under Field Marshal Paul von Hindenburg and 
General Erich Ludendorff had succeeded in sidelining Chancellor Theobald 
von Bethmann Hollweg and the civilian leadership and in subordinating  
political considerations to military strategy. The military’s triumph led directly 
to Germany’s decision to declare unrestricted submarine warfare. With the 
chancellor outmaneuvered, and the kaiser unable and unwilling to resist the 
OHL, political concerns about the American reaction were dismissed or over-
ruled. The resulting threat of U.S. intervention on behalf of the Allies sparked 
the telegram.
Zimmermann’s search for an insurance policy against U.S. intervention, 
his management of previous covert operations, his desire to ingratiate himself 
with the OHL, and previous attempts to conclude a separate peace with Tokyo 
all played a role in the foreign secretary’s decision to sanction the Mexican-
Japanese alliance scheme. More remarkable than any specific goal Arthur 
Zimmermann may have been pursuing as German foreign secretary is that he 
provided no intellectual input for the telegram bearing his signature and spent 
only a minimal amount of time considering and authorizing the scheme. The 
haphazard and precipitous way in which the Wilhelmstrasse conceptualized, 
reviewed, approved, and dispatched the telegram highlights the fragmented and 
dysfunctional decision-making process of imperial Germany in early 1917.
While the OHL under Hindenburg and Ludendorff sidelined the chan-
cellor and dominated the government’s decision-making process, the military 
did not seek overt control of foreign policy. As a result, no one in the Ger-
man leadership assumed responsibility for considering all aspects—military, 
political, and diplomatic—of the Zimmermann telegram, and at a time when 
U.S.-German relations were deteriorating rapidly, Zimmermann lacked proper 
supervision. A careful review of Kemnitz’s proposal would probably have bur-
ied it. In the absence of a comprehensive evaluation process, his half-baked 
scheme became official policy.
Organizational deficiencies at the highest levels of the German govern-
ment affected the telegram episode in other ways as well. The pursuit of nar-
row, departmental interests prevented the foreign office from conducting an 
effective damage assessment after the telegram’s disclosure in the American 
press. (Of note, the U.S. State Department was equally negligent in drawing 
conclusions with regard to the security of its diplomatic communications.) A 
competently conducted and truly independent damage assessment could have 

Conclusion 
 247
found ample evidence to identify cryptanalysis, not espionage or theft, as the 
cause of the telegram’s compromise, including information provided by the 
German military, references to non-secure codes from foreign office officials, 
foreign government officials, hints in American newspapers, as well as an  
explicit reference to Britain’s hand in an open debate of the U.S. Senate.
Even if the foreign office could be excused for not identifying cryptanalysis 
as the source of the telegram’s compromise, the Wilhelmstrasse should have 
realized that German diplomatic codes had been compromised after the plain 
text of the telegram appeared in American newspapers. In addition, even if 
British or American cryptanalysts had been unable to decrypt German tele-
grams prior to March 1, 1917, all they had to do on that day was obtain an 
encoded copy of the telegram from their own telegraph services, compare it 
against the published text, and reconstruct the German code. The publication 
of the telegram provided the Allies with the proverbial Rosetta stone.
Bureaucratic inertia at the Wilhelmstrasse may partially account for the 
continued use of the compromised code 0075, but so did Zimmermann’s per-
sonal agenda. The foreign secretary had found it convenient to blame the tele-
gram’s disclosure on the ambassador to the United States, Johann Heinrich von 
Bernstorff, because it checkmated a potential rival and absolved himself from 
blame. Thus, thanks to the Wilhelmstrasse’s cavalier attitude regarding com-
munications security, and Zimmermann’s decision to scapegoat Bernstorff, 
Germany’s internal transatlantic communications remained an open book for 
the British.
Top German officials—with the exception of Bernstorff, who had only a 
minimal role in the telegram affair—never fully grasped the power of the press 
and the significance of public opinion as factors in U.S. politics. Throughout 
the period of American neutrality, U.S. newspapers reported careless remarks 
by German officials and disclosed secret German documents. Over time, the 
constant stream of such information created an unfavorable image of imperial 
Germany in the minds of many Americans. The foreign office intended the 
telegram as a “secret” offer of alliance, but given previous disclosures of Ger-
man secret documents, the Wilhelmstrasse should have seriously questioned 
the likelihood of keeping the gist of the scheme out of the American press and 
considered the implications of a failure to do so. After the telegram’s disclo-
sure, Zimmermann’s overriding concern lay in defending his position at home; 
he made no effort to explain the scheme to an international audience. With this 
course of action, Zimmermann effectively ceded power to those among Ger-
many’s enemies who were intent on bringing the United States into the war.

248 
 Conclusion	 	
In hindsight, the telegram lays bare some of the reasons why Germany  
ultimately lost the war. Insufficient intragovernmental coordination, the sub-
ordination of diplomatic considerations to purely military concerns, and a lack 
of expertise in non-European affairs all conspired to bring about Zimmer-
mann’s alliance scheme. Underlying these factors was an attitude of the German 
leadership bordering on wishful thinking. Key military officers and Wilhelm-
strasse officials preferred to see events as they deemed fit because it served 
their personal or departmental goals. The OHL, for example, belittled U.S. 
military potential because acknowledging American power would have raised 
serious questions about the wisdom of unrestricted submarine warfare. After 
the telegram’s disclosure, the Wilhelmstrasse refused to consider the possibility 
that German diplomatic codes had been compromised, because it would have 
undermined Zimmermann’s position. This type of narrow-mindedness and  
selective perception pervaded the highest levels of the German government. As 
a result, Berlin concocted not only the ill-considered Mexican-Japanese alli-
ance proposal, but based many of its policies and strategies during the war on 
illusions rather than realistic assessments.2
During World War I, virtually all the belligerent governments established 
or expanded their permanent intelligence organizations in order to procure 
and exploit secret information by means of espionage, cryptanalysis, and  
covert action. The art of code breaking proved that signals intelligence, in par-
ticular, could make a valuable contribution to the war effort. Unfortunately for 
the Germans, Zimmermann made his secret alliance offer to Mexico at a time 
when the British were routinely intercepting foreign diplomatic traffic, and the 
cryptanalysts of Room 40 had honed their skills to near perfection.
The British, however, were not uniquely skilled in the craft of code break-
ing. Austria-Hungary, France, and Germany also ran first-rate cryptanalytic 
services. The Germans were reading the easily decryptable messages to and 
from the U.S. embassy in Berlin as regularly as the British were reading those 
to and from the U.S. embassy in London. Room 40’s cryptanalytic competence 
was one factor that enabled Captain William Reginald Hall’s organization to 
turn Zimmermann’s Mexican alliance scheme into a major coup, but it was 
not the only one. The British had distinctive advantages over their German 
rivals in other respects. 
One such advantage was geography. The strategic location of the British 
Isles allowed the Allies control over Germany’s access to the Atlantic. As a result,  
at the outset of war the Royal Navy was able to cut Germany’s transatlantic 

Conclusion 
 249
cables, forcing the Germans to send overseas communication by wireless trans-
mission. Since German messages to the embassy in Washington had to cross 
the isles, British naval intelligence could easily intercept them. The constant 
stream of German intercepts provided British code breakers with a large vol-
ume of material, which in turn aided them in their quest to solve German 
encryptions.
A unique organizational aspect of British naval intelligence enabled Lon-
don’s code breakers to decrypt the Zimmermann telegram. In the major pow-
ers of the World War I era, including Britain, France, Germany, Russia, and 
the United States, the military oversaw cryptanalysis, so the soldiers (and or 
sailors) turned into code breakers targeted primarily military or naval commu-
nications. In Britain, Hall recognized the importance of capturing diplomatic 
messages as well and in 1915 set up Room 40’s diplomatic section, which 
would do exactly that. Two years later, it produced its most consequential 
decryption of the war.
After Room 40 had obtained and decrypted the telegram, the British had 
to decide how best to exploit it. Here, too, Hall’s expertise and vision came into 
play. Unlike the Germans, with the notable exception of Ambassador Bern-
storff, the British were well attuned to the complexities of the American debate 
over intervention, and Hall had used his access to compromising material  
repeatedly to “play” the American press, public, and politicians to London’s 
advantage. By 1917, as director of naval intelligence, Hall had become adept at 
operations to influence opinion in the United States, and he used his expertise 
to the hilt in the way that he chose to disclose the telegram. At the same time, 
he did everything in his power to protect his source from the Germans and 
the Americans in order to ensure continued British access to diplomatic traffic 
from both countries.
Hall would have been unable to close the deal without the unwavering 
and enthusiastic support of American diplomats and the State Department’s 
Bureau of Secret Intelligence. Although Hall’s charisma was not lost on the 
Americans, the support he received from U.S. intelligence related first and fore-
most to political considerations in Washington. After Secretary of State Rob-
ert Lansing began pushing for intervention in 1915, the members of the U.S. 
diplomatic corps and its intelligence organization worked hand in glove with 
Hall and British intelligence to expose German plots in the effort to bring the 
United States closer to joining the war. Other nations, notably Germany, could 
have only dreamed of a similarly cozy relationship with the intelligence service 
of the most important neutral country.

250 
 Conclusion	 	
When Hall approached the U.S. embassy in London with news of the tele-
gram, American officials and politicians on both sides of the Atlantic did their 
utmost to aid him in disclosing the scheme while simultaneously obscuring the 
role of British intelligence. The moment Hall showed the telegram to Second 
Secretary Edward Bell at the U.S. embassy, he ceded exclusive control over it 
and was rightly concerned about the possible exposure of Britain’s invisible 
hand. Only a determined and disciplined effort by members of the Wilson 
administration and highly placed interventionists in Washington prevented 
this from happening. The telegram’s successful publication resulted from and 
reinforced the evolving special relationship between British and American 
intelligence.
In the long run, British intelligence proved a double-edged sword for the 
government. By ably combining cryptanalysis with covert action, the British 
pulled off a major intelligence and propaganda coup. Hall’s leadership style, 
inspiration he provided to others, and political vision contributed greatly to the 
operation’s success. Yet Hall’s participation came at a price for British policy 
makers. During the war, Hall repeatedly leaked secret intelligence without first 
consulting his superiors, and he had no qualms about using his privileged ac-
cess to information and his intelligence connections to pursue his own political 
goals. As a result, he exercised a degree of influence over British foreign policy 
that far exceeded his position. “This man,” recalled an American cryptolo-
gist who worked with him, “because of the information he obtained from the 
messages that his enormous bureau deciphered, stood next to Lloyd George in 
power.”3
Hall’s imperious handling of secret intelligence points to the larger issue of 
the secret services’ role in the modern state. In order to perform successfully, 
intelligence agencies require secrecy, but their clandestine modus operandi also 
means reduced government supervision. In Britain, the intelligence services’ 
wartime autonomy led to a postwar “para-intelligence” network with an 
agenda of its own. In one instance, the network turned against its government 
and contributed to its downfall in 1924. By boosting Hall’s standing and 
muting critics of his high-handed approach, the telegram contributed to the 
emergence of a quasi-secret state in Britain.
The Zimmermann telegram had its biggest impact in the United States. 
The disclosure of the Mexican alliance scheme in the American press rein-
forced the interventionist message and handed the pro-war lobby an expedient 
propaganda tool on the eve of the country’s entry into the conflict. Yet the 
telegram failed to rally non-interventionists, further dividing Americans on the 

Conclusion 
 251
question of belligerency. As a result, the United States entered the war less uni-
fied than many contemporaries and historians believed.
Despite the failure to mobilize the majority of the American public for war, 
the telegram did manage to exert a marked influence over the chief protagonist 
in the United States’ struggle over intervention, the president. Both President 
Woodrow Wilson’s idealism and his touchiness came into play when Lansing 
informed him of the telegram. In early 1917, the president still retained hope 
of ending the war through mediation, but the Mexican alliance proposal 
persuaded him of the futility of his efforts. At the same time, Germany’s brazen 
abuse of U.S. diplomatic cables to send the telegram offended him personally. 
As a result, Wilson lost any lingering hope and desire for a peaceful settle-
ment with Berlin and instead committed himself to war. This step, however, 
alienated him from a large segment of the population that continued to favor 
neutrality. To turn remarks by Lansing on their head, rather than “putting the 
people solidly behind the government,”4 the telegram served to reinforce a 
growing rift between isolationists and the administration. In the debate over 
American intervention, Zimmermann’s scheme proved divisive rather than 
unifying.
The United States certainly would have entered World War I regardless 
of the telegram, but by removing Wilson’s final doubts about the wisdom of 
joining the Allies, it accelerated U.S. intervention, though perhaps only by a 
few weeks. A slightly later date of the U.S. declaration of war on Germany 
would not have affected the conflict’s outcome, but it may well have had seri-
ous implications for London. By early 1917, the British treasury was rapidly 
running out of funds, and only the U.S. entry into the war allowed London to 
conceal its dire financial situation from Washington. Though it is impossible 
to say whether and how Wilson would have reacted to the news of Britain’s 
utter economic dependence on the United States, the information might have 
elevated the United States to primus inter pares status among the Allies. Ulti-
mately, U.S. preeminence would have strengthened Wilson’s hand during the 
remainder of the war and at the ensuing peace conference. While this train of 
thought is speculative, it goes to show how even a small change in the United 
States’ trajectory toward intervention may well have caused significant ripples. 
For the United States, the telegram certainly had a butterfly effect.
In the various ways described in this book, the Zimmermann telegram 
made history, but its significance transcends its historical impact. The telegram 
has provided later generations an instrument with which to bring into sharp 
focus some of the key political dynamics of modern times. By examining the 

252 
 Conclusion	 	
circumstances of the telegram’s inception, interception, and disclosure, one 
can understand more broadly the consequences of a national policy guided 
by military strategy, opportunities and challenges created by having a power-
ful intelligence organization, and the process of a nation’s descent into war. 
The events surrounding the telegram affair unfolded a century ago, but com-
plex decisions and events involving secrecy, diplomacy, and propaganda have 
played out time and again in societies across the globe. In this respect, the 
Zimmermann telegram remains as relevant for understanding the present as it 
is for considering the past.

253
Names and Terms
The Language of Cryptology
A code is a system for replacing words, phrases, letters, or numbers by other 
words or groups of letters or numbers for concealment or brevity. A cipher, 
on the other hand, replaces each individual letter or figure with another let-
ter or figure. The Wilhelmstrasse did not use a cipher but a code, 0075, to  
send the Zimmermann telegram from Berlin to Washington, and the German 
embassy in Washington used another code, 13040, to forward it to Mexico. 
On occasion, the Germans enciphered an already encoded message in an effort 
to make it more difficult for the enemy to decrypt it. This process came to be 
known as “superencipherment.” The Germans did not use it in the case of the  
Zimmermann telegram between Berlin and Washington or Washington to 
Mexico City.
Encryption or encrypting refers to the encoding as well as to the encipher-
ing of a message. Decryption or decrypting typically refers to the process of 
cryptanalysis, that is, the conversion of an encoded or enciphered message into 
plain (readable) text without having initial knowledge of the original code or 
cipher. German diplomats used codebooks to encode and decode their tele-
grams, but the British needed to reconstruct the relevant German code be-
fore they could read an intercepted and encrypted message. Therefore, as long 
as the British were not in possession of a full, reconstructed codebook, they  
decrypted, rather than decoded, the intercepted messages. Once they had 
reconstructed the relevant codebook, the cryptanalysts could use their recon-
structed codebook to decode the message in the same manner as the “legitimate” 

254 
 Names and Terms	
	
German recipient. An encoded message is called an encrypt or cryptogram, 
and a decrypted message, a decrypt. An intercepted message is an intercept, 
regardless of whether it is encrypted.
The Zimmermann Telegram
The alliance proposal signed by German foreign secretary Arthur Zimmer-
mann has been known by a plethora of names over the years. Zimmermann 
himself used multiple terms for the plan. In two closed sessions of the German 
budget committee in early March 1917, he referred to it variably as the Tele-
gramm, Instruktionen (instructions), Depesche (dispatch), and Mexiko-Note. 
A month later in the same forum, he again used Note but also Brief (letter), 
though he implied he was referring to a description used by others.1 An official 
foreign office investigation into the compromising of Zimmermann’s alliance 
proposal referred to it alternatively as the Instruktion, Telegramm, Ziffern-
text (cipher text), Depesche, Note, and Schriftstück (typescript or document).2 
Contemporary German newspapers similarly used a range of terms, including 
Weisung (directive), Brief, and Note.3 Germany’s ambassador to Washington, 
Johann Heinrich von Bernstorff, called it the “Mexico telegram,” and the Ger-
man envoy in Mexico, Heinrich von Eckardt, referred to it as “the Zimmer-
mann note.”4 In foreign office parlance, Zimmermann’s alliance proposal was 
a Depesche—an expeditiously delivered, brief instruction. The term Mexiko-
Depesche came to be a widely used German term after the war, although other 
descriptors persisted. In 1931 Zimmermann wrote about his diplomatic initia-
tive as an Instruktion, and two years later, he referred to it as a “message” 
while talking to a visiting American journalist.5
The director of British naval intelligence, Captain William Reginald Hall, 
seems to have thought of Zimmermann’s proposal chiefly in terms of its trans-
mission mode. According to his autobiography, he called it a “cablegram” 
when one of his cryptanalysts first showed it to him in January 1917.6 Several 
weeks later, he used the word cable,7 and he continued to use these terms long 
after the war.8 In February 1917, British Foreign Office officials simply referred 
to the proposal as “this information” and “this news,”9 indicating that White-
hall had not yet agreed on a universally accepted term. After the American 
press revealed the scheme to the public, the London Times referred to it as a 
“document.”10 When the British handed a copy of Zimmermann’s intercept to 
the U.S. embassy in London, they may have used the term cipher telegram, be-
cause the American ambassador, Walter Hines Page, called it that when com-
municating the news to Secretary of State Robert Lansing.11

Names and Terms 
 255
On March 1, American newspapers used mostly pejorative terms to  
describe Zimmermann’s alliance proposal. Some of the more colorful descrip-
tors included “conspiracy,” “dark plot,” “machination,” “intrigue,” and “vil-
lainous treachery.”12 By far the most common term employed that day was 
plot. On the following day, cooler editorial heads prevailed, and journalists 
began to use neutral expressions, such as “note” or “letter,”13 though many 
continued to use disparaging descriptors, such as “plot” or “scheme.”14 Mean-
while, American officials internally quickly settled on the term telegram, first 
employed by Ambassador Page, on February 24, 1917. Secretary of State Lan-
sing called it that in a message to the American envoy in Mexico, and other 
U.S. officials involved in the operation also adopted it.15 In the interwar period, 
the term Zimmermann telegram gained traction on both sides of the Atlantic, 
as evidenced by popular works such as Walter Millis’ bestseller, Road to War.16 
Hall, too, titled the relevant chapter in his autobiography “The Zimmermann 
Telegram.”
After World War II, the Germanized Zimmermann Telegramm began to 
appear in German-language-publications,17 although the older term Depesche 
continued to be in use throughout the Cold War.18 Of note, the German transla-
tion of Tuchman’s Zimmermann Telegram became Zimmermann Depesche.19 
Only after the end of the Cold War did the term Telegramm marginalize 
Depesche, making the former the universally accepted descriptor in German 
and English for the Mexican-Japanese alliance proposal.
This book adopts the shorthand “telegram.” The term is used both in a 
literal and in a figurative sense. It refers narrowly to the text of Zimmermann’s 
alliance proposal to Mexico as well as to larger aspects of the plan, such as 
German motivations, British interception and decryption, and American per-
ceptions.
 


257
Chronology
1916
November 25	
Arthur Zimmermann becomes Germany’s foreign secretary.
December 12	
In a speech at the Reichstag, German chancellor Theobald von Bethmann 
Hollweg extends an offer of peace to the Allies.
December 18
In an effort to reach a negotiated peace, President Woodrow Wilson sends 
a note asking the Allies and the Central Powers to state their war aims.
1917
January 9
At a meeting in Pless, German leaders decide to launch unrestricted sub-
marine warfare beginning February 1.
January 13
German foreign office official Hans Arthur von Kemnitz completes the 
initial draft of what will become known as the Zimmermann telegram, in 
which Germany proposes the idea of an alliance with Mexico should the 
United States enter World War I on behalf of the Allies.

258 
 Chronology		
January 16
The Wilhelmstrasse dispatches the telegram via the U.S. embassy in Berlin, 
telling the Americans that the message only contains instructions to the 
German embassy in Washington, D.C.
January 17
Room 40, a cryptanalysis unit established by British naval intelligence, 
receives an encoded copy of the telegram. Within a few hours, the crypt-
analyst Nigel de Grey produces a partial decrypt.
January 19
The telegram reaches the German embassy in Washington, where it is for-
warded to Mexico. It reaches the German legation later in the day.
January 22
President Wilson delivers his “peace without victory” speech.
January 31
In Washington, German ambassador Johann Heinrich von Bernstorff  
informs Secretary of State Robert Lansing of Berlin’s decision to wage 
unrestricted submarine warfare.
February 1
Germany launches unrestricted submarine warfare.
February 2
President Wilson informs his cabinet that the United States will not enter 
the war without an “overt act” committed by Germany.
February 3
The United States severs diplomatic relations with Germany. 
February 5
Captain William Reginald Hall, director of British naval intelligence, 
informs Permanent Under-secretary Charles Hardinge of the Foreign 
Office about the Zimmermann telegram.
Hall asks Edward Thurstan, a diplomat at the British legation in Mexico, 
to procure a copy of the telegram sent to Mexico from Washington. Hall 
suspects that that telegram will be more easily decryptable than the one 
intercepted earlier between Berlin and Washington.

Chronology 
 259
Zimmermann sends a telegram to Mexico with instructions for the Ger-
man envoy, Heinrich von Eckardt, to begin “negotiations even now” with 
the Mexican leader Venustiano Carranza.
February 8
Room 40 receives an intercepted copy of Zimmermann’s encoded tele-
gram of February 5.
February 10
Room 40 completes decryption of Zimmermann’s telegram of February 5.
February 14
Ambassador Bernstorff leaves New York on board the Frederik VIII.
February 17
Zimmermann instructs the German envoy in Sweden to sound out his 
Japanese colleague there on a separate peace.
February 19
Room 40 receives a copy of the telegram sent to Mexico by Ambassador 
Bernstorff and procured there by Thurstan of the British legation.
Cryptanalyst de Grey produces a complete decrypt of the telegram sent 
from Washington to Mexico.
Hall shows the telegram decrypt to Second Secretary Edward Bell of the 
U.S. embassy in London.
February 20
Hall, Hardinge, and Ronald Campbell, his secretary, and Foreign Secre-
tary Arthur Balfour discuss the most effective way of officially submitting 
the telegram to the Americans.
Eckardt, the German envoy to Mexico, discusses the telegram with Mexi-
can foreign minister Cándido Aguilar.
February 23
Balfour hands a copy of the decrypted Zimmermann telegram to U.S. 
ambassador Walter Hines Page in London.
February 24
Ambassador Page sends the telegram to Washington.

260 
 Chronology		
State Department counselor Frank Polk receives the telegram at 8:30 p.m.
Foreign Minister Aguilar asks a Japanese legation official in Mexico about 
Tokyo’s intentions in case of U.S. intervention.
February 25
State counselor Polk shows the telegram to President Wilson.
February 26
President Wilson asks Congress for emergency powers to arm merchant 
ships.
State counselor Polk informs the American ambassador in Mexico about 
the telegram and discusses it with the Japanese ambassador in Washington.
Foreign Minister Aguilar denies knowledge of the telegram to the Ameri-
can ambassador.
Polk mentions the telegram to Edward M. House, adviser to President 
Wilson.
February 27
State Department official William Phillips shows the telegram to Secretary 
of State Lansing.
President Wilson meets with Lansing to discuss the telegram.
A Japanese official informs Foreign Minister Aguilar that Japan has no 
intention of defecting from the Allies. 
State counselor Polk obtains a copy of the encoded telegram from Western 
Union in Washington.
February 28
Secretary of State Lansing discloses the Zimmermann telegram to Associ-
ated Press correspondent Edwin Milton Hood.
March 1
American newspapers publish the telegram. 
The U.S. House of Representatives debates and approves the arming of 
merchant ships (but the Senate subsequently filibusters the resolution).
The Senate debates the telegram’s authenticity and possible British involve-
ment in procuring it.

Chronology 
 261
At 9 p.m., Secretary of State Lansing sends the encoded text of the tele-
gram obtained from Western Union to the U.S. embassy in London with 
instructions to decrypt it with British assistance.
March 2
Bell and de Grey decrypt the Western Union copy of the telegram in 
London.
Ambassador Page sends the Western Union decrypt to Secretary of State 
Lansing. 
Zimmermann issues an official statement to Wolff’s Telegraph Bureau 
acknowledging his authorship of the telegram. 
March 3
Zimmermann reiterates his authorship of the telegram to the German 
Overseas News Agency. 
March 5
Zimmermann defends his authorship of the telegram in a closed session of 
the Reichstag budget committee.
March 10
Ambassador Bernstorff arrives in Christiania, Norway.
March 11
President Wilson announces the arming of American merchant ships by 
executive order.
March 13
Ambassador Bernstorff arrives in Berlin.
March 14
Chancellor Bethmann meets with Ambassador Bernstorff.
March 17
German foreign office official Otto Göppert is instructed to investigate the 
telegram’s disclosure.
March 20
U.S. cabinet members unanimously advise President Wilson to declare war.

262 
 Chronology		
March 21
President Wilson requests that Congress meet for a special session on April 2.
April 2
President Wilson asks Congress for a declaration that a state of war exists 
with Germany.
April 4
The U.S. Senate votes in favor of war. 
In Berlin, foreign office official Göppert submits his final report on the 
telegram’s disclosure, implying theft at the German embassy in Washing-
ton, rather than cryptanalysis, as the source of its disclosure.
April 6
The House of Representatives votes in favor of war.
August 5
Zimmermann resigns as foreign secretary. 

263
Abbreviations
AA	
Auswärtiges Amt (German Foreign Office)
ADM	
Records of the Admiralty (Royal Navy) 
BA-MA	
Bundesarchiv-Militärarchiv (German Military Archives), 	
	
Freiburg 
CAB	
British Cabinet Minutes and Memoranda, 1916–1939, 
	
Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.
FO	
British Foreign Office
FRUS	
U.S. Department of State, Papers Relating to the Foreign 
	
Relations of the United States, 1914–1918: Supplement—	
	
The World War. 9 vols. Washington, D.C.: Government 	
	
Printing Office, 1928–1933
GFM	
German Foreign Ministry, 1867–1920, captured records 	
	
(microfilm copies held at the National Archives and Records 	
	
Administration)
HALL 	
Admiral Sir William Reginald Hall, “Draft Autobiography,” 
	
chapter 25, Churchill College Cambridge Archive Center, 	
	
Hall Papers, HALL 3/6
HW	
Records of the Codes and Cypher School, United Kingdom
INF	
Records of the Ministry of Information, United Kingdom
LC	
Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.
M	
Microcopy
NA	
National Archives, London
NARA	
National Archives and Records Administration, College 	
	
Park, Maryland

264 
 Abbreviations	
	
OHL	
Oberste Heeresleitung (German supreme army command) 
PA-AA	
Politisches Archiv des Auswärtigen Amtes (German foreign 	
	
office political archives), Berlin
R	
Akten des Deutschen Reiches (German foreign office records, 	
	
1867–1945) 
RG	
Record Group
RM	
Reichsmarine (imperial Germany naval records) 
T	
Microfilm publication number, National Archives and 
	
Records Administration

265
Notes
Introduction
1. 	Cooper, Woodrow Wilson, 163.
2. 	Lansing, War Memoirs, 232.
3. 	HALL, 31.
4. 	Leonard, War Addresses, 42.
5. 	Henry F. Schorreck, “The Telegram That Changed History,” NARA, RG 457, 
entry 9002, box 87, folder SRH-234, “The Zimmermann Telegram and Related 
Papers” (declassified 15 March 1983).
6. 	Nassua, Gemeinsame Kriegführung, 2.
7. 	Peterson, Propaganda, 315.
8. 	Warner, “Wanted,” 21.
Chapter 1. The Zimmermann Telegram in History
1. 	Memo, Lansing, March 4, 1917, cited in Lansing, War Memoirs, 229.
2. 	Jones and Hollister, German Secret Service, 298–300. 
3. 	Lansing, War Memoirs, 225.
4. 	Tumulty, Woodrow Wilson, 159.
5. 	Seymour, American Diplomacy, 204.
6. 	For an overview of American revisionism, see Cohen, American Revisionists.
7. 	Bernstorff, My Three Years, 380–81.
8. 	Turner, Shall It Be Again?, 14.
9. 	Grattan, Why We Fought, 403–405.
10. 	Millis, Road to War, 405–408.
11. 	Transill, America Goes to War, 653–54; and Morrissey, American Defense, 183–84.
12. 	Peterson, Propaganda for War, 313–15.
13. 	“Dr. Zimmermann Dies in Germany,” New York Times, June 8, 1940.
14. 	Grattan, Why We Fought, 405; Transill, America Goes to War, 654; Millis, Road 
to War, 408; Peterson, Propaganda for War, 314.
15. 	Spencer, Decision for War, 64–65, 77, 79, 108.
16. 	Tuchman, Zimmermann Telegram, 8, 25, 70, 185, 199.
17. 	Katz, Secret War, 350.
18. 	Katz, Secret War, 361.
19. 	Link, Wilson: Campaigns, 354.
20. 	Cooper, Vanity, 177.

21.	 Möckelmann, “Deutschlandbild,” 133.
22. 	Devlin, Too Proud, 648, 653.
23. 	Witcover, Sabotage, 215, 219, 225.
24. 	Mead, Doughboys, 64.
25. 	Koopmann, Diplomatie, 295, 297.
26. 	Nassua, Gemeinsame Kriegführung, 46, 48, 147.
27. 	Nickles, Under the Wire, 143–45.
28. 	Hodgson, Right Hand, xi.
29. 	Ross, Propaganda, 3, 22.
30. 	Fleming, Illusion of Victory, 2, 27, 78, 307, 490. 
31. 	For details, see chapter 7.
32. 	Friedman and Mendelsohn, Zimmermann Telegram, 14, 17, 19, 26, 28.
33. 	Kahn, Codebreakers, 286–88, 1025, note to page 284; Kahn, “Zimmermann Tele-
gram,” 69. 
34. 	Nickles, Under the Wire, 240, note 25.
35. 	Ramsay, “Blinker” Hall, 188. 
Chapter 2. Arthur Zimmermann
1. 	For biographical details, see Auswärtiges Amt, Biographisches Handbuch, vol. 5, s.v. 
“Zimmermann, Arthur.” On Zimmermann’s family background, see also Jagow, 
memoirs, 179, PA-AA, Nachlass Jagow.
2. 	Hürter, “Die Staatssekretäre,” 225; Fischer, Germany’s Aims, 122.
3. 	Auswärtiges Amt, Biographisches Handbuch, vol. 5, s.v. “Zimmermann, Arthur.”
4. 	Gerard, My Four Years, 423.
5. 	Auswärtiges Amt, Biographisches Handbuch, vol. 5, s.v. “Zimmermann, Arthur,” 
and Jagow, memoirs, 179, PA-AA, Nachlass Jagow. 
6. 	Letter, Grew to William Phillips, February 22, 1916, Grew, Turbulent Era, vol. 1, 220.
7. 	Wolff, Tagebücher, vol. 1, no. 170, entry, June 12, 1915.
8. 	Bülow, Denkwürdigkeiten, vol. 3, 159.
9. 	Gilbert Hirsch in the Evening Post, November 25, 1916. For a physical description 
of Zimmermann, see also Fischart, “Neue Politikerköpfe,” 173.
10. 	Grew, Turbulent Era, vol. 1, 220.
11. 	Wolff, Tagebücher, vol. 1, no. 31, entry, September 28, 1914.
12. 	Jagow, memoirs, 180, PA-AA, Nachlass Jagow.
13. 	Grew, Turbulent Era, vol. 1, 287.
14. 	Jagow, memoirs, 180, PA-AA, Nachlass Jagow.
15. 	Bülow, Denkwürdigkeiten, vol. 3, 159, 271.
16. 	For Zimmermann’s arguments, see Vierhaus, Tagebuch, entry, January 9, 1913; see 
also Lerchenfeld to Hertling, December 31, 1912, in Deuerlein, Briefwechsel, vol. 
1, no. 44; Lerchenfeld to Hertling, January 5, 1913, ibid., no. 45; and Hanssen, 
Diary, entry, September 14, 1914. For Jagow’s arguments, see Jagow, memoirs, 
174–75, 177, PA-AA, Nachlass Jagow. Jagow suggests that Zimmermann secretly 
coveted the appointment, but his contention is not supported by any evidence.
17. 	Gerard, My Four Years, 391; Evening Post, November 25, 1916.
18. 	Wolff, Tagebücher, vol. 1, no. 287, entry, January 15, 1916; and no. 461, entry, 
November 3, 1916.
19. 	Jagow to Bernstorff, September 2, 1919, cited in Bernstorff, Memoirs, 165.
20. 	Fischer, Germany’s Aims, 43.
21. 	Fischer, Germany’s Aims, 52.
22. 	Wolff, Tagebücher, vol. 1, no. 12, entry, August 18, 1914. In fact, Japan had sub-
mitted an ultimatum to this effect the previous day.
23. 	Wolff, Tagebücher, vol. 1, no. 26, entry, September 1, 1914.
24. 	Ritter, Sword and Scepter, vol. 3, 23; Fischer, Germany’s Aims, 102.
25. 	Hürter, “Die Staatssekretäre,” 236.
266 
 Notes to Pages 16–28

26. 	The author expresses his gratitude to Cord Eberspächer for providing information 
on the German consular intelligence network in China. On German naval intel-
ligence and the foreign office, see generally Koopmann, Diplomatie, 69–70, and 
Boghardt, Spies of the Kaiser, 19–20.
27. 	Cited in Fischer, Germany’s Aims, 120.
28. 	Fischer, Germany’s Aims, 122, 128, 143, 147; for the Middle East, see especially 
Lüdke, Jihad Made in Germany.
29. 	Gerard, My Four Years, 237. In his telegram to Secretary of State William J. Bryan, 
Gerard apparently made no mention of his witty response, see Doerries, Imperial 
Challenge, 144.
30. 	Doerries, Imperial Challenge, 64, 66, 144, 151, 157, 171, 179.
31. 	Lerchenfeld to Hertling, November 24, 1916, in Deuerlein, Briefwechsel, vol. 2, 
no. 328; see generally Ritter, Sword and Scepter, vol. 3, 213–14; and Birnbaum, 
Peace Moves, 216–17.
32. 	Wolff, Tagebücher, vol. 1, no. 152, entry, May 10, 1915.
33. 	Jagow to Bernstorff, September 2, 1919, cited in Bernstorff, Memoirs, 165; Jagow, 
memoirs, 181, PA-AA, Nachlass Jagow.
34. 	Auswärtiges Amt, Biographisches Handbuch, vol. 5, s.v. “Zimmermann, Arthur.”
35. 	Lerchenfeld to Hertling, November 28, 1916, in Deuerlein, Briefwechsel, vol. 2, 
no. 332.
36. 	Grew, Turbulent Era, vol. 1, 264–65; Evening Post, November 25, 1916.
Chapter 3. The Mexican Imbroglio
1. 	Kunimoto, “Japan and Mexico,” 249.
2. 	Hayashima, Illusion des Sonderfriedens, 55.
3. 	Hürter, “Die Staatssekretäre,” 230. Hintze moved on to become minister in China  
and, eventually, foreign secretary, for two months, in 1918. For Magnus, see Hohler, 
Diplomatic Petrel, 222.
4. 	Memorandum, Eckardt to AA, January 24, 1916, cited in Nassua, Gemeinsame 
Kriegführung, 31.
5. 	Commander of SMS Nürnberg, Captain Mörsberger, Mazatlán, to kaiser, Decem-
ber 3, 1913, BA-MA, RM 5/5823.
6. 	Magnus to AA, via Stockholm, May 24, 1915, GFM, Mexiko 1, vol. 53, NARA, 
T 141, roll 20.
7. 	See Washington Post, February 19, 1917; New York Times, April 24, 1924; for 
details on Montgelas’ career, see Ministerium des Innern, Handbuch, volumes for 
the years 1901 through 1922. It was in Japan that Montgelas met his future wife, 
Fanny Dickinson Hazeltine, the daughter of Charles S. Hazeltine, who had served 
as U.S. consul to Milan under President Grover Cleveland. The couple married in 
1908, and the countess joined her husband when he was recalled to Berlin in late 
1911 and was appointed counselor for North American and Mexican affairs.
8. 	Montgelas, Tokyo, to Bethmann, March 23, 1911, GFM, Mexiko 10, NARA, T 
149, roll 378.
9. 	Grew, Turbulent Era, vol. 1, 221; Gerard, My Four Years, 376, 386.
10. 	Wolff, Tagebücher, vol. 1, entry, October 31, 1916.
11. 	New York Times, April 24, 1924.
12. 	Gerard, My Four Years, 382.
13. 	Memoranda, Montgelas, August 25, 1915, and June 19, 1916, cited in Birnbaum, 
Peace Moves, 345 and 115, note 2. 
14. 	Bernstorff to AA, June 2, 1915, GFM, Mexiko 1, vol. 53, NARA, T 141, roll 20. 
The report reached Berlin on June 19, and Montgelas signed and commented on it 
on June 21. For Wilson’s note, see Katz, Secret War, 299.
15. 	Bernstorff to Bethmann, March 29, 1916, GFM, Mexiko 1, vol. 53, NARA, T 
141, roll 20.
Notes to Pages 29–38 
 267

16. 	Top secret, Lieutenant Commander Walther Freyer to chief of admiralty staff, March 
17, 1916, GFM, Mexiko 1, vol. 56, NARA, T 141, roll 20. Prieger forwarded the 
message to the Wilhelmstrasse, where Montgelas initialed it on March 23.
17. 	Memorandum, Montgelas, March 23, 1916, GFM, Mexiko 1, vol. 56, NARA, T 
141, roll 20.
18. 	Lansing desk diary, October 10, 1915, LC, Lansing Papers.
19. 	Nassua, Gemeinsame Kriegführung, 32.
20. 	Ratibor to AA, December 7, 1914, GFM, Mexiko 1, vol. 52, NARA, T 141, roll 19.
21. 	Eckardt to Bethmann Hollweg, May 5, 1916, GFM, Mexiko 1, vol. 56, NARA, T 
141, roll 20.
22. 	Thomson, Scene Changes, entries, May 31 and June 2, 3, 1916.
23. 	Page to State Department, July 5, 1916, NARA, RG 59, decimal file 862.20212, 
M 336, roll 55; handwritten note, Montgelas, June 14, 1916, GFM, Mexiko 1, 
vol. 56, NARA, T 141, roll 20.
24. 	Einsiedel, Berne, to Jagow, September 5, 1916, GFM, Mexiko 1, vol. 57, NARA, 
T 141, roll 20; Jagow to Einsiedel, September 9, 1916, ibid.
25. 	Einsiedel to Bethmann, September 15, 1916, GFM, Mexiko 1, vol. 57, NARA, T 
141, roll 20; Memorandum by [ill.], September 11, 1916, ibid.
26. Krumm Heller, Berlin, to Jagow, October 21, 1916, GFM, Mexiko 1, vol. 57, 
NARA, T 141, roll 20; Jagow to Krumm Heller, October 28, 1916, ibid.; memo-
randum, Montgelas, October 30, 1916, ibid.
27. 	War ministry to AA, December 18, 1916, GFM, Mexiko 1, vol. 57, NARA, T 141, 
roll 20; Friedrich, war ministry, to Bethmann, January 24, 1917, with attached 
report by first lieutenant (reserve) Commerell of January 22, 1917, ibid.
28. 	Memorandum, admiralty staff, February 7, 1917, BA/MA, RM 5/5822.
29. 	Commerell to war ministry, January 22, 1917, GFM, Mexiko 1, vol. 57, NARA, 
T 141, roll 20; Krumm Heller, Charlottenburg, to Zimmermann, July 23, 1917, 
GFM, Mexiko 16, vol. 1, NARA, T 149, roll 378; Zimmermann to Krumm Hel-
ler, July 28, 1917, ibid.
30. 	Bell, London, to Harrison, State Department, January 9, 1918, NARA, RG 59, 
Office of the Counselor, entry 543, box 2, confidential file no. 7.
31. 	Bell to Harrison, April 16, 1918, NARA, RG 59, Office of the Counselor, entry 
543, box 2, confidential file no. 7.
32. 	Bell to Harrison, April 17, 1918, NARA, RG 59, Office of the Counselor, entry 
543, box 2, confidential file no. 7.
33.	 Bell to Harrison, November 5, 1918, NARA, RG 59, Office of the Counselor, 
entry 543, box 2, confidential file no. 7.
34. 	Hurley, London, to Winslow, State Department, December 18, 1918, NARA, RG 
59, Office of the Counselor, entry 543, box 2, confidential file no. 7.
35. 	Ratibor to AA, February 17, 1916, GFM, Mexiko 1, vol. 56, NARA, T 141, roll 20.
36. 	Ratibor to AA, February 17, 1916, GFM, Mexiko 1, vol. 56, NARA, T 141, roll 
20; Zimmermann’s comments and reply, February 23, 1916, ibid. For the report 
of the Mexican consul in Havana, see Katz, Secret War, 331. For a U.S. report on 
Enrile, see W. E. D. Stokes, New York, to Lansing, June 28, 1916, NARA, RG 59, 
decimal file 862.20212, M 336, roll 55.
37. 	Deputy general command intelligence division, Karlsruhe, to AA, April 29, 1916, 
with Zimmermann’s response scribbled at bottom, GFM, Mexiko 1, vol. 56, 
NARA, T 141, roll 20; General Manteuffel, Karlsruhe, to AA, May 5, 1916, with 
enclosure of Islas’ papers, ibid.
38. 	Note by intelligence officer Berlin, OHL, April 28, 1916, GFM, Mexiko 1, vol. 56, 
NARA, T 141, roll 20.
39. 	Memorandum, Enrile, April 19, 1916, GFM, Mexiko 1, vol. 56, NARA, T 141, 
roll 20.
40. 	Memorandum, Enrile, April 19, 1916, GFM, Mexiko 1, vol. 56, NARA, T 141, 
roll 20.
268 
 Notes to Pages 38–44

41. 	Memorandum, Enrile, to AA, June 14, 1916, GFM, Mexiko 1, vol. 56, NARA, T  
141, roll 20.
42. 	Memorandum, Montgelas, June 27, 1916, GFM, Mexiko 1, vol. 56, NARA, T 
141, roll 20.
43. 	Berlin police president to AA, June 21, 1916, GFM, Mexiko 1, vol. 56, NARA, T 
141, roll 20.
44. 	Ratibor to AA, July 24, 1916, GFM, Mexiko 1, vol. 57, NARA, T 141, roll 20; 
Kemnitz’s handwritten note, on behalf of Zimmermann, ibid.
45. 	Ratibor to AA, August 16, 1916, GFM, Mexiko 1, vol. 57, NARA, T 141, roll 
20; Zimmermann to war minister, August 23, 1916, ibid.; war ministry to AA, 
September 3, 1916, ibid.; Jagow to Ratibor, September 4, 1916, ibid.; Ratibor to 
AA, February 7, 1917, ibid.; Zimmermann to Ratibor, February 10, 1917, ibid.; 
Ratibor to AA, August 21, 1917, GFM, Mexiko 1, vol. 58, NARA, T 141, roll 20.
46. 	Katz, Secret War, 348.
47. 	Memorandum, Mexican minister [Rafael Zubáran Capmany], Berlin, November 
3, 1916, GFM, Mexiko 1, vol. 57, NARA, T 141, roll 20.
48. 	Memorandum, Zimmermann, November 3, 1916, GFM, Mexiko 1, vol. 57, 
NARA, T 141, roll 20; see also Nassua, Gemeinsame Kriegführung, 24.
Chapter 4. The German Quest for Japan
1. 	Iklé, “Japanese-German Peace Negotiations,” 62.
2. 	Hayashima, Illusion des Sonderfriedens, 31.
3. 	Ibid., 44.
4. 	Ibid., 50–51, 125.
5. 	Ibid., 125.
6. 	Ibid., 50.
7. 	Iklé, “Japanese-German Peace Negotiations,” 63–65.
8. 	Hayashima, Illusion des Sonderfriedens, 64, 70.
9. 	Iklé, “Japanese-German Peace Negotiations,” 64.
10. 	Hayashima, Illusion des Sonderfriedens, 71–72.
11. 	Gerard, Face to Face, 88.
12. 	Iklé, “Japanese-German Peace Negotiations,” 70.
13. 	Mehnert, “Deutsche Weltpolitik,” 1469.
14. 	The official biographical reference book of the German foreign office gives Kem-
nitz’s first name as “Arthur.” See Auswärtiges Amt, Biographisches Handbuch, 
vol. 3, s.v. “Kemnitz, Arthur von.” Kemnitz, however, referred to himself as “Hans 
Arthur.” See his various memoranda in the Kemnitz Papers at the Hoover Institution.
15. 	Memorandum, Kemnitz, May 1945, Hoover Institution, Kemnitz Papers.
16. 	Hayashima, Illusion des Sonderfriedens, 45, 116.
17. 	Hayashima, Illusion des Sonderfriedens, 129.
18. 	Kemnitz to foreign secretary, December 4, 1930, PA-AA, Personalakte Kemnitz, 
vol. 7170.
19. 	For Kemnitz’s career details, see Auswärtiges Amt, Biographisches Handbuch, vol. 
3, s.v. “Kemnitz, Arthur von”; Ministerium des Innern, Handbuch für das Deut-
sche Reich, volumes for years 1904–1918.
20. 	Fischart, “Neue Politikerköpfe,” 172–73.
21. 	Memorandum, Kemnitz, summer 1927, PA-AA, Personalakte Kemnitz, vol. 7170; 
Auswärtiges Amt, Biographisches Handbuch, vol. 3, s.v. “Kemnitz, Arthur von.”
22. 	Hayashima, Illusion des Sonderfriedens, 94.
23. 	Erdmann, Riezler: Tagebücher, entry, May 7, 1916.
24. 	Hayashima, Illusion des Sonderfriedens, 95.
25. 	Fischer, Germany’s Aims, 228–32.
26. 	Hayashima, Illusion des Sonderfriedens, 106.
Notes to Pages 44–55 
 269

27. 	Jagow to Lucius, May 4, 1916, cited in Mehnert, “Japanese Peril,” 1470.
28. 	Iklé, “Japanese-German Peace Negotiations,” 73.
29. 	Handwritten comment, Kemnitz, on report, Lucius to AA, May 17, 1916, cited in 
Hayashima, Illusion des Sonderfriedens, 116.
30. 	Kemnitz to Solf, November 24, 1918, GFM, Mexiko 16, vol. 2, NARA, T 141, 
roll 378.
31. 	Mehnert, “Japanese Peril,” 1471.
32. 	Kemnitz to Solf, November 24, 1918, GFM, Mexiko 16, vol. 2, NARA, T 141, 
roll 378.
33. 	Memorandum, Kemnitz, July 2, 1916, cited in Hayashima, Illusion des Sonder-
friedens, 122.
34. 	Hayashima, Illusion des Sonderfriedens, 127.
35. 	Kemnitz to Solf, November 24, 1918, GFM, Mexiko 16, vol. 2, NARA, T 141, 
roll 378.
36. 	Herwarth, Washington, D.C., to war ministry, December 14, 1910, BA-MA, RM 
5/5807; Montgelas, Tokyo, to AA, March 3, 1911, GFM, Mexiko 10, NARA, T 
49, roll 378; Boy-Ed, Washington, D.C., to imperial navy office, May 7, 1914, 
BA-MA, RM 5/5826.
37. 	Kunimoto, “Japan and Mexico,” 197.
38. 	Ibid., 210.
39. 	Ibid., 216–21.
40. 	Ratibor, Madrid, to AA, July 24, 1916, GFM, Mexiko 1, vol. 57, NARA, T 141, 
roll 20.
41. 	Katz, Secret War, 353.
Chapter 5. Drafting the Telegram
1. 	Chickering, Imperial Germany, 88–94; Stevenson, First World War, 74–75.
2. 	Ritter, Sword and Scepter, vol. 3, 214.
3. 	Asprey, German High Command, 64.
4. 	Birnbaum, Peace Moves, 207.
5. 	Ludendorff to Zimmermann, December 20, 1916, and Zimmermann to Lersner, 
December 21, 1916, both cited in Ludendorff, General Staff, vol. 1, 289.
6. 	Hanssen, Diary, March 31, 1916.
7. 	Grew, Turbulent Era, vol. 1, 255.
8. 	For the Pless council, see Ritter, Sword and Scepter, vol. 3, 313–15; and Birnbaum, 
Peace Moves, 222–23.
9. 	Schwertfeger, Valentini, 145–46.
10. 	Görlitz, Regierte der Kaiser? entry, February 17, 1917.
11. 	Wolff, Tagebücher, vol. 1, no. 503, entry, January 23, 1917.
12. 	Erdmann, Riezler: Tagebücher, no. 694, entry, January 31, 1917.
13. 	Schwertfeger, Valentini, 149.
14. 	Jagow, memoirs, 185, PA-AA, Nachlass Jagow.
15. 	For firsthand accounts of the dinner, see Wolff, Tagebücher, vol. 1, no. 494, entry, 
January 6, 1917; Gerard, My Four Years, 361–62; and Frankfurter Zeitung, Janu-
ary 8, 1917.
16. 	Jagow, memoirs, 184–85, PA-AA, Nachlass Jagow.
17. 	Gerard, Face to Face, illustration facing page 304.
18. 	Birnbaum, Peace Moves, 314.
19. 	Nassua, Gemeinsame Kriegführung, 16.
20. 	Memorandum, Kemnitz, summer 1927, PA-AA, Personalakte Kemnitz, vol. 7170.
21. 	Erdmann, Riezler: Tagebücher, no. 701, entry, March 4, 1917
22. 	Jordan to Lersner, March 5, 1917, PA-AA, R 22222.
23. 	Memorandum, Rhomberg to undersecretary of state, November 29, 1918, GFM, 
Mexiko 16, vol. 2, NARA, T 149, roll 378.
270 
 Notes to Pages 55–66

24. 	Kemnitz to Solf, November 24, 1918, GFM, Mexiko 16, vol. 2, NARA, T 149, 
roll 378; New York Times, May 15, 1920; and Vossische Zeitung, May 8, 1920.
25. 	Kemnitz’s handwritten draft with comments can be found in PA-AA, R 16919; 
German foreign office historian Peter Grupp identified the signatories of the docu-
ment. Personal communication, Grupp to author, July 14, 2004. For a complete 
transcription of the handwritten draft, including all marginal comments, see von 
zur Gathen, “Zimmermann Telegram,” 5–10.
26. 	Memorandum, Enrile, April 19, 1916, GFM, Mexiko 1, vol. 56, NARA, T 141, 
roll 20.
27. 	Von zur Gathen, “Zimmermann Telegram,” 3.
28. 	Auswärtiges Amt, Biographisches Handbuch, vol. 3, s.v. “Langwerth von Sim-
mern, Ernst.”
29. 	Jordan to Lersner, March 5, 1917, PA-AA, R 22222. Comment by Reichstag 
deputy Eduard David in Carnegie, Official German Documents, vol. 2, 715. Gott-
fried zu Hohenlohe-Schillingfürst to Czernin, April 2, 1917, cited in Katz, Secret 
War, 353.
30. 	Memorandum, Rhomberg, November 29, 1918, GFM, Mexiko 16, vol. 2, NARA, 
T 149, roll 378.
31. 	Grew, Turbulent Era, vol. 1, 220.
32. 	Wolff, Tagebücher, vol. 1, no. 14, entry, August 20, 1914.
33. 	Wolff, Tagebücher, vol. 1, no. 37, entry, October 16, 1914.
34. 	Jagow, memoirs, 183, PA-AA, Nachlass Jagow.
35. 	Erdmann, Riezler: Tagebücher, no. 701, entry, March 4, 1917.
36. 	Katz, Secret War, 353.
37. 	Schiffers and Koch, Hauptausschuss, vol. 3, session 122, March 3, 1917, and ses-
sion 123, March 5, 1917.
38. 	Thurstan to FO, February 14, 1917, NA, FO 204/488.
39. 	New York Times, March 1, 1917.
40. 	Tuchman, Zimmermann Telegram, 146.
41. 	German foreign office official Otto Göppert was the first to remark on the mis-
translation. Report, Göppert, April 4, 1917, PA-AA, R 16919.
42. 	Schiffers and Koch, Hauptausschuss, vol. 3, session 123, March 5, 1917.
43. 	Hanssen, Diary, February 22, 1917.
44. 	Schiffers and Koch, Hauptausschuss, vol. 3, session 123, March 5, 1917.
45. 	Schiffers and Koch, Hauptausschuss, vol. 3, session 123, March 5, 1917. For the 
thesis that Zimmermann used the telegram principally to cater to the military, see 
Nassua, Gemeinsame Kriegführung, 45. 
46. 	Erdmann, Riezler: Tagebücher, no. 701, entry, March 4, 1917.
47. 	Nürnberger Nachrichten, October 25, 1918, referenced by Katz in Link, Wilson: 
Campaigns, 434.
48. 	Jagow, memoirs, 180, PA-AA, Nachlass Jagow.
49. 	Von Papen to Boy-Ed, August 25, 1919, cited in Reiling, Deutschland, 294. 
50. 	Katz, Secret War, 354.
51. 	Draft, Kemnitz, January 11, 1917, PA-AA, R 16919.
52. 	Heitmann, Unter Wasser, 284–87.
53. 	Memorandum, Montgelas, January 16, 1917, GFM, Mexiko 16, secret, NARA, T 
149, roll 378; see also Rhomberg to undersecretary of state, November 29, 1918, 
subheading 4, GFM, Mexiko 16, vol. 2, NARA, T 149, roll 378.
54. 	Von zur Gathen, “Zimmermann Telegram,” 13.
55. 	Report, Göppert, April 4, 1917, PA-AA, R 16919; memorandum, Montgelas, 
January 17, 1917, GFM, Mexiko 16, secret, NARA, T 149, roll 378.
56. 	Freeman, “Zimmermann Telegram Revisited,” 117; Nickles, Under the Wire, 160.
57. 	Bavarian military plenipotentiary at GHQ to Bavarian war ministry, January 12, 
1917, cited in Nassua, Gemeinsame Kriegführung, 37.
Notes to Pages 66–78 
 271

58. 	Carnegie, German Official Documentsv vol. 2, 462–63.
59. 	Wolfgang Heyne, a Social Democrat, to Wolff, see Wolff, Tagebücher, vol. 1, no. 
507, entry, January 30, 1917
60. 	H. Rumbold, Berne, to FO, February 13, 1917, NA, FO 371/3109. Also testifying 
to Zimmermann’s genuine surprise, see Grew, Turbulent Era, vol. 1, 308.
61. 	Zimmermann to Lucius, February 5, 1917, initialed by Kemnitz, February 4, 
Montgelas and Zimmermann, February 5, GFM, Mexiko 16, secret, NARA, T 
149, roll 378. Since American diplomatic cables were not available after the rup-
ture of diplomatic relations with Washington, Kemnitz used the so-called Swedish 
roundabout for transmission of this message to Mexico.
62. 	Iklé, “Japanese-German Negotiations,” 75.
Chapter 6. “Blinker” Hall
1. 	Beesly, Room 40, 8–20; Ewing, “Special War Work, Part 2,” 33–34. 
2. 	Beesly, Room 40, 16–17.
3. 	Ibid., 20.
4. 	For biographical data and Hall’s early naval career, see O’Halpin, “Hall,” 646, and 
the obituary of Admiral Sir William Reginald Hall, The Times, October 23, 1943.
5. 	Andrew, Secret Service, 91–92.
6. 	Kahn, Codebreakers, 276. For another physical description of Hall, see Andrew, 
Secret Service, 91.
7. 	Quotes are from James, Eyes of the Navy, xvii, 202.
8. 	Kahn, Codebreakers, 285.
9. 	Beesly, Room 40, 123–24; Andrew, Secret Service, 94.
10. 	Porter, Plots and Paranoia, 169.
11. 	Memorandum, de Grey, October 31, 1945, NA, HW 3/177; memorandum, Knox, 
1927, NA, HW 3/182.
12. 	O’Halpin, “British Intelligence in Ireland,” 58.
13. 	Beesly, Room 40, 190.
14. 	James, Eyes of the Navy, 38–41.
15. 	Andrew, Secret Service, 106; James, Eyes of the Navy, 131; email, Peter Freeman 
to author, March 8, 2006.
16. 	James, Eyes of the Navy, 206.
17. 	House diary, November 28, 1915, Yale University Library, House papers.
18. 	Cooper, Wilson, 317 (emphasis in the original).
19. 	May, World War, 355–56.
20. 	Hall to Roger Keyes, May 15, 1915, cited in Larsen, “British Intelligence,” 687.
21. 	Freeman, “MI1(b),” 216–17: “Either Room 40 (which then had no access to 
American telegrams, and never attacked them) was somehow acquiring and read-
ing those sent by Colonel House: or—more likely—Hall showed Hankey decrypts 
produced by MI1(b).”
22. 	Larsen, “British Intelligence,” 702, argues that it was Hall’s lobbying that turned 
the British government against House’s mediation project.
23. 	Roskill, Hankey, vol. 1, 247.
24. 	Yardley, American Black Chamber, 140.
25. 	James, Eyes of the Navy, 206.
26. 	Roskill, Hankey, vol. 1, 160–61.
27. 	Quoted in Andrew, Secret Service, 307. Like the Gallipoli operation itself, Hall’s 
plot came to naught.
28. 	Beesly, Room 40, 37–38.
29. 	HALL, 2; Beesly, Room 40, 205, 207.
30. 	James, Eyes of the Navy, 71.
31. 	Memorandum, Bell, May 1, 1919, NARA, RG 59, Office of the Counselor, entry 
543, box 5, confidential file no. 121, “secret service.”
272 
 Notes to Pages 78–89

Chapter 7. Interception and Decryption
1. 	See chapter 5.
2. 	Bernstorff, My Three Years, 53, 65–66.
3. 	“Chapter entitled Intelligence, written by Frank Birch in 1919 for the joint Birch/
Clarke history of First World War,” 11–12, NA, HW 3/8. One can only specu-
late why Room 40 did not begin attacking these intercepts earlier. Peter Freeman 
suggested that Swedish intercepts simply fell through the cracks. With Room 40 
responsible for attacking German encrypts, and army intelligence MI1b responsible 
for all others, the German-Swedish messages did not fall clearly into either agency’s 
purview and might have ranked low in priority—as long as no one guessed their 
explosive content: “It would have been nice to have been a fly on the wall at a 
meeting between Hall and DMI [director of military intelligence] which I imagine 
would have taken place around July/August 1916 at which the question of who 
was supposed to be doing what about ‘Swedish’ telegrams was discussed.” Email, 
Freeman to author, October 13, 2005.
4. 	For details, see chapter 5.
5. 	For a technical discussion of the various channels, see Friedman and Mendelsohn, 
Zimmermann Telegram, 6–8. For the U.S. route, see memorandum, Kemnitz, Sep-
tember 24, 1917, PA-AA, R 16463, and Cooper, Walter Hines Page, 329.
6. 	Report, Göppert, April 4, 1917, PA-AA, 16919.
7. 	Hall, “Affidavit.” 
8. 	HALL, 11.
9. 	Hendrick, Life and Letters, vol. 3, 335, 339–40; Carnegie, Official German Docu-
ments, vol. 2, 1337.
10. 	Hendrick to Bell, June 17, 1921, NARA, RG 59, Office of the Counselor, entry 
539, box 7, folder 1.
11. 	Friedman and Mendelsohn, Zimmermann Telegram, 6, 14.
12. 	Kahn, Codebreakers,1025, note to page 284.
13. 	Nickles, Under the Wire, 240, note 25.
14. 	Freeman, “Zimmermann Telegram Revisited,” 130; and von zur Gathen, “Zim-
mermann Telegram,” 12, 18, 24.
15. 	Tuchman, Zimmermann Telegram, 146.
16. 	Katz, Secret War, 354–55; and Nassua, Gemeinsame Kriegführung, 54–55.
17. 	Singh, Code Book, 110.
18. 	Yardley, American Black Chamber, 4. Yardley decided not to inform his superi-
ors about the vulnerability of the State Department’s codes, probably because he 
feared retribution for his unauthorized attack of a State Department code and for 
reading a highly confidential message to the president.
19. 	Yardley, American Black Chamber, 10.
20. 	See intercepted American messages from August 1917 in NA, HW 7/22. I am 
grateful to Peter Freeman for sharing this material with me.
21. 	Yardley, American Black Chamber, 136.
22. 	Bamford, Puzzle Palace, 30, 540.
23. 	Yardley, American Black Chamber, 241–45.
24. 	Hall and Peaslee, Three Wars, 8. The relevant paragraph suggests that the Brit-
ish obtained the telegram by eavesdropping on German wireless communications: 
“What happened was this: Hall picked up and decoded those cables just as he did 
all other cables and radios which the Germans were sending and receiving.”
25. 	Aldrich, Hidden Hand, 247; Bamford, Puzzle Palace, 30.
26. 	Email, Freeman to author, March 8, 2006.
27. 	I am grateful to Peter Freeman for clarifying the British procedure of sorting 
through intercepted messages; email, Freeman to author, March 8, 2006.
28. 	Kahn, Codebreakers, 282; Freeman, “Zimmermann Telegram Revisited,” 114; 
and report, Göppert, April 4, 1917, PA-AA, R 16919.
Notes to Pages 90–95 
 273

29. 	Memorandum, de Grey, October 31, 1945, NA, HW 3/177; Freeman, “Zimmer-
mann Telegram Revisited,” 118, note 46, argues persuasively that it was indeed 
Knox who first received the telegram.
30. 	Memorandum, de Grey, October 31, 1945, NA, HW 3/177.
31. 	HALL, 10.
32. 	Telegram decrypt, NA, HW 3/187, with Hall’s handwritten note on top left: “Main 
line—not exposed.” See Freeman, “Zimmermann Telegram Revisited,” 114, 117–
18. For an overview of the decryption process, see Kahn, Codebreakers, 286.
33. 	HALL, 11–12.
34. 	Hall and Peaslee, Three Wars, 9–10. 
35. 	HALL, 11–12.
36. 	Freeman, “MI1(b),” 217.
37. 	Cited in Friedman and Mendelsohn, Zimmermann Telegram, 24.
38. 	Freeman, “Zimmermann Telegram Revisited,” 121.
39. 	HALL, 13.
40. 	Ibid., 12, 14.
41. 	See chapter 8. He obscured the fact that the British had plucked the telegram from 
American cables.
42. 	Freeman, “Zimmermann Telegram Revisited,” 121–22.
43. 	Freeman, “Zimmermann Telegram Revisited,” 121–22.
44. 	HALL, 12.
45. 	Ibid.,13.
46. 	Freeman, “Zimmermann Telegram Revisited,” 123; email, Freeman to author, 
April 10, 2006: “there is no evidence that the Admiralty ever sent this [i.e., Zim-
mermann’s telegram to Eckardt of February 5, 1917] to the FO.”
47. 	Gaunt, Yield of the Years, 256; HALL, 16; Cooper, Walter Hines Page, 364.
48. 	DID to naval attaché New York, February 5, 1917, “sent 1000,” NA, HW 3/178.
49. 	Hohler, Diplomatic Petrel, 223–24. HALL, 7–10, recounts a variation of the same 
story, probably relying on information provided by Hohler. The tale sounds some-
what improbable but cannot be disproved. That Hohler planted a spy in the Mexi-
can telegraph office seems certain.
50. 	Cummins, Mexico, to FO, September 22, 1917, NA, FO 371/3068.
51. 	HALL, 17. Hall mistakenly gives the date for his telegram to Gaunt as February 
6. For a different interpretation of the sequence of events, see Freeman, “Zimmer-
mann Telegram Revisited,” 123, note 66.
52. 	HALL, 18.
53. 	Kahn, Codebreakers, 289.
54. 	See Edmonds, “Persian Gulf Prelude.”
55. 	Freeman, “Zimmermann Telegram Revisited,” 141.
56. 	Andrew, Secret Service, 107.
57. 	For a British reconstruction of the German 13040 codebook, see NA, HW 3/176.
58. 	Freeman, “Zimmermann Telegram Revisited,” 138–41, persuasively dismisses the 
notion that Room 40 used a captured German codebook.
59. 	For de Grey’s handwritten decrypt, dated February 19, 1917, and a typewritten 
version thereof, see NA, HW 3/187.
Chapter 8. A Special Relationship
1. 	Gaunt, Yield of the Years, 135. 
2. 	Beesly, Room 40, 228–29.
3. 	Gaunt, Yield of the Years, 137–38.
4. 	Seymour, Intimate Papers, vol. 2, 426. 
5. 	House to Balfour, November 23, 1916, cited in Sanders and Taylor, British Propa-
ganda, 180.
6. 	Herbert Yardley, cited in Beesly, Room 40, 233.
274 
 Notes to Pages 95–109

7. 	On American intelligence during World War I, see Jeffreys-Jones, American Espio-
nage, 46–47. For Polk, see Srodes, Allen Dulles, 48; and Jeffreys-Jones, American 
Espionage, 44–45. For Harrison and the establishment and operations of BSI, see 
Lansing, War Memoirs, 318–25.
8. 	Srodes, Allen Dulles, 50–52.
9. 	Kahn, “Edward Bell,” 144–47.
10. 	Lansing, War Memoirs, 318–19.
11. 	Cooper, Walter Hines Page, 355.
12. 	Handwritten note, Balfour, January 12, 1917, and response, Drummond, NA, FO 
800/383.
13. 	Rintelen, Dark Invader, xiv–xxii.
14. 	Beesly, Room 40, 229–30. After the U.S. entry into the war, Rintelen was extra-
dited to the United States and sentenced to four years in prison. He was released in 
1920.
15. 	Beesly, Room 40, 228; Bernstorff, My Three Years, 197–99.
16. 	Thomson, The Scene Changes, entry, September 4, 1915.
17. 	Doerries, Imperial Challenge, 115.
18. 	Beesly, Room 40, 232; for operational consequences of the Papen papers, see 
Boghardt, Spies of the Kaiser, 125.
19. 	Tóibín, “Tragedy of Roger Casement,” 53, 56.
20. 	O’Halpin, “British Intelligence in Ireland,” 60.
21. 	William Dean Howells, letter to the editor, New York Evening Post, May 8, 1916, 
cited in Link, Wilson: Campaigns, 13.
22. 	Tóibín, “Tragedy of Roger Casement,” 54.
23. 	Porter, Plots and Paranoia, 134, 144.
24. 	Thomson, The Scene Changes, 296, entry, April 23, 1916.
25. 	Sanders and Taylor, British Propaganda, 175.
26. 	James, Eyes of the Navy, 112–15.
27. 	HALL, 12.
28. 	Ibid., 17.
29. 	Ibid., 17. On Hardinge’s interactions with Hall generally, see Hardinge, Old 
Diplomacy, 205; Tomes, Balfour and Foreign Policy, 17; Zebel, Balfour, 232; and 
Beesly, Room 40, 199, 235.
30. 	HALL, 20.
31. 	Balfour to Spring Rice, February 20, 1917, NA, FO 115/2266.
32. 	Spring Rice to Balfour, February 23, 1917, NA, FO 115/2266.
33. 	Balfour to Greene, Admiralty, February 17, 1917, NA, FO 800/204.
34. 	Thurstan to Balfour and Spring Rice, February 26, 1917, NA, FO 204/488.
35. 	Memorandum, Spring Rice, March 12, 1917, NA, FO 115/2266.
36. 	See chapter 7.
37. 	HALL, 19.
38. 	Bell, Tokyo, to Hurley, Washington, July 13, 1921, NARA, RG 59, Office of the 
Counselor, entry 539, box 7, folder 1.
39. 	HALL, 20.
40. 	Ibid., 17.
41. 	Campbell to Hardinge, February 20, 1917, HALL, 21.
42. 	Memorandum, Hardinge, no date, HALL, 21–22.
43. 	Note, Balfour, no date, HALL, 22.
44. 	Cooper, Walter Hines Page, 367.
45. 	Memorandum, Laughlin, “Interception of the Zimmermann Note in 1917,” no 
date, Herbert Hoover Library, Irwin Boyle Laughlin papers. Laughlin wrote some 
time after the war from memory, and his account is somewhat confused. It confirms, 
however, that Hall called on him and that he did not know of the telegram at this 
point in time.
Notes to Pages 110–119 
 275

46. 	Quotes are from Cooper, Walter Hines Page, 368.
47. 	Memorandum, de Grey, October 31, 1945, NA, HW 3/177; Bell to Hurley, July 
13, 1921, NARA, RG 59, entry 539, box 7, folder 1.
48. 	Page to Lansing, February 24, 1917, FRUS, 1917, supplement 1; a copy of the 
telegram handed to Page can be found in NA, HW 3/187, with Hall’s handwritten 
comment, “Inland cable on American soil—this was the one handed to Dr Page 
and exposed [published] by the President.”
49. 	For the Foreign Office’s reminder to Page about secrecy, see Drummond to Page, 
February 23, 1917, NARA, RG 59, Office of the Counselor, entry 543, box 5, file 
123.
50. 	Dugdale, Balfour, vol. 2, 138.
51. 	Cooper, Walter Hines Page, 368.
52. 	Page to Lansing, February 24, 1917, 2 a.m., cited in Hendrick, Life and Letters, 
vol. 3, 332.
53. 	Bell to Hurley, July 13, 1921, NARA, RG 59, Office of the Counselor, entry 539, 
box 7, folder 1.
54. 	Page to Lansing, February 24, 1917, 1 p.m., cited in Hendrick, Life and Letters, 
vol. 3, 333–34. 
55. 	HALL, 25–26.
56. 	Page to Lansing, February 24, 1917, FRUS, 1917, supplement 1.
57. 	“Effort will be made,” Lansing wrote Page, “to secure copies of all German cipher 
messages as far back as possible.” Lansing to Page, February 28, 1917, FRUS, 
1917, supplement 1.
58. 	Memorandum, Lansing, March 4, 1917, cited in Lansing, War Memoirs, 228. 
Polk obtained the Western Union telegrams on February 27. 
59. 	Winkler, Nexus, 121–22.
60. 	Lansing to Page, February 28, 1917, FRUS, 1917, supplement 1.
61. 	Page to Lansing, March 1, 1917, cited in Hendrick, Life and Letters, vol. 3, 344.
62. 	Freeman, “Zimmermann Telegram Revisited,” 126–27.
63. 	HALL, 26–27.
64. 	Lansing to Page, March 1, 1917, FRUS, 1917, supplement 1.
65. 	Bell to Hurley, July 13, 1921, NARA, RG 59, Office of the Counselor, entry 539, 
box 7, folder 1.
66. 	HALL, 28.
67. 	Memorandum, de Grey, October 31, 1945, NA, HW 3/177.
68. 	Bell’s and de Grey’s telegram decrypt is in NARA, RG 59, decimal file 862.20212, 
M 336, roll 55.
69. 	Kahn, Codebreakers, 294. 
70. 	HALL, 28
71. 	Page to Lansing, March 2, 1917, cited in Hendrick, Life and Letters, vol. 3, 345.
72. 	Diary, Chandler Anderson, entry, March 11, 1917, LC, Chandler Anderson papers. 
73. 	Balfour to Thurstan, February 27, 1917, NA, FO 115/2266.
74. 	Thurstan to Balfour, February 27, 1917, NA, FO 115/2266.
75. 	Page to Lansing, March 1, 1917, NARA, RG 59, decimal file 862.20212, M 336, 
roll 55.
76. 	Balfour to Spring Rice and Thurstan, March 14, 1917, NA, FO 115/2266. 
77. 	Spring Rice to Balfour, March 12, 1917, NA, FO 115/2266.
78. 	Hohler, Washington, to Hardinge, London, March 23, 1917, Hardinge papers, 
vol. 31, referring to a conversation with House on March 9, 1917.
79. 	Memorandum, Thurstan, June 23, 1917, cited in Katz, Secret War, 466.
80. 	Gaunt to Hall, February 26, 1917, NA, HW 3/178.
81. 	Hall to Gaunt, February 27, 1917, NA, HW 3/178.
82. 	Hall to Gaunt, March 1, 1917, NA, HW 3/178.
276 
 Notes to Pages 119–128

Chapter 9. The Smoking Gun
1. 	Memorandum, Montgelas, January 17, 1917, GFM, Mexiko 16, secret, NARA, T 
149, roll 378; for details, see chapter 5.
2. 	Report, Göppert, April 4, 1917, PA-AA, R 16919; von zur Gathen, “Zimmermann 
Telegram,” 20–22.
3. 	Bernstorff, My Three Years, 380.
4. 	Bernstorff to AA, January 19, 1917, cited in Bernstorff, My Three Years, 359.
5. 	Bernstorff to AA, January 27, 1917, and AA to Bernstorff, January 29, 1917, both 
cited in Doerries, Imperial Challenge, 216–17.
6. 	Memorandum, Lansing, February 4, 1917, cited in Lansing, War Memoirs, 210–
12; Bernstorff, My Three Years, 379.
7. 	Elkus, Constantinople, to Lansing, January 8, 1917, FRUS, 1917, supplement 1.
8. 	Gerard, Berlin, to Lansing, January 10, 1917, FRUS, 1917, supplement 1.
9. 	Lansing, “Note on the Probable Renewal of Submarine Warfare,” January 24, 
1917, cited in Lansing, War Memoirs, 206–7.
10. 	Memorandum, Lansing, February 4, 1917, cited in Lansing, War Memoirs, 210.
11. 	MacMillan, Paris 1919, 5.
12. 	On Wilson’s life and presidency, see Cooper, Woodrow Wilson.
13. 	House had never served in the military but found it useful to sport the honorary 
title “colonel,” which an appreciative benefactor had conferred upon him. See 
Ross, Propaganda for War, 148.
14. 	Seymour, Intimate Papers, vol. 1, 114.
15. 	Cooper, Woodrow Wilson, 318. 
16. 	Ibid., 367.
17. 	Link, Wilson: Campaigns, 291–96.
18. 	Memorandum, Lansing, February 4, 1917, cited in Lansing, War Memoirs, 210–12.
19. 	Link, Wilson: Campaigns, 296–97.
20. 	Houston, Eight Years, vol. 1, 229.
21. 	Franklin Lane to George Lane, February 9, 1917, in Lane, Letters, 233–34.
22. 	Spring Rice to FO, February 17, 1917, NA, FO 371/3109.
23. 	“Convoys for Shipping,” Washington Post, February 14, 1917.
24. 	Franklin Lane to George Lane, February 9, 1917, in Lane, Letters, 234. 
25. 	Franklin Lane to George Lane, February 16, 1917, in Lane, Letters, 237; Cronon, 
Cabinet Diaries, 105–106.
26. 	Houston, Eight Years, vol. 1, 232, 235.
27. 	Mirow, Seekrieg, 140.
28. 	Spring Rice to FO, February 10, 1917, NA, FO 371/3108.
29. 	Houston, Eight Years, vol. 1, 235–36.
30. 	Franklin Lane to George Lane, February 25, 1917, in Lane, Letters, 240.
31. 	Nickles, Under the Wire, 149.
32. 	Memorandum, Lansing, March 4, 1917, cited in Lansing, War Memoirs, 229.
33. 	House diary, February 26, 1917, Yale University Library, House papers.
34. 	Lansing did not return to Washington until February 27, by which time “I found 
Polk had [already] obtained the original cipher message filed [with Western Union] 
by Bernstorff.” See memorandum, Lansing, March 4, 1917, cited in Lansing, War 
Memoirs, 228.
35. 	Polk to Fletcher, February 26, 1917, FRUS, 1917, supplement 1.
36. 	Fletcher to State Department, February 26, 1917, FRUS, 1917, supplement 1.
37. 	Lansing to Page, February 27, 1917, FRUS, 1917, supplement 1.
38. 	Fletcher to State Department, March 10, 1917, FRUS, 1917, supplement 1. Only 
after Washington’s declaration of war did Carranza declare Mexico’s strict neutral-
ity, thereby openly rejecting an alliance with Germany.
39. 	Memorandum, Polk, February 23, 1917, Yale University Library, Polk papers, 
confidential diary, vol. 1.
Notes to Pages 129–137 
 277

40. 	Memorandum, Polk, February 28, 1917, Yale University Library, Polk papers, 
confidential diary, vol. 2.
41. 	Guthrie, Tokyo, to State Department, March 3, 1917, FRUS, 1917, supplement 1.
42. 	House diary, February 26, 1917, Yale University Library, House papers.
43. 	Wilson to House, February 26, 1917, in Link, Papers of Woodrow Wilson, vol. 41.
44. 	House to Wilson, February 27, 1917, in Seymour, Intimate Papers, vol. 2. For 
House’s tip to Gaunt, see chapter 7.
45. 	Proceedings of the 64th Congress, March 1, 1917, 4599; Link, Wilson: Cam-
paigns, 346, denies this claim. Katz, Secret War, 359, suggests the telegram reached 
Wilson “at an opportune moment.” Tuchman, Zimmermann Telegram, 170, con-
tends the president sought to use the telegram to preempt a looming Senate fili-
buster against his armed ships bill. Nassua, Gemeinsame Kriegführung, 62, argues 
that Wilson sought to sway Congress in favor of the bill by publishing the telegram 
on the day of the House vote.
46. 	May, World War, 422.
47. 	Cooper, Vanity of Power, 176: “Two simultaneous events [the telegram and the 
sinking of the Laconia] insured that armed neutrality would be considered entirely 
in light of the prospect of intervention.”
48. 	Seymour, Intimate Papers, 452.
49. 	Congressional Record, 64th Cong., 2nd Sess., March 1, 1917, 54:4595.
50. 	Lansing desk diary, Tuesday, February 27, 1917, LC, Lansing papers.
51.	 Phillips, Ventures in Diplomacy, 80.
52. 	Lansing desk diary, Tuesday, February 27, 1917, LC, Lansing papers.
53. 	Memorandum, Lansing, March 4, 1917, cited in Lansing, War Memoirs, 228.
54. 	Cabinet diaries, Josephus Daniels, Tuesday, February 27, 1917, LC, Daniels papers.
55. 	“A News Report,” no date, in Link, Papers of Woodrow Wilson, vol. 41, 302–4.
56. 	Link, Wilson: Campaigns, 345.
57. 	Memorandum, Lansing, March 4, 1917, cited in Lansing, War Memoirs, 228.
58. 	Tuchman, Zimmermann Telegram, 174.
59. 	Memorandum, Lansing, March 4, 1917, cited in Lansing, War Memoirs, 228; 
Lansing desk diary, Wednesday, February 28, 1917, LC, Lansing papers.
60. 	On Hitchcock, see Cooper, Vanity of Power, 28; and Fleming, Illusion of Vic-
tory, 31.
61. 	Memorandum, Lansing  March 4, 1917, cited in Lansing, War Memoirs, 229.
62. 	Lansing desk diary, Wednesday, February 28, 1917, LC, Lansing papers.
63. 	Memorandum, Lansing, March 4, 1917, cited in Lansing, War Memoirs, 229.
64.	 House diary, February 28, 1917, Yale University Library, House papers.
65. 	Memorandum, Lansing, March 4, 1917, cited in Lansing, War Memoirs, 230.
66. 	Lansing desk diary, Wednesday, February 28, 1917, LC, Lansing papers.
67. 	For the published text and accompanying AP explanatory note, see New York 
Times, March 1, 1917; for a linguistic critique of the “generous Anglo-Saxon 
translation practice,” see Koopmann, Diplomatie, 292.
68. 	Chalkley, Zach Lamar Cobb, 58, 84, 86.
69. 	Letter, Lansing to Edward N. Smith, March 3, 1917, LC, Lansing papers, vol. 35. 
Smith was a personal friend of Lansing’s.
70. 	Congressional Record, 64th Cong., 2nd Sess., March 1, 1917, 54:4600; Lansing 
memorandum, March 4, 1917, cited in Lansing, War Memoirs, 230–31.
71. 	HALL, 33.
72. 	Lansing desk diary, March 1, 1917, LC, Lansing papers.
73. 	House diary, March 1, 1917, Yale University Library, House papers; only the 
United Press correspondent was unhappy because Lansing had given the telegram 
to the rival AP. Ever keen on maintaining excellent relations with all press organs, 
House asked Wilson “to see that the U.P. get the next sensation.”
74. 	Lansing, War Memoirs, 232.
278 
 Notes to Pages 137–144

Chapter 10. Congress Debates the Telegram
1. 	Cooper, Woodrow Wilson, 358.
2. 	Cooper, Vanity of Power, 178.
3. 	Memoir, Lansing, March 4, 1917, cited in Lansing, War Memoirs, 229.
4. 	Cooper, Vanity of Power, 179–80.
5. 	Congressional Record, 64th Cong., 2nd Sess., March 1, 1917, 54:4603.
6. 	Cooper, Vanity of Power, 182–83.
7. 	Ibid., 181.
8. 	“Text of the President’s Statement to the Public,” New York Times, March 5, 1917.
9. 	Cooper, Vanity of Power, 174–89; Millis, Road to War, 410. 
10. 	Lodge to Roosevelt, March 2, 1917, Roosevelt, Correspondence, vol. 2, 499.
11. 	Congressional Record, 64th Cong., 2nd Sess., March 1, 1917, 54:4569–70.
12. 	Tuchman, Zimmermann Telegram, 177.
13. 	Congressional Record, 64th Cong., 2nd Sess., March 1, 1917, 54:4598, 4603–5.
14. 	Lodge to Roosevelt, March 2, 1917, in Roosevelt, Correspondence, vol. 2, 500.
15. 	Congressional Record, 64th Cong., 2nd Sess., March 1, 1917, 54:4571.
16. 	Congressional Record, 64th Cong., 2nd Sess., March 1, 1917, 54:4570–71.
17. 	Congressional Record, 64th Cong., 2nd Sess., March 1, 1917, 54:4571.
18. 	Congressional Record, 64th Cong., 2nd Sess., March 1, 1917, 54:4572.
19. 	Congressional Record, 64th Cong., 2nd Sess., March 1, 1917, 54:4604.
20. 	See the AP note, as reprinted in the New York Times, March 1, 1917: “This docu-
ment has been in the hands of the Government since President Wilson broke off 
diplomatic relations with Germany. It has been kept secret while the President has 
been asking Congress for full authority to deal with Germany, and while Congress 
has been hesitating. It was in the President’s hands while Chancellor [Theobald] 
von Bethmann Hollweg was declaring that the United States had placed an inter-
pretation on the submarine declaration ‘never intended by Germany’ and that 
Germany had promoted and honored friendly relations with the United States ‘as 
an heirloom from Frederick the Great.’” Lansing certainly did not deliberately pro-
vide AP correspondent Hood with a false date when informing him of the telegram 
on February 28, therefore a simple misunderstanding between the two men is the 
most likely explanation for the AP’s misstatement. 
21. 	Congressional Record, 64th Cong., 2nd Sess., March 1, 1917, 54:4569, 4571–72, 
4596, 4599, 4604.
22. 	Lodge to Roosevelt, March 2, 1917, in Roosevelt, Correspondence, vol. 2, 499.
23. 	For Stone, see Towne, Senator William J. Stone.
24. 	Congressional Record, 64th Cong., 2nd Sess., March 1, 1917, 54:4593.
25. 	Congressional Record, 64th Cong., 2nd Sess., March 1, 1917, 54:4593.
26. 	Congressional Record, 64th Cong., 2nd Sess., March 1, 1917, 54:4593
27. 	Congressional Record, 64th Cong., 2nd Sess., March 1, 1917, 54:4593.
28. 	Congressional Record, 64th Cong., 2nd Sess., March 1, 1917, 54:4593.
29. 	Congressional Record, 64th Cong., 2nd Sess., March 1, 1917, 54:4594.
30. 	Congressional Record, 64th Cong., 2nd Sess., March 1, 1917, 54:4594.
31. 	Congressional Record, 64th Cong., 2nd Sess., March 1, 1917, 54:4594.
32. 	Congressional Record, 64th Cong., 2nd Sess., March 1, 1917, 54:4594.
33. 	Congressional Record, 64th Cong., 2nd Sess., March 1, 1917, 54:4594–95.
34. 	Congressional Record, 64th Cong., 2nd Sess., March 1, 1917, 54:4595.
35. 	Congressional Record, 64th Cong., 2nd Sess., March 1, 1917, 54:4595.
36. 	Congressional Record, 64th Cong., 2nd Sess., March 1, 1917, 54:4596.
37. 	Congressional Record, 64th Cong., 2nd Sess., March 1, 1917, 54:4596.
38. 	Congressional Record, 64th Cong., 2nd Sess., March 1, 1917, 54:4597.
39. 	Congressional Record, 64th Cong., 2nd Sess., March 1, 1917, 54:4597.
40. 	Congressional Record, 64th Cong., 2nd Sess., March 1, 1917, 54:4597. 
41. 	Congressional Record, 64th Cong., 2nd Sess., March 1, 1917, 54:4601.
Notes to Pages 145–157 
 279

42. 	Congressional Record, 64th Cong., 2nd Sess., March 1, 1917, 54:4603.
43. 	Congressional Record, 64th Cong., 2nd Sess., March 1, 1917, 54:4618.
Chapter 11. The American Public
1. 	Memorandum, Lansing, March 4, 1917, cited in Lansing, War Memoirs, 229.
2. 	Lansing, War Memoirs, 232.
3. 	Wellington House, “American Press Resumé,” March 7, 1917, cited in Peterson, 
Propaganda for War, 314.
4. 	HALL, 27.
5. 	Tuchman, Zimmermann Telegram, 199.
6. 	Link, Wilson: Campaigns, 354.
7. 	Nassua, Gemeinsame Kriegführung, 65.
8. 	Cooper, Woodrow Wilson, 378.
9. 	The sample includes the Albuquerque Morning Journal, Arizona Republican, 
Atlanta Journal, Boston Globe, Chicago Daily Tribune, Dallas Morning News, 
Florida Times-Union, Houston Post, Los Angeles Times, Milwaukee Journal, Mil-
waukee Sentinel, New York American, New York Times, New Yorker Staats-Zeitung, 
News and Courier (Charleston, S.C.), San Antonio Express, San Francisco Chron-
icle, Santa Fe New Mexican, Savannah Tribune, Tucson Citizen, Washington Post, 
Wisconsin State Journal. The New Yorker Staats-Zeitung had the largest circula-
tion (120,000) among German American newspapers. Due to its size and editorial 
weight, it is included in this sample as well as in the analysis of German American 
papers below.
10. 	Memorandum, Spring Rice, December 29, 1916, NA, FO 800/242.
11. 	New York World, February 1, 1917, and New York Times, February 1, 1917.
12. 	 See editorials in the Chicago Daily Tribune, Milwaukee Journal, New Yorker Staats-
Zeitung, and San Francisco Chronicle, February 1, 1917; New York American, 
quoted in Millis, Road to War, 387; Dallas Morning News and Houston Post, 
February 2, 1917. The Staats-Zeitung’s “wait and see” stance was not dissimilar to 
Wilson’s subsequently adopted “overt act” policy.
13. 	See editorials in the Milwaukee Sentinel, February 1, 1917, and Florida Times-
Union, February 2, 1917.
14. 	Arizona Republican, Albuquerque Morning Journal, both February 1, 1917; Tuc-
son Citizen, Santa Fe New Mexican, San Antonio Express, all February 2, 1917.
15. 	Peterson, Propaganda for War, 8.
16. 	See editorials in the Washington Post, February 20 and February 28, 1917; Florida 
Times-Union, February 25 and February 28, 1917; San Francisco Chronicle, Feb-
ruary 27, 1917; and Arizona Republican, February 28, 1917.
17. 	Spring Rice to FO, February 2, 1917, NA, FO 800/242.
18. 	Spring Rice to Balfour, February 9, 1917, NA, FO 371/3109.
19. 	Letter, Spring Rice, February 23, 1917, NA, FO 800/242.
20. 	Spring Rice to FO, February 20, 1917, NA, FO 371/3109; Spring Rice to FO, 
February 24, 1917, ibid.; and Spring Rice to FO, February 23, 1917, NA, FO 
800/211.
21. 	House diary, February 24, 1917, Yale University Library, House papers.
22. 	Letter, Spring Rice, February 23, 1917, NA, FO 800/242.
23. 	Lansing to Edward N. Smith, February 27, 1917, LC, Lansing papers, vol. 24.
24. 	Cooper, Vanity of Power, 167.
25. 	Tuchman, Zimmermann Telegram, 185.
26. 	See editorials in the Boston Globe, Los Angeles Times, Milwaukee Journal, News 
and Courier, Santa Fe New Mexican, March 1, 1917; in Albuquerque Morning 
Journal, Atlanta Journal, Chicago Tribune, and New York World, March 2, 1917; 
and in Tucson Citizen, March 3, 1917.
27. 	Arizona Republican and New York Times, March 2, 1917.
280 
 Notes to Pages 157–164

28. 	Houston Post, New Yorker Staats-Zeitung, and Washington Post, March 2, 1917.
29. 	Florida Times-Union and San Francisco Chronicle, March 2, 1917. See below, 
note 33, for the Milwaukee Sentinel. The remaining papers variably uttered cau-
tion, surprise, and disgust. None of them regarded the telegram as a casus belli. 
The Missouri press portrayed the telegram as either insidious or ridiculous. See 
Crighton, Missouri, 177–78.
30. 	Katz, Secret War, 361.
31. 	Lansing, War Memoirs, 231–32.
32. 	Memorandum, Lansing, March 4, 1917, cited in Lansing, War Memoirs, 231. Fol-
lowing in Lansing’s footsteps, Tuchman, Zimmermann Telegram, 183. Zimmer-
mann’s motives for admitting his authorship are explored in the following chapter.
33. 	Dallas Morning News, Houston Post, New York Times, and San Francisco Chron-
icle, March 2, 1917. It is true that the hitherto pro-German Milwaukee Sentinel 
called the telegram “serious if authentic” and counseled postponement of a final 
judgment until the German foreign secretary had had a chance to comment. Even 
the Sentinel, however, voiced no serious doubt about the telegram’s authenticity, as 
the editorial went on to play it down as “a move on the diplomatic chessboard,” 
quite common in European diplomacy, and conceded that “adequate measures” 
must be “taken by the government for the full protection of the honor and interests 
and possessions of this republic.” Milwaukee Sentinel, March 2, 1917.
34. 	Gaunt to Hall, March 6, 1917, HALL, 30.
35. 	Tuchman, Zimmermann Telegram, 181, argues that the Round Table dinner rep-
resented an example of genuine doubt about the telegram’s authenticity.
36. 	For example, see Link, Wilson: Campaigns, 356.
37. 	Doerries, “Promoting Kaiser and Reich,” 149.
38. 	Telegram, Viereck to Burleson, March 1, 1917, LC, Burleson papers, 2886–88.
39. 	Viereck, Strangest Friendship, 190.
40. 	Mugridge, View from Xanadu, 114.
41. 	New York American, March 2, 1917.
42. 	Viereck, Germs of Hate, 114.
43. 	Tuchman, Zimmermann Telegram, 185, portrays Viereck as a “leader of pro- 
German sentiment” at the time of the telegram’s disclosure.
44. 	Devlin, Too Proud to Fight, 651–52.
45. 	New York Times, March 2, 1917, comments by Herman Metz and Ludwig Nis-
sen, respectively.
46. 	The following review of ten German American newspapers is based on Nassua, 
Gemeinsame Kriegführung, 93–106. Unless otherwise noted, all quotes were 
translated from German into English by the author here.
Chapter 12. War
1. 	Hall to Gaunt, March 1, 1917, NA, HW 3/178.
2. 	Gaunt to Hall, March 1, 1917, NA, HW 3/178.
3. 	British propaganda report to Norman Thwaites, April 20, 1917, NA, FO 115/2185.
4. 	Lansing to Wilson, March 19, 1917, in FRUS, Lansing Papers, vol. 1.
5. 	Link, “That Cobb Interview”; Fleming, Illusion of Victory, 6.
6. 	Roosevelt to Lodge, March 18, 1917, Roosevelt, Correspondence, vol. 2, 504.
7. 	Hohler to Hardinge, March 23, 1917, Cambridge University Library, Hardinge 
papers, vol. 31.
8. 	Cronon, Cabinet Diaries of Josephus Daniels, March 20, 1917.
9. 	Link, Papers of Woodrow Wilson, 401–8.
10. 	Hodgson, Woodrow Wilson’s Right Hand, 139.
11. 	Franklin K. Lane to George W. Lane, April 1, 1917, in Lane, Letters, 242.
12. 	Tumulty, Woodrow Wilson, 256. Fleming, Illusion of Victory, 21, doubts the  
accuracy of the presidential crying scene. 
Notes to Pages 165–183 
 281

13. 	Cooper, Woodrow Wilson, 387, calls it “the greatest presidential speech since Lin-
coln’s second inaugural address.”
14. 	Leonard, War Addresses, 41–42.
15. 	For a description of reactions to Wilson’s speech, see Link, Wilson: Campaigns, 430.
16. 	“Is La Follette Mad?” Madison Democrat, April 6, 1917.
17. 	Fleming, Illusion of Victory, 31–32.
18. 	Link, Wilson: Campaigns, 430.
19. 	For accounts of La Follette’s speech and reactions thereto, see Cooper, Vanity of 
Power, 198; Millis, Road to War, 440, 453; and Fleming, Illusion of Victory, 30–37.
20. 	Fleming, Illusion of Victory, 36.
21. 	Ibid., 37–42.
22. 	“Debate Lasted 16 1/2 Hours,” New York Times, April 6, 1917.
23. 	Foreign intelligence post (Auslandsnachrichtenstelle) of the AA to Kemnitz and 
Montgelas, April 10, 1917, GFM, Mexiko 16, vol. 1, NARA, T 149, roll 378. 
Zimmermann initialed the report on the same day. 
24. 	Fleming, Illusion of Victory, 37–42.
25. 	Cooper, “United States,” 437, 441.
26. 	Roosevelt to Lodge, April 6, 1917, in Roosevelt, Correspondence, vol. 2, 507.
27. 	“Toasts Kaiser, Is Hanged. Man in Wyoming Is Cut Down and Driven from 
Town,” New York Times, April 3, 1917.
28. 	Lansing to Senator Claude A. Swanson, March 29, 1917, LC, Lansing papers, vol. 
25; Franklin K. Lane to George W. Lane, April 1, 1917, Lane, Letters, 243. For 
U.S. war sentiment in March, see generally Cooper, Vanity of Power, 191.
29. 	Memorandum, Spring Rice, March 9, 1917, NA, FO 800/242.
30. 	Fleming, Illusion of Victory, 82.
31. 	Ibid., 14.
32. 	Millis, Road to War, 433–34. The injured man, Alexander Bannwart, was of Swiss 
German descent.
33. 	Cooper, Vanity of Power, 206; Unger, La Follette, 343, note 26.
34. 	Spring Rice to Hardinge, April 13, 1917, Cambridge University Library, Hardinge 
papers, vol. 31.
35. 	Keith, “Southern Draft Resistance,” 1338.
36. 	Link, Wilson: Campaigns, 391, 429, note 103. 
37. 	As Cooper, “United States,” 437, points out, “Contrary to the fulminations of war 
hawks like Roosevelt, an outraged public was not forcing a reluctant Wilson into 
war.” 
38. 	“German Plotting in Mexico,” Washington Post, March 16, 1917. 
39. 	Burk, Sinews of War, 81.
40. 	Minutes, war cabinet meeting, December 9, 1916, CAB 23/1, LC.
41. “The Duty of Americans,” Florida Times-Union, April 6, 1917.
Chapter 13. Fallout in Berlin
1. 	Berliner Lokalanzeiger telephone service from Holland, March 2, 1917, GFM, 
Mexiko 16, secret, NARA, T 149, roll 378.
2. 	As cited in “Defending ‘Plot,’ Zimmermann Accuses U.S.,” Washington Post, 
March 4, 1917.
3. 	Lansing, War Memoirs, 228; Tuchman, Zimmermann Telegram, 183; Katz, Secret 
War, 372, contends that a flat-out denial would “undoubtedly have been the most 
clever maneuver.”
4. 	HALL, 31.
5. 	The notion that Zimmermann first admitted his role to Hale appears to originate 
with Hale himself. See Ross, Propaganda for War, 141, quoting from Hale’s pa-
pers at Yale University. See also Viereck, Strangest Friendship, 190, and Tuchman, 
Zimmermann Telegram, 183. For Zimmermann’s statement to the anonymous 
282 
 Notes to Pages 183–193

overseas news agency correspondent, see  “Defending ‘Plot,’ Zimmermann Ac-
cuses U.S.,” Washington Post, March 4, 1917.
6. 	Peter Freeman explained Hall’s decision to pass up on releasing the February 5 
message thus: “The ZT stands alone as demonstrating German perfidy; if we add 
the 5 Feb message, which is frankly a bit of a detail, there is a danger of diluting 
the impact. What will German security authorities think? The ZT went via Wash-
ington and there are plenty of potential suspects, but the 5 Feb message went only 
to Mexico City and there are only two people there (Eckardt and Magnus) who 
read it. And the Germans (unlike the Americans) will know about the Swedes’ part 
in transmitting the 5 Feb message; we do not plan to give the Germans any idea 
that the British were involved at all in the acquisition of the ZT, but every new 
revelation (especially when the technical details of transmission are different—the 
only common factors between the ZT and the 5 Feb message are that they were 
transmitted via London, arrived in Mexico, and were encoded in 13040) is going 
to make that a bit more difficult to conceal from them.” Email, Freeman to author, 
April 18, 2006. 
7. 	Zimmermann to Lucius, February 17, 1917, cited in Iklé, “Japanese-German 
Peace Negotiations,” 75; memorandum, Ludendorff to Bethmann, February 26, 
1917, ibid.
8. 	Bethmann to Ludendorff, March 3, 1917, cited in Iklé, “Japanese-German Peace 
Negotiations,” 75.
9. 	Hayashima, Illusion des Sonderfriedens, 151.
10. 	Leipziger Zeitung, March 5, 1917, cited in Katz, Secret War, 370.
11. 	Vorwärts, March 4, 1917.
12. 	Wolff, Tagebücher, vol. 1, entry no. 525, March 2, 1917; Berliner Tageblatt, March 
5, 1917, cited in Katz, Secret War, 371.
13. 	Frankfurter Zeitung, March 5, 1917, evening edition.
14. 	Erdmann, Riezler: Tagebücher, entry, March 4, 1917.
15. 	Lerchenfeld to Hertling, March 20, 1917, in Deuerlein, Briefwechsel, entry no. 357.
16. 	Deutsche Tageszeitung, March 3, 1917.
17. 	Wolff, Tagebücher, vol. 1, no. 526, entry, March 5, 1917, and no. 547, entry, April 
3, 1917; Lerchenfeld, Berlin, to Hertling, Munich, March 20, 1917, in Deuerlein, 
Briefwechsel, doc. no. 357.
18. 	Wolff, Tagebücher, vol. 1, no. 590, entry, August 15, 1917.
19. 	Egan, Constantinople, to secretary of state, March 16, 1917, NARA, RG 59, deci-
mal file 862.20212, M 336, roll 55.
20. 	National-Zeitung, March 6, 1917; Kölnische Zeitung, March 3, 1917, both cited 
in Katz, Secret War, 369.
21. 	Deutsche Tageszeitung, March 6, 1917, cited in Katz, Secret War, 371.
22. 	Vossische Zeitung, March 5, 1917.
23. 	 During the last two years of the war, while parliament was adjourned, the Reich-
stag’s budget committee met on a regular basis, taking on the character of an 
executive agency for the broader body. See Chickering, Imperial Germany, 165.
24. 	Schiffers and Koch, Hauptausschuss, sessions of March 3 and 5, 1917, 1149–55; 
translation of Zimmermann’s quote implicating Bernstorff adopted from Nickles, 
Under the Wire, 153.
25. 	Deutscher Reichstag, Stenographische Berichte, vol. 309, 95th session, March 29, 
1917, 2836, 2863, 2874.
26. 	Hohenlohe to Austrian foreign ministry, March 3, 1917, cited in Katz, Secret War, 
372.
27. 	“Kaiser calls Zimmermann for a Long Conference,” Washington Post, March 4, 
1917.
28. 	Nassua, Gemeinsame Kriegführung, 35–37.
29. 	Ludendorff, Own Story, vol. 2, 15.
30. 	Lerchenfeld to Hertling, May 31, 1917, in Deuerlein, Briefwechsel, doc. no. 369.
31. 	House to Hall, September 22, 1917, in Seymour, Intimate Papers, 454.
Notes to Pages 193–200 
 283

32. 	Chickering, Imperial Germany, 163–64; Hürter, “Die Staatssekretäre,” 238.
33. 	Erdmann, Riezler: Tagebücher, entry, May 8, 1917.
34. 	Müller, in Görlitz, Regierte der Kaiser?, entry, July 12, 1917.
35. 	Boghardt, Spies of the Kaiser, 129–31; Zimmermann to Kühlmann, Constantinople, 
July 16, 1917, GFM, Unterstaatssekretär Zimmermann, NARA, T 137, roll 88.
36. 	Hayashima, Illusion des Sonderfriedens, 151.
37. 	For the history of the commission, see Fischer-Baling, “Der Untersuchungsauss-
chuss,” 117–19, 123–25; and Schnauber, “Die parlamentarische Untersuchung,” 
2, 7.
38. 	Link, Wilson: Campaigns, 344; and letter, Katz to Link, ibid., 433.
39. 	Transcript of commission’s 11th session, November 14, 1919, Carnegie, Official 
German Documents, vol. 2, 715.
40. 	Vietsch, Solf, 197–98, 384.
41. 	Transcript of commission’s 11th session, November 14, 1919, Carnegie, Official 
German Documents, vol. 2, 715.
42. 	Viereck, Strangest Friendship, 190.
43. 	Zimmermann, “Fürst Bülows Kritik,” 234.
44. 	Hazen, Giants and Ghosts, 37–38.
45. 	Ibid., 4, 34, 37–38, 42–44.
46. 	“Dr. Zimmermann Dies in Germany,” New York Times, June 8, 1940.
Chapter 14. Scapegoat
1. 	Doerries, Imperial Challenge, 228.
2. 	HALL, 34
3. 	Bernstorff, My Three Years, 406. Bernstorff suggests that “someone had laid the 
matter before the Kaiser in a distorted light.” Given Zimmermann’s efforts to de-
flect blame from himself, it is entirely possible that the “someone” could have been 
the foreign secretary or one of his supporters.
4. 	Nickles, Under the Wire, 153.
5. 	Michahelles, Christiania, to AA, March 10, 1917, GFM, Mexiko 16, vol. 1, 
NARA, T 149, roll 378.
6. 	Brockdorff-Rantzau to AA, March 11, 1917, cited in Katz, Secret War, 375.
7. 	National Tidende interview cited in von zur Gathen, “Zimmermann Telegram,” 34.
8. 	Kemnitz set up the interview with the Hamburger Fremdenblatt editor in chief, Felix 
von Eckardt, March 7, 1917, GFM, Mexiko 16, vol. 1, NARA, T 149, roll 378.
9. 	“Strictly confidential for Col. House,” Egan, Copenhagen, to secretary of state, 
March 16, 1917, NARA, RG 59, decimal file 862.20212, M 336, roll 55.
10. 	Vietsch, Solf, 197, 371.
11. 	Bernstorff, My Three Years, 404.
12. 	Ibid., 409.
13. 	Ibid., 413–14.
14. 	Wolff, Tagebücher, vol. 1, doc. no. 590, entry, August 15, 1917.
15. 	Bernstorff to Viereck, October 29, 1929, Hoover Institution, Viereck papers, box 
2, folder XX237–10.V.
16. 	Bernstorff, Memoirs, 242, 266, 273–74, 285–87, 290–92.
17. 	Doerries, Imperial Challenge, 10–13.
18. 	Zimmermann’s appointment of Göppert, March 17, 1917, GFM, Mexiko 16, 
secret, NARA, T 149, roll 378.
19. 	For Göppert, see Auswärtiges Amt, Biographisches Handbuch, vol. 2, s.v. “Göp-
pert, Otto.”
20. 	Statement, Schmid to Göppert, March 1917, cited in von zur Gathen, “Zimmer-
mann Telegram,” 22. 
21. 	The telegram exchange between the foreign office and Eckardt is translated and 
reprinted in Hendrick, Life and Letters, vol. 3, 357–60.
284 
 Notes to Pages 200–210

22. 	Report, Göppert, April 4, 1917, PA-AA, R 16919. An English translation of Göp-
pert’s report can be found in “The Zimmermann Telegram,” Cryptologic Quarterly 
20, no. 1–2 (Summer/Spring 2001): 46–52. The journal is published by the Na-
tional Security Agency. The author’s name has been redacted.
23. 	Nickles, Under the Wire, 171–72. According to Nickles, the State Department 
used simplistic codes designed to save money rather than provide communica-
tions security.
24. 	Report, Göppert, April 4, 1917, PA-AA, R 16919.
25. 	AA notice, May 28, 1917, GFM, Mexiko 16, secret, NARA, T 149, roll 378.
26. 	Bernstorff, Memoirs, 402; Carnegie, Official German Documents, vol. 2, 480–81.
27. 	 Lerchenfeld to Hertling, March 20, 1917, in Deuerlein, Briefwechsel, doc. no. 357.
28. 	Memorandum, director of cipher bureau, March 12, 1917, GFM, Mexiko 16, 
secret, NARA, T 149, roll 378.
29. 	Report, intelligence officer no. 2, Captain Schlenther, September 23, 1914, Col-
lection Markus Pöhlmann, “Material über die Kompromittierung deutscher 
Chiffrierverfahren.”
30. 	Report, intelligence officer no. 4, Captain Witte, November 3, 1914, Collection 
Markus Pöhlmann, “Material über die Kompromittierung deutscher Chiffrier-
verfahren.”
31. 	Report, collection post Lörrach, November 17, 1914, Collection Markus Pöhl-
mann, “Material über die Kompromittierung deutscher Chiffrierverfahren.” 
32. 	Sektion IIIb to AA, March 13, 1917, GFM, Mexiko 16, secret, NARA, T 149, roll 
378; and general staff to AA, March 27, 1917, cited in Katz, Secret War, 377.
33. 	Lucius, Stockholm, to foreign office, March 13, 1917, GFM, Mexiko, vol. 1, 
NARA, microcopy no. T 149, roll 378; memorandum, Kemnitz, summer 1927, 
“strictly confidential” attachment, PA-AA, Personalakte Kemnitz, vol. 7170.
34. 	Nickles, Under the Wire, 156.
35. 	Wedel, AA, to Eckardt, March 24, 1917, LC, Wilson papers, series 2, reel 92.
36. 	Freeman, “Zimmermann Telegram Revisited,” 130, 133.
37. 	Ibid., 107.
38. 	Memorandum, Kemnitz, September 24, 1917, PA-AA, R 16463.
39. 	Different aspects of the Luxburg telegrams are covered by Doss, Amt, 46–79; Beesly, 
Room 40, 237–40; Katz, Secret War, 420; and Luxburg, Erinnerungen, 109–13.
40. 	Memorandum, Kemnitz, September 24, 1917, PA-AA, R 16463.
41. 	Denniston, Thirty Secret Years, 100. 
Chapter 15. Aftermath in Mexico
1. 	Kunimoto, “Japan and Mexico,” 240–42.
2. 	Eckardt to AA, February 26, 1917, GFM, Mexiko 16, vol. 1, NARA, T 149, roll 
378.
3. 	Hayashima, Illusion des Sonderfriedens, 139.
4. 	Eckardt to AA, March 2, 1917, GFM, Mexiko 16, secret, NARA, T 149, roll 378.
5. 	Secret, Hülsen to AA, March 8, 1917, GFM, Mexiko 16, vol. 1, NARA, T 149, 
roll 378.
6. 	Nassua, Gemeinsame Kriegführung, 141, considers the military’s offer “symbolic.” 
Katz, Secret War, 379, describes it as “fraudulent.”
7. 	Doerries, Imperial Challenge, 163.
8. 	Hülsen to Kemnitz, April 4, 1917, GFM, Mexiko 16, vol. 1, NARA, T 149, roll 378.
9. 	Top secret, admiralty staff to AA, March 8, 1917, GFM, Mexiko 16, vol. 1, 
NARA, T 149, roll 378.
10. 	Zimmermann to Lucius, for relay to Mexico, March 17, 1917, GFM, Mexiko 16, 
vol. 1, NARA, T 149, roll 378.
11. 	Memorandum, Kemnitz to Sektion P, March 28, 1917, GFM, Mexiko 16, vol. 1, 
NARA, T 149, roll 378.
Notes to Pages 210–219 
 285

12. 	Montgelas to Zimmermann, February 23, 1917, GFM, Mexiko 16, vol. 1, NARA, 
T 149, roll 378.
13. 	I am grateful to Phil Tomaselli for pointing out to me Kraft’s status as a double 
agent and sharing documentary evidence to this effect. See Cummins, Mexico City, 
to FO and Spring Rice, September 22, 1917, NA, FO 371/3068. Without reveal-
ing their source, the British subsequently shared much of Kraft’s information with 
the Americans. See R. Sperling, FO, to Bell, December 18, 1917, NARA, RG 59, 
Office of the Counselor, entry 543, box 5, confidential file 113.
14. 	Sektion P to AA, August 2, 1917, GFM, Mexiko 16, vol. 2, NARA, T 149, roll 
378.
15. 	On the Jahnke-Dilger rivalry, see Koenig, Fourth Horseman, 228–30
16. 	Hülsen to AA, April 29, 1917, GFM, Mexiko 16, vol. 1, NARA, T 149, roll 378, 
designating Jahnke as Sektion P’s principal agent and “Delmar” as the navy’s man 
and refusing their subordination to Eckardt.
17. 	Eckardt to AA, February 21, 1918, GFM, Mexiko 16, vol. 2, NARA, T 149, roll 
378, asking for subordination of Jahnke and Dilger to Eckardt.
18. 	Katz, Secret War, 382–83.
19. 	Sektion P to AA, August 2, 1918, GFM, Mexiko 16, vol. 2, NARA, T 149, roll 
378.
20. 	Stumm to Maguerre, Sektion P, August 15, 1918, GFM, Mexiko 16, vol. 2, NARA, 
T 149, roll 378 (emphasis in the original).
21.	 Admiral Ebert to Eckardt, May 19, 1919, GFM, Mexiko 16, vol. 2, NARA, T 
149, roll 378.
22. 	Koenig, Fourth Horseman, 263–67.
23. 	Report, Neunhoffer, March 29, 1919, NARA, RG 59, Office of the Counselor, 
entry 539, box 3, folder, “Dr. Heinrich von Eckardt’s trip through U.S. to Mexico 
March 1919.”
24. 	“Statement dictated by Heinrich von Eckhardt [sic], at New York City, on March 
25th, 1919, to Wm. Neunhoffer, of the Department of Justice,” NARA, RG 59, 
Office of the Counselor, entry 539, box 3, folder, “Dr. Heinrich von Eckardt’s trip 
through U.S. to Mexico March 1919.”
25. 	Report, Neunhoffer, March 29, 1919, NARA, RG 59, Office of the Counselor, 
entry 539, box 3, folder, “Dr. Heinrich von Eckardt’s trip through U.S. to Mexico 
March 1919.”
26. 	Auswärtiges Amt, Biographisches Handbuch, vol. 2, s.v. “Eckardt, Heinrich von.”
27. 	Hazen, Giants and Ghosts, 45–52; Auswärtiges Amt, Biographisches Handbuch, 
vol. 2, s.v. “Eckardt, Heinrich von.”
28. “May Take Post: Count Montgelas Being Considered as German Minister,” New 
York Times, March 7, 1920; “Count Montgelas Is Dead in Berlin,” New York 
Times, April 24, 1924; and Wolff, Tagebücher, vol. 1, 431, note 5.
29. 	Katz, Pancho Villa, 764–66. 
Chapter 16. A German Reckoning
1. 	Chickering, Imperial Germany, 188; Vietsch, Solf, 197, 206, 216.
2. 	All original issues of that edition of the Nürnberger Nachrichten appear to have 
been lost. The article is referred to in a letter by Friedrich Katz to Arthur Link, 
quoted in Link, Wilson: Campaigns, 434. Katz informed this author that he did 
not have a copy of the article. Email, Katz to Boghardt, June 6, 2005. It is tempting 
to see the hand of Adolf von Montgelas behind the article, given Kemnitz’s subse-
quent attempt to shift responsibility to Montgelas, the two men’s natural rivalry as 
regional experts, and Montgelas’ Bavarian background. Definitive proof, however, 
remains lacking.
3. 	Auswärtiges Amt, Biographisches Handbuch, vol. 2, s.v. “Kemnitz, Arthur von.”
4. 	Kemnitz to Solf, November 24, 1918, GFM, Mexiko 16, vol. 2, NARA, T 149, 
286 
 Notes to Pages 219–226

roll 378 (emphasis in the original, probably by Solf or his subordinate, Edmund 
Rhomberg).
5. 	Rhomberg to undersecretary of state, November 29, 1918, GFM, Mexiko 16, vol. 
2, NARA, T 149, roll 378; and Rat der Volksbeauftragten (Council of the People’s 
Representatives), signed by Wilhelm von Solf, Friedrich Ebert, and Hugo Haase, 
Berlin, December 11, 1918, PA-AA, Personalakte Kemnitz, vol. 7170.
6. 	Kemnitz to Schüler, April 11, 1919, PA-AA, Personalakte Kemnitz, vol. 7170.
7. 	Kemnitz to Schüler, June 29, 1919, PA-AA, Personalakte Kemnitz, vol. 7170.
8. 	Müller to Kemnitz, July 24, 1919, PA-AA, Personalakte Kemnitz, vol. 7170.
9. 	Kemnitz to AA, January 19, 1923, PA-AA, Personalakte Kemnitz, vol. 7172.
10. 	AA to treasury, January 31, 1923, PA-AA, Personalakte Kemnitz, vol. 7172.
11. 	Fischart, “Neue Politikerköpfe,” 173–74.
12. 	Vossische Zeitung, May 8, 1920, evening edition.
13. 	“Admits Authorship of Note to Mexico; Kemnitz Explains Aim of German Plot,” 
New York Times, May 15, 1920. The Times picked up the Frankfurter article, thus 
introducing Americans to Kemnitz and his part in the telegram affair.
14. 	Vossische Zeitung, May 14, 1920, morning edition.
15. 	Vossische Zeitung, May 21, 1920, morning edition.
16. 	Deutscher Reichstag, Stenographische Berichte, vol. 347, 1st legislative period, 
55th session, Monday, January 24, 1921, 2070.
17. 	Deutscher Reichstag, Stenographische Berichte, vol. 347, 1st legislative period, 
55th session, Monday, January 24, 1921, 2048–51, 2070–75.
18. 	Fischart, “Neue Politikerköpfe,” 173–74.
19. 	Deutscher Reichstag, Stenographische Berichte, vol. 391, 3rd legislative period, 
262nd session, Thursday, February 3, 1927, 8800, 8825.
20. 	Kemnitz to foreign secretary, December 4, 1930, PA-AA, Personalakte Kemnitz, 
vol. 7170; memorandum, Kemnitz, summer 1927, ibid.
21. 	Daniel to Kemnitz, July 30, 1929, PA-AA, Personalakte Kemnitz, vol. 7170; mem-
orandum, AA, December 16, 1930, ibid.; Kemnitz to foreign secretary, December 
4, 1930, ibid.; memorandum, Kemnitz, summer 1927, ibid.
22. 	Crown Prince Friedrich Wilhelm to Neurath, September 14, 1932, PA-AA, Per-
sonalakte Kemnitz, vol. 7170; Neurath to “His Imperial Highness” (i.e., Friedrich 
Wilhelm), September 17, 1932, ibid.; Kemnitz to Weizsäcker, June 21, 1933, ibid.; 
Lammers to Neurath, July 21, 1933, ibid.; Crown Prince Friedrich Wilhelm to 
Neurath, April 30, 1933, ibid.; Alfred Hugenberg to Neurath, April 10, 1933, 
ibid.; Winterfeld to Neurath, April 3, 1933, ibid.
23. 	Kemnitz to AA, September 22, 1933, PA-AA, Personalakte Kemnitz, vol. 7170; 
Zimmermann to AA, January 30, 1934, ibid.
24. 	Friedrich von Winterfeld to Neurath, April 3, 1933, PA-AA, Personalakte Kem-
nitz, vol. 7170. Winterfeld was deputy chairman of the DNVP.
25. 	Memorandum, Grünau, August 26, 1933, PA-AA, Personalakte Kemnitz, vol. 
7172.
26. 	Cited in Kershaw, Hitler, vol. 1, 377.
27. 	Kemnitz to Neurath, March 17, 1933, PA-AA, Personalakte Kemnitz, vol. 7170.
28. 	Kemnitz to AA, September 22, 1933, PA-AA, Personalakte Kemnitz, vol. 7170. It 
is unclear whether Kemnitz ever joined the NSDAP. According to the NSDAP cen-
tral archives in Berlin, Kemnitz’s name is not listed in their records. However, only 
80 percent of all NSDAP members are included in the surviving records. Email, 
Franz Goettlicher to author, August 19, 2004.
29. 	Kube to Hitler, December 15, 1933, PA-AA, Personalakte Kemnitz, vol. 7170; 
Kube to Hess, December 15, 1933, ibid.
30. 	AA to Kemnitz, December 14, 1934, PA-AA, Personalakte Kemnitz, vol. 7170.
31. 	Kemnitz to Kriebel, July 20, 1939, PA-AA, Personalakte Kemnitz, vol. 7170; 
Kriebel to Kemnitz, July 29, 1939, ibid.
32. 	Kemnitz to AA, September 3, 1939, PA-AA, Personalakte Kemnitz, vol. 7170.
Notes to Pages 227–232 
 287

33. 	AA to Kemnitz, September 9, 1939, PA-AA, Personalakte Kemnitz, vol. 7170.
34. 	Memorandum, Kemnitz, “Are We Liberated?” May 1945, Hoover Institution, 
Kemnitz papers.
35. 	Essay, Kemnitz, “Befreiung oer Deklassierung?” January 27, 1947, Hoover Institu-
tion, Kemnitz papers; memorandum, Kemnitz, “Deutschland als Leidtragender,” 
n.d. (1947–1948), ibid.; memorandum, Kemnitz, “Preussischer und Deutscher 
Militarismus,” n.d., ibid.; memorandum, Kemnitz, 1947, ibid.; memorandum, 
Kemnitz, Berlin, November 6, 1946. Kemnitz’s various memoranda found their 
way to Stanford University through Ferdinand Stibi, who had met Kemnitz in 
Berlin in 1948, was given the papers, and then donated them to the Hoover Institu-
tion. See letter, Stibi, Washington, D.C., to Hoover Library, November 30, 1950, 
ibid.
36. 	Memorandum, Kemnitz, “Are We Liberated?” May 1945, Hoover Institution, 
Kemnitz papers.
37. 	Auswärtiges Amt, Biographisches Handbuch, vol. 2, s.v. “Kemnitz, Arthur von.”
Chapter 17. Hall’s Intelligence Legacy
1. 	Andrew, Secret Service, 120; and Beesly, Room 40, 169, 236. Hall’s promotion to 
rear admiral had probably already been decided upon before the interception of 
the Zimmermann telegram.
2. 	James, Eyes of the Navy, 167, 169.
3. 	Beesly, Room 40, 291–92.
4. 	Yardley, American Black Chamber, 140.
5. 	Memorandum, Bell, London, May 1, 1919, NARA, RG 59, Office of the Coun-
selor, entry 543, box 5, confidential file 121, “secret service.”
6. 	Hughes, Spies at Work, 8, 13–15 (online edition pagination); McIvor, “Economic 
League,” 634, 640–48, 651.
7. 	“Retirement of Admiral Hall: To Stand for Parliament,” The Times, December 21, 
1918.
8. 	James, Eyes of the Navy, 175–77.
9. 	Beesly, Room 40, 236.
10. 	Wemyss to Hall, January 20, 1919, Churchill College Cambridge, Archive Centre, 
Hall papers, Hall 1/5.
11. 	O’Halpin, “Hall,” 647, refers to “Hall’s independence of mind” as having antago-
nized Whitehall officials, precipitating his retirement. 
12. 	Hall to secretary of the navy, October 30, 1918, NA, ADM 1/8541/279.
13.	 Memorandum, October 30, 1918, NA, ADM 1/8541/279; memorandum, No-
vember 4, 1918, ibid.; and board minutes, November 7, 1918, ibid.
14. 	The Times, December 21, 1918.
15. 	Knightley, Second Oldest Profession, 55.
16. 	“Sir Reginald Hall Adopted for Liverpool Constituency,” The Times, January 
20, 1919; “Lloyd George to Hall: ‘Wish You Success in Your Candidature,’” The 
Times, February 25, 1919; and “Coalition Win at West Derby,” The Times, March 
12, 1919.
17. 	Hughes, Spies at Work, 39.
18. 	Knightley, Second Oldest Profession, 57.
19. 	Bennett, Mysterious Business, 34–35; Chester, Fay, and Young, Zinoviev Letter, 66.
20. 	West and Tsarev, Crown Jewels, 33, 40–43. Gill Bennett, who analyzed the Zino-
viev letter on the basis of British records, concedes that West and Tsarev’s account 
“is plausible in many respects.” See Bennett, Mysterious Business, 90. For a com-
prehensive selection of White Russian forgery activities, see Anti-Soviet Forgeries.
21. 	Bennett, Mysterious Business, 50; Chester, Fay, and Young, Zinoviev Letter, 125–26.
22. 	Marquand, Ramsay MacDonald, 386.
23. 	Chester, Fay, and Young, Zinoviev Letter, 95.
288 
 Notes to Pages 232–238

24. 	Chester, Fay, and Young, Zinoviev Letter, 98.
25. 	Andrew, Secret Service, 306–307. See also Andrew, Defend the Realm, 150.
26. 	Chester, Fay, and Young, Zinoviev Letter, 109.
27. 	Bell to Hurley, July 13, 1921, NARA, RG 59, Office of the Counselor, entry 539, 
box 7, folder 1.
28. 	Press cutting from “Bos[ton Globe?],” not dated, NARA, RG 59, Office of the 
Counselor, entry 543, box 5, confidential file, Bell 123, “Zimmermann’s Inter-
cepted Telegram and Subsequent Correspondence, Feb.–Apr. 1917”; Cabot gives 
Gaunt’s age as forty-five, which would date the speech to 1915. This is obviously 
impossible. The speech’s content suggests it was delivered during the association’s 
annual meeting, typically June 17. Since the unit returned from France in January 
1919, the speech may have been delivered in June 1919. 
29. 	Laughlin to Bell, July 28, 1921, NARA, RG 59, Office of the Counselor, entry 539, 
box 7, folder 1.
30. 	Hendrick to Bell, June 17, 1921, NARA, RG 59, Office of the Counselor, entry 
539, box 7, folder 1.
31. 	Laughlin to Hurley, July 23, 1921, NARA, RG 59, Office of the Counselor, entry 
539, box 7, folder 1.
32. 	Bell to Hendrick, July 13, 1921, NARA, RG 59, Office of the Counselor, entry 
539, box 7, folder 1
33. 	Bell to Laughlin, August 24, 1921, NARA, RG 59, Office of the Counselor, entry 
539, box 7, folder 1.
34. 	Bell to Hurley, July 13, 1921, NARA, RG 59, Office of the Counselor, entry 539, 
box 7, folder 1.
35. 	Bell to Hurley, August 24, 1921, NARA, RG 59, Office of the Counselor, entry 
539, box 7, folder 2.
36. 	Hurley to Winslow, July 29, 1921, NARA, RG 59, Office of the Counselor, entry 
539, box 7, folder 1.
37. 	Secret, undersecretary [Henry Fletcher] to Winslow, no date [August 1921], 
NARA, RG 59, Office of the Counselor, entry 539, box 7, folder 2. 
38. 	Telegram, Hall to Hendrick, no date, written on Office of the Under Secretary 
stationery, with sentence added: “Tyrrell says Brit. Gov’t. (never?) gave (?) consent 
for publication,” NARA, RG 59, Office of the Counselor, entry 539, box 7, folder 1.
39. 	Cablegram, Hall to Hendrick, no date [July/August 1921], NARA, RG 59, Office 
of the Counselor, entry 539, box 7, folder 1.
40. 	Letter, Hall to Winslow, August 13, 1921, NARA, RG 59, Office of the Counselor, 
entry 539, box 7, folder 1.
41. 	Hall to Hendrick, July 23, 1921, NARA, RG 59, Office of the Counselor, entry 
539, box 7, folder 1.
42. 	Page to Fletcher, August 22, 1921, NARA, RG 59, Office of the Counselor, entry 
539, box 7, folder 2.
43. 	Page to Fletcher, August 25, 1921, NARA, RG 59, Office of the Counselor, entry 
539, box 7, folder 2.
44. 	Bell to Harrison, May 1, 1922, NARA, RG 59, Office of the Counselor, entry 539, 
box 7, folder 3. Tyrrell’s role appears ambivalent. On the one hand, the Americans 
suspected him of having provided Hendrick with information about the telegram; 
on the other hand, he later denied that the British government had ever given its 
consent to publication. Possibly, Tyrrell meant to provide Hendrick with back-
ground information that would not be published, or like Hall, he backpedaled  
after he sensed strong resistance from his American colleagues. A colleague 
described Tyrrell as “a little man as quick as a lizard with scintillating eyes and wit 
and a great aversion to any work not transacted orally.” His reluctance to com-
mit his thoughts to paper renders tracing his thoughts difficult. See Harrison to 
Hughes, 22 May 1922, ibid., and Goldstein, “Tyrrell.”
45. 	Millman, The Detonators, 135–36.
Notes to Pages 238–241 
 289

46. 	James, Eyes of the Navy, 183–84.
47. 	Andrew, Secret Service, 450.
48. 	Ibid., 466.
49. 	MacDonnell, “Second Zimmermann Telegram.”
50. 	For Roosevelt and the map story, see generally, Persico, Roosevelt’s Secret War, 78, 
125–27, 173–75.
51. 	Mahl, Desperate Deception, 55.
52. 	MacDonnell, “Second Zimmermann Telegram,” 498.
53. 	Bamford, Puzzle Palace, 397, 399.
54. 	Churchill, Never Give In, 413–23.
Conclusion
1. 	Lorenz, “Predictability.”
2. 	This is the central theme of Fischer, War of Illusions.
3. 	Yardley, American Black Chamber, 139–40.
4. 	Lansing, War Memoirs, 232.
Names and Terms
1. 	Statement, Zimmermann, budget committee, 122rd session, March 3, 1917, 
Schiffers and Koch, Hauptausschuss, 1149; statement, Zimmermann, budget 
committee, 123rd session, March 5, 1917, Schiffers and Koch, Hauptausschuss, 
1152; statement, Zimmermann, budget committee, 148th session, April 28, 1917, 
GFM, Mexiko 16, vol. 1, NARA, T 149, roll 378.
2. 	Report, Göppert, April 4, 1917, PA-AA, R 16919.
3. 	Frankfurter Zeitung, March 3, 1917; Vorwärts, March 4, 1917; Vossische Zei-
tung, March 5, 1917.
4. 	Bernstorff, My Three Years, 380; “Statement Dictated by Heinrich von Eckhardt 
[sic], at New York City, on March 25th, 1919, to Wm. Neunhoffer, of the Depart-
ment of Justice,” NARA, RG 59, Office of the Counselor, entry 539, box 3, folder, 
“Dr. Heinrich von Eckardt’s Trip Through U.S. to Mexico March 1919.”
5. 	Zimmermann, “Fürst Bülows Kritik,” 234; Hazen, Giants and Ghosts, 38.
6. 	HALL, 11.
7. 	Hall’s handwritten comment on the fully decrypted and translated copy of Zim-
mermann’s message, no date [shortly after 1 March 1917], NA, HW 3/187.
8. 	Hall, “Affidavit,” 31; Hall and Peaslee, Three Wars, 7.
9. 	Campbell to Hardinge, February 20, 1917, HALL, 21; Hardinge to Campbell, no 
date, HALL, 21–22.
10. 	The Times, March 2, 1917.
11. 	Page to Lansing, February 24, 1917, FRUS, 1917, supplement 1.
12. 	News and Courier, Arizona Republican, Washington Post, New York Times, Santa 
Fe New Mexican, March 1, 1917.
13. 	Houston Post, Milwaukee Sentinel, March 2, 1917.
14. 	Dallas Morning News, March 2, 1917.
15. 	Lansing to Fletcher, March 2, 1917, NARA, RG 59, decimal file 862.20212, M 
336, roll 55. Hall’s liaison at the U.S. embassy in London, Edward Bell, referred 
to it as “Z. telegram.” Bell to Hurley, July 13, 1921, NARA, RG 59, Office of the 
Counselor, entry 539, box 7, folder 1.
16. 	Millis, Road to War, 466.
17. 	For example, Ritter, Staatskunst und Kriegshandwerk, vol. 3, 564; and Möckel-
mann, “Deutschlandbild,” 133
18. 	Koopmann, Diplomatie, 289.
19. 	Tuchman, Zimmermann Depesche. 
290 
 Notes to Pages 242–255

291
Bibliography
Archival and Manuscript Sources
Bundesarchiv-Militärarchiv (German Military Archives), Freiburg
RM 3	 Acta betreffend Mobilmachung (Records on Military Mobilization) 
RM 5	 Admiralstab der Marine (Admiralty Staff of the Navy)
RM 8	 Reichsmarineamt (Imperial Navy Office)
Cambridge University Library
Papers of Charles Hardinge
Churchill College, Cambridge, Archive Centre
Admiral Sir William Reginald Hall, “Draft Autobiography,” Hall Papers, HALL 3/6
Collection Markus Pöhlmann, Potsdam
“Material über die Kompromittierung deutscher Chiffrierverfahren” (Material 
Regarding Compromising of German Ciphering Methods)
Herbert Hoover Library, West Branch, Iowa
Papers of Irwin Boyle Laughlin
Hoover Institution, Stanford, California
Great Britain, Foreign Office, Wellington House
Papers of Hans Arthur von Kemnitz
Selected Papers of George Sylvester Viereck
Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.
Papers of Chandler P. Anderson
Papers of Newton D. Baker
Papers of Albert S. Burleson
Papers of Josephus Daniels
Papers of Robert Lansing
Papers of William G. McAdoo
Papers of Theodore Roosevelt
Papers of Woodrow Wilson
Records of the (British) Cabinet Office

292 
 Bibliography
National Archives, London
Records of the Admiralty (ADM)
Records of the Cabinet Office (CAB)
Records of the Code and Cypher School (HW)
Records of the Foreign Office (FO)
Records of the Information Ministry (INF)
National Archives and Records Administration, College Park, Maryland
RG 15 Records of the Department of Veterans Affairs
Papers of the Mixed Claims Commission, United States and Germany
RG 59 Records of the Department of State
German Military Activities in Mexico, 1910–1929
Internal Affairs of Germany, 1910–1929
Internal Affairs of Mexico, 1910–1929
Records of the Office of the Counselor
RG 242 Collection of Foreign Records Seized
Generalmajor a.D. Fritz Gempp, “Der Geheime Nachrichtendienst und die Spionage 
des Heeres von 1866 bis 1918” (The Secret Intelligence Service and Espionage of 
the Army from 1866 to 1918)
German Foreign Ministry (GFM, Auswärtiges Amt)
RG 457 Records of the National Security Agency
Entry 9002, box 87, folder SRH-234, “The Zimmermann Telegram and Related 
Papers (declassified 15 March 1983)”
Politisches Archiv des Auswärtigen Amtes (Political Archives of the Foreign Office, 
PA-AA), Berlin 
Akten des Deutschen Reiches (R series) (Records of the German Empire)
Nachlass Gottlieb von Jagow (Papers of Gottlieb von Jagow)
Personalakte Arthur Zimmermann (Personnel File of Arthur Zimmermann)
Personalakte Hans Arthur von Kemnitz (Personnel File of Hans Arthur von Kemnitz)
Yale University Library
Papers of Edward M. House
Papers of Frank L. Polk
Government Documents and Publications
Anti-Soviet Forgeries: A Record of Some of the Forged Documents Used at Various 
Times against the Soviet Government. London: Workers’ Publications, 1927.
Auswärtiges Amt. Biographisches Handbuch des deutschen Auswärtigen Dienstes, 
1871–1945. 5 vols. Paderborn: Schöningh, 2000–2012.
Bureau des Reichstags. Reichstags-Handbuch III: Wahlperiode 1924. Berlin: Nord-
deutsche Buchdruckerei, 1925.
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, ed. Official German Documents Relat-
ing to the World War: Translated under the Supervision of the Carnegie Endow-
ment for International Peace, Division of International Law. 2 vols. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1923.
Deutsche Nationalversammlung. Beilagen zu den Stenographischen Berichten über die 
öffentlichen Verhandlungen des Untersuchungsausschusses: Bericht des zweiten 
Untersuchungsausschusses über die Friedensaktion Wilsons, 1916/17. Berlin: 
Norddeutsche Buchdruckerei, 1920.
———. Stenographische Berichte über die öffentlichen Verhandlungen des Untersu-
chungsausschusses. 15. Ausschuss. Berlin: Norddeutsche Buchdruckerei, 1919.

Bibliography 
 293
Deutscher Reichstag. Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen des Deutschen 
Reichstags, 1871–1939. 458 vols. Berlin: Norddeutsche Buchdruckerei, 1871–
1939.
Reichsamt/Reichsministerium des Innern. Handbuch für das Deutsche Reich. 65 vols. 
Berlin: Heymanns, 1871–1936. (The Reichsamt became the Reichsministerium 
after 1918.)
Schiffers, Reinhard, and Manfred Koch, eds. Der Hauptausschuss des Deutschen 
Reichstages, 1915–1918. 4 vols. Düsseldorf: Droste, 1981.
U.S. Congress. Congressional Record. 64th Congress, 2nd Sess., 1917. Vol. 54, pt. 5.
U.S. Department of State. Papers Relating to the Foreign Relations of the United States, 
1914–1918: Supplement—The World War. 9 vols. Washington, D.C.: Govern-
ment Printing Office, 1928–1933.
———. Papers Relating to the Foreign Relations of the United States: The Lansing 
Papers, 1914–1920. 2 vols. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 
1939–1940. 
Correspondence, Memoirs, Contemporary Works
Addams, Jane. Peace and Bread in Time of War. New York: Macmillan, 1922.
Baker, Newton Diehl. Why We Went to War. New York: Harper, 1936.
Baker, Ray Stannard. Woodrow Wilson: Life and Letters. 8 vols. Garden City: Double-
day, 1927–1939.
Batey, Mavis, and Edward Wakeling, eds. Alice in I.D. 25: A Code-Breaking Parody of 
Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland. 1918. Reprint, with an introduction by Mavis 
Batey and Edward Wakeling. London: Aznet, 2007.
Bauer, Max. Der Große Krieg in Feld und Heimat: Erinnerungen und Betrachtungen. 
Tübingen: Ostandersche Buchandlung, 1921.
Bernstorff, Johann Heinrich von. My Three Years in America. New York: Scribner, 
1920.
———. Memoirs of Count Bernstorff. New York: Random House, 1936.
Bethmann Hollweg, Theobald von. Betrachtungen zum Weltkriege. 2 vols. Berlin: Ull-
stein, 1919.
Boy-Ed, Karl, Verschwörer? Die ersten siebzehn Kriegsmonate in den Vereinigten Staa-
ten von Nord-Amerika. Berlin: Scherl, 1920.
Bülow, Bernhard von. Denkwürdigkeiten. 4 vols. Berlin: Ullstein, 1930–1931.
Cambon, Henri, ed. Paul Cambon: Correspondence, 1870–1924. 3 vols. Paris: Edi-
tions Bernard Grasset, 1940–1946.
Churchill, Winston. Never Give In! The Best of Winston Churchill’s Speeches. New 
York: Hyperion, 2004.
———. The World Crisis. 6 vols. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1923.
Cronon, E. David, ed. The Cabinet Diaries of Josephus Daniels, 1913–1921. Lincoln: 
University of Nebraska Press, 1963.
Czernin, Count Ottokar von. In the World War. New York: Harper, 1920.
Daniels, Josephus. The Wilson Era: Years of War and After. 2 vols. Chapel Hill: Univer-
sity of North Carolina Press, 1944.
Deuerlein, Ernst, ed. Briefwechsel Hertling-Lerchenfeld, 1912–1917: Dienstliche Pri-
vatkorrespondenz zwischen dem bayerischen Ministerpräsidenten Georg Graf von 
Hertling und dem bayerischen Gesandten in Berlin Hugo Graf von und zu Ler-
chenfeld. 2 vols. Boppard am Rhein: Boldt, 1973.
Dobson, Miles C. E. At the Edge of the Pit. Pasadena, Calif.: New Publishing Company, 
1914.
Dugdale, Blanche E. C. Baffy: The Diaries of Blanche Dugdale, 1936–1947. Edited by 
N. A. Rose. London: Valentine, Mitchell, 1973.
Dumba, Constantin. Memoirs of a Diplomat. Boston: Little, Brown, 1932.
Erdmann, Karl D., ed. Kurt Riezler: Tagebücher, Aufsätze, Dokumente. Göttingen: 
Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1972.

294 
 Bibliography
Ewing, Alfred Washington. The Man of Room 40: The Life of Sir Alfred Ewing. Lon-
don: Hutchinson, 1939.
———. “Some Special War Work, Part 1. With an Introduction by David Kahn.” 
Cryptologia 4, no. 4 (October 1980): 193–203. 
———. “Some Special War Work, Part 2.” Cryptologia 5, no. 1 (January 1981): 33–39.
Flicke, Wilhelm F. War Secrets in the Ether. Parts I and II. Translated by Ray W. 
Pettengill. Washington, D.C.: National Security Agency, 1953.
Gaertringen, Friedrich Freiherr von, ed. Wilhelm Groener: Lebenserinnerungen. Jugend,  
Generalstab, Weltkrieg. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1957.
Gaunt, Guy. The Yield of the Years: A Story of Adventure Afloat and Ashore by Admi-
ral Sir Guy Gaunt, Naval Attaché and Chief of the British Intelligence Service in 
the United States, 1914–1918. London: Hutchinson, 1940.
Gerard, James. Face to Face with Kaiserism. New York: Doran, 1918.
———. My First Eighty-three Years in America: The Memoirs of James W. Gerard. 
New York: Doubleday, 1951.
———. My Four Years in Germany. New York: Doran, 1917.
Görlitz, Walter, ed. Regierte der Kaiser? Kriegstagebücher, Aufzeichnungen und Briefe 
des Chefs des Marine-Kabinetts Admiral Georg von Müller, 1914–1918. Göttin-
gen: Musterschmidt, 1959.
Grew, Joseph C. Turbulent Era. 2 vols. Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1952.
Grey, Edward. Twenty-Five Years, 1892–1916. 2 vols. New York: Frederick A. Stokes, 
1925.
Gwynn, Stephen, ed. The Letters and Friendships of Sir Cecil Spring Rice. 2 vols. Lon-
don: Constable, 1929.
Hall, William Reginald. “Admiral Hall on the Zimmermann Telegram.” World’s Work 
51, no. 6 (April 1926): 578.
Hall, William Reginald. “Affidavit of Admiral Sir W. Reginald Hall, K. C. M. G., C. 
B., D. C. L., L. L. D., Formerly Chief of the Intelligence Department of the British  
Admiralty, Verified December 28, 1926, with Annexed Copies of German Cable-
grams, Wireless and Other Messages Intercepted by the British Government during 
the War.” In The Zimmermann Telegram of January 16, 1917, and Its Crypto-
graphic Background, edited by William F. Friedman and Charles J. Mendelsohn, 
30–32. 1938. Reprint, Laguna Hills: Aegean Park Press, 1976.
Hall, William Reginald, and Amos J. Peaslee. Three Wars with Germany. New York: 
Putnam, 1944.
Hankey, Lord Maurice. The Supreme Command, 1914–1918. 2 vols. London: Allen 
and Unwin, 1961.
Hanssen, Hans Peter, Diary of a Dying Empire. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 
1955.
Hazen, David W. Giants and Ghosts of Central Europe. Portland: Metropolitan Press, 
1933.
Helfferich, Karl. Der Weltkrieg. 2 vols. Berlin: Ullstein, 1919.
Hendrick, Burton J. The Life and Letters of Walter H. Page. 3 vols. Garden City, N.Y.: 
Doubleday, Page, 1924–26.
Hindenburg, Paul von. Aus meinem Leben. Leipzig: Hirzel, 1933.
Hohler, Thomas B. Diplomatic Petrel. London: J. Murray, 1942.
Houston, David F. Eight Years with Wilson’s Cabinet, 1913 to 1920. 2 vols. Garden 
City, N.Y.: Doubleday, Page, 1926.
Hoy, Hugh Cleland. 40 O.B. Or, How the War was Won. London: Hutchinson, 1932.
Jones, Thomas. Whitehall Diary. Edited by Keith Middlemas. 3 vols. Oxford and New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1969–1971.
Jusserand, Jean Jules, Le sentiment américain pendant la guerre. Paris: Payot, 1931.
Kemnitz, Hans Arthur von. “Nationalitätenprinzip und Selbstbestimmungsrecht.”  
Österreich-Deutschland “Heim ins Reich!” 4 (1931).

Bibliography 
 295
Lane, Anne W., and Louise W. Wall, eds. The Letters of Franklin K. Lane. Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin, 1922.
Lansing, Robert. War Memoirs of Robert Lansing. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1935.
Lea, Homer. The Valor of Ignorance. New York: Harper, 1909.
Lennox, Lady Algernon G., ed. The Diary of Lord Bertie of Thames, 1914–1918. 2 
vols. London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1924.
Leonard, Arthur R., ed. War Addresses of Woodrow Wilson. Boston: Ginn, 1918.
Link, Arthur, ed. The Papers of Woodrow Wilson. 69 vols. Princeton: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 1966–1994.
Ludendorff, Erich. “The American Effort.” Atlantic Monthly 129 (May 1929): 676–87.
———. The General Staff and Its Problems: The History of the Relations between the 
High Command and the German Imperial Government as Revealed by Official 
Documents. Translated by F. A. Holt. 2 vols. New York: Dutton, 1920.
———. Meine Kriegserinnerungen. Berlin: Mittler, 1919.
Luxburg, Karl Graf von. Nachdenkliche Erinnerung. Schloss Aschach, 1953.
Marshall, Thomas R. Recollections of Thomas R. Marshall, Vice-President and Hoo-
sier Philosopher: A Hoosier Salad. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1925.
Matthias, Erich, and Susanne Miller, eds. Das Kriegstagebuch des Reichstagsabgeord-
neten Eduard David, 1914–1918. Düsseldorf: Droste, 1966.
McAdoo, William G. Crowded Years. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1931.
Papen, Franz von. Der Wahrheit eine Gasse. Munich: List, 1952.
Phillips, William. Ventures in Diplomacy. Boston: Beacon Press, 1953.
Redfield, William C. With Congress and Cabinet. New York: Doubleday, Page, 1924.
Riddell, George Allardice, ed. Lord Riddell’s War Diary, 1914–1918. London: Ivor 
Nicholson & Watson, 1918.
Rintelen von Kleist, Captain Franz. The Dark Invader: Wartime Reminiscences of a 
German Naval Intelligence Officer. 1939. Reprint, with an introduction by Rein-
hard R. Doerries.  London, Portland: Frank Cass, 1998.
Roosevelt, Theodore. Letters. Edited by Elting E. Morison. 8 vols. Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 1951–1954.
———. Selections from the Correspondence of Theodore Roosevelt and Henry Cabot 
Lodge. Edited by Henry Cabot Lodge and Charles Redmond. 2 vols. New York: 
Scribner, 1925.
Scheidemann, Philip. Memoirs of a Social Democrat. Translated by J. E. Michell. 2 vols. 
London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1929.
Schwertfeger, Bernard, ed. Rudolf von Valentini: Kaiser und Kabinettschef. Oldenburg: 
Gerhard Stalling, 1931.
Seymour, Charles, ed. The Intimate Papers of Colonel House. 4 vols. Boston: Hough-
ton Mifflin, 1926–1928.
Stopford, Francis, ed. Raemaekers’ Cartoons: With Accompanying Notes by Well-
Known English Writers, with an Appreciation from H. H. Asquith, Prime Minister 
of England. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, Page, 1916.
Taylor, A. J. P., ed. Lloyd George: A Diary by Frances Stevenson. London: Hutchinson, 
1971.
Thomson, Basil. The Scene Changes. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1937.
Thwaites, Norman. Velvet and Vinegar. London: Grayson & Grayson, 1932.
Tirpitz, Alfred von. Politische Dokumente von A. von Tirpitz. 2 vols. Stuttgart and 
Berlin: Cotta, 1924–1926.
Tumulty, Joseph P. Woodrow Wilson As I Know Him. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 
Page, 1921.
Valentini, Rudolf. Kaiser und Kabinettschef: Nach eigenen Aufzeichnungen und dem 
Briefwechsel des wirklichen Geheimen Rats Rudolf von Valentini dargestellt von 
Bernhard Schwertfeger. Edited by Bernhard Schwertfeger. Oldenburg: Gerhard 
Stalling, 1931.

296 
 Bibliography
Viereck, George Sylvester. Spreading Germs of Hate. With a foreword by Colonel  
Edward M. House. New York: Horace Liveright, 1930.
———. The Strangest Friendship in History: Woodrow Wilson and Colonel House. 
1932. Reprint, Westport: Greenwood Press, 1976.
Vierhaus, Rudolf, ed. Das Tagebuch der Baronin Spitzemberg geb. Freiin v. Varnbüler: 
Aufzeichnungen aus der Hofgesellschaft des Hohenzollernreiches. 5th ed. Göttin-
gen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1989.
Voska, Emanuel Victor, and Will Irwin. Spy and Counter Spy. Garden City, N.Y.: Dou-
bleday, 1941.
Willert, Sir Arthur. Washington and Other Memories. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1972.
Wilson, Edith Bolling. My Memoir. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1939.
Wolff, Theodor. Tagebücher, 1914–1919: Der erste Weltkrieg und die Entstehung der 
Weimarer Republik in Tagebüchern, Leitartikeln und Briefen des Chefredakteurs 
am “Berliner Tageblatt” und Mitbegründer der “Deutschen Demokratischen Par-
tei.” Edited by Bernd Sösemann. 2 vols. Boppard am Rhein: Boldt, 1984.
Yardley, Herbert. The American Black Chamber. 1931. Reprint, Laguna Hills: Aegean 
Press, 1990. 
Zimmermann, Arthur. “Bülow und Holstein–Die Daily Telegraph-Affäre–Bülow und 
Bethmann Hollweg.” Süddeutsche Monatshefte 28, no. 6 (March 1931): 391–92.
———. “Fürst Bülows Kritik am Auswärtigen Amt.” In Front wider Bülow: Staats-
männer, Diplomaten und Forscher zu seinen Denkwürdigkeiten, edited by Fried-
rich Thimme, 221–34. Munich: F. Bruckmann, 1931.
Books, Articles, Papers, and Theses
Adams, Henry H., and Robin K. Rebel Patriot: A Biography of Franz von Papen. Santa 
Barbara, Calif.: MacNally & Loftin, 1987.
Adams, John Coldwell. Seated with the Mighty: A Biography of Sir Gilbert Parker. 
London: Borealis Press, 1979.
Adler, Selig. The Isolationist Impulse: Its Twentieth-Century Reaction. New York: 
Abelard-Schuman, 1957.
Aldrich, Richard J. “British Intelligence and the Anglo-American ‘Special Relation-
ship’ during the Cold War.” Review of International Studies 24, no. 3 (July 1998): 
331–51.
———. The Hidden Hand: Britain, America, and Cold War Secret Intelligence. New 
York: Overlook Press, 2001.
Altenhöner, Florian. “Total War–Total Control? German Military Intelligence on the 
Home Front, 1914–1918.” Journal of Intelligence History 5, no. 2 (Winter 2005): 
55–72.
Ambrosious, Lloyd E. Wilsonian Statecraft: Theory and Practice of Liberal Internation-
alism during World War I. Wilmington, Del.: Scholarly Resources, 1991.
———. Wilsonianism: Woodrow Wilson and His Legacy in American Foreign Rela-
tions. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2002.
Andrew, Christopher. Her Majesty’s Secret Service: The Making of the British Intelli-
gence Community. New York: Viking, 1985.
———. Defend the Realm: The Authorized History of MI5. New York: Viking, 2010.
Angermann, Erich. “Ein Wendepunkt in der Geschichte der Monroe-Doktrin und der 
deutsch-amerikanischen Beziehungen.” Jahrbuch für Amerikastudien 3 (1958): 
22–58.
Asprey, Robert B. The German High Command at War: Hindenburg and Ludendorff 
Conduct World War I. New York: Morrow, 1991.
Auerbach, Jerold S. “Woodrow Wilson’s ‘Prediction’ to Frank Cobb: Words Historians 
Should Doubt Ever Got Spoken.” Journal of American History 54 (December 
1967): 608–17.

Bibliography 
 297
Avery, Laurence G. “Maxwell Anderson’s Report on Frank Cobb’s Interview with 
Woodrow Wilson: The Documentary Source.” North Dakota Quarterly 45, no. 
3 (1977): 5–14.
Baecker, Thomas. “The Arms of the Ypiranga: The German Side.” Americas 30 (July 
1973): 347–62.
———. Die deutsche Mexikopolitik, 1913/14. Berlin: Colloquium, 1971.
Bailey, Thomas Andrew. The Policy of the United States toward the Neutrals, 1917–
1918. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1942.
———. “The United States and the Blacklist during the Great War.” Journal of Modern 
History 6 (March 1934): 14–35.
———. A Diplomatic History of the American People. 10th ed. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: 
Prentice-Hall, 1980.
Bamford, James. The Puzzle Palace: A Report on America’s Most Secret Agency. Bos-
ton: Houghton Mifflin, 1982.
Barie, Ottavio. L’opinione interventistica negli Stati Uniti, 1914–1917. Milan: Istituto 
Editoriale Cisalpino, 1960.
Barnes, Trevor. “Special Branch and the First Labour Government.” Historical Journal 
22, no. 4 (December 1979): 941–51.
Bass, Herbert J., ed. America’s Entry into World War I: Submarines, Sentiment, or 
Security? New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1964.
Batey, Mavis. Dilly: The Man Who Broke Enigmas. London: Dialogue, 2009.
Beckett, Ian F. W. The First World War: The Essential Guide to Sources in the National 
Archives. Kew: PRO Publications, 2002.
Beckman, Bengt, and C.G. McKay. Swedish Signal Intelligence, 1900–1945. London: 
Frank Cass, 2003.
Beesly, Patrick. Room 40: British Naval Intelligence, 1914–1918. London: Harcourt 
Brace Jovanovich, 1982.
Bemis, Samuel Flagg. The United States as World Power: A Diplomatic History, 1950–
1950. New York: Holt, 1950.
———. The United States as a World Power, 1900–1955. New York: Holt, 1955.
Benbow, Mark E. “‘All the Brains I Can Borrow’: Woodrow Wilson and Intelligence 
Gathering in Mexico, 1913–15.” Studies in Intelligence 51, no. 4 (December 2007).
Bennett, Gill. ‘A Most Extraordinary and Mysterious Business’: The Zinoviev Letter of 
1924. London: Foreign and Commonwealth Office, 1999.
———. The Records of the Permanent Under-Secretary’s Department. London: For-
eign & Commonwealth Office, 2005.
———. Churchill’s Man of Mystery: Desmond Morton and the World of Intelligence. 
London: Routledge, 2006.
Billington, Monroe L. “The Gore Resolution of 1916.” Mid-America 47 (1965): 89–98.
———. “The Sunrise Conference: Myth or Fact?” Southwestern Social Science Quar-
terly 37 (March 1957): 330–40.
Birdsall, Paul M. “Neutrality and Economic Pressure, 1914–1917.” Science and Society 
3 (1939): 217–28.
Birnbaum, Karl E. Peace Moves and U-Boat Warfare. Stockholm: Almqvist & Wiksell, 
1958.  
Blum, John M. Joe Tumulty and the Wilson Era. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1951.
Bodnar, John, ed. Bonds of Affection: Americans Define Their Patriotism. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 1996.
Boghardt, Thomas. Spies of the Kaiser: German Covert Operations in Great Britain 
during the First World War Era. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004.
Brands, Henry W. Woodrow Wilson. New York: Times Books, 2003.
Brandes, Stuart. Warhogs: A History of War Profits in America. New York: Times 
Books, 2003.

298 
 Bibliography
Bruce, Robert B. A Fraternity of Arms: America and France in the Great War. Law-
rence: University Press of Kansas, 2003.
Brückner, Hilmar-Detlef. “Die Deutsche Heeres-Fernmeldeaufklärung im Ersten Welt-
krieg an der Westfront.” In Geheimdienst, Militär und Politik in Deutschland, edited 
by Jürgen W. Schmidt, 199–246. Ludwigsfelde: Ludwigsfelder Verlagshaus, 2008.
Buchanan, Albert Russell. “European Propaganda and American Public Opinion, 
1914–1917.” PhD diss., Stanford University, 1935.
Buehrig, Edward Henry. “Wilson’s Neutrality Re-Examined.” World Politics 3 (Octo-
ber 1950): 1–19.
———. Woodrow Wilson and the Balance of Power. Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press, 1955.
Burdick, Charles B. “A House on Navidad Street: The Celebrated Zimmermann Note 
on the Mexican Border?” Arizona and the West 8, no. 1 (Spring 1966): 19–34.
Burk, Kathleen. Britain, America and the Sinews of War, 1914–1918. Boston: Allen & 
Unwin, 1985.
Burton, David H. Cecil Spring Rice: A Diplomat’s Life. Rutherford, N.J.: Fairleigh 
Dickinson University Press, 1990.
Carroll, John M., and George C. Herring, eds. Modern American Diplomacy. Wilming-
ton, Del.: Scholarly Resources, 1986.
Cecil, Lamar. The German Diplomatic Service, 1871–1914. Princeton: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 1976.
Chalkley, John F. Zach Lamar Cobb: El Paso Collector of Customs and Intelligence 
during the Mexican Revolution, 1913–1918. El Paso: Texas Western Press, 1998.
Chester, Lewis, Stephen Fay, and Hugo Young. The Zinoviev Letter: A Political Intrigue. 
London: Heinemann, 1967.
Chickering, Roger. Imperial Germany and the Great War, 1914–1918. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1998.
Child, Clifton J. “German-American Attempts to Prevent the Exportation of Munitions 
of War, 1914–1915.” Mississippi Valley Historical Review 25, no. 3 (December 
1938): 351–68.
———. The German-Americans in Politics, 1914–1917. Madison: University of Wis-
consin Press, 1939.
Clements, Kendrick. “Woodrow Wilson’s Mexican Policy, 1913–15.” Diplomatic His-
tory 4 (Spring 1980): 113–36.
———. The Presidency of Woodrow Wilson. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 
1992.
———. Woodrow Wilson, World Statesman. Chicago: I. R. Dee, 1999. 
Coerver, Don M., and Linda B. Hall. Texas and the Mexican Revolution: A Study in 
State and National Border Policy. San Antonio: Trinity University Press, 1984.
Cohen, Warren I. The American Revisionists: The Lessons of Intervention into World 
War I. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1967.
Coletta, Paolo E. “A Question of Alternatives: Wilson, Bryan, Lansing, and America’s 
Intervention in World War I.” Nebraska History 63, no. 1 (1982): 33–57.
Cook, Andrew. Ace of Spies: The True Story of Sidney Reilly. Stroud: Tempus, 2002.
Cooper, John Milton, Jr. “The Great War and American Memory.” Virginia Quarterly 
Review 79, no. 1 (Winter 2003): 70–84.
———. “The United States.” In The Origins of World War I, edited by Richard F. Hamil-
ton and Holger H. Herwig, 415–42. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2003. 
———. The Vanity of Power: American Isolationism and the First World War, 1914–
1917. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, 1969.
———. Walter Hines Page: The Southerner as American, 1855–1918. Chapel Hill: 
University of North Carolina Press, 1977.
———. Woodrow Wilson: A Biography. New York: Knopf, 2003.

Bibliography 
 299
———. “World War I: European Origins and American Intervention.” Virginia Quar-
terly Review 56 (Winter 1980): 1–18.
Costrell, Edwin. How Maine Viewed the War, 1914–1917. Orono, Me.: University 
Press, 1940.
Cowling, Maurice. The Impact of Labour. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1971.
Crighton, John Clark. Missouri and the World War, 1914–1917: A Study in Public 
Opinion. Columbia: University of Missouri Press, 1947.
Cummins, Cedric. Indiana Public Opinion and the World War, 1914–1917. Indianapo-
lis: Indiana Historical Bureau, 1947.
Dalton, Brian J. “Wilson’s Prediction to Cobb: Notes on the Auerbach-Link Debate.” 
Historian 32 (August 1970): 545–63.
De Grey, Nigel. The Dartington Hall Experiment. Totnes: Dartington Hall, 1934.
Deist, Wilhelm. Militär und Innenpolitik im Weltkrieg, 1914–1918. 2 vols. Düsseldorf: 
Droste, 1970.
Denniston, Robin. Thirty Secret Years: A. G. Denniston’s Work in Signals Intelligence, 
1914–1944. Clifton-upon-Teme: Polperro Heritage Press, 2007.
Devlin, Patrick. Too Proud To Fight: Woodrow Wilson’s Neutrality. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1974.
DeWeerd, Harvey A. President Wilson Fights His War: World War I and American 
Intervention. New York: Macmillan, 1968.
Dickinson, Frederick R. War and National Reinvention: Japan in the Great War, 1914–
1919. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1999.
Dietl, Ralph. “Friedensvermittlung oder Siegfrieden? William Jennings Bryan und der 
Erste Weltkrieg, 1914–1917.” In Zwei Wege in die Moderne: Aspekte der deutsch-
amerikanischen Beziehungen, 1900–1918, edited by Ragnhild Fiebig-von Hase 
and Jürgen Heideking, 211–27. Trier: Wissenschaftlicher Verlag Trier, 1998.
Doerries, Reinhard R. Imperial Challenge: Ambassador Count Bernstorff and German 
American-Relations, 1908–1917. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 
1989.
———. “Promoting Kaiser and Reich: Imperial German Propaganda in the United 
States during World War I.” In Confrontation and Cooperation: Germany and 
the United States in the Era of World War I, 1900–1924, edited by Hans-Jürgen 
Schröder, 135–66. Providence, R.I.: Berg, 1993.
———. “Die Tätigkeit deutscher Agenten in den USA während des Ersten Weltkrieges 
und ihr Einfluss auf die diplomatischen Beziehungen zwischen Washington und 
Berlin.” In Diplomaten und Agenten: Nachrichtendienste in der Geschichte der 
deutsch-amerikanischen Beziehungen, edited by Reinhard Doerries, 11–52. Hei-
delberg: C. Winter, 2001.
Doss, Kurt. Das deutsche Auswärtige Amt im Übergang vom Kaiserreich zur Weimarer 
Republik: Die Schülersche Reform. Düsseldorf: Droste, 1977.
Dugdale, Blanche E. C. Arthur James Balfour. 2 vols. London: Hutchinson, 1936–1937.
Durán, Esperanza. “Revolution and International Pressures: The Mexican Experience, 
1910–1920.” Journal of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs 24, no. 4 (No-
vember 1982): 483–95.
Edmonds, Cecil J. “The Persian Gulf Prelude to the Zimmermann Telegram.” Journal 
of the Royal Central Asian Society 47 (1960): 58–67.
Egremont, Max. Balfour: A Life of Arthur James Balfour. London: Collins, 1980.
Esposito, David M. The Legacy of Woodrow Wilson: American War Aims in World 
War I. London and Westport, Conn.: Praeger, 1996.
Farr, Barbara. The Development and Impact of Right Wing Politics in Britain, 1902–
1932. London, New York: Garland, 1987.
Fay, Sidney Bradshaw. The Origins of the World War. 2 vols. New York: Macmillan, 
1928.

300 
 Bibliography
———. “Wilson and Neutrality.” Nation, January 22, 1936, 109–10.
Fearon, Peter. “Manufacturing Industry in the United States during the First World 
War.” In The First World War and International Economy, edited by Chris Wrig-
ley, 52–75. Cheltenham and Northampton: Edward Elgar, 2000.
Ferguson, Niall. The Pity of War. New York: Basic Books, 1999.
Fiebig-von Hase, Ragnhild. Lateinamerika als Konfliktherd der deutsch-amerikanischen 
Beziehungen, 1890–1903: Vom Beginn der Panamapolitik bis zur Venezuelakrise 
von 1902/03. 2 vols. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1986.
———. “The United States and Germany in the World Arena, 1900–1917.” In Confron-
tation and Cooperation: Germany and the United States in the Era of World War I, 
1900–1924, edited by Hans-Jürgen Schröder, 33–68. Providence, R.I.: Berg, 1993.
Fiebig-von Hase, Ragnhild, and Jürgen Heideking, eds. Zwei Wege in die Moderne:  
Aspekte der deutsch-amerikanischen Beziehungen, 1900–1918. Trier: Wissen-
schaftlicher Verlag Trier, 1998.
Fischart, Johannes. “Hans Arthur von Kemnitz (Neue Politikerköpfe, XV. Teil). ” Die 
Weltbühne: Wochenschrift für Politik, Kunst Wirtschaft 31 (1924).
Fischer, Fritz. Germany’s Aims in the First World War. Translated by C. A. Macartney 
with an introduction by James Joll. New York: Norton, 1967.
———. War of Illusions: German Policies from 1911 to 1914. Translated by Marian 
Jackson with a foreword by Sir Alan Bullock. New York: Norton, 1975.
Fischer-Baling, Eugen. “Der Untersuchungsausschuss für die Schuldfrage des ersten 
Weltkrieges.” In Aus Geschichte und Politik: Festschrift für Ludwig Bersträsser, 
edited by Alfred Herrmann, 117–37. Düsseldorf: Droste, 1954.
Fitzgerald, Michael, and Richard Ned Lebow. “Iraq: The Mother of all Intelligence 
Failures.” Intelligence and National Security 21, no. 5 (October 2006): 884–909.
Fitzgerald, Penelope. The Knox Brothers. London: Macmillan, 1977.
Fleming, Thomas James. “Woodrow Wilson’s Fight for Peace.” Reader’s Digest 99 
(September 1971): 87–91.
———. The Illusion of Victory: America in World War I. New York: Basic Books, 2003. 
Foley, Robert T. “Easy Target or Invincible Enemy? German Intelligence Assessments 
of France before the Great War.” Journal of Intelligence History 5, no. 2 (Winter 
2005): 1–24.
Forsbach, Ralf. Alfred von Kiderlen-Wächter (1852–1912): Ein Diplomatenleben im 
Kaiserreich. 2 vols. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1997.
Freeman, Peter. “The Zimmermann Telegram Revisited: A Reconciliation of the Pri-
mary Sources.” Cryptologia 30, no. 2 (April 2006): 98–150.
———. “MI1(b) and the Origins of British Diplomatic Cryptanalysis.” Intelligence and 
National Security 22, no. 2 (April 2007): 206–28.
Freud, Sigmund, and William C. Bullitt. Thomas Woodrow Wilson: A Psychological 
Study. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1967.
Friedman, William F., and Charles J. Mendelsohn. The Zimmermann Telegram of Jan-
uary 16, 1917, and Its Cryptographic Background. 1938. Reprint, Laguna Hills: 
Aegean Park Press, 1976.
Garcés, Laura. “The German Challenge to the Monroe Doctrine in Mexico, 1917.” 
In Confrontation and Cooperation: Germany and the United States in the Era of 
World War I, 1900–1924, edited by Hans-Jürgen Schröder, 281–314. Providence, 
R.I.: Berg, 1993.
von zur Gathen, Joachim. “Zimmermann Telegram: The Original Draft.” Cryptologia 
31, no. 1 (January 2007): 2–37.
Gatzke, Hans W. Germany and the United States: A “Special Relationship?” London, 
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1980.
Gilderhus, Mark T. Pan American Visions: Woodrow Wilson in the Western Hemi-
sphere, 1913–1921. Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1986.

Bibliography 
 301
———. Diplomacy and Revolution: U.S.-Mexican Relations under Wilson and Car-
ranza. Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1977.
Goldstein, Erik. “Tyrrell, William George, Baron Tyrrell.” In Oxford Dictionary of  
National Biography: From the Earliest Times to the Year 2000, edited by H. C. J.  
Matthew and Brian Harrison. 61 vols. New York: Oxford University Press, 2004.
Grattan, C. Hartley. Why We Fought. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1929.
Gregory, Ross. The Origins of American Intervention in the First World War. New 
York: Norton, 1971.
———. Walter Hines Page: Ambassador to the Court of St. James. Lexington: Univer-
sity Press of Kentucky, 1970.
Grenville, John Ashley Soames. “The United States Decision for War, 1917: Excerpts 
from the Manuscript Diary of Robert Lansing.” Renaissance and Modern Studies 
4 (1960): 59–81.
Griffiths, Richard. Fellow Travellers of the Right. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1983.
Grigg, John. Lloyd George: War Leader, 1916–1918. London: Allen Lane, 2002.
Hall, Linda B., and Don M. Coerver. Revolution on the Border: The United States and 
Mexico, 1910–1920. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1988.
———. “Woodrow Wilson, Public Opinion, and the Punitive Expedition: A Re- 
Assessment.” New Mexico Historical Review 72 (April 1997): 171–94.
Handlin, Oscar. “A Liner, a U-boat . . . and History.” American Heritage 6 (1955): 
40–45.
Hardinge, Charles. Old Diplomacy: The Reminiscences of Lord Hardinge of Penshurst. 
London: J. Murray, 1947.
Harris, Charles H., III, and Louis R. Sadler. The Archaeologist Was a Spy: Sylvanus 
G. Morley and the Office of Naval Intelligence. Albuquerque: University of New 
Mexico Press, 2003.
———. “Pancho Villa and the Columbus Raid: The Missing Documents.” In The Bor-
der and the Revolution: Clandestine Activities of the Mexican Revolution, 1910–
1920, edited by Charles H. Harris III and Louis R. Sadler, 101–112. Las Cruces: 
New Mexico State University Press, 1990.
———. “The Plan of San Diego and the Mexican-U.S. War Crisis of 1916: A Reexami-
nation.” In The Border and the Revolution: Clandestine Activities of the Mexi-
can Revolution, 1910–1920, edited by Charles H. Harris III and Louis R. Sadler, 
71–98. Las Cruces: New Mexico State University Press, 1990.
———. The Texas Rangers and the Mexican Revolution: The Bloodiest Decade, 1910–
1920. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 2004.
———. “The Witzke Affair: German Intrigue on the Mexican Border, 1917–18.” Mili-
tary Review (February 1979): 36–50.
Hayashima, Akira. Die Illusion des Sonderfriedens: Deutsche Verständigungspolitik 
mit Japan im ersten Weltkrieg. Munich: Oldenburg, 1982.
Heaton, John Langdon, ed. Cobb of “The World”: A Leader in Liberalism. New York: 
Dutton, 1924.
Heitmann, Jan. Unter Wasser in die Neue Welt: Handelsunterseeboote und kaiserliche 
Unterseekreuzer im Spannungsfeld von Politik und Kriegführung. Berlin: Berliner 
Wissenschafts-Verlag, 1999.
Hieber, Hanne. “‘Mademoiselle Docteur’: The Life and Service of Imperial Germany’s 
Only Female Intelligence Officer.” Journal of Intelligence History 5, no. 2 (Winter 
2005): 91–108.
Hodgson, Geoffrey. Woodrow Wilson’s Right Hand: The Life of Colonel Edward M. 
House. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2006.
Hope, John. “Fascism, the Security Service and the Curious Careers of Maxwell Knight 
and James McGuirk Hughes.” Lobster 22 (November 1991): 1–5.

302 
 Bibliography
Horn, Martin. Britain, France, and the Financing of the First World War. Montreal: 
McGill-Queens University Press, 2002.
Hornbeck, Stanley Kuhl. “Cause and Occasion of Our Entry into the World War, 
1917.” Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 192 (July 
1932): 56–66.
Hughes, Mike. Spies at Work. London: 1 in 12 Publications, 1994.
Hulnick, Arthur S. “What’s Wrong with the Intelligence Cycle.” Intelligence and 
National Security 21, no. 6 (December 2006): 959–79.
Hürter, Johannes. “Die Staatssekretäre des Auswärtigen Amtes im Ersten Weltkrieg.” 
In Der Erste Weltkrieg: Wirkung, Wahrnehmung, Analyse, edited by Wolfgang 
Michalka, 216–51. Munich: Piper, 1994.
Iklé, Frank. “Japanese-German Peace Negotiations during World War I.” American 
Historical Review 71 (October 1965): 62–76.
Jähnicke, Burkhard. Washington und Berlin zwischen den Kriegen: Die Mixed Claims 
Commission in den transatlantischen Beziehungen. Baden-Baden: Nomos, 2003.
James, William M. The Eyes of the Navy: A Biographical Study of Admiral Sir Reginald 
Hall. London: Methuen, 1955.
Jarausch, Konrad Hugo. The Enigmatic Chancellor: Bethmann Hollweg and the Hubris 
of Imperial Germany. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1973.
Jeffreys-Jones, Rhodri. American Espionage: From Secret Service to CIA. New York: 
Free Press, 1977.
Jervis, Robert. “Intelligence and Foreign Policy: A Review Essay.” International Secu-
rity 11, no. 3 (Winter 1986/1987), 141–61.
Johnson, Charles T. Culture at Twilight: The National German-American Alliance, 
1901–1918. New York: Peter Lang, 1999.
Johnson, Niel M. George Sylvester Viereck: German-American Propagandist. Urbana: 
University of Illinois Press, 1972.
Jonas, Manfred. The United States and Germany: A Diplomatic History. Ithaca and 
London: Cornell University Press, 1984.
Jones, John Price, and Paul Merrick Hollister. The German Secret Service in America. 
Boston: Small, Maynard & Co., 1918.
Jordan, William G. Black Newspapers and America’s War for Democracy, 1914–1920. 
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2001.
Jore, Jeff. “Pershing’s Mission in Mexico: Logistics and Preparation for the War in 
Europe.” Military Affairs 52, no. 3 (July 1988): 117–21.
Kahn, David. The Codebreakers: The Story of Secret Writing. London: Weidenfeld and 
Nicolson, 1967.
———. “Edward Bell and His Zimmermann Telegram Memoranda.” Intelligence and 
National Security 14, no. 3 (Autumn 1999): 143–59.
———. “The Rise of Intelligence.” Foreign Affairs 85, no. 5 (Sept.–Oct. 2006): 125–34.
———. “The Zimmermann Telegram: The Original Plaintext of What Became the 
Most Important Cryptogram Solution in History.” Cryptogram 38, no. 2 (March–
April 1972): 49, 53, 61, 71.
Katz, Friedrich. Deutschland, Diaz und die mexikanische Revolution: Die deutsche 
Mexikopolitik, 1870–1920. Berlin: VEB Deutscher Verlag der Wissenschaften, 
1964. 
———. The Life and Times of Pancho Villa. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1998. 
———. “Pancho Villa and the Attack on Columbus, New Mexico.” American Histori-
cal Review 83, no. 1, suppl. (1978): 101–30.
———. The Secret War in Mexico: Europe, the United States and the Mexican Revolu-
tion. London and Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981.
Kawamura, Noriko. Turbulence in the Pacific: Japanese-U.S. Relations during World 
War I. Westport, Conn.: Praeger, 2000.

Bibliography 
 303
Keene, Jennifer D. The United States and the First World War. New York: Longman, 
2000.
Keith, Jeannette. “The Politics of Southern Draft Resistance, 1917–1918: Class, Race, 
and Conscription in the Rural South.” Journal of American History 87, no. 4 
(March 2001): 1335–61.
Kennedy, David. Over Here: The First World War and American Society. Oxford and 
New York: Oxford University Press, 1980.
Kershaw, Ian. Hitler. 2 vols. New York: Norton, 1999–2000.
Kestler, Stefan, Die deutsche Auslandsaufklärung und das Bild der Ententemächte 
im Spiegel zeitgenössischer Veröffentlichungen während des Ersten Weltkrieges. 
Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang, 1994.
Kitchen, Martin. The Silent Dictatorship: The Politics of the German High Command 
under Hindenburg and Ludendorff, 1916–1918. London: Croom Helm, 1976.
Knight, Alan. The Mexican Revolution. 2 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1986–1990.
Knightley, Philip. The First Casualty: The War Correspondent as Hero, Propagandist 
and Myth Maker from the Crimea to Vietnam. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovan-
ovich, 1975.
———. The Second Oldest Profession: The Spy as Bureaucrat, Patriot, Fantasist and 
Whore. London: Deutsch, 1986.
Knock Thomas J. To End All Wars: Woodrow Wilson and the Quest for a New World 
Order. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1992.   
Koenig, Robert. The Fourth Horseman: One Man’s Mission to Wage the Great War in 
America. New York: Public Affairs, 2006.
Koistinen, Paul A. C. “The ‘Industrial-Military Complex’ in Historical Perspective: 
World War I.” Business History Review 41 (1967): 378–403.
Koopmann, Friedhelm. Diplomatie und Reichsinteresse: Das Geheimdienstkalkül in der 
deutschen Amerikapolitik, 1914–1917. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang, 1990.
Kunimoto, Iyo. “Japan and Mexico, 1888–1917.” PhD diss., University of Texas at 
Austin, 1975.
La Follette, Belle C., and Fola La Follette. Robert M. La Follette. 2 vols. New York: 
Macmillan, 1953.
Larsen, Daniel. “British Intelligence and the 1916 Mediation Mission of Colonel  
Edward M. House.” Intelligence and National Security 25, no. 5 (October 2010): 
682–704.
Leberke, Botho. Die wirtschaftlichen Ursachen des amerikanischen Kriegseintritts, 
1917. Berlin: Junker und Dünnhaupt, 1940.
Leuchtenburg, William E. The Perils of Prosperity, 1914–1932. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1993.
Levin, Norman Gordon, Jr. Woodrow Wilson and World Politics: America’s Response 
to War and Revolution. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1968.
Link, Arthur. Wilson: Campaigns for Progressivism and Peace, 1916–1917. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 1965.
———. “That Cobb Interview.” Journal of American History 72, no. 1 (June 1985): 
7–17.
Livermore, Seward W. Politics Is Adjourned: Woodrow Wilson and the War Congress, 
1916–18. Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan University Press, 1966.
Lorenz, Edward N. “Predictability: Does the Flap of a Butterfly’s Wings in Brazil Set 
Off a Tornado in Texas?” Paper presented at the 139th meeting of the American 
Association for the Advancement of Sciences, 1972.
Ludendorff, Erich von. Ludendorff’s Own Story. 2 vols. New York and London: Harp-
er & Brothers, 1920. 
Luebke, Frederick C. Bonds of Loyalty: German Americans and World War One. 
DeKalb: Northern Illinois University Press, 1974.

304 
 Bibliography
Lüdke, Tilman. Jihad Made in Germany: Ottoman and German Propaganda and Intel-
ligence Operations in the First World War. Münster: Lit Verlag, 2005.
MacDonnell, Francis. “The Search for a Second Zimmermann Telegram: FDR, BSC, 
and the Latin American Front.” International Journal of Intelligence and Counter-
intelligence 4, no. 4 (Winter 1990): 487–505.
MacMillan, Margaret. Paris 1919: Six Months that Changed the World. New York: 
Random House, 2002.
Madeira, Victor. “‘No Wishful Thinking Allowed’: Secret Service Committee and Intel-
ligence Reform in Great Britain, 1919–23.” Intelligence and National Security 18, 
no. 1 (Spring 2003): 1–20.
Mahl, Thomas E. Desperate Deception: British Covert Operations in the United States, 
1939–44. Washington, D.C.: Brassey’s, 1998.
Marquand, David. Ramsay MacDonald. London: J. Cape, 1977.
Masterman, Lucy. C.F.C. Masterman: A Biography. London: Cassell, 1968.
Matthew, H. C. J., and Brian Harrison, eds. Oxford Dictionary of National Biography: 
From the Earliest Times to the Year 2000. 61 vols. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2004.
May, Ernest R. The World War and American Isolation, 1914–1917. Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 1959.
May, Henry F. The End of American Innocence: A Study of the First Years of Our Own 
Time, 1912–1917. New York: Knopf, 1959.
McDonald, Timothy G. “The Gore-McLemore Resolutions: Democratic Revolt against 
Wilson’s Submarine Policy.” Historian 26, no. 1 (1963): 50–74.
McIvor, Arthur. “‘A Crusade for Capitalism’: The Economic League, 1919–1939.” 
Journal of Contemporary History 23, no. 4 (October 1988): 631–55.
McMahon, Paul. British Spies and Irish Rebels: British Intelligence and Ireland, 1916–
1945. Woodbridge: Boydell Press, 2008.
Mead, Gary. The Doughboys: America and the First World War. New York: Overlook 
Press, 2000.
Mehnert, Ute. “Deutsche Weltpolitik und amerikanisches Zweifronten-Dilemma: Die 
‘Japanische Gefahr’ in den deutsch-amerikanischen Beziehungen, 1904–1917.” 
Historische Zeitschrift 257, no. 3 (December 1993): 647–92.
———. “German Weltpolitik and the American Two-Front Dilemma: The ‘Japanese 
Peril’ in German-American Relations, 1904–1917.” Journal of American History 
82, no. 4 (March 1996): 1452–1477.
Meine, Arnold. Wilsons Diplomatie in der Friedensfrage, 1914–1917. Stuttgart: Kohl-
hammer, 1938.
Meyer, Michael C. “The Mexican-German Conspiracy of 1915.” Americas 23 (July 
1966): 76–89.
Millis, Walter. Road to War. London: Faber & Faber, 1935.
Millman, Chad. The Detonators: The Secret Plot to Destroy America and an Epic Hunt 
for Justice. New York: Little Brown, 2006.
Mirow, Jürgen. Der Seekrieg 1914–1918 in Umrissen. Göttingen: Musterschmidt, 1976.
Möckelmann, Jürgen. “Das Deutschlandbild in den USA 1914–1918 und die Kriegs-
zielpolitik Wilsons.” PhD diss., University of Hamburg, 1965.
Mooney, Christopher F. “Moral Consensus and Law.” Thoughts 51, no. 202 (Septem-
ber 1976): 231–54.  º
Morrissey, Alice M. The American Defense of Neutral Rights, 1914–1917. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1939.
Mugridge, Ian. The View from Xanadu: William Randolph Hearst and United States 
Foreign Policy. Montreal and London: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 1995.
Mulder, John M., Ernest M. White, and Ethel S. White, eds. Woodrow Wilson: A Bib-
liography. Westport, Conn., and London: Greenwood Press, 1997.

Bibliography 
 305
Müller, Klaus-Jürgen. “On the Difficulties of Writing Intelligence History.” Studies in 
Intelligence 30, no. 3 (Fall 1986): 57–62.
Nassua, Martin. “Gemeinsame Kriegführung. Gemeinsamer Friedensschluß.” Das 
Zimmermann-Telegramm vom 13. Januar 1917 und der Eintritt der USA in den 
1. Weltkrieg. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang, 1992.
Nickles, David Paull. Under the Wire: How the Telegraph Changed Diplomacy. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2003.
Ninkovich, Frank. The Wilsonian Century: U.S. Foreign Policy since 1900. Chicago 
and London: University of Chicago Press, 1999.
O’Halpin, Eunan. “British Intelligence in Ireland, 1914–1921.” In The Missing Dimen-
sion: Governments and Intelligence Communities in the Twentieth Century, edited 
by Christopher Andrew and David Dilks, 54–77. Chicago: University of Illinois 
Press, 1984.
———. “Hall, Sir (William) Reginald.” In Oxford Dictionary of National Biography: 
From the Earliest Times to the Year 2000, edited by H. C. J. Matthew and Brian 
Harrison, 646–48. 61 vols. New York: Oxford University Press, 2004.
O’Keefe, Kevin. A Thousand Deadlines: The New York City Press and American Neu-
trality, 1914–1917. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1972.
Orde, Anne. The Eclipse of Great Britain: The United States and British Imperial  
Decline, 1895–1956. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 1996.
Parker, Gilbert. “The United States and the War.” Harper’s Monthly Magazine, March 
1918, 521–31.
Parkinson, Roger. Tormented Warrior: Ludendorff and the Supreme Command. London: 
Hodder & Stoughton, 1978.
Persico, Joseph E. Roosevelt’s Secret War: FDR and World War II Espionage. New 
York: Random House, 2001.
Peterson, Horace C. Propaganda for War: The Campaign against American Neutrality, 
1914–17. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1939.
Piehler, P. Kurt. Remembering War the American Way. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian 
Institution Press, 1995.
Pöhlmann, Markus. “Towards a New History of German Military Intelligence in the 
Era of the Great War: Approaches and Sources.” Journal of Intelligence History 5, 
no. 2 (Winter 2005): 1–9.
———. “German Intelligence at War, 1914–1918.” Journal of Intelligence History 5, 
no. 2 (Winter 2005): 25–54.
Porter, Bernard. Plots and Paranoia: A History of Political Espionage in Britain, 1790–
1988. Boston: Unwin Hyman, 1989.
Raat, W. Dirk. “U.S. Intelligence Operations and Covert Actions in Mexico, 1900–1947.” 
Journal of Contemporary History 22 (1987): 615–38.
Rafalko, Frank J., ed. A Counterintelligence Reader. Washington, D.C.: National Coun-
terintelligence Center, 2004.
Ramsay, David. “Blinker” Hall, Spymaster: The Man Who Brought America into 
World War I. Stroud, Gloucestershire: Spellmount, 2008.
Reiling, Johannes. Deutschland: Safe for Democracy? Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag, 
1997.
Rielage, Dale C. Russian Supply Efforts in America during the First World War. Jefferson, 
N.C.: McFarland, 2002.
Ritter, Gerhard. Staatskunst und Kriegshandwerk: Das Problem des “Militarismus” in 
Deutschland. 4 vols. Munich: Oldenburg, 1954–1968.
———. The Sword and the Scepter: The Problem of Militarism in Germany. Translated 
from the German by Heinz Norden. 4 vols. Coral Gables: University of Miami 
Press, 1972.
Rochester, Stuart. American Liberal Disillusionment in the Wake of World War I. Uni-
versity Park and London: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1977.

306 
 Bibliography
Roskill, Stephen W. Hankey: Man of Secrets. 3 vols. London: Collins, 1970–1974.
Ross, Stewart H. Propaganda for War: How the United States Was Conditioned to Fight 
the Great War of 1914–1918. Jefferson, N.C., and London: McFarland, 1996.
Sanders, Michael L., and Philip M. Taylor. British Propaganda during the First World 
War, 1914–1918. London and Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1982.
Sandos, James A. “German Involvement in Northern Mexico: A New Look at the 
Columbus Raid.” Hispanic American Historical Review 50 (February 1970): 
70–88.
Scheiber, Harry Noel. “What Woodrow Wilson Said to Cobb in 1917: Another View of 
Plausibility.” Wisconsin Magazine of History 52, no. 4 (1969): 344–47.
Schiff, Warren. “German Military Penetration into Mexico during the Late Diaz Period.” 
Hispanic American Historical Review 39 (August 1959), 568–79.
Schnauber, Jens. “Die parlamentarische Untersuchung der ‘Ursachen des deutschen  
Zusammenbruches im Jahre 1918.’” University seminar paper, Universität der Bun-
deswehr, Munich, 1998. 
Schöllgen, Gregor. “Die Großmacht als Weltmacht: Idee, Wirklichkeit und Perzeption 
deutscher ‘Weltpolitik’ im Zeitalter des Imperialismus.” Historische Zeitschrift 
248, no. 1 (February 1989): 79–100.
Schorreck, Henry F. “The Telegram That Changed History.” Cryptologic Spectrum 
(Summer 1970): 22–32.
Schröder, Hans-Jürgen, ed. Confrontation and Cooperation: Germany and the United 
States in the Era of World War I, 1900–1924. Providence, R.I.: Berg, 1993.
Schwabe, Klaus. Das diplomatische Korps, 1871–1945. Boppard/Rhein: Boldt, 1985.
Schwartz, E. A. “The Lynching of Robert Prager, the United Mine Workers, and the 
Problems of Patriotism in 1918.” Journal of the Illinois State Historical Society 95, 
no. 4 (Winter 2002/2003): 414–37.
Seaburg, Paul. The Wilhelmstraße: A Study of German Diplomats under the Nazi  
Regime. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1954.
Seymour, Charles. American Diplomacy during the World War. Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 1934.
———. American Neutrality, 1914–1917: Essays on the Causes of American Interven-
tion in the World War. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1935.
Simpson, Colin. The Lusitania. Boston: Little, Brown, 1973.
Singh, Simon. The Code Book: The Evolution of Secrecy from Mary, Queen of Scots to 
Quantum Cryptography. New York: Doubleday, 1999.
Sloan, Geoff. “Dartmouth, Sir Mansfield Cumming and the Origins of the British Intel-
ligence Community.” Intelligence and National Security 22, no. 2 (April 2007): 
298–305.
Smith, Daniel M. The Great Departure: The United States and World War I, 1914–
1920. New York: J. Wiley, 1965.
———. “National Interest and American Intervention, 1917: An Historical Appraisal.” 
Journal of American History 52, no. 1 (June 1965): 5–24.
———. “President Wilson and the German ‘Overt Act’ of 1917: A Reappraisal.” Uni-
versity of Colorado Studies Series in History 2 (1961): 129–39.
———. Robert Lansing and American Neutrality, 1914–1917. Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1958.
Smith, Dean. “The Zimmermann Telegram, 1917.” American History Illustrated 13, 
no. 3 (1978): 28–37.
Smith, Michael M. “The Mexican Secret Service in the United States, 1910–1920.” 
Americas 59, no. 1 (July 2002): 65–85.
Spence, Richard B. “Englishmen in New York: The SIS American Station, 1915–21.” 
Intelligence and National Security 19, no. 5 (Autumn 2004): 511–37.
———. “K. A. Jahnke and the German Sabotage Campaign in the United States and 
Mexico, 1914–1918.” Historian 59, no. 1 (1996): 89–112.

Bibliography 
 307
———. “Sidney Reilly in America, 1914–1917.” Intelligence and National Security 10, 
no. 1 (January 1995): 92–121.
Spencer, Samuel R., Jr. Decision for War, 1917: The Laconia Sinking and the Zimmer-
mann Telegram. Rindge, N.H.: R. R. Smith, 1953.
Squires, James D. British Propaganda at Home and in the United States from 1914 to 
1917. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1935.
Srodes, James. Allen Dulles: Master of Spies. Washington, D.C.: Regnery, 2000.
Stafford, David. Churchill and Secret Service. Woodstock, N.Y.: Overlook Press, 1998.
Stegman, Dirk. “Die deutsche Inlandspropaganda 1917/18: Zum innenpolitischen 
Machtkampf zwischen OHL und ziviler Reichsleitung in der Endphase des Kaiser-
reiches.” Militärgeschichtliche Mitteilungen 2 (1972): 75–116.
Sterba, Christopher M. Good Americans: Italian and Jewish Immigrants during the 
First World War. New York: Oxford University Press, 2003.
Stevenson, David. The First World War and International Politics. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1988. 
Swain, Joseph Ward. “Woodrow Wilson’s Fight for Peace.” Current History 35, no. 6 
(March 1932): 805–12.
Syrett, Harold C. “The Business Press and American Neutrality, 1914–1917.” Missis-
sippi Valley Historical Review 32 (1945): 215–30.
Taylor, A. J. P. English History, 1914–1945. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1965.
Taylor, Philip M. “The Foreign Office and British Propaganda during the First World 
War.” Historical Journal 15 (1980): 113–59.
———. British Propaganda in the 20th Century: Selling Democracy. Edinburgh: Edin-
burgh University Press, 1999.
Thimme, Friedrich, ed. Front wider Bülow: Staatsmänner, Diplomaten und Forscher zu 
seinen Denkwürdigkeiten. Munich: Bruckmann, 1931.
Thompson, J. Lee. Politicians, the Press and Propaganda: Lord Northcliffe and the 
Great War, 1914–1919. Kent, Ohio: Kent State University Press, 1999.
Thompson, John A. “Woodrow Wilson and World War I: A Reappraisal.” Journal of 
American Studies 19, no. 3 (December 1985): 325–48.
Tóibín, Colm. “The Tragedy of Roger Casement.” New York Review of Books, May 
27, 2004, 53–57.
Tomes, Jason. Balfour and Foreign Policy: The International Thought of a Conserva-
tive Statesman. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.
Towne, Ruth Warner. Senator William J. Stone and the Politics of Compromise. Port 
Washington, N.Y., and London: Kennikat Press, 1979.
Transill, Charles C. America Goes to War. Boston: Little, Brown, 1938.
Trask, David F. “Woodrow Wilson and International Statecraft: A Modern Assess-
ment.” Naval War College Review 27, no. 4 (1975): 23–31.
Tuchman, Barbara W. Die Zimmermann Depesche. Bergisch Gladbach: Lübbe, 1986.
———. The Zimmermann Telegram. 4th ed. New York: Ballantine Books, 1985.
Tucker, Robert W. “An Inner Circle of One: Woodrow Wilson and His Advisers.” Na-
tional Interest 51 (Spring 1998), 3–26.
Turner, Jason. British Politics and the Great War: Coalition and Conflict, 1915–1918. 
New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1992.
Turner, John Kenneth. Shall It Be Again? New York: Huebsch, 1922.
Unger, Nancy C. Fighting Bob La Follette: The Righteous Reformer. Chapel Hill: Uni-
versity of North Carolina, 2000.
Unnewehr, Lewis E. Silent Night, Unholy Night: The Story of German-Americans dur-
ing World War I. New York: Vantage Press, 2000.
Vietsch, Eberhard. Wilhelm Solf: Botschafter zwischen den Zeiten. Tübingen: Reiner 
Wunderlich Verlag, 1961.
West, Nigel, and Oleg Tsarev. The Crown Jewels: The British Secrets at the Heart of the 
KGB Archives. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1999.

308 
 Bibliography
Yockelson, Mitchell. “The War Department: Keeper of Our Nation’s Enemy Aliens 
during World War I.” Paper presented to the Society for Military History Annual 
Meeting, April 1998.
Young, Robert J. Marketing Marianne: French Propaganda in America, 1900–1940. 
New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 2004.
Warner, Michael. “The Kaiser Sows Destruction.” Studies in Intelligence 46, no. 1 (2002): 
3–9.
———. “Wanted: A Definition of Intelligence.” Studies in Intelligence 46, no. 2 (2002): 
15–22.
Williams, William J. The Wilson Administration and the Shipbuilding Crisis of 1917: 
Steel Ships and Wooden Steamers. Lewiston, N.Y.: Mellen, 1992.
Winkler, Jonathan Reed. Nexus: Strategic Communications and American Security in 
World War I. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2008.
Winkler, John K. William Randolph Hearst: A New Appraisal. New York: Hastings 
House, 1955.
Witcover, Jules. Sabotage at Black Tom: Imperial Germany’s Secret War in America, 
1914–1917. Chapel Hill, N.C.: Algonquin, 1989.
Wright, Esmond. “Foreign Policy of Woodrow Wilson: A Re-Assessment.” History 
Today 10, Nos. 3–4 (March and April 1960): 149–57, 223–31. 
Zebel, Sidney H. Balfour: A Political Biography. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1973.
“The Zimmermann Telegram.” Cryptologic Quarterly 20, no. 1–2 (Spring/Summer 
2001): 43–52. 

309
Index
Allied powers: arms sales to, 2; covert 
programs to cause problems for, 4, 29; 
enemy territories, apportionment of, 
18; explosives in Allied ships, German 
scheme to plant, 200–201; German-
Japanese negotiations, leaking terms of 
to, 51–52, 55, 226; Japanese allegiance 
to, 48, 52, 97, 116; peace conference 
promotion by Wilson and House, 
131–32; State Department diplomats 
and intelligence operations in, 110
Archibald, James F. J., 112–13
Arizona, 1, 15, 44, 67, 71, 73–74, 117, 
142, 162, 165–66
Austria, 12, 27, 112–13
Balfour, Arthur J.: Foreign Secretary 
appointment, 89; Gaunt, House com-
mendation about, 109; German activity 
in Mexico, confirmation of, 125, 128; 
Hall, relationship with, 89, 235, 236; 
intelligence sharing with, 88; telegram 
delivery, thanks for, 120, 121; telegram 
delivery to U.S. embassy, 115–17, 
118–120
Belgium, 15, 16, 28, 160, 184
Bell, Edward “Ned”: appearance and 
character of, 110; Bernstorff telegram 
decryption, 123–25, 126–27; family 
and early life of, 110; foreign service 
career and promotions, 110; Hall,  
relationship with, 110, 240; intelligence 
operations role of, 110–11; Page sup-
port for, 111; Rintelen covert opera-
tions, information about, 112; telegram 
delivery to, 116–17, 118, 119, 250; 
telegram interception and decryption, 
credit for, 239, 240, 241
Bernstorff, Johann Heinrich von:  
attitudes toward and, 205; Canadian 
Pacific Railway and plans to destroy, 
30; Constantinople ambassadorship, 
208; death of, 209; diplomacy and 
keeping U.S. out of war, 17, 202, 208; 
diplomatic message that included tele-
gram to, 95; diplomatic messages from, 
obtaining copies of, 122, 276n57; 
Eckardt, decryption of telegram to, 
123–25, 126–27; Eckardt, telegram 
to, 100, 104–5, 116–17, 121–22, 136, 
274n49; election of, 208; encrypted 
messages as part of State Department 
diplomatic cables, 77–78; Hindenburg, 
opinion of, 208–9; League of Nations 
representative, 208–9; memoir of, 11, 
19; Mexican revolution, threat of U.S. 
intervention in, 37; Solf, congratula-
tions to, 225; as source of telegram and 
a traitor, 194, 197–98, 206–8, 211–12, 
223, 247, 284n3; submarine warfare, 
diplomacy in preparation for, 71; sub-
marine warfare, opinion about, 59–60, 
129–130; U.S.-German diplomatic 
relations break and return to home, 
102, 133, 158, 205–6; Zimmermann 
telegram delivery, 76–78, 129; 
Zimmermann telegram, disclosure of 
source of, 11; Zimmermann telegram, 
interview about, 206–7; Zimmermann 
telegram, names for, 254
Bethmann Hollweg, Theobald von:  
attitudes toward and opinions of, 24; 
authority of, 65; broken spirit of, 62; 
character of, 60–61; German-Japanese 
negotiations, 49, 51, 52, 193–94;  
leadership of, 60–61, 62; military and  

310 
 Index
civilian leadership, struggle between, 
60–61, 246; resignation of, 200; sub- 
marine warfare, diplomacy in prepa-
ration for, 65; submarine warfare, 
meeting about, 62–63; submarine 
warfare, opinion about, 59–60, 62, 
207; submarines attacks, response to, 
62; telegram, awareness of scheme in, 
75; Zimmermann disloyalty to, 202; 
Zimmermann meeting about tele-
gram, 199
butterfly effect, 245
California, 44, 67, 71
Carranza, Venustiano: alliance proposal, 
47, 73, 79; assassination of, 224; condi-
tions of Mexico under rule of, 34–35; 
German negotiations with, 11–12, 102, 
193, 197; German support for, 34, 
44, 46–47, 72–73, 125, 128; German-
Japanese alliance, role in creation of, 
74; German-Mexican alliance, 217–18, 
277n38; Mexican attack on U.S., pro-
posal for, 72–73; Mexican revolution 
role of, 33; Mexican-Japanese alliance, 
interest in, 136–37; overthrow of, sup-
port for, 42, 43–44, 128, 221; U.S. sup-
port for, 37; U.S. war, avoidance of, 40
Casement, Roger, 113–15
Central Powers, 13, 48–49, 87, 110, 
131–32, 201, 202, 250
Churchill, Winston, 81–82, 86, 244
codes and codebooks, German: 0075 
(7500) code, 19, 20, 78, 95–96, 105, 
122–23, 210–11, 213–14, 247, 253; 
5950 code, 122–23, 214; 13040 code, 
19, 20, 78, 105, 122–23, 210–11, 
212–14, 253; British code breaker suc-
cess against, 81, 105, 274n58; British 
copy of code, effort to obtain copy of, 
122–23; codebook use by Germans, 
253; codebooks, capture of by British 
and Allied nations, 81, 105, 119, 
274n58; delivery of to Washington 
embassy, 76, 95; Enigma machine, 242; 
numeric codes, 95, 105; vulnerability 
and compromise of codes, 210–16, 
246–47, 248
Cold War, 13–16, 18
Congress, U.S.: armed ships bill, 137–38, 
141, 146–47, 158, 182, 278n45; authen-
ticity of telegram, questions about, 
123, 125, 147–49, 150, 158; Casement 
death, motion of regret about, 115; 
debate about telegram in, 6, 147–158; 
Democrat control of, 145; disclosure of 
telegram, reaction to, 6; interventionists 
bloc in, 6, 145–158, 185; isolationists/
noninterventionists bloc in, 6, 145–158, 
185–87; neutrality acts, 10; publication 
of telegram, questions about intentions 
behind, 149–150; telegram role in U.S. 
entrance into war, 186–87; telegram 
source and method of interception, 
questions about, 142, 150–58; war 
votes, honoring of those who voted no, 
10–11; Wilson war address and debate 
about, 1, 2, 9–10, 183–87, 282n13
Cooper, John Milton, 15, 160
cryptology and cryptanalysis: British 
naval intelligence work on, 4, 6, 19, 80, 
119, 210–16, 248–49; British organiza-
tions after war, 242; concept of and 
terminology, 253–54; cryptologic study 
of the telegram, 18–22; crytographic 
intelligence, sharing of between British 
and U.S., 122–23; decryption and  
decrypts, 253–54; decryption of tele-
gram, 20, 95–99, 274n29; encryption 
and encrypts, 253–54; Enigma machine, 
242; intercepts, 253–54; records about, 
4; U.S. codes, 93–94, 95, 101, 273n18
de Grey, Nigel: appearance of, 84; 
Bernstorff telegram decryption, 
123–25, 126–27; diplomatic messages, 
decryption of, 86; family of, 84; Hall, 
loyalty to, 85; telegram contents, shar-
ing of with Hall, 96–97; WWII intel-
ligence activities, 242; Zimmermann 
telegram decryption, 95–99, 105–7, 
119, 158
Eckardt, Heinrich von: Bernstorff tele-
gram, decryption of, 123–25, 126–27; 
Bernstorff telegram to, 100, 104–5, 
116–17, 121–22, 136, 274n49; com-
munications to Germany through 
Washington embassy, 34; death of, 223; 
diplomatic skill of, 34; German secret 
agents in Mexico, authority over, 221, 
286n16; German-Mexican negotia-
tions, 11–12, 102, 193, 197, 217–18; 
Mexican envoy assignment, 34; recall 
of to Germany, 221–23; Zimmermann 
telegram, accusation as source of 

Index 
 311
disclosure, 210, 211; Zimmermann 
telegram delivery to, 76–78, 283n6; 
Zimmermann telegram, downplaying 
role of, 222–23; Zimmermann tele-
gram, names for, 254
Economic League, 235
Enrile, Gonzalo C., 42–46, 58, 67, 71
Ewing, Alfred, 19, 80–81, 83, 85, 86
Fletcher, Henry P., 136, 240, 241
Foreign Office, British: Balfour as 
Foreign Secretary, 89; Bernstorff tele-
gram, obtaining copy of, 104; disclo-
sure of intelligence to by Hall, 235; 
disclosure of telegram, authorization 
for, 5, 115–17, 118–120, 240, 289n44; 
disclosure of telegram to, 100; German-
Mexican alliance, concern about, 116, 
125, 128; Hall and intelligence from, 
attitudes toward, 88
France, 1, 10, 28, 52, 87, 241
Freeman, Peter, 21, 93
Friedman, William F., 19–20, 92
Gallipoli campaign, 88, 272n27
Gaunt, Guy: authenticity of telegram, 
questions about, 175–76, 281n35; 
Bernstorff telegram, obtaining copy of, 
104–5, 116, 274n49; Casement diary, 
release of to, 115; character of, 108–9; 
Hall, relationship with, 20, 108–9; 
House, relationship with, 109; intel-
ligence and propaganda activities, 86; 
Rathom, relationship with, 109; tele-
gram interception and decryption, cred-
it for, 239, 289n28; telegram source 
and method of interception, 128; U.S. 
intervention in war, news about, 181; 
U.S.-German diplomatic relations 
break, notification of, 102–3
Gerard, James: dinner in honor of, 64; 
diplomatic message that included tele-
gram, 95; German reservists in U.S., 
Zimmermann boast of, 30, 267n29; 
German-Japanese alliance, concern 
about, 52; interception of messages of 
by Germans, 211; Montgelas, opinion 
of, 36; submarine warfare, protest 
against, 78; submarine warfare, report 
on, 130; telegram contents, awareness 
of, 211; telegram contents, question 
about, 78; Zimmermann, opinion of, 
24, 26
German embassy, Washington: Bernstorff 
telegram delivery to Eckardt, 100, 
104–5, 274n49; communications of 
Mexican envoy to Germany through, 
34; diplomatic messages from, obtain-
ing copies of, 122, 276n57; diplomatic 
messages, interception and decryp-
tion of, 20, 86, 91, 93–95, 101, 104, 
118, 121, 248–49, 273n24; encrypted 
messages as part of State Department 
diplomatic cables, 77–78, 91, 216; mail 
and codebook delivery to, 76, 95; as 
source of telegram, 194, 197–98, 206, 
211–12, 284n3; Zimmermann telegram 
delivery to, 76–78
German foreign office (Auswärtiges Amt/
Wilhelmstrasse), 3, 15, 26, 27, 30–32, 
56, 208, 266n16
German-Japanese alliance: concern 
about, 51–52; feasibility of, 58; impor-
tance of in ending war, 56, 226; leaking 
terms of by Japan, 51–52, 55, 226; 
peace negotiations for, 4–5, 48–52, 
54–56, 58, 72, 79, 193–94, 201; pur-
suit of through Mexico, 56–57, 74, 
193–94, 226
German-Mexican alliance: communica-
tion with Eckardt about, 79, 272n61; 
Eckardt-Carranza negotiations, 11–12, 
102, 193, 197, 217–18; Foreign Office 
concern about, 116, 125, 128; German 
interest in, 46–47; German newspaper 
reactions to, 194–97; German support 
for Mexican attack on U.S., 1, 73–74, 
193, 271n41; Mexican interest in, 
39–47, 65, 136–37, 277n38; Mexican-
Japanese alliance and, 67, 226; propos-
al for, 73, 79, 97; support for Mexico 
as part of, 46, 67, 71; Zimmermann 
interest in, 46
Germany and German government/
Wilhelmstrasse: Allied powers peace  
negotiation, 60; anti-American 
schemes, 142–43; Archibald as courier 
for, 112–13; capabilities of, 11, 28; 
Cold War attitudes toward telegram 
and, 13–16; colonial empire in Pacific 
region, 27–28, 48, 52, 55, 56, 266n22; 
communication with Mexican envoy, 
34; defeat of, causes and reasons for, 
245–49; defeat of, investigation into 
causes of, 201–2; domestic politics, 
foreign policy, and Zimmermann plot, 

312 
 Index
4–5, 6, 16, 17, 245–48; East Asian 
foreign policy, 49–50; encrypted mes-
sages as part of State Department 
diplomatic cables, 77–78, 91, 216; 
explosives in Allied ships, scheme to 
plant, 200–201; geography and access 
to communications, 248–49; German-
Japanese-Russian alliance, 54–55; 
Japanese war declaration against, 48; 
Mexico, support for, 34–35, 72–73, 
217–220, 285n6; military and civilian 
leadership, struggle between, 60–61, 
245–46; military rule of, 60–61; news-
paper reactions to telegram, 194–97; 
peace conference promotion by Wilson 
and House, 87, 131–32, 140, 201, 202, 
250; peace negotiations with U.S., 225; 
plots against the Western Hemisphere, 
9–10, 13–14, 16, 22; postwar revi-
sionist attitudes about telegram and, 
11–13; post–WWII attitudes toward 
telegram and, 13–14; secret agents in 
Mexico, 220–21, 286n16; surrender of, 
42; transatlantic cables, cutting of, 34, 
77, 80, 90, 248–49; U.S., diplomatic 
relations with, 2, 6, 17, 44, 47, 78–79, 
102–3, 132–33, 158; U.S. military 
strength, underestimation of, 17, 248. 
See also German-Japanese alliance; sub-
marines, German
Göppert, Otto, 20, 21, 209–14, 217
Great Britain and British government/
Whitehall: communist agitation and 
Zinoviev letter, 237–39, 288n20; covert 
programs to cause problems for, 29; 
democracy promotion by, 186; geogra-
phy and access to German communica-
tions, 248–49; insurgencies, support 
for, 29; Japan, alliance with, 1, 48, 49, 
51, 54; Japanese agreement with, 52; 
peace conference promotion by Wilson 
and House, 87, 131–32, 272n22; post-
war revisionist attitudes about telegram 
and, 13; propaganda and U.S. interven-
tion in war, 11, 12; U.S. politics, med-
dling in, 22; U.S. war debts, payment 
of, 10; war costs and U.S. intervention, 
189–190. See also Foreign Office, 
British; intelligence and intelligence ser-
vices, British
Hall, William Reginald: appearance and 
character of, 83; attitudes toward and 
opinions of, 6, 11, 14, 83, 119, 235, 
236, 240; authority and autonomy of, 
5–6, 21–22, 83, 89, 234–35, 249–250; 
autobiography of, 4, 19, 20; Balfour, 
relationship with and opinion of, 89, 
235, 236; Bell, relationship with, 110, 
240; Bernstorff telegram decryption, 
123–25; Bernstorff telegram, obtaining 
copy of, 101, 104–5, 116–17, 121–22, 
274n49; biography of, 21; Casement 
reputation, destruction of, 113–15; 
covert actions conducted by, 5; cryp-
tanalysis expertise of, 19; death of, 
242; disinformation about telegram, 3; 
Gaunt, relationship with, 20, 108–9; 
German code, effort to obtain copy of 
from, 122–23; information from, reli-
ability of, 19–20, 21; intelligence, han-
dling and distribution of, 85, 86–89, 
97, 100–105, 249–250, 272nn21–22; 
intelligence assignment, 82–83; intelli-
gence-gathering network development, 
85–86; legacy of, 242–43; loyalty to, 
85; management of intelligence and 
Room 40 by, 5, 21–22, 234–35, 250; 
multiple means of telegram relay and 
interception, 19, 91–93, 94, 119; naval 
career, 82; para-intelligence network 
after war, 234, 238, 250; peace confer-
ence initiative, attitude toward, 87–88, 
272nn21–22; personal vendettas, intel-
ligence use for, 88–89; political interests 
and career, 235–38; power and influ-
ence of, 89, 250; promotion of, 234, 
288n1; relationships with intelligence 
colleagues, 86; retirement of, 235–37, 
288n11; telegram, names for, 254, 255; 
telegram authorship, opinion of deci-
sion to disclose, 192–93; telegram con-
tents, de Grey sharing of, 96–97; tele-
gram decryption, 128, 158; telegram 
delivery to U.S. embassy, 1, 5, 101–5, 
115–121, 249–250, 275n45, 276n48; 
telegram interception and decryption, 
credit for, 239–242, 289n44; telegram 
role in U.S. entrance into war, 2, 159, 
238–39; telegram source and method 
of interception, speculation about and 
disclosure of, 4, 14, 16, 100–102, 121, 
128, 193, 213, 274n41, 283n6; U.S. 
intelligence agencies, relationship with, 
5, 108–15; Zinoviev letter and commu-
nist agitation in Britain, 237–39

Index 
 313
Hardinge, Charles, 104, 115–16, 118, 
183, 236
Harrison, Leland, 109, 110, 111, 241
Hendricks, Burton J., 11, 19, 21, 92, 93, 
239–241, 289n44
Hindenburg, Paul von, 61, 62–63, 
208–9, 231, 246
Hintze, Paul von, 34, 39, 50, 51, 54, 
267n3
Hitler, Adolf, 203–4, 231, 232, 242–44
Hohler, Thomas, 104, 125, 128, 182–83, 
274n49
Hood, Edwin Milton, 141–42, 152, 
279n20
House, Edward: appearance and char-
acter of, 131; attitudes toward and 
opinions of, 131; encrypted messages 
as part of State Department diplomatic 
cables, 77, 93, 273n18; Gaunt, rela-
tionship with, 109; intervention in war, 
discussion with Wilson about, 183; 
military service, 277n13; peace confer-
ence promotion by, 87–88, 272n22; 
telegram delivery to, 137; U.S.-German 
diplomatic relations break, notification 
of, 102; Wilson, relationship with, 131
India, 29, 30, 219
intelligence, definition of, 6
intelligence and intelligence services, 
American: British intelligence agencies, 
cooperation with, 4, 5, 6–7, 111–15, 
242–44; crytographic intelligence, 
sharing of between British and U.S., 
122–23; files and records about tele-
gram, 3; governmental decision-making 
and, 6; importance of role in telegram 
affair, 6–7
intelligence and intelligence services, 
British: American intelligence agencies, 
cooperation with, 4, 5, 6–7, 111–15, 
242–44; attitudes toward intelligence 
work, 82; authority and autonomy 
of, 5–6; code breaker success against 
German codes, 81, 105, 274n58; covert 
actions based on, 5; crytographic intel-
ligence, sharing of between British and 
U.S., 122–23; files and records about 
telegram, 3, 20; governmental decision-
making and, 6; importance of role 
in telegram affair, 6–7; methods and 
sources, protection of, 14, 16, 94, 100–
102, 274n41; organizations involved 
in, 80, 242; para-intelligence network 
after war, 234, 238, 250; recruitment of 
members, 84, 234; sorting of naval or 
military intercepts, 95. See also Naval 
Intelligence Division (NID)/Room 40
intelligence and intelligence services, 
German, 3, 6–7, 16–17, 28–30
interception of telegram. See transmis-
sion and interception of messages
Ireland, 29, 30, 219, 235
Jagow, Gottlieb von: attitudes toward 
and opinions of, 24; Foreign Secretary 
appointment, 26, 266n16; German-
Japanese negotiations, 49, 50–51, 52, 
55; leadership style of, 27; resigna-
tion of, 30–31, 56; submarine war-
fare, opinion about, 30–31, 59–60; 
Zimmermann, opinion of, 25, 27, 
31–32, 64
James, William Melbourne “Bubbles,” 
20, 21, 86, 88, 234, 235, 236
Japan: Allied powers, allegiance to, 48, 
52, 97, 116; arms sales to Mexico, 
57–58, 219–220; German colonial em-
pire, claim to, 48, 52; German colony 
in China, demand for surrender of, 
27–28, 266n22; German-Japanese-
Russian alliance, 54–55; Germany, war 
declaration against, 48; Great Britain, 
alliance with, 1, 48, 49, 51, 54; Russian 
agreement with, 52, 56; U.S., diplo-
matic relations with, 4–5, 116. See also 
German-Japanese alliance; Mexican-
Japanese alliance
Kahn, David, 20, 21, 92–93
Katz, Friedrich, 15, 93, 165
Kemnitz, Hans Arthur von: attitudes  
toward and opinions of, 53–54, 229–
230, 231, 233; Bernstorff interview 
about telegram, 206–7; death of, 233; 
diplomatic skill of, 53–54; East Asian 
foreign policy, 49, 52, 54; Enrile offer, 
decline of, 45; family and early life of, 
52; files and records about telegram, 
3–4, 233, 288n35; foreign service  
career and reemployment efforts, 52–
53, 54, 227, 230–32; German-Japanese 
negotiations, 50, 54–57, 58, 72, 79, 
194, 201; Hitler and Nazi regime, 
opinions about, 232, 233, 287n28; 
Luxburg message damage assessment, 

314 
 Index
215–16; Madeira casino affair, 53–54; 
marriage of, 53; Mexican-Japanese alli-
ance proposal, 3–4, 22, 58, 226, 245, 
246; military service, 52, 54; name of, 
269n14; political interests of, 227–230; 
retirement of, 227; Russia assignment, 
201; self-delusion, 233; submarine 
delivery of message, 76–77; telegram, 
signing off on, 67; telegram word-
ing and draft, author of, 3–4, 65–73, 
225–27, 228–230, 286n2; war policy, 
influence on, 58; writing on WWI, 233; 
Zimmermann, relationship with, 53
Knox, Alfred Dilwyn “Dilly,” 84, 85, 86, 
95–96, 242, 274n29
Kraft, Vincent, 219–220, 286n13
Krumm Heller, Arnold (Arnoldo), 39–42
Lansing, Robert: anti-German/pro-Allied 
attitude, 10, 110; Bernstorff telegram, 
obtaining copy of, 121–22, 136, 
277n34; German code, effort to obtain 
copy of from British, 122–23; German 
diplomatic messages, obtaining copies 
of, 122, 276n57; Hood, leaking tele-
gram through, 141–42, 152, 279n20; 
interventionist opinions of, 132; Papen 
papers on covert operations, 113; tele-
gram, attitude toward, 10; telegram, 
disclosure and publication of, 140–44; 
telegram, names for, 254, 255; telegram 
authorship, opinion of decision to dis-
close, 192, 282n3; telegram delivery 
to, 120–22, 130; telegram role in U.S. 
entrance into war, 2, 9, 159, 179–180, 
190; telegram source and method of 
interception, speculation about and 
disclosure of, 142, 156, 157–58, 191, 
194, 211, 213; U.S. entrance into war, 
U.S.-Mexican crisis to provoke, 39; 
Wilson possession of telegram, errone-
ous report on length of time to, 279n20
Laughlin, Irwin B., 111, 119, 239–240, 
275n45
Link, Arthur, 15, 159–160
Lloyd George, David, 89, 100, 188, 
189–190, 237
Lucius, Hellmuth von, 51, 54, 55, 79
Ludendorff, Erich: Bernstorff, meeting 
with, 207–8; character of, 61; dismissal 
of, 225; exile of, 201; German-Japanese 
negotiations, support for, 79, 193–94; 
Hitler appointment, opinion about, 
231; imperialist goals, 200; Mexico, 
endorsement of support for, 219; mili-
tary and civilian leadership, struggle 
between, 61, 246; OHL leadership, 
61; submarine warfare, meeting about, 
62–63; telegram, awareness of scheme 
in, 75–76, 199–200; Zimmermann, 
relationship with, 61–62, 63, 199–200
Luxburg, Karl von, 214–16, 241
Madeira casino affair, 53–54
Magnus, Arthur, 34, 35, 210, 283n6
media and news agencies: authenticity of 
telegram, questions about, 172, 175–
79, 281n33; Casement diary, release 
of to, 115; disclosure and publication 
of telegram contents, 7, 79; German 
American press, response to telegram 
by, 176–79, 281n43; German news-
paper reactions to telegram, 194–97; 
Kemnitz as telegram author, article 
about, 225–26, 286n2; leaking tele-
gram to, 118, 140–41, 152, 278n73, 
279n20; propaganda and news censor-
ship, 18; publication of telegram, 140–
44, 278n73; publication of telegram 
and mobilization for war, 15, 22, 159, 
179–180, 189–190, 238–39, 249–251; 
publication of telegram, questions 
about intentions behind, 149–150; 
submarine warfare, articles and opin-
ion pieces about, 160–63; telegram, 
articles, opinion pieces, and political 
cartoons about, 163–172, 281n29; 
telegram, names for, 255; Wilson pos-
session of telegram, erroneous report 
on length of time to, 149–150, 279n20; 
Zimmermann writings and interviews 
about telegram, 202–4; Zinoviev letter 
publication, 237–39
Mendelsohn, Charles J., 19–20, 92
Mexican-Japanese alliance: close ties 
between countries, 57; disclosure of to 
U.S. embassy, 105; German-Mexican 
alliance and, 67, 226; Japanese eco-
nomic interests in Mexico, 57; Japanese 
interest in, 116, 135, 136, 217–18; 
Kemnitz role in, 3–4, 22, 58, 226, 
245, 246; Mexican interest in, 57–58, 
135–36, 217–18; Mexican revolution 
and, 57; Montgelas report on improb-
ability of, 35, 57; oral agreement of, 
41; proposal for, 1, 3–5, 12, 22, 44, 46, 

Index 
 315
246; rationale behind, 4–5; reality of 
alliance, 58; Zimmermann telegram as 
name for, 255
Mexico: annexation of by U.S., 57; arms 
from German for, 217–19, 285n6; 
arms purchases from Japan, 57–58, 
219–220; attack on U.S. by, proposal 
for, 1, 67, 71, 72–74, 142–43, 193, 
271n41; British double-agent in, 
219–220, 286n13; British ties to, 34; 
conditions in Mexico under rule of 
Carranza, 34–35; foreign policies, 34; 
German domination over and influence 
in, 15, 125, 128; German promotion of 
conflict between U.S. and, 15, 38–39; 
German secret agents in, 220–21, 
286n16; German support for, 34–35, 
72–73, 217–220, 285n6; German-
Japanese negotiations through, 56–57; 
lectures on prosperity of, 42; lost ter-
ritories, proposal for reconquering of, 
1, 67, 71, 73–74, 117, 142; revolution 
in, 33–34, 37, 267n14; telegram, effect 
of on, 6; U.S. influence in, 34; U.S.-
Mexican crisis to prevent intervention 
in WWI, 38–39, 58, 72; war against 
U.S., proposal for, 42, 45, 221. See also 
German-Mexican alliance; Mexican-
Japanese alliance
Millis, Walter, 12, 13, 255
Mixed Claims Commission, 19–20, 91, 
241, 289n44
Montgelas, Adolf Maximilian Maria 
von: American affairs, foreign officer 
counselor on, 35; attitudes toward and 
opinions of, 35–36; Bernstorff inter-
view about telegram, 207; death of, 
224; diplomatic skill of, 35–36; East 
Asian foreign policy, 49; Enrile, meeting 
with, 43, 44; family and early life of, 
35; foreign service career and promo-
tions, 35, 267n7; German-Japanese  
negotiations, 50, 51; Kemnitz as tele-
gram author, source for article about, 
286n2; Mexican affairs and envoy  
assignment, 35, 71, 224; Mexican  
revolution, threat of U.S. intervention 
in, 37, 267n14; Mexican-Japanese  
alliance, report on improbability of, 
35, 57; North American foreign policy, 
54; publication of telegram, disclosure 
of, 191; submarine warfare, concern 
about, 36–37; submarine warfare, 
diplomacy in preparation for, 71; tele-
gram, responsibility for, 226; telegram, 
signing off on, 67, 71; telegram as mes-
sage delivery route, 77–78, 226; U.S. 
entrance into war, concern about, 36; 
US entrance into war, U.S.-Mexican 
crisis to prevent, 38–39; wife of, 36, 
267n7
Nassua, Martin, 17, 93, 160
Naval Intelligence Division (NID)/Room 
40: attitudes toward intelligence work, 
82; cryptanalysis work, 4, 6, 19, 80, 
119, 210–16, 248–49; decrypted mes-
sages, handling and distribution of, 
81–82, 85, 86–89, 100–105, 249–250, 
272nn21–22; diplomatic messages, 
interception and decryption of, 20, 
86, 91, 93–95, 101, 104, 118, 121, 
248–49, 273n18, 273n24; esprit de 
corps, 85; expertise, idiosyncrasies, and 
characteristics of staff, 83–85; German 
code, effort to obtain copy of from, 
122–23; Hall, loyalty to, 85; Hall role 
in, 5, 21–22, 234–35, 250; intelligence-
gathering network development, 85–
86; interception of messages, 80–81; 
recruitment of members, 84; Room 40, 
establishment of, 83; Swedish round-
about message interception, 91–93, 94, 
102, 214–16, 272n61, 273n3, 283n6; 
telegram interception and decryption, 
1, 6, 11, 80, 91–97, 98–99; telegram 
interception and decryption, credit 
for, 239–242, 289n28, 289n44; wire-
less messages, interception of, 80–81, 
90–91, 273n3
Nazi regime, 232, 233, 242–43, 287n28
New Mexico, 1, 15, 37, 44, 67, 71, 
73–74, 142, 162, 165–66
news agencies. See media and news 
agencies
Nickles, David Paull, 17, 21, 93
Norway, covert action in, 200–201
Oberste Heeresleitung (OHL), 60–63, 
200, 246, 248
Page, Walter Hines: American source 
of telegram, activity to support claim 
of, 157–58; anti-German/pro-Allied 

316 
 Index
attitude, 111; Bell, support for, 111; 
Bernstorff telegram, copy to send to 
State Department, 122, 136; biography 
of, 11, 19, 92, 239–241; Casement  
activities, opinion about, 115; disclo-
sure of information to by Hall, 235; 
German activity in Mexico, informa-
tion about, 128; Hall, opinion of, 83, 
119; Papen papers on covert opera-
tions, 113; recall or resignation of,  
111; telegram delivery, thanks to 
Balfour for, 120, 121; telegram delivery 
to, 119–120, 276n48; telegram source,  
disclosure of, 223; Zimmermann tele-
gram delivery to State Department, 
120, 135; Zimmermann telegram, 
names for, 254, 255
Papen, Franz von, 42–43, 45–46, 75–76, 
112, 113, 160, 167, 197, 231
Polk, Frank K., 109, 110, 111, 122, 
135–36, 137, 158, 277n34
public and public opinion, American: 
annexation of Southwest, attitudes 
toward, 15; anti-German attitudes, 10, 
18; anti-war protests, 188, 282n32; 
Archibald courier activity, outrage 
about, 113; authenticity of telegram, 
questions about, 172, 175–79, 281n33, 
281n35; German Americans, response 
to telegram by, 176–79, 281n43; 
intervention in war, opinions about, 
187–190, 282n37; interventionist opin-
ions, 6, 11, 13, 187–89; isolationist/
noninterventionist opinions, 6, 13, 163, 
187–89; opinions about telegram, 4, 6, 
15–16, 22, 163–172, 281n29; opinions 
about telegram, measurement of, 160, 
280n9; postwar revisionist attitudes 
about war and telegram, 10, 11–13; 
pro-war rallies, 185, 187–88; rally for 
war opinions, 9; submarine warfare, 
opinions about, 160–63, 280n12; tele-
gram disclosure and mobilization for 
war, 6, 22, 159–160, 179–180, 189–
190, 249–251; telegram interception, 
information about, 7; war hysteria,  
13; WWII entrance, attitudes toward, 
13, 190
Rhomberg, Edmund, 49, 50, 226–27
Rintelen von Kleist, Franz, 30, 111–12, 
113, 275n14
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 83, 109, 110, 
181, 242–44
Roosevelt, Theodore, 109, 145, 147, 
150, 182–83, 187, 282n37
Russia, 1, 29–30, 52, 54–55, 56, 237–39, 
288n20
Solf, Wilhelm von, 196, 202, 207, 
225–27, 228
State Department, U.S.: anti-German/
pro-Allied attitudes in, 110; Bernstorff 
telegram, obtaining copy of, 121–22, 
136; Bureau of Secret Intelligence 
operations, 109–10; diplomacy and 
keeping U.S. out of war, 17; diplomatic 
codes used by, 101, 211, 285n23; dip-
lomatic messages, interception and 
decryption of, 20, 86, 91, 93–95, 
101, 104, 118, 121, 248–49, 273n18, 
273n24; encrypted messages as part of 
State Department diplomatic cables, 
77–78, 91, 216; files and records about 
telegram, 3, 4; interception of telegram, 
role in, 19; Luxburg messages, disclo-
sure of, 215, 241; telegram delivery to, 
120–22, 135; telegram relay and inter-
ception via cable, 19, 20, 21, 91–95, 
118, 139, 140, 226, 248–49, 273n24
Stumm, Wilhelm von, 29, 67, 71–72,  
78, 221
submarines, German: anti-German atti-
tudes in US because of, 10; Argentinean 
ships, sinking of, 214–16; armed mer-
chant ships to defend against, 134–35, 
137–38, 141, 146–47, 158, 182, 
278n45; attacks on merchant ships/
neutral and Allied ships, 2, 25, 30–31, 
36–37, 59, 62, 138, 182; diplomatic 
preparations for unrestricted warfare, 
64–65, 71, 73; Lusitania, sinking of, 
15, 16, 31, 36, 38, 77, 111, 160, 163, 
171, 184; mail and codebook delivery 
to Washington by, 76, 95; Mexican 
support for, 46; submarine warfare, 
Hindenburg regret in use of, 209;  
unrestricted submarine warfare and 
U.S. intervention, 56, 59–60, 63, 65, 
101–3, 115, 117–18, 130, 132–35, 
182, 201–2, 246; unrestricted sub-
marine warfare and U.S.-German 
diplomatic relations, 78–79, 132–33; 
unrestricted submarine warfare, con-

Index 
 317
fidence in ending war with, 74–75; 
unrestricted submarine warfare, eco-
nomic impact of, 133–35; unrestricted 
submarine warfare, launch of, 2, 5, 52, 
62–65; unrestricted submarine warfare, 
opinions about, 6, 31, 36–37, 59–60, 
61–62, 63–64, 72, 74–75, 129–130, 
160–63, 207, 280n12
Sweden: communications of Mexican 
envoy to Germany through Swedish 
minister, 34; diplomatic codes used 
by, 214–16; diplomatic messages, 
interception and decryption of, 86; dip-
lomatic papers, trunk of, 206; German-
Japanese negotiations, role in, 50, 51, 
52, 54, 55, 56; interception of telegram, 
role in, 19; Swedish roundabout for 
cable transmissions, 20, 21, 91–93, 94, 
102, 214–16, 272n61, 273n3, 283n6
telegram, Zimmermann: authenticity of, 
123, 125, 136, 139, 147–49, 150, 158, 
175–79, 281n33, 281n35; author of, 
Kemnitz as, 3–4, 65–73, 225–27, 228–
230, 286n2; author of, Zimmermann 
confirmation as, 172, 175, 177, 
178–79, 191–94, 282n3, 282–83n5; 
chronology, 257–262; Cold War and 
interpretation of, 13–16; contemporary 
and neo-revisionist attitudes toward, 
16–18; content, wording, and draft 
of, 1, 3–4, 22, 65–75, 78, 129–130, 
225–27, 286n2; cryptologic study of, 
18–22; decision to send as telegram, 
75, 76–78; decryption of, 20, 95–99, 
103, 105–7, 158, 274n29; delivery of 
to Eckardt, 78; delivery of to German 
Washington embassy, 1, 5, 11, 76–78; 
disclosure of and publication of con-
tents, 2, 7, 79, 115–121, 128, 137–38, 
140–44, 240, 249–250, 275n45, 
289n38, 289n44; disclosure of, com-
mission to investigate, 209–14, 217; 
disclosure of source of and method 
of interception, 7, 11, 128, 193, 194, 
198, 223, 246–47, 283n6; disclosure of 
telegram and source, hesitation about 
sharing, 4, 14, 16, 94, 100–102, 121, 
191, 274n41; follow-up on proposals 
in, 78; government and military official 
aware of message, 75–76; long-term 
consequences of, 7; names for, 254–55; 
postwar revisionist attitudes about, 
11–13; post–WWII attitudes toward, 
13–14, 232–33; records, memoirs, and 
intelligence reports about, 2–4, 14–15, 
19, 20; significance of, 6, 251–52; sign-
ing off on draft, 67, 271n25; submarine 
delivery of message, 76–77, 90, 226; 
U.S. intervention in war, role in, 2, 6, 
9–10, 22, 96, 159–160, 179–180, 181, 
184–85, 186–87, 189–190, 201–2, 
238–39, 249–251; Zimmermann writ-
ings and interviews about, 202–4. See 
also transmission and interception of 
messages
Texas, 1, 15, 44, 67, 71, 73–74, 117, 
142, 162, 165–66
Thomson, Basil, 85, 86, 114–15
Thurstan, Edward, 104–5, 116, 125, 128
total war policy, 61
transmission and interception of mes-
sages: Berlin-Washington version, 
disclosure of, 20; British misinforma-
tion about, 21; credit for interception 
and decryption, 239–242, 289n28, 
289n44; cryptologic study of the tele-
gram, 19–20, 21; diplomatic messages, 
interception and decryption of, 20, 
86, 91, 93–95, 101, 104, 118, 121, 
248–49, 273n18, 273n24; geography 
and access to German communications, 
248–49; multiple means of relay and 
interception, 19, 91–93, 94, 119; NID 
interception of telegram, 1, 6, 91–95, 
103; source of telegram and method of 
interception, disclosure of, 7, 11, 128, 
193, 194, 198, 223, 246–47, 283n6; 
source of telegram and method of in-
terception, questions about, 141–42, 
143, 150–58; source of telegram, 
hesitation about disclosure of, 4, 14, 
16, 94, 100–102, 121, 191, 274n41; 
State Department cable as transmission 
means, 19, 20, 21, 91–95, 118, 139, 
140, 226, 248–49, 273n24; Swedish 
roundabout for cable transmissions, 20, 
21, 91–93, 94, 102, 214–16, 272n61, 
273n3, 283n6; wireless transmission of, 
19, 21, 80–81, 90–91
Tuchman, Barbara, 2–3, 14–15, 16, 21, 
74, 93, 159, 163–64, 192, 255
Tyrrell, William, 240, 241, 289n38, 
289n44

318 
 Index
United States embassy, London: anti-
German/pro-Allied attitudes in, 110; 
location of, 110; Mexican-Japanese 
alliance, disclosure of to, 105; telegram 
delivery to, 1, 5, 11, 101–5, 115–121, 
249–250, 275n45
United States (U.S.): anti-German atti-
tudes, 9–10, 18; British meddling in 
politics of, 22; Caillaux affair and U.S.-
French relations, 241; covert opera-
tions against, 112; German promotion 
of conflict between Mexico and, 15, 
38–39; German reservists in US, 30, 
267n29; Germany, diplomatic relations 
with, 2, 6, 17, 44, 47, 78–79, 102–3, 
132–33; intervention in war, causes of 
and reasons for, 11, 22; intervention 
in war, decision about, 1–2, 181–83, 
281n12, 282n37; intervention in war, 
Montgelas concern about, 36; inter-
vention in war, telegram role in, 2, 6, 
9–10, 22, 96, 159–160, 179–180, 181, 
184–85, 186–87, 189–190, 201–2, 
238–39, 249–251; intervention in war, 
U.S.-Mexican crisis to prevent, 38–39, 
58, 72; intervention in war, Wilson 
and House peace conference proposal 
and, 87, 131–32; isolationist policy, 
10; Japan, diplomatic relations with, 
4–5, 116; Mexican attack on, proposal 
for, 1, 67, 71, 72–74, 193, 271n41; 
Mexican revolution, threat of interven-
tion in, 37, 267n14; Mexico, annexa-
tion of, 57; military strength, German 
underestimation of, 17, 248; neutrality 
policy, 1–2, 10, 132–33, 135, 138, 157, 
158, 160–64, 278n47, 280n12; peace 
negotiations with Germany, 225; post-
war revisionist attitudes about war and 
telegram, 10–11; propaganda and news 
censorship, 18; sabotage operations in, 
30; submarine warfare and U.S. inter-
vention, 56, 59–60, 63, 65, 101–3, 115, 
117–18, 182, 201–2; telegram analy-
sis and role in US entrance into war, 
10–18; war casualties, 10, 18; war costs 
and U.S. intervention, 189–190; war 
debts, payment of, 10; war hysteria, 
13; WWII, entrance into, 13, 190, 244. 
See also Congress, U.S.; intelligence and 
intelligence services, American; public 
and public opinion, American
Versailles, Treaty of, 10, 229, 233
Villa, Francisco “Pancho,” 33, 37–38, 
39, 43, 44, 71, 72, 224
von zur Gathen, Joachim, 21, 93
Wilhelm II, Kaiser: Beast of Berlin name, 
18; Bernstorff, meeting with, 207–8; 
character of, 60; exile of, 201; German-
Japanese negotiations, 55; leader-
ship of, 60, 245–46; memoir of, 11; 
Mexican alliance suggestion from, 72; 
Mexican operations to stir up trouble 
with U.S., 58; post–WWII attitudes 
toward, 13, 14; submarine warfare, 
meeting about, 62–63; Zimmermann, 
opinion of, 26, 31; Zimmermann meet-
ing about telegram, 199
Wilson administration and Woodrow 
Wilson: affect of telegram on, 15; Allied 
powers-German negotiations, 60;  
appearance and character of Wilson, 
130–31; armed merchant ships to  
defend against, 134–35, 137–38, 141, 
182, 278n45; democracy promotion 
and making world safe for democracy, 
10, 17, 183, 185–86, 282n13; domes-
tic and foreign policies, 18; Germany, 
negotiated settlement with, 6; Hall, 
opinion of, 83; House, relationship 
with, 131; intervention in war, decision 
about, 1–2, 181–83, 281n12, 282n37; 
Mexican revolution, threat of interven-
tion in, 37, 267n14; neutrality policy, 
132–33, 135, 138, 160–64, 278n47, 
280n12; Page, usefulness of, 111; 
peace conference promotion by, 87–88, 
131–32, 140, 201, 202, 250, 272n22; 
peace negotiations with Germany, 225; 
possession of telegram, report on length 
of time of, 149–150, 279n20; pro-war 
cabinet, 6, 183; submarine warfare 
and U.S. intervention, 117–18, 130, 
132–35, 182, 201–2, 246; telegram, 
disclosure and publication of, 135–36, 
137–38, 140–44, 278n45; telegram, 
reaction to, 6, 135–36, 138–140; tele-
gram delivery to, 135–36; telegram 
interception, information about, 7, 
139, 140; telegram role in U.S. entrance 
into war, 2, 6, 9–10, 184–85, 238–39, 
249–251; war address to Congress and 
Congressional debate about, 1, 2, 9–10, 
183–87, 282n13

Index 
 319
Wolff, Theodor, 25, 28, 194–95, 196, 
208
World War I (WWI): Armistice, 216, 
236; German defeat, causes and rea-
sons for, 245–49; German defeat, 
investigation into causes of, 201–2; 
German surrender, 42; intervention in 
war, peace conference proposal and, 
87, 131–32, 201, 202; records about, 
declassification of, 3; start of, events 
that triggered, 27; U.S. casualties, 10, 
18; U.S. entrance into, concern about, 
36; U.S. entrance into, U.S.-Mexican 
crisis to prevent, 38–39, 58, 72; U.S. 
intervention in, 1–2, 9–10, 11, 22; U.S. 
intervention in, role of telegram in, 2, 6, 
9–10, 22, 96, 159–160, 179–180, 181, 
184–85, 186–87, 189–190, 201–2, 
238–39, 249–251; U.S. intervention in, 
Wilson decision on, 1–2, 181–83; U.S. 
war debts, 10; war costs and U.S. inter-
vention, 189–190
World War II (WWII), 13, 94, 190, 
242–44
Yardley, Herbert, 93–94, 273n18
Zimmermann, Arthur: alliance pro-
posal to Carranza, 47; alliance scheme, 
decision to support, 4–5, 22, 246; 
American response to appointment 
of, 32; annexation, opposition to, 28; 
attitudes toward and opinions of, 12, 
24–25, 26–27, 31–32, 63–64; author-
ship of telegram, confirmation of, 172, 
175, 177, 178–79, 191–94, 282n3, 
282–83n5; Bethmann, disloyalty to, 
202; birth and early life of, 23; blame 
for telegram disclosure, shifting of, 194, 
197–98, 247; character of, 24–27, 31; 
chronology, 257–262; covert opera-
tions, participation in, 28–30; death of, 
204; diplomatic skill of, 26, 28; educa-
tion of, 23; Foreign Secretary appoint-
ment, 1, 26, 27, 30–32, 56, 266n16; 
foreign service career and promotions, 
23–24, 26–27, 266n16; German reserv-
ists in U.S., boast about, 30, 267n29; 
German-Japanese negotiations, 49, 50, 
72; German-Mexican alliance, inter-
est in and negotiation instructions, 
11–12, 46, 102, 193, 197; influence 
of, 27–28; intelligence operations role 
of, 4; Kemnitz, recommendation for 
reemployment, 230–32; Kemnitz, rela-
tionship with, 53; liberal leanings of, 
26–27; Ludendorff, relationship with, 
61–62, 63, 199–200; military and war, 
opinion about, 31, 61–62; resignation 
of, 200–201; resignation of, call for, 
196; stress and pressure, response to, 
25, 64, 73, 79; submarine operations, 
opinion about, 31, 61–62, 63–64, 72, 
74–75; submarine warfare, diplomacy 
in preparation for, 64–65, 73; sup-
port for, 196–200; telegram, signing 
off on, 67, 72; telegram, writings and 
interviews about, 202–4; U.S. visit and 
knowledge of American character, 24; 
U.S.-Mexican crisis to prevent interven-
tion in war, 58; war aims, position on, 
28; WWI start and warmonger atti-
tudes, 27
Zinoviev, Grigory, 237–39, 288n20


321
About the Author
Thomas Boghardt is Senior Historian at the U.S. Army Center of Military 
History in Washington, D.C. He has published widely on the history of intelli-
gence and World War I and is the author of Spies of the Kaiser: German Covert 
Operations in Great Britain during the First World Era. He received his PhD in 
modern history from the University of Oxford. He lives with his wife and two 
children in Bethesda, MD.

The Naval Institute Press is the book-publishing arm of the U.S. Naval Insti-
tute, a private, nonprofit, membership society for sea service professionals and 
others who share an interest in naval and maritime affairs. Established in 1873 
at the U.S. Naval Academy in Annapolis, Maryland, where its offices remain 
today, the Naval Institute has members worldwide.
Members of the Naval Institute support the education programs of the 
society and receive the influential monthly magazine Proceedings or the color-
ful bimonthly magazine Naval History and discounts on fine nautical prints 
and on ship and aircraft photos. They also have access to the transcripts of the 
Institute’s Oral History Program and get discounted admission to any of the 
Institute-sponsored seminars offered around the country.
The Naval Institute’s book-publishing program, begun in 1898 with basic 
guides to naval practices, has broadened its scope to include books of more 
general interest. Now the Naval Institute Press publishes about seventy titles 
each year, ranging from how-to books on boating and navigation to battle 
histories, biographies, ship and aircraft guides, and novels. Institute members 
receive significant discounts on the more than eight hundred Press books in 
print.
Full-time students are eligible for special half-price membership rates. Life 
memberships are also available.
For a free catalog describing Naval Institute Press books currently avail-
able, and for further information about joining the U.S. Naval Institute, please 
write to:
Member Services
U.S. Naval Institute
291 Wood Road
Annapolis, MD 21402-5034
Telephone: (800) 233-8764
Fax: (410) 571-1703
Web address: www.usni.org

