
THE INTERNET
AND SOCIETY
A Reference Handbook

Other Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY 
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Chemical and Biological Warfare, Al Mauroni
Childhood Sexual Abuse, Second Edition, Karen L. Kinnear
Conﬂicts over Natural Resources, Second Edition, 
Jacqueline Vaughn
Cults, Second Edition, James R. Lewis
Forest Fires, Philip N. Omi
Genetic Engineering, Second Edition, Harry LeVine, III
Gun Control in the United States, Gregg Lee Carter
Human Rights Worldwide, Zehra F. Kabasakal Arat
Hurricanes, Second Edition, Patrick J. Fitzpatrick
Illegal Immigration, Michael C. LeMay
Illicit Trafﬁcking, Robert J. Kelly, Jess Maghan, 
and Joseph D. Serio
International Environmental Disputes, Aaron Schwabach
Invasion of Privacy, Kevin M. Keenan
Juvenile Justice, Donald J. Shoemaker and Timothy W. Wolfe
Mental Health in America, Donna R. Kemp
Native American Issues, Second Edition, William N. Thompson
New Slavery, Second Edition, Kevin Bales
U.S. Homeland Security, Howard Ball
U.S. Military Service, Cynthia A. Watson
The United Nations System, Chadwick F. Alger
World Population, Second Edition, Geoffrey Gilbert

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address 
vital issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering,
pollution, and biodiversity. Written by professional writers,
scholars, and nonacademic experts, these books are author-
itative, clearly written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide 
a good starting point for research by high school and college
students, scholars, and general readers as well as by legislators,
business people, activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series 
will find the information they need in order to have a better
understanding of the social, political, environmental, and
economic issues facing the world today.


THE INTERNET
AND SOCIETY
A Reference Handbook
Bernadette H. Schell
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California 
Denver, Colorado 
Oxford, England

Copyright © 2007 by ABC-CLIO, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Schell, Bernadette H. (Bernadette Hlubik), 1952–
The Internet and society : a reference handbook / Bernadette H. 
Schell.
p.
cm. — (ABC-CLIO's contemporary world issues)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-10: 1-59884-031-2 (hardcover : alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 1-59884-032-0 (ebook)
ISBN-13: 978-1-59884-031-5 (hardcover : alk. paper)
ISBN-13: 978-1-59884-032-2 (ebook)
1. Internet—Social aspects.
2. Internet—History.
3. Internet—
Biography.
4. Internet—Law and legislation.
5. Computer crimes.
6. Digital divide.
I. Title. 
HM851.S25 2007
303.48'33—dc22
2006036122
11
10
09
08
07
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 10
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook. 
Visit abc-clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116–1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
Manufactured in the United States of America.

Contents
List of Tables
xiii
Preface xv
1
Background and History, 1
What the Internet and an Intranet Are—and the Internet’s
Colorful History, 1
What the Internet Is, 1
What an Intranet Is, 2
The Colorful History of the Internet and Its Increasingly
Problematic Future, 3
How the Internet Works, 36
The General Nature of the Internet, 36
Gaining Access, 37
Ways to Communicate, 38
Publishing on the World Wide Web, 41
Creating a Website and Getting a Domain Name 
Address, 42
Navigating the World Wide Web, 44
Future Development of the Internet, 45
Online Voting and VoIP Long-Distance Telephoning, 47
Beating Jetlag with Redeﬁned Internet 
Videoconferencing, 48
Indulging in the Need for Speed with New and 
Improved Wireless Networks, 49
Growing Podcasting, 49
Turning to the Web to Watch Television, 50
Dual-Core Multi-Processing and 64-Bit Computing, 50
Conclusion, 51
References, 52
vii

2
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 57
Internet Users’ Concerns about Privacy, Security,
and Trust, 57
Concerns about Privacy, 58
Concerns about Security, 63
Concerns about Trust, 69
An Overview of Internet Crimes, 73
Internet Crimes Resulting in Harm to Property, 73
Internet Crimes Resulting in Harm to Persons, 74
Technical Nonoffenses, 74
Internet Criminal Liability: Four Elements, 75
Conclusion, 98
References, 98
3
Worldwide Perspective, 103
Cultural Adaptation Factors Inﬂuencing the 
Digital Divide, 107
Geographical Factors, 107
Socioeconomic Status, Gender, and Life Stage 
Factors, 108
Legal Jurisdictional Adaptation Factors, 109
A U.S. Noncomplex Legal Jurisdiction Case in Point, 109
The Electronic Frontier and Frontier Justice, 110
Governments and Internet-Related Crimes, 113
The United States, 113
Canada, 118
The United Kingdom, 119
International Developments: The Convention on 
Cyber-Crime, 120
Culture and the Digital Divide, 121
An International Incident, 121
Cultural Property and Personal Access, 129
Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) Protection, 130
Censorship of Certain Websites, 132
Conclusion, 137
References, 138
4
Chronology, 143
The Setting, 143
The Creative Beginning: The 1970s, 144
The Growing-up Years: The 1980s, 145
viii
Contents

The Booming 1990s, 149
Fear of a High-Tech Meltdown: 2001 to the Present, 156
5
Biographical Sketches, 173
Tim Bray, 173
Sergey Brin and Larry Page, 174
Tim Burners-Lee, 175
Vinton Cerf, 175
Stephen Cook, 176
Shawn Fanning, 176
David Filo and Jerry Yang, 177
William H. Gates, 178
James Gosling, 179
Steve Jobs, 180
Johan Johansen, 180
Mers Kutt, 181
Maﬁaboy, 182
Kevin Mitnick, 182
Pierre Omidyar, 183
Dennis Ritchie, 184
Dmitry Sklyarov, 185
Ken Thompson, 185
Ray Tomlinson, 186
Steve Wozniak, 186
References, 187
6
Data and Documents, 191
Internet Legislation in the U.S., 191
18 U.S.C., 191
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of
1996 (HIPAA), 192
Digital Millennium Copyright Act of 1998 (DMCA), 193
Gramm-Leach Bliley Act of 1999 (Financial Services
Modernization Act), 193
Trademark Law, Patent Law, and the U.S. Anticybersquatting
Consumer Protection Act of 1999, 195
USA Patriot Act of 2001 and Patriot Act II, 197
Homeland Security Act of 2002, 197
Cyber Security Research and Development Act of 2002, 
198
PROTECT Act of 2003, COPPA of 1998, and CIPA of 2000,
199
Contents
ix

CAN-SPAM Act of 2003, 201
Cyber Security Enhancement Act of 2005/2001, 202
A Sampling of Recent Internet Crime Cases, 203
Russian Computer Hacker Sentenced to Three Years in 
Prison, 204
Creator of Melissa Computer Virus Sentenced to Twenty
Months in Federal Prison, 204
Disgruntled Philadelphia Phillies Fan Charged with Hacking
into Computers Triggering Spam E-Mail Attacks, 205
Los Angeles, California, Man Sentenced to Prison for Role 
in International Computer Hacking and Internet Fraud
Scheme, 205
U.S. Charges Hacker with Illegally Accessing New York Times
Computer Network, 206
Justice Department Sues to Halt Alleged Internet Tax Scam, 207
Internet Pharmacy Operator Receives 51-Month Prison
Sentence, 207
First Criminal Defendants Plead Guilty in Peer-to-Peer
Copyright Piracy Crackdown, 208
Second Defendant Pleads Guilty in Prosecution of Major
International Spam Operation, 209
Virginia Man Pleads Guilty to Child Pornography Charges, 210
Data Regarding Internet Use and Prevalence Worldwide, 211
References, 214
7
Directory of Organizations, 217
Government Agencies, 217
Independent Organizations, 223
Academic Degrees in Internet Security, 237
8
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources, 241
Books, 242
Internet-Related Journals and Magazines, 251
Journals, 251
Magazines, 256
Online Newspapers, Scholarly and Literary Journals, 
and E-Zines, 259
URLs of Selected Online Newspapers, 259
URLs of Selected Scholarly and Literary Journals, 261
URLs of Selected E-Zines, 267
Websites, 270
Websites of Companies Offering Antivirus Software, 270
x
Contents

Websites of Companies Offering Firewalls, 271
Websites of Companies Offering Intrusion Detection
Systems, 272
Websites Related to Sexual Assault, Cyber Pornography,
and Cyber Child Pornography, 273
Websites Related to Internet Periodicals and Journals, 274
Internet-Related Audios, Documentaries, and Films, 275
Glossary, 285
Index, 295
About the Author, 311
Contents
xi


Tables
Table 6.1
Top 15 Internet-Using Countries, 211
Table 6.2
Selected 2006 Internet2 Connectivity Survey
Findings Regarding Internet Connectivity in 
U.S. Educational Environments, 212
Table 6.3
Top 15 Internet-Using Countries in Asia, 213
Table 6.4
Internet Pornography Statistics, 214
xiii


Preface
A
s part of the Contemporary World Issues series, Internet and
Society: A Reference Handbook is intended for a general audi-
ence with no technical knowledge of networking. Its pur-
pose is to help readers better understand the controversial politi-
cal, social, technical, legal, and economic issues surrounding the
Internet—or the Net, as it is commonly called. Because of its non-
technical writing style, this book should be useful to college and
university students in any discipline, not only those in sociology
or computer science. Also, because this book is consistent in form
with the Contemporary World Issues series, it is relevant to a
broader adult audience, including professionals and lawyers
wanting to know more about how the Internet operates and its
impact on society.
Since its appearance in the United States in the second half
of the twentieth century, the Internet has been the subject of ar-
duous study from different disciplines, including the social sci-
ences, business, law, computer science, and political science. In
the last few decades, when the Internet started to expand at un-
precedented rates and with different socioeconomic interests in-
volved, the Net’s impact on global citizens’ daily lives has been
profound. Representing a solid source of economic, social, and
political information, the Internet has, without question, become
one of the most important means of international communica-
tions (including online activism—known as hacktivism) and for
advancing economies around the world. Moreover, the complex
infrastructure of the World Wide Web has facilitated a number of
common activities and, thus, has provided a more level political
and economic “playing ﬁeld” for citizens in both developed and
developing countries.
xv

With the advent of the Internet in the 1960s, a variety of pos-
itive services have been made available to citizens around the
globe, ranging from communications—such as instant messaging
and telephony—to rapid, real-time online transactions—such as
e-commerce, Internet banking, online gaming, political activism,
and online voting. Through the use of handheld Internet wireless
devices, physicians have readily been able to access patients’
health histories and diagnostic records without having to rely on
time-delaying courier services; young billionaires have been cre-
ated with the development of “Google-like” search engines; and
governments around the globe have used the Internet to collect
homeland security intelligence as a means of keeping their citi-
zens safe.
However, with the growth of and diversity in Internet traf-
fic, a dark side to the Internet has surfaced in recent decades,
particularly since the late 1980s. That growth has played an im-
portant role in advancing abuses of available online services.
Thus, tech-savvy criminals have increasingly made use of the
Internet to perpetrate online crimes—which has led to a marked
worldwide rise in cases of child pornography, identity theft, in-
tellectual property theft, worm and virus infestations of busi-
ness and home computers (resulting in a drastic reduction in
computers’ information-processing effectiveness), and online
fraud involving e-commerce, voting, and gaming. Also, cell
phone––owning citizens—including famous ones such as  Paris
Hilton—have discovered their stored personal messages and
photos displayed over the Internet for millions of eyes to peruse.
According to recent estimates, the cost to victims of malicious
computer attacks (known in the security ﬁeld as “cracks”) have
totaled more than $10 billion since the turn of the millennium,
including cellular phone exploits (IBM Research, 2006).
Because of illegal access by cyber-criminals to online data
ﬁles, citizens have become increasingly fearful that their personal
health histories, their banking transactions transmitted over the
Net, and their online voting results are vulnerable to destruction
or alteration. Also, business executives have become increasingly
concerned, not only that their computer networks will be cracked
by tech-savvy outsiders but also that insider employees will
either destroy critical business information when they leave the
corporation—or they will sell industrial secrets and proprietary
information to competitors over the Net.
xvi
Preface

As a result of the concerns and expectations surrounding on-
line privacy, security, and trust issues of citizens, government of-
ficials, financial institution executives, and businesses leaders,
various technical and legal solutions have emerged in the United
States and elsewhere to combat Internet abuses. These laws—of-
ten controversial themselves—have included the USA Patriot
Act, the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA), the Elec-
tronic Communications Privacy Act, the Foreign Intelligence Sur-
veillance Act, the Prosecutorial Remedies and Tools against the
Exploitation of Children Today (or PROTECT) Act, the Health In-
surance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPPA), and the
Gramm-Leach Bliley Act.
Besides all of these pluses and minuses, the Internet has had
a tremendous economic and political impact on underdeveloped
and developing countries, particularly in China, India, Russia,
and Pakistan. Compared with the development of the Net in
North America—where companies like Yahoo, Inc., have been
able to succeed because they got onto the Information Highway
early on, had plenty of ﬁnancing to hire the very best profession-
als, and had a supportive government—in China, as a case in
point, Baidu, the Chinese Internet search engine that emerged as
a growing success story in 2005, has been ﬁve years in the mak-
ing, and has often been at odds with the government. Although
relatively unknown outside of China until now, Baidu was
founded by two Chinese gurus who had previously worked for
U.S. technology ﬁrms. The entrepreneurs who own the company
claim that they have a strong following of more than 100 million
Web surfers in China, but they openly admit that, relative to the
open surﬁng privileges given North American Web surfers, the
Chinese government censors whatever content they feel would
corrupt the morals of its citizens (In Brief, 2005; Vage, 2005).
It is interesting to note, however, that the Internet did not de-
velop from “thin air.” Rather, its development and growth over a
remarkably short time occurred as a result of some very talented
Americans and Canadians. Any list of Internet notables includes
some of the world’s wealthiest innovators, such as U.S.-born Bill
Gates, who in 1975 started Microsoft. A Canadian innovator who
is at the top of the list of notables is Tim Bray, who helped create
an index called Extensible Markup Language (or XML)—thus al-
lowing computer programmers to attach universal codes (or
tags) to distinguish, say, a business name from a phone number
Preface
xvii

and thereby aid in the boom for electronic commerce (that is,
business conducted over the Net). Also, Canada’s Stephen Cook,
a University of Toronto professor, helped to develop the ﬁeld of
cryptography—the underlying basis for relatively safe online
Web purchases. Other notables include Mers Kutt, who in 1973
started Micro Computer Machines—thereby introducing the
world’s first personal computer. Then there is James Gosling,
credited with producing a Web revolution allowing the World
Wide Web (typically abbreviated “WWW”) to move from a static
environment to an interactive, user-friendly one in which online
surfers around the world can post messages, order books in a
matter of minutes without leaving home, and download songs
from the comfort of their bedrooms. Other notable North Ameri-
cans include Dennis M. Ritchie of UNIX operating system fame;
Vinton Cerf, involved with Internet protocols; Shawn Fanning,
known for the controversial online song-swapping Napster; Rail
Tomlinson, an e-mail contributor; and Tim Berners-Lee, a World
Wide Web pioneer.
On the darker side—at least for parts of their younger lives
and to name just two of many—are North American cyber-crimi-
nals Kevin Mitnick—an American who spent years in prison for
online Denial of Service (DoS) exploits but who is today consid-
ered one of the world’s finest Internet security professionals—
and Maﬁaboy, a young Canadian who, unlike Mitnick, escaped
prison for committing similar online exploits but who has yet to
make it as a successful online security guru.
With the growth of the Internet came the monitoring of the
critical workings and safety of this massive network by organiza-
tions and agencies such as the American Registry for Internet
Numbers, the Asia Paciﬁc Network Information Center, the Cen-
tral Intelligence Agency, the CERT Coordination Center, the Cy-
ber Warning and Information Network, the CyberAngels, the De-
fense Intelligence Agency, the Department of Homeland Security,
the Department of Justice in the United States, the Electronic
Frontier Foundation (EFF), the Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI), the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), the Internet Assigned
Numbers Authority, the Internet Corporation for Assigned
Names and Numbers, the Internet Fraud Complaint Center—to
name just a few.
This book details the impact that the Internet has had on
society—the good and the not so good—from its beginnings to
the present. Readers will be better able to understand how to op-
xviii
Preface

timize the opportunities that the Internet provides as well as how
to best protect their property and their persons from harm when
riding on this Information Highway. The chapters are as follows:
Chapter 1, “Background and History,” deﬁnes what the In-
ternet is, outlines the history of the Internet in the United States
and elsewhere, and discusses the Net’s impact socially, politically,
technically, and economically. A global perspective is taken, and
the positive impact is emphasized—especially early on. Some im-
portant evolutionary changes of the Internet described include
the ARPAnet (1960s), electronic mail (1971), remote login (1972),
ﬁle transfer (from the basic ﬁle transfer applications of the 1970s
to the sophisticated file-sharing applications of our day), the
emergence of the World Wide Web, the Universal Resource Loca-
tor (1989–1991), the birth of Google and of Google’s billionaires
post-2000, and the future of Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP).
Following positive details such as these, a chronology of key
events related to the growth of the Internet is presented at the
end of the chapter.
Chapter 2, “Problems, Controversies, and Solutions,” dis-
cusses the controversies surrounding the Internet and possible
solutions. With the growth of and diversity in Internet trafﬁc, a
dark side to the Internet has surfaced, particularly since the late
1980s. The ﬁrst half of Chapter 2 explores a number of privacy, se-
curity, and trust issues of concern to various segments of society,
techies and nontechies. A number of crimes perpetrated by abus-
ing the Internet infrastructure are described, such as illegal file
transfer (for example, copyrighted material abuse, intellectual
property abuse), transfer of censured material (such as child
pornography), identity theft, and fraud (for example, through
pharming and online auction abuses). Similar to e-mail phishing,
pharming tries to get personal or private and typically money-re-
lated information from online users through domain spoofing.
So, rather than being spammed with e-mail requests prompting
online users to visit various Websites appearing to be legitimate,
pharming poisons a DNS server by putting in fake information to
the DNS server.  The result is that the online user’s request is
redirected to some other Website other than that requested. The
second half of Chapter 2 explains various laws passed in the
United States and elsewhere to reduce or prevent common Inter-
net crimes, as well as some technical solutions.
Chapter 3, “Worldwide Perspective,” discusses the economic
and political impact of the Internet on countries outside of North
Preface
xix

America, particularly in the underdeveloped and developing na-
tions and including China, India, Russia, and Pakistan.
Chapter 4, “Chronology,” details interesting events from the
foundational start of the Internet to the present.
Chapter 5, “Biographical Sketches,” includes twenty bio-
graphical sketches of people who have signiﬁcantly contributed
to the development of the Internet, or who have used the Internet
to execute harm on people or property.
Chapter 6, “Facts and Data,” examines the laws and legal
cases in the United States and elsewhere relating to Internet
abuses.
Chapter 7, “Directory of Organizations,” describes organiza-
tions created in the United States and elsewhere for setting Inter-
net-related policies and for curbing Internet-related abuses.
Chapter 8, “Print and Nonprint Resources,” provides addi-
tional print and nonprint resources related to the Internet.
The glossary provides Internet terminology to assist readers
in their understanding of the basic workings of the Internet.
Resources
IBM Research. “Global Security Analysis Lab: Fact Sheet.” IBM Research,
http://domino.research.ibm.com/comm/pr.nsf/pages/rsc.gsal.html?
Open&printable (accessed January 16, 2006).
In Brief. “China Cracks Down on Public Internet.” Globe and Mail, Febru-
ary 17, 2005, p. B10.
Vage, Lars. “China’s Search Engine Censorship Continues.” Internet-
Brus, http://www.pandia.com/sw–2005/09-china.html (accessed Janu-
ary 27, 2005).
xx
Preface

1
Background and History
T
his chapter deﬁnes what the Internet is, outlines the history
of the Internet in the United States—from its beginnings in
the 1960s to its rapid growth globally in the 1990s—and dis-
cusses the Internet’s impact socially, politically, technically, and
economically over four decades. The positive effects are empha-
sized near the beginning, but the negative side is intro d u c e d
later on, because that is the reality associated with Internet devel-
opment. A section on how the Internet works follows. The chap-
ter closes with a look at future developments of the Internet. A
chronology of key events related to the growth of the Internet is
presented at the end of the chapter.
What the Internet and an Intranet Are—
and the Internet’s Colorful History
What the Internet Is
An “internet,” generally speaking, is a network connecting
computer systems. The Internet, as we know it today, is also
called the World Wide Web—which had its seeds planted in the
United States back in 1969. At that time, “the Internet” was a
designated high-speed network built by the U.S. Department of
Defense as a digital communications experiment. By linking
h u n d reds of universities, defense contractors, and re s e a rc h
labs, A R PAnet—the computer network belonging to the U.S.
Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA)—let Artiﬁcial Intel-
1

ligence (AI) re s e a rchers in dispersed areas exchange critical in-
formation with incredible speed and ﬂexibility. Simply put, AI is
the branch of computer science concerned with making comput-
ers behave like humans by modeling on computers human
thoughts. Sometimes, AI is meant to solve a problem that a per-
son can solve but do it more efﬁciently using a computer.
Although this ARPA “Internet” was reserved exclusively for
the U.S. military and a very select group of contractors and uni-
versities involved in defense-related re s e a rch, its capability ad-
vanced the ﬁeld of Information Technology (IT). Instead of work-
ing in isolated pockets, key agents involved in keeping the
United States safe were now able to communicate through the
electronic highway as networked tribes rather than having to ﬂy
from one destination to another to complete the information ex-
change. It is interesting to note that this networked tribe phe-
nomenon still exists in the Computer Underg round (CU), or
hacking world, today.
What an Intranet Is
An Intranet, or, more pro p e r l y, Intranet site, is an information
system internal to an organization built with Web-based technol-
ogy. An Intranet site is often called a “portal,” and it typically ex-
ists in large companies having in excess of 15,000 employees. It is
considered by many to be an IT luxury.
An Intranet site is actually a mini-Internet accessed
t h rough a Web browser and is typically run on private Local
A rea Networks (LANs) rather than on public Web servers like
the World Wide Web. A Web browser interprets HTML ( H y p e r
Text Markup Language), the programming language used to
code Web pages on the Internet, into words and graphics so
that users can view the pages in their intended layout and re n-
d e r i n g .
Intranet sites have a number of functions, but most are used
to keep employees informed about a company’s upcoming
events, to distribute software or company newsletters online,
and to provide routine company information online. New In-
tranet site software made by companies such as the Micro s o f t
Corporation and Plumtree Software, Inc., has made the technol-
ogy affordable in 2006 even for small and medium-size compa-
nies (Palmer, 2005).
2
Background and History

The Colorful History of the Internet and 
Its Increasingly Problematic Future
A number of factors have pushed the development of the power-
ful Internet that society enjoys today—businesses, universities,
governments, medical institutions, ﬁnancial institutions, adults,
and children. No single factor produced the World Wide We b
that today connects so many global networks. Gro u n d b re a k i n g
events in hard w a re (the mechanical parts composing the com-
puter network) and software (the programming language ru n-
ning the network and doing the necessary computations) cre-
ation have taken place, and these developments have had huge
social and economic impacts on society.
The 1940s, 1950s, and 1960s.
In the late 1940s and 1950s, when
computers were made with 10,000 vacuum tubes and occupied
more than 93 square meters of space, there was indeed a limit to
how big the cyber beasts could be, for they could overheat and
explode. There were other problems with those early computers.
The vacuum tubes could leak; the metal that emitted electrons in
the vacuum tubes burned out; and all of those tubes re q u i re d
tons of power to run. Major improvements came in computer
h a rd w a re technology with the development of transistors, in-
vented by John Bardeen and Walter Brattain in 1947 and 1948 at
Bell Telephone Laboratories, and the development of integrated
circuits, invented by Jack Kilby at Texas Instruments and Robert
Noyce at Fairchild Camera in 1958 and 1959. Integrated circuits
resolved a number of vacuum-tube technology’s problems and
did much to further the the development of smaller computers
with greater power. With this improved technology, instead of
making transistors one by one, several transistors could be made
at the same time and on the same piece of semiconductor. In ad-
dition to transistors, other electric components such as resistors,
capacitors, and diodes could be made using the same pro c e s s
and materials (Haviland, 2005).
It is important to note that since the 1960s, the number of
transistors per unit area has been doubling every one-and-a-half
years—thus increasing computing power. This amazing progres-
sion of circuit fabrication is called Moore’s Law, named after
G o rdon Moore, a pioneer in the integrated circuit field and
founder of the Intel Corporation (ibid.).
What the Internet and an Intranet Are
3

Indeed, the art of computer networking dates back to the
1960s. As computer use was on the increase back then, the ques-
tion of how to hook up and share the data between computers re-
mained. To this end, the first revolutionary packet-switching
technique was invented by Leonard Kleinrock. The idea soon
gained in popularity, and gifted people like Paul Baran at the
Rand Institute began investigating how to use packet switching
for secure voice over military networks (Edge, 2002).
One of the early critical events making networking on a
broader scale possible occurred in 1969, when Bell Laboratory IT
g u rus Dennis Ritchie and Ken Thompson developed the com-
puter software standard operating system UNIX. At that time,
UNIX was (and still is) considered a thing of beauty, because its
s t a n d a rd user and programming interfaces assisted with com-
puting, word processing, and networking. It must be empha-
sized, however, that back in the 1960s, computer hardware was
huge and was stored in air-conditioned areas to keep it fro m
overheating.
The 1970s.
In 1970, only an estimated 100,000 computers were
in use in the United States; few of them were networked, and
most of them were found in businesses, in government ofﬁc e s ,
and in universities. Computer users keypunched data cards and
carried them in an orderly fashion in boxes, then dumped the
cards into the computer for processing.
In 1971, Ray Tomlinson gave society one of the gre a t e s t
communications gifts in Internet history: electronic mail, or e-
mail. Tomlinson, a graduate of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT), is one of the forefathers of the Internet, for he
worked on A R PAnet. He is also the man who chose the @ sign
for e-mail, still in use today to mean “at,” as in Bernadette
Schell@uoit.ca (Gaudin, 2002).
In 1971, Stephen Cook, a Canadian professor at the Univer-
sity of To ronto, published Cook’s Theorem, identifying a larg e
class of computational search problems that at the time would
have taken even the largest, highest-power computers millions
of years to solve. This theorem helped lead to the development
of the ﬁeld of cryptography—critical now for secure online busi-
ness transactions. To d a y, after an Internet purchaser places an
online order, the retailer selling the merchandise has a computer
system that encrypts, or encodes, the data using a complex algo-
rithm. Back in the 1970s, Cook’s Theorem predicted that a cyber-
4
Background and History

criminal would need to spend a lifetime ﬁnding the solution for
breaking encoded data. This theorem alone has saved billions of
dollars in online transaction thefts. For example, in 2004, 16 mil-
lion fellow Canadians completed online transactions through the
Net, and 12 million of them completed their banking transac-
tions through the Net (Brearton, 2005).
In 1972, the National Center for Supercomputing A p p l i c a-
tions (NCSA) created the telnet application for remote login, pro-
viding an easier means for users to log into a remote machine.
Also in 1972, David Boggs and Robert Metcalfe invented Ether-
net at the Xerox Corporation in California. Ethernet back then
used a passive bus operated at 10 megabits per second (Mbps)
and a 50-ohm coaxial cable to connect computers in the Local
Area Network (LAN). It was not until 1985 that the U.S. Institute
of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) developed stan-
dards for LANs—known as the IEEE 802 standards, which today
form the basis of most networks around the world. Although a
single LAN can have as many as 1,024 attached computer sys-
tems, in practice most LANs have far fewer.
In 1973 the File Transfer Protocol (FTP) was developed, sim-
plifying the transfer of information between networked ma-
chines. Also in the 1970s, Dennis Ritchie invented a new pro-
gramming language called “C,” which, like UNIX in the
operating system world, was designed to be pleasant, uncon-
straining, and ﬂexible. By the end of the decade, the whole envi-
ronment had successfully been ported to machines of diff e re n t
types.
In the early 1970s, computer hard w a re specialists were
“hung up” on the idea that bigger meant more powerful—at
least as far as computers went. However, Canadian mathemati-
cian and businessman Mers Kutt had a novel idea; he thought
that smaller is better! In 1973, this pioneer founded Toronto, On-
tario-based Micro Computer Machines, which released onto the
market the world’s ﬁrst Personal Computer (PC). This PC looked
a lot more like a typewriter than a laptop; it weighed 9 kilo-
grams, and it had tape drives to store information. It could hold
only 8 kilobytes of memory—compared with today’s PCs, which
can hold about 30,000 times that amount—and the display con-
sole could hold only thirty-six or so characters. It cost aro u n d
$5,000 and got its power from a small chip rather than vacuum
tubes. Today, the company is selling millions of highly improved,
vastly more powerful Personal Computers (ibid.).
What the Internet and an Intranet Are
5

In 1975, Apple Computer, Inc., was founded by two mem-
bers of California’s Homebrew Computer Club: Steve Jobs and
Steve Wozniak. Once the Apple Computer and the simplistic and
u s e r-friendly BASIC computer language were purchased by tech-
savvy types, home use of computers—which is common in devel-
oped countries today—was on its way to becoming a re a l i t y.
Also in 1975, William Henry Gates, III—Bill Gates, as the
world knows him—and Paul Allen founded the Microsoft Cor-
poration. Nowadays, Microsoft is a word that even children un-
derstand and “crackers” (people who intentionally break into
computer systems to cause harm, to take revenge, or for personal
financial gain) often detest—a testament to the software com-
pany’s success.
S e c u re transactions using the Internet had their ro o t s
planted in 1976, when Whitﬁeld Difﬁe and Martin Hellman cre-
ated the Difﬁe-Hellman Public-Key Algorithm, or DH. The DH,
an algorithm used in many secure protocols on the Internet, is
now celebrating thirty years of use. An algorithm is a set of rules
and procedures for resolving a mathematical or logical problem,
much as a recipe in a cookbook helps baffled cooks to solve a
m e a l - p reparation issue. A c t u a l l y, a computer program can be
thought of as an elaborate algorithm. In computer science, an al-
gorithm—the term is believed to stem from the name of a mathe-
matician at the Royal Court in Baghdad in the ninth century—is
a mathematical procedure for solving a recurrent problem. Often
inventors of algorithms seek patents to ensure the safety and
proper recognition of their Intellectual Property (IP). Information
security professionals, in particular, work with cryptographic al-
gorithms to encrypt, or encode, messages sent over the Internet.
By the end of the 1970s, the one positive thing missing from
the cyber community that could serve a much-needed social
function was a form of networking social club. In 1978, the void
was filled by two men from Chicago, Randy Suess and Wa rd
Christiensen. This pair created the ﬁrst computer Bulletin Board
System (BBS), the forerunner of today’s Internet chat rooms.
It was also at the end of the 1970s that the Tr a n s m i s s i o n
Control Protocol (TCP) was split into TCP and IP (Internet Proto-
col). Without getting too technical, it is important to know that
information is sent over the Internet in information packets that
are disassembled and then reassembled. The TCP and IP are crit-
ical for the proper transmission and routing of these information
packets. Widely known as one of the Fathers of the Internet, Vin-
6
Background and History

ton Cerf is the codesigner of the TCP/IP protocols and the archi-
tecture of the Internet. In December 1997, President Clinton pre-
sented the U.S. National Medal of Technology to Vinton Cerf and
Robert Kahn, for helping to develop the Internet (ICANN, 2005).
The 1980s.
In 1981, Personal Computers (PCs) finally became
a ff o rdable. IBM (International Business Machines) announced
their new model, stand-alone computer, which was actually
called “the PC.” Also, the Commodore 64 computer (known to
many techies as the “Commie 64”) was released, as was the TRS-
80 computer (known to many as the “Trash-S”). It is interesting
to note that in 1981, fewer than 300 computers were linked to the
Internet.
In 1982, a group of talented UNIX hackers from Stanford
University and the University of California at Berkeley—Scott
M c N e a l y, Bill Joy, Andy Bechtolsheim, and Vinod Khosla—
founded Sun Microsystems Incorporated on the foundation that
UNIX running on relatively cheap hardware would prove to be a
perfect solution for a wide range of applications. These visionar-
ies seemed to know what they were doing, for their Sun Mi-
c rosystem Networks increasingly replaced older, less eff i c i e n t
computer systems like the VAX and other time-sharing systems
that consumed much space in corporations and universities
across North America.
On January 13, 2006, these four Sun Microsystem visionaries
w e re treated like famous rock stars when they appeared at the
Computer History Museum in Mountain View, California. Their
message was this: Sun Microsystems Incorporated has remained
loyal to its original philosophy of sharing technology and en-
abling innovation. McNealy, the company’s chair and CEO, cred-
ited Bill Joy—the UNIX guru—with the concept of online com-
munity development, resulting from work at the University of
Berkeley related to Berkeley Software Distribution. Over the
years, McNealy noted, Sun Microsystems has built a huge cyber
community around Java technology, in particular. McNealy fur-
ther noted that the company’s Java Virtual Machine, a free tool
used to run Java applications on Microsoft Windows software
(which is not free), is currently downloaded 20 million times
each month. McNealy also affirmed that there are more than 
3 billion Java technology–enabled devices currently available to
techies and nontechies, including DVD players and cellular
phones. This fact by itself shows how innovative products devel-
What the Internet and an Intranet Are
7

oped by innovative geniuses have helped to transform the
world.
Bechtolsheim, now senior vice president of the company’s
Network Systems Group, added that Sun’s growth is far fro m
over. He maintained that there are many more business opportu-
nities around Sun’s open source and free products for the indus-
try as a whole than there are with Microsoft’s costly technologies
(Sun Microsystems, Inc., 2006). [A Webcast of their talk that fo-
cused on how critical themes from their twenty-four-year history
illuminate technology’s very positive future is available at
http://www.sun.com/2006–0113/feature/index.html.]
Other creative people did artistic things on the computer
back in 1982. It was in this year that Scott Fahlman typed the ﬁrst
online smiley, known and used by adults and children today in
their e-mail transmissions and created with the three simple
computer board key presses :-). It was also then that Wi l l i a m
Gibson coined the term c y b e r s p a c e . On a more technical note, it
was in 1982 that the Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP)—
which relates to how e-mail is transmitted between host comput-
ers and users—was published. The following year, the Te l n e t
protocol was published, allowing technically inclined individu-
als familiar with UNIX operating system software to log onto
other computers on the Internet.
In 1984, other interesting creative events occurred in the
United States. For one, 2600: The Hacker Quarterly m a g a z i n e
emerged—a particularly exciting medium for computer hackers
interested in technical and political issues surrounding the com-
puter world. This magazine—and today’s Website of the same
name founded by Eric Corley (a.k.a. Emmanuel Goldstein)—are
still hugely popular with those in the Computer Underground. It
was also in 1984 that Steven Levy’s book Hackers: Heroes of the
Computer Revolution was released, detailing the Hacker Ethic, a
s o u rce still guiding neophyte hackers to this day. Also in 1984,
F red Cohen introduced the term computer virus, a cyberspace
vandal that can cause corruption of and possible erasing of infor-
mation stored in computer ﬁles.
In 1984, Cisco Systems, Inc., was begun by a small number
of computer scientists at Stanford University, and to this day the
company remains committed to developing Internet Pro t o c o l –
based networking technologies, particularly in the areas of rout-
ing and switches. It was also about this time that the American
Richard Stallman began constructing a clone of UNIX, written in
8
Background and History

the “C” programming language and available to those in the
“wired world” for free. His project, called GNU (meaning Gnu’s
Not Unix) operating system, is popular among computer hackers
today.
In 1984, there were also creative advances in knowledge on
the Canadian front. At the University of Montreal, Gilles Bras-
s a rd and fellow re s e a rcher Charles Bennett released an acade-
mic paper detailing how quantum physics could be used to cre-
ate unbreakable codes using quantum cryptography. Wi t h o u t
getting too technical, this form of data encoding uses subatomic
particles transmitted as individual pulses of light as the key for
unlocking succeeding messages. The estimated return on this
one piece of Intellectual Property used in commercial applica-
tions today is quoted to be about U.S. $15 billion (Bre a r t o n ,
2 0 0 5 ) .
In 1985, the online hacker “zine” known as Phrack was ﬁrst
published by Craig Neidor (a.k.a. Knight Lightning) and Randy
Tischler (a.k.a. Taran King) on the P h r a c k Website. For twenty
years, the online magazine had some enlightening pieces on top-
ics such as anarchy, cryptography, reverse-engineering, and nu-
merous other features of high-tech interest. Then, on January 24,
2005, Phrack announced that number 63 would be their ﬁnal re-
lease. The magazine was distributed at the DefCon hacking gath-
ering in Las Vegas in July (phrackstaff@phrack.org, 2005).
It was also in 1985 that the ﬁrst Website domain name was
re g i s t e red and assigned, known as www.Symbolics.com, a pri-
vately held company that acquired the Intellectual Property of
the previously publicly held company known as Symbolics, Inc.
The company produces special-purpose computer systems for
running state-of-the-art object-oriented software programs writ-
ten in the Lisp computer language (Reti, 2006).
It was in 1985 that America Online (AOL)—a popular online
search engine today—was incorporated under its original name
of Quantum Computer Services, and in 1985, the Free Software
Foundation (FSF) was founded by Richard Stallman. FSF then
and now has been committed to giving computer users permis-
sion to use, study, copy, change, and redistribute computer pro-
grams. It is important to note that over the past twenty years, the
FSF has promoted the development of free software and has en-
hanced awareness in the computer community and more
b roadly in society about the ethical and political issues associ-
ated with using free software.
What the Internet and an Intranet Are
9

It was also in 1985 that the word hacker was introduced into
the mainstream in the United States. The word was coined by
good folks in the Computer Underground—known as the White
Hats—who developed software and hard w a re, tested them for
ﬂaws, and then found ﬁxes (known as patches). There was never
any negative connotation attached to the word; it meant simply a
person who enjoyed learning the details of computer systems
and how to stretch their capabilities. However, the news media
kept using the word hacker incorrectly, to indicate someone who
broke into computer systems and caused property harm—often
for personal ﬁnancial gain or revenge. In the Computer Under-
ground, people with malicious intent are known as “crackers” or
“Black Hats,” but the press repeatedly failed to make the correc-
tion. This incorrect usage of the word by the North A m e r i c a n
and the international press continues to this day, despite the
White Hats’s continued efforts. Interestingly, the original use of
the word hacker had nothing at all to do with computers. Hacker
is a Yiddish word that means “inept furniture maker.”
In 1986, the term “criminal hacker” was ﬁrst alluded to in
the British press. It was triggered with the convictions of Robert
Schifreen and Steven Gold in April of that year. The pair broke
into a text information retrieval system operated by BT Pre s t e l
and left a greeting for his Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh
on his BT Prestel network mailbox. The pair were convicted on a
number of criminal charges under the British Forgery and Coun-
terfeiting Act of 1981. The case led to the eventual passage in
Britain of the Computer Misuse Act of 1990, meant to pre v e n t
unauthorized access to computer systems and to stop cyber-
criminals from impairing or hindering access to data stored on a
computer or system.
It was also in 1986 that the U.S. Congress passed the Com-
puter Fraud and Abuse Act, meant to counteract fraud and asso-
ciated activity aimed at or completed with computers. The act
was amended in 1994, 1996, and 2001 by the USA Patriot Act—it-
self a very controversial piece of legislation for reasons that will
be discussed later in this book. Also in 1986, the Internet Engi-
neering Task Force (IETF) was formed to act as a technical coor-
dination forum for those who worked on ARPAnet, on the U.S.
Defense Data Network (DDN), and on the Internet core gateway
system.
In 1988, the public ﬁrst realized the damage Internet worms
could cause when Robert Morris, Jr., accidentally unleashed one
10
Background and History

that he had developed while studying at Cornell University.
Later called “the Morris worm,” it infected and subsequently
crashed thousands of networked computers. The graduate stu-
dent was not sentenced to prison for this exploit but was sen-
tenced to three years on probation and told to complete 400
hours of community service. Morris, a university professor to-
day, was also ordered to pay a hefty $10,500 ﬁne.
The same year, and largely as a reaction to the Morris worm
incident, the Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT ) /
CERT Coordination Center was created in the United States. Lo-
cated at Carnegie Mellon University, the center’s function was to
c o o rdinate communications among homeland security experts
during security emergencies.
It was also in 1988 that Kevin Mitnick—a famous, re p e a t
cracking offender who was imprisoned a number of times and
has now become a computer security expert and author—se-
cretly monitored the e-mail of computer security ofﬁcials at MCI
(a leading U.S. communications provider company) and DEC
(Digital Equipment Corporation, a pioneering company in the
U.S. computer industry). For these exploits, he was convicted of
damaging computers and stealing software. Mitnick was sen-
tenced to one year in prison.
Also in 1988, the U.S. Secret Service began their investiga-
tions of those in the Computer Underground. The Secret Service
s e c retly videotaped the SummerCon hacking convention atten-
dees, suspecting that not all hacker activities were “White Hat”
in nature.
In 1989, Herbert Zinn (a.k.a. Shadowhawk) was the ﬁrst mi-
nor to be convicted for violating the U.S. Computer Fraud and
Abuse Act of 1986. Zinn cracked the American Telephone and
Telegraph (AT&T) computer network and the U.S. Department
of Defense network, destroying files estimated to be worth
$174,000. He copied electronic programs allegedly worth mil-
lions of dollars and published online passwords and instructions
for exploiting computer systems. At the age of sixteen, Zinn was
imprisoned for nine months and ﬁned $10,000.
Also in 1989, a group of West German computer crackers led
by Karl Koch (a member of the Chaos Computer Club) made in-
ternational news headlines—labeled as the ﬁrst cyber espionage
case—after they broke into the U.S. government’s computer net-
work and then sold the operating system source code to the So-
viet KGB, the agency in charge of Soviet state security.
What the Internet and an Intranet Are
11

By 1989 only about 90,000 computers were linked to the In-
ternet. By that time, however, techies were excited about URLs.
A URL, or Uniform Resource Locator, is the complete location of
an Internet item a user may want to receive. It is an absolute ref-
erence, and it is synonymous with the Internet terms location and
Internet address. Each Web page has a unique URL. Online users
may instantly view a Web page if they know the URL. As a case
in point, the URL for the University of Ontario is http:// w w w
.uoit.ca. The term “H t t p ://” deﬁnes the Internet protocol being
used. Other protocols are “g o p h e r ://” and “f t p ://.” The host’s
n a m e — w w w.uoit.ca—is the location the user is interested in.
What then follows is more detailed information, such as a direc-
tory or folder—a domain name typically enclosed by “/”. An ex-
ample would be http://www.uoit.ca/business/lecture1.htm. Of
particular interest would be the business directory or folder and
the lecture 1 individual ﬁle.
The 1990s.
The year 1990 is a very signiﬁcant one in terms of In-
ternet development on a worldwide scale. It was then that Tim
Berners-Lee and Robert Cailliau developed the protocols that be-
came the World Wide Web (www) while working at the Cern
laboratory in Geneva, Switzerland.
Tim Berners-Lee’s present-day Website gives some interest-
ing insights into this remarkable development. He notes that the
original Web browser, or more appropriately browser-editor, was
called “Wo r l d Wi d e Web” (because, he says, that’s the way it
looked back then—very one dimensional). Later it was renamed
“Nexus” to prevent confusion between the software pro g r a m
and the more abstract information space—currently spelled
“World Wide Web” (with spaces). The reason, says Berners-Lee,
that he chose the word “Nexus” is that he wrote the pro t o c o l
using a NeXT computer. By using this protocol on his NeXT
c o m p u t e r, Berners-Lee admits that he was able to accomplish
work in a couple of months that would have taken him a year
utilizing other platforms (Berners-Lee, 2006).
It is important to emphasize that until 1991, the Internet was
restricted in the United States to linking the military and re-
stricted university computers. In 1991 the ban preventing Inter-
net access for businesses was lifted, thus making possible busi-
ness transactions online.
In the early 1990s, Internet growth on a homeowner scale
can be attributed to the fact that many more tech-savvy individu-
12
Background and History

als could afford to buy PCs similar in power and storage capacity
to the clunky computer systems of the 1980s. The reason for
g rowth on this plane was the availability of newer, lower- c o s t ,
higher-performing PCs having Intel 386 chips. Despite this good
news, affordable software was still a problem. The products sold
by Microsoft to businesses and government ofﬁces were gener-
ally out of the price range of most homeowners.
In 1991, Linus Torvald tried filling the aff o rdable software
void by initiating the development of a free UNIX version for
PCs using the Free Software Foundation’s toolkit. His rapid suc-
cess attracted many hackers on the Net—who gave him their
very useful feedback on how to improve his product. Eventually,
as a result of this tribal collaboration, Linux was developed, a
complete UNIX available for free (meaning at no cost to users)
and having redistributable sources.
In 1991, the PGP (Pretty Good Privacy) encryption program
was released by Phillip Zimmermann, who later became in-
volved in a complex three-year criminal investigation. The U.S.
government alleged that the PGP p rogram violated export re-
strictions for cryptographic software.
In 1992, the Michelangelo computer virus attracted a lot of
news media attention because, according to U.S. computer secu-
rity expert John McAfee (who had his own computer security
s o f t w a re company), it was believed to cause great damage to
data and networked computers. Those fears turned out to be
greatly exaggerated, however, as the virus did little to the com-
puters it invaded. Some say that McAfee “hyped” the damage
the virus could cause in order to sell more of his software.
It was about this time that Jean Armour Polly coined the
term surﬁng the Net, even though just over one hundred Websites
existed on the Internet—and they were still very one-dimen-
sional. Despite the shortage of Websites, though, in 1993 there
were more than 1 million computers linked to the Internet.
In 1993, there were good events and bad events in terms of
computer security issues. On the good side, White Hat Scott
Chasin started BUGTRAQ, a full-disclosure online mailing list
dedicated to issues about computer security—including soft-
w a re vulnerabilities (typically related to Microsoft pro d u c t s ) ,
methods of exploitation, and ﬁxes for the discovered vulnerabili-
ties. On the darker side, Randal Schwartz used the software pro-
gram “Crack” at Intel Corporation for what he thought was “ap-
propriate use” for cracking password ﬁles at work. He was later
What the Internet and an Intranet Are
13

found guilty of illegal cracking activities under an Oregon com-
puter crime law after Intel ofﬁcials said that Randal had “crossed
the line” into illegal and unauthorized activity. Schwartz was
sentenced to five years’ probation, ord e red to complete almost
500 hours of community work, and was to pay Intel almost
$70,000 in restitution.
In 1994, headlines were on ﬁre with the story of cyber thieves
led by Vladimir Levin. They cracked Citibank’s computers and
made transfers from customers’ accounts without authorization
totaling more than $10 million. Although in time Citibank re c o v-
e red all but about $400,000 of the illegally transferred funds, that
point was not featured by the news media. Levin got a thre e - y e a r
prison sentence.
The year 1994 also saw its creative geniuses. Two Stanford
University students, David Filo and Jerry Yang, started their cy-
ber-guide in a campus trailer as a way of tracking their interests
on the Internet. The cyber-guide later became the popular search
engine www. Yahoo.com (which means “Yet Another Hierarc h i-
cal Ofﬁcious Oracle”).
Also, Canadian James Gosling, a native of Calgary, Alberta,
headed a creative team at Sun Microsystems with the objective of
developing a programming language that would change the
simplistic, one-dimensional nature of the Web. The feat was ac-
complished, and the name given to the programming language,
Java, was apparently coined in a coffee outlet near the gro u p ’ s
Palo Alto, California, ofﬁces. Java allowed software on any oper-
ating system—the popular Microsoft Windows, Apple’s Macin-
tosh, or UNIX—to communicate by streaming bits of universally
translatable data. The impact on the Internet was astounding: the
“ Wo r l d Wi d e Web” became the “World Wide Web.” In other
words, the Web was no longer one-dimensional but allowed for a
user-friendly, interactive environment where online users could
leave each other e-mail messages, download songs, or ord e r
books—without leaving their homes or worksites (Bre a r t o n ,
2005).
In 1995, political activism utilizing the Web became obvious,
and with its popularity came a new online activity known as
“hacktivism”—using the Web to send and receive politically mo-
tivated messages. For example, White Hat hacktivists squashed
the U.S. government’s highly controversial Clipper proposal, one
that would have placed strong encryption (the process of scram-
bling information into something seemingly unintelligible) un-
14
Background and History

der the government’s control. Also White Hat in nature, the Cy-
berAngels was founded in the United States, now the world’s
oldest and largest online safety organization designed to track
and assist authorities in charging cyber-stalkers (those who stalk
others using the Web), cyber-harassers (those who harass and
threaten others using the Web), and cyber-pornographers (those
who make or distribute pornography, particularly child pornog-
raphy, using the Web).
In 1995, the Apache Software Foundation, a nonproﬁt corpo-
ration, evolved after the Apache Group interacted. As a sidebar
update, this foundation eventually developed the now-popular
Apache HTTP Server, which runs on virtually all major operat-
ing systems. HTTP stands for “hypertext transfer protocol” and
is used to transfer data over the World Wide Web. All Internet
site addresses begin with http://. So, when a computer user
types a URL, or Uniformed Resource Locator, into the bro w s e r
(software application used to locate and display Web pages) and
hits the “Enter” key, the computer sends an HTTP request to the
correct Web server. The Web server, designed to handle such re-
quests, then sends the user the requested HTML (or hypertext
markup language) page (SharpenedNet.com, 2006).
With the Web now available to businesses, 1995 saw the
launch of the first online bookstore by Jeff rey Bezos—the now
hugely popular international e-business chain selling books,
DVDs, and assorted items at Website http://www.Amazon.com.
The projected Net sales for 2005 were in the U.S. $8–9 billion
range (Stone, 2006). Commercially speaking, Microsoft re l e a s e d
Windows 95—and sold more than a million copies of it in less
than ﬁve days—with strong sales being an indicator of the grow-
ing demand for software by home computer users.
In 1996 the World Wide Web had grown to 16 million hosts,
and White Hat hacktivists continued to be active online. They
mobilized a broad online coalition to defeat the U.S. govern-
ment’s “Communications Decency A c t ” — t h e reby pre v e n t i n g
censorship on the then quite active Internet.
Also in 1996, the National Information Infrastru c t u re Pro-
tection Act (NIIPA) was enacted in the United States to amend
the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1984, thus enhancing its
powers. It was also in 1996 that the Child Pornography Pre v e n-
tion Act (CPPA) was passed in the United States to curb the cre-
ation and distribution of online child pornography. The 1996
Child Pornography Prevention Act extended the existing federal
What the Internet and an Intranet Are
15

criminal laws against child pornography to the new computer
media. As part of the overhaul, the deﬁnition of “child pornog-
raphy” was extended to include “morphed” or computer- g e n e r-
ated images, as well as online material marketed as child
pornography (Goodwin, 2001).
In the same year, XML 1.0, or Extensible Markup Language,
was developed by an XML Working Group, including Tim Bray,
currently director of Web Technology at Sun Microsystems. Orig-
inally known as the SGML Editorial Review Board, the Working
G roup was formed under the auspices of the World Wide We b
Consortium (W3C) in 1996. The goals of XML were that it (W3C,
1998):
• be straightforwardly usable over the Internet
• support a wide variety of applications
• be easy to write programs that process XML documents
• be human-legible and reasonably clear
• have few optional features, ideally zero
• have a design that is formal and concise.
In 1997, ARIN, a for- p ro ﬁt organization, was started to as-
sign Internet Protocol address space for North America, South
America, sub-Saharan Africa, and the Caribbean. Also in that
year, the DVD (Digital Versatile Disc) format was released. Con-
s e q u e n t l y, DVD players were released for sale, appealing to
many consumers because with this new software and hardware
t e c h n o l o g y, they could watch popular movies at home rather
than go to theaters.
In 1998, the main activities of the White Hat hacker labs be-
came Linux development and the mainstreaming of the Internet.
Many creative and entrepreneurial White Hats launched Internet
Service Providers (ISPs), selling or giving online access to many
around the world—and creating some of the world’s wealthiest
corporate leaders.
One of those corporate leaders was a Canadian named Tim
B r a y, a native of Va n c o u v e r, British Columbia. Bray helped to
c reate the index known as Extensible Markup Language, or
XML. The beauty of XML is that it made the popular online auc-
tion, eBay.com, possible. Prior to this language’s development,
the Internet was one jumbled reference book—which was inter-
esting to delve into but which was one big, disorganized mess.
The beauty of XML is that it allowed computer programmers to
16
Background and History

attach “tags,” or universal codes, to distinguish, say, a business
name from a telephone number. This development pushed elec-
tronic business (known as e-business) to the forefront, primarily
because purchase orders could be universally read and properly
routed. As a primary language of Web servers, XML p ro p e l l e d
the activities of the estimated 1 billion Internet users in 2005.
Equally as exciting, in 2005 e-Bay was estimated to have pumped
$45 billion into the U.S. economy (Brearton, 2005).
Also in 1998, the Digital Millennium Copyright A C T
(DMCA) was passed in the United States to implement certain
worldwide copyright laws to cope with emerging digital tech-
nologies. By providing protection against the disabling or by-
passing of technical measures designed to protect copyright, the
DMCA encouraged owners of copyrighted works to make them
available on the World Wide Web in digital format. Also during
this year, the Boston hacker group L0pht testiﬁed before the U.S.
Senate and warned about the many software vulnerabilities that
could easily be exploited with widespread Internet use.
The year 1999 saw some incidents relating to harm to per-
sons through Internet usage. One such cyber-criminal was nine-
t e e n - y e a r-old Eric Burns, known on the Internet as Zyklon (a
nerve gas). Besides cracking computers of U.S. companies, the
White House, and the U.S. Senate, Burns also cyber-stalked a
young woman named Crystal, one of his classmates. For these
crimes, Burns eventually served ﬁfteen months in federal prison,
paid $36,240 in restitution, and was not allowed to touch a com-
puter for three years after his release.
The year 1999 also witnessed some alleged incidents relating
to harm to property as a result of Internet use. One such case in-
volved a then fifteen-year-old Norwegian hacker known as
“DVD-Jon.” Acting with others in the Computer Underground,
this young man developed a software program—called DeCSS—
to circumvent the Content Scrambling protection on DVDs, thus
making it possible for users to view DVDs with the open source
Linux operating system. DVD-Jon then published his DeCSS de-
cryption program on his Website so that other online users could
download the decryption program and use it. In January 2000,
the U.S. DVD Copy Control Association and the Norwegian Mo-
tion Picture Association, allies of the U.S. Motion Picture Associ-
ation of America, ﬁled charges against him in Norway. By Janu-
ary of 2003, DVD-Jon had been acquitted. The courts found that
although DeCSS could be used to make illegal (that is, pirated)
What the Internet and an Intranet Are
17

copies of the DVDs, the courts could not prove that this was
DVD-Jon’s motive for developing the software program or that
others had used the program on illegally obtained DVD films
(Vaagan and Koehler, 2005).
In the same year, the Internet was infected by the Melissa
v i rus. It moved rapidly throughout computer systems in the
United States and Europe. In the United States alone, the viru s
struck more than 1 million computers in 20 percent of the coun-
try’s largest corporations. Months later, David Smith pleaded
guilty to creating the Melissa virus, named after a Florida strip-
p e r. The virus is said to have caused more than $80 million in
damages to computers worldwide.
Also in 1999, the Napster online music ﬁle-sharing system—
used by Internet subscribers to copy and swap songs for free—
began to gain popularity on Websites where students had access
to high-speed Internet. Napster was developed by university
students Shawn Fanning and Sean Parker, and it attracted more
than 85 million online registered users before it was shut down
in July 2001 as a violator of the Digital Millennium Copyright
Act (DMCA).
And in that year, more legislation appeared. The Gramm-
Leach-Bliley Act of 1999 was passed in the United States to pro-
vide limited privacy protection against the sale of individuals’
private financial information. The intent of the act was to stop
regulations preventing the merger of financial institutions and
insurance companies. However, by removing these regulations,
experts became concerned about the increased risks associated
with financial institutions having unrestricted access to larg e
databases of individuals’ personal information—and the likeli-
hood that this information could eventually ﬁnd itself re l e a s e d
for all to see on the Internet.
2 0 0 0 .
In 2000, the emotional tone of high-tech moved fro m
“positive” and “entre p reneurial” to “negative” and “fearful.”
Fears were running high, for example, about data losses result-
ing from Y2K (Year 2000) computer glitches. There were also ex-
t r a o rdinary financial losses reported by investors wanting to
earn major gains on the high-tech stock market—which had
boomed in the 1990s during the growth of the Internet. There
were also fears announced by North American government and
security agencies of increasing numbers and types of cyber-
crime, resulting from more widespread use of the World Wi d e
18
Background and History

Web by individuals of all ages. Cyber-criminals no longer
needed to be tech-savvy themselves. They could easily down-
load cracking or defacing formulas from Websites—a common
practice of “newbies” or “scriptkiddies” in the Computer Under-
ground.
One high-proﬁle cracking case making the news in 2000 was
that of a fifteen-year-old Montreal, Canada, boy named “Mafi-
a b o y.” This case raised concerns in North America and aro u n d
the globe about Internet security, following a series of Denial-of-
Service attacks on several high-proﬁle business Websites, includ-
ing Amazon.com, eBay.com, and Yahoo.com. A year later, in Jan-
uary 2001, Mafiaboy admitted to cracking Internet servers and
using them to start the cyber-attacks, causing legitimate online
purchasers to be unable to access the business Websites to com-
plete their transactions—and causing the businesses, in turn, to
lose sales. For these exploits, Maﬁaboy served just eight months
in a youth prison and was ﬁned $250. It was about this time that
International Business Machines (IBM) experts estimated that
online retailers could lose $10,000 or more in sales per minute if
service was not available to customers because of such attacks.
In 2000, John Serabian, the CIA’s information issue manager,
said in written testimony to the U.S. Joint Economic Committee
that the CIA was detecting with increasing frequency the appear-
ance of government-sponsored cyber-warfare programs in other
countries. Also in 2000, Dr. Dorothy Denning, a cyber-crime ex-
pert at Georgetown University, gave testimony before the U.S.
Special Oversight Panel on Terrorism, afﬁrming that cyberspace
was constantly under assault, and that it was fertile ground for
c y b e r-attacks targeted at individuals, companies, and govern-
ments. She warned that unless critical infrastru c t u re computer
systems were secured, conducting a computer operation that
could bring physical harm to society’s citizens on a wide scale
could become as easy over the next few years as penetrating a
Website and changing the words on it.
In 2000, some high-tech companies admitted that their com-
panies’ networks were vulnerable to attack. For example, Mi-
c rosoft, the company of Bill Gates, admitted that its corporate
network had been cracked, and that the source code for future
Windows products had been seen. The suspected cracker was as-
sumed to be from Russia.
Also in 2000, approximately 55,000 credit card numbers
w e re stolen from Cre d i t c a rds.com, a company that pro c e s s e s
What the Internet and an Intranet Are
19

c redit transactions for e-businesses. Almost half of these stolen
c redit card numbers were publicized on the World Wide We b
when an extortion payment was not delivered by the company—
a problem when it comes to online privacy (the state of being free
f rom unauthorized access) and trust (having confidence in the
company partner) by citizens making use of e-businesses.
2 0 0 1 .
In 2001, computer worms and viruses crawled into the
mainstream vocabulary because so many home and ofﬁce com-
puters were hit. For example, the Code Red worm compromised
several hundred thousand computer systems around the globe
in less than fourteen hours, overloading the Internet’s capacity
and costing about $2.6 billion in damages. The worm stru c k
again in August 2001. Writer Carolyn Meinel noted in a piece in
Scientiﬁc American that the worm was like a computer “disease”
that had computer security researchers more worried than ever
about the integrity of the Internet and the likelihood of imminent
c y b e r- t e r rorist attacks. She likened the worm to electro n i c
snakebites that infected Microsoft Internet Information Servers—
the lifeline to many of the most popular Websites around the
world.
Also in 2001, the Anna Kournikova virus was placed on the
Net by Jan de Wit, also known as OnTheFly. The creator was a
t w e n t y - y e a r-old from the Netherlands who was eventually ar-
rested for this exploit and made to perform 150 hours of commu-
nity service. Also in that year, NIMDA (ADMIN spelled back-
ward) arrived, a blend of computer worm and virus. It lasted on
the Web for days and attacked an estimated 86,000 networked
computers. NIMDA demonstrated that some of the cyber-
weapons available to organized and technically savvy cyber-
criminals now had the capability to adapt to the local cyber envi-
ronment.
And in 2001, there was excitement raised—as well as fears 
of unlawful arrest among White Hat hackers—at the DefCon 9
hacker convention in Las Vegas when the Russian Dmitry
S k l y a rov was arrested before speaking on the decryption soft-
ware particulars that he had developed for his Russian employer,
ElcomSoft. The software in question allowed users to download
e-books on the Internet from supposedly secure Adobe software
to more commonly used PDF computer files. The Electro n i c
F rontier Foundation (EFF) argued that jurisdictional issues ap-
plied in this case and that Dmitry’s behavior was perfectly legal
20
Background and History

in Russia, where he had conducted his acts. Eventually the courts
agreed with the EFF, and Dmitry and his company were found
not guilty (ibid.).
In 2001, a Los Angeles Ti m e s newspaper article spread fears
about an imminent apocalypse caused by a computer. Crackers at-
tacked a computer system controlling the distribution of electricity
in California’s power grid. Power was out for almost two weeks.
A c c o rding to the newspaper, the attack appeared to have origi-
nated from individuals in China’s Guangdong province. The cy-
b e r-attack appeared to have been routed through China Te l e c o m .
Extreme fear was raised on September 11, 2001, when terror-
ists attacked the World Trade Center and the Pentagon using
commercial airlines. Hundreds of passengers were killed. For the
first time in U.S. history, citizens became familiar with the in-
tense fear generated by such political attacks.
On October 23, the USA Patriot Act of 2001 was introduced
by James Sensenbrenner with the intent of deterring and punish-
ing terrorist acts in the United States and enhancing law enforce-
ment investigatory tools. The introduction of this act was a reac-
tion to the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. Related bills
included an earlier antiterrorism bill that passed the House on
October 12, 2001, and the Financial A n t i - Te r rorism Act, which
became law on October 26, 2001.
Internationally in 2001, group action was being taken to
combat cyber-crime. On November 23, for example, the Council
of Europe opened to ratify its newly drafted Convention on Cy-
bercrime. The convention was signed by thirty-three states after
the council recognized that many cyber-crimes could not be
prosecuted by existing laws—which were typically local in juris-
diction. The convention was, indeed, the ﬁrst global legislative
attempt to set standards on the deﬁnition of cyber-crime and to
develop policies and procedures to govern international cooper-
ation to combat cyber-crime on the Internet.
On an optimistic note, in 2001 online gaming was becoming
a very positive social force for the Internet. Online gaming, or
Massively Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Game (MMORPG),
is a form of computer entertainment played by one or more indi-
viduals using the Internet. Before online gaming, computer
games were single-layer against a computer component. In con-
trast, online gamers can compete against or cooperate with hu-
man players through the Internet. The “I can see you, and you
can see me” principle makes online gaming more interactive and
What the Internet and an Intranet Are
21

exciting. A c c o rding to a forecast made by DataMonitor.com in
2001, the global online gaming market would generate more
than U.S. $3 billion in revenues and draw in over 113 million
users by 2005.
It is interesting to note that this prediction appears to have
been correct, for recent evidence shows that online gaming in
Asia can be called the most successful software industry to date.
As a case in point, the online game Lineage, developed by NC-
Soft.com of Korea, made approximately U.S. $133 million in
p ro ﬁts in 2002, and about U.S. $144 million the following year.
M o re o v e r, there were an estimated 2 million online gamers in
South Korea in 2002 and more than 2 million players in Taiwan
by 2003. The success of online gaming has shown huge growth
potential for related industries, such as broadband network, on-
line payment businesses, and Internet cafes. Online gaming has
also, however, brought about the likelihood of online cheating
and fraud (Chen et al., 2004).
2 0 0 2 .
On July 10 and 11, 2002, U.S. Representative Richard
Armey (R-TX) introduced a congressional bill known as the
Homeland Security Act of 2002 to establish the Department of
Homeland Security. The act was signed into public law by the
p resident of the United States, and Section 225 of the act was
known as the Cyber Security Enhancement Act of 2002; it was
specially designed to keep U.S. cyberspace safe.
In 2002, the headlines reported a number of cyber- c r i m e s
committed by women, indicating that as far as gender equity
goes, women can commit cyber-crimes just as well as men. For
example, a seventeen-year-old female cracker from Belgium,
known as Gigabyte, claimed to have written the ﬁrst-ever virus
in the programming language C# (pronounced C sharp), and a
ﬁfty-two-year-old Taiwanese woman named Lisa Chen pleaded
guilty to pirating hundreds of thousands of software copies
worth over $75 million. She was sentenced to federal prison in
the United States for nine years—one of the most severe sen-
tences ever given for such a crime.
In 2002, problems associated with online gaming started to
be reported. For example, according to National Police Adminis-
tration of Taiwan statistics, there were more than 3,553 cyber-
crime cases in 2001, for which 3,983 cyber-criminals were prose-
cuted during 2002—an indicator that sometimes cyber-criminals
22
Background and History

work with others. Within these cases, more than 1,300 cases (37
p e rcent) were related to online gaming, primarily online cheat-
ing (ibid.).
2003.
In 2003, the notion of the vulnerability of wireless com-
puter systems came to the forefront. For example, one interesting
case involved a computer security analyst by the name of Stefan
Puffer. After he ﬁgured out that the Harris County district clerk’s
w i reless computer network was vulnerable to crack attacks, he
warned the clerk’s office that anyone with a wireless network
card could gain access to their sensitive data. He was charged by
police but was later acquitted by a Texas jury.
On April 30, 2003, stronger measures were passed in the
United States to fight cyber- p o r n o g r a p h y. The PROTECT A c t
( P rosecutorial Remedies and Tools against the Exploitation of
C h i l d ren Today Act) of 2002 was signed into law by Pre s i d e n t
G e o rge W. Bush, which not only implemented the Amber alert
communication system to alert the nation about kidnapped chil-
dren but also redeﬁned child pornography to include images of
c h i l d ren engaging in sexually explicit conduct with adults as
well as computer-generated images indistinguishable from re a l
children engaging in such sexual acts. Prior to the passage of the
PROTECT Act, the definition of child pornography came fro m
the 1996 Child Pornography Prevention Act, or CPPA.
In 2003, Paul Henry, vice president of an Internet security ﬁr m
in Florida called CyberGuard Corporation, noted that cyber- s e c u-
rity experts predicted that there was an 80 percent probability that
a cyber-attack against critical infrastru c t u res in the United States
would occur as early as 2005. He said that the technology was
available to those who wanted to use it—including org a n i z e d
criminals and terrorists. This fear was also manifested in a July
2003 poll of more than 1,000 U.S. adults conducted by the Pew In-
ternet and American Life Project. The poll found that 58 percent of
the female respondents and 47 percent of the male re s p o n d e n t s
f e a red an imminent national attack on critical infrastru c t u re s —
b rought on through a combination of cyber-attacks on networked
computers running those critical infrastru c t u res and on-gro u n d
t e r rorist attacks. Similar fears were raised when George Mason
University doctoral student Sean Gorman’s dissertation showed,
using mathematical equations and charts, how terrorists could at-
tack the communications network binding the United States.
What the Internet and an Intranet Are
23

More worms and viruses crawled onto the World Wide Web
and wreaked havoc in August of 2003. The Blaster worm sur-
faced on August 11, exploiting security holes found in Microsoft
Windows XP. The Welchia worm surfaced the same day, target-
ing active computers on the Internet. The latter went to Mi-
crosoft’s Website, downloaded a program that ﬁxes the Windows
holes (known as a “do-gooder”), and then deleted itself. The
most damaging of the three malware irritants was the e-
mail–borne SoBigF virus, the ﬁfth variant of a “bug” that origi-
nally invaded computers in January 2003 and then resurfaced on
August 18. The damage caused by lost production for these three
worms was reportedly in excess of $2 billion for just an eight-day
period. It was about this time that John McAfee, the founder of
the antivirus software company of the same name, claimed that
there were more than 58,000 virus threats against Internet trafﬁc,
and that somewhere between ten and ﬁfteen new online viruses
and worms are discovered daily.
On August 14, 2003, fears of a cyber apocalypse were height-
ened for a period known as the Blackout of 2003, when the East
Coast of the United States and the province of Ontario, Canada,
were hit by a massive power blackout—in fact, the biggest ever
a ffecting the United States. Some utility control system experts
claimed that two events—the August Internet worm and viru s
invasions and the Blackout of 2003—might have been linked, be-
cause the Blaster worm, in particular, may have degraded the
performance of several lines connecting critical data centers used
by utility companies to control the power grid.
On September 15, 2003, the U.S. government, through the
Department of Homeland Security, took even greater steps to
tighten homeland security—including cyberspace—when they
c reated the U.S.-Computer Emergency Response Team (or US-
C E RT). More o v e r, technical groups such as the National High-
Tech Crime Unit (NHTCU) in Britain began working with an-
tivirus company experts to ﬁnd patterns in the coding of some of
the most destructive Internet worms and viruses to determine if
they were the products of organized underg round groups or
other crime afﬁliates. NHTCU experts thought that perhaps hid-
den in the lines of code would be hints of the creators’ identities,
their motives, and maybe information about forthcoming cyber
sabotage plans.
As a countermeasure against Internet crimes, in October
2003 an international consortium—including the U.S. Depart-
24
Background and History

ment of Homeland Security, the UK National Infrastructure Se-
curity Coordination Center, Canada’s Office of Critical Infra-
s t ru c t u re Protection and Emergency Pre p a redness (OCIPEP),
and the U.S.-based SANS Institute (committed to ﬁghting cyber-
crime)—released a list of the top twenty known Internet security
vulnerabilities. The consortium had as their objective the deﬁn-
ing of an absolute minimum standard of security for networked
computers around the globe.
In October 2003, large, wealthy Internet companies faced
s t i ff penalties for infringing Intellectual Property Rights (IPR).
For example, the Internet search giant Google was ﬁned 75,000
Euros for letting marketers link their advertisements on the Net
to trademarked search terms—a ruling that was said to be the
ﬁrst of the kind. At the time, the court gave Google a month to
stop their illegal practices.
On November 6, 2003, the large, wealthy software compa-
nies started ﬁghting back against cyber-criminals. For example,
M i c rosoft took the very unusual step of creating a $5 million
fund to track down malicious crackers targeting the Wi n d o w s
operating system. That fund, by the way, included a $500,000 re-
w a rd for information leading to the arrest of the designers of
Blaster and SoBigF. This Wild West–like bounty underscored the
perceived “problem” environment of the Internet frontier. Some
cynical security critics said that this reward had more to do with
saving the company’s public relations than it had to do with cy-
ber-crime prevention.
Without question, 2003 was a year of spam-banning as well.
In November, the U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC) created
a national spam database and encouraged networked citizens to
forward to them all the e-mail spam they received. Unsolicited,
unwanted, impersonal e-mail received through the World Wide
Web is considered to fall into the general heading of “spam.” The
FTC noted that in 2002, informants had taken it upon themselves
to report more than 17 million complaints about spam messages
to federal agents for investigation. In fact, the FTC said that they
received nearly 110,000 complaints daily.
As a spam countermeasure, in November 2003 the U.S. Sen-
ate passed the CAN-SPAM Act of 2003, formally known as the
Controlling the Assault of Non-Solicited Pornography and Mar-
keting Act of 2003. Its purpose, as its name implies, was to regu-
late interstate commerce by placing limitations and penalties on
the transmission of spam through the Internet. Penalties that
What the Internet and an Intranet Are
25

could be imposed were ﬁnes as high as U.S. $1 million and im-
prisonment for not more than ﬁve years if found guilty of act in-
fringement.
2 0 0 4 .
In 2004, large companies started pursuing U.S. citizens
who swapped songs using the Internet without paying royalties
to the song artists. On January 21, the Recording Industry Asso-
ciation of America (RIAA), for example, said that it had identi-
ﬁed 532 song swappers through the cyber trails that their com-
puters left when the swappers illegally downloaded music from
the Internet. The swappers, identiﬁed by their Internet Protocol
(IP) addresses, were targeted in four lawsuits in New York and in
Washington, D.C. The lawsuits were filed using the so-called
John Doe process, allowing the RIAA to sue defendants whose
names were not yet known.
More worm releases emerged in 2004. For example, on Janu-
ary 26, the worm W32.Novarg.A@mm, also known as MyDoom,
spread like wildﬁre through the World Wide Web, arriving as an
attachment with the ﬁle extension .bat ,.cmd., .exe, .pof, .scr,  or
.zip. It affected Windows 2000, Windows 95, Windows 98, Win-
dows Server 2003, and Windows XP systems. It did not, how-
ever, affect DOS, Linux, Macintosh, OS/2, UNIX, or Windows 3.x
systems. Clearly, the Microsoft Corporation was the pre m e d i-
tated target. The damage done by MyDoom was estimated to be
U.S. $2 billion worldwide.
Although much of the Internet development headlines have
been increasingly negative since 2000, the occasional bright light
does appear. For example, in mid-August of 2004, would-be
high-tech billionaire White Hats by the names of Sergey Brin and
Larry Page began their long-awaited Initial Public Offering (IPO)
on the stock market of their Internet e-business Google—home of
the world’s leading Internet search engine.
It is interesting to note that in September 2004, the Computer
Industry Almanac estimated that the worldwide number of Inter-
net users would top 1 billion, with the United States alone ac-
counting for 185 million users. The Almanac also noted that there
will be little Internet user growth in the developed countries
over the next ﬁve years, but that many users will be supplement-
ing their PC Internet use with Smartphone and mobile device In-
ternet applications. Elsewhere around the globe Internet use is
g rowing strongly in China, which actually had greater Internet
g rowth than Japan in 2003. The A l m a n a c also predicted that
26
Background and History

g rowth in Internet users will continue in developing countries
for the next decade (Computer Industry Almanac, 2004).
On the international scene in 2004, Chinese authorities, wor-
ried that some of the material appearing on the Internet was im-
moral or violent in nature, closed more than 12,000 Internet cafes
where Chinese citizens of all ages connected to the World Wide
Web.
2 0 0 5 .
In January 2005, under public pre s s u re from U.S. citi-
zens, the FBI (Federal Bureau of Investigation) abandoned its
custom-built and highly controversial Internet surveillance tech-
nology known as Carnivore, designed to read e-mail and online
communications of suspected terrorists and cyber-terrorists. The
FBI moved to using commercially available software and encour-
aged Internet providers to conduct wiretaps on suspected indi-
viduals, and to forward the ﬁndings to government agents.
On January 21, 2005, in an embarrassing Harvard University
incident, the conﬁdential drug purchase histories of Harvard stu-
dents and staff and the e-mail addresses of underg r a d u a t e s
(guaranteed by university officials of nondisclosure) appeare d
on Harvard’s iCommons Pool Tool. To make matters worse, this
personal health history information was accessible for months to
anyone having an Internet e-mail account and a few minutes’
time to investigate the particulars of anyone having an eight-
digit ID number at the university. This vulnerability in Harvard’s
computer network underscored the difﬁculty of securing the sys-
tem when there is prevalent use of ID numbers to verify individ-
uals’ identities.
In February 2005, the National Technology Readiness Sur-
vey (NTRS) results indicated that spam, besides being very an-
noying, costs nearly U.S. $22 billion annually in lost productivity
in the United States alone. That same month, while delivering a
speech to security experts at the RSA Conference in San Jose, Cal-
ifornia, Microsoft Corporation founder Bill Gates said that his
company will give away software to combat privacy-invasive cy-
ber nuisances like spyware and adware. Spyware is covert soft-
ware whose mission it is to capture data about online users’ In-
ternet-surfing habits. A d w a re, a form of spyware, gathers
information on unsuspecting users with e-mail pop-up ads or
other marketing inducers.
In February 2005, a report released by a U.S. legislative com-
mittee found that information on the Websites of the New York
What the Internet and an Intranet Are
27

Motor Vehicles, the New York Department of Education, the
New York Department of Correctional Services, the State Divi-
sion of Military and Naval Affairs, and the New York Power Au-
thority had been defaced seventy-two times from 1999 to early
December 2004. The chair of the oversight committee said that
because state and private companies are not keeping important
personal and homeland security online information safe, identity
thefts (stealing the personal details of another person, such as so-
cial security numbers or credit card numbers and using them for
one’s own beneﬁt)—or worse—could occur.
In February 2005, another warning came, from the vice pres-
ident of security products for the OpenService company. He
warned that from the legal requirements of the Sarbanes-Oxley
Act, recently passed in the United States—an act intended to pre-
vent further ﬁnancial scandals like Worldcom—any breach in IT
security poses a risk to a company’s internal information system.
Since IT underlies the critical business of recording and reporting
all ﬁnancial activity, a lack of control over IT security would im-
ply a lack of control by a company over its ﬁnancial reports—a
direct violation of Section 404 of the act, in particular.
Other computer system vulnerabilities made headlines in
2005. One of those occurred on March 2 when Harvard Business
School announced that they would reject 119 applicants who fol-
lowed a cracker’s instructions for peeking into the school’s ad-
mission Internet site to see if they had been accepted—one
month before the acceptances would be made public. The next
day, MIT’s Sloan School of Management said that they would do
the same with crackers of their Internet site. An anonymous per-
son known as “brookbond,” who said that he was a male who
specializes in IT security, posted the how-to-crack instructions on
Business Week Online’s technology forum just after midnight on
March 2, making Harvard University’s Website vulnerable to at-
tack for more than nine hours.
Other kinds of aggressive Internet-related incidents were re-
ported in March 2005. For example, on March 5, a cyber- w a r
broke out between Indonesia and Malaysia, instigated by a dis-
pute over the Ambalat oil ﬁelds in the Sulawesi Sea—and, per-
haps, the termination of amnesty for illegal Indonesian workers.
Kuala Lampur ofﬁcials were upset over an intrusion into its wa-
ters by an Indonesian naval vessel after Indonesian pre s i d e n t
Bambang Yudhoyona ord e red the military to show itself in the
Sulawesi Sea jurisdiction under dispute. Within twenty-four
28
Background and History

hours of that act, the Website of Universiti Sains Malaysia was
cracked and plagued with aggressive anti-Malaysian messages
with an Indonesian twist.
Two days later, on March 7, 2005, documents seized fro m
t h ree members of the Lashkar- e - Toiba (LeT) terrorist gro u p
killed in an encounter with Indian police indicated that they had
planned to execute a “suicide crack attack” on the computer net-
works of companies having software and computer chip design
outlets in Banglahore and Karnal Singh. These companies
would include such readily recognizable names as Intel, Te x a s
I n s t ruments, and IBM. The motive behind this act was LeT’s de-
manding independence for the Indian states of Jammu and
K a s h m i r. These cyber- t e r rorists said that they wanted to attack
the high-tech companies to hinder the economic engine of India.
The companies who were targeted said that not only do they
have tight entry re q u i rements in their facilities in those locations
but they also have well-designed disaster recovery plans in
p l a c e .
In the ever-evolving world of wireless technology and the
Internet, more opportunities for virus creation have emerg e d .
For example, on March 8, 2005, data security firms said that a
new virus capable of attacking users’ cellular phones had been
developed. F-Secure Corporation, a Finnish software security
c o m p a n y, said that the Commwarrior virus appeared to be the
ﬁrst one capable of spreading through online multimedia mes-
saging services containing photos, sound, or video clips. Tw o
days after this announcement, Trend Micro, another IT security
firm, issued an alert re g a rding two more worms that spre a d
through users’ MSN Messenger, a widely employed instant mes-
saging platform found in particular in the Asia Pacific re g i o n .
Known as kelvir.b and fatso.a, these worms were reported invad-
ing the cyberspace in both the United States and the Asia Paciﬁc
region.
Despite the heavy negative tone that has pervaded the cyber
community since 2000, there have been some cyber-incidents re-
ported by the news media that could evoke a chuckle or two.
One of these occurred on or about March 10, 2005, when the
press reported that Limp Bizkit singer Fred Durst had taken legal
action against ten Website operators for posting his self-created
sex tape after his computer was cracked.
Fears about the vulnerability of wireless computer networks
continued to make the news in 2005. On or about March 10,
What the Internet and an Intranet Are
29

a c c o rding to a study commissioned by RSA S e c u r i t y, the huge
growth in the use of wireless networks by businesses around the
globe is making those networks increasingly more subject to
drive-by cracking—meaning that someone can literally drive by
a company and connect to the wireless network to do online
Google searches, say, or to view online pornography (Grami and
Schell, 2004). As a case in point, in Europe’s financial districts,
the wireless networks seem to be growing at an annual rate ap-
proaching 70 percent. What is really worrisome is that more than
a third of the businesses making use of this technology are un-
p rotected from crack attacks. By comparison, noted RSA S e c u-
rity, almost 40 percent of the businesses in New York seem to be
unprepared for such exploits, and more than a third of the busi-
nesses in San Francisco seem to be unprepared.
M o re o v e r, in March 2005, evidence surfaced of the poorly
regulated Internet information brokerage industry. On or about
March 10, cyber-criminals used passwords stolen from legitimate
users to access the LexisNexis Group’s data on as many as 32,000
Americans. Similar computer network breaches occurred at
ChoicePoint, Inc., and at the Bank of America. These intrusions
p rompted calls for U.S. federal government oversight thro u g h
the General Services Administration (GSA) to look into the mat-
ter. The GSA agreed to review the online security policies of the
Bank of America and four other SmartPay contractors providing
c redit avenues for online transactions—Bank One of Delaware ,
Citibank of New York, Mellon Bank of Pittsburgh, and the U.S.
Bank of Minneapolis. Recommendations were to follow about
p roviding adequate protection for the safety of online personal
information.
E l s e w h e re around the globe, Denial-of-Service (DoS) crack
attacks made the headlines yet again. On March 16, for example,
ﬁve crackers in The Netherlands were found guilty of disabling a
number of Dutch government Websites because of DoS attacks a
year earlier. Citing protests against recent cabinet proposals as
the motive for their attacks, the hacktivist group went by the
moniker Oxlfe Cre w. The spokesperson for the group, an eigh-
teen-year-old who said that he would appeal his thirty-eight-day
detention sentence, argued that there was no evidence to prove
that he was involved in the Internet attacks. This was the first
time that anyone in The Netherlands had been convicted of such
a cyber-crime.
30
Background and History

News releases in 2005 from Internet security firms contin-
ued to report signiﬁcant growth in the number of attacks made
on North American companies’ computer networks. For exam-
ple, on March 21, 2005, Symantec Corporation issued a re p o r t
saying that Internet attacks had grown by 28 percent in the sec-
ond half of 2004, compared with the ﬁrst six months. On average,
Symantec noted, businesses and other agencies received about
fourteen attacks on their computer networks daily in the second
half of 2004, relative to about eleven attacks in the ﬁrst half of the
year. Moreover, crackers increasingly turned to mobile comput-
ers to exploit networks—using such online tools as phishing,
s p y w a re, and adware. Phishing is a form of identity theft
w h e reby a scammer uses an authentic-looking e-mail from a
l a rge corporation to trick e-mail receivers into disclosing sensi-
tive personal information online, such as credit card numbers or
bank account codes.
Another release at about the same time by a security com-
pany called Mazu Networks indicated that almost half of the 230
companies surveyed had had a computer worm outbreak in
2004, despite their increased spending for security. A l t h o u g h
about three-quarters of the IT professional respondents said that
their companies had increased security spending in 2004 to com-
ply with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, less than 15 percent of the re-
spondents reported that they were conﬁdent that their networks
could stop cyber-crime.
Despite the accumulating negative news in 2005, there was
the occasional positive word. For example, on April 8, 2005, in a
landmark legal case, spammer Jeremy Jaynes of North Carolina,
described by prosecutors as being among the top ten spammers
in the world, was sentenced to nine years in federal prison. This
was the ﬁrst successful felony prosecution in the United States
for transmitting spam over the Internet.
Also in 2005, some advances in Internet technology sparked
thoughts of cyber-crime relief. For example, during the week of
April 25, Bill Gates said that his company planned to put hard-
w a re computer security into a silicon chip, instead of re l y i n g
only on software in the next release of the Windows PC operat-
ing system—which would be available sometime in 2006. Also,
on May 23, Apple Computer, Inc., announced that they were in
talks with the Intel Corporation about using their Intel chip in
the Macintosh computer line. Using Intel chips in the Macintosh
What the Internet and an Intranet Are
31

would make it feasible to install the hugely popular Wi n d o w s
software on their Mac computers. With that announcement, not
surprisingly, Apple shares rose on the Nasdaq stock market.
T h e re were also technological advances in 2005 that con-
tributed to medical benefits. For example, the U.S. Food and
D rug Administration (FDA) had already approved for use Im-
plantable Cardioverter-Deﬁbrillators, or ICDs, made to transmit
a patient’s heart-monitoring data (including electrocardiograms)
over telephone lines. Although ICDs are meant to assist doctors
in monitoring their patients’ heart conditions from locations
other than at the doctor’s ofﬁce, there have already been IT secu-
rity concerns voiced by security experts. The security concern
lies around the remote relaying system, whereby patients hold a
wand above their chest. The information is then sent over the
telephone line to the doctor in encrypted form. Although the
FDA has not yet approved physicians being able to adjust the de-
ﬁbrillator over the phone, the technology does allow for that. The
f e a r, then, is that some ill-motivated Black Hat cracker will at-
tempt to adjust the deﬁbrillator of some targeted individual by
cracking telephone lines or by altering the information relayed to
the physician (Adler, 2005).
Also in 2005, there were indications that many North Amer-
ican cyber-citizens had become addicted to using the Internet for
a variety of reasons—reading e-mail, surﬁng the Net for topics of
interest to them, or purchasing consumer goods online. For ex-
ample, during the first week of May 2005, Websense’s annual
Web@Work survey results indicated that more than 50 percent of
the employee respondents said that they would rather forg o
their morning coffee than lose their ability to surf non-work-
related Websites during the workday. More o v e r, according to a
2005 report released by Forrester Research, Inc., U.S. households
now spend at least 30 percent of their media time online, and ac-
c o rding to the Interactive Advertising Bureau, online ad re v-
enues grow at a rate at or exceeding 33 percent per quarter.
In 2005 cyber-citizens outside of North America were also
becoming addicted to the pleasures of the Internet. For example,
in early August the newly released Chinese search engine
Baidu.com stock soared over 350 percent on the ﬁrst day of trad-
ing. The thirty-seven-year-old Chinese founder, Robin Li, told re-
porters that Chinese Internet use was still in its infancy, but that
like North American search engine founders, he had hopes of be-
coming another high-tech billionaire, because Chinese citizens
32
Background and History

enjoy staying “connected” with the rest of the world through the
World Wide Web. Although Li’s statement contains much truth,
on October 5, 2005, Chinese authorities shut down another two
Internet sites popular among academics, journalists, and civil
rights activists. One Website served as an online discussion
group to report on anticorruption protests in a southern village
around Beijing. The other Website serviced ethnic Mongolians.
In the fall of 2005, while many students in North A m e r i c a
w e re returning to school, another young cracker was going to
jail. On September 8, 2005, a Massachusetts juvenile pleaded
guilty to cracking Paris Hilton’s T-Mobile cellular phone and
dumping personal information of hers on the Internet. He also
admitted to cracking other computer systems in 2004, to stealing
personal information, and to sending bomb threats through the
Internet to high schools in Florida and Massachusetts. All of the
incidents occurred in a ﬁfteen-month period, beginning in March
2004. The harm to persons and to property over this short period
cost an estimated U.S. $1 million, and like other young crackers
before him, the youth was sentenced to eleven months in a de-
tention center.
On a positive year-end note, 2005 ended with some happy
stories. Although almost a quarter of the world’s spam in the last
t h ree months of 2005 was sent from U.S.-based computers, ac-
cording to UK antivirus company Sophos, the latest ﬁgures indi-
cate for the first time that the United States accounts for one-
quarter of all relayed spam—a significant drop from about 42
percent in 2004. The reduction is linked to the effectiveness of the
CAN SPAM Act and to the courts’ imposing harsh prison sen-
tences and stiff ﬁnancial penalties for those found guilty of the
crime. In 2005 the U.S. spam offenders were followed closely by
Chinese spam offenders, owning about 22 percent of the pro b-
lem. Korea was the next spam offender, coming in with about 10
percent of the relayed spam (Evers, 2006).
If Robin Li needs good role models, he has found them in
Google’s founders Sergey Brin and Larry Page. With the news on
November 17, 2005, that stock market shares of online searc h
giant Google, Inc., had crossed the amazing $400-per- s h a re
mark, the cyber and ﬁnancial worlds may have seen the birth of
a new ﬁnancial planetary system.
As of November 22, 2005, Google has a market cap of U.S.
$120 billion—double the market cap of its nearest competitor, Ya-
hoo, capped at U.S. $60 billion. For comparison, online auction
What the Internet and an Intranet Are
33

house eBay has a market cap of U.S. $65 billion, and online pub-
lisher Time Warner has a market cap of U.S. $85 billion. There is
little question that the success of Google is altering in a very pos-
itive way the tech industry’s behavior—and is sending a strong
message that tech billionaires can still be made on the Internet
highway. In fact, Google’s stock, with a price-earning ratio of 70,
re p resents one of the richest deal-making currencies in the
world. So, where are Brin and Page looking to invest their dol-
lars? Although for a while they were interested in Web phone
Skype, they have since backed away. To date their largest deal,
made in 2003, seems to be the U.S. $102 million they paid for on-
line advertisement upstart Applied Semantics, Inc. To d a y, Brin
and Page are looking to spread their online wings in China.
2006.
The New Year ushered in more cracking headline stories.
For example, in January 2006, a twenty-year-old California
cracker named Jeanson James Ancheta admitted to seizing con-
t rol of hundreds of thousands of Internet-connected computers
by making use of a zombie network to dump pop-up ads on tar-
geted computers. He also rented the network to others so that
they could mount cyber-attacks on selected Websites and send
out spam. Ancheta cracked computers at two U.S. military Web-
sites, earning himself about $60,000. Lawyers arguing for the
government cited this case as the ﬁrst to obtain signiﬁcant proﬁts
from the use of botnets—large numbers of computers comman-
d e e red by crackers and marshaled for personal gain (Mer-
curyNews.com, 2006).
In recent years, botnets have been used to overwhelm Web-
sites with streams of data and feed off vulnerabilities in comput-
ers running the Microsoft Windows operating system. The vul-
nerable machines are generally those whose owners have not
installed security patches, and zombie machine owners are un-
aware that programs have been installed on their computers that
a re being controlled by crackers in a remote fashion. The court
documents apparently indicate that Jeanson would spend about
$600 for expensive clothes and BMW car parts. He faces up to six
months in prison and will have to pay the government re s t i t u-
tion. At about the time of his arrest, the FBI released their latest
findings indicating that viruses, worms, and Trojan horse soft-
ware programs like the ones that Ancheta used cost U.S. compa-
nies U.S. $11.9 billion annually. Named after the Trojan horse of
ancient Greek history, a Trojan is a particular kind of network
34
Background and History

software application developed to stay hidden on the computer
where it has been installed. Like worms, Trojans generally serve
malicious purposes, and today Trojans access the target com-
puter through the Internet. Since Trojans can launch Denial-of-
Service attacks, security experts suggest using antivirus software
to protect networks (ibid.).
A m o re recent legal case re g a rding Intellectual Pro p e r t y
Rights and Internet technology made the headlines in 2006. This
fascinating case involved two high-tech companies: RIM, Ltd.
(Research in Motion, Ltd., a Canadian company based in Water-
loo, Ontario), and NTP, Inc. (a small U.S. company based in Vir-
ginia). Each company claimed that it owned the Intellectual
P roperty Rights (IPR) and patents for the wireless handhelds
used by business and government people around the world to
read and respond to their e-mail while away from their comput-
ers. Named by RIM as “The BlackBerry,” these nifty little hand-
helds have been given the name “crackberries” for their addict-
ing ease of use. It is interesting to note that the devices are so
popular that the U.S. federal government had requested that em-
ployees with mission-critical roles be exempted from an injunc-
tion, should one be levied by the courts (Arnone, 2006). How-
e v e r, the case ended in a negotiated settlement in March 2006.
The CEO of RIM, Jim Balsillie agreed to pay NTP a one-time pay-
ment of $612.5 million, settling the dispute. Under this agre e-
ment, RIM received a license to NTP’s patents going forward.
Other interesting news surfacing in 2006 included the U.S.
partnership with developing nations in the war against cyber-
terrorism. For example, in January 2006, just over twenty ofﬁcers
f rom Indian law enforcement agencies were trained in New
Delhi in a cyber Incident Response Course, sponsored by the
U.S. State Department’s A n t i - Te r rorism Assistance Pro g r a m .
Those attending the course were trained in methods of securing
and preserving evidence at a cyber- t e r rorism crime scene. The
participants also learned how to identify and seize digital evi-
dence without altering its contents—an important issue for
courts needing untouched evidence (NewKerala.com, 2006).
M o re o v e r, the U.S. government was still concerned about
the vulnerability of the computer networks responsible for criti-
cal infrastructures. In January 2006, ofﬁcials in the Homeland Se-
curity Department said that it will maintain the conﬁdentiality of
critical infrastructure information submitted to the National As-
set Database. Also, the department said that they will scrutinize
What the Internet and an Intranet Are
35

all requests to view this database and will grant access only to se-
lect Department of Homeland Security employees and others
only on a tightly controlled, need-to-know basis (Lipowicz,
2006).
The UK government is also concerned about tight contro l
but in a different online context. That government has repeatedly
expressed a desire to use e-enabled, or a Remote Electronic Vot-
ing (REV) system, in a general election to be held after June
2006—the latest date for the next election. From a security stand-
point, say security experts, most existing REV schemes use some
form of cryptography, either to secure the transmission of un-
changed votes or to model some positive feature of public elec-
tions. REV schemes have also been proposed for nonelection
purposes, such as for jury voting or for parliamentary voting,
w h e re it may be desirable to reveal the association between a
voter and a vote. It will be interesting to see how this creative use
of the modern-day Internet will turn out, for most pre s e n t - d a y
elections use a combination of in-person voting, regular mail vot-
ing, and small-scale online voting (Storer and Duncan, 2005).
On February 1, 2006, RIM, Ltd., secured a key victory after
U.S. patent authorities rejected the last of ﬁve contested patents
at the heart of the dispute, and immediately RIM shares ro s e
nearly 9 percent on the Toronto Stock Exchange, as investors bet
that RIM might be gaining the edge in the ﬁve-year patent saga.
The patent agency’s decision, although not ﬁnal, is quite unlikely
to be changed. However, NTP has thirty days in which to re-
spond, after which a ﬁnal court ruling is delivered. Either side
can appeal the decision to a patent appeals board, the U.S. Court
of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, and the Supreme Court. This
case clearly shows how cumbersome and costly patent disputes
can become. The patent rejection could also strengthen RIM’s
hand in continuing talks with NTP or in reaching a possible set-
tlement—which is likely to top U.S. $1 billion (McKenna, 2006).
How the Internet Works
The General Nature of the Internet
Until 1996, few North American laypersons or lawyers under-
stood how the Internet, or the World Wide Web, actually works.
Then in 1996 and 1997, after the U.S. government passed the
36
Background and History

Communications Decency Act (CDA) to regulate obscene infor-
mation on the Internet, some lawsuits were ﬁled challenging the
C D A’s constitutionality. One of these was the 1997 case Reno v.
ACLU (that is, Reno, the U.S. attorney general, versus the Ameri-
can Civil Liberties Union). Details on the workings of the Inter-
net using lay language were consequently reported in the court
decisions pertaining to these cases (Findlaw, 2006).
Without question, even from the beginning the Internet was
designed to be a huge network interconnecting many smaller
groups of linked computers. The Internet never had a physical or
tangible entry, as a door on a house provides entry to the rest of
the house. Moreover, the Internet, even in 1969, was designed to
be a decentralized, self-maintaining group of redundant links be-
tween computers and computer networks. The beauty of the In-
ternet was that it was able to send data rapidly without human
intervention and with the unique capability to reroute data if one
or more links were damaged or unavailable. There f o re, from a
military perspective, even if a portion of the network were de-
s t royed during a war, with a redundant system, critical data
could still reach its intended destination.
It is important to note that data travel along networks not as
“whole” information but as very small information packets. In
fact, even in A R PAnet’s early days, the Internet used packet
switching protocols to allow messages to be subdivided into
smaller packets of information. These smaller packets would be
sent rather independently to the required destination and be au-
tomatically reassembled by the destination computer. Although
packets containing information for a larger message often travel
along the same path to get to the ﬁnal destination, some of them
could be re routed along a diff e rent path if one or more ro u t e r s
along the route became overloaded.
The reason that the networked computers can communicate
with one another is as a result of a common communication pro-
tocol called Internet Protocol. All applications utilized on the
Net are designed to make use of this IP—both in earlier days
and today.
Gaining Access
Inasmuch as the Internet is not tangible, is not stored in any one
place, and has no door in the true sense, how do Internet users
gain access? There are a number of ways that individuals can
How the Internet Works
37

gain access, but one of the earliest means was through a com-
puter network linked directly to the Internet at an educational
institution, business, or government office. The IT department
would issue account numbers and passwords to legitimate users.
As more and more citizens bought PCs during and after the
1990s, individuals would more commonly pay a fee to an Internet
Service Provider (ISP) and then receive a software package, a user-
name, a password, and an access phone number. Equipped with a
modem, the client could then log on to the Internet, browse the
World Wide Web, or send and receive e-mail. Lately, ISPs have
been offering high-speed services using DSL (a general term for
any local network loop digital in nature) or cable-modem technol-
o g y. ISPs are connected to each other through Network A c c e s s
P o i n t s .
Today, laypersons often gain access to the Internet through
c o m m e rcial online services—such as America Online (AOL),
CompuServe, and the Microsoft Network—which offer not only
Internet access but also other useful content, such as news, enter-
tainment, and lifestyle, diet, and marketplace information.
Ways to Communicate 
The most common ways to communicate with others over the
Internet include
• E-mail, or Electronic Mail
• Listserv
• Newsgroups
• Internet Relay Chat (IRC)
• Telnet
• Remote Retrieval
E-mail.
Using e-mail, an individual can send a message to one or
m o re other individuals also connected to the Internet. Unen-
crypted e-mail is not secure compared with regular posted mail
(often called “snail mail” because of its comparatively slow de-
livery time), which is delivered in a sealed envelope via the gov-
ernment’s postal service. Contents may be accessed, viewed, and
a l t e red by someone with computer access along the path fro m
sender to receiver. It is quite common for online users to check
on the receipt of e-mail by sending a follow-up e-mail if a re-
sponse is not received in a timely fashion.
38
Background and History

Listserv.
Probably the best way to think about listserv is to pic-
ture it as an online subscription to some topic of interest. Enlisted
online users can then receive messages posted by other enlisted
members and post messages for others on the listserv to receive.
The kind of software that manages listservs is known as a mail
exploder; it is a program that runs on the server where the list re-
sides. It is this software program that gives instructions to those
wanting to unsubscribe, and it does so without human interven-
tion. Some listservs have open access, while others have more re-
stricted access. Moderated listservs have someone who actually
approves of the messages posted before sending them on to reg-
istered users.
N e w s g ro u p s .
Users connected to the Internet can also get arti-
cles posted to thousands of discussion groups called news-
g roups. The articles are topic-arranged and distributed thro u g h
an electronic bulletin board system called Usenet. When a user
having access to a Usenet server (that is, a computer linked to
the Usenet system) posts an article to a newsgroup, the server
f o r w a rds the article to adjacent Usenet servers, making the arti-
cle available on all Usenet sites with access to that newsgro u p .
Some Usenet newsgroups are moderated, while others are not.
Once a message reaches a particular Usenet site, it is store d
t h e re temporarily. Users running software called “newsre a d e r ”
can then sort articles by header information and respond to the
i n f o r m a t i o n .
Internet Relay Chat (IRC).
Servers running software known as In-
ternet Relay Chat allow multiple users “to talk online” and in
real time by choosing one of many activated discussion channels.
What this means is that some message typed on one user’s com-
puter will appear almost immediately on another user’s com-
puter monitor. There are a number of commercial online service
p roviders from which users may partake of these online chats,
including America Online and CompuServe. To keep their iden-
tities unknown to those in the chat rooms, users often go online
under some contrived moniker, such as Maﬁaboy. Although on-
line chat rooms form an important communications link for citi-
zens around the globe, many children and women have filed
complaints to the authorities after being cyber-harassed or cyber-
stalked in these virtual rooms.
How the Internet Works
39

Telnet.
Technically speaking, Telnet is a terminal emulation pro-
gram, or a program based on that protocol, which allows users to
log on to the Internet. Stated simply, Telnet is an Internet applica-
tion permitting a user’s PC to act as a terminal to a remote sys-
tem. For many users connecting to the Net, Telnet is not used, be-
cause it requires familiarity with the UNIX operating system. For
example, a professor at one university can use Telnet to make use
of the extraordinary computing power of a supercomputer lo-
cated at some other university. One case in point is Canada’s
S h a red Hierarchical Academic Research Computing Network
(SHARCNET), having a network capacity of 6,000 pro c e s s o r s
and linking eleven leading Ontario academic institutions. Its
purpose is to meet the rapidly growing high-performance com-
puting demands of the twenty-ﬁrst century and to advance re-
s e a rch pro g ress in the Canadian re s e a rch community (Hewlett
Packard Development Company, 2005).
Remote Retrieval.
A common use of the Internet these days is to
search for and retrieve information located on remote computers.
There are basically three ways in which this search and retrieval
process may be accomplished. One way is to use the File Transfer
Protocol to transfer ﬁles between systems over the network, par-
ticularly from a host (that is, server) to a remote computer (that
is, client). It is important to note that commercial browsers like
Netscape have FTP capabilities built in.
The gopher protocol, a distributed document searc h - a n d - ﬁn d
network protocol, was released in 1991 by Paul Lindner and Mark
McCahill. The gopher’s original design for sharing documents
was similar to that of the World Wide Web—and, as such, it has
been replaced by the Web. Because the protocol had some feature s
not supported by the Web, some IT experts consider it to have had
a better protocol for searching and storing large data re p o s i t o r i e s .
In fact, when the World Wide Web was ﬁrst introduced in 1991,
gopher was still popular. Then, in February 1993, when the Uni-
versity of Minnesota—which is where Lindner and McCahill at-
tended university—announced that it would begin to charge users
licensing fees to use the protocol, it underwent a huge decrease in
p o p u l a r i t y. Some security experts believe that gopher’s downfall
was brought about by its stru c t u re, which is limited compare d
with free-form hypertext formatting language, or HTML.
The third method to retrieve information from the Wo r l d
Wide Web is to use HTML. Today, programs browsing the Web
40
Background and History

can display HTML documents having text, images, sound, and
video, and they can do so anywhere in the world. Although in-
formation on the Web is stored in individual HTTP ( h y p e r t e x t
transfer protocol) servers, the connection of these computers to
the Internet through W3C protocols (those used to exchange in-
formation on the Web) permits the linked information to become
part of a single body of information. In short, the World Wi d e
Web, or WWW, describes the network of HTTP servers using hy-
pertext links both to ﬁnd and to access ﬁles. That is why today all
Internet site addresses begin with http://. Without question, the
World Wide Web is the most advanced information system of an
Internet nature and has embraced within its data model most in-
formation in earlier networked information systems using FTP,
Usenet, and gopher.
Information contained on the World Wide Web is stored in
many formats, as noted—video, text, images, and sounds, with
each document having an address consisting of numbers. More-
over, most Web documents contain links—words or images—re-
ferring to other documents. Thus, when an Internet user clicks
on any linked text or image (typically blue and underlined when
displayed), results in the referenced document will be automati-
cally displayed—re g a rdless of where it is being stored aro u n d
the globe. A l t e r n a t i v e l y, if a user types a URL (Universal Re-
s o u rce locator) into the browser and hits the “Enter” key, the
computer will send an HTTP request to the correct Web server.
The Web server, developed to handle such requests, then sends
the user the requested HTML page.
Publishing on the World Wide Web
To d a y, hospitals, re s e a rch centers, financial institutions, busi-
nesses, and universities have their information available on the
World Wide Web. If information is available, it is said to be pub-
lished. Getting published on the Web requires only a computer
connection to the Internet and running server software on the
computer that meets the W3C (World Wide Web Consortium)
formatting standards. It is the meeting of such standards that al-
lows connected computers to communicate and exchange infor-
mation with one another.
The W3C was founded by Tim Berners-Lee, who once said
that the World Wide Web is actually a universe of network-
How the Internet Works
41

accessible data—an embodiment, as it were, of human knowl-
edge. To d a y, the W3C exists to help the Web reach its fullest po-
tential. It is a consortium of industry leaders wanting to pro-
mote standards for the Web’s continued development and for
g reater interoperability between WWW pro d u c t s .
The W3C receives funding from its industrial partners to
produce reference software and speciﬁcations. Despite this fund-
ing arrangement, the W3C upholds its claim not only that it is
v e n d o r-neutral but also that its products are free for everyone.
M o re o v e r, the W3C is international in character. Joint hosts in-
clude the MIT Laboratory for Computer Science (where Ti m
Berners-Lee is a professor) and the INRIA (the French National
Institute for Research in Computer Science and Control) in Eu-
rope. Throughout their six re s e a rch units in France (Bord e a u -
L i l l e - S a c l a y, Grenoble, Nancy, Rennes, Rocquencourt, and
Sophia Antipolis), INRIA has more than 3,500 employees (Bern-
ers-Lee, 2006; INRIA, 2006).
Once published on the Web, publishers may choose to make
their Websites open to the general pool of Internet users, or to
close them by permitting access only to users with advanced au-
thorization. If publishers want to limit access, they assign spe-
c i ﬁc user names and passwords as a pre requisite for obtaining
access to the published Website. If a Website is designed primar-
ily for an organization’s internal use, it is known as an Intranet.
Thus, access to information is permitted only from other com-
puters within the organization’s local network.
Creating a Website and 
Getting a Domain Name Address
C reating a We b s i t e .
In the late 1990s, creating a Website used to
cost anywhere from U.S. $1,000 to U.S. $15,000, with monthly op-
erating costs varying according to the Website’s purpose and the
amount of trafﬁc. To d a y, creating a Website can be done for free, if
using, for example, http://w w w. f reewebs.com, and it includes
f ree bandwidth—up to 1.5 GB. More bandwidth—up to 50 GB—
can be purchased for as little as $30 per month. Also, a domain
name address can be re g i s t e red on Websites like http://w w w
. Yahoo.com for as little as $2.99 per year. The most popular do-
main name extensions include .com (meaning commercial) and
.edu (meaning an educational institution).
42
Background and History

Getting a Domain Name Addre s s .
The Domain Name System, or
DNS, is a hierarchical system of naming hosts and placing the
hosts into categories. The DNS is a way of translating numerical
Internet addresses into word strings to denote user names and
locations. For example, the Domain Name System http:// r s
.internic.net/ is also known as 198.41.0.13.
Any machine on the Internet has its own address, called the
Internet Protocol address (IP a d d ress). The IP a d d ress looks
something like this: 123.123.123.123—four numerical segments
separated by dots. Any computer is reachable through its IP ad-
dress. Because users cannot remember these numerical strings of
I P a d d resses, an alternative, more user-friendly system was
needed. For this reason, IP addresses were translated into more
logical strings for humans to re m e m b e r. The IP a d d ress for the
Yale University computer science department, for example, is de-
noted as www.cs.yale.edu.
During A R PAnet’s early development, one file called
host.txt listed all of the org a n i z a t i on‘s I P a d d resses. At the end
of each day, all computers connected to the Internet would get
the list from the Website where it was kept. With time, the num-
ber of connected hosts increased to such a degree that the size
of the host file was huge, and the system was inefficient. Thus
the DNS was invented—a hierarchical domain-based stru c t u re
in which the Internet is divided into pieces called “domains.”
The pieces are categorized as top-level domains and subdo-
mains. The top-level domains include generic and country do-
m a i n s .
The generic domains are .com (a commercial enterprise),
.edu (an educational institution), .gov (a governmental agency),
.int (an international institution), .mil (a military institution), .net
(a network institution), and .org (a nonproﬁt organization). The
country domains, allocated one per country, look like this: .au for
Australia, .us for the United States, and .ca for Canada.
Each top-level domain is divided into several subdomains,
with each domain having control over its subdomains. For exam-
ple, the .edu domain covers all of the educational institutions
and subdomains—such as Yale University, Princeton University,
Rutgers University, and Harvard University. Moreover, the coun-
try domains have subdomains. For example, the .uk (the United
Kingdom) and the .jp (Japan) domains have two common subdo-
mains: .ac (standing for academic entity) and .com (standing for
c o m m e rcial entity). Each domain has a particular server with a
How the Internet Works
43

table containing all IP addresses and domain names belonging to
its domain.
An organization called the Internic maintains a database
having all registered domains for the world. Anyone can query
its database by means of whois. Although several organizations
maintain whois databases, the Internic has the main database. So
any company, institution, or organization wanting to have its
own domain name must register it with Internic.
A number of whois servers exist around the globe. For ex-
ample, in A m s t e rdam, there is the European whois server at
RIPE (Reseaux Ip Europeans).
Navigating the World Wide Web
These days, a number of search engines—such as Google, Inc.,
and Mozilla Fire f o x — p ro c u re information and organize it in a va-
riety of ways to help users navigate the World Wide Web. That is
why there are so many diff e rent search engines. At a basic level, a
s e a rch engine is one of two things: a Robot, shown as a letter R , o r
a Dire c t o r y, shown as a letter D . Although some search engines
combine features of both, most are predominantly R or D .
A Robot uses a software program to search, catalog, and
then organize information on the Internet. Organization of infor-
mation can be completed in a number of ways—among them
h a r v e s t e r, robot, spider, wandere r, and worm—and employing
diverse ways of searching Websites to gather information.
Directory search engines do not search on the Internet for in-
formation but rather obtain it from databases consisting of infor-
mation placed there by individuals. Because each Directory has
its own means of categorizing information, multitudes of them
exist.
In March 2005, Google, Inc., released its ﬁrst ofﬁcial version
of its free software for ﬁnding information stored on computer
h a rd drives. The software scours hard drives for information con-
tained in Adobe A c robat’s portable document format (known as
PDF) as well as in music, video ﬁles, and e-mail (In Brief, 2005).
It is interesting to note that on Saturd a y, May 7, 2005, the
Google, Inc., search engine went down for ﬁfteen minutes, from
6:45 until 7:00 P.M. E S T. A Google spokesperson said that the
p roblem was not caused by crackers—as many people had
thought—but by a problem related to the Domain Name System.
He did not elaborate (Google Admin., 2005). 
44
Background and History

Future Development of the Internet
In 2006, the World Wide Web is being used to:
• Boost electronic business to sell multitudes of product
lines, ranging from books and DVDs to expensive jew-
elry, clothes, and vehicles.
• Market services online, ranging from hotel reservations
and airline bookings to conference registrations, wedding
arrangements, and executive searching.
• Market oneself online through blog development—an
online journal in which the job seekers make reference to
their education, work experience, thoughts, and personal
quirks that are value-added.
• Produce interactive entertainment activities such as
multiuser online gaming.
• Complete ﬁnancial transactions online rather than visit-
ing a brick-and-mortar facility, or to trade in securities,
adjust one’s retirement funds, and apply for loans with-
out having to leave home.
The 2005 holiday season indicated the huge success of elec-
t ronic business. A c c o rding to recently released statistics, Cana-
dian online retailers posted their best holiday shopping season
yet, as more buyers went to the Internet to buy their holiday
gifts. The result was hundreds of millions of dollars in sales and
another quarter of double-digit growth for Internet shopping
portals. The holiday season, it is said, is simply a condensed ver-
sion of the year’s overall online trends and potential. The hot
items ranged from high-tech toys like Apple iPods and Mi-
c rosoft’s Xbox 360s to books and gold jewelry. Also, Seattle,
Washington–based Amazon.com, Inc., posted a re c o rd season.
The online retailer said that it got more than 100 million orders
during the holiday season, and on December 12, 2005, its busiest
d a y, it processed an average of forty-one items per second. Be-
sides buying gifts for others online, some Internet users sent on-
line holiday cards rather than using traditional cards (El Akkad,
2005).
Also, in the ofﬁce environment, instant messaging, or IM, is
an essential business tool—essentially turbocharged e-mail—
that is another good indicator of present-day Internet use. Using
Future Development of the Internet
45

IM, employees can communicate with one another instanta-
n e o u s l y. From an employer’s perspective, IM’s beneﬁts include
real-time communications, improved customer service, and
more efﬁcient employee productivity. According to a recent sur-
vey by Pew Internet and American Life, today 53 million Ameri-
can adults use IM—and only 11 million of them use it for work
purposes. Most use IM to communicate with friends and family
members. At IBM, all of the company’s 320,000 employees use its
Lotus Sametime instant messaging software to communicate
with one another; they apparently send 4 million instant mes-
sages each day and hold 12,000 Web conferences each month
with more than 80,000 attendees. In fact, more than 60 percent of
the Fortune 100 companies apparently use IBM’s Lotus Same-
time software, including most worldwide commercial banks and
automobile makers. America Online, Inc.—which has the largest
instant messaging service, known as AIM—apparently handles 2
billion messages daily. The downside of IM’s popularity is that
problems arise because most companies do not have IM policies
in place to manage the rapidly growing tool. Although about 
60 percent of all organizations today monitor their employees’
e-mail, only about 10 percent monitor IM (Lorek, 2006).
But is the Web in 2005 all that diff e rent from what it was
like, say, ﬁve years ago? Most IT people would say that today‘s
Internet is all about Web 2.0.
No, the World Wide Web is not much different from what it
was ﬁve years ago, but it has been evolving. In fact, Web 2.0 to-
day is just more of what it used to be: faster, more interactive,
and more adaptable. High-speed Internet access is more com-
mon, a lot of the software has been improved, and there are
many more users online—what some experts are calling the
“network effect” (Ingram, 2005).
So, what is Web 2.0? It is Web-based services—things con-
sumers can use that take advantage of the kind of real-time inter-
activity that software like AJAX (the asynchronous javascript)
and the Extensible Markup Language (XML) allow.
Over the past year, for example, Yahoo.com incorporated
blogs into its search and news functions, and it used the new and
improved AJAX-powered e-mail. Microsoft Corporation has re-
leased some early-stage services such as live.com, a new and im-
p roved A J A X - p o w e red e-mail client with Web-based antiviru s
capacity. And Google’s Earth and Google Maps, two applications
46
Background and History

using Web 2.0 technology, have helped millions of Internet users
to not only get a sense of the devastation caused by Hurricane
Katrina but to search for, say, a nearby wine store (ibid.).
Online Voting and VoIP Long-Distance
Telephoning
How, then, is the development of the Internet likely to occur?
As noted earlier, online voting is likely to be tested in 2006 in
the United Kingdom, and Voice over Internet Protocol (Vo I P )
technology already permits telephone calls to be placed over net-
works like the Internet—making it much less expensive to place
long-distance calls than when calling with a conventional tele-
phone. The main drawbacks from a convenience point of view
are that there is a greater potential for “dropped” calls and a gen-
erally reduced voice quality (compared with traditional phones).
Current VoIP products include (Walsh and Kuhn, 2005):
• Telephone handsets: usually more than a simple handset
with a dial pad; some of these pieces have a base-station
design that provides the convenience of a cordless phone.
• Conferencing units that provide the same type of service
as conventional conference-call telephone setups, but be-
cause communication occurs over the Net, users can co-
ordinate other communication devices such as a white-
board displayed on computer monitors at participating
sites.
• Wi reless mobile units that are becoming quite popular;
many organizations already have an installed base of
8 0 2 . 11 networking equipment. However, because of the
known vulnerabilities associated with the 802.11b pro t o-
cols, Vo I P equipment can have some major security ﬂa w s .
• PC or softphone: using a headset, software, and an inex-
pensive connection service, users can use any PC or
workstation as a VoIP unit or softphone.
In terms of security and trust issues, experts caution that
Vo I P technology could create an enormous market for voice
spam (known as SPIT, or Spam Over Internet Telephony). Using
automated Vo I P servers, telemarketers could send messages to
Future Development of the Internet
47

thousands of Internet telephone addresses all at once rather than
placing each call separately using a conventional phone line.
Currently, SPIT is not much of a problem, primarily because not
enough people receive their telephone services over the Internet.
In short, while trade-offs between convenience and security are
routine in software, VoIP is not an exception. Just about all VoIP
components use integrated Web services for conﬁguration, and
while Web interfaces are attractive, easy to use, and inexpensive
to produce because of the wide availability of development tools,
they pose security risks. Because Vo I P device Web applications
have weak or no access control as well as script vulnerabilities,
there could be privacy and Denial of Service weaknesses. Appar-
ently, there are only about 5 million VoIP users worldwide at this
time; time will tell if the strengths of Vo I P can outweigh the
weaknesses (Avery, 2004; Buckler, 2004; In Brief, 2004).
Beating Jetlag with Redeﬁned Internet
Videoconferencing
After the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the World Trade
C e n t e r, U.S. employees and employers were increasingly re l u c-
tant to ﬂy. The same could be said for those at DreamWorks Ani-
mation SKG, Inc. Before this incident, somewhere between forty
and sixty employees would daily ﬂy up and down the California
coast. To deal with the issue, the animation company looked for a
high-tech partner who could help solve the problem. Dre a m-
Works and Hewlett-Packard Co. developed an audio-video
linkup called “Halo” that makes use of large, ﬁfty-inch plasma
TV screens (giving users the sense of sitting on two sides of a
window), super rapid fiber-optic connections (reducing delays
between sender and receiver), and “smart” software that makes
it possible for users to share information on one of the screens,
such as Web pages or slides (Avery, 2006).
Halo has the ability to redeﬁne videoconferencing, because
unlike older videoconferencing equipment, it can capture the
finer points of a face-to-face meeting. The problem is the cost,
and for that reason Halo is now being targeted at Fortune 500
companies that can get a decent payback for the costly audio
video linkup. The videoconference rooms cost U.S. $550,000
each, and a buyer must have at least two rooms. Also, there is a
network and service fee of U.S. $18,000 a month per room (ibid.).
48
Background and History

Indulging in the Need for Speed with 
New and Improved Wireless Networks
Mobile commerce—the conducting of business transactions
over Internet-enabled wireless devices—is slowly becoming a
dominant force in business and society. The push of advancing
technology and the pull of public demand for low-cost, high-
speed communications and ubiquitous access to information
anytime, anywhere have revolutionized the telecommunication
industry over the past twenty years. This revolution has, in
fact, led Canada to have one of the lowest Internet access
c h a rges among G7 nations. More re c e n t l y, Internet access and
high computing power in wireless devices began to pave the
way for the introduction of broadband interactive multimedia
applications. Despite these signs of pro g ress, the wireless We b
market is still in its infancy; because most Internet users think
of wireless networks as slower than wired ones (Grami and
Schell, 2004).
But if a Wi-Fi technology standard called 802.11n comes in,
that could boost wireless performance to the same level as that
found in wired networks. Although the original 802.11b version
of Wi-Fi transmits information at up to 11 Mbps, the newer
802.11n standard guarantees speeds of 100 Mbps. The Institute of
Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) has been working on
this new and improved standard since 2002, but delays have
taken place because of infighting among companies having an
i n t e rest in the standard. The promised 100 Mbps or gre a t e r
would bring wireless to an ideal speed for wonderful things like
multimedia and large-ﬁle transfers. The new standard should be
ready for implementation after the year 2007 (Buckler, 2005).
Growing Podcasting
Techies are talking about the technology called podcasting,
which makes it easy for Internet users to create their own audio
re c o rdings and then post them on the Web. Podcasting allows
users to have radio shows about any topic near and dear to
their hearts. The more innovative types have experimented
with advertisements and subscriptions. In November 2005, pio-
neer Adam Curry launched a podcast network with thirty to
fifty shows that split advertisement revenues. Curry’s concept
Future Development of the Internet
49

b rought him nearly U.S. $10 million worth of investment fro m
two top venture capital firms in Silicon Valley (Green, 2005).
Curry is not alone in his entre p reneurial adventure. Many
podcasters are looking for sponsors, typically involving a 15- or
30-second audio advertisement at the start of the podcast. In fact,
popular podcasts could see advertisement rates range from a few
thousand dollars per month to $45,000 or more. Other podcasters
are coming up with alternative ﬁnancial schemes. “This Week in
Tech,” which has more than 200,000 listeners, asks each listener
for a $2 donation per month. As a result, about $10,000 per
month is generated. New developments make podcasting a fas-
cinating new technology on the Internet highway (ibid.).
Turning to the Web to Watch Television
Within ﬁve years, consumers who turn on the television to enter-
tain themselves can anticipate alternative ways to watch their fa-
vorite shows—such as downloading programs and viewing tele-
vision streamed over the Internet. There will be television-
equipped cell phones,  and favorite shows will be pulled fro m
Websites—likely without all the heavy advertising that television
viewers face today. Although there has been a large conservative
television market, in which viewers watch scheduled shows, and
a nontraditional television market of tech-savvy viewers who
p refer mobile television and on-demand programming,  it is
likely that the latter will survive and the former will dwindle. The
down side, say marketers, is that without advertisement re v e n u e s
to cover the cost of producing and distributing local television
news, it is likely that signiﬁcant amounts of programming will
move to the Internet and that television news will become avail-
able only in major urban areas (Robertson, 2006).
Dual-Core Multi-Processing  
and 64-Bit Computing
Two or more microprocessors plugged into the same chipset are
certainly more powerful than one. That is what dual-core multi-
processing is about, and in the future it should become especially
powerful in servers and workstations designed for smaller busi-
nesses. In fact, by the end of 2007, dual-core will be the micropro-
50
Background and History

cessing standard used by Intel Corporation and Advanced Micro
Devices, Inc. Dual-core multiprocessing will allow smaller busi-
nesses to use applications having an enterprise scale. Small busi-
nesses could then do complex applications such as customer re-
lations management, graphics creation and editing, and decision
support—all at a cost comparable to that of current, single-core
chips.
M o re o v e r, the next generation of computing will arrive in
the form of dual-core and 64-bit processors like Intel’s Itanium
and Xeon chipsets. They will have a huge memory caching—on
the scale of 16 billion gigabytes of memory, compared with the 4
gigabytes of memory of the 32-bit systems. The upshot is that
with this amount of memory, Internet data searches and data re-
trieval will be a lot quicker. After Microsoft Corporation
launches its Vista operating system, many 64-bit applications are
sure to be released onto the market (McLean, 2005).
Conclusion 
Without question, a variety of extremely positive services have
been made available to citizens around the globe with the devel-
opment and rapid growth of the Internet over the last decade.
These very useful functions range from communications ser-
vices, such as instant messaging and telephony, to rapid, re a l -
time online transactions, such as e-commerce, Internet-banking,
online gaming, political activism, and online voting. Also, within
the past few years, physicians have been able to access over the
Internet and through handheld wireless devices patients’ health
histories and diagnostic records without having to rely on time-
delaying courier services. Not only have young billionaires been
made with the creative development of “Google-like” search en-
gines, but, in addition, governments around the globe have
made use of the Internet to collect homeland security intelligence
as a means of keeping their citizens safe.
Some important evolutional improvements of the Internet
described in the ﬁrst half of this chapter included the ARPAnet
(during the 1960s), electronic mail or e-mail (which ﬁrst arrived
about 1971), remote login (which arrived in 1972), file transfer
( f rom the basic ﬁle transfer applications of the 1970s to the so-
phisticated ﬁle-sharing applications of our day), the emerg e n c e
of the World Wide Web (WWW), the Universal Resource Locator
Conclusion
51

or URL (which arrived sometime between 1989 and 1991), and
the birth of the Google search engine. Despite this positive evolu-
tion, however, cyber-criminals have used the capacity of the In-
ternet to engage in cyber-crime—and on a much larger scale than
had previously been seen.
References
Adler, Joe. “Hackers May Target Pacemaker Technology.” InfoSec News,
h t t p ://lists.jammed.com/ISN/2005/02/0120.html (accessed Febru a r y
24, 2005).
Arnone, Michael. “Contractors Told to Relax about Blackberry.” 101
Communications, http:// w w w. f c w. c o m / a r t i c l e 9 2 0 2 3 – 0 1 – 2 3 – 0 6 - P r i n t
(accessed January 23, 2006).
Avery, Simon. “How to Beat Jet Lag for $550,000.” Globe and Mail, Janu-
ary 3, 2006, pp. B1, B2.
_____. “New Service Searches for the Right Connection.” Globe and Mail,
November 4, 2004, p. B13.
Berners-Lee, Tim. “The Wo r l d Wi d e Web Bro w s e r.” Tim Berners-Lee We b-
site, http:// w w w. w 3 . o rg / P e o p l e / B e r n e r s - L e e / Wo r l d Wi d e Web.html 
(accessed January 20, 2006).
Brearton, Steve. “Innovation.” Globe and Mail Report on Business 22 (Sep-
tember 2005): 54–55, 57, 59, 63, 65–66, 68.
B u c k l e r, Grant. “New Standard Would Let Wi reless Junkies Indulge
Need for Speed.” Globe and Mail, December 29, 2005, p. B5.
_____. “Spammers on Your Phone Line? Makes You Want to SPIT.” Globe
and Mail, November 4, 2004, p. B15.
Chen, Y-C, et al. “Online Gaming Crime and Security Issue—Cases and
C o u n t e r m e a s u res from Taiwan.” University of New Brunswick, http://
d e v. h i l . u n b . c a / Texts/PST/pdf/chen.pdf (accessed October 13–15, 2004).
Computer Industry Almanac, Inc. “Worldwide Internet Users Will Top
One Billion in 2005.” Computer Industry Almanac, http:// w w w. c - i -
a.com/pr0904.htm (accessed September 3, 2004).
Edge. “Networking to Internet, a Long Journey.” http:// n e w o rd e r
.box.sk/newsread.php?newsid=6047 (accessed September 19, 2002).
El Akkad, Omar. “On-line Stores Set Holiday Records.” Globe and Mail,
December 27, 2005, pp. B1, B8.
52
Background and History

Evers, Joris. “Most Spam Still Coming from the U.S.” CNET Networks,
Inc., http:// n e w s . c o m . c o m / M o s t + s p a m + s t i l l + c o m i n g + f ro m + t h e + U . S . /
2100–1029_3–6030758.html (accessed January 24, 2006).
Farzad, R., and B. Elgin. “Googling for Gold.” Businessweek 49 (Decem-
ber 5, 2005): 48–52, 54.
F i n d l a w.com. “U.S. Supreme Court Syllabus: Reno v. ACLU.” Findlaw,
h t t p :// c a s e l a w. l p . ﬁn d l a w. c o m / s c r i p t s / g e t c a s e . p l ? c o u r t = U S & v o l = 0 0 0 &
invol=96–511 (accessed January 28, 2006).
Gaudin, Sharon. “A Conversation with the Inventor of Email.” http://
i t m a n a g e m e n t . e a r t h w e b . c o m / e n t d e v / a r t i c l e . p h p / 1 4 0 8 4 11 (accessed
July 16, 2002).
Goodwin, Jean. “Child Pornography Prevention Act.” Northwestern Uni-
v e r s i t y, http:// f a c u l t y - w e b . a t . n o r t h w e s t e r n . e d u / c o m m s t u d / f re e s p e e c h /
cont/cases/morphed.html (accessed February 6, 2001).
Google Admin. “Google Down? Getting 404! Google Hacked?”
Google.com, http:// w w w. s u b m i t e x p re s s . c o m / b b s / p o s t - 1 6 0 1 . h t m l &
highlight=&sid=cdfcb4b3aa56cdca7df35ed920dd8079 (accessed May 9,
2005).
Grami, A., and B. Schell. “Future Trends in Mobile Commerce: Service
O fferings, Technological Advances, and Security Challenges.” http://
p h x . c o r p o r a t e - i r. n e t / p h o e n i x . z h t m l ? c = 9 7 6 6 4 & p = i ro l - n e w s
Article&ID=772580&highlight=#top (accessed October 13–15, 2004).
Green, Heather. “Searching for the Pod of Gold.” Businessweek 46 (No-
vember 14, 2005): 95–96.
Haviland, David. “The Tr a n s i s t o r.” Nobel Foundation, http:// n o b e l
p r i z e . o rg/physics/educational/transistor/history/ (accessed June 20,
2 0 0 5 ) .
Hewlett Packard Development Company. “Canada’s SHARCNET Re-
s e a rch Network Chooses HP for Exponential Leap in Superc o m p u t i n g
P o w e r.” Hewlett Packard, http:// w w w. h p . c o m / h p i n f o / n e w s ro o m /
press/2005/050621b.html (accessed June 21, 2005).
ICANN. “Vinton G. Cerf.” ICANN, http:// w w w. i c a n n . o rg / b i o g /
cerf.htm (accessed September 27, 2005).
In Brief. “Google’s Official Desktop Search Software Released.” G l o b e
and Mail, March 10, 2005, p. B10.
———. “Voice Spam Alert.” Globe and Mail, August 12, 2004, p. B7.
Ingram, Mathew. “Google, Yahoo Go to Top of the Class in Web 2.0 This
Year.” Globe and Mail, December 29, 2005, p. B5.
References
53

INRIA. “The French National Institute for Research in Computer Sci-
ence and Control.” INRIA, http:// w w w.inria.fr/ (accessed January 27,
2006).
Lipowicz, Alice. “DHS Vows to Protect Info on National Database.”
Post-Newsweek Media, Inc., http:// w w w. w a s h i n g t o n t e c h n o l o g y. c o m /
news/1_1/daily_news/27812–1.html (accessed January 24, 2006).
Lorek, Laura. “The IM Revolution—and the Risks.” Globe and Mail, Jan-
uary 25, 2006, p. C11.
McKenna, Barrie. “RIM Wins Key Battle in Patent Dispute.” Globe and
Mail, February 2, 2006, pp. B1, B8.
McLean, Dan. “‘Virtualizing’ and Other Trends to Come in IT World.”
Globe and Mail, December 22, 2005, p. B6.
MercuryNews.com. “Hacker Pleads Guilty to Building, Renting Attack
Network.” Mercury News, http:// w w w. m e rc u r y n e w s . c o m / m l d /
mercurynews/business/13693354.htm (accessed January 23, 2006).
Newkerala.com. “22 Police Officers Complete A n t i - Te r ror Tr a i n i n g . ”
Newkerala.com, 
http:// w w w. n e w k e r a l a . c o m / n e w s . p h p ? a c t i o n =
fullnews&id=93688 (accessed January 24, 2006).
Palmer, Ian. “Workplace: It’s Not Just the Big Boys Using Intranets any
Longer.” Globe and Mail, May 5, 2005, p. B27.
P h r a c k s t a ff @ p h r a c k . o rg. “Call for Papers—P h r a c k #63.” P h r a c k, http://
phrack.org (accessed January 24, 2005).
Reti, Kalman. “Symbolics.” Symbolics, http://www.symbolics.com (ac-
cessed January 19, 2006).
Robertson, Grant. “Internet Threatens Canadian Broadcasters: Report.”
Globe and Mail, January 27, 2006, p. B3.
SharpenedNet.com. “Glossary: HTTP.” SharpenedNet.com, http://
w w w.sharpened.net/glossary/definition.php?http (accessed January
25, 2006).
Stone, Tim. “AMZN Investor Relations.” Internet Stock Blog, http://
internetstockblog.com/article/6471 (accessed February 2, 2006).
Storer, T., and I. Duncan. “Practical Remote Electronic Elections for the
U.K.” http:// w w w. d c s . s t - a n d . a c . u k / re s e a rc h / p u b l i c a t i o n s / S D 0 4 c . p h p
(accessed October 6, 2005).
Sun Microsystems, Inc. “The Fab Four Reunites.” Sun Micro s y s t e m s ,
http://www.sun.com/2006–0113/feature/index.html (accessed January
19, 2006).
Vaagan, R., and W. Koehler. “Intellectual Property Rights vs. Public Ac-
cess Rights: Ethical Aspects of the DeCSS Decryption Program.” I n f o r-
mation Research 10 (April 2005): 1–10.
54
Background and History

Walsh, T., and R. Kuhn. “Challenges in Securing Voice over IP.” I E E E
Security & Privacy 3 (May/June 2005): 44–49.
W3C. “Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0.” W3C, http:// w w w
.xml.com/axml/testaxml.htm (accessed February 10, 1998).
References
55


2
Problems, Controversies,
and Solutions
W
ith the growth of and diversity in Internet trafﬁc, a dark
side to the Internet has surfaced in recent decades, partic-
ularly since the late 1980s. The ﬁrst half of this chapter ex-
plores a number of privacy, security, and trust issues of concern
to various segments of society. Some technical defenses are dis-
cussed. A number of crimes perpetrated by abusing the Internet
i n f r a s t ru c t u re are described, such as illegal ﬁle transfer (for ex-
ample, of copyrighted material and intellectual property), trans-
fer of censured material (such as child pornography), identity
theft, and fraud (such as through online auction abuses). This
chapter also explains various laws passed in the United States
and elsewhere to reduce such abuses.
Internet Users’ Concerns about
Privacy, Security, and Trust
In the last decade in particular, the growth of the Internet and e-
commerce has dramatically increased the amount of personal in-
formation that can potentially be collected about individuals by
corporations and governments. Such data collection, along with
usage tracking and the sharing of data with third parties—espe-
cially in light of the fact that such actions can easily be done
t h rough high-speed links and high-capacity storage devices
without the consumer’s expressed knowledge or consent—has
57

raised issues among Internet users about privacy, security, and
trust (Grami and Schell, 2004).
Concerns about Privacy
Internet Usage Policies.
Before giving employees access to the
Internet, companies, government agencies, medical institutions,
and universities typically have would-be Internet users sign a re-
q u i red “Internet Usage Policy,” to make users accountable for
their online activities and to prevent abuses and liability claims.
Such a form typically looks like this:
I have received a copy of Company X’s Internet A c c e p t a b l e
Use Policy. I understand this policy’s terms and conditions
and agree to follow them. I understand that Company X’s
s o f t w a re may re c o rd for management’s review the Internet
a d d resses of all the Websites I visit. I also understand that
management may maintain a record of all of my network ac-
tivity (including the sending and receiving of e-ﬁles).
I acknowledge that all e-files and e-messages sent or re-
ceived by me may be recorded and stored in an archive ﬁle for
management’s review. I fully understand that if I violate this
p o l i c y, I can receive disciplinary action, ranging from the
revoking of my Internet privileges to firing. If I violate this
policy in a criminal way, I understand that I may also face
criminal charges.
Employee Signature _____________________  Date: ___________
Employee Name (Print) ___________________________________
While, on face, the form seems to be reasonable from a man-
agerial and institutional liability point of view, it has raised con-
cerns among the signers that their privacy may be at risk.
Privacy Deﬁned.
Privacy, by deﬁnition, is the state of being free
from unauthorized access. By signing the form, the Internet users
are agreeing to let management have authorized access to all of
their network activities, for the primary reason of keeping the
company safe from liability claims. At the same time, Internet
users are assuming in good faith that management will not be
sharing their online activity records with third parties who have
no need to know.
58
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Privacy laws, from a macro level, deal with the right of indi-
vidual privacy, critical to maintaining the quality of life that citi-
zens in a free society expect. Privacy laws generally maintain
that an individual’s privacy shall not be violated unless the gov-
ernment (or a company) can show some compelling reason to do
so—such as by providing evidence that the safety of the nation
(or that of a company) is at risk. This tenet forms the basis of pri-
vacy laws in the United States and elsewhere. Privacy also
means being able to maintain a balance between individuals’ pri-
vacy rights and those of the government in providing national
security or the rights of a company in terms of avoiding liability
claims. From a citizen’s point of view, privacy is the interest an
individual has in controlling, or at least in signiﬁcantly inﬂuenc-
ing, the handling of personal data (Al-Fedaghi, 2005).
Privacy Policies.
To balance employees’ individual privacy rights
and those of the company, management typically pre p a res “pri-
vacy policies” for their organizations. A privacy policy, by deﬁn i-
tion, is a clear description of how companies use e-mail addre s s e s
and other information they gather when online users opt to be in-
cluded in requests for company information, newsletters, or
t h i rd-party deals. U.S. state laws compel companies not only to
state their privacy policy on their Websites but also to place the
policy statement so that people may plainly see it. In some cases,
state laws may also prescribe the display form for the policy.
Internet Privacy Issues.
From a technical perspective, privacy is-
sues in the security sense include digital rights management,
spam deterrence, anonymity maintenance, and cracker disclo-
sure rule adequacy. It is interesting to note that over the past few
years, intruders into companies’ and institutions’ computer net-
works have violated the privacy rights of employees and online
registrants. As noted in Chapter 1, in 2005 evidence surfaced of
the poorly regulated Internet information brokerage industry, for
on or about March 10, cyber-criminals stole passwords from le-
gitimate online users of as many as 32,000 Americans in a data-
base owned by the renowned LexisNexis Group.
Similar computer network breaches have also occurred at
ChoicePoint, Inc., and at the Bank of America. These intrusions
p rompted calls for U.S. federal government oversight thro u g h
the General Services Administration (GSA) to look into the mat-
ter. The GSA agreed to review the online security policies of the
Internet Users’ Concerns
59

Bank of America and four other SmartPay contractors providing
c redit avenues for online transactions—Bank One of Delaware ,
Citibank of New York, Mellon Bank of Pittsburgh, and the U.S.
Bank of Minneapolis. Recommendations were to follow about
providing adequate protection for the safety of federal employ-
ees’ personal information. Fears of identity theft surfaced on a
large scale.
The present-day reality is that re g a rdless of how well inten-
tioned management is about protecting employees’ privacy
rights, valuable personal information can often be collected by
hidden online tools such as cookies and Web bugs—and then be
s h a red with third parties for marketing purposes or surveil-
lance. Contrary to what some individuals think, cookies are not
by themselves a security risk. They are simply small bits of
data—a message—transmitted from a Web server to a We b
b ro w s e r. The browser stores the message in a text ﬁle, and each
time the browser requests from the server a particular page, the
message is sent back to the server. Cookies personalize a We b-
site for users. That is, when users enter a Website, they may be
asked to complete forms indicating their name and certain par-
ticulars. Instead of seeing a generic welcome page, users are
later greeted with a page including their identiﬁers stored in the
c o o k i e s .
Nevertheless, as noted, there is controversy surro u n d i n g
cookies. For example, cookies may be accessed, read, and used
by malicious Websites unintentionally visited by innocent users.
This cookie information can be used to gather intelligence on the
user and later be utilized against the user, it might be combined
with other off-line data, such as demographic and psychographic
information, to predict a user’s interests, needs, and possible fu-
ture purchases.
P roposed Solutions.
How might these privacy concerns be re-
solved? That is an especially important question in light of the
fact that public surveys have indicated that many consumers are
still afraid to buy things online because they fear that their credit
c a rd numbers will be used by someone else, even though the
credit card companies say that they will not hold consumers ac-
countable for fraudulent charges. Trust seals and increased gov-
ernment regulation are two ways of promoting improved pri-
vacy disclosures on the Internet.
60
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

We’ve all seen trust seals on e-business We b s i t e s — g re e n
Truste images, the BBBOnLine (Better Business Bureau OnLine)
padlocks, and a host of other privacy and security seals. In fact,
m o re than 2,000 companies are paying as much as $13,000 per year
to display those logos on their Websites. Almost half of the For-
tune 100 companies display such logos, and of the fourteen IT sites
in the Fortune 100 companies, ten have such seals (Cline, 2003). In
terms of market share, Truste (now nine years in business) lists
1,374 Websites, while BBBOnLine lists 701 Websites (ibid.).
But do they really work? Although trust seals are intended
to advance privacy for consumers through legislation—primar-
ily through self-regulation by businesses—critics say that they
can become more of a privacy advocate for corporations than for
consumers. Both Truste and BBBOnLine charge companies an-
nual fees based on yearly revenues. With Truste, companies hav-
ing revenues of less than $5 million are charged about $600,
while those having revenues of more than $2 billion pay about
$13,000. The charge is lower with BBBOnLine; smaller businesses
pay only about $200, while companies with revenues over $2 bil-
lion pay about $7,000. Companies having trust seals say that they
will follow the trust standards, they will provide online clients
with a way to opt out of direct marketing and to having their
personal information sold to third parties, and they will be given
a means to access the company’s information and file com-
plaints. ScanAlert, an emerging security seal provider, attributes
Internet sales increases of 10 to 33 percent to having that seal on a
company’s Website (ibid.).
From a consumer perspective, a recent study conducted by
Flinn and Lumsden (2005) indicated that 42 percent of the con-
sumers in their study reported that they were more likely to trust
a Website that displays a trust mark than one that did not have
the display, and 49 percent of the consumers said that they are
likely to trust a Website only if they are able to recognize the trust
mark program.
M o re o v e r, while government regulations are increasing to
advance the privacy of citizens—as through the passage of the
Canadian Personal Information Protection and Electronic Docu-
ments Act (PIPEDA) and the U.S. Health Insurance Portability
and Accountability Act of 1996, citizens themselves are often un-
easy with these measures, for they dislike having, say, their
telecommunications trafﬁc monitored by government agents.
Internet Users’ Concerns
61

As a case in point, the U.S. Carnivore DCS 1000 program 
(a computer-automated snooping tool capable of interc e p t i n g
and sorting through millions of messages like telephone calls
and e-mails passing through ISPs by monitoring incoming and
outgoing messages to speciﬁc IP addresses, particularly those of
suspected terrorists) was never implemented by the U.S. govern-
ment. Why? There was massive public outcry that citizens’ pri-
vacy rights would be violated with such an implementation. In-
stead, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) moved to using
c o m m e rcially available software and encouraged Internet
p roviders to conduct wiretaps on suspected individuals and to
forward their ﬁndings to government agents.
As a result of privacy concerns, the field of Information
Ethics (IE) has developed, dealing with issues arising from con-
necting technology with concepts such as privacy, Intellectual
P roperty Rights (IPR) information access, and intellectual fre e-
dom. Although IE issues were raised as early as 1980, the ﬁe l d
has evolved into a multithreaded phenomenon, stimulated by
the concerns of a number of disciplines over abuses occurring
through the Internet. According to IE, information itself, in some
form or role, is recognized to have intrinsic moral value.
T h e o reticians have formulated a number of complex mathe-
matical solutions for providing better information protection over
the Internet. One of these is provided in the database area and is
based on atomic assertions, such that the relationship between in-
dividuals and their own atomic private information is identiﬁe d
t h rough the notion of proprietorship. The concept goes like this.
Suppose that a company has a private information database that
includes information privacy databases for three departments
and information privacy databases for each of the company’s em-
ployees. Each possession of a department contains the private in-
formation about its employees and perhaps employees of other
departments. It is conceptually possible to enforce global privacy
constraints on information in possession (Al-Fedaghi, 2005).
Also, all employees have an information privacy database
called Proprietary.Known that tells them what, for example, de-
partment 1 “knows” about them. Because the database automati-
cally inserts any private information in the appropriate em-
ployee’s Pro p r i e t a r y.Known, this capability provides some
veriﬁcation that the employee is aware of the personal informa-
tion held by the department. The same verification pro c e s s
would hold for the other two departments (Al-Fedaghi, 2005).
62
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Concerns about Security
Wi reless devices give ready access to the Internet for owners
with cellular phones and handheld computers, and for that con-
venience factor alone, mobile commerce services are appealing to
consumers around the world. However, the success of mobile
c o m m e rce depends on the security of the underlying mobile
technologies. Without such security, citizens have concerns about
using these devices.
Without getting too technical, wireless communications rely
on open and public transmission media (over the air) that raise
security vulnerabilities. These vulnerabilities for wireless de-
vices, in particular, must be addressed by the companies releas-
ing such products into the marketplace, in addition to providing
ﬁxes for software vulnerabilities found in wired networks.
The mobile commerce challenges relate to the user’s mobile
device, the wireless access network, the wired-line backbone net-
work, and mobile commerce software applications. Unlike wire-
line networks, the unique traits of wireless networks pose a
number of complex challenges for security experts, such as vul-
nerability of the air interface, an open Peer-to-Peer (P2P) net-
work architecture (in mobile ad hoc networks), a shared wireless
medium, the limited computing power of mobile devices, a
highly dynamic network topology, and the low data rates and
f requent “disconnects” of wireless communications. Coping
with these vulnerabilities costs companies money; for example,
the chargeback rate for credit card transactions is about ﬁf t e e n
times higher than the chargeback for instore point-of-sale credit
card transactions (Grami and Schell, 2004).
Security Defined.
“Security” means being protected from one’s
adversaries, particularly from those who would do harm—even
unintentionally—to property or to a person.
Information Technology security issues, in particular, in-
clude but are not limited to adequate authentication of users
while online, adequate critical infrastructure protection, well-de-
signed disaster recovery plans following a cyber exploit, sound
network intrusion detection and network management, ade-
quate and regularly updated malicious code software protection,
adequate physical security protection of networks, the develop-
ment and implementation of sound security policies, and state-
of-the-art wireless security protection.
Internet Users’ Concerns
63

I n t e rnet Security Issues.
Security breaches in the computer net-
works of governments, businesses, ﬁnancial institutions, and ed-
ucational institutions occur daily, with some of them making
headlines and with some of them shaking consumers’ and share-
holders’ conﬁdence.
On January 30, 2005, for example, an Internet-related secu-
rity incident brought considerable embarrassment to the Dutch
armed forces. About seventy-ﬁve pages of highly classiﬁed docu-
ments about human trafﬁckers from the computers of the Dutch
Royal Marechaussee (the armed forces contingency that guards
the Dutch borders) somehow found their way to the controver-
sial Weblog (online log) of Geen Stijl (meaning “No Style”).
The conjecture is that a Dutch armed forces staff person
worked on the documents at home and unwittingly shared the
contents of his computer’s hard drive with numerous others
when he logged onto Kazaa—a nonsecure online file-sharing
Website. And that was not the ﬁrst time that the Dutch govern-
ment had made news media headlines over computer security
issues. In 2004 the Dutch public prosecutor’s ofﬁce was equally
embarrassed after it was publicized that the prosecutor had
t h rown his old PC into the trash, making available for public
scrutiny his hard drive with hundreds of pages of classiﬁed data
on high-proﬁle Dutch crimes as well as his own credit card num-
bers and personal tax information. As a result, the prosecutor re-
signed from his job (Libbenga, 2005).
Mobile services, in general, are prone to two types of fraud
risks as a result of security vulnerabilities: subscription fraud
and device fraud. Subscription fraud (more commonly known
as “identity theft”) is the same problem that issuers of cre d i t
c a rds have when someone pretends to be another subscriber.
As with other types of cre d i t - related identity theft, an impostor
fails to pay the bills and the service is eventually stopped. A l-
though the customer will not be responsible for paying an im-
p o s t o r’s bills, credit rating complications can arise (Grami and
Schell, 2004).
Device theft has become more attractive to thieves as wire-
less devices become smaller but more powerful. Today, devices
have location technology embedded within to assist authorities
in tracking the stolen item. Also, to combat theft, besides the us-
age password, devices are tailored to owners using effective but
inexpensive biometric control technologies (ibid.).
64
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Security Checklist.
Given these security concerns of consumers, a
security policy checklist detailing the kinds of measures compa-
nies generally take to ensure that their networks are secure (and
posing key questions for system administrators to answer) is
given below. These measures include but are not limited to the
following (Queeg Company, 1997):
• Administrator rights and re s p o n s i b i l i t i e s : Under what con-
ditions may a system administrator examine an em-
ployee’s account or e-mail, and what parts of the system
should the system administrator not examine (for exam-
ple, looking at bookmarks)? Can the system administra-
tor monitor network trafﬁc, and, if so, what boundaries
e x i s t ?
• Back-ups: What systems in this company are backed up,
and, if so, how often? How are back-ups in this company
secured and veriﬁed?
• Connections to and from the Internet: What computers
should be seen from the outside? If computers are out-
side the ﬁrewall (bastion hosts), how securely are they
separated from computers on the inside? Are connections
from the Internet to the internal network allowed, and, if
so, how are they authenticated and encrypted? What on-
line trafﬁc is allowed to go outside the internal network?
If there is trafﬁc across the Internet, how is it secured, and
what protection is in place against worms, viruses, or
hostile java applets?
• Dial-up connections: Are dial-up connections allowed,
and, if so, how are they authenticated and what access
level to the internal network do dial-in connections pro-
vide? How are modems distributed in this company, and
can employees set up modem connections to their home
or desktop computers?
• Documentation: Does a map of the network topology exist,
and is it clearly stated where each computer ﬁts on that
map? Is there an inventory of all hardware and software
in this company, and does a document exist detailing the
preferred security conﬁguration of every system?
• Emergency procedures: What kinds of procedures exist for
installing security patches or for handling exploits? In
cases of system intrusion, is it company policy to shut
Internet Users’ Concerns
65

down the network immediately, or does the company
prefer to monitor the intruder for a time? How and when
are employees notiﬁed of network intrusions, and at
what stage are law enforcement agencies called in?
• Logs: What information in this company is logged, and
how and where is the information logged? Are the infor-
mation logs secure from tampering, and, if so, are they
regularly examined, and by whom?
• Physical security: Are systems physically protected from
outsider crackers and adequately secured, where needed,
from insider crackers? Are reusable passwords utilized
internally, and are employees told through company pol-
icy to change their passwords routinely?
• Sensitive information: How is sensitive and proprietary in-
formation protected online, and how are backup tapes
protected?
• User rights and responsibilities: How much freedom do em-
ployees have in terms of selecting their own operating
system, software, and games for their computers, and can
employees in this company send and receive personal e-
mail or do personal work on company computers? What
policies exist regarding resource consumption (for exam-
ple, disk or CPU quotas) and abuse (accidental or inten-
tional) of services? What penalties exist, for example, if
an employee brings down a server? 
Proposed Solutions.
Security threats in mobile commerce may be
passive, such as information monitoring and release for fraudu-
lent purposes, or active, such as the modiﬁcation of information
through Denial of Service (DoS) and unauthorized access. Addi-
tional security issues posed by wireless networks have been out-
lined above.
G e n e r a l l y, businesses and government agencies take two
kinds of approaches to preventing security breaches: pro a c t i v e
approaches, such as preventing crackers from launching attacks
in the ﬁrst place (typically through various cryptographic tech-
niques); and reactive approaches, which means detecting secu-
rity threats after the fact and applying appropriate ﬁxes. Com-
p rehensive network security solutions tend to integrate both
a p p roaches. In technical circles, securing Websites generally
refers to the use of SSL/TLS technology for encrypting and au-
thenticating HTTP connections (Flinn and Lumsden, 2005).
66
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Furthermore, because network security is a chain, it is only
as secure as its weakest link. Although enhanced network secu-
rity features are desirable, they cost money—which is why some
companies and institutions, especially the smaller ones, are re-
luctant to apply an enhanced security solution. Some costs are
associated with additional overhead (such as increased band-
width), increased complexity (which re q u i res specialized secu-
rity experts), and information processing delays (degraded per-
formance), which can, in turn, degrade network performance
(Grami and Schell, 2004).
A number of commercial tools have been developed to as-
sist network administrators in preventing intrusions. One such
tool was designed in 1995 by Dan Farmer and Wieste Ve n e m a
and is known as Security Administrator Tool for Analyzing Net-
works, or “SATAN.” SATAN, though a UNIX-based tool, was
first designed for SunOS/Solaris and Irix. Ports to many other
varieties of UNIX now exist, including one for Linux—permit-
ting any individual with a personal computer and a Slip/PPP
account to get information provided by SATAN. This tool works
by procuring as much data as possible about system and net-
work services, and it pro c u res data on known software glitches,
network configurations, and poorly set up network utilities.
Upon discovering vulnerabilities, SATAN gives rather limited
data about fixing the problem, but acknowledging that limita-
tion, it is a useful tool for testing single computers or entire net-
works. Its successor, known as SAINT, is also on the market
(Center for Education and Research in Informance A s s u r a n c e
and Security, 1995).
Also, some commercial products, such as Microsoft’s Inter-
net Explorer browser, divide the Internet into security zones so
that users can assign a Website to zones having suitable security
levels. In fact, users can ascertain a Web page’s zone by viewing
the right side of the bro w s e r’s status bar. When a user tries to
download information from any Website, Internet Explorer re-
views the security conﬁguration for that Website’s zone. Here are
the four zones (Prescription Pricing Authority, 2006):
• Local Intranet zone. This zone has addresses not requiring
a proxy server, and the addresses here are conﬁgured by
the system administrator in the Internet Explorer Admin-
istrator’s Kit (IEAK). By default, the security level of this
zone is Medium.
Internet Users’ Concerns
67

• Trusted Website zone. This zone has Websites that users
should be able to trust, meaning that they should be able
to download or run ﬁles without worrying about damage
being caused to their computer or information. Users can
assign Websites to this zone, whose default security level
is Low.
• Restricted Website zone. This zone has Websites that users
would not trust, because they can not be sure that they
can download or run ﬁles without damaging their com-
puters or information. Although users can assign Web-
sites to this zone, it defaults to the High security level.
• Internet zone. This zone has information not on the user’s
computer, not on an Intranet, and not assigned to any
other zone. This level’s default security level is Medium. 
F rom a standard perspective, the emerging IEEE 802.11 i
s t a n d a rds will improve wireless security issues, in particular,
and turn wireless networking into a trusted medium for all
users, including preventing Denial of Service problems, caused
when the entire network is jammed. The jamming attack could
be against the client’s wireless device or against the network’s
access point. Jamming has been difficult to stop, because most
w i reless local area networking technologies use unlicensed fre-
quencies and are subject to interference from a variety of
s o u rces. To prevent unintentional jamming, site surveys are re c-
ommended; to prevent intentional Denial of Service (DoS) at-
tacks by crackers, jamming equipment must be identified and
removed (Grami and Schell, 2004).
Finally, countries around the world have passed legislation
to prevent cyber security breaches and to impose stiff penalties
for crackers. One such act was introduced in 1986 in the United
States, called the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act. On a global
scale, in 2001, group action was taken to combat security
b reaches. On November 23, the Council of Europe opened to
sign its newly drafted Council on Cybercrime. The convention
was signed by thirty-three states after the council recognized that
many cyber-crimes could not be prosecuted by existing laws—
which were typically local in jurisdiction. The convention was,
indeed, the ﬁrst global legislative attempt to set standards on the
deﬁnition of cyber-crime and to develop policies and procedures
to govern international cooperation to combat cyber-crime on
the Internet.
68
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Concerns about Trust
The essence of a business transaction conducted either through a
wired or a wireless network is trust, and trust must be mutual.
Trust in a business context may be expressed in laws, contracts,
regulations, policies, and in personal reputations and long-term
relationships. Transferring trust to an online environment is not
easy. In fact, evidence indicates that many people using the Inter-
net are too trusting of persons connected to the Net. It is not un-
common for Internet users to download virus-infected software
or to engage in online chat rooms with strangers. Oddly, though,
consumers seem to be wary of trusting online businesses with
transactions conducted over the Net.
The Definition of Tru s t .
Trust, a complex concept studied by
scholars from a number of academic disciplines, is present in a
business relationship when one partner willingly depends on an
exchanging partner in whom one has confidence. The term d e-
pend can take on a number of meanings in this context, including
the willingness of one partner to be vulnerable to the actions of
the other partner, or the expectation of one partner to receive eth-
ically bound behaviors from the other partner. Security issues re-
g a rding Information Technology center on maintaining trust in
e-commerce transactions.
Internet Trust Issues.
Marketers who use the Internet to “spam”
users’ e-mail accounts with unwanted advertising using false but
legitimate-looking headers have produced countless headaches
for online users and have placed serious concerns in consumers’
minds about the trustworthiness of the Net. Many efforts have
been made to eradicate spam—including the production of fil-
ters to stop it from getting through the network and the passage
of laws—but, to date, none have been successful.
The root cause of spam is the same property that makes e-
mail so useful: the low cost of communicating with a large num-
ber of people around the globe. Moreover, the almost zero cost of
creating and spooﬁng an e-mail identity ensures that even when
the sending of unwanted bulk messages is prohibited by law—
such as the U.S. CAN-SPAM Act of 2003—or an ISP’s policies,
tracing and punishing the offender is not an easy task.
The reason for the difﬁculty? Primarily, it is that the founda-
tion of current e-mail systems was not designed with secure
Internet Users’ Concerns
69

authentication in mind. Proposed solutions attempting to re m-
edy this problem have been dismissed as unfeasible in the short
term (Seigneur et al., 2004).
An interesting case of breach of online trust occurred in
M a rch 2005. The Harvard Business School administration said
that, as a result of unauthorized intrusions, they were going to
reject 119 applicants who had followed a cracker’s instructions to
break into the school’s admission Internet site to see if they had
been accepted into the university. The actions were cited by the
school’s administration not only as being unethical but also as
b reaching trust. Other universities have taken similar punitive
approaches to such breaches, including Carnegie Mellon Univer-
sity’s School of Business. These universities and others similarly
affected used the ApplyYourself online application and notiﬁca-
tion software (Associated Press, 2005).
As noted, a major barrier to the success of online business
has been the fundamental lack of faith between business and
consumer partners. This lack of trust by consumers is larg e l y
caused by their having to provide detailed personal and conﬁ-
dential information on request. More o v e r, consumers fear that
their credit card number could be used for purposes other than
the one allowed.
But concerns about the consumer are also present from the
business partner’s vantage point. For instance, the company is
not sure if the credit card number the consumer gives is genuine,
is in good credit standing, and actually belongs to the consumer
trying to make the transaction.
In the modern information society, large open and distrib-
uted networks—which is what the World Wide Web is—leave
Internet applications such as electronic mailing, Peer- t o - P e e r
file sharing, Internet phoning with Voice over Internet Pro t o c o l ,
online auctions like eBay, and online gaming vulnerable to tru s t
issues. From the perspective of a single user, a common security
p roblem of such networks is that most or all other users on the
network are unknown. There f o re, communicating with un-
knowns through the Internet elicits two crucial sets of ques-
tions that the user must reflect upon and answer: What is the
real identity of other persons on the Net, and can their identi-
ties be authenticated? How reliable are other persons on the
Net, and is it safe to interact with them? (Jonczy and Haenni,
2 0 0 5 ) .
70
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Proposed Solutions.
The question of identity and authentication
deals with the authenticity of the available information re g a rd-
ing other Internet users’ identities, while the second deals with
whether the service provider is trustworthy—a trust manage-
ment issue.
In short, authentication is the process of identifying an indi-
vidual, message, ﬁle, and other data. The two major roles for au-
thentication, there f o re, are: (1) confirming that users are who
they say they are, and (2) conﬁrming that the transmitted Inter-
net message is authentic and has not been altered or forged.
In recent years, a number of products have been developed
to assist in the authentication process, including the following:
• biometrics (assessing users’ signatures, facial features, and
other biological identiﬁers);
• smart cards (having microprocessor chips that run crypto-
graphic algorithms and store a private key);
• digital certiﬁcates containing public or private keys—the
value needed to encrypt or decrypt a message; and
• SecureID, a commercial product using a key and the cur-
rent time to generate a random number stream that is
veriﬁable by a server—thus ensuring that a potential user
puts in a veriﬁable number on the card within a set
amount of time (typically 5 or 10 seconds). 
Trusted authentication management in a distributed network
like the Internet—pertinent to the second question raised—is not
e a s y. Trust management is generally based on either a centralized
or a decentralized model. In the former, the responsibility of issu-
ing various types of credentials—digitally assigned statements or
attestations about what another user is or does—can be taken
over by a central authority. Then, all network users place their
t rust in the central authority (ibid.).
In a decentralized authority, in contrast, every user is also a
potential issuer of credentials, and a given set of credentials, per-
haps issued by many different users, forms a credential network.
Therefore, a web of trust model and solution was introduced by
Pretty Good Privacy (PGP), a popular application for e-mail au-
thentication. In short, PGP o rganizes public keys and corre-
sponding certiﬁcates in local key rings. The owner of the key ring
gets a web of trust by assigning trust values to all certificate
Internet Users’ Concerns
71

issuers. This web of trust acts as the basis for a qualitative evalu-
ation of the authenticity of the public keys involved. In PGP, the
evaluation of a web of trust is founded on three rules and the
production of two outcomes: valid or invalid (ibid.).
Unfortunately, to date, authentication systems like PGP and
S/MIME, designed to run over the legacy system, have failed to
gain large acceptance and to solve real-world trust pro b l e m s
such as spam, because they suffer from a number of deployment
usability issues as well as trust management issues. For example,
in “web of trust” style systems, Internet users must validate keys
out-of-band—a laborious task. Furthermore, while Certificate
Authority (CA) schemes replace the onerous task for individual
users to check identities, the charges imposed by the CA often act
as a barrier to adoption (Seigneur et al., 2004).
As noted, security experts have found that wireless commu-
nications, in general, are not as reliable—and, there f o re, not as
trustworthy—as wired communications. Thus the occurrence of
a technical or technological failure is more likely for mobile com-
m e rce (conducted with a wireless device) than for electro n i c
commerce (conducted with a wired device).
Technological failures further diminish the level of trust that
consumers have in wireless devices. For example, dropped calls
(whereby a carrier fails to hand off a call in progress), busy sig-
nals (caused by having too many customers in a cell call at the
same time), and dead spots (an area where the signal between
the handset and the cell tower is blocked) can all degrade the
w i reless service’s performance—and thereby reduce the con-
sumers’ trust in the service (Grami and Schell, 2004).
Emerging advances in mobile commerce—whether they are
through improved telecommunications technologies to help real-
ize higher rates, wider coverage, and higher quality of service, or
t h rough an improved business framework—cultivating mea-
s u res such as informed consent, minimum risk insurance, im-
p roved Website quality and trust, information clarity, company
competence and integrity, and public and private policies all
help to build consumers’ trust in mobile commerce (ibid.).
It is important to note that in recent years there has been
some effort by experts to set standards and indicators for a more
systematic and coordinated fashion to capture the tru s t w o r t h i-
ness state of a particular Information Technology infrastructure.
The World Wide Web is no exception. Such indicators would re-
ﬂect the “assurance” of the IT infrastructure to reliably transfer
72
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

information (including security, quality of service, and availabil-
ity of service)—thus increasing trust in the network by con-
sumers.
These indicators could then be used to identify areas of the
infrastructure requiring attention and be used by an IT organiza-
tion to assess the return on investment for improved IT infra-
structure equipment purchase. Despite the existing work that is
in pro g ress, there is currently no standard or widely accepted
method of assessing assurance levels associated with IT infra-
s t ru c t u res, including end-hosts, servers, applications, ro u t e r s ,
ﬁrewalls, and the network permitting the subsystems to commu-
nicate. Clearly, this is an area where academics and security ex-
perts need to focus (Seddigh et al., 2004).
An Overview of Internet Crimes
Crimes committed over the Internet fall in the general category
of “cyber-crimes,” because they are committed in cyberspace and
involve breaches of privacy, security, and trust. Harm re s u l t i n g
over the Net can be either to persons or to pro p e r t y. There are
also technical nonoffenses that are politically motivated and that
no legislation declares as unlawful (Brenner, 2001).
Internet Crimes Resulting
in Harm to Property
Internet cyber-crime resulting in property harm is generally ac-
complished with well-honed cracking skill sets and includes
common variations like the following (Schell and Martin, 2004):
• Flooding—a type of Internet vandalism resulting in De-
nial of Service to authorized, legitimate users of a Web-
site or computer network.
• Virus and worm production and release—a type of Internet
vandalism causing corruption, and possibly erasing, of
data stored on the network.
• Spooﬁng—a type of appropriation of an online user’s
identity by others online, causing fraud or attempted
fraud in some cases, as well as critical infrastructure
breakdowns in other cases.
An Overview of Internet Crimes
73

• Phreaking—a type of Internet fraud consisting of using
technology to make free telephone calls.
• Infringing Intellectual Property Rights and Copyright—a
type of Internet theft involving the copying of the infor-
mation or software of others without their consent.
Internet Crimes Resulting
in Harm to Persons
Internet cyber-crime resulting in personal harm includes two
major variations (ibid.):
• Cyber-stalking—using the Internet to try to control, ha-
rass, or terrorize another online user to the point that the
stalked person fears harm to reputation or to person, ei-
ther to self or to others.
• Cyber-pornography—using the Internet to possess, create,
import, display, publish, or distribute pornography (es-
pecially child pornography) or other obscene materials.
Technical Nonoffenses
Politically motivated, controversial online behaviors that are
technical nonoffenses by law include the following (ibid.):
• Hacktivism—using the Internet to promote political plat-
forms or missions.
• Cyber-vigilantism—using the Internet to conduct vigilante
activities.
It should be noted that cyber-terrorism and terrorism were
also in the nonoffense category before the U.S. Congress hastily
passed the antiterrorist USA Patriot Act in 2001. The act was
passed within seven weeks of the September 11 attack on the
World Trade Center. Formerly, terrorists who caused harm to
persons or property were charged under other applicable laws,
such as homicide, assault, and property destruction.
The Patriot Act, approved overwhelmingly by Congre s s
shortly after the attacks, has long been the subject of ﬁerce debate
over the balance between civil liberties and national security. Be-
sides other measures, the act expanded government search and
surveillance authority. Just before breaking for Christmas in De-
74
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

cember 2005, the U.S. House and Senate approved a ﬁv e - w e e k
extension of the Patriot Act, until February 3, 2006. The act had
been scheduled to expire on December 31, 2005. On February 1,
2006, the House of Representatives pre p a red to extend the an-
titerrorism law to March 10, 2006, giving House and Senate ne-
gotiators another ﬁve weeks to dispute the controversial statute.
The act was signed into law on March 9, 2006.
It should also be noted that on January 10, 2003, after the
passage of the Patriot Act, Attorney General John Ashcroft sent
to some of his government colleagues a draft of the Patriot II Act,
also known as the Domestic Security Enhancement Act of 2003,
which would have had more than 100 new provisions intensify-
ing measures against cyber-terrorists. Once word of this contro-
versial act hit the press, public outcry killed its passage. Citizens’
concerns can be found at this Website: http:// w w w. e ff . o rg /
Censorship/Terrorism_militias/patriot-act-II-analysis.php.
Internet Criminal Liability: Four Elements
Conventional Crimes and the Four Elements.
For old-fash-
ioned/conventional or Internet crimes to occur, Anglo-American
law bases criminal liability on the coincidence of four elements
(Brenner, 2001):
• A culpable mental state (the mens rea).
• A criminal action or a failure to act when one is under a
duty to do so (the actus reus).
• The existence of certain necessary conditions, or “atten-
dant circumstances.” With some crimes, it must be
proven that certain events occurred, or certain facts are
true, in order for a person to be found guilty of a crime.
• A prohibited result, or harm to property or to person.
The conventional, real-world crime of bigamy, for example,
illustrates nicely how all of these elements must combine for the
imposition of liability. To commit bigamy, an individual must en-
ter into a marriage knowing either that he or she is already mar-
ried, or that the person whom he or she is marrying is alre a d y
married. The prohibited act, then, is the redundant marriage (the
actus reus). The culpable mental state (the mens rea) is the perpe-
t r a t o r’s knowledge of entering into a redundant marriage. The
attendant circumstance is the existence of the previous marriage
An Overview of Internet Crimes
75

still being in force. Finally, the prohibited result, or harm to an-
other person, is the threat that bigamous marriages pose to the
stability of family life.
Simply put, a conventional crime, as well as an Internet
crime, involves conduct that is unacceptable to society’s stan-
dards. Therefore, society through its laws, imposes criminal lia-
bility. In 2001, Brenner said that except for bigamy and sexual as-
sault—which technically cannot be committed through the
Internet, because they are truly real-world acts—other conven-
tional crimes seem to be able to make a smooth transition into
the virtual world.
This does not suggest, however, that there has been an ab-
sence of controversy around virtual assault cases. For example,
Donn Parker debated Brenner’s position that bigamy should not
be allowed to take place through the Internet. He said that it
may, in fact, soon become possible for the conventional crime of
bigamy to be perpetrated through the Internet. As digital signa-
t u res become valid, a marriage ceremony could be conducted
with the two parties and an ofﬁcial in three different places. Mar-
riage using the Web would make for a great reality television
show—and allegations of fraudulent marriages could soon fol-
low (Parker, 2001).
Some Diff e rences between Conventional Crimes and Internet Crimes.
At times, there can be some differences between real-world, con-
ventional crimes (even if they are relatively new) and those con-
ducted through the Internet. Using stalking and cyber- s t a l k i n g
as a new crime case in point, there are some striking legal simi-
larities between the two, and some striking differences.
Although online harassment and threats can take many
forms, cyber-stalking shares important characteristics with off-
line stalking. These common traits include the following (U.S.
Department of Justice, 2003):
• First, many stalkers are motivated by a desire to exert
control over their targets and engage in similar types of
behavior to accomplish this end.
• Second, as with ofﬂine stalking, the available evidence
suggests that the majority of cyber-stalkers are men, and
the majority of their targets are women, although there
have been cases reported of women cyber-stalking men
and of same-sex cyber-stalking.
76
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

• Third, often the cyber-stalker and the target had a prior
relationship, and the cyber-stalking begins when the vic-
tim attempts to break off the relationship. However, there
also have been many instances of cyber-stalking by
strangers. 
Given the enormous amount of personal information avail-
able through the Internet, a cyber-stalker can easily locate pri-
vate information about a potential target with a few mouse
c l i c k s .
The fact that cyber-stalking does not involve physical con-
tact may create the wrong impression that it is a more benign act
than physical stalking. That is not necessarily true. As the Inter-
net becomes an ever more integral part of our personal and pro-
fessional lives, stalkers can take advantage of the ease of com-
munications as well as increased access to personal information.
In addition, the ease of use and nonconfrontational, impersonal,
and sometimes anonymous nature of Internet communications
seems to remove disincentives to cyber-stalking. Whereas po-
tential stalkers in real life may be unwilling or unable to con-
f ront a target in person, they may have little hesitation in send-
ing threatening e-mails to the target. Finally, as with physical
stalking, online harassment and threats may be a fore runner to
m o re serious behavior, including physical violence (Schell and
Lanteigne, 2000).
D i ff e rences between conventional stalking and cyber- s t a l k-
ing, however, have been noted. These include the following (U.S.
Department of Justice, 2003):
• First, ofﬂine stalking generally requires the perpetrator
and the target to be located in the same geographical
area, whereas cyber-stalkers may be next door or around
the world.
• Second, the Internet makes it easier for a cyber-stalker to
encourage third parties to harass or threaten a target by
impersonating the target online and then posting inﬂam-
matory messages in chat rooms, encouraging online
viewers of that message to send threatening messages
back to the targeted “author.” Alternatively, the messages
sent could encourage viewers to perform harm (such as
sexual assault) to the target, who would be painted as
consenting to the harmful act.
An Overview of Internet Crimes
77

• Third, the Internet seems to lower barriers to harassment
and threats, for cyber-stalkers do not need to confront the
victim physically; they could encourage others to com-
plete such acts.
Special stalking laws have been passed in recent years to
cope with this “new” crime. The ﬁrst traditional stalking law was
enacted by the state of California in 1990, and since then,
Canada, the United Kingdom, and Australia have passed similar
legislation. A number of U.S. states have put in special statutes
for dealing with cyber-stalking relating to the Internet and elec-
t ronic transmission of threatening communications, including
Alabama, Arizona, Connecticut, Hawaii, Illinois, New Hamp-
shire, and New York.
It is important to note that U.S. laws vary from state to state,
but if someone is being threatened in e-mail, an online user may
wish to ask a lawyer if federal statute 18 U.S.C. 875(c) might ap-
ply. Under that statute, transmission in interstate or foreign com-
merce of a communication containing any threat to kidnap any
person or any threat to injure the person of another is a federal
felony and carries a maximum prison sentence of ﬁve years and
a ﬁne of $250,000 (Hartman, 2006).
In April 1999, the first successful prosecution under Cali-
fornia’s cyber-stalking law occurred. Prosecutors received a
guilty plea from a fifty-year-old former security guard who had
used the Internet to encourage a sexual assault on a twenty-
e i g h t - y e a r-old woman who had rejected the guard’s ro m a n t i c
o v e r t u res. The charges were one count of stalking and thre e
counts of soliciting sexual assault. The guard terrorized this
woman by impersonating her in various Internet chat ro o m s
and online bulletin boards, where he posted her telephone
n u m b e r, address, and messages saying that she fantasized
about being sexually assaulted. On at least six occasions, some-
times in the middle of the night, men knocked on the targ e t ’ s
door saying that they were there to meet her fantasies (Schell
and Martin, 2004).
Apart from laws, a number of cyber-stalking re s o u rces exist
online to assist targets in managing their situations and for get-
ting protection, prevention, and recovery advice. These include
CyberAngels (at http:// w w w. c y b e r a n g e l s . o rg/), the world’s
oldest and largest Internet-safety organization, Coyote Commu-
78
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

nications (at http:// w w w.coyotecom.com/), and SafeTeens (at
h t t p :// w w w. s a f e t e e n s . c o m / ) .
T h e re are also some sound pro c e d u res that cyber- s t a l k i n g
t a rgets can follow. First, they should report the incident to the sys-
tem administrator of their Internet Service Provider (ISP) and that
of the stalker or harasser. It is possible that the stalker will try to
conceal his or her tracks by forging (that is, “spooﬁng”) his or her
e-mail header, but complaints of abuse are generally sent to the
postmaster or the abuse department (with addresses something
like postmaster@yourisp.com or abuse@yourisp.com). In fact,
many ISPs use both addresses. After investigating the complaint,
most system administrators will not hesitate to cancel the account
of anyone using the ISP to send abusive e-mail (Hartman, 2006).
Anyone receiving abusive e-mail might want to visit Spam-
Cop at http://www.spamcop.net/. This free service will analyze
the unwanted e-mail to determine its point of origin, and it can
generate a report that will be e-mailed to the appropriate system
administrator. Internet users can also visit the CyberSnitch Web-
site at http://www.cybersnitch.net/cybersnitch.htm to report In-
ternet abuse or suspected cyber- t e r rorism—and have a re p o r t
sent to the appropriate law enforcement agency.
M o re o v e r, in recent years, and particularly because of the
importance of obtaining credible cyber evidence for judges, po-
lice ofﬁcers have had to get special training in cyber forensics to
deal properly with Internet crimes. A reported cyber- s t a l k i n g
case not that long ago demonstrates how the lack of law enforce-
ment training and expertise can cause psychological harm, if not
physical harm, to a cyber-stalking target.
A mother complained to a local police agency that a man
had been posting information on the Web, saying that her nine-
y e a r-old daughter was available for sex. The Web posting in-
cluded their home phone number—with an invitation to tele-
phone that number twenty-four hours a day. The family received
n u m e rous phone calls. Disgusted with this cyber- s t a l k e r, the
family then went to the local police to report the problem and
their rising fears. The police initially advised the family simply
to change their home phone number. Bothered by this advice, the
family then contacted the FBI, and they started an investigation.
The FBI later discovered that the reason the family was given this
poor advice was that the police did not have a computer expert
with the appropriate training (U.S. Department of Justice, 2003).
An Overview of Internet Crimes
79

F i n a l l y, anonymous services on the Internet—known as
anonymous remailers—make cyber-stalking detection diff i c u l t
for three reasons. First, anonymous services allow online users to
create a free electronic mailbox through a Website. Second, while
most entities providing this service request identifying informa-
tion from online users, such services almost never actually au-
thenticate the information. Third, for these services, a payment
may be made in advance through the use of, say, a money order
or other nontraceable form of payment. As long as the money is
received in advance by the Internet Service Pro v i d e r, the We b
service can be provided to the unknown account holder.
In short, anonymous remailers purposefully strip identify-
ing information and transport headers from electronic mail. By
f o r w a rding e-mails through several of these services serially, a
cyber-stalker can transmit numerous quite anonymous harassing
and threatening e-mails to targets. The availability of these ser-
vices makes it relatively easy to send anonymous communica-
tions but relatively difﬁcult for law enforcement to identify the
person or persons responsible (ibid.).
A Case of Past and Present Online Gaming Controversies.
A series of
events occurring in the late 1990s in a text-based online virtual
community known as LambdaMOO produced much controver-
sial discussion about whether “virtual rape” is or should be a
criminal offense. These events also focused on whether cyber-
stalking actually occurred in this virtual space.
In 1998, Julian Dibbell described the cyber “complaints” that
grew in LambdaMOO (Dibbell, 1998, p. 1):
They say he raped them at night. They say he did it with
a cunning little doll, fashioned in their image and im-
bued with the power to make them do whatever he de-
s i red. They say that by manipulating the doll, he forc e d
them to have sex with him, and with each other, and to
do horrible, brutal things to their own bodies. I can as-
s u re you that what they say is true, because it all hap-
pened right in the living room—right there amid the
well-stocked bookcases and the sofas and the ﬁre p l a c e —
of a house I came later to think of as my second home.
Indeed, LambdaMOO was a Black Hat equivalent of the pre-
sent-day popular White Hat online game, Sims Online. To be
80
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

more precise, it was a subspecies of MUD (a multiuser dungeon)
known as a MOO—short for “MUD, object-oriented.”
It was a kind of database designed to give users the vivid
i m p ression of moving through a physical space. When users
dialed into LambdaMOO, the program immediately pre s e n t e d
them with a brief textual description of one of the database’s ﬁc-
tional rooms in a fictional mansion. The rooms, the things in
them, and the characters were allowed to interact according to
rules roughly mimicking the laws of the physical world. In gen-
eral, LambdaMOOers were given the freedom to create. They
could describe their characters any way they liked, they could
decorate the rooms any way they wanted, and they could build
new objects. Although there was an illusion of presence, what
the user really saw when visiting LambdaMOO was a kind of
slow-moving script, lines of dialogue, and stage direction creep-
ing steadily up the computer screen (ibid.).
On the night in question, the cyber-perpetrator was a Lamb-
daMOO individual, known as Mr. Bungle, who used an online
voodoo doll and a piece of programming code to spoof other
players by appropriating their identities. In the context of Lamb-
daMOO, this meant that by typing actions into the virtual
voodoo doll, Bungle could make it appear as if another player in
LambdaMOO was performing certain actions. One evening, Mr.
Bungle logged into LambdaMOO and used the voodoo doll to
make it appear that a number of the female participants were en-
gaging in various forms of sexually humiliating activities. One
player using the moniker Moonﬁre saw on her computer screen
these obnoxious words: “As if against her will, Moonﬁre jabs a
steak knife up her ass, causing immense joy. You hear Mr. Bungle
laughing evilly in the distance.” (Brenner, 2001, p. 27).
The targets of Mr. Bungle’s attention were shocked and trau-
matized by how he had manipulated their characters and by
how powerless they had been to stop him. Outraged by their suf-
fering, some targets demanded “capital punishment” for Mr.
Bungle, insisting that his character be annihilated. Others dis-
agreed, claiming freedom of speech.
Before the issue was formally resolved, one member of the
cyber community eliminated Mr. Bungle’s persona and the corre-
sponding user account in the system. Although Mr. Bungle’s
real-life puppeteer was a New York University computer user, it
was clear that Mr. Bungle could not be prosecuted under the
rape laws that existed at the time, as Mr. Bungle (and his real-life
An Overview of Internet Crimes
81

counterpart) did not commit the crime of rape—for that requires
a physical assault. More o v e r, while the LambdaMOO incident
also had elements of identity theft—the malicious misuse of
someone else’s identity—participants in the cyber community
did not allege any such infraction (Brenner, 2001).
Moving into this millennium, the New York University com-
puter user might have been given a much harder time by the cy-
ber community—and the legal system—for his cyber game ex-
ploits. While virtual-world owners have long faced difﬁculties in
policing the security of their systems, combining sophisticated
code exploits with virtual property markets can today be big
business—sometimes resulting in charges being laid.
In South Korea in 2003, for example, a twenty-two-year-old
student named Choi and an accomplice manipulated a virtual
world server and got 1.5 billion won, or about 1.2 million U.S.
dollars. A c c o rding to reports, these two people were arre s t e d
amid claims that they had cracked an online game server and
awarded themselves huge amounts of cyber money, which they
later exchanged for real South Korean money. A s p o k e s p e r s o n
for South Korea’s national police agency told the press that Inter-
net criminals are becoming increasingly organized, and that they
target online gaming sites in the hope of defrauding the services
and converting cyber money into hard cash. At the time of this
incident, 40,000 Internet crimes had been reported in South Ko-
rea—an 18 percent increase over the same period in 2002. More
than 22,000 of these Internet crimes involved online gaming
sites, which are extremely popular in South Korea (We a rd e n ,
2003).
In the United States, the federal Computer Fraud and Abuse
Act (CFAA) would seem to apply to such online gaming mis-
deeds. A criminal violation of Section 1030, in particular, requires
three main elements—all of which are present in the Choi case:
• The defendant must have intentionally accessed a com-
puter to commit a wrongdoing,
• The access must have been without authorization or ex-
ceeding the scope of the defendant’s authorization,
• The damaging harm resulting from the unauthorized ac-
cess must exceed $5,000.
M o re o v e r, on July 30, 2003, the chief judge of a mock U.S.
district court in Las Vegas, Philip M. Pro, heard United States v.
82
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

J.B. We a s e l . Like Choi, Mr. Weasel was accused of violating the
CFAA by attacking the servers of Getta Entertainment, maintain-
ers of the virtual game GettaLife. Mr. Weasel allegedly directed a
person who controlled an avatar called Terron to crack Mr. Mar-
tin’s account in GettaLife, steal all of his virtual assets (especially
his endeared “Staff of Viagra”), and leave his avatar unclothed
and defenseless in the game. The case was entirely ﬁctitious, of
course. The moot was conducted at the 2003 Black Hat security
conference of network and computer security experts (Lastowka
and Hunter, 2006).
The interesting point in terms of online gaming‘s legal evo-
lution, however, was that the contrived jury agreed with the
p rosecution’s arguments that the virtual property at issue had
real value—and that real harm could, therefore, be caused to per-
sons or property. Edward Castronova, an expert witness for the
prosecution, reported (ibid., p. 314):
Defense counsel Jennifer Granick mounted a stro n g
c o u n t e r a rgument, namely that we might, as a society,
decide that it is just too difﬁcult to classify game-related
damages as real, just as we shy away from taking cases
of lost sexual favors to court, even though there clearly
a re damages. This powerful argument suggests that
losses in something we agree to call a “game” should
also be free from legal oversight, even though, in fact,
the distinction between game and life is arbitrary. In the
end, jury and audience disagreed with this cultural
stratagem, preferring instead Prosecutor Richard Sal-
gado’s argument that human activity in the allegedly
virtual space is not virtual at all. It is real activity and
has real values and thus, in principle, it deserves the
full attention of policy and law. 
If such a finding actually occurs in a real courtroom, it
would be an obvious ﬁrst step in North America toward the legal
recognition of virtual property, and online users who could pos-
sibly beneﬁt from such an argument would be online game own-
ers victimized by commercial exploiters.
An example would be a gold dupe, where an online player
would, by exploiting game code, generate duplicate currency. If
the player had sufﬁcient game account and computers exploiting
this type of dupe, it would be possible to create so much excess
An Overview of Internet Crimes
83

gold that the virtual currency would be devalued in the game.
For the exploiter, a dupe can generate a large number of re a l -
world dollars before the exchange rate drops drastically. This
sort of crime is like counterfeiting, because dupers and exploiters
are trying to create value illegitimately, but the creation of such
surplus currencies can destroy functioning economies by cre a t-
ing frustration in online gamers, causing them to stop their on-
line game subscriptions. In short, game owners who are victims
of such commercial exploiters could point to real economic harm
created by the unauthorized access and sale of virtual currencies.
These harms may end in criminal prosecution for pro p e r t y
crimes through the Internet, running counter to computer tre s-
pass statutes (Lastowka and Hunter, 2006).
Using similar arguments, if the real-life person were to
conduct the virtual abuses of Mr. Bungle in LambdaMOO in
2006, the real-life university-computer user might face a convic-
tion. The argument could be made that he caused psychological
harm to persons in this virtual community, totaling in excess of
$ 5 , 0 0 0 .
Present-day Identity Theft Complaints.
Although no one in the vir-
tual community complained about Mr. Bungle as an identity
theft case, today, identity theft, both in the real world and on the
Internet, is one of the most troubling and increasingly harmful
cyber-crimes.
The malicious theft of and consequent misuse of someone
else’s identity to commit a crime is known as identity theft or
masquerading. Identify theft often involves cracking into a sys-
tem to obtain personal information—such as credit card num-
bers, birth dates, and social security numbers—and then using
that information in an illegal manner. The cracker may buy items
with the stolen identity or pretend to be someone else of higher
professional status to gain special privileges. Identity theft is one
of the fastest growing crimes in the United States and elsewhere
around the globe.
Often identity theft victims are informed by their ﬁn a n c i a l
institutions or places of employment that there has been an ex-
ploit in the computer network, leaving their personal informa-
tion at risk. At other times, victims often suddenly discover that
someone has stolen their identities, emptied their bank accounts,
spent on their credit card accounts to the maximum limitation,
and left them with a huge debt to pay to clear their credit ratings.
84
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Sometimes, tragically, the impostor has committed a serious
crime using the victim’s identity, leaving the victim with an un-
deserved criminal record. Although identity theft is often viewed
as a high-tech, Internet-assisted crime, the thief can be, and often
is, a family member, a trusted friend, or a coworker having
knowledge of the target’s personal information, including ac-
count passwords (Hammond, 2003).
Since 1999, an alarming number of Internet Website cracks,
personal information leaks, and potential identity theft incidents
have been reported in the news media. For example, in February
2005, a report released by a U.S. legislature committee found that
information on the Websites of the New York Department of Mo-
tor Vehicles, the Department of Education, the Department of
C o r rectional Services, the State Division of Military and Naval
Affairs, and the New York Power Authority had been defaced a
whopping seventy-two times from 1999 to early December 2004.
The chair of the oversight committee investigating the problem
said that because state and private companies are not keeping
important personal and homeland security online information
safe, identity thefts could occur.
M o re o v e r, in March 2005, more evidence emerged of the
poorly regulated Internet information brokerage industry. About
March 10, cyber thieves stole passwords from legitimate online
users on as many as 32,000 Americans in a database owned by
the trustworthy LexisNexis Group (affecting 310,000 clients).
Similar computer network breaches occurred at ChoicePoint,
Inc., and the Bank of America (affecting about 1.2 million federal
employees with this charge card).
These intrusions prompted calls for the U.S. government to
investigate this serious set of events. Government off i c i a l s
a g reed to review the online security policies of the Bank of
America, as well as Bank One of Delaware, Citibank of New
York, Mellon Bank of Pittsburgh, and the U.S. Bank of Minneapo-
lis. Recommendations were to be forthcoming about how to pro-
vide adequate protection for the safety of federal employees’
personal information.
Although the ﬁrst in a series of hearings was scheduled to
begin on Capitol Hill on March 10, 2005, the U.S. states are collec-
tively proposing more than 150 bills to regulate online security
standards, to increase identity theft and fraud protection, to in-
crease data broker limitations, to increase limits on data sharing
or use or sales, and to improve security breach notiﬁcation.
An Overview of Internet Crimes
85

In recent years, some seemingly innocent-looking tech-
niques have been used by malicious online users to commit iden-
tity theft crimes. Phishing is a form of identity theft, whereby a
scammer uses an authentic-looking e-mail from a large corpora-
tion to trick e-mail receivers into online disclosure of sensitive
personal information, such as credit card numbers or bank ac-
count codes.
A c c o rding to a 2004 report released by Garner, Inc., an IT
marketing re s e a rch firm, in 2003, phishing exploits cost banks
and credit card companies an estimated $1.2 billion. More o v e r,
a c c o rding to the Anti-Phishing Working Group (a nonpro f i t
group of government agencies and corporations trying to reduce
cyber fraud), more than 2,800 active phishing sites are known to
exist on the World Wide Web.
In April 2005, a new “cousin” of phishing was deﬁned and
called “WiPhishing” (pronounced “why phishing”)—an act exe-
cuted when an individual covertly sets up a wire l e s s - e n a b l e d
laptop computer or access point to get other wire l e s s - e n a b l e d
laptop computers to associate with it before launching a crack at-
tack. Because about 20 percent of wireless access points use de-
fault SSIDs (like Linksys), a cracker can quite easily guess the
name of a network that target computers are normally config-
ured to, thereby gaining access to the laptop computer. Once ac-
cess is gained, crackers can put malicious code into it. Intrusion
detection appliances like A i r P a t rol Enterprise have been de-
signed to detect wireless exploits.
Firms having wired networks are at risk of being cracked if
employees’ laptop computers are left on. Instead of having
crackers exploit wireless networks with WiPhishing, they could
do even more damage by hijacking the legitimate connection to a
wired computer network, exploit the soft underbelly of that net-
work, and launch an invasive attack (Leyden, 2005).
Similar in nature to phishing, pharming is done by crackers
wanting to get personal or private (usually financially re l a t e d )
information through domain spooﬁng. So, instead of spamming
targets with ill-intended e-mail encouraging them to visit spoof
Websites appearing to be legitimate, pharming actually poisons a
DNS server by putting false information into it. The result is that
the online user’s request is re d i rected elsewhere. Often the on-
line user is unaware that this is happening, because the browser
indicates that the user is at the correct Website. Because of this
outcome, Internet security experts view pharming to be a more
86
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

serious exploit, because it is more difficult to detect. In short,
while phishing exploits try to scam targets on a one-on-one basis,
pharming lets Black Hats scam large numbers of targets all at
once by effectively using domain spooﬁng.
It is interesting to note that on March 4, 2005, White Hat
hackers surfed the Web at Seattle University with the intention of
harvesting Social Security and credit card numbers—a re p l i c a-
tion of what goes on in the real world by Black Hats. In less than
sixty minutes they found millions of names, birth dates, and So-
cial Security and credit card numbers using just one Internet
s e a rch engine, Google. They warned that the use of the right
kind of sophisticated search terms could even ﬁnd data deleted
from company or government Websites but temporarily cached
in Google’s extraordinarily large data warehouse. The pro b l e m
did not lie with Google, they afﬁrmed, but with companies al-
lowing Google to enter into the public segment of their networks
(called the DMZ) and to index all the data contained there. A l-
though Google does not need to be re p a i red, said the White
Hats, companies and government agencies need to understand
that they are exposing themselves and their clients by posting
sensitive data in public places (Shukovsky, 2005).
P resent-day Fraud Complaints.
Because of its often anonymous
and decentralized composition, the Internet is fertile ground for
fraud exploits. Fraud is generally deﬁned in law as an intentional
m i s re p resentation of facts made by one person to another per-
son, knowing that such misrepresentation is false but will, in the
end, induce the other person to act in some manipulated fashion
that results in injury or damage to the person manipulated.
Fraud may include an omission of facts or an intended fail-
ure to state all of the facts. Knowledge of the latter would have
been needed to prevent the other statements from being mislead-
ing. In cyber terms, spam is often sent in an effort to defraud an-
other person into purchasing something that he or she has no in-
tention of purchasing. Fraud can also occur through online
gaming, as noted earlier, or through online auctions. Fraud can
also occur in online voting.
Recently in the United States, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOA)
was passed as a reaction to the accounting misdeeds in compa-
nies such as WorldCom and Enron, but its passage has fraud im-
plications for online personal information storage. Simply stated,
with the vast amounts of personal information stored on
An Overview of Internet Crimes
87

company computers, fraud opportunities abound for cyber-
criminals. A major problem prompting the passage of this act
was that companies storing huge amounts of information have
tended to give little thought to what is being stored in company
or institutional networks, or how securely it is being stored. Con-
sequently, occasional occurrences of fraud or alterations of data
by crackers have often gone undetected.
Experts have argued that, rather than spending lots of
money to store data in accordance with the act, companies
should allocate some money to determine exactly what kinds of
information need to be stored and for how long. Many compa-
nies have policies, for example, dictating that data be stored for
periods lasting from six to nine months, but that timeline may
not be realistic. Such confusion over this important information
storage issue may be a primary reason why the Sarbanes-Oxley
Act deadline for companies based in European countries has
been pushed back another year. Originally, controversial Section
404 of the SOA outlined the re q u i rement for companies to
archive information by July 15, 2005.
And on an optimistic note, in the ﬁght against online auc-
tion fraud, consumers fed up with being ripped off by online
criminals have started to fight back through cyber- v i g i l a n t i s m .
They use the Internet to get even with cyber thieves, and they
band together to inform federal authorities of their online
plights.
This interesting story started on or about August 10, 2002,
when a man named Mark was the highest online auction bidder
for a Toshiba Protege 2000 laptop computer, listed on eBay. He
sent a cashier’s check for $1,485 to the eBay seller Tech-Surplus,
but by September 1, 2002, he had still not received the item. Frus-
trated, Mark e-mailed other winning bidders to see if their items
had been received from Tech-Surplus (Steiner, 2002). His worries
were conﬁrmed. No one had received the purchased computers.
One of the e-mail respondents, named Karen, volunteered to cre-
ate a Website to publish revealing information about the seller,
who was suspected of acting in bad faith. Although originally set
up on GeoCities, the vigilante Website was later moved to
h t t p :// w w w.techsurplusvictim.com (ibid.). As of February 2,
2006, this site was still active.
Another respondent named Cory created a mailing list on
Yahoo Groups to arrange for an online communications network
for Tech-Surplus targets. With this effort, Mark, Karen, and Cory
88
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

soon realized that they were just three of a group of more than
eighty online targets who were similarly hit by Tech-Surplus. Al-
though Karen and Cory received refund checks from the seller in
what they perceive was an attempt to get them to cease and de-
sist from their cyber-vigilante activities, the attempt failed. Karen
continues to put in about six hours a day to keep the Website ac-
tive. She also contacts law enforcement officials and speaks
about the Website’s ﬁndings to the press (ibid.).
F i n a l l y, to deal with cyber incidents resulting in fraud and
identity theft, the Internet Fraud Complaint Center (IFCC) was
created in the United States in May 2000 by the FBI and the Na-
tional White Collar Crime Center. The IFCC deals with com-
plaints about Internet fraud and provides targets with resources
for protecting themselves. To date, the IFCC has received thou-
sands of complaints weekly about crimes including online auc-
tion frauds, undelivered goods, credit card fraud, identity theft,
and nonpayment for services.
This agency is now called the Internet Crime Complaint
C e n t e r, or IC3, and is found at Website http:// w w w. i c 3 . g o v / .
IC3’s mission is to serve as a vehicle to receive, develop, and re-
fer criminal complaints to authorities involving the Internet.
Since its creation, the IC3 has received complaints crossing a
wide range of Internet crimes, including online fraud in many
forms, Intellectual Property Rights matters, computer intrusions
(that is, cracking), economic espionage (that is, stealing trade se-
c rets), online extortion, international money laundering, and
identity theft. Since June 2000, the IC3 has realized that regard-
less of the label placed on a particular Internet crime, the poten-
tial for it to overlap with another referred matter is substantial.
Since 2002, a number of U.S. states (as well as other jurisdic-
tions) with high online fraud complaint records have been ﬁght-
ing back through improved legislation. For example, California
Senate Bill 1386 was signed into law on September 25, 2002. It
amended the California Civil Code to re q u i re that notice be
given to the Department of Defense (DoD) re g a rding security
b reaches involving unencrypted (that is, unprotected) personal
information.
C y b e r- p o rnography and Child Cyber- p o rnography Complaints.
B e-
cause of the relative anonymity off e red by the Internet and 
the users’ capacity to create and amend visuals using online
An Overview of Internet Crimes
89

graphics and software technology, the prevalence of cyber-
pornography—and child cyber- p o r n o g r a p h y, in particular—
has soared over the past decade. Without question, they pre-
sent major moral and personal harm problems for society.
For example, To p TenReviews, Inc., estimates that online
child pornography, alone, generates about U.S.$3 billion annu-
a l l y. More than 100,000 Internet Websites currently offer child
pornography. What is frightening is that the demand for online
child pornography appears to exceed that for adult pornography,
relative to supply. A c c o rding to this same re v i e w, online adult
pornography generates about U.S.$2.5 billion annually. In total,
more than 4 million pornographic Websites—about 12 percent of
all Websites—exist (Ropelato, 2006).
In the United States, child pornography is a category of
speech not protected by the First Amendment. The federal legal
deﬁnition of child pornography can be found at 18 U.S.C. § 2256.
Some particulars around the deﬁnition have changed in re c e n t
years, with the latest change occurring on April 30, 2003, when
President George W. Bush signed the PROTECT Act.
The latter not only implemented the Amber Alert communi-
cation system—which allows for nationwide alerts when chil-
d ren go missing or are kidnapped—but also redefined child
pornography to include both images of real children engaging in
sexually explicit conduct and computer-generated depictions in-
distinguishable from real children engaging in such acts. Indistin-
g u i s h a b l e was further deﬁned as that which an ordinary person
viewing the image would conclude is a real child engaging in
sexually explicit acts. However, cartoons, drawings, paintings,
and sculptures depicting minors or adults engaging in sexually
explicit acts, as well as depictions of actual adults that look like
minors engaging in sexually explicit acts, are excluded from the
deﬁnition of child pornography.
The PROTECT Act of 2000 was passed because of three ma-
jor problems that remained despite previous legislation (U.S. De-
partment of Justice, 2003). These were as follows:
• Law enforcement did not have the tools needed to locate
missing children and to prosecute offenders.
• Existing federal laws did not ensure adequate, and at
times, consistent punishment for those found guilty of
such crimes.
90
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

• Past legal obstacles have made prosecuting child pornog-
raphy cases very difﬁcult—especially in the case of virtu-
ally produced child pornography.
Prior to the enactment of the PROTECT Act, the deﬁnition of
child pornography came from the 1996 Child Pornography Pre-
vention Act (CPPA). More o v e r, the Children’s Online Privacy
Protection Act (COPPA), effective April 21, 2000, applied to the
online collection of personal information from children under
the age of thirteen. The rules detailed what a Website operator
must include in a privacy policy, when and how to seek veriﬁ-
able consent from parents or guardians, and what actions an op-
erator must take to protect children’s privacy and safety online.
It is important to note that these Internet safety policies required
the use of filters to protect against access to visual depictions
considered obscene or harmful to minors (Miltner, 2005).
A ﬁlter is a device or material that suppresses or minimizes
waves or oscillations of certain frequencies. There f o re, ﬁl t e r i n g
s o f t w a re should block access to Internet sites listed in an internal
database of the product, block access to Internet sites listed in a
database maintained external to the product itself, block access to
Internet sites carrying certain ratings assigned to those sites by a
t h i rd party or that are unrated under such a system, and block ac-
cess based on the presence of certain words or phrases on those
Websites. In short, software ﬁlters use an algorithm to test for the
a p p ropriateness of Internet material—in this case, for minors.
Websites are ﬁrst ﬁltered based on IP addresses or domain
names. Since this process is based on predeﬁned lists of appro-
priate and inappropriate sites, experts suggest that relying to-
tally on these lists is ineffective because Internet sites come and
go so quickly. More o v e r, though minors often frequent online
chat rooms, instant messaging, and newsgroups, those are not
under the ﬁltering system but are a real point of concern for soci-
ety (ibid.).
It is important to note that librarians in the United States
have had particular difﬁculty enforcing the use of ﬁlters and the
re q u i rements of CIPA, because they are faced daily with both
protecting minors from viewing obscene materials and also not
o b s t ructing adults from viewing materials they are legally al-
lowed to obtain and peruse under the First Amendment, offen-
sive or not. To that end, in the 2002 case American Library Associa-
An Overview of Internet Crimes
91

tion v. the United States, the District Court for the Eastern District
of Pennsylvania held CIPA to be unconstitutionally broad be-
cause of its crude approach to ﬁltering technology. Furthermore,
the district court noted that any technology protection measure
mandated by CIPA will necessarily block access to a larg e
amount of speech whose suppression serves no legitimate gov-
ernment interest. Besides determining that CIPA’s content-based
filtering restrictions were subject to tight scru t i n y, the district
court also considered whether the libraries’ use of ﬁlters to pro-
tect minors constituted a legitimate state interest. In the end, the
district court saw the Internet as a public forum—much like side-
walks and parks—and ruled that the First Amendment should,
t h e re f o re, be promoted in this public forum. Also, the district
court concluded that less restrictive use policies should be imple-
mented by librarians rather than adhering to CIPA’s overly inclu-
sive ﬁltering systems (ibid.).
Nevertheless, on June 20, 2002, the U.S. government ap-
pealed the district court’s ruling, and on June 23, 2002, the U.S.
S u p reme Court reversed the district court’s decision. The
S u p reme Court upheld CIPA’s constitutionality on the gro u n d s
that this piece of legislation does not violate the First A m e n d-
ment, because U.S. public libraries do not offer Internet access to
p roduce a public forum for Web publishers but to facilitate re-
search, learning, and the recreational pursuits of library patrons
by providing materials of appropriate quality. The Supre m e
Court held that librarians need to select books and materials for
public shelves on a rational basis rather than using strict
s c ru t i n y. With re g a rd to the filters and their tendency to
overblock First A m e n d m e n t – p rotected speech, Chief Justice
Rehnquist afﬁrmed that CIPA allows librarians to disable a ﬁlter
without signiﬁcantly delaying adult users’ requests to view ma-
terial, and that protecting library minors from viewing material
inappropriate for them outweighs any temporary inconvenience
to adult library patrons (United States v. American Library Associa-
tion, 2003).
Following that Supreme Court ruling, U.S. librarians argued
that though CIPA allows but does not re q u i re librarians to dis-
able Internet-ﬁltering software, there are no procedures in place
to guide librarians as to the proper circumstances under which
disabling a ﬁlter is appropriate. There f o re, the disabling pro v i-
sion of CIPA will be applied unequally to patrons in various U.S.
jurisdictions.
92
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

C e r t a i n l y, re g a rdless of existing laws, controlling what ob-
scene materials minors view is a problem worldwide. For ex-
ample, in 2002, Kinderconsument, a Dutch consumers’ org a n i-
zation for children, published their own sampling study among
1,300 children from ten to thirteen years of age. The re s u l t s
w e re alarming. Up to 44 percent of the children—depending on
the chat rooms they fre q u e n t e d — w e re bothered by floods of
abuse and sexual intimidation. The children were also dis-
gusted to find that annoying men who turned out not to be
c h i l d ren at all flooded them with abusive comments and
w o rds. They received unwanted pornographic pictures online,
along with invitations to meet in person. More o v e r, there
seemed to be gender diff e rences in terms of coping with the
s t ress in chat rooms. Girls admitted to experiencing emotion-
ally complex and disturbing situations on the Internet, but they
tended not to tell their parents. Some even admitted to having
an online love affair—without their parents knowing (Ben-
schop, 2005).
Royal Mounted Canadian Police corporal Jim Gillis, head of
P roject Horizon, a policing initiative dealing with online child
pornography and based in Halifax, Nova Scotia, said that home
PC owners and businesses play an unknown but key role in pro-
moting such criminal activities, for a large part of the pro b l e m
arises from the fact that “bots” are often planted by a virus on
home and business computers to convert them into zombies that
a re remotely controlled by cyber-criminals. Although the com-
puters appear to be operating normally, they could actually be
relaying child pornography trafﬁc or storing child porn images.
In this way, the cyber-criminals can avoid detection (Butters,
2005). To avoid being part of the criminal chain, PC users and
businesses should have antivirus software on their computers, as
well as ﬁrewall and network protection.
In a report on children as victims of violent crime released
on April 20, 2005, the Ofﬁce of Statistics Canada said that charges
related to child pornography increased eightfold over the period
from 1998 through 2003. The increase in charges laid by law en-
forcement agents in Canada has been a result of several factors,
including increased public awareness about the potential of the
Internet to cause harm to children, police having increased re-
sources to conduct the investigations, and improvements in tech-
n o l o g y. Also, volunteers patrolling the Internet for cyber- c r i m i-
nals have aided law enforcement in their capture.
An Overview of Internet Crimes
93

In 1995, the CyberAngels started to appear online to patro l
the World Wide Web around the clock in the battle against child
pornography and cyber-stalking. In 1999, the org a n i z a t i o n
helped to locate child pornography sites, resulting in the first-
ever set of arrests in Japan of Internet child pornographers
(Karp, 2000).
The frightening reality is that at least 80 percent of those who
p u rchase child pornography are active child molesters. More o v e r,
36 percent of child pornographers who use the U.S. mail to ex-
ploit a child have been found to be actual child molesters. Child
pornographers range in age from 10 to 65 (Posey, 2005).
Suspected child pornography Websites can be reported on-
line at www.Cybertip.ca. The latter is operated by Child Find
Manitoba and launched in Canada at the end of January 2005.
Also, as of February 2005, a Child Exploitation Tracking System
went into operation in Canada, made available by Micro s o f t
founder Bill Gates. The Child Exploitation Tracking software
helps police share information about cyber-pornographers by
s t reamlining the difficult task of managing huge information
stores.
In recent years, a number of technological attempts to com-
bat cyber-pornography have been developed. First, there are
host-based solutions such as CBIR—content-based image and
video retrieval. This area is very important because of emerging
child-pornography employing both image and video files. The
objective is to retrieve visual ﬁles based on their semantics. The
semantics of a ﬁle are determined according to a set of character-
istics like color contrast and shapes “learned” from similar ﬁles
(Chopra et al., 2006).
Second, there are censured P2P solutions. A number of P2P
program vendors have recently entered alliances to combat child
p o r n o g r a p h y. Although most programs used for file sharing
have not in any way been part of this alliance (such as the Japa-
nese software named Winny—a Japanese P2P file-sharing pro-
gram claiming to be inspired by the Freenet network, and that
also claims to be able to keep online users’ identities untrace-
able), the state of P2P p rograms is quickly changing to include
heavy encryption and anonymity features (ibid.; Wi k i p e d i a ,
2006).
T h i rd, child pornography can be combated at the network
level. The technical approaches can be classiﬁed within a trafﬁc-
type model consisting of visual-type trafﬁc, text-type trafﬁc, and
94
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

encrypted-type trafﬁc. Visual-type trafﬁc consists of moving pic-
tures or frames. Text-type trafﬁc consists of things like e-mail and
documents. Encrypted-type trafﬁc represents a more challenging
phenomenon, since it may be computationally unfeasible to ana-
lyze heavily encrypted ﬁle contents.
Fourth, a number of new classification systems are under
development. One of these is a classiﬁer combining a stochastic
learning-based weak estimator and a linear classiﬁer, so that data
in each IP packet of 512 bytes drawn from a source alphabet can
be classiﬁed as “obscene” or “nonobscene.” If this classiﬁcation
system meets the industry standard, it should be able to classify
both textual and visual child pornography (Chopra et al., 2006).
Violations of Intellectual Pro p e rty Rights.
Infringing Intellectual
Property Rights (IPR) and copyright can occur online and, thus,
fall in the broad-based category of “cyberspace theft.” An exam-
ple of such infringement would be copying another’s work from
an online source without being authorized to do so or without
giving credit for the work—including songs, articles, movies, or
software.
In January 2000, one of the interesting cases to make head-
lines in the United States was the Internet free speech and copy-
right civil court case involving 2600: The Hacker Quarterly, U n i-
versal Studios, and members of the Motion Picture A s s o c i a t i o n
of America. Here, legal issues emerged around 2600’s alleged vi-
olation of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA). En-
acted in October 1998, the DMCA was intended to implement
under U.S. law certain worldwide copyright laws to cope with
e m e rging digital technologies by providing protection against
the disabling or the bypassing of technical measures designed to
p rotect copyright. DMCA sanctions apply to anyone who at-
tempts to impair or disable an encryption device protecting a
copyrighted work, typically using the Internet. A copy of the
D M C A can be found at this Website: http:// w w w. c o p y r i g h t
.gov/legislation/dmca.pdf.
The problem arose for 2 6 0 0 when, in November 1999, the
hacker vehicle linked to and discussed a computer pro g r a m
called DeCSS, DVD decryption software. The complainants ob-
jected to the publication of DeCSS, because they argued that it
could be used as part of a process to infringe copyright on DVD
movies. However, in their defense, 2600 claimed that decryption
of DVD movies is necessary for a number of reasons, including
An Overview of Internet Crimes
95

to make “fair use” of movies. In the end, the hacker magazine
lost the case, despite the excellent legal advice and re p re s e n t a-
tion by the EFF.
Another interesting court case surrounding Intellectual
Property Rights (IPR) arose in 2002, but the events around that
case were really quite bizarre. Seldom does a new product land
in court before it is displayed on store shelves. But that was the
case with DVD X Copy, a newly developed software pro g r a m
that gave consumers who purchased a DVD a relatively easy
way to burn a backup copy of a pre re c o rded, copy-pro t e c t e d
DVD movie for safekeeping but without breaking copyright
laws. What is even more unusual in this particular incident is
that the lawsuit was started by the software program’s cre a t o r,
321 Studios, Inc. The reason for the company-driven court case
was that the company wished to obtain a deﬁnitive ruling from
the U.S. courts on whether making one’s own personal backup
copies of DVDs—without sharing them with friends—is a legal
activity under U.S. copyright laws. Despite its neophyte charac-
ter, DVD X Copy raised considerable controversy regarding the
murky line between the protection of copyright laws and con-
sumer fair use rights, particularly when most types of entertain-
ment are becoming digitalized (Evangelista, 2002).
Another controversial issue re g a rding IPR came to light
with the release of Sony’s Digital Rights Management (DRM)
software used on some of its CDs—a content protection scheme.
P u rchasers who, say, bought the Sony BMG’s “Get Right with
the Man” CD by the Van Zant brothers may have noticed that it
has been protected with DRM. What this means in real terms is
that the CD can be played only using the media player that ships
on the CD itself, and that purchasers are limited to at most three
copies. Some consumers became angered not only that Sony had
put software on their systems that utilizes techniques commonly
employed by malware to mask its presence but also that the soft-
ware is so poorly written that it provides consumers no way of
uninstalling it. To make matters worse, most consumers who
have purchased the DRM CD and who discover the cloaked ﬁles
with, say, an RKR (RootkitRevealer) scan, will cripple their com-
puters if they try to delete the cloaked ﬁles. Although most con-
sumers would probably uphold the media industry’s right to
employ copy-protection devices to curb illegal CD copying,
many would argue that, to date, society has not found the right
balance between fair use and copy protection—and that Sony’s
96
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

employment of DRM may be taking IPR protection one step too
far (Mark’s Sysinternals Blog, 2005).
Without question, the social issue of infringing Intellectual
Property Rights, copyrights, and patents has drawn considerable
debate from those who ﬁght for freedom of information as well
as from those who ﬁght against abuses of artists’ rights and roy-
alties. For this reason, during the 2004 U.S. presidential cam-
paign, the INDUCE Act, or Inducing Infringement of Copyright
Act of 2004, was proposed by Senator Hatch of Utah.
If passed, the latter could have killed the market for digital
music devices like Apple iPods—which copy music from users’
computers. The INDUCE Act would have criminalized digital
music technologies because they could be viewed as inducing
others to infringe copyright. When news about the INDUCE Act
surfaced, hacktivists (that is, online political activists) went to
work, constructing Websites like www.Savetheipod.com to moti-
vate music lovers to send letters of opposition to Congress. The
electronics industry and the Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF)
also lobbied against its passage. The INDUCE Act met its demise
in October 2004, but, if passed, this far-reaching piece of legisla-
tion could have forced electronic companies and Internet ser-
vices to get permission for each new technology developed.
A more recent legal case regarding IPR and Internet technol-
ogy made the headlines in 2006. This fascinating case—which
ended with a negotiated settlement of U.S.$612.5 million in
March 2006—involved two high-tech companies—RIM, Ltd. (Re-
s e a rch in Motion, a Canadian company based in Waterloo, On-
tario) and NTP, Inc. (a small U.S. company based in Vi rg i n i a ) .
Each company claimed that it owned the Intellectual Pro p e r t y
and patents for the wireless handheld used by business and gov-
ernment people around the world to read and respond to their e-
mail while away from their computers.
Named “BlackBerry” by RIM, these nifty little handhelds
had been called “Crackberries” because users tended to become
addicted to using them. The devices became so popular that,
during the legal proceedings, the U.S. federal government re-
quested that employees with mission-critical roles be exempted
from an injunction, should one be levied by the courts (Arnone,
2006).
On February 1, 2006, RIM, Ltd., secured a key victory after
U.S. patent authorities rejected the last of ﬁve contested patents
at the heart of the dispute, and immediately RIM shares ro s e
An Overview of Internet Crimes
97

nearly 9 percent on the Toronto Stock Exchange, as investors bet
that RIM was gaining the edge in the ﬁve-year patent saga. How-
ever, with the negotiated settlement, the CEO of RIM agreed to
pay NTP a one-time payment of over U.S.$600 million to receive
a license to NTP’s patents going forward.
This case, and others of a similar nature, clearly show how
cumbersome and costly patent disputes can become. Estimates at
one point were that a possible settlement could place at over 
U.S. $1 billion. (McKenna, 2006).
Conclusion
Indeed, while the Internet has created many opportunities for so-
ciety to improve the lifestyle of its citizens, costs have also arisen.
As in the noncyber world, for every positive outcome that ﬂows
from real-world events and discoveries, there are counterbalanc-
ing negative outcomes committed by criminals with narcissistic
motives. The same can be said for the virtual world.
Chapter 2 has focused on the controversies surrounding the
Internet, particularly those of a privacy, security, and trust na-
t u re. A number of crimes perpetrated by Internet abusers were
detailed, as were the legal, social, and technological solutions.
With the evolution of the Internet and with its increased global-
ization, new social issues will continue to emerge, and novel le-
gal, social, and technological solutions will need to be found for
resolving them. The growth of the Internet in developing coun-
tries will be the focus of Chapter 3.
References
Al-Fedaghi, Sabah. “How to Calculate the Information Privacy.” Uni-
versity of New Brunswick, http:// w w w. l i b . u n b . c a / Te x t s / P S T / 2 0 0 5 /
pdf/fedaghi.pdf (accessed October 12–14, 2005).
Arnone, Michael. “Contractors Told to Relax about Blackberry.” 101
Communications, http:// w w w. f c w. c o m / a r t i c l e 9 2 0 2 3 – 0 1 – 2 3 – 0 6 - P r i n t
(accessed February 2, 2006).
Associated Press. “Business Schools: Harvard to Bar 119 A p p l i c a n t s
Who Hacked Admissions Site.” Globe and Mail, March 9, 2005, p. B12.
98
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Benschop, Albert. “Child Pornography in Cyberspace.” SocioSite,
h t t p :// w w w 2 . f m g . u v a . n l / s o c i o s i t e / w e b s o c / p o r n o g r a p h y _ c h i l d . h t m l
(accessed December 28, 2005).
Brenner, Susan. “Is There Such a Thing as ‘Virtual’ Crime?” Susan Bren-
n e r’s Website, http:// w w w. c r i m e - re s e a rc h . o rg/library/Susan.htm (ac-
cessed 2001 in the California Criminal Law Review).
Butters, George. “Criminal Activity: Your Computer May be Housing
Child Porn.” Globe and Mail, January 27, 2005, p. B14.
Center for Education and Research in Informance Assurance and Secu-
rity (CERIAS). “Info about SATAN.” Purdue University, http:// w w w
. c e r i a s . p u rdue.edu/about/history/coast/satan.php (accessed June 2,
1995).
Chopra, M., et al. “A Source Address Reputation System to Combating
Child Pornography at the Network Level.” IADIS International Confer-
ence on Applied Computing, February 25–28, 2006, San Sebastian,
Spain.
Cline, Jay. “The ROI of Privacy Seals.” ComputerWorld, Inc., http://
w w w. c o m p u t e r w o r l d . c o m / d e v e l o p m e n t t o p i c s / w e b s i t e m g m t / s t o r y /
0,10801,81633,00.html (accessed June 2, 2003).
Dibbell, Julian. “A Rape in Cyberspace (Or TINYSOCIETY, and How to
Make One).” Julian Dibbell Website, http:// w w w. j u l i a n d i b b e l l . c o m /
texts/bungle_print.html (accessed 1998).
Evangelista, Benny. “Burning Debate: New DVD-copying Software Sets
Stage for Legal Showdown with Hollywood.” San Francisco Chro n i c l e ,
h t t p :// w w w. s f g a t e . c o m / c g i - b i n / a r t i c l e . c g i ? f = / c / a / 2 0 0 2 / 1 2 / 0 9 /
BU141167.DTL (accessed December 9, 2002).
Flinn, S., and J. Lumsden. “User Perceptions of Privacy and Security on
the Web.” University of New Brunswick, http:// w w w. l i b . u n b . c a /
Texts/PST/2005/pdf/ﬂinn.pdf (accessed October 12–14, 2005).
Grami, A., and B. Schell. “Future Trends in Mobile Commerce: Service
O fferings, Technological Advances, and Security Challenges.” Univer-
sity of New Brunswick, http:// d e v. h i l . u n b . c a / Te x t s / P S T / p d f / g r a m i
.pdf (accessed October 13–15, 2004).
Hammond, Robert. Identity Theft: How to Protect Your Most Valuable Asset.
New Jersey: Career, 2003.
Hartman, Rachel. “Cyberstalking and Internet Safety FAQ.” Science
Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America, Inc., http:// w w w. s f w a . o rg /
gateway/stalking.htm (accessed February 1, 2006).
J o n c z y, J., and R. Haenni. “Credential Networks: A General Model for
Distributed Trust and Authenticity Management.” University of New
References
99

B runswick, http:// w w w. l i b . u n b . c a / Te x t s / P S T / 2 0 0 5 / p d f / j o n c z y. p d f
(accessed October 12–14, 2005).
Karp, Hal. “Angels On-Line.” Reader’s Digest 157 (2000): 50–56.
Lastowka, F., and D. Hunter. “Virtual Crimes.” New York Law School,
http://www.nyls.edu/pdfs/lastowka.pdf (accessed February 1, 2006).
Leyden, John. “WiPhishing Hack Risk Warning.” Register, http://www
.theregister.co.uk/2005/04/20/wiphishing (accessed April 20, 2005).
Libbenga, Jan. “Classiﬁed Military Documents Found on P2P Site.” Reg-
i s t e r, h t t p :// w w w. t h e re g i s t e r. c o . u k / 2 0 0 5 / 0 1 / 3 0 / d u t c h _ c l a s s i ﬁe d _ i n f o _
found_on_kazaa/ (accessed January 30, 2005).
Mark’s Sysinternals Blog. “Sony, Rootkits and Digital Rights Manage-
ment Gone Too Far.” Sysinternals, http://www.sysinternals.com/blog/
2 0 0 5 / 1 0 / s o n y - rootkits-and-digital-rights.html (accessed October 31,
2005).
McKenna, Barrie. “RIM Wins Key Battle in Patent Dispute.” Globe and
Mail, February 2, 2006, pp. B1, B8.
Miltner, Katherine. “Discriminatory Filtering: CIPA’s Effect on Our Na-
tion’s Youth and Why the Supreme Court Erred in Upholding the Con-
stitutionality of the Children’s Internet Protection Act.” FindArticles,
h t t p :// w w w. ﬁn d a r t i c l e s . c o m / p / a r t i c l e s / m i _ h b 3 0 7 3 / i s _ 2 0 0 5 0 5 / a i _ n 1 5
014919 (accessed May, 2005).
Parker, Donn. “Is Computer Crime Real?” California Criminal Law Re-
v i e w, http:// w w w. b o a l t . o rg / C C L R / v 4 / v 4 l e t t e r s t o e d i t o r.htm (accessed
2001).
P o s e y, Julie. “Child Pornography: Is It So Bad?” Owl Publishing,
http://www.pedowatch.com/porn.htm (accessed December 29, 2005).
Prescription Pricing Authority. “What Are Security Zones?” Prescription
Pricing Division, http:// w w w. p p a . o rg . u k / h e l p / w w w / i n t 0 0 2 9 0 . h t m
(accessed February 1, 2006).
Queeg Company. “Security Policy Checklist.” Queeg, http:// q u e e g
.com/~brion/security/secpolicy.html (accessed October 6, 1997).
Ropelato, Jerry. 2006. “Internet Pornography Statistics.” Top Ten Re-
views, Inc., http:// i n t e r n e t - f i l t e r- re v i e w. t o p t e n re v i e w s . c o m / i n t e r n e t -
pornography-statistics.html (accessed 2005).
Schell, B., and N. Lanteigne. Stalking, Harassment, and Murder in the
Workplace: Guidelines for Prevention and Protection. Connecticut: Quorum,
2000.
Schell, B., and C. Martin. C y b e rcrime: A R e f e rence Handbook. C a l i f o r n i a :
ABC-CLIO, 2004.
100
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Seddigh, N., et al. “Current Trends and Advances in Information Assur-
ance Metrics.” University of New Brunswick, http:// d e v. h i l . u n b . c a /
Texts/PST/pdf/seddigh.pdf (accessed October 13–15, 2004).
S e i g n e u r, J-M., et al. “Combating Spam with TEA ( Trustworthy Email
A d d resses).” University of New Brunswick, http:// d e v. h i l . u n b . c a /
Texts/PST/pdf/seigneur.pdf (accessed October 13–15, 2004).
S h u k o v s k y, Paul. “Good Guys Show Just How Easy It Is to Steal ID.”
Seattle-Post Intelligencer, h t t p :// s e a t t l e p i . n e w s o u rc e . c o m / l o c a l / 2 1 4 6 6 3 _
googlehack05.html (accessed March 5, 2005).
S t e i n e r, Ina. “eBay Auction Fraud Spawns Vigilantism Trend.” Steiner
Associates, http:// w w w. a u c t i o n b y t e s . c o m / c a b / a b n / y 0 2 / m 1 0 / i 1 2 / s 0 1
(accessed October 12, 2002).
United States v. American Library Association, 539 U.S. 194 (2003).
U.S. Department of Justice. “Fact Sheet. PROTECT Act.” U.S. Depart-
ment of Justice, http:// w w w. u s d o j . g o v / o p a / p r / 2 0 0 3 / A p r i l / 0 3 _
ag_266.htm (accessed April 30, 2003).
_____. “1999 Report on Cyberstalking: A New Challenge for Law En-
f o rcement and Industry.” U.S. Department of Justice, http:// w w w
.usdoj.gov/criminal/cybercrime/cyberstalking.htm (accessed February
7, 2003).
We a rden, Graeme. “Cybercriminals Ta rget Online Gamers.” CNET 
Networks, Inc., http:// n e w s . z d n e t . c o . u k / i n t e r n e t / s e c u r i t y / 0 , 3 9 0 2 0 3 7 5
,39115585,00.htm (accessed August 8, 2003).
Wikipedia. “Wi n n y.” Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., http:// e n . w i k i p e d i a
.org/wiki/Winny (accessed March 21, 2006).
References
101


3
Worldwide Perspective
T
he Internet has permitted Internet users around the globe to
communicate with one another with the click of a button, en-
tertain themselves with online gaming, enter votes for politi-
cal candidates without leaving their home, and purchase pro d-
ucts online—with store-to-door delivery. In fact, in 2001 the
Forrester Market Research group predicted that worldwide elec-
tronic commerce (that is, e-commerce) would be a success to the
tune of $6.8 trillion by 2004, and that growth in e-commerce was
expected to continue at about a 5 percent rate over the next ﬁve
years, particularly in countries in which citizens had re a d i l y
available Internet access (McCarthy, 2001).
As consumer acceptance and advertiser ambitions have dri-
ven the rapid growth of the Internet, there has been considerable
optimism re g a rding consumer interest in We b - d e l i v e red adver-
tising and marketing tactics (Nowak et al., 1999). Studies of on-
line users have reported that at least one-third of interactive
households use the Web to investigate or buy products or ser-
vices, with as many as 70 percent of regular Web users having
made one or more online purchases in the recent past (Magill,
1998).
Besides allowing for growth in electronic commerce, the In-
ternet has made possible enormous growth in the online educa-
tional market, both in developed countries and in developing
countries. On April 4, 2001, the Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
nology (MIT) made headlines when officials announced that
over the next decade, materials for nearly all of the courses of-
fered at the university would be freely available on the Internet.
This move was apparently inspired by the so-called White Hat
103

spirit that has been the primary driving force behind the free in-
formation sharing movement found in the Computer Under-
ground since the 1960s.
In North America, children from the early years on through
graduate study tend to be connected to the Internet, making life-
long learning a reality for those even in rural areas. A survey in
March of 2006 found that more than 46,000 schools for students
between kindergarten and grade 12, community colleges, li-
braries, and museums in at least thirty-ﬁve U.S. states are now
connected to the Internet2 backbone network. The survey also
indicated the success of the nationwide Internet2 K20 Initiative
in bringing together Internet2 member institutions and creative
educators from elementary and secondary schools, colleges, uni-
versities, libraries, and museums to extend new technologies, ap-
plications, and advanced content to all educational sectors across
the United States (Rotman, 2006).
The survey results also showed that 37 percent of all U.S.
K–12 schools, 54 percent of all U.S. community colleges, 57 per-
cent of all U.S. four-year colleges, and 20 percent of all U.S. li-
braries are now connected to Internet2’s nationwide network.
Equally as impressive, most of these Internet-connected institu-
tions have also adopted the use of leading-edge video conferenc-
ing and streaming media technology (such as DVTS or MPEG) to
enable students to have access to world-class learning experi-
ences such as music classes taught by world-renowned musi-
cians or scientists anywhere in the world. Students are also en-
couraged to participate in programs like Megaconference Junior,
a project that brings together thousands of students in elemen-
tary and secondary schools from around the world using ad-
vanced multipoint video conferencing (ibid.).
In addition, not too long ago, students wanting a college
diploma or a university degree had to pay tuition and then at-
tend class on a university campus. To d a y, students wanting to
advance their postsecondary education may do so simply with
the click of a computer mouse. For example, the Directory of
Schools, featured at http:// w w w. d i rectoryofschools.com/, is a
Website designed for college and university students seeking on-
line programs through distance learning. This online search en-
gine directory admits students worldwide—from those seeking
college diplomas to those wanting doctoral degrees—to universi-
ties such as the University of Phoenix and Kaplan University. In
all, more than 8,000 degrees and accredited online programs are
104
Worldwide Perspective

o ff e red. Although the enlisted colleges and universities would
claim to provide an equal educational advantage to citizens
a round the world—re g a rdless of where they are—the pro b l e m
arises when experts and law enforcement claim that some of
these institutions are merely offering degree-mill diplomas and
degrees.
And while some might argue that there is no harm in getting
more education, regardless of whether it is received through the
Internet or in the traditional classroom, news media reports have
in recent years cited some North American tragedies. For exam-
ple, after a mother named Marion Kolitwenzew discovered that
her daughter was diabetic, in 1999 she took her child to a special-
ist whose walls were ﬁlled with a number of alleged medical de-
g rees from seemingly reputable universities, and whose off i c e
was brimming with medical supplies. It turned out, however,
that this individual’s diplomas came from degree mills, deﬁned
as bogus postsecondary institutions conferring diplomas and de-
grees for a fee, often with little or no studying on the part of the
re g i s t e red student. When the mother followed the so-called
physician’s advice and stopped giving her daughter insulin, the
e i g h t - y e a r-old child started vomiting and eventually died. The
North Carolina man who treated the child, Laurence Perry, was
convicted of manslaughter and practicing medicine without a li-
cense. He is currently serving just ﬁfteen months in jail (Armour,
2003).
Other professions have been equally hard hit with false de-
g ree holders, including such fields as engineering, sex-abuse
counseling, and psychological counseling; even college pre s i-
dents have appeared with false degrees. The use of diploma
mills is exploding as the Internet makes bogus degrees easier to
get than ever before. Without question, many more employees
around the globe are today purchasing these credentials so that
they can get promoted or gain a competitive edge in tough job
markets.
Moreover, since traditionally based universities are moving
t o w a rd more online course offerings, the cyber environment is
such that degree mills can ﬂourish more easily than ever before.
In fact, as part of their branding exercise, many of these online
degree mills intentionally try to mimic the names of well-estab-
lished postsecondary institutions to trick consumers into re g i s-
tering online. It is interesting to note that in 2002, an investiga-
tion by the U.S. General Accounting Ofﬁce discovered more than
Worldwide Perspective
105

1,200 resumes on a government Internet site with listed degrees
from diploma mills. Even the Homeland Security Department’s
deputy chief information ofﬁcer, Laura Callahan, was under in-
vestigation for her doctoral degree, which apparently was
a w a rded by Hamilton University of Wyoming—not Hamilton
College in New York or another legitimate university. Given this
modern-day reality, a number of U.S. states have recently passed
laws making it a crime punishable by imprisonment to use a bo-
gus degree to get a job (ibid.).
Although citizens around the world tend to think that just
about any kind of information is available through the Wo r l d
Wide Web, there remains some information that evades such
transmission. For example, most of the books available in li-
braries and book stores are not available on the Internet, for two
main reasons. First, many authors are not willing to give their
c reative Intellectual Property (IP) to others for free. Second,
given the thousands of books available in many libraries today, it
would take an extremely long time and huge amounts of money
to digitize all the books available through conventional circula-
tion policies (Tardy, 2005).
However, a number of Websites are available to assist online
users with personal lifelong learning, including language train-
ing. For example, www. R e a l f rench.net provides a collection of
free online French language resources developed by Manchester
Metropolitan University (ibid.).
Another reality about Internet access globally is that there is
not quite an even playing ﬁeld in terms of global cultural adop-
tion of and adaptation to the Internet. Particularly in the devel-
oping countries, access to the Internet is an issue. It is well
known that in China and in India, for example, citizens in the de-
veloping world rely on the Internet to obtain Western news and
information, but only a portion of the population has Internet ac-
cess. In China, as a case in point, while there is an estimated pop-
ulation of more than 1.3 billion people, there are an estimated 94
million Internet users—most located in universities or large cities
(Thomson, 2006).
Moreover, in the developing world, online access to Western
newspapers, such as Canada’s Globe and Mail, and to Western on-
line reference sources, such as Wikipedia, are often censored by
governments, because, they say, they are concerned about the
morals of their citizens. In January 2006, for example, communist
authorities in China blocked the Wikipedia Website, the third
106
Worldwide Perspective

shutdown of the site in China over the past two years. The most
recent shutdown continued for ten weeks without any explana-
tion and without any indication of whether the ban would be
temporary or permanent (York, 2006b).
There is, unquestionably, a digital divide between those who
are wealthy enough to obtain Internet access and those who can-
not afford to do so. Moreover, not every government is agreeable
to having its citizens roam the Net freely, because, they maintain,
there are moral concerns. In such cases, the government feels the
need to censor Websites that they feel are harmful to their citi-
zens or to pass laws that make breaches of “community stan-
dard” tolerance levels subject to sanctions.
In short, online users in developing nations, in particular,
face a series of cultural adaptation and restriction issues that are
very complex in nature. These include social, legal, and econom-
ical facets. This chapter focuses on some of those critical cultural
adaptation and restriction issues, using real-world examples as
cases in point.
Cultural Adaptation Factors
Inﬂuencing the Digital Divide
Geographical Factors
If one considers that the Internet was developed as a security
adaptation in the United States (ARPAnet) by the U.S. govern-
ment so that during times of war, information could be transmit-
ted to critical agents to keep the country secure, then one would
expect that the United States would be far ahead in the adoption
and adaptation race in terms of Internet access and use for U.S.
citizens. Recent Computer Industry Almanac estimates, in fact,
c o n ﬁrm that this expectation is, indeed, the case. Although the
Almanac projected that worldwide Internet users in 2005 would
exceed 1 billion by the end of 2004, as few as ﬁfteen countries ac-
counted for 71 percent of the global Internet user population. As
expected, the United States topped the Internet adoption list, ac-
counting for 185 million Internet users. The next heaviest Inter-
net user was China (99 million users), followed by Japan (78 mil-
lion users), Germany (41 million), India (37 million), the United
Kingdom (33 million), South Korea (32 million), Italy (about 
Cultural Adaptation Factors
107

26 million), France (about 26 million), Brazil (22 million), Russia
(21 million), Canada (20 million), Mexico (13 million), Spain (13
million), and Australia (13 million). In terms of market share for
the top three user countries, the United States had 20 percent of
the Internet user market, followed by China with 11 percent, fol-
lowed by Japan with 8 percent (Computer Industry A l m a n a c ,
Inc., 2004).
The almanac had other predictions about future growth in
Internet adoption and adaptation—namely, that there would be
little adoption growth in the developed countries, because the
market is pretty well at its saturation point, but that over the next
five years many present-day Internet users with home PCs
would be making use of newer applications, including Vo i c e
over Internet Protocol (VoIP) to make less expensive long-dis-
tance telephone calls. There was also projected to be an increase
in mobile device use among present-day Internet users (with the
Research In Motion—RIM—being one such device).
In the developing nations, Internet use was conjectured to
continue to climb over the next decade, as more and more citi-
zens gained access. The largest growth was projected to be in
China, primarily because of the government’s tremendous eco-
nomic growth. Growth in Internet use was projected to increase
but at a slower rate in the developing countries of Pakistan, In-
dia, and Russia, where access issues for citizens are more
strained (ibid.).
Socioeconomic Status, Gender, and 
Life Stage Factors
Other demographic variables, including socioeconomic status,
gender, and life stage, have been reported to have an impact on
Internet-user access and adoption, particularly in the developing
nations (Vaagan and Koehler, 2005). For example, Internet access
is far greater for citizens in cities than in rural areas—with Inter-
net cafes (that is, store f ronts having Internet connections for 
fee-paying consumers) being quite popular in the more densely
populated areas. Moreover, in the developing nations, the well-
educated college and university population and those with
greater economic means are more likely to have Internet access
than are those without advanced education or wealth.
108
Worldwide Perspective

C u r re n t l y, gender is also a key variable re g a rding Internet
access in the developing world. As in the developed world, men
are more likely to gain access to a computer at earlier ages and to
be more interested in hacking, cracking, networking, and Inter-
net chat rooms (Schell and Dodge, 2002). In the future, however,
as women gain access to the Internet at earlier ages—motivated
primarily as a way to communicate inexpensively with their
friends—the gender divide may become less acute.
F i n a l l y, life stage factors are important in terms of Internet
access for those living in developed and developing nations. In-
dividuals born after the 1950s are more likely to seek access to
the Internet, because they were more likely to be exposed to com-
puters at younger ages, and are, there f o re, less likely to feel
threatened by the opportunities that Internet access can provide.
Legal Jurisdictional Adaptation Factors
C l e a r l y, Internet access and adoption by citizens in developed
and developing nations can provide for both personal and ﬁnan-
cial growth. However, Internet access and adoption by the
masses can also lead to revengeful online acts or exploits in-
tended to bring personal financial gains to online users mali-
ciously motivated. As these malevolent online exploits have been
b rought to court, interesting legal jurisdictional questions have
arisen. This next section will show how complex legal jurisdic-
tional adaptation factors can become, as more than one jurisdic-
tion becomes involved in any given online exploit.
A U.S. Noncomplex Legal Jurisdiction 
Case in Point
One such malicious motivation case that made world headlines
back in 2001 was that of U.S. waiter Abraham Abdullah. A s e l f -
taught cracker, Abdullah was arrested and sent to prison for de-
frauding ﬁnancial institutions of about $20,000,000 by using an
identity theft scheme. Abdullah would select his targets’ identi-
ties from the Forbes 400 list of America’s wealthiest citizens—
including Steven Spielberg, Oprah Wi n f re y, Martha Stewart, 
Ross Perot, and Wa r ren Buffett. Then, with the help of his local
Legal Jurisdictional Adaptation Factors
109

library’s computer, Abdullah would use the Google search engine
to glean ﬁnancial information on these wealthy citizens. He then
used information obtained from forged Merrill Lynch and Gold-
man Sachs correspondence to persuade credit reporting services
(such as Equifax and Experion) to supply him with detailed ﬁ-
nancial reports on those targeted individuals. The detailed re-
ports were then used by Abdullah to dupe banks and ﬁn a n c i a l
b rokers into transferring money to accounts controlled by him
(Caslon Analytics, 2006; Schell and Dodge, 2002).
This case illustrates that with access to the library’s computer
and the Internet, Abdullah was able to initiate a surprisingly
simple process of identity theft by gaining access to credit card
and brokerage accounts. Abdullah’s scheme came to light when
he sent a fake e-mail message to a brokerage house requesting a
transfer of $10,000,000 to his bank account in Australia from an
account belonging to e-commerce millionaire Thomas Siebel. A n
American, Abdullah was tried according to U.S. jurisdictional law
and was sentenced to imprisonment in a U.S. penitentiary
(Caslon Analytics, 2006; Schell and Dodge, 2002).
The Abdullah case also shows the relative simplicity of juris-
dictional issues when an online exploit is conducted by a citizen
of a given country and no cross-border issues are involved. Inter-
net crimes involving cro s s - b o rder jurisdictions, however, make
for much more difﬁcult prosecution and, often, competing ru l-
ings and remedies by the courts. Before discussing some re a l -
world cases, more needs to be said about how nations aro u n d
the globe generally treat Internet-related crimes.
The Electronic Frontier and Frontier Justice
Without question, monopolies in new industries tend to attract
the attention of antitrust laws, and within a short span of time
the New Frontier, electronic or not, becomes increasingly disor-
d e r l y. Governments around the globe have scrambled over the
decades to bring order and control to disorderly environments,
stretching ﬁnancial and legal resources and forcing the nation to
implement, at times, rather blunt instruments of justice. As a re-
sult, the concept of “frontier justice” has become a common term
in society’s lexicon. Briefly, “frontier justice” encapsulates the
struggle by lawmakers and enforcement agencies to bring order
and control where there is none. Invariably, affirm lawmakers,
110
Worldwide Perspective

“examples” have to be made of offenders. Abraham A b d u l l a h
would be one such Electronic Frontier criminal who had to be
brought to justice, thus serving as a visible presentation to other
online citizens that Internet-related crimes will not be tolerated
by U.S. society. Other jurisdictions around the globe have pro-
duced similar visible presentations (Schell and Dodge, 2002).
Over time and re g a rdless of jurisdiction, there has been a
continual state of disorder-to-order evolution, including that in-
volving the Electronic Frontier. Since the mid-1990s, for example,
monthly, it seems, somewhere around the globe, new legislation
is being implemented, or a special task force of law enforcement
ofﬁcials is being established, to deal with some evolving facet of
Internet crime.
The CAN SPAM Act of 2003—a U.S. act created to thwart
online spammers and cyber-pornographers, in particular—
serves as one such evolutionary case in point. With the passage
of this act, both U.S. citizens and those around the globe appear
to have beneﬁted in terms of spam crime reduction. Although al-
most a quarter of the world’s spam in the last quarter of 2005
was sent from U.S.-based computers, according to UK antivirus
company Sophos, that is good news. In 2004, about 42 percent of
all relayed spam came from U.S.-based computers. The re d u c-
tion has been linked, say legal authorities, to the effectiveness of
the CAN SPAM Act of 2003 and to the U.S. courts’ imposition of
harsh prison sentences and stiff ﬁnancial penalties on spam “ex-
amples” found guilty of this Internet-related crime.
One such spam case involved the April 8, 2005, sentencing
of spammer Jeremy Jaynes of North Carolina. Jaynes re c e i v e d
nine years in U.S. federal prison for his online exploits; according
to legal authorities, he was labeled one of the Top Ten spammers
in the world.
Often, the passage of evolving legislation has drawn criti-
cism from those supporting the values of free speech and fre e -
ﬂowing information in society—a common argument, for exam-
ple, used by those in the White Hat hacking community and
espoused by the Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF).
These free speech critics have argued that governments
around the globe have tended to over-react to a large number of
so-called Internet crimes, and, often, they assert, the wrong par-
ties are being made to serve as “examples.” White Hat hackers,
motivated by a need to ﬁnd ﬂaws in computer systems and to
Legal Jurisdictional Adaptation Factors
111

provide ﬁxes (or patches) for the ﬂaws, are too often labeled as
“Black Hat examples” by the news media and legal authorities.
M o re o v e r, the critics afﬁrm, the state’s legislative re s p o n s e
to threats to computer systems and networks, in particular, is
generally skewed by a perceived threat of “outside” crackers, cy-
ber-terrorists, and wrongdoers, when in fact the principal threat
of cyber-attacks already exists within the country, within a busi-
ness, or within the institution that the law seeks to protect from
external attack. In the U.S. jurisdiction, both the Abdullah and
Jaynes cases would be cited by the critics as two cases in point of
“insiders” causing harm as a result of Internet abuses.
In the UK jurisdiction, the London bombings that took place
on July 7, 2005, would classify as a noncyber “insider” crime.
Those terrorists, who killed fifty-two UK citizens as they were
commuting to work, were raised in the Beeston district of Leeds
(Suleaman, 2005).
F i n a l l y, from a historical perspective, it is generally ex-
t remely difﬁcult to assess the “reasonableness” of the laws’ re-
sponse to a perceived threat to societal order and well-being
within one’s own lifetime and from within one’s own culturally
biased conceptual and emotional framework. That said, most
modern-day legal observers seem to view recently passed Inter-
net crime laws as a “reasonable” compromise of the competing
interests espoused by the “property and person paradigm” (that
is, proposing remedies for harm done to property or to persons)
and by the free speech and free-ﬂowing information contingency
(Schell and Dodge, 2002).
One hundred years ago, for example, a judge in the Wi l d
West would not have “reasonably” hesitated to sentence a horse
thief to public hanging. Because of the disorder-to-order evolu-
tion, however, how the law would “reasonably” treat a horse
thief now would be very different from how a horse thief would
have been treated earlier: there is little doubt that in modern
North American jurisdictions, for example, a horse thief would
not be hanged.
Considering the worldwide confusion and early-stage de-
velopment of Internet crimes, many more controversial laws,
court cases, and court renderings are sure to surface around the
globe over the next decade. And critics are sure to argue, at
times, that too many “examples” have been wrongly charged, or
that they have been made to serve too harsh a sentence for a cy-
ber-crime they allegedly committed.
112
Worldwide Perspective

Governments and
Internet-Related Crimes
The point has been made that various jurisdictions around the
globe have attempted to deal with the evolving facets of Internet-
related crime. This section describes some legal attempts made
by various countries to cope with this evolution, beginning with
the United States and including three cases of violations of the
Digital Millennium Copyright Act, then moving to Canada, the
United Kingdom, and a more global dimension.
The United States
The Computer Fraud and Abuse Act, the Patriot Act of 2001, and the
Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA).
In the United States, the
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (CFAA) was passed in 1986 to
deal with computer-related crime, in particular. Through its evo-
lution, this act has been amended in 1994, in 1996, and, again, in
2001 by the USA Patriot Act.
At its inception, the CFAA applied only to government com-
puters. Today, it applies to a much broader group of computers,
including the Internet. Furthermore, its purpose has been ex-
panded in a more recent evolutionary twist with the intent of de-
terring terrorists and cyber- t e r rorist “examples” from causing
harm to property and persons in the United States.
As noted, the Patriot Act of 2001, also known as H.R.3162,
was introduced on October 23, 2001, by James Sensenbre n n e r
with the intention of deterring and punishing terrorist acts in the
United States and elsewhere and enhancing law enforcement in-
vestigation tools. The passing of the amendment was, in part, a
reaction to the devastating outcomes of the September 11, 2001,
t e r rorist attacks. Related earlier evolutionary bills included
H.R.2975 (an earlier antiterrorism bill that passed the House on
October 12, 2001) and H.R.3004 (the Financial A n t i - Te r ro r i s m
Act). On October 26, 2001, H.R.3162 became Public Law No.
107–56, more commonly known as the USA Patriot Act of 2001.
During the 1996 evolutionary phase of the CFAA, the Na-
tional Information Infrastru c t u re Protection Act (NIIPA) ex-
panded the act to include unauthorized access to and acquisition
of information from a protected computer without proper autho-
rization from the party owning that computer.
Governments and Internet-Related Crimes
113

B e f o re these more recent CFA A amendments, for the U.S.
courts to find a violation of the CFAA, the judges would have
had to interpret the CFAA as requiring that the accused (that is,
“the example”) intended commercial gain from the online ex-
ploit. The CFAA, said by legal experts to have been drafted with
future evolutionary phases in mind, provided the basis for crimi-
nal prosecution of cyber-crime in the United States. It was also
designed to be easily modiﬁed to reﬂect both changes in technol-
ogy and changes in criminal techniques.
Currently, the CFAA is broad in its application, reﬂecting the
U.S. government’s resolve to combat Internet crime on a compre-
hensive basis. A conviction for violation of most of the provisions
of the CFAA can include up to ﬁve years in prison and a ﬁne of
up to $250,000 for a ﬁrst offense. For a second offense, convicted
“examples” can serve up to ten years in prison and be made to
pay up to a $500,000 ﬁne. The current version of the CFAA also
permits any target suffering damages or losses to take civil ac-
tion against the violator.
It is important to note, as well, that the application of certain
subsections of the CFA A to Internet crimes has presented chal-
lenges for prosecutors. For instance, the re q u i rement for dam-
ages defined to be “a loss aggregating at least $5,000 in value
during a one-year period” has been difﬁcult to prove in court, es-
pecially when, for example, the text of a Web page has been al-
tered, but the computer system has not been damaged (ibid.).
Another important piece of legislation passed in re c e n t
years in the United States to deal with Internet crimes is the Dig-
ital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA). Enacted in 1998, the
D M C A was intended to implement under U.S. law certain
worldwide copyright laws to cope with emerging digital tech-
nologies. By providing protection against the disabling or by-
passing of technical measures designed to protect copyright, the
D M C A encouraged owners of copyrighted works—such as
songs and DVDs—to make them available on the Internet in a
“safe” digital format. DMCA sanctions would then apply to any-
one trying to impair or disable any encryption device protecting
such a copyrighted work.
Jurisdictional Factors in Three Court Cases Involving Violations of the
D M C A .
T h ree recent court cases involving violations of the
DMCA, in particular, illustrate both how legal jurisdictional is-
sues are critical to the outcomes of those cases and how jurisdic-
114
Worldwide Perspective

tional issues can add to the complexity of the cases’ resolution—
especially when more than one jurisdiction is involved.
For example, in 1999, just a year after the passage of the
DMCA, a civil court case arose in the United States that was one
of the more interesting hacker activist cases to make headlines.
Known as the Internet free speech and copyright case to those in
the White Hat hacker community, it involved 2600: The Hacker
Quarterly and, in opposition, Universal Studios and other mem-
bers of the Motion Picture Association of America. The case arose
in November 1999, from 2 6 0 0’ s publication of and linkage to a
computer program called DeCSS as part of its news coverage
about DVD decryption software. Universal Studios and fellow
companies ﬁled suit against 2600 in January 2000 and sought a
court order ensuring that the magazine no longer distribute the
computer program in question. These powerful complainants
objected to the publication of DeCSS, because they argued that it
could be used as part of a process to infringe copyright on DVD
movies.
In their defense, the editors of 2600 and representatives from
the EFF argued that decryption of DVD movies is necessary for a
number of reasons, including to make “fair use” of movies and
to be able to play DVD movies on computers running Linux—an
operating system widely used on Internet servers and embraced
by large corporations as an alternative to the Microsoft operating
system software. In the end, the courts agreed with the arg u-
ments made by lawyers for Universal Studios and other mem-
bers of the Motion Picture Association of America. Note how rel-
atively easy this U.S. case was to conclude in a court setting,
primarily because all parties to the complaint were A m e r i c a n s ,
and the case arose—and was settled—in the U.S. jurisdiction. In
fact, the resolution of this case was as comparatively noncomplex
as the Abdullah case, described earlier (ibid.).
The second case involving Intellectual Property Rights (IPR)
violations also took place in the United States, but with a for-
eigner as the alleged violator of the DMCA. This case also made
for very interesting reading, but it was a bit more complex than
the former case because two jurisdictions were involved. In July
2001, Dmitry Sklyaro v, a Russian scientist who had developed
s o f t w a re to crack Adobe’s supposedly secure eBook Reader for
his employer, ElcomSoft, was arrested and prosecuted in Las Ve-
gas as he was about to address the DefCon Computer Under-
g round community. The U.S. government agents who arre s t e d
Governments and Internet-Related Crimes
115

him argued that Sklyarov was in a U.S. jurisdiction and that his
Adobe code-cracking software was in violation of the DMCA.
The court case increased in color as Sklyarov’s Russian employer
was also later charged. The case ended with both Sklyarov and
Elcomsoft walking away free. In the end, the U.S. courts con-
cluded that Sklyarov’s behavior was legal in the country and in
the jurisdiction in which he had developed the software—Russia
(Schell and Martin, 2004).
The third case involves a ﬁfteen-year-old Norwegian hacker
nicknamed DVD-Jon. This case was very interesting because al-
though the hacker allegedly committed an Internet crime in Nor-
way, charges were brought forward by the U.S. DVD Copy Con-
t rol Association Incorporated. Again, two jurisdictions were
involved, making resolution of the case rather messy, costly,
time-consuming, and complex.
The issue started when DVD-Jon developed a software pro-
gram to circumvent the content scrambling protection on DVDs,
making it possible to view DVDs with the open source Linux op-
erating system. He then published the DeCSS decryption pro-
gram on his Website, and he permitted other Internet users to
download the program if they wished. It is important to know
that DeCSS removes the copy bar (that is, content scrambling
system) in DVDs and stores a copy of the ﬁlm on the hard disk of
the computer.
The issue became an international incident in 2000, because
the copy bar is licensed by the DVD Copy Control A s s o c i a t i o n
Incorporated for the protection of DVD ﬁlms produced by Mo-
tion Pictures Association members. Thus, in January 2000, the
U.S. DVD Copy Control Association (DVD-CCA) and the Nor-
wegian Motion Picture Association (MAP)—affiliated with the
U.S. Motion Picture Association of America (MPA A ) — f i l e d
c h a rges in Norway under penal code section 145. Three years
later, DVD-Jon was fully acquitted of all charges in an Oslo mu-
nicipal court, but the ruling was appealed to the Borgarting ap-
pellate court. In the end, the 2003 appellate court ruling upheld
the lower court’s ruling, and the Norwegian hacker walked
away a free man (Vaagan and Koehler, 2005).
The Oslo court found, first, that access to movies legally
p u rchased was not unlawful, even if the movies were viewed
differently from the way presumed by the producer of the movie.
The Oslo court also found, that disclosure of encryption keys by
the minor did not in and of itself constitute unauthorized access
116
Worldwide Perspective

to data. In other words, the minor could not be convicted for con-
tributing to unauthorized access to DVD movies by others, be-
cause the software program also had a legal application. The ap-
pellate court found that the minor’s actions were not an
infringement of the provisions of the DMCA (ibid.).
The DVD-Jon court rulings were viewed as a clear victory
for the White Hat community. The White Hats argued that the
freedom of information and the open-source software movement
principles were upheld by the Norwegian courts. Equally as im-
portant, this case demonstrates the complexity of and alternate
ﬁndings of courts as the issues in question involve more than one
geographical jurisdiction—particularly when they involve differ-
ent countries.
In combination, these three cases involving the DMCA raise
a number of Information Ethics (IE) and legal questions that
have yet to be fully answered. Clearly, all three cases are about
harm to property, but the Norwegian court rulings also suggest
that access and freedom of expression are also in jeopard y. For
example, can all kinds of digital information and knowledge be
considered to be Intellectual Property—and, if so, is there a clear
b o rderline between public domain software (such as open-
s o u rce, which is free) and proprietary software (such as Mi-
c rosoft, which is not free)? Also, how can one distinguish be-
tween the public’s right to access and the ownership rights of
authors and producers with respect to Intellectual Pro p e r t y
Rights (Vaagan, 2004)?
Without question, there is a variation in the frequency of
DeCSS software Website postings across nations—indicating a
more open or a more closed orientation to this software’s presen-
tation to citizens. Also, there is a variation in the context in which
DeCSS is shown on Websites—indicating either a likely negative
software application or a likely positive software application.
For instance, some nations (such as The Netherlands, Ger-
many, the United Kingdom, France, and the United States) con-
tain more examples of DeCSS Website postings than do other na-
tions (such as Italy, Spain, Ireland, and China). Moreover, there
a re diff e rences in the context created by Website authors for
DeCSS. Although authors in China tend to present DeCSS as an
audio-visual cracking tool (with placement on Web page cate-
gories such as “DVD Rippers” and “Decoding”), most European
Union authors tend to present DeCSS in a more politically open
context or without any clear positive or negative context (with
Governments and Internet-Related Crimes
117

placement on Web page categories such as “Linux DVD” and
“DeCSS Central”). Although sociopolitical stances as well as
global differences in law provide some explanation for these ob-
served variances, there are many issues left unanswered at this
stage of Internet crime evolution. And there are many variations
in interpretation from one jurisdiction to another (Eschenfelder,
2005).
Canada
Compared with the United States, Canada’s attempts at dealing
with Internet crime have been more compartmentalized, with
prohibitions found in the Canadian Criminal Code. Moreover, an
Internet offense generally falls in one of two categories, depend-
ing on the severity of the crime: an indictable offense, or a sum-
mary conviction offense.
Indictable offenses are more serious than summary convic-
tion offenses; there f o re, the former carry lengthier maximum
prison sentences. In combating Internet crimes in Canada, the
following criminal code provisions are generally applied: theft,
fraud, computer abuse, data abuse, and the interception of com-
munications.
The primary cracking prohibition in the criminal code is set
out in Section 342.1—namely, “unauthorized use of a computer,”
often referred to as the “computer abuse” offense. Section 342.1
of the criminal code is aimed at several potential harms: protec-
tion against theft of computer services (342.1(1)(a)), protection of
privacy (342.1(1)(b)), and protection against persons who trade
in computer passwords or who crack encrypted systems
(342.1(1)(c)). Of all of these provisions, section (c) is likely the
most controversial, because it creates as an offense the mere use
of a computer to intend to commit offenses (a) or (b), or to com-
mit mischief pertaining to data. The underlying rationale for pro-
vision (c) is that law enforcement and potential targets of Inter-
net crime should not be re q u i red to wait until actual harm to
p roperty or persons is inflicted before the act of abuse attracts
criminal sanction—a point that has angered White Hat hackers,
who feel that many in the Computer Underg round can be un-
justly criminalized.
By now, most readers are probably familiar with the case of
a young Canadian cracker named Mafiaboy. He is the fifteen-
y e a r-old minor who in February 2000 raised concerns in North
118
Worldwide Perspective

America and elsewhere about Internet safety when he cracked
Internet servers and used them as launching pads for Denial of
Service (DoS) attacks on the Websites of Amazon, eBay, and Ya-
hoo. He admitted his part in the cyber-attacks in January 2001, in
a courtroom in Montreal, Quebec. The judge ruled that the minor
had indeed committed a criminal offense in violation of the crim-
inal code, and he was sentenced to eight months in a youth de-
tention center. Maﬁaboy was placed on one year’s probation af-
ter his release and was ﬁned $250. Like the Abdullah case in the
United States, this Canadian case is not that legally complex, be-
cause the Canadian youth was convicted in a Canadian jurisdic-
tion and served time in a Canadian detention center.
Other well-publicized, Internet-related crime cases have
also had interesting legal nuances re g a rding cro s s - b o rder juris-
dictional issues involving Canada and the United States. One
such case was Guillot v. Istek Corporation (2001), a copyright-in-
fringement claim over online articles and links posted on a Web-
site. The plaintiff was a U.S.-based trademark lawyer who main-
tained that a Canadian Website copied both articles and a series
of links posted on his Website without getting authorization
from him. The trademark lawyer asked the courts for an injunc-
tion forcing the Canadian Website to immediately remove the
disputed content. However, the judge hearing the case refused to
issue the injunction; he found that posting material on the Inter-
net includes an implied license to copy material to the extent nec-
essary to make personal use of it. There was no evidence in this
case that the Canadian Website did anything that it was not im-
plicitly authorized to do. Michael Geist, a Canadian professor of
Internet law, said that while the judge’s decision highlights the
challenge of applying conventional copyright principles to the
Internet, it also demonstrates the difﬁculty of effectively explain-
ing rapidly emerging technologies to those unfamiliar with the
most recent Internet developments (Bareskin and Parr, 2005;
Geist, 2001).
The United Kingdom
The main Internet crime law passed in the United Kingdom
within the recent past is the Computer Misuse Act of 1990,
b rought in after the failed prosecution of Robert Schifreen and
Steven Gold—the famous 1986 crackers of the BT Prestel text in-
formation retrieval system. Although the pair were convicted on
Governments and Internet-Related Crimes
119

a number of charges under the British Forgery and Counterfeit-
ing Act of 1981, on appeal they were acquitted on the gro u n d s
that the language of the British Forgery and Counterfeiting Act
was not intended to apply to this case. Therefore, the Computer
Misuse Act was passed to prevent unauthorized access to com-
puter systems, to deter criminals from using computers to com-
mit property crimes, and to prevent criminals from impairing or
hindering access to data stored on a computer.
M o re re c e n t l y, the United Kingdom passed the Te r ro r i s m
Act of 2000 to criminalize public computer cracks, particularly
when the crack puts the life, health, or safety of UK persons at
risk. The United Kingdom, like other jurisdictions with serious
economic interests in the Internet—including the United States
and Canada—has chosen to adopt an approach to Internet abuse
legislation that results in criminal sanctions by linking cracking
activities to matters of fundamental national interest.
International Developments: 
The Convention on Cyber-Crime
In 2001, group action on an international level was being taken
to combat Internet crime. On November 23, the Council of Eu-
rope opened to sign its newly drafted Convention on Cyber-
crime. The convention was signed by thirty-three states after the
council recognized that many Internet crimes could not be pro s-
ecuted with existing legislation—typically local in jurisdiction.
The convention was the first global legislative attempt to set
s t a n d a rds on the deﬁnition of Internet-related crime and to de-
velop policies and pro c e d u res to govern international coopera-
tion to ﬁght it.
The treaty was to enter into force when five states, at least
t h ree of which were members of the Council of Europe, had
ratified it. The United States, as a participant in the drafting of
the tre a t y, had been invited to ratify the tre a t y. In many adopt-
ing states, ratification of the treaty would re q u i re amendments
to national law. It is interesting to note that President Bush
transmitted the convention to the U.S. Senate on November 17,
2003, for ratification. Finally, the convention was adopted at
the 110th session of the Committee of Ministers in Vilnius, on
May 3, 2002.
120
Worldwide Perspective

The convention requires countries ratifying it to adopt simi-
lar criminal laws on cracking, infringements of Intellectual-
P roperty Rights, Internet-related fraud, and Internet-re l a t e d
child pornography. It also contains provisions on investigative
powers and pro c e d u res, including the search of computer net-
works and the interception of communications. In particular, the
convention re q u i res cro s s - b o rder law enforcement cooperation
in searches and seizures as well as extradition. The convention
has recently been supplemented by an additional protocol mak-
ing any publication of racist propaganda via the Internet a crimi-
nal offense (Center for Democracy and Technology, 2005).
Culture and the Digital Divide
So far, this chapter has discussed some key access issues regard-
ing the Internet. First, there was a discussion about how various
geographical, socioeconomic status, gender, and life stage factors
i n ﬂuence global citizens’ Internet access. Next, there was a dis-
cussion about how different nations around the globe have dealt
with unauthorized computer access and Internet misuse
breaches. This section will present an international incident that
t r i g g e red Internet community standard tolerance breach ques-
tions, caused deaths, evoked cultural restriction reactions fro m
various nations around the globe, and produced news media
and legal questions about whether it was, indeed, a case of cy-
ber-terrorism.
An International Incident
In late December 2005, a young Dane by the name of A h m e d
Akkari flew to Beirut, carrying a package of booklets in gre e n
covers containing cartoons depicting the Prophet Mohammed. A
young Islamic scholar and activist, he was on a mission. He
failed to get the Danish prime minister to take action over the
cartoons’ perceived slight to Islam when they were published in
Danish newspapers and posted on Websites. Akkari was equally
disturbed about the slight to the Prophet Mohammed bro u g h t
about by the degrading nature of the media- and Internet-pub-
lished cartoons (Saunders, 2006a).
Culture and the Digital Divide
121

In a matter of weeks, Akkari had given copies of the book-
lets to the grand mufti of Egypt, the chief cleric of the Sunni faith,
leaders of the Arab League, and the head of the Lebanese Chris-
tian Church, to name just a few. Their reaction was quite pre-
dictable: they stared in amazement at the degrading images of
the Prophet Mohammed. As of February 8, 2006, Ahmed Akkari
found himself doubting whether his actions had done more
harm than good. He knew that as a result of his actions, millions
of online users saw somewhat distorted cartoons flash aro u n d
the Muslim world through the Internet, through newspaper pho-
tos, and through verbal text-message descriptions. Vi o l e n t
p rotests erupted about the cartoons and continued to eru p t
a round the globe, bringing the death toll from the demonstra-
tions to at least nine. The United Nations, the European Union,
and other governments struggled to contain the escalating vio-
lence and unrest (ibid.).
During the ﬁrst week of February 2006, the Norwegian and
Danish embassies in Damascus, Syria, were set on by angry Mus-
lims, and on February 5, 2006, the Danish consulate in Beirut was
also burned to the ground. Iro n i c a l l y, the anger sweeping the
globe was not started with the Internet images or the text mes-
sages; it began with a children’s book. In 2005, Danish writer
Kare Bluitgen was searching for someone to illustrate his account
of the Prophet Mohammed, but he could not ﬁnd anyone to do
the job, primarily because individuals feared antagonizing Mus-
lims’ feelings about images of their prophet. By disclosing his
dilemma to several Danish newspapers, newspaper editors be-
gan to question how far Denmark should go in self-censorship—
and whether freedom of speech was more important than Mus-
lims’ cultural sensitivities (McKay, 2006).
Then, on September 30, 2005, the editor of the Danish news-
paper J y l l a n d s - P o s t e n launched a provocative experiment. He
published images from twelve cartoonists whom he had hired to
create satirical drawings of the Mohammed. One photo, for ex-
ample, depicted a bearded Mohammed with his turban trans-
formed into a bomb. Another showed a group of ragged suicide
bombers arriving in heaven, only for the prophet to tell them,
“Stop, stop, we’ve run out of virgins.” Another showed Mo-
hammed as a dog engaged in offensive actions. Within days,
three of the cartoonists who had contributed to the newspaper’s
display received death threats, and security guards were placed
outside the newspaper’s ofﬁces in Copenhagen and Arhus. What
122
Worldwide Perspective

should have remained a local controversy became an interna-
tional incident within a few days after Prime Minister A n d e r s
Fogh Rasmussen and the Danish judicial system failed to act or
to do damage control (ibid.).
M o re o v e r, as part of the globe exploded in furious and, at
times, deadly riots against the Danish cartoons, the streets of
Copenhagen suddenly took on an air of frightened calm, as the
majority of Danish citizens feared that the cartoon furor would
lead to terrorist attacks. Although some of the Danish citizens
also felt insulted by the cartoons because they believed that the
depictions surpassed their community standard tolerance levels,
others felt that the global protests were unfair slurs on the coun-
try’s much-cherished culture of free expression and freedom of
speech. Without doubt, the majority of Danish citizens were con-
cerned about the harm to the economy that began to quickly
manifest. For example, Iran announced that it was severing all
trade ties with Denmark as part of its promise to respond to an
anti-Islamic current, and Cairo protesters called for an immedi-
ate boycotting of all Danish and Norwegian products (Saunders,
2006b).
International Reactions to the Incident.
The U.S. reaction to the Is-
lamic terrorist attacks was restrictive, calling for the Danes and
other countries around the globe to snoop on Islamic telephone
conversations and to read Islamic text messages. Attorney Gen-
eral Alberto Gonzales afﬁrmed on February 7, 2006, that snoop-
ing on telephone calls is vital to winning the war against Islamic
terrorists; he in fact suggested that wiretaps imposed earlier by
P resident George W. Bush had thwarted terrorist strikes in the
United States after 9/11. The secret surveillance program, he
said, began after the September 11, 2001, air attacks on the World
Trade Center and on the Pentagon (Koring, 2006).
E l s e w h e re, on February 7, 2006, French president Jacques
Chirac pledged solidarity with Denmark. Also, the Euro p e a n
Commission in Brussels released a statement saying that no real
or perceived grievance justiﬁes acts of violence (Sachs, 2006).
H o w e v e r, the European leaders—unable in the recent past
to create a common foreign or defense policy as they had been
able to create a common foreign cyber-crime policy—appeare d
to be unwilling and unable to forge a uniform response to the
newly erupted violence. More o v e r, the attacks on European of-
fices in the Gaza Strip, in the first week of February 2006, also
Culture and the Digital Divide
123

raised concerns that the cartoon incident could poison future re-
lations with Palestinians, already unsettled by a recent election
resulting in a victory for Hamas, the Islamic fundamentalist
group (ibid.).
Rather than calling for a restriction of or an intervention in
Islamic communications, Canadian foreign affairs minister Peter
MacKay noted on February 8, 2006, that while he condemned the
violence and simultaneously defended world citizens’ fre e d o m
of expression, he afﬁrmed that this right to freedom of expre s-
sion must be exercised responsibly. This sensitive issue, he said,
highlights the need for a better understanding of Islam and of
Muslim communities by citizens around the globe. He afﬁrmed
that the Canadian government pledges to promote a better un-
derstanding of Islam internationally, while partnering with Mus-
lim communities. On an aside, while some Canadian university
newspapers printed the cartoons, none of the mainstream news-
papers did (Sallot and Den Tandt, 2006).
Meanwhile, on February 8, 2006, the Canadian government
was, nevertheless, worried about the safety of more than 2,000
Canadians being deployed to Afghanistan, a Muslim country
with some of the bloodiest of the anti-Western protests, follow-
ing the cartoon’s release. For example, on February 8, Afghan po-
lice killed four protestors, bringing the number of cartoon-re-
lated deaths in that country to eleven (ibid.).
Elsewhere on February 8, 2006, crackers defaced as many as
600 Danish Websites, replacing the usual information with
t h reats and hacktivist messages. One page said: “Danish, you’r
D3ad,” while another showed a mannequin painted in the Dan-
ish flag and hanging from its neck. On that day, Muslims in
Bangladesh burned Italy’s ﬂag and called for the boycott of Euro-
pean Union goods (ibid.).
The Turks, angry that the leaders of Denmark and other Eu-
ropean countries had apologized for insulting Islam but not for
publishing the caricatures (repeatedly in their newspapers and
online), took part on February 7 and 8, 2006, in demonstrations
outside the Danish consulate and the French cultural center. As
the furor over the cartoons continued to grow, some Turks began
to question whether there was room for a country of 72 million
Muslims in a secular but predominantly Christian Euro p e a n
Union (MacKinnon, 2006).
Moreover, on February 9, 2006, advice given to hundreds of
business leaders, economists, and institutional investors around
124
Worldwide Perspective

the world by experts at U.S.-based Goldman Sachs was blunt
and went something like this: Given the terrorist atmosphere
that seems to predominate around the globe, build your bomb
shelters and buy a bullet-proof vest (Grant, 2006).
Legal Issues Raised by This Incident.
This case raises two very in-
t e resting legal questions that deal with restrictions in the cyber
world. In terms of the community standard, did the newspaper
editor exceed the community’s normative standard by initially
publishing these cartoons in hard copy and then online—thus
b reaching Danish law, followed by likely breaches in other ju-
risdictions around the globe? Also, since this case involved the
Internet, elements of terrorism (that is, the burning of build-
ings), online death threats to citizens, and resulting deaths fro m
demonstrations, is this case, by definition, a case of cyber-
t e r ro r i s m ?
The Community Standards Tolerance Level Issue Raised by This
I n c i d e n t .
Without question, in the last fifteen years, there has
been a meteoric rise in the popularity of a new medium of com-
munications and entertainment called the Internet. This new
medium has not only brought the promise of new opportunities
for self-expression and the communication of ideas to a bro a d ,
global audience; it has also brought the opportunity for breaches
in levels of tolerance within communities (since anyone with an
Internet account can post information on the Net and do so rela-
tively uncensored).
In fact, when an online user posts information on the Net,
that person is known to be a “content provider.” As the Internet
has grown in popularity with the growth of home PCs, so have
citizens’ concerns around the globe about objectionable or ob-
scene material available on Websites that can be accessed by mi-
nors—such as written and graphic pornography (particularly
child pornography), hate literature, and downloadable informa-
tion on bomb-making and computer-cracking (Sillito, 1999).
What is obscene material? The U.S. court system, for exam-
ple, tends to utilize the Miller test for determining whether free
speech or free expression is deemed to be “obscene” and, there-
fore, not protected by the First Amendment. If information meets
this test, it can legally be banned. The Miller test stemmed from a
court case known as Miller v. California, a 1973 court case in
Culture and the Digital Divide
125

which the U.S. Supreme Court held that material is found to be
obscene if these factors are satisﬁed (EFF, 2006):
• Whether the average person, by applying contemporary
community standards, would perceive that the work in
question and taken as a whole appeals to the prurient in-
terest;
• Whether the work in question depicts or describes in a
patently offensive way sexual conduct deﬁned by applic-
able laws; and
• Whether the work taken as a whole lacks serious literary,
artistic, political, or scientiﬁc value. 
Countries around the globe have developed similar tests for
determining if information exceeds that jurisdiction’s commu-
nity standards. In most developed countries, for example,
pornography depicting sexual acts among consenting adults or
genitalia would not be considered to be obscene, but in develop-
ing nations, community standards tend to vary widely, and those
nations tend to be more conservative in their deﬁnitions.
Under current international laws, the legal question of
whether Internet-related speech is deemed to be obscene is de-
termined, in part, by reference to a local community’s tolerance
standards. Federal venue rules tend to allow an obscenity prose-
cution to be brought where the online speech originated, or
where it was received. Since Internet speech is able to be received
in every community and in all nations, the community standards
criterion as applied to a nationwide audience tends to be judged
by the standards of the community most likely to be offended by
the online message (ibid.).
Even within countries, there can be diff e rences in commu-
nity standard tolerance levels, as the latter vary from one juris-
diction to another (Schell and Bonin, 1988, 1989; Schell and
B i g e l o w, 1990). As a case in point, in the U.S. v. Thomas case, a
U.S. Appellate Court in the 1990s held that a couple who oper-
ated a computer Bulletin Board System (BBS) in California could
successfully be prosecuted for breaching the Digital Millennium
Copyright Act (DMCA) if the case were to be held in a more con-
servative jurisdiction.
The latter case depended on the community standard deﬁni-
tion of obscenity. Because the community standard tolerance
126
Worldwide Perspective

level in western Tennessee was far more conservative than that
found in California, the prosecutors for the case thought that
Tennessee would be a better venue for hearing the case than Cal-
ifornia would be. Although the accused couple argued for pro-
tection of freedom of speech under the U.S. First A m e n d m e n t ,
the pair was eventually convicted under a number of federal
statues, including 18 U.S.C. §1465. They were found to have in-
tentionally used a facility and a means of interstate commerce—in
this case, a computer and the telephone system—to transport ob-
scene, computer-generated information. In short, the pair ran an
Internet pornographic BBS from their California home by scan-
ning onto their BBS sexually explicit photos that they bought in
various adult book stores. To view and download these photos,
Internet users had to pay a $55 membership fee to the pair and
sign an application that included spaces for users’ names and ad-
dresses (Rogers and Cohen, 1998).
On an international perspective, the publishing of the car-
toons of the Prophet Mohammed can arguably be seen as a
breach of community standards across global jurisdictions, par-
ticularly those containing a majority of Muslim citizens. A l-
though the violent outcomes that ensued are unjustified and
even criminal, perhaps they were effective in having culturally
insensitive countries realize their wrongdoings, particularly with
re g a rd to breaches of international community-standard toler-
ance levels.
The United Kingdom seems to have acted in a culturally
sensitive way in the days following the Danish publication of
the offensive cartoons. The British airwaves tried to strike a bal-
ance between the various holders of community-standard toler-
ance levels and to elicit mutual respect in this instantly con-
nected Internet world by inviting re p resentatives advocating
f ree speech and those calling for the cartoonists to be tried in an
Islamic court to discuss their thoughts on the air so that all citi-
zens could hear.
T h e re was also a riveting discussion broadcast on BBC’s
Newsnight program that allowed two British Muslim women to
calmly argue against violence with extremist Anjem Choudary of
the al-Guraba group, who called for violence against those favor-
ing the offensive cartoons. It is clear that the British saw the car-
toon eruption not as a terrorist war but as a cultural-sensitivity
and community-standard breach. Viewed in that way, it becomes
Culture and the Digital Divide
127

clear that this cartoon dispute will not be won by snooping on
Muslim’s cellular phones but by permitting public and respectful
communication exchanges. Offering platforms of civilized fre e
speech for European Muslims to debate with one another in an
appropriate context—as Britain did—beneﬁts society much more
than heavy-handed restrictions or violence (Ash, 2006).
The Incident as an Act of Cyber-Terrorism.
Regarding the question
of whether the cartoon online publication actually turned into an
act of cyber-terrorism because it involved the Internet, elements
of terrorism (that is, the burning of the buildings), and resulting
deaths of protestors, it is clear that there is no easy or obvious an-
swer to this question, because of the very early evolution of this
legal term.
In the present, the meaning of the word cyber-terrorism is be-
ing debated by Internet researchers, government and legal policy
makers, scholars, and Internet security firms. The word was
coined in the 1980s by Barry Collin, a senior re s e a rch fellow at
California’s Institute for Security and Intelligence. It was derived
by joining the concepts of “cyberspace” and “terrorism” (a term
believed to be derived from the Latin word terrere, meaning “to
tremble” or “to frighten”).
The intrinsic problem is that the word t e r ro r i s m itself has
very diff e rent meanings for diff e rent people. In short, because
the Internet is still relatively young, the meanings of words used
to describe breaches are still evolving, both in deﬁnition and in
legal circles around the globe. More o v e r, depending on one’s
vantage point, parties to the debate of deﬁnition have taken sides
over whether cyber- t e r rorism as a crime is an immediate pro b-
lem, a future threat, or an overhyped concept used by the news
media and governments. Finally, because of legal and cultural
differences among nations, it is difﬁcult to respond effectively to
online attacks. It is doubly difﬁcult to deal with Internet breaches
when there is disagreement about both the definition of what
constitutes cyber- t e r rorism and the degree of danger to society
likely to result (Keith, 2005).
In an attempt to provide scholars with a framework for un-
derstanding how the word cy b e r - t e r ro r i s m has been used by the
news media in recent years, in 2005, Susan Keith released her
findings about how the term had been used in 146 articles ap-
128
Worldwide Perspective

pearing between 2001 and 2004 in mainstream English-lan-
guage U.S., British, and Canadian newspapers and magazines.
She then produced the Cyber- t e r rorism Coverage Model, which
had variables relating to the notions that cyber- t e r rorism is
alive and real, that fear among government agents and citizens
is expected and justified, that defense and protection against
the crime are critical, and that cyber-security experts are
needed to stop cyber-criminals in their tracks. Keith also had
variables in her model relating to the overhyped news media
angle. On the one hand, there was the notion that cyber- t e r ro r-
ism is more hype than reality; on the other hand, there was the
notion that present-day terrorists lack the needed technical
skills to cause real harm to society, that present-day terro r i s t s
p e rceive the impact of cyber- t e r rorism to be less effective than
that of old-fashioned bomb attacks in targeted “soft” are a s
(such as trains and subways), and that public awareness about
c y b e r- t e r rorism is important but that civil liberties should be
p reserved (ibid.).
Indeed, Keith’s work sets out nicely how the news media in
various jurisdictions have in recent times conceptualized for citi-
zens how the term c y b e r - t e r ro r i s m may be perceived and acted
upon by citizens and various agencies. However, until the courts
around the globe actually rule on real cases and attempt to an-
swer the legal questions raised here and found in Keith’s model,
for the time being the Prophet Mohammed cartoon case cannot
be clearly pronounced as being a case of “cyber-terrorism.”
Cultural Property
and Personal Access
The ﬁnal section of this chapter deals with cultural-property re-
striction and personal-access restriction issues. The ﬁrst part de-
scribes key legal concepts around Intellectual Property Rights
and agencies created to protect such rights. The second part of
this section describes how diff e rent nations, particularly devel-
oping nations, have moved to restrict citizens’ access to certain
Websites because they are believed to be harmful to the moral
values of that society. In short, the ﬁnal portion of this chapter fo-
cuses on Internet censorship in certain parts of the globe.
Cultural Property and Personal Access
129

Intellectual Property 
Rights (IPR) Protection
There are a number of laws and protection agencies around the
globe to protect Intellectual Property Rights.
The Role of WIPO.
One such agency is the World Intellectual
P roperty Organization (WIPO), an international org a n i z a t i o n
p romoting the use and protection of Intellectual Pro p e r t y — t h e
creative outputs in all ﬁelds, including science, technology, and
the arts—and available for posting online.
With its head ofﬁce in Geneva, Switzerland, WIPO is one of
the sixteen specialized agencies of the UN system of org a n i z a-
tions. WIPO’s primary function is to administer twenty-three in-
ternational treaties dealing with diff e rent aspects of IP p ro t e c-
tion, and it currently has 183 nations as members (all of which
appear on WIPO’s Website; WIPO, 2006).
Before the advent of the Internet, IP was and continues to be
protected by patents, copyright, and trade secrets. But with ad-
vances in technology and with the worldwide growth of the In-
ternet, other legal and technological measures have been created
to deal with IP abuses. For example, anticopying restriction mea-
s u res such as copy bars are often used by proprietary software
producers to curb piracy and illicit copying. As a legal example,
the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) was passed in
the United States in 1998 to provide protections against technical
measures that could be utilized to disable or bypass encryption
devices used to protect copyright. The DMCA was created to en-
courage authors of copyrighted material to place their work on
the Internet in a digitalized presentation.
Moreover, penalties are to be applied when IPR breaches oc-
cur. For example, DMCA penalties are to be applied to any indi-
vidual attempting to disable or successfully disabling an encryp-
tion device. Stated simply, according to this piece of legislation,
Intellectual Property and copyright infringement are theft—tak-
ing what does not belong to the perpetrator of the encryption by-
pass, thereby depriving the true copyright owners of ro y a l t i e s
for the sale of their creative products.
Global Concerns about Piracy.
It is interesting to note that although
183 nations are part of WIPO, legal allegations have arisen in re-
cent years that in some countries, piracy is nonetheless openly
130
Worldwide Perspective

j u s t i ﬁed or covertly condoned by some of the member nations.
This kind of behavior is not acceptable, say member nations who
uphold the tenets of the agreement. As a result, some WIPO na-
tions have argued that unauthorized access restrictions need to be
espoused by and re i n f o rced through sanctions by WIPO partici-
pants. On the contrary, arguments have been made—particularly
by the developing nations—that poverty prevents poorer citizens
in their countries from making legal purchases of software or
DVDs. There f o re, pirating or reverse-engineering imported mate-
rials re p resents re d ress for decades of exploitation of the poore r
class (Vaagan and Koehler, 2005).
A Recent Case of IPR Infringement.
To illustrate a recent case of
IPR infringement, on May 22, 2005, reports surfaced that coun-
terfeiters in Beijing, China, were selling illegally copied DVDs of
the ﬁlm Star Wars: Episode III-Revenge of the Sith just days after the
ﬁlm opened in theaters in North America. The price charged for
the pirated movies, sold from vendors wearing shoulder bags on
the streets of Beijing, was a mere $3.05. The street sales occurred,
despite numerous Chinese government promises to clamp down
on the thriving black-market industry that North A m e r i c a n
movie companies have argued costs them billions of dollars in
lost revenue yearly. About 9,000 cases of piracy were brought to
court in China in 2004 (Associated Press, 2005).
Is there factual evidence to corroborate the claims that pi-
rated goods are a potential means of re d ressing decades of ex-
ploitation of the poorer class, particularly in developing coun-
tries? Although this question likely cannot be answered here, the
reality is that the poorest 20 percent of China’s urban residents
are earning less than 3 percent of the total urban income, accord-
ing to a new study released by China’s National Development
and Reform Commission. Moreover, the inequality is even more
obvious when assets are measured. The wealthiest 10 percent of
Chinese urban residents control a signiﬁcant 45 percent of urban
assets, while the poorest 10 percent of residents have only 1.4
percent of the assets. The sad news is that not only has the earn-
ings-and-assets gap reached an alarming level in China but the
gap appears to be expanding. Although the Chinese government
says that one of its 2006 objectives is to narrow the income gap, a
number of sociologists around the globe maintain that the huge
gap will continue to cause hatred of the rich by the poor for quite
some time (York, 2006c).
Cultural Property and Personal Access
131

Relative to China, recent economic reports indicate that In-
dia fares far worse. Some economic experts say that this is the
price that India is paying for its democracy. The economic re-
forms in India started in 1991 with Prime Minister Narasimah
Rao, who released the country from the suffocating web of bu-
reaucratic socialism. Despite the wealthier software and business
services area present in Bangalore, the rest of India is still strug-
gling economically—with the majority of citizens surviving at
near the poverty level. In short, India is no China. Where a s
China’s powerful government officials can bulldoze slums to
build modern-day highways and increase the country’s wealth
potential, India’s leaders find themselves tirelessly negotiating
with their own citizens to make any real economic progress, or
just to stay economically functional. As a case in point, the In-
dian government finally reached settlement with its airport
workers following a five-day strike in 2006 and hours upon
hours of negotiation. During negotiations, the area surrounding
the airport smelled bad—a problem for potential business in-
vestors and visitors—the result of the hot temperatures ferment-
ing heaps of stinking garbage (Mortished, 2006).
E u ropean Eff o rts to Protect Intellectual Pro p e rty Rights.
E l s e w h e re
around the globe, as a means to further reinforce the protection
of IPR in Europe, in April 2004 the European Union Directive for
the Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights became law. It is
important to point out that no matter where in the world IPR leg-
islation is passed, there is always controversy. With the passage
of this directive, for example, came complaints from the Irish
Software Organization that the law’s extreme provisions and its
tough sanctions toward regular consumers for accidental in-
fringements appear to be unreasonable. More o v e r, because this
directive had tough sanctions for those wanting to reverse-engi-
neer licensed software products to produce competing but
l o w e r-priced items, open-source and free software developers
were concerned that their products could be sanctioned (Vaagan
and Koehler, 2005).
Censorship of Certain Websites
Censorship by some nations of certain Websites is a current so-
cial global issue. Censorship of information is one social issue
132
Worldwide Perspective

that has plagued public librarians for years when they select ma-
terial for their library collections. Although researchers have re-
ported that the censorious librarian tends to be female, to have
less than a university education, and to have generally liberal at-
titudes but conservative, risk-averse behaviors (Schell and
Bonin, 1988), there has been little research conducted by scholars
to shed light on why certain countries—such as China and Rus-
sia—feel the need to censor their citizens’ access to certain Web-
sites.
Possible Explanations for Governments’ Censorious Behavior.
As the
Internet has grown to become an ingrained part of Internet-con-
nected citizens’ lives, a number of concerns about commerc i a l
harms have been raised. Concerns about the darker side of the
Internet have given governments in both developed and devel-
oping nations a reason for investigating a number of We b s i t e s
deemed potentially harmful to users, particularly to minors. Tar-
geted Websites for investigation by government and legal au-
thorities have included those created for often controversial com-
mercial purposes—such as pornography distribution, interactive
gaming, online auctions, and online gambling.
Moreover, concerted efforts to prevent harm to persons that
may be caused by the viewing of and interaction on certain com-
m e rcial Websites and chat rooms have come from a number of
s o u rces, including online industries, consumer interest gro u p s ,
legislators, and government agencies. Claims of potentially
harmful consequences to online citizens have, in fact, led to nu-
m e rous calls for the regulation of the contents of commerc i a l
Websites through a number of measures. In the United States, for
example, restrictive regulations have included the passage of the
Child Online Protection Act (COPA). This piece of legislation
was created to restrict obscene materials from being available to
minors online. Also, the Project Safe Bid, to curb online auction
fraud, was created, as was the Internet Gambling Prohibition Act
to ban online gambling.
The growing willingness to restrict commercial Websites by
governments and citizens appears to rest on the belief that such
restrictions will help reduce online pornography distribution,
online violations of IPR and consumer privacy, as well as online
auction fraud and online gambling addictions. Proponents of
such restrictive measures have argued that legal interventions
can protect vulnerable groups—children, teenagers, and women
Cultural Property and Personal Access
133

—from the dangerous materials illustrated on or the unsafe ac-
tivities promoted by the Internet.
However, whenever legal measures are created to restrict ac-
cess, controversy typically ensues. One piece of legislation result-
ing in controversy in the United States, for example, was the
Communication Decency Act, or CDA. As a means of restricting
minors’ access to indecent and patently offensive speech on the
Internet, in 1996 the U.S. Congress passed the CDA. However,
shortly after its passage, a lawsuit was launched by the Ameri-
can Civil Liberties Union, alleging that this piece of legislation
violated the First Amendment. The U.S. Supreme Court, sup-
porting that view, struck down the CDA. A more recent and sec-
ond attempt to regulate pornography on the Internet resulted in
the passage of COPA. By remedying the alleged defects in the
CDA, COPA was made to apply only to those communications
made for commercial purposes and considered to be potentially
harmful to teens or children.
It is important to note, however, that the debate concerning
the regulation of Website content and the protection of minors
has not been limited to pornographic commercial Websites. Web-
sites promoting online games have also provoked a number of
voiced concerns by parents, educators, and politicians about the
potential harm they can cause, including that of motivating on-
line users to act out in real-life aggressive acts. Given that chil-
d ren or teens in developed countries today have nearly unlim-
ited access to the Internet, it is plausible, they have argued, that
without proper monitoring or parental restrictions, minors can
easily access game sites promoting interactive violence. In fact,
some online gaming critics have blamed violent computer games
for desensitizing young gamers to the ugliness of bloodshed and
homicide. As a response to public outrage about online gaming,
politicians in many jurisdictions have provided resources to help
parents protect their children from objectionable or offensive ma-
terial posted on the Internet.
Online auction sites are also major points of Internet contro-
versy. According to e-commerce analysts at Forrester Marketing
Research, the number of products sold online increases dramati-
cally year after year. In 1998, for example, only about $1.4 billion
worth of products were sold through online auctions, but by
2003, online auction sales rose to more than $19 billion. Although
online auction sales continued to boom in 2006, consumer pro-
tection groups have increasingly advocated for restrictions to be
134
Worldwide Perspective

placed on online auction Websites because of an increased inci-
dence of online fraud and the sale of controversial products. For
example, in 1999 a human kidney was placed for sale on the
eBay Website, receiving bids by online clients of nearly $6 mil-
lion (Yeon, 2001).
In the United States, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC),
concerned that there needed to be a vehicle for alerting prospec-
tive online auctioneers that fraud was becoming more prevalent
online, launched Project Safebid—a full-blown effort to get law
enforcement agents to treat online auction fraud cases very seri-
ously and to apply strong sanctions for those who defraud oth-
ers. Today, auction Websites tend to cooperate with law enforce-
ment agents to prevent the selling of offensive items online—
including drugs, weapons, and body parts, human or otherwise.
Often, caught and convicted spammers and online-fraud perpe-
trators are sent to jail (ibid.).
Censorship Cases in China.
North America is not the only place
w h e re Internet controversies and restrictions have occurred. In
China, for example, the government tends to monitor what users
do and see on the Internet. The Chinese government has invented
two cartoon figures, called Jingjing and Chacha, that float on
users’ computer screens. Their job is to keep online users under
constant surveillance to ensure that they do not view material
p e rceived by the government to be unauthorized or subversive.
Users, for example, who try to post comments on any of Shen-
zhen’s Websites or online chat rooms will ﬁnd that the cartoon
characters pop up on their computer screens to remind users that
their online behavior is being monitored. The line used by the
Chinese government is that the cartoons’ official function is to
maintain order on the Electronic Frontier and to remind online
citizens to be conscious of the safe and healthy use of the Net.
What is very interesting is that the cartoon ﬁg u res were designed
by real-life Internet police in Shenzhen, China, so that Internet
users could communicate interactively with the cartoon police
(and, there b y, real police). The combined names of Jingjing and
Chacha produce the word “jingcha,” which means “police” in
Chinese. Censored Websites by the Chinese government in 2006
have included the Canadian mainstream newspaper The Globe
and Mail, blocked and then unblocked a number of times. With an
estimated 40,000 Internet police, China is actively engaged in a
campaign to control what online users see and read (York, 2006a).
Cultural Property and Personal Access
135

Although censorship of Chinese Websites is seen as a neces-
sary restrictive action by the government to keep citizens safe,
a p p a rently not all citizens are happy with the restrictions. Chi-
nese students and intellectuals have openly voiced outrage at
Beijing’s decision to restrict access to the Wikipedia Website, an
online encyclopedia that has become a re s o u rce for many stu-
dents and academics in China and elsewhere. The site off e r s
more than 2 million articles in 100 languages, but its presentation
on political issues such as the Tibetan autonomy issue, Ta i-
wanese independence, and the Tiananmen Square student
protests has evoked the wrath of the Chinese government. As a
reaction to one of the blockages, one message posted on an on-
line site said, “What idiots these ofﬁcials are! They are killing our
culture with censorship” (York, 2006b).
Reactions to Chinese Censorship by Business.
Although China
wants to do business with the rest of the world—online or in the
conventional sense—censorship like this can create havoc for
Chinese businesses connected to the World Wide Web. For exam-
ple, in August 2005, North America heard about the newly re-
leased Chinese search engine Baidu.com when its stock soare d
m o re than 350 percent on the first day of trading. The thirty-
s e v e n - y e a r-old Chinese founder, Robin Li, told newspaper re-
porters that although Chinese Internet usage was still in its in-
fancy and was constantly being monitored by the government,
he, like North American search engine founders, had hopes of
becoming another high-tech billionaire, because Chinese citizens
enjoy staying “connected” with the rest of the world through the
World Wide Web. Although Li’s statement contained much truth,
on October 5, 2005, the reality was that Chinese authorities shut
down another two Internet sites popular among academics, jour-
nalists, and civil rights activists. There appear to be no guaran-
tees that Li’s Website may not some day face a similar fate.
To d a y, businesses wanting to do transactions in China are
making adaptations. For example, in February 2006, the Mi-
c rosoft Corporation outlined a policy for handling government
restrictions on personal Websites. General counsel Brad Smith
said that the software maker would shut down personal We b
logs, or blogs, only if it received a legally binding notice from a
government. In the past, Microsoft did not re q u i re that content
explicitly violate laws for it to be blocked or removed. Mr. Smith
afﬁrmed that the company would block a site deemed to be ille-
136
Worldwide Perspective

gal only in the country where it received legal notice—but
nowhere else. The company wanted to maintain access to the site
for the rest of the noncensored world. In a similar vein, Google
said that its new Chinese service would remove links to Websites
believed to be offensive to the Chinese government. In particular,
Google afﬁrmed that they would not run certain services—like
blogs and e-mail—on computers in China (Guth, 2006).
Censorship Cases in Russia.
China is not the only country that
wants to keep a careful eye on its citizens’ online activity. In Rus-
sia, twenty-six-year-old A n d rei Skovoro d n i k o v, a young gui-
tarist, has just ﬁnished serving a six-month conditional sentence
for publishing an offensive phrase on the Internet—or, as the in-
dictment noted, for repeating the words twenty-five times in
Russian and English. The phrase included these words: “Oh, oh,
oh, Putin. Oh, oooh, Putin is a fag.” Although Andrei says that
his Website was meant to be a joke, he did not think it was a joke
when the police raided his apartment, threw him into prison for
almost two years, and placed his name in the criminal ﬁles. He
was convicted under Article 319 of Russia’s criminal code, for-
bidding public insult of an authority re p resentative, connected
with the fulﬁllment of his responsibilities. It is interesting to note
that Reporters Without Borders ranks Russia near the bottom of
its pre s s - f reedom index: 140th among 167 countries (Smith,
2006). In comparison, China ranks 159th (York, 2006a).
Conclusion
This chapter has discussed the cultural, economic, legal, and po-
litical impact of the Internet in developed countries such as the
United States, Canada, and the United Kingdom, and develop-
ing countries like China, India, and Russia. The focus throughout
the chapter was on critical cultural adaptation and restriction is-
sues related to the growth of the Internet around the globe.
C o m p a red with the development of the Internet in North
A m e r i c a — w h e re companies like Yahoo, Inc., have been able to
succeed because they got onto the Information Game highway
early (thanks to the trail-blazing efforts of ARPAnet), with plenty
of financing, with the ability to hire the best professionals to
make the business initiative a success, and with a minimal de-
gree of restricted user access—by this chapter’s end it should be
Conclusion
137

clear that in China, as a comparative case in point, Baidu, the
Chinese Internet search engine that ﬁnally emerged as a growing
positive concern in news media articles in the summer of 2005,
had been ﬁve years in the making. The odd thing is that, like Ya-
hoo, Inc., and ARPAnet, Baidu also has a U.S. connection.
Although relatively unknown outside of China until now,
Baidu was founded by two Chinese gurus who had previously
worked for U.S. technology ﬁrms. The entre p reneurs who own
Baidu claim that they have a strong following of more than 100
million online Web surfers in China, but they openly admit that,
relative to the open Internet surfing privileges given North
American and European online users, the Chinese government
censors whatever content it feels might corrupt the morals of its
citizens.
In short, this chapter has focused on the unique cultural
adaptations and restrictions regarding the Internet found in the
underdeveloped and developing nations around the globe. The
s t rong message has been that the Internet is still in its early
phases of evolution; many more cultural adaptations, legislative
challenges, and restrictive interventions are likely to arise in the
forthcoming years.
References
A r m o u r, Stephanie. “Diploma Mills Insert Degree of Fraud into Job
Market.” USA
To d a y, http:// w w w. u s a t o d a y. c o m / m o n e y / w o r k-
place/2003–09–28-fakedegrees_x.htm (accessed September 29, 2003).
Ash, Timothy. “Going Head to Head for Islam’s Heart.” Globe and Mail,
February 9, 2006.
Associated Press. “Entertainment: Counterfeiters Move Fast on Illegal
Star Wars DVD.” Globe and Mail, May 23, 2005, p. B7.
B a reskin and Parr. “Recent Court Decisions 2001.” Bareskin and Parr,
h t t p :// w w w. b a re s k i n p a r r. c o m / E n g l i s h / p u b l i c a t i o n s / rc d / p u b _ rc d _
aug_2001.html (accessed July 4, 2005).
Caslon Analytics. “Caslon Analytics Profile: Identity Theft, Identity
Fraud.” Caslon Analytics, http:// w w w. c a s l o n . c o m . a u / i d t h e f t p ro f i l e 2
.htm (accessed March 2006).
Center for Democracy and Te c h n o l o g y. “International Issues: Cyber-
crime.” Center for Democracy and Te c h n o l o g y, http:// w w w. c d t . o rg /
international/cybercrime/ (accessed February 8, 2005).
138
Worldwide Perspective

Computer Industry Almanac, Inc. “Worldwide Internet Users Will Top
One Billion in 2005.” Computer Industry Almanac, http:// w w w
.c-i-a.com/pr0904.htm (accessed September 3, 2004).
EFF (Electronic Frontier Foundation). “Bloggers FAQ-Adult Material.”
E l e c t ronic Frontier Foundation, http:// w w w. e ff . o rg / b l o g g e r s / l g /
faq-adult.php (accessed February 22, 2006).
Eschenfelder, Kristin. “Chasing Down the Social Meaning of DeCSS: In-
vestigating the Internet Posting of DVD Circumvention Software . ”
American Society for Information Science and Technology, http://www
.asis.org/Bulletin/Jun05/eschenfelder.html (accessed June/July 2005).
Geist, Michael. “Cyberlaw Shows Its True Colours.” Globe and Mail, Sep-
tember 6, 2001, p. B27.
Grant, Tavia. “Te r rorism and Oil Woes Top List of Biggest Financial
Worries.” Globe and Mail, February 9, 2006, p. B19.
Guth, Robert. “Microsoft Revises Policy on Spiking Blogs.” Globe and
Mail, February 1, 2006, p. B11.
Keith, Susan. “Fear-Mongering or Fact: The Construction of ‘Cyber-Ter-
rorism’ in U.S., U.K. and Canadian News Media.” Oxford Internet Insti-
tute, http:// w w w. o i i . o x . a c . u k / re s e a rc h / c y b e r s a f e t y / e x t e n s i o n s / p d f s /
papers/susan_keith.pdf (accessed September 8–10, 2005).
Koring, Paul. “Phone Snooping Needed, Gonzales Says.” Globe and Mail,
February 7, 2006, p. A13.
MacKinnon, Mark. “Looking West, but Still Deeply Offended.” G l o b e
and Mail, February 9, 2006, p. A17.
Magill, K. “Merchants—Not Consumers—Are Blocking E-commerc e ,
Study Says.” Direct Marketing News 20 (1998): 19–20.
M c C a r t h y, J., with M. Tavilla. “Business View and IT Brief.” http://
w w w. f o r re s t e r. c o m / ﬁn d re s e a rc h / re s u l t s ? S o r t Ty p e = D a t e & N t t = % 2 4 6 . 8 +
t r i l l i o n & s w i n = 1 & N t k = M a i n S e a rc h & N t x = m o d e + m a t c h a l l a n y & g e o = 0 &
dAg=10000&N=50181 (accessed March 13, 2001).
M c K a y, Simeon. “Text Messages Helped Stoke Flames of Fury.” G l o b e
and Mail, February 6, 2006, pp. A1, A12.
Mortished, Carl. “India Booms but—Unlike China—Democracy Dulls
the Tiger’s Claws.” Globe and Mail, February 9, 2006, p. B17.
Nowak, G., et al. 1999. “Interactive Media: A Means for More Meaning-
ful Advertising?” In Advertising and the World Wide We b , edited by 
D. Schumann and E. Thorson, 99–117. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Inc.
Rogers, S., and B. Cohen. “The First Amendment and the Internet:
United States v. Thomas, 74 F. 3d 701 6t h C i r. 1996.” Sugarman et al.,
References
139

h t t p :// w w w.netlitigation.com/netlitigation/cases/thomas.htm (ac-
cessed 1998).
Rotman, Lauren. “Internet Survey Finds over 46,000 K20 Institutions
Connected to Its Next-generation Network.” Lauren Rotman,
h t t p s :// m a i l . i n t e r n e t 2 . e d u / w w s / a rc / i 2 - n e w s / 2 0 0 6 – 0 3 / m s g 0 0 0 0 4
.html (accessed March 24, 2006).
Sachs, Susan. “Europe Fails to Mount United Response to Pro t e s t s . ”
Globe and Mail, February 7, 2006, p. A13.
Sallot, J., and M. Den Tandt. “Cartoons Caused Offence, Ottawa Says.”
Globe and Mail, February 9, 2006, p. A17.
Saunders, Doug. “‘It Is Not What I Want to Happen.’” Globe and Mail,
February 8, 2006a, pp. A1, A14.
_____. “Danes Fear Cartoon Furor Will Lead to Te r ror Attacks.” G l o b e
and Mail, February 7, 2006b, pp. A1, A13.
Schell, B., and B. Bigelow. “Expert Testimony in Pornography Trials: 
A Role for the Social Scientist.” Behavioral Sciences and the Law 8 (1990):
301–311.
Schell, B., and L. Bonin. 1989. “Understanding Pornographic Tolerance
Levels of Community Residents Regarding Three Media: Magazines,
Movies, and Video Cassettes.” Annals of Sex Research 1 (1989): 501–521.
_____. 1988. “Factors A ffecting Censorship by Canadian Librarians.”
Journal of Psychology 123 (1988): 357–367.
Schell, B., and J. Dodge, with S. Moutsatsos. 2002. The Hacking of Amer-
ica: Who’s Doing It, Why, and How. Westport, CT: Quorum.
Schell, B., and C. Martin. C y b e rcrime: A R e f e rence Handbook. Santa Bar-
bara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2004.
Sillito, Casey. “The Relationship between Attitude toward Government
Censorship of the Internet and Internet Exposure.” http:// s 9 3 5 0 2 9 7 9
.onlinehome.us/cjsweb/employ/portfolio/academic/psych_4.htm (ac-
cessed February 25, 1999).
Smith, Graeme. “‘It Wasn’t That Funny the Day They Raided My Apart-
ment.’” Globe and Mail, January 31, 2006, p. A3.
Suleaman, Nasreen. “The Mystery of Sid.” http:// n e w s . b b c . c o . u k / 1 /
hi/magazine/4354858.stm (accessed October 19, 2005).
Ta rd y, Yvan. “Internet for Learning Languages.” University of Bristol,
h t t p :// w w w. v t s . rd n . a c . u k / t u t o r i a l / l a n g s ? s i d = 7 4 2 5 1 0 0 & o p = re n d e r & m
anifestid=132&page=copyrighthtml (accessed April 2005).
Thomson, Sandy. “China Rising.” Elle Canada 59 (May 2006): 11 6 – 11 8 ,
120.
140
Worldwide Perspective

Vaagan, Robert. “Ethical Issues Raised by the Electronic Information En-
vironment.” Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the Library Association
of Ireland and the Chartered Institute of Library and Informational Profession-
als (CILIP) Ireland, 2004.
Vaagan, R., and W. Koehler. “Intellectual Property Rights vs. Public Ac-
cess Rights: Ethical Aspects of the DeCSS Decryption Program.” Infor-
mation Research, http:// i n f o r m a t i o n r.net/ir/10–3/paper230.html (ac-
cessed April 2005).
WIPO. “About WIPO.” World Intellectual Property Org a n i z a t i o n ,
http://www.wipo.int/about-wipo/en/ (accessed February 9, 2006).
Yeon, Seounmi. “Censorship of Commercial Websites.” Michigan State
U n i v e r s i t y. http:// l i s t . m s u . e d u / c g i - b i n / w a ? A 2 = i n d 0 1 0 9 b & L = a e j m c
&T=0&F=&S=&P=3185 (accessed September 9, 2001).
York, Geoff re y. “Chinese Ban on Wikipedia Prevents Research, Users
Say.” Globe and Mail, January 10, 2006a, p. A2.
_____. “Internet Police State.” Globe and Mail, January 28, 2006b, p. F1.
_____. “China Frets over Its Expanding Income Gap.” Globe and Mail,
February 9, 2006c, pp. A1, A18.
References
141


4
Chronology
The Setting
1940s 
In the 1940s and 1950s, computers are made with 10,000 
and
vacuum tubes and occupy more than 93 square me-
1950s
ters of space. There is a limit to how big computers can
be because they could overheat and explode. Major im-
p rovements come in computer hard w a re technology
with the development of transistors in 1947 and 1948.
Computers develop even more with the advent of inte-
grated circuits in 1958 and 1959.
1960s
Since the 1960s, the number of transistors per unit area
has been doubling every one-and-a-half years, incre a s-
ing computing power tremendously. This amazing pro-
gression of circuit fabrication is called Moore’s Law.
1968
The Intel company in the United States is started by
Andy Grove, Gordon Moore, and Robert Noyce to build
semiconductor memory products. Their 2006 company
Website speaks to their huge success over the years: 
“This year 100 million people around the world
will discover digital for the ﬁrst time. This year
150 million more people will become part of the
w i reless world. This year the living room will
g row more interactive and the digital divide
will shrink. This year more people will be using
technology in more fascinating ways than ever
imagined. And behind all of this progress you’ll
ﬁnd innovative Intel technology.”
143

1969
A R PAnet (Advanced Research Projects Agency Net-
work) starts, the ﬁrst intercontinental, high-speed com-
puter network built by the U.S. Department of Defense
as a digital communications experiment. By linking hun-
d reds of universities, defense contractors, and re s e a rc h
laboratories, A R PAnet allows Artificial Intelligence re-
s e a rchers in dispersed areas to exchange information
with incredible speed and ﬂexibility. This capability ad-
vances the ﬁeld of Information Technology (IT). Instead
of working in isolated pockets, the White Hats are now
able to communicate via the electronic highway as net-
worked tribes—a phenomenon still existing in today’s
Computer Underground.
The standard operating system UNIX is developed by Bell
Laboratory re s e a rchers Dennis Ritchie and Ken Thomp-
son. UNIX is considered to be a thing of beauty because
its standard user and programming interface assist users
with computing, word processing, and networking.
The Creative Beginnings: The 1970s
1970
An estimated 100,000 computer systems are in use in the
United States.
1971
Canadian Stephen Cook publishes Cook’s Theore m ,
which helps to advance the ﬁeld of cryptography.
1972
The National Center for Supercomputing A p p l i c a t i o n s
creates the telnet application for remote login, providing
an easier means for users to log into a remote machine.
David Boggs and Robert Metcalfe invent Ethernet at the
Xerox Corporation in California.
1973
Intel’s chairman, Gordon Moore, publicly reveals the
prediction that the number of transistors on a microchip
would double every year and a half. This prediction is
known as Moore’s Law.
144
Chronology

The File Transfer Protocol (FTP) is developed, simplify-
ing the transfer of data between networked machines.
Canadian Mers Kutt creates Micro Computer Machines
and releases the world’s ﬁrst Personal Computer (PC).
1975
Apple Computer, Inc., is founded by a pair of members
of California’s Homebrew Computer Club: Steve Jobs
and Steve Wozniak. Once the Apple Computer and the
simplistic BASIC language appear on the hacking scene,
techies see the potential for using microcomputers.
William Henry Gates, III (commonly known as “Bill
Gates”), and Paul Allen form Microsoft, Inc.
1 9 7 6
The Diffie-Hellman Public-Key Algorithm, or DH, is
developed by Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellman.
The DH, an algorithm used in many secure pro t o c o l s
on the Internet, is now celebrating more than thirty
years of use.
1978
By the end of the 1970s, the only positive thing missing
from the cyber community is a form of networking social
club. In 1978, that void is filled by two men fro m
Chicago, Randy Suess and Ward Christiensen, who cre-
ate the first computer Bulletin Board System (BBS) for
communicating with others in the wired world of com-
puters.
The Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) is split into
TCP and IP (Internet Protocol) by Vinton Cerf.
The Growing-up Years: The 1980s
1981
IBM (International Business Machines) announces a new
model, stand-alone computer, dubbed “the PC.”
The “Commie 64” (more conservatively labeled the
Commodore 64) and the “Trash-S” (more conservatively
Chronology
145

labeled the TRS-80) become two of the enthusiasts’ fa-
vorite tech-toys.
1982
A g roup of talented UNIX hackers from Stanford Uni-
versity and the University of California at Berkeley cre-
ate Sun Microsystems Incorporated on the foundation
that UNIX running on relatively cheap hardware would
prove to be a perfect solution for a wide range of appli-
cations. These visionaries turn out to be right. The Sun
M i c rosystem Network increasingly replaces older com-
puter systems like the VAX and other time-sharing sys-
tems in corporations and in universities across North
America. In 2005, the company Website indicates that,
from a ﬁnancial perspective, Sun Microsystem Networks
ends the ﬁscal year with a cash and marketable debt se-
curities balance of more than U.S.$75 billion.
Scott Fahlman types the ﬁrst online smiley :-).
The Internet is formed when A R PAnet splits into mili-
tary and civilian sections.
The SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol) is published.
William Gibson coins the term cyberspace.
1983
The Telnet protocol is published.
1984
Steven Levy’s book Hackers: Heroes of the Computer Revo-
lution is released, detailing the White Hat Hacker Ethic—
a guiding source for those in the Computer Under-
ground to this day.
Fred Cohen introduces the term computer virus.
2600: The Hacker Quarterly is founded by Eric Corley
(a.k.a. Emmanuel Goldstein).
Cisco Systems, Inc., is started by a small number of sci-
entists at Stanford University. Even today, the company
remains committed to developing Internet Pro t o c o l –
146
Chronology
1981
cont.

based networking technologies, particularly in the areas
of routing and switches.
R i c h a rd Stallman begins constructing a clone of UNIX,
written in “C” and obtainable to the wired world for
f ree. His project, called the GNU (which means that
Gnu’s Not Unix) operating system, becomes a major fo-
cus for creative hackers.
In Montreal, Gilles Brassard and Charles Bennett release
an academic paper detailing how quantum physics can
be used to create unbreakable codes using quantum
cryptography.
1985
The hacker “zine” Phrack is ﬁrst published by Craig Nei-
dorf (a.k.a. Knight Lightning) and Randy Tischler (a.k.a.
Taran King).
www.Symbolics.com is assigned, becoming the ﬁrst reg-
istered domain.
America Online (AOL) is incorporated under the origi-
nal name of Quantum Computer Services.
The Free Software Foundation (FSF) is founded by
Richard Stallman. FSF is committed to giving computer
users the permission to utilize, study, copy, change, and
redistribute computer programs. The FSF not only pro-
motes the development and use of free software but also
helps to enhance awareness about the ethical and politi-
cal issues associated with the use of free software.
1 9 8 6
In Britain, the term criminal hacker is first alluded to and
triggers the public’s fears in April 1986 with the convic-
tions of Robert Schifreen and Steven Gold. Schifre e n
and Gold crack a text information retrieval system op-
erated by BT Prestel and leave a greeting for his Royal
Highness the Duke of Edinburgh on his BT Pre s t e l
mailbox. The two are convicted on a number of crimi-
nal charges under the Forgery and Counterfeiting A c t
of 1981.
Chronology
147

The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) is formed to
act as a technical coordination forum for those who work
on ARPAnet, on the U.S. Defense Data Network (DDN),
and on the Internet core gateway system.
The U.S. Congress brings in the Computer Fraud and
Abuse Act. This act is amended in 1994, 1996, and in
2001 by the USA Patriot Act. This act in all of its varia-
tions is meant to counteract fraud and associated activity
aimed at or completed with computers.
1988
Robert Schifreen’s and Steven Gold’s convictions are set
aside through appeal to the House of Lords, because, it is
argued, the Forgery and Counterfeiting Act of 1981 is be-
ing extended beyond its appropriate boundaries.
Robert Morris, Jr., becomes known to the world when, as
a graduate student at Cornell University, he accidentally
unleashes an Internet worm that he has developed. The
worm, later known as “the Morris worm,” infects and
subsequently crashes thousands of computers. Morris
receives a sentence of three years’ probation, 400 hours
of community service, and a $10,500.00 ﬁne.
Kevin Mitnick secretly monitors the e-mail of both MCI
and DEC security ofﬁcials. For these exploits he is con-
victed of damaging computers and stealing software and
is sentenced to one year in prison—a cracking-then-
prison story that is to repeat over the next few years.
The Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT ) / C E RT
C o o rdination Center for Internet security is founded in
1988, in large part as a reaction to the Morris worm inci-
dent. Located at Carnegie Mellon University, the center’ s
function is to coordinate communications among experts
during security emerg e n c i e s .
The U.S. Secret Service secretly videotapes the Summer-
Con hacker convention, suspecting that not all hacker ac-
tivities are “White Hat” in nature .
148
Chronology
1986
cont.

1989
A group of West German hackers led by Karl Koch (afﬁl-
iated with the Chaos Computer Club) are involved in the
first cyber-espionage case to make international news
when they are arrested for cracking the U.S. govern-
ment’s computers and for selling operating-system
s o u rce code to the Soviet KGB (the agency re s p o n s i b l e
for State Security).
Herbert Zinn (a.k.a. Shadowhawk) is the ﬁrst minor to
be convicted for violating the Computer Fraud and
Abuse Act of 1986. Zinn cracks the American Telephone
& Telegraph (AT&T) computer systems and the Depart-
ment of Defense systems. He apparently destroys files
estimated to be worth about $174,000, copies pro g r a m s
estimated to be worth millions of dollars, and publishes
passwords and instructions on how to exploit computer
security systems. At age sixteen, he is sent to prison for
nine months and is ﬁned $10,000.
The Booming 1990s
1990
At the Cern laboratory in Geneva, Switzerland, Ti m
Berners-Lee and Robert Cailliau develop the pro t o c o l s
that become the World Wide Web (WWW).
A R PAnet (Advanced Research Projects Agency Net-
work) ceases to exist.
Early
There is Internet growth on a homeowner scale, because 
1990s
m o re tech-savvy computer individuals can aff o rd to
have machines at home that are similar in power and
storage capacity to the systems of a decade earlier—
thanks to newer, lower-cost, and higher-performing PCs
with chips from the Intel 386 family. The down side is
that affordable software is still not available.
1991
Linus Torvald initiates the development of a free UNIX
version for PCs using the Free Software Foundation’s
toolkit. His rapid success attracts many Internet hackers
—who give him their feedback on how to improve his
Chronology
149

p roduct. Eventually Linux is developed, a complete
UNIX built from free and redistributable sources.
The PGP ( P retty Good Privacy) encryption program is
released by Philip Zimmermann. Later, Zimmermann
becomes involved in a three-year criminal investigation,
because the U.S. government says that the PGP program
is in violation of export restrictions for cryptographic
software.
Until 1991, the Internet is restricted to linking the mili-
tary and educational institutions in the United States. In
this year, the ban preventing Internet access for busi-
nesses is lifted.
1992
The Michelangelo virus attracts a lot of news media at-
tention because, according to computer security expert
John McAfee, it is believed to cause great damage to data
and computers around the world. Those fears turn out to
be greatly exaggerated, as the Michelangelo virus actu-
ally does little to the computers it invades.
The phrase s u r ﬁng the Net is coined by Jean Armour Polly.
1993
Scott Chasin starts BUGTRAQ, a full-disclosure mailing
list dedicated to issues about computer security, includ-
ing vulnerabilities, methods of exploitation, and ﬁxes for
vulnerabilities. The mailing list is today managed by
Symantec Security Response.
Just slightly more than 100 Websites exist on the Internet,
and the first Def Con hacker convention occurs in Las
Vegas.
Randal Schwartz uses the software program “Crack” at
Intel for what he thinks is appropriate use for cracking
p a s s w o rd ﬁles at work, an exploit for which he later is
found guilty of illegal cracking under an Oregon com-
puter crime law.
150
Chronology
1991
cont.

Linux competes on reliability and stability with other
c o m m e rcial versions of UNIX, and it hosts vastly more
“free” software.
1 9 9 4
News media headlines are sizzling with the story of a gang
of crackers led by Vladimir Levin. The gang cracks
Citibank’s computers and makes transfers from customers’
accounts without authorization, totaling more than $10
million. Although in time Citibank recovers all but about
$400,000 of the illegally transferred funds, that positive end
to the story is not featured by the news media. Levin gets a
t h ree-year prison sentence for his exploits.
Canadian James Gosling heads a creative team at Sun Mi-
c rosystems with the objective of developing a pro g r a m-
ming language that changes the simplistic, one-dimen-
sional nature of the Web. That feat is accomplished, and
the name given to the programming language is Java.
Two Stanford University students, David Filo and Jerry
Yang, start their cyber-guide in a campus trailer as a way
of tracking their interests on the Internet. The cyber-
guide later becomes the popular www. Yahoo.com (which
means “Yet Another Hierarchical Ofﬁcious Oracle”).
1995
White Hat hacktivists squash the Clipper proposal, one
that would have put strong encryption (the process of
scrambling data into something that is seemingly unin-
telligible) under U.S. government control.
Linux becomes stable and reliable enough to be used for
many commercial applications.
Randal Schwartz, writer of the hot-selling books P ro-
gramming Perl and Learning Perl, is convicted on charges
of industrial espionage. While employed at Intel as a
system administrator, he performs security tests using a
p rogram called “Crack” to uncover weak password s .
Schwartz is sentenced to five years’ probation and al-
most 500 hours of community work, and has to pay Intel
almost $70,000 in restitution.
Chronology
151

CyberAngels is created in the United States. It is the
world’s oldest and largest online safety org a n i z a t i o n .
Their mission is the tracking of cyber-stalkers, cyber-ha-
rassers, and cyber–child pornographers.
The Apache Software Foundation, a nonpro ﬁt corpora-
tion, evolves after the Apache Group convenes in 1995.
The Apache Software Foundation eventually develops
the now-popular Apache HTTP Server—which runs on
virtually all major operating systems.
The first online bookstore, www.Amazon.com, is
launched by Jeffrey Bezos.
Tatu Ylonen releases the first SSH (Secure SHell) login
p rogram, a protocol for secure remote logins and other
s e c u re network services over a network pre v i o u s l y
deemed to be nonsecure.
M i c rosoft releases Windows 95 and sells more than a
million copies in less than ﬁve days.
1996
Kevin Mitnick is arrested once more for the theft of
20,000 credit card numbers, and he pleads guilty to ille-
gal use of stolen cellular telephones. His status as a re-
peat cyber- o ffender earns him the cute nickname “the
lost boy of cyberspace.” Computer security consultant
Tsutomu Shimomura, in close association with New York
Times reporter John Markoff, helps the FBI to eventually
locate Mitnick, while on the lam. Shimomura and
Markoff write a book about the episode, calling it, Take-
down: The Pursuit and Capture of Kevin Mitnick, America’s
Most Wanted Computer Outlaw—By the Man Who Did It.
The book infuriates many in the hacker community.
White Hat hacktivists mobilize a broad coalition not
only to defeat the U.S. government’s rather misnamed
“Communications Decency Act” but also to prevent cen-
sorship of the Internet.
The National Information Infrastru c t u re Protection A c t
of 1996 (NIIPA) is enacted in the United States to amend
152
Chronology
1995
cont.

the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (CFAA), originally
enacted in 1984.
The Child Pornography Prevention Act (CPPA) is passed
in the United States to curb the creation and distribution
of child pornography, including online.
The Internet has more than 16 million hosts.
1 9 9 7
ARIN, a for- p ro ﬁt organization, assigns Internet Pro t o-
col (IP) address space for North America, South A m e r-
ica, sub-Saharan Africa, and the Caribbean. Networks
allocated before 1997 are re c o rded in the ARIN whois
d a t a b a s e .
The DVD (Digital Versatile Disc) format is released, and
DVD players are released for sale.
1998
The central activities of the White Hat hacker labs be-
come Linux development and the mainstreaming of the
Internet. Many of the gifted White Hats launch Internet
Service Providers (ISPs), selling or giving online access
to many around the world—and creating some of the
world’s wealthiest corporate leaders and stock options
owners.
The Digital Millennium Copyright Act of 1998 (DCMA)
is passed in the United Stated to implement certain
worldwide copyright laws to cope with emerging digital
technologies. By providing protection against the dis-
abling or bypassing of technical measures designed to
p rotect copyright, the DMCA encourages owners of
copyrighted works to make them available on the Inter-
net in digital format.
Cryptographic products from the United States in-
tended for general use outside the U.S. can not legally
use more than 40-bit symmetric encryption and 512-bit
asymmetric encryption. The reason for this re s t r i c t i o n
is that the 40-bit key size is widely recognized to be not
s e c u re .
Chronology
153

Members of the Boston hacker group L0pht testify be-
fore the U.S. Senate about vulnerabilities associated with
the Internet.
Canadian Tim Bray helps to create an index known as
Extensible Markup Language, or XML, which makes
possible the popular online auction eBay.com.
1999
A grand jury in Vi rginia indicts Eric Burns, aged nine-
teen years, on three counts of computer intru s i o n .
Burns’s moniker on the Internet is Zyklon, and he is be-
lieved to be a group member claiming responsibility for
attacks on the White House and Senate Websites during
this time. A woman named Crystal, who is a cyber-
stalked target and classmate of his, identifies Burns as
Zyklon to the FBI. The judge hearing his case rules that
Burns should serve ﬁfteen months in federal prison, pay
$36,240 in restitution, and not be allowed to touch a com-
puter for three years after his prison release.
The Internet is infected by the Melissa virus. It moves
rapidly throughout computer systems in the United
States and Europe. In the United States alone, the viru s
infects more than 1 million computers in 20 percent 
of the country’s largest corporations. Months later,
David Smith pleads guilty to creating the Melissa viru s ,
named after a Florida stripper. The virus is said to
cause more than $80 million in damages to computers
w o r l d w i d e .
The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999 is passed in the
United States to provide limited privacy pro t e c t i o n s
against the sale of individuals’ private ﬁnancial informa-
tion. The intent of the act is to stop regulations pre v e n t-
ing the merger of financial institutions and insurance
companies. However, by removing these regulations, ex-
perts become concerned about the increased risks associ-
ated with ﬁnancial institutions having unrestricted access
to large databases of individuals’ personal information.
The Napster music ﬁle–sharing system, often used by in-
dividuals to copy and to swap songs for free, gains pop-
154
Chronology
1998
cont.

ularity on Websites where students have access to high-
speed Internet connections. Napster, developed by uni-
versity students Shawn Fanning and Sean Parker, at-
tracts more than 85 million re g i s t e red users before it is
shut down in July 2001 as a violator of the Digital Mil-
lennium Copyright Act (DCMA).
Jon Johansen, aged fifteen, becomes one of a triad of
founders of MoRE (which stands for “Masters of Reverse
Engineering”). Johansen starts a ﬂurry of negative activ-
ity in the DVD marketplace when he releases DeCSS, a
s o f t w a re tool used to circumvent the Content Scram-
bling System (CSS) encryption protecting DVD movies
from being copied illegally.
2000
Authorities in Norway raid Jon Johansen’s house and
take his computer equipment. Although he is charg e d
with infringing Intellectual Property Rights (IPR), he is
eventually acquitted by the courts. His nickname in pa-
pers is DVD-Jon.
Another newsworthy hacktivist case is the Internet free
speech episode of 2600: The Hacker Quarterly. For Em-
manuel Goldstein, the magazine’s editor, the “enemy” is
Universal Studios and other members of the Motion Pic-
t u re Association of America. The civil court legal issue
revolves around the DeCSS DVD decryption software
and the coverage that Emmanuel Goldstein gave to it in
The Hacker Quarterly. In the end, the civil court battle fa-
vors Universal Studios and the Digital Millennium
Copyright Act.
The high-profile case of a Canadian cracker with the
moniker Maﬁaboy (his identity is not disclosed because
he is only ﬁfteen years old at the time) raises concerns in
North America about Internet security following a series
of Denial of Service (DoS) attacks on several high-proﬁle
Websites, including Amazon, eBay, and Yahoo! On Janu-
ary 18, 2001, Maﬁaboy says he is guilty of cracking Inter-
net servers and using them to start DoS attacks. In Sep-
tember 2001 he is sentenced to eight months in a youth
prison and is ﬁned $250.
Chronology
155

John Serabian, the CIA’s information issue manager, says
in written testimony to the U.S. Joint Economic Commit-
tee that the CIA is detecting with increasing fre q u e n c y
the appearance of government-sponsored cyber-warfare
programs in other countries.
IBM estimates that online retailers could lose $10,000 or
more in sales per minute if service is not available to cus-
tomers because of Denial of Service attacks.
The Love Bug virus is sent from the Philippines. Michael
Buen and Onel de Guzman are suspected of writing and
distributing the virus.
Microsoft Corporation admits that its corporate network
has been cracked and that the source code for future
Windows products has been seen. The cracker is sus-
pected to be from Russia.
In excess of 55,000 credit card numbers are taken fro m
C re d i t c a rds.com, a company that processes credit trans-
actions for e-businesses (that is, those online). A l m o s t
half of those stolen credit card numbers are publicized on
the Internet when an extortion payment is not delivere d .
Fear of a High-Tech Meltdown:
2001 to the Present
2001
In a piece published in The New Yo r k e r, Peter G. Neu-
mann, a principal scientist at the technological consult-
ing firm SRI International and a consultant to the U.S.
N a v y, Harvard University, and the National Security
Agency (NSA), underscores his concerns about the ad-
verse impact of cyber-criminals. He says that he is wor-
ried about an imminent cyber-apocalypse, because mali-
cious hackers can now get into important systems in
minutes or seconds and can wipe out one-third of the
computer drives in the United States in a single day.
156
Chronology
2000
cont.

The Code Red worm compromises several hundre d
thousand systems worldwide in less than fourteen
hours, overloading the Internet’s capacity and costing
about $2.6 billion worldwide. It strikes again in August
2001. Carolyn Meinel, an author of a number of hacking
books and a contributor to Scientiﬁc American, labels the
worm a type of computer disease that has computer se-
curity researchers more worried than ever about the in-
tegrity of the Internet and the likelihood of imminent cy-
b e r- t e r rorist attacks. She likens the Code Red worm to
electronic snakebites that infect Microsoft Internet Infor-
mation Servers—the lifeline to many of the most popular
Websites around the world.
Russian Dmitry Sklyarov is arrested at the DefCon 9
hacker convention in Las Vegas when he is about to give
a speech on software particulars that he developed for
his Russian employer, ElcomSoft Co., Ltd. The software
in question permits users to download e-books from se-
cure Adobe software to more commonly used PDF com-
puter files. The San Francisco–based advocacy gro u p
E l e c t ronic Frontier Foundation (EFF) lobbies heavily
against his conviction, saying that jurisdictional issues
apply and that his behavior is perfectly legal in the coun-
try in which he performs his exploits (Russia).
The Anna Kournikova virus is placed on the Internet by
Jan de Wit (a.k.a. OnTheFly), aged twenty, who is from
The Netherlands. He is later arrested and made to per-
form 150 hours of community service for his exploits.
The Los Angeles Ti m e s reports that crackers have attacked
a computer system, controlling the distribution of elec-
tricity in California’s power grid for more than two
weeks and causing a power crisis. A c c o rding to the news-
p a p e r, the attack appears to have originated from indi-
viduals associated with China’s Guangdong pro v i n c e .
The cyber-attack, routed through China Telecom, ad-
versely affects California’s leading electric power grid
and causes a lot of concern among state and federal bu-
reaucrats about the potential for a cyber- a p o c a l y p s e .
Chronology
157

N I M D A (ADMIN spelled backward) arrives, a blend of
computer worm and virus. It lasts for days and attacks
an estimated 86,000 computers. NIMDA d e m o n s t r a t e s
that some of the cyber-weapons available to org a n i z e d
and technically savvy cyber-criminals today have the
capability to learn and adapt to their local cyber-
e n v i ro n m e n t s .
On September 11, the United States and the world forget
the fears of the Cold War and come face to face with
fears surrounding terrorism and cyber- t e r rorism when
Al-Qaeda terrorists deliberately crash passenger jets into
the twin towers of the World Trade Center (WTC) and
the Pentagon.
On October 23, the USA Patriot Act of 2001 is introduced
by James Sensenbrenner, with the intent of deterring and
punishing terrorist acts in the United States and of en-
hancing law enforcement investigatory tools. The intro-
duction of this act is a reaction to the September 11, 2001,
t e r rorist attacks. Related bills include an earlier antiter-
rorism bill, which passes the House on October 12, 2001,
and the Financial Anti-Terrorism Act.
By October 26, just three days after the USA Patriot A c t
is introduced, it becomes law. Immediately after its pas-
sage, controversy is widespread. For example, Con-
g ressman Ron Paul informs the Washington Ti m e s t h a t
no one in Congress was permitted to read the Patriot
Act before h a n d .
Apple Computer releases the iPod portable music
player, considered by many to be one example of a good
hack that can utilize the song downloading potential of
the Internet.
Also, online gaming is becoming a positive social forc e
for the Internet. Online gaming, or Massively Multi-
player Online Role-Playing Game (MMORPG), is intro-
duced, a form of computer entertainment played by one
or more individuals connected to the Internet.
158
Chronology
2001
cont.

On November 23, the Council of Europe opens to sign its
newly drafted Convention on Cybercrime. The conven-
tion is signed by thirty-three states after the council rec-
ognizes that many cyber-crimes cannot be prosecuted by
existing laws, or that applying those existing laws to cy-
b e r-crimes means stretching the intent of the laws. The
convention is the first global legislative attempt of its
kind to set standards on the definition of cyber- c r i m e
and to develop policies and procedures to govern inter-
national cooperation to combat cyber-crime.
2002
On July 10 and 11, a U.S. bill on Homeland Security is in-
troduced by Richard Armey to the Standing Committees
in the House. The bill is received in the Senate on No-
vember 19, 2002, and is passed by the Senate on Novem-
ber 25, 2002. The Homeland Security Act of 2002 is
signed by the president as Public Law 107–296 and is
meant to establish the Department of Homeland Secu-
r i t y. Section 225 is known as the Cyber Security En-
hancement Act of 2002.
A s e v e n t e e n - y e a r-old female cracker from Belgium,
known as Gigabyte, claims to have written the ﬁrst-ever
virus in the programming language C# (that is, C sharp).
A f i f t y - t w o - y e a r-old Taiwanese woman named Lisa
Chen pleads guilty of pirating hundreds of thousands of
s o f t w a re copies worth more than $75 million. The soft-
ware was apparently smuggled from Taiwan. She is sen-
tenced to nine years in a U.S. prison, one of the most se-
vere sentences ever given for such a crime.
2003
A Texas jury acquits a computer security analyst by the
name of Stefan Puff e r, who a year earlier had been
c h a rged with illegally accessing the county computer
network. After he had figured out that the Harris
County district clerk’s wireless computer network was
vulnerable, he warned the clerk’s ofﬁce that anyone with
a wireless network card could gain access to their sensi-
tive data.
Chronology
159

On April 30, some particulars around the definition of
child pornography change when George W. Bush signs
the PROTECT Act. This act not only implements the
Amber alert communication system—which allows for
nationwide alerts when children go missing or are kid-
napped—but also redefines child pornography to in-
clude both images of real children engaging in sexually
explicit conduct with adults and computer images in-
distinguishable from real children engaging in such
acts. Prior to the enactment of the PROTECT Act, the
definition of child pornography came from the 1996
Child Pornography Prevention Act (CPPA). The longer
name of the PROTECT Act is Prosecutorial Remedies
and Tools against the Exploitation of Children To d a y
Act of 2002.
Paul Henry, vice president of CyberGuard Corporation,
an Internet security ﬁrm in Florida, says that experts pre-
dict that there is an 80 percent probability that a cyber-at-
tack against critical infrastru c t u res in the United States
could occur within two years. The capability is pre s e n t
among certain crackers and terrorists, Henry warns. It is
simply a question, he afﬁrms, of the intent of such crimi-
nals to launch an attack.
In July, a poll of more than 1,000 U.S. adults by the Pew
Internet and American Life Project ﬁnds that one in two
adults has expressed concern about the vulnerability of
the national infrastru c t u re to terrorist attackers. The poll
finds that 58 percent of the women polled and 47 per-
cent of the men fear an imminent attack. More than 70
p e rcent of the respondents are optimistic, however, for
they are fairly confident that the U.S. government will
p rovide them with sufﬁcient information in the event of
another terrorist attack—be it on the ground or thro u g h
c y b e r s p a c e .
Sean Gorman of George Mason University makes head-
lines when he produces for his doctoral dissertation a set
of charts detailing the communication networks binding
the United States. Using mathematical formulas, Gor-
man had probed for critical infrastructure links in an at-
160
Chronology
2003
cont.

tempt to respond to the query, “If I were Osama bin
Laden, where would I want to attack?”
In August, three crippling worms and viruses cause con-
siderable cyber damage and increase the stress levels of
business leaders and citizens about a possible cyber-
apocalypse. The Blaster worm surfaces on August 11, ex-
ploiting security holes found in Microsoft Windows XP.
The Welchia worm surfaces on August 11, targeting ac-
tive computers. It goes to Microsoft’s Website, down-
loads a program that ﬁxes the Windows holes (known as
a “do-gooder”), and then deletes itself. The most damag-
ing of the three irritants is the e-mail–borne SoBigF
v i rus, the fifth variant of a “bug” that had initially in-
vaded computers in January and resurfaces with a
vengeance on August 18, 2003. The damage for lost pro-
duction and economic losses caused by these worms and
v i ruses is reportedly in excess of $2 billion for just an
eight-day period.
John McAfee, the developer of the McAfee antiviru s
s o f t w a re company, claims that there are more than
58,000 virus threats. Also, the antivirus software com-
pany Symantec further estimates that ten to ﬁfteen new
viruses are discovered daily.
On August 14, fears of a cyber-apocalypse heighten for a
period known as the Blackout of 2003. The East Coast of
the United States and the province of Ontario, Canada,
a re hit by a massive power blackout—the biggest ever
a ffecting the United States. Some utility contro l - s y s t e m
experts say that the two events—the August computer
worm invasions and the blackout—might have been
linked, because the Blaster worm, in particular, may
have degraded the performance of several lines connect-
ing critical data centers used by utility companies to con-
trol the power grid.
On September 15, the Department of Homeland Security,
along with Carnegie Mellon University, announces the
c reation of the U.S.-Computer Emergency Response
Team (US-CERT), a unit that is expected to grow by
Chronology
161

including other private sector security vendors and do-
mestic and international CERT organizations.
G roups such as the National High-Tech Crime Unit
(NHTCU) in the United Kingdom begin working with
a n t i v i rus companies to find patterns in the coding of
some of the most destructive Internet worms and viruses
to determine whether they are the work of organized un-
d e rg round groups or other crime affiliates. NHTCU
thinks that hidden somewhere in the lines of code are
hints regarding the creator’s identity and motives, and,
possibly, imminent cyber-sabotage exploits.
In October, an international consortium releases a list of
the top twenty Internet security vulnerabilities. The con-
sortium—which includes the U.S. Department of Home-
land Security, the UK National Infrastru c t u re Security
C o o rdination Center (NISCC), Canada’s Ofﬁce of Criti-
cal Infrastru c t u re Protection and Emergency Pre p a re d-
ness (OCIPEP), and the SANS (SysAdmin, Audit, Net-
work, Security) Institute—has as its objective the
defining of an absolute minimum standard of security
for networked computers.
In October, a French court ﬁnds the Internet search giant
Google guilty of infringing Intellectual Property Rights.
The company is fined 75,000 euros for allowing mar-
keters to link their advertisements on the Net to trade-
marked search terms—a ruling that is said to be the ﬁrst
of this nature. The court gives the search company just
one month to stop the practice.
On November 5, the news media report that a cracker
has broken into one of the computers on which the
s o u rces of the Linux operating systems are stored and
from which they are distributed worldwide.
On November 6, Microsoft Corporation takes the un-
usual step of creating a $5 million fund to track down
malicious crackers targeting the Windows operating sys-
tems. That fund includes a $500,000 reward for informa-
tion resulting in the arrest of the crackers who designed
162
Chronology
2003
cont.

and unleashed Blaster and SoBigF. This Wild We s t – l i k e
bounty underscores the perceived problem posed by
viruses and worms in a networked environment, as well
as the difﬁculties associated with ﬁnding the developers.
H o w e v e r, some cynical security critics say that the re-
ward has more to do with Microsoft Corporation’s pub-
lic relations than it has to do with cyber-crime and pun-
ishment.
In November, the U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC)
creates a national spam database and encourages people
to forward to them all of the e-mail spam they re c e i v e .
The FTC notes that in 2002, informants had re p o r t e d
m o re than 17 million complaints about spam messages
to federal agents for investigation, and the FTC says that
they receive nearly 110,000 complaints daily.
To control spam, on November 25, the U.S. Senate passes
the CAN-SPAM Act of 2003, formally known as the Con-
t rolling the Assault of Non-Solicited Pornography and
Marketing Act of 2003. Its purpose is to regulate inter-
state commerce in the United States by placing limita-
tions and penalties on the transmission of spam through
the Internet. Penalties include ﬁnes as high as $1 million
and imprisonment for not more than ﬁve years for those
found guilty of infringing the act. The act is to take effect
on January 1, 2004.
2004
On January 21, the Recording Industry Association of
America (RIAA) says that it has identified 532 song-
swappers by the trails that their computers leave when
the swappers illegally download music from the Inter-
net. The swappers, identiﬁed by their IP addresses only,
are targeted in four lawsuits, three ﬁled in New York and
one in Washington, D.C. The lawsuits are ﬁled using the
so-called John Doe process, which allows the RIAA t o
sue defendants whose names are not yet known.
On January 26, the worm W32.Novarg.A@mm, also
known as MyDoom, spreads throughout the Internet
and wreaks havoc. It arrives as an attachment with 
the ﬁle extension .bat, .cmd, .exe, .pof., scr., or .zip and
Chronology
163

a ffects Windows 2000, Windows 95, Windows 98, Wi n-
dows Server 2003, and Windows XP systems but not the
DOS, Linux, MacIntosh, OS/2, UNIX, or Windows 3.x
systems. The damage done by MyDoom is estimated to
be $2 billion worldwide.
In May, Sven Jaschan, aged eighteen, is arrested in Waf-
fensen, Germany, in connection with creating and releas-
ing on the Internet the Sasser worm. He later admits to
police that he was the creator of Sasser.
On August 14, appearing before a judge in Seattle, Wash-
ington, eighteen-year-old Jeff rey Lee Parson concedes
through a plea agreement that he had created the B vari-
ant of the Blaster worm, and that he used it to take over
computers that were employed for an attack on nearly
50,000 other machines.
In mid-August, some would-be high-tech billionaire
White Hats by the names of Sergey Brin and Larry Page
commence their long-anticipated initial public off e r i n g
(IPO) of Google, home of the world’s leading Internet
search engine.
From October to December, the Chinese authorities close
more than 12,500 Internet cafes because they say that the
cafes harm public morality by giving children access to
violent games and sexually explicit material.
2005
In January, the U.S. FBI abandons its custom-built and
highly controversial Internet surveillance technology
known as Carnivore, designed to read e-mails and on-
line communications of suspected cyber-criminals and
terrorists. The FBI moves to commercially available soft-
ware and encourages Internet providers to conduct wire-
taps on suspected clients and then forward the informa-
tion to the FBI.
On January 21, the conﬁdential drug purchase histories
of Harvard students and staff and the e-mail addresses
of undergraduates who had been guaranteed nondisclo-
s u re by the university appear on Harvard’s iCommons
164
Chronology
2004
cont.

Pool Tool. In fact, this information was accessible for
months to anyone who had, say, a free Hotmail account
and a few minutes’ time to look up students’ and
s t a ffers’ eight-digit ID numbers. The vulnerability un-
d e r s c o res the difficulty of securing the system when
there is prevalent use of ID numbers to verify identity.
In Febru a r y, while delivering a speech to security ex-
perts at the RSA Conference in San Jose, California, Mi-
crosoft Corporation founder Bill Gates says that the com-
pany will give away software to combat spyware ,
adware, and other privacy-invasive cyber nuisances.
In Febru a r y, the 2004 National Technology Readiness
Survey (NTRS) results indicate that spam, spre a d
through the Internet, costs nearly $21.6 billion annually
in lost productivity in the United States alone.
In February, a report released by a legislature committee
finds that information on the Websites of New Yo r k ’ s
Department of Motor Vehicles, the New York Depart-
ment of Education, the New York Department of Correc-
tional Services, the State Division of Military and Naval
A ffairs, and the New York Power Authority has been
cracked and defaced seventy-two times from 1999 to
early December 2004. Jeff Klein, who heads the oversight
committee and the report, notes that because state and
private companies are not keeping important personal
and homeland security information safe, identity theft
can occur.
On February 15, in a plea agreement with pro s e c u t o r s ,
Nicolas Jacobsen, aged twenty-two, pleads guilty in U.S.
federal court in Los Angeles to one felony charge of in-
tentionally gaining access to a protected computer and
causing damage to it. His crime spree began in late 2003
and ended when he was arrested in the fall of 2004. Al-
though Jacobsen’s cyber-targets include Paris Hilton’s T-
Mobile Sidekick II, he is not known to be connected to
the late February 2005 crack that resulted in Hilton’s top-
less photos being shown on the Internet. Although most
reports speculate that the leak was caused by an attack
Chronology
165

on T-Mobile’s database (where the address book is
backed up), others speculate that someone has access ei-
ther to her phone or to her password.
On February 28, Phil Hollows, vice president of Security
P roducts for OpenService, warns that from a Sarbanes-
Oxley Section 404 perspective, any breach in Information
Technology security poses a risk to a company’s internal
information system. Since IT underlies the critical busi-
ness of re c o rding and reporting all financial activity, a
lack of control over IT security implies a lack of control
by a company over its ﬁnancial reports—a direct viola-
tion of section 404 of Sarbanes-Oxley. As the financial
scandals at Worldcom and Enron have illustrated, hav-
ing an auditor sign off is no guarantee that lawsuits can
be avoided, and the Sarbanes-Oxley Act makes it very
clear that CEOs and CFOs are personally liable for any
material mispresentation.
On March 2, Harvard Business School says that it will re-
ject 119 applicants who followed a cracker’s instructions
for peeking into the school’s admission Internet Website
to see if they had been accepted into the school—a
month before results are to be disseminated. An anony-
mous man known as “brookbond,” who says that he
specializes in IT security, posted the instructions on Busi-
ness Week Online’s technology forum at 12:15 A.M. Har-
v a rd’s admissions Website was, re p o r t e d l y, vulnerable
for more than nine hours.
On March 5, a cyber-war breaks out between Indonesia
and Malaysia, brought on by a dispute over the Ambalat
oil ﬁelds in the Sulawesi Sea and perhaps the termina-
tion of amnesty for illegal Indonesian workers.
On March 7, documents seized from three members of
the Lashkar- e - Toiba (LeT) terrorist group killed in an en-
counter with Indian police indicate that they had
planned to execute a “suicide” crack attack on the net-
works of companies having software and chip design op-
erations in Bangalore and Karnal Singh. These companies
include IBM, Intel, Texas Instruments, and A c c e n t u re .
166
Chronology
2005
cont.

On March 8, data security ﬁrms say that a new virus ca-
pable of attacking cell phones has emerged. F-Secure
Corporation, a Finnish software security ﬁrm, says that
the Commwarrior virus is the first one capable of
spreading via multimedia messaging services containing
photos, sound, or video clips.
On March 10, Trend Micro issues an alert regarding two
new worms that spread through MSN Messenger, a
widely used instant messaging platform. Known as
k e l v i r.b and fatso.a, the worms have been reported on
computers in the Asia Paciﬁc region and in the United
States.
On or about March 10, cyber-criminals stole passwords
from legitimate users on as many as 32,000 Americans in
an online database owned by the LexisNexis Gro u p .
Similar breaches occur at ChoicePoint, Inc., and at Bank
of America. These cyber-crimes prompt calls for U.S.
federal oversight through the General Services Adminis-
tration (GSA) of the seemingly poorly regulated infor-
mation brokerage industry.
On or about March 10, Limp Bizkit singer Fred Durst
sues ten Website operators who posted his self-cre a t e d
sex tape on the Internet after it was stolen from his
c o m p u t e r.
On March 10, according to a study commissioned by
RSA Security, the huge growth in the use of wireless net-
works by businesses around the globe is making them
i n c reasingly subject to drive-by cracking. For example,
in Europe’s financial districts—the wireless networks
seem to be growing at an annual rate of 66 percent. What
is worrisome is that over a third of the businesses em-
ploying this technology are unprotected. By comparison,
about 38 percent of the businesses in New York seem to
be unprepared for such exploits, and about 35 percent of
the businesses in San Francisco seem to be unprepared.
On March 16, ﬁve crackers in The Netherlands are found
guilty of disabling a number of Dutch government
Chronology
167

Websites in 2004 because of DoS attacks. Citing pro t e s t s
against recent cabinet proposals as the motive for their
crack attacks, the hacktivist group goes by the name of
Oxlfe Cre w. The spokesperson for the group, an eighteen-
year-old who says that he would appeal his thirty-eight-
day detention sentence, argues that there is no evidence
to prove that he was involved in the attacks.
On March 21, Symantec Corporation issues a report say-
ing that Internet attacks grew by 28 percent in the second
half of 2004, compared with the ﬁrst six months of 2004.
On average, businesses and other agencies received 13.6
attacks on their computer networks daily in the second
half of 2004—relative to 10.6 attacks in the first half of
the year. More o v e r, crackers seem to be setting their
sights on mobile computers. The favored attack tools in-
clude phishing, spyware, and adware.
On March 21, survey ﬁndings released by security com-
pany Mazu Networks and the Enterprise Strategy Group
show that almost half of 229 companies surveyed had a
worm outbreak in 2004, despite their increased spending
for network security features. Although appro x i m a t e l y
75 percent of the IT professional respondents say that
their companies increased security spending in 2004 to
comply with Sarbanes-Oxley Act re q u i rements, only 14
percent of the respondents report that they are conﬁdent
that their networks could stop exploits.
On April 8, in a landmark case, spammer Jeremy Jaynes
of North Carolina, described by prosecutors as being
among the top spammers in the world, is sentenced to
nine years in U.S. prison. This is the first successful
felony prosecution in the United States for transmitting
spam over the Internet.
On April 20, the Cyber Security Enhancement Act of
2005, or HR 285, is passed in the United States, specify-
ing that the assistant secretary for Cyber Security will
lead the directorate’s National Cyber Security Division.
168
Chronology
2005
cont.

During the week of April 25, Microsoft Corporation’s
chair Bill Gates says that his company plans to put hard-
ware computer security into a silicon chip instead of re-
lying on only software in the next release of the Wi n-
dows PC operating system, available in 2006.
During the first week of May, Websense’s annual
We b @ Work survey indicates that 52 percent of the em-
ployee respondents admit that they would rather forgo
their morning coffee than lose their ability to surf non-
work-related Websites during the workday.
On May 23, Apple Computer, Inc., announces that they
a re in talks with the Intel Corporation about using the
Intel chip in their Macintosh computer line—a prospect
that could stir up the software and computer marketing
world. Using Intel chips in the Macintosh computer
makes it theoretically feasible for computer users to in-
stall Windows software on their “Mac” computers. With
this announcement, Apple shares rise $1.94 to $39.49 on
the Nasdaq Stock Market.
In early August, the Chinese search engine Baidu.com
stock soars over 350 percent on the ﬁrst day of trading.
The thirty-seven-year-old founder, Robin Li, tells re-
porters that Chinese Internet use is still in its infancy,
with just 94 million Internet users. Li has hopes of be-
coming another high-tech billionaire.
On September 8, a Massachusetts juvenile pleads guilty
to cracking Paris Hilton’s cell phone and dumping her
personal information on the Internet. He also admits to
cracking other systems in 2004, stealing personal infor-
mation without authorization, and sending bomb threats
to high schools in Florida and Massachusetts. All inci-
dents occurred within a ﬁfteen-month period, beginning
M a rch 2004. They allegedly have resulted in $1 million
in damages to targets. The youth is sentenced to eleven
months in a detention center.
On October 5, Chinese authorities shut down another
two Internet Websites popular among academics, jour-
Chronology
169

nalists, and civil rights activists. One Website serves as
an online discussion group to report on anticorru p t i o n
protests in a southern village around Beijing. The other
services ethnic Mongolians.
On November 17, the stock market shares of online
s e a rch giant Google, Inc., cross the amazing $400-per-
share mark.
2006
In January, more than twenty officers from Indian law
enforcement agencies are trained in New Delhi in a Cy-
ber Incident Response Course sponsored by the U.S.
State Department’s Anti-Terrorism Assistance Program.
In January, Chinese students and intellectuals expre s s
outrage at Beijing’s decision to prevent access to
Wikipedia, the fast-growing online encyclopedia off e r-
ing more than 2.2 million articles in 100 languages. The
online encyclopedia has emerged as an important source
of scholarly information in China as well as many other
developed and developing countries. The Website’s in-
dependence on political issues involving Tibet and Ta i-
wan has infuriated Chinese authorities.
In early Febru a r y, the fascinating five-year Intellectual
P roperty Rights legal battle between a U.S. company,
NTP, and a Canadian company, RIM, is quickly coming
to an end. The two companies are fighting about the
patent rights to a wireless handheld called “The Black-
Berry,” which lets users read and respond to e-mail even
when they are away from their computers and their
desks.
In March, RIM, the Waterloo, Ontario, maker of the pop-
ular BlackBerry handheld device and enterprise server
s o f t w a re, says it will pay its rival NTP U.S. $612.5 mil-
lion to settle the ﬁve-year patent dispute.
In March, a Canadian team of musical buffs, an interna-
tional aid group, and the state government of Chi-
huahua, Mexico, set up an Internet radio station, Radio-
Tarahumara.com, aimed at bringing modern technology
170
Chronology
2005
cont.

and communication to a remote Indian tribe in the
mountains of Mexico to help them preserve their her-
itage. The team decided that helping the local Indian
tribe compile educational and cultural digital content is
a crucial step to introducing technology to the commu-
nity and getting those who have not been exposed to
technology interested in it. The Tarahumara Indians live
in small adobe houses or caves, and there are only
twelve computer-equipped sites in the entire region that
can tune into the Internet radio station.
On March 14, a U.S. federal judge says that he intends to
require Google, Inc., to turn over information to the Jus-
tice Department in its desire to revive a law making it
m o re difﬁcult for children to view online pornography.
A legal showdown over how much of the World Wi d e
Web’s vast databases should be shared with the U.S.
government has added fuel to the fires burning in the
battle against the George W. Bush administration and
Google, Inc. The company has resisted a subpoena to
turn over any information because of user privacy and
trade secret concerns. Although it defies the Bush ad-
ministration, Google, Inc., has recently agreed to the Chi-
nese government’s censoring of its search results in
China so that it can have better access to China’s rapidly
growing Internet market.
On March 22, the Microsoft Corporation offers free, un-
limited technical support to competitors interested in
making their software work with Microsoft servers. The
company says that it wants to comply with a landmark
European Union (EU) antitrust ruling. The EU placed a
record $669 million ﬁne against Microsoft Corporation in
March 2004. 
On September 5, in Odense, Denmark, police raided
homes and detained nine men for allegedly pre p a r i n g
explosives for a terrorist attack in Denmark. The attacks
were said to be related to Muslim outrage earlier in the
year over media cartoons of the Prophet Mohammed.
Chronology
171


5
Biographical Sketches
Tim Bray (b. 1955)
Tim Bray, a Canadian who attended the University of Guelph
in Ontario, is credited with making online auctions like eBay
possible. An entre p re n e u r, Bray worked for computer compa-
nies like DEC and then accepted the unique job in 1987 of man-
aging the online transfer of the Oxford English Dictionary at
the University of Waterloo in Ontario. He also founded the
Open Text Company (a content management powerhouse) two
years later, and by 1994, he had built the first successful Inter-
net search engine.
Between 1996 and 1999, Bray was an independent consul-
tant who was invited as an expert in the computer science ﬁeld
to the World Wide Web Consortium. This undertaking led to his
eventually creating XML, or the Extensible Markup Language,
which permits programmers to attach “tags” or universal codes
to differentiate, say, a business name from a telephone number.
The implication for e-commerce was great, because with this
XML invention, purchase orders or invoices could be universally
read as well as routed to the right applications. Put into context,
as a key language of Web servers, the Extensible Markup Lan-
guage facilitates the activities of an estimated 1 billion Internet
users who are busy gaming online, buying things from Amazon,
or partaking in eBay.
Although Bray wanted to be a high school math teacher
after graduating from the University of Guelph, he said that
t h e re were no jobs in his then-chosen field, so he went into
computer science. The rest of his career was all uphill fro m
173

t h e re, he admits. Bray now works for Sun Microsystems in Va n-
c o u v e r, British Columbia (Brearton, 2005; O’Reilly Media, Inc.,
2006; Textuality Services, Inc., 2005).
Sergey Brin (b. 1973)
and Larry Page (b. 1973)
S e rgey Brin, born in 1973 in Russia, and Larry Page, born the
same year in the United States, are two Stanford University Ph.D.
d ropouts who started Google, Inc., the six-year-old Internet
search engine that is now valued at $120 billion.
B e f o re Brin and Page launched Google, Inc., Internet
s e a rches often returned more useless than useful information.
Users would have to wade through all of the useless information
to find something worthwhile—a huge waste of re s o u rces and
time. Internet pioneers Brin and Page streamlined the search pro-
cess to such a degree that today, the Google search engine re-
ceives, on average, 200 million queries daily (A & E Te l e v i s i o n
Networks, 2006; Farzad and Elgin, 2005).
Brin’s father was a Russian professor who moved to teach at
the University of Maryland, where he is still employed. Brin’s
mother works for NASA. When Brin was nine years old, his fa-
ther apparently gave him his first computer, a Commodore 64.
Both Brin and Page went to Montessori schools, where, they say,
their creative and free-thinking spirits were fueled.
Page says that when he and Brin were working on their
Ph.D.s, they had no interest in starting a business, but when their
computer science re s e a rch turned up the promise of a faster kind
of search engine, they decided to abandon academic pursuits (and
a likely smaller pay check) for the entre p reneurial spirit. Page’s fa-
t h e r, by the way, was also a university professor of computer sci-
ence, but at Michigan State University (Woopidoo.com, 2006).
A c c o rding to Forbes business magazine, Brin and Page are
each now worth about $11 billion and are ranked the second rich-
est Americans under the age of forty—after the founder of eBay,
Pierre Omidyar (Blinkbits, 2006).
Like other billionaires who have made their success
t h rough e-commerce, Brin and Page are interested in giving
back to the collective good of society. To that end they re c e n t l y
announced that Dr. Larry Brilliant, a former high-tech executive
174
Biographical Sketches

and physician who specializes in global health, will head the
G o o g l e . o rg philanthropic arm. The sixty-one-year-old Dr. Bril-
liant is currently director of the Seva Foundation in Berkeley,
California, which he founded in 1979 to fight blindness in
people in the developing nations. In his new position with
Google, Dr. Brilliant will have to decide how to invest about 
1 percent of the company’s annual profit and 1 percent of
Google’s annual stock—which amounts to about $ 1 billion—for
the betterment of society. Dr. Brilliant said that he will likely
p romote public health (Delaney, 2006).
Tim Burners-Lee (a.k.a. Sir Timothy
“Tim” John Burners-Lee) (b. 1955)
A graduate of Oxford University in England, Tim Burners-Lee in
1989 invented the World Wide Web, an Internet-based hyper-
media start-up for information sharing on a wide-ranging scale.
This brilliant scholar currently holds the 3Com Founder’s Chair
at the Laboratory for Computer Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(AI) at MIT. He also directs the World Wide Web Consortium, a
group of companies and agencies interested in capitalizing on the
World Wide Web’s potential. A year after he invented the World
Wide Web, he wrote the first Web client (bro w s e r-editor) and
server. In 1999 the book by Tim Burners-Lee’s (along with coau-
thor Mark Fischetti), entitled Weaving the We b , was released by
Harper Publishers, San Francisco (www.w3.org, 2005).
Vinton Cerf
(a.k.a. Father of the Internet) (b. 1943)
Known to many as “the Father of the Internet,” Vinton Cerf was
the codesigner, along with Robert Kahn, of the TCP/IP protocols
and the arc h i t e c t u re of the Internet. For that major accomplish-
ment, in 1997 the pair were presented by President Bill Clinton
with the U.S. National Medal of Technology. In 2004 the pair were
also honored with the ACM Alan M. Turing Aw a rd, considere d
by many in the computer science ﬁeld to be the equivalent of the
Nobel Prize.
Biographical Sketches
175

Today Vinton Cerf is employed in senior management for
Google, Inc., the online search engine. He identiﬁes new enabling
technologies to support the development of the next evolution of
products and services for Google. He is also chair of the Board of
the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers
(ICANN).
Earlier in his career, from 1976 to 1982, Cerf played a critical
role in leading the development of the Internet, as well as in cre-
ating data packet and security technologies when he was em-
ployed by the U.S. Department of Defense’s Advanced Research
Projects Agency (ICANN, 2005).
Stephen Cook (b. 1939)
Born in the United States in 1939, Stephen Cook, a distinguished
university professor now at the University of Toronto in Canada,
received his graduate degrees from Harvard University. A mathe-
matics pro f e s s o r, Dr. Cook published what some believe was
quite an esoteric work known as The Complexity of Theorem Prov-
ing Pro c e d u re s in 1971. Its shorter title was C o o k ’s Theore m . T h e
wonderful thing about this theorem is that it identified a larg e
g roup of computational search problems that would normally
take even the most powerful computers millions of years to com-
pute. This theorem has been an especially strong contributor to
the important ﬁeld of cryptography. Without cryptography, on-
line transactions as we now know them would not be secure.
Without getting into all of the technical details, the theorem’s
main contribution was that the security of every e-commerc e
transaction depends on a rather unique silicon iro n y — n a m e l y,
that the relative safety of users’ credit card information, say, relies
not so much on what computers can do, but rather on what they
cannot do. Dr. Cook is the only professor in Canada to have won
the Association for Computing Machinery’s A.M. Turing Award,
c o n s i d e red by many to be computer science’s most pre s t i g i o u s
prize (Brearton, 2005; NSERC, 2006).
Shawn Fanning (b. 1980)
At age eighteen, Shawn Fanning was a creative, entrepreneurial
young adult who was the lead software engineer and co-
176
Biographical Sketches

founder—along with Sean Parker—of Napster, a contro v e r s i a l
but free software program that during its short life span let online
users exchange MP3 music ﬁles without having to pay royalties
to the artists and without having to purchase CDs at stores. Nap-
s t e r, in fact, could best be described as a “music bootlegging”
business. Fanning says that the creative idea for Napster was con-
ceived while he was a ﬁrst-year university student at Northeast-
ern University in Boston.
Not too long after Napster’s release, the big music compa-
nies—including Universal Studios and Sony—alleged that Fan-
ning’s technology was an infringement of the U.S. Digital Millen-
nium Copyright Act of 1998, and that he was cheating artists out
of their royalties. As a result, Napster was eventually pushed out
of business. They ﬁled for bankruptcy in 2002 (Ante, 2000).
Two years later (on December 3, 2004), Shawn Fanning
launched Snocap, a music-licensing platform that permitted mu-
sic download services by Internet-connected users—but with the
users’ knowing that they were paying music copyright holders
their share of the cost. In short, Snocap acted as a licensing man-
ager. Upon the announcement of Snocap’s release by Fanning, an
online service in the United Kingdom called Wippit claimed that
it used a similar system for its music-sharing service and that it
was the real pioneer in this space, not Fanning (Smith, 2004).
It is interesting to note that Fanning is quite a legend among
youth, particularly among young hackers. In February 2005,
Paramount Pictures and MTV ﬁlms partnered to hire Alex Winter
to write “Napster: The Shawn Fanning Bio Project.” Although in
2002 MTV ﬁrst developed the media project about Fanning as a
TV movie, the company later opted, instead, for a “big scre e n ”
movie version of this creative man’s biography (MovieWeb, Inc.,
2005).
David Filo (b. 1967)
and Jerry Yang (b. 1969)
The Yahoo online search engine, now worth $60 billion, was
started by two electrical engineering Ph.D. candidates at Stan-
f o rd University: David Filo and Jerry Yang. Like Brin and Page,
these two creative entre p reneurs had not seriously thought
about making business their careers. A c t u a l l y, the search engine
Biographical Sketches
177

started in a campus trailer in February 1994, with the main pur-
pose of helping those two men keep track of their personal in-
t e rests on the Internet. But because the self-selected Internet
task was somewhat more interesting than their doctoral study
tasks, the pair apparently started spending more time on their
lists of favorite links than on their dissertations. When the
p a i r’s lists became too large and unwieldy, they put them into
categories and subcategories—which is how the framework be-
hind Yahoo was created. Although Filo and Yang originally
called their Website “Jerry and David’s Guide to the Wo r l d
Wide Web,” they eventually changed the name to Ya h o o —
which means Yet Another Hierarchical Officious Oracle. Since
the pair of creators had a sense of humor, they wanted their
Website to have one, too—which is why they came up with the
name. They also wanted the name to indicate an entity that was
somewhat rude, unsophisticated, and somewhat uncouth—just
like its developers, they jested (Farzad and Elgin, 2005; Ya h o o ,
Inc., 2006).
William H. Gates (b. 1955)
M i c rosoft Corporation’s chair and chief software architect, Bill
Gates founded the company with childhood friend Steve A l l e n
back in 1975. For the year ending 2005, the Microsoft company
had business revenues of nearly $40 billion. 
An “eager beaver” in terms of computing, Gates apparently
started programming at age eleven. He started Harvard Univer-
sity in 1973—where he met Steve Ballmer, who now has the pres-
tigious position of chief executive ofﬁcer (CEO) of Microsoft. In
order to run the Microsoft business more effectively, Gates chose
to drop out of Harvard University in his third year.
F o rever devoted to computing, Mr. Gates in 1999 wrote a
book entitled Business @ the Speed of Thought. The focus of the
book was how computer technology can solve complex business
problems in unique ways. The book itself became a best-seller. It
made it to the New York Ti m e s best-seller list—and held the top
position for a solid seven weeks. The book was sold in more than
sixty countries and was translated into at least twenty-ﬁve differ-
ent languages.
178
Biographical Sketches

A p h i l a n t h ropist as well as an entre p reneur and visionary,
Bill Gates today gives away the proceeds of his books to non-
p rofit organizations promoting the use of technology in educa-
tion. The company itself is committed to promoting programs ad-
vancing the use of technology for children and young adults
(Microsoft Corporation, 2006)
James Gosling
(a.k.a. Software Wizard, a.k.a. 
World’s Greatest Programmer)
(b. 1955)
Born in Calgary, Alberta, Canada, James Gosling headed a tal-
ented group at Sun Microsystems that developed a pro g r a m-
ming language and environment known as Java. Java’s primary
asset was that it could convert the one-dimensional and very
noninteractive Web into a system permitting software on any op-
erating system (that is, Microsoft Windows, UNIX, or Mac-
Intosh) to communicate by streaming bits of information that
was universally translatable. The highly interactive World Wi d e
Web that adults and children experience today is as user- f r i e n d l y
as it is because of this wonderful invention called Java. It is im-
portant to note that the reputation of Sun Microsystems also ro s e
when the company permitted other software developers to make
use of the Java programming language free of charge. A w h i t e
paper on Java, written by Gosling, can be found at: <http://
i n v e n t o r s . a b o u t . c o m / g i/d y n a m i c/o ff s i t e . h t m ? s i t e = h t t p :// j a v a . s
un.com/docs/white/langenv/>.
When recently asked if Java is at the mature end of its evo-
lutionary phase, Gosling remarked: “It feels like we’re only a
t h i rd of the way through exploiting into what we can really do
with Java. There’s a lot of play in this puppy yet” (LaMonica,
2 0 0 6 ) .
James Gosling received his undergraduate degree from 
the University of Calgary in Canada in 1977 and his Ph.D. in 
1983 from Carnegie Mellon University in the United States. He
began employment with Sun Microsystems in 1984 and is still
Biographical Sketches
179

employed there, but now with the important title of chief techni-
cal ofﬁcer (Brearton, 2005).
Steve Jobs (b. 1955)
Steve Jobs, one of the two cofounders of Apple Computer, Inc.,
seems to have had a ﬂexible, broad-based intelligence even in his
early adulthood. He studied physics, literature, and poetry while
at Reed College in Portland, Oregon. In 1976, Jobs’s entre p re-
neurial drive became evident, as he sold his Volkswagen minibus
and used the proceeds to start his computer company, along with
fellow cofounder Steve Wozniak.
In 1980 the pair took their company public at $22 per share,
and within four years they had created the MacIntosh computer.
During the years 1986 through 1997, Jobs founded NeXT Soft-
ware, Inc., a company that made hardware to exploit object-ori-
ented technologies (that is, those that model features of the real
world using computer programming). In 1997, Jobs sold the com-
pany to Apple, where he is currently the CEO.
But Steve Jobs’s entrepreneurial activities did not stop there.
In 1986 he cofounded an animation company called Pixar Anima-
tion Studios—the producer of many high-grossing ﬁlms such as
Toy Story, Toy Story 2, A B u g ’s Life, Monsters, Inc., Finding Nemo,
and The Incre d i b l e s . To date, Pixar’s six films have brought in
more than $3 billion in revenues at the worldwide box ofﬁce. The
CEO of this Academy Award–winning, creative company is Steve
Jobs.
Since 1997, Steve Jobs has helped Apple Computer, Inc.,
bring to market creative and high-demand products, such as the
iPod portable music player and the itunes online music outlet
(Apple Computer, Inc., 2004; Schell and Martin, 2004).
Johan Johansen
(a.k.a. DVD-Jon) (b. 1983)
Johan Johansen was born to a Polish mother and a Norwegian fa-
ther in 1983—the year, he maintains, that he had his first en-
counter with a computer (his father’s Sinclair ZX Spectrum). Ob-
v i o u s l y, Johansen was a bright child, for in January 2000 he
180
Biographical Sketches

received the Karoline Aw a rd in high school for his excellent
grades (he had a 5.75 average of a 6.0 maximum) and his contri-
butions to society—in art, culture, and the like. However, bored
with a stru c t u red high school regimen and called by a cre a t i v e
spirit, Johan dropped out of high school in June of the same year.
A year earlier, in 1999, he, along with two European com-
puter programmers, had coauthored the DeCSS decryption pro-
gram. DVD-Jon, as he eventually became known, was only ﬁfteen
years old at the time. The moniker derived from an exploit that
occurred in 1999–2000. DVD-Jon cracked a DVD-access code and
published his decryption program on the Internet. For that action
he was sued by the U.S. DVD Copy Control Association (DVD-
CCA) and the Norwegian Motion Picture Association of America
(MAA). Although he was charged by the Norwegian police with
computer crime for the act, two courts in Norway unanimously
ruled that DVD-Jon’s decryption program did not breach Norwe-
gian law. Therefore, he was eventually acquitted of all charges.
In 2002, Johansen accepted the Electronic Frontier Founda-
tion Pioneer Award for his contribution toward the development
of DeCSS. Johan Johansen continues to produce creative soft-
ware, and in October 2005 he moved to San Diego, California, so
that he could be closer to other creative types with similar inter-
ests (Johansen, 2004; Vaagan and Koehler, 2005).
Mers Kutt (b. 1933)
Mers Kutt is the Canadian inventor of the first Personal Com-
puter (PC), the MCM/70. Believe it or not, this MCM/70 has now
passed its thirtieth anniversary of user demand. Born in Wi n-
nipeg, Manitoba, Mers is a mathematician and an entre p re n e u r
who in 1973—two years before Bill Gates founded Micro s o f t —
founded Toronto-based Micro Computer Machines, Inc.
The MCM/70 was a small desktop microcomputer designed
to provide the APL programming language environment for vari-
ous applications—scientiﬁc, educational, and business. The com-
pany that Kutt founded was one of the first to recognize the
power of, and to capitalize on, the micro p rocessor technology’s
huge capabilities for developing a whole new generation of cost-
effective computing machines.
The MCM/70 was apparently a vision planted in Kutt’s
mind back in the late 1960s when he was a mathematics professor
Biographical Sketches
181

at Queen’s University in Kingston, Ontario. He thought that
what the world needed was not another big, clunky computer or
another fan-driven minicomputer but a small, powerful machine
that could be for individuals’ personal use. What was needed, in
essence, was a Personal Computer, or PC. Not only was Kutt’s
MCM/70 quieter and more powerful than the loud, fan-driven
minicomputers in use at the time, but it had some advanced fea-
tures built into it that even IBM’s PC was lacking.
Kutt’s other inventions included the key edit, a data prepara-
tion system for computers that evolved after the IBM punch card,
p revalently used in the late 1960s. What this device did was to
permit a computer user to enter data into a computer. The com-
puter would then edit the information that had been inputted
(Canadian Information Processing Society, 2003; Stachniak, 2003).
Maﬁaboy (b. 1985)
M a ﬁa b o y, likely Canada’s most famous cracker, was a minor (ﬁf-
teen years of age) when in February 2000 he cracked Internet
servers and used them to launch very costly Denial of Service
(DoS) attacks on several high-pro ﬁle e-commerce Websites, such as
Amazon, eBay, and Yahoo. After pleading guilty on January 18,
2001, to the charges, he was sentenced by a Montreal judge to eight
months in a youth detention center, and he was ﬁned a mere $250.
After his release, Mafiaboy appears to have reflected and
acted on some lifestyle changes. Today he uses his technical and
creative talents as a columnist for CNews Tech News in Montreal.
Still going by the moniker Maﬁaboy, his recent columns have had
such interesting high-tech titles as: “Know the Risks When Pur-
chasing Online,” “Want Free Distance? Use the Internet,” “Hack-
ing Becoming Even Easier,” and “Can a Printer Invade Your Pri-
vacy?” (Canoe, Inc., 2006; Schell and Dodge, 2002).
Kevin Mitnick (a.k.a. Condor) (b. 1963)
Kevin Mitnick, a cracker who was hunted down by the Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI) for cracking computers in his early
adulthood, for stealing corporate secrets, for scrambling tele-
phone networks, and for cracking the U.S. national defense warn-
ing system, seems now to have been rehabilitated.
182
Biographical Sketches

Besides being a regular speaker at the Black Hat and DefCon
security gatherings held in Las Vegas every July, Matnick now
owns his own IT security company—Mitnick Security Consult-
ing, LLC. The Website for his company says that he offers a com-
p rehensive range of IT security services to help companies pro-
tect their valuable assets, and he has lots of contacts in the
Information Technology Security business.
Mitnick is quite the icon in the Computer Underg round. It
is interesting to note that in February 1995, White Hat hacker
Tsutomu Shimomura helped the FBI locate Mitnick for his
series of crack exploits. As a result, Mitnick was imprisoned on
a twenty-five-count indictment that included charges related 
to wire fraud as well as illegal possession of computer files
stolen from well-known high-tech companies such as Sun
M i c rosystems and Nokia. Mitnick was released from prison 
in 2000.
Mitnick has now turned his creative energy to writing secu-
rity books, one of which is The Art of Deception: Controlling the Hu-
man Element of Security—a book that details the importance of so-
cial engineering in successful crack attacks. His latest book
release is The Art of Intrusion: The Real Stories behind the Exploits of
Hackers, Intruders, and Deceivers (Mitnick Security Consulting,
LLC, 2004).
Pierre Omidyar (b. 1967)
On Labor Day in 1995, Pierre Omidyar decided to launch eBay as
an experiment—one that has since paid off extremely well. Today
the online auction eBay is worth about $65 billion (Farzad and El-
gin, 2005).
Pierre graduated from Tufts University in 1988 with an un-
d e rgraduate degree in computer science (Omidyar Network,
2004). At the time that he was contemplating the experiment,
Pierre asked himself, “What would happen within a marketplace
if everyone had equal access to information and tools?” He
quickly found his answer. There are voluminous beneﬁts for on-
line users when there is an open and secure environment in
which to conduct business transactions. Today, hundreds of thou-
sands of individuals lead economically sustainable lives because
of eBay, an online auction. Besides participating in an online auc-
tion, they are business people in their own right. A c c o rding to
Biographical Sketches
183

eBay’s founder, more than 150 million people trust strangers with
each transaction.
It is interesting to note that the billionaires who have made
their fortunes on the Information Highway seem to have devel-
oped a real commitment to giving back to the community for the
collective good of society. It is, perhaps, an extension of the White
Hat hacker ethic applied to business.
For example, after eBay’s success and its IPO in 1998, Omid-
yar and his wife, Pam, cofounded the Omidyar Foundation to
fund nonproﬁt organizations. In short, eBay’s tremendous social
impact as a for-proﬁt company has demonstrated that businesses
a round the globe could also be effective tools for making the
world a better place to live in and for redistributing the wealth.
In June 2004, the Omidyars created a new entity called the
Omidyar Network to invest in for- p rofit, nonprofit, and public
policy efforts. So far, the Network (even its name has Internet im-
plications) has funded a number of social areas so that—accord-
ing to the network’s Website—“more and more people discover
their own power to make good things happen.” These social
a reas have included microfinance, citizens’ journalism, open-
s o u rce software development, and IP p rotection. The Omidyars
say that over the next few years, the network will invest $400 mil-
lion across sectors and will search for economically sound ﬁnan-
cial models that will only evolve even further—if they result in
positive social impacts (Omidyar Network, 2004).
Dennis Ritchie (a.k.a. dmr) (b. 1941)
Dennis Ritchie, who is still at the Computing Sciences Research
Center at Bell Laboratories but under the Lucent Technologies la-
bel, joined the company in 1967—back when the company was
still known as the American Telephone and Telegraph Company
(or AT&T). Before long Dennis Ritchie met Ken Thompson at the
Research Center, and the pair, along with other creative talents at
the lab, created UNIX—an open operating system for minicom-
puters. Besides helping UNIX users with general computing,
w o rd processing, and networking, UNIX also soon became a
standard computer language.
In 1971, Ritchie wrote the UNIX Pro g r a m m e r’s Manual, First
Edition, and in 1990 he helped write the UNIX Tenth Edition Man-
ual, the last UNIX manual published by his group.
184
Biographical Sketches

Also the creator of the popular C programming language,
Dennis Ritchie received his graduate degrees in applied mathe-
matics from Harvard University. Dennis Ritchie is currently a re-
searcher at Lucent Technologies in Murray Hill, New Jersey (Bell
Labs, 2002; Ritchie, 2006).
Dmitry Sklyarov (b. 1974)
In July 2001 the Russian-born computer programmer Dmitry Skl-
y a rov made headlines when he was arrested at the DefCon 9
hacker convention in Las Vegas. He had been about to speak on a
software package that he had developed for Elcomsoft, his Russ-
ian employer.
What bothered FBI agents as they handcuffed Sklyarov and
whisked him off to jail was that Sklyarov’s software permitted In-
ternet users to convert the so-called copy-protected Adobe eBook
ﬁle format to a more commonly utilized and freely copyable com-
puter file. Said to have infringed the U.S. Digital Millennium
Copyright Act (DMCA) of 1998, Sklyarov was imprisoned by the
federal agents who had cut his appearance at the hacker conven-
tion short.
Soon after his arrest, the Electronic Frontier Foundation
(EFF) got involved in Sklyarov’s case and lobbied on his behalf.
The EFF claimed that jurisdictional issues applied and that Skl-
y a rov’s activities were perfectly legal in his homeland—Russia.
As the case went on, Sklyarov’s employer, Elcomsoft Co., Ltd.,
was also charged with infringing the DMCA. In December 2002
both the computer programmer and his company were cleared of
any wrongdoing by the courts, and on December 13, 2001, the
creative doctoral student returned home to be with his wife and
two children (Glasner, 2002).
Ken Thompson (b. 1943)
Dennis Ritchie’s coinventor of the UNIX operating system, Ken
Thompson, is now re t i red from Bell Labs Computing Researc h
Center (now under the Lucent Technologies umbrella). This cre-
ative spirit now lives in Murray Hill, New Jersey.
Thompson arrived at Bell Labs in 1966. Within three years,
he worked with Dennis Ritchie to produce UNIX. In 1970,
Biographical Sketches
185

Thompson also focused on creating the B programming lan-
guage—which was the precursor to Dennis Ritchie’s C language.
Then, in 1973, Thompson rewrote UNIX in C.
In 1995 and 1996, Thompson took up a visiting professorship
at the University of California, Berkeley, where he received his
undergraduate and master’s degrees in electrical engineering. In
1998, near the end of his career, Thompson was awarded, along
with Dennis Ritchie, the National Medal of Technology for his
key role in developing UNIX. Two years after receiving that
honor, he opted to retire (Lucent Technologies, 2002).
Ray Tomlinson (b. 1941)
In 1971–1972, Ray Tomlinson helped contribute to one of the
greatest communication gifts in Internet history: electronic mail,
or e-mail. Tomlinson, one of the forefathers of the Internet,
worked on ARPAnet. A Harvard University graduate, Tomlinson
is the creative person who chose the @ sign for e-mail—a sign still
in use today. The sign simply means “at” (Gaudin, 2002).
It is important to note that Tomlinson was not actually the
inventor of e-mail, for it had been around since about 1965, when
Fernando Corbato and his colleagues at MIT developed a soft-
ware program allowing users of MIT’s Compatible Timesharing
System (CTSS) to share messages. The shortfall was that the pro-
gram let individuals using only one machine communicate with
one another.
Tomlinson’s value-added contribution was that he made it
possible for users to exchange messages between machines and in
d i ff e rent locations—even if they were located in diff e rent continents
or across oceans. E-mail—as users today know it and love it—was
t h i r ty years old on October 8, 2001 (BBC NewsOnline, 2001).
Steve Wozniak (a.k.a. Oak Toebark;
a.k.a. The Wizard of Woz;
a.k.a. The Other Steve) (b. 1950)
Steve Wozniak, a creator and entre p reneur of many names, has
lived up to his Leo horoscope sign by being one of the world’s
186
Biographical Sketches

best-known high-tech leaders. Together with Steve Jobs, Steve
Wozniak made his fortune in the high-tech market with the inven-
tion of the Apple II computer more than twenty-ﬁve years ago.
An engineer by profession, Wozniak was a creative sort
f rom the tender age of eleven, when he built his own ham radio
station. Two years later he began designing computers, and
when he went to university—where he met Steve Jobs—the pair
had fun creating “blue boxes.” These permitted Jobs and Wo z-
niak to phreak (that is, manipulate) long-distance telephone
lines to get telephone calls for free. In fact, at the 2004 Hackers
on Planet Earth gathering in New York City, the Wi z a rd of Wo z ,
as he is called, joked with the audience about those fond “blue
box” exploit memories from the good old days.
E n t re p reneurial Steve Wozniak and Steve Jobs—the two
Steves—in 1976 started the Cupertino, California, Apple Com-
p a n y, and four years later, the company went public—cre a t i n g
two very wealthy men. As a result of a power struggle between
the two entrepreneurs, both men left the Apple Company in 1985.
Although Steve Jobs came back to Apple as CEO in 1997—and
has continued on in that capacity—Steve Wozniak has stayed
away from the company since that time, although he is still on
Apple’s payroll.
With the entre p reneurial spirit still within him, Steve Wo z-
niak went on to found the Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF)
advocacy group, the Tech Museum, and the Children’s Discovery
Museum of San Jose. In 2000 this philanthropic individual was
a w a rded the highly re g a rded Heinz Aw a rd for Technology for
designing the world’s first PC and the Economy and Employ-
ment Aw a rd for later sharing his passions for mathematics and
electronics with elementary school students. During 2000 he was
also inducted into the Inventors Hall of Fame (Nowak, 2006; Un-
uson Corporation, 2003).
References
A & E Television Networks. “Rich List: Google Boys (Sergey Brin and
Larry Page).” The Biography Channel, http:// w w w. t h e b i o g r a p h y c h a n
n e l . c o . u k / b i o g r a p h y _ s t o r y / 1 3 5 2 : 1 4 9 1 / 1 / G o o g l e _ B o y s _ - _ S e rg y _ B r i n _
Larry_Page.htm (accessed February 23, 2006).
Ante, Spencer. “Shawn Fanning.” Business Week, http://www.business
week.com/2000/00_20/b3681054.htm (accessed May 15, 2000).
References
187

Apple Computer, Inc. “Steve Jobs.” Apple Computer, http://www.apple
.com/pr/bios/jobs.html (accessed December, 2004).
BBC NewsOnline. “Indepth: Dot Life; H@ppy Birthday to You.” BBC
News, http:// n e w s . b b c . c o . u k / 1 / l o w / i n _ d e p t h / s c i _ t e c h / 2 0 0 0 / d o t _ l i f e /
1586229.stm (accessed October 8, 2001).
Bell Labs. “Dennis M. Ritchie.” Bell Labs, http://www.cs.bell-labs.com/
who/dmr/ (accessed March, 2002).
Blinkbits. “Sergey Brin Wikipedia RSS Feed.” Blinkbits, http:// w w w
. b l i n k b i t s . c o m / b i t s / v i e w t o p i c / s e rg e i b r i n _ s e rg e y _ b r i n _ w i k i p e d i a _ r s s _
feed?t=5785642 (accessed February 14, 2006).
Brearton, Steve. “Innovation.” Globe and Mail Report on Business, Septem-
ber 22, 2005, pp. 54–55, 57, 59, 63, 65–66, 68.
Canadian Information Processing Society (CIPS). “CIPS Honours Mers
Kutt, Inventor of First PC.” CIPS, http:// w w w. c i p s . c a / n e w s / n a t i o n a l /
news.asp?aID=1747 (accessed October 31, 2003).
Canoe, Inc. “Mafiaboy.” Canoe, http:// c n e w s . c a n o e . c a / C N E W S / Te c h
News/Maﬁaboy/ (accessed February 23, 2006).
Delaney, Kevin. “Dr. Brilliant: From Rock-Star Physician to Advisor for
Google.” Globe and Mail, February 22, 2006, p. B15.
Farzad, R., and B. Elgin “Googling for Gold.” Businessweek 49 (December
5, 2005): 48–52, 54.
Gaudin, Sharon. “A Conversation with the Inventor of Email.” IT
Management, http://itmanagement.earthweb.com/entdev/article.php/
1408411 (accessed July 16, 2002).
G l a s n e r, Joanna. “Elcomsoft Found Not Guilty on All Counts!” Radar
News, http:// w w w. o n l i s a re i n s r a d a r. c o m / a rchives/000747.php (ac-
cessed December 17, 2002).
ICANN (Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers).”Vin-
ton G. Cerf.” ICANN, http:// w w w. i c a n n . o rg/biog/cerf.htm (accessed
September 27, 2005).
Johansen, Johan. “So Sue Me: About Me.” Johansen, http:// n a n o c re w
.net/about/ (accessed 2004).
LaMonica, Martin. “Is Java Getting Better with Age?” CNET Networks,
Inc., http://www.builderau.com.au/program/java/soa/Is_Java_getting
_better_with_age_/0,39024620,39228342,00.htm (accessed January 11 ,
2006).
Lucent Technologies. “Kenneth Thompson.” Lucent Te c h n o l o g i e s ,
h t t p :// w w w.bell-labs.com/about/history/unix/thompsonbio.html (ac-
cessed 2002).
188
Biographical Sketches

M i c rosoft Corporation. “William H. Gates.” Microsoft Corporation,
h t t p :// w w w. m i c rosoft.com/billgates/bio.asp (accessed February 23,
2006).
Mitnick Security Consulting, LLC. “Mitnick Security Consulting, LLC.”
Mitnick Security, http://w w w.kevinmitnick.com/index.php (accessed
2 0 0 4 ) .
M o v i e Web, Inc. “MTV Hires Alex Winter to Pen Napster: The Shawn
Fanning Bio.” Movie Web, http:// w w w. m o v i e w e b . c o m / n e w s / 6 5 / 6 9 6 5
.php (accessed February 25, 2005).
NSERC (Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council). “Stephen
Cook.” NSERC, http:// w w w. n s e rc . c a / n e w s / 2 0 0 6 / p 0 6 0 2 1 4 _ c o o k . h t m
(accessed February 23, 2006).
Nowak, Peter. “What the Other Steve Is Saying about Apple’s Striking
Resurgence.” Globe and Mail, February 23, 2006, p. B10.
Omidyar Network. “Pierre Omidyar.” Omidyar Network, http://
www.omidyar.net/corp/t_pierre.html (accessed 2004).
O’Reilly Media, Inc. “Tim Bray.” O’Reilly Media, Inc., http:// w w w
.xml.com/pub/au/10 (accessed February 23, 2006).
Ritchie, Dennis. “Dennis M. Ritchie.” Dennis Ritchie Website, http://
cm.bell-labs.com/cm/cs/who/dmr/bigbio1st.html (accessed Febru a r y
23, 2006).
Schell, B., and J. Dodge, with S. Moutsatsos. 2002. The Hacking of America:
Who’s Doing It, Why, and How. Westport, CT: Quorum.
Schell, B., and C. Martin. 2004. C y b e rcrime: A R e f e rence Handbook. S a n t a
Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
Smith, To n y. “Shawn Fanning’s Snocap Touts Vision of P2P Heaven.” The
R e g i s t e r, http:// w w w. t h e re g i s t e r. c o . u k / 2 0 0 4 / 1 2 / 0 3 / s n o c a p _ l a u n c h /
(accessed December 3, 2004).
Stachniak, Zbigniew. “The Making of the MCM/70 Micro c o m p u t e r. ”
IEEE, Inc., http://csdl2.computer.org/persagen/DLAbsToc.jsp?resource
P a t h = / d l / m a g s / a n / & t o c = c o m p / m a g s / a n / 2 0 0 3 / 0 2 / a 2 t o c . x m l & D O I =
10.1109/MAHC.2003.1203059 (accessed April–June 2003).
Textuality Services, Inc. “Tim Bray.” Textuality Services, Inc., http://
www.textuality.com/ (accessed 2005).
Unuson Corp. “Short Bio for Steve Wozniak.” Unuson Corporation,
http://www.woz.org/wozscape/wozbio.html (accessed May 14, 2003).
Vaagan, R., and W. Koehler. “Intellectual Property Rights vs. Public Ac-
cess Rights: Ethical Aspects of the DeCSS Decryption Program.” Infor-
mation Research, http:// i n f o r m a t i o n r.net/ir/10–3/paper230.html (ac-
cessed April 2005).
References
189

Woopidoo.com. “Larry Page Biography.” Woopidoo, http:// w w w
.woopidoo.com/biography/larry-page/ (accessed February 23, 2006).
w w w. w 3 . o rg. “Tim Berners-Lee.” W3, http:// w w w. w 3 . o rg / P e o p l e /
Berners-Lee/ (accessed December 31, 2005).
Yahoo, Inc. “The History of Yahoo! How It All Started.” Yahoo, Inc.,
h t t p :// d o c s . y a h o o . c o m / i n f o / m i s c / h i s t o r y.html (accessed February 24,
2006).
190
Biographical Sketches

6
Data and Documents
C
hapter 6 discusses newsworthy Internet crime case facts
p rosecuted in the United States under the computer crime
statute 18 U.S.C. Section 1030. In the United States, the Com-
puter Fraud and Abuse Act (CFAA) has been the primary federal
statute criminalizing Internet abuses regarding privacy, security,
and trust; to strengthen its powers, it was modiﬁed in 1996 by
the National Information Infrastructure Protection Act and codi-
fied at U.S.C. subsection 1030, Fraud and Related Activity in
Connection with Computers.
Following the September 2001 terrorist attacks on the Wo r l d
Trade Center and the Pentagon, the U.S. government began to
pass a number of laws not only to curb Internet crimes but also to
cope with potential terrorist and cyber- t e r rorist activities in the
United States. The ﬁrst half of this chapter summarizes legislation
pertaining to the Internet, as well as ten case facts prosecuted in
the United States under the computer crime statute U.S.C. section
1030 for the past ﬁve years. The focus of this section is on speciﬁc
and highly publicized case facts of harm to persons and to pro p-
erty: child pornography, identity theft, worms and viruses, Intel-
lectual Property infringement, and online fraud.
The second half of this chapter presents interesting data re-
g a rding Internet prevalence and use, taken from a global per-
spective.
Internet Legislation in the U.S.
18 U.S.C.
As of this writing in 2006, the following statutes pertain to Inter-
net crime in the United States under 18 U.S.C.:
191

Section 1020: Fraud and related activity regarding access 
devices.
Section 1030: Fraud and related activity regarding com-
puters.
Section 1362: Communication lines, stations, or systems.
Section 2510: Wire and electronic communications intercep-
tion as well as the interception of oral communication.
Section 2512: The manufacture, distribution, possession,
and advertising of wire, oral, or electronic communica-
tion intercepting devices prohibited.
Section 2517: Authorization for disclosure and use of inter-
cepted wire, oral, or electronic communications.
Section 2520: Recovery of civil damages authorized.
Section 2701: Unlawful access to stored communications.
Section 2702: Voluntary disclosure of customers’ communi-
cations or records.
Section 2703: Required disclosure of customers’ communi-
cations or records.
Section 3121: Recording of dialing, routing, addressing, 
and signaling information.
Section 3125: Emergency pen register and trap and trace 
device installation.
Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA)
HIPAA, short form for the Health Insurance Portability and Ac-
countability Act of 1996, is focused on health protection for U.S.
employees in a number of ways, with the Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services (CMS) having the responsibility to imple-
ment various unrelated provisions of HIPAA.
Title I of HIPAA maintains that health insurance coverage for
individuals and their families will carry on when they transfer or
lose employment, and Title II requires the Department of Health
and Human Services to develop and maintain national standards
for e-transactions in health care. Title II also speaks to the security
and privacy of online health data, capable of being sent through
the Internet.
192
Data and Documents

The developers of HIPAA felt that such standards would im-
prove the efﬁciency and effectiveness of the U.S. health care sys-
tem by encouraging the secure and private handling of electronic
data. From an information security perspective, it is interesting to
note that HIPAA requires a double-entry or double-check of data
entered by personnel.
With a deadline of April 21, 2005, all U.S. healthcare org a n i-
zations had to meet the new HIPA A Security Rule re g u l a t i o n s
by taking extra measures to secure protected health informa-
tion. The final version of the Security Rule was published on
April 21, 2003 (Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services,
2 0 0 2 ) .
Digital Millennium Copyright Act of 1998
(DMCA) 
The protection of Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) from attack
by cyber-criminals is, for many modern-day businesses, as im-
portant as dealing with crack attacks on computer networks.
Enacted in October 1998, the DMCA was intended to imple-
ment under U.S. law certain worldwide copyright laws to cope
with emerging digital technologies by providing pro t e c t i o n
against the disabling or the bypassing of technical measures de-
signed to protect copyright. The DMCA sanctions apply to any-
one who attempts to impair or disable an encryption device
p rotecting a copyrighted work, typically using the Internet. 
The Website for the DMCA is http://www. c o p y r i g h t . g o v /
l e g i s l a t i o n / d m c a . p d f .
Gramm-Leach Bliley Act of 1999 
(Financial Services Modernization Act) 
Personal information that many citizens would consider to be
private—such as their bank account numbers and their bank ac-
count balances—is routinely exchanged for a price by banks and
credit card companies. For that reason, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley
Act (GLBA), or Financial Services Modernization Act of 1999,
brought in some privacy protections against the sale of citizens’
private information of a ﬁnancial nature. Also, the GLBA codiﬁed
p rotections against “pre-texting,” defined as the act of getting
someone’s personal data through false means.
Internet Legislation in the U.S.
193

The purpose of the GLBA was to remove regulations pre-
venting banks, insurance ﬁrms, and stock brokerage ﬁrms fro m
m e rging. However, argued critics, if such regulations were re-
moved, merged ﬁnancial institutions would be able to have ac-
cess to a huge quantity of citizens’ personal information, typi-
cally stored on networks and capable of being sent through the
Internet—with little or no restrictions on how the personal infor-
mation could be used. Before the passage of the GLBA, an insur-
ance company having citizens’ health re c o rds, for example,
would be distinct from, say, a banking institution that had per-
sonal information on clients wanting a house mortgage. With the
passage of the GLBA and following the merger of two such ﬁrms,
they could not only pool the information they had on all of their
clients but also sell it to interested third parties.
Because of these risks, the GLBA included three re q u i re-
ments to protect the personal data of individuals: (1) information
had to be securely stored; (2) the merged institutions had to ad-
vise clients about the policy of sharing personal ﬁnancial infor-
mation with others; and (3) the institutions had to give con-
sumers the right to opt out of the information-sharing schemes if
they so desired (Electronic Privacy Information Center, 2005).
It is generally not well known that a Victoria’s Secret cata-
log—an Internet e-commerce Website and regular retail outlet for
women’s lingerie—is one of the key reasons that Congress in-
cluded privacy protections for ﬁnancial information when pass-
ing the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA). The debate started in
C o n g ress when Representative Joe Barton talked about his con-
cerns that his credit union had sold his address to Victoria’s Se-
c ret, after which, he said, he started getting the catalogs at his
home in Washington. He noted that he became stressed when the
catalogs starting arriving, because he did not want his wife to
think that he was buying lingerie for other women or that he was
entertaining himself with the pictures of skimpily clad women in
the catalogs. He emphasized that neither he nor his wife had ever
purchased from the store—online, in person, or through the cata-
log. Barton said that since he spent so little money in Washington,
he knew that his credit union was the only business having his
a d d ress. He said that because he believed he should be able to
stop financial institutions from selling personal information to
t h i rd parties, he supported the act. Since the U.S. Congre s s
passed the act, individuals now have the right to direct ﬁnancial
194
Data and Documents

institutions not to sell personal information to third parties
(Hoofnagle and Honig, 2005).
In short, if physical access to a computer system can be ob-
tained, U.S. Congress members feared that gaining illegal or in-
a p p ropriate access to information on that computer could also
be obtained. With relatively new U.S. laws pertaining to the se-
curity of information on the Internet—including HIPA A ( H e a l t h
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act), the Gramm-
Leach-Bliley Act, and the Sarbanes-Oxley Act—data in both
physical and electronic forms must not only be protected by ad-
equate access control mechanisms but also be audited, as well, if
compliance with the various regulations is going to be main-
t a i n e d .
Trademark Law, Patent Law, and the 
U.S. Anticybersquatting Consumer 
Protection Act of 1999
Trademark law governs disputes between business owners over
the names, logos, and other means that they use to identify their
p roducts and services in the marketplace. More than 33,000,000
Internet domain names have been re g i s t e red, including tens of
thousands of domain names apparently infringing on trademark
and service marks. If someone owns a trademark or a service
mark (federally re g i s t e red or not), there could be some domain
names infringing on that trademark; although individuals may
not realize it, under U.S. trademark law, trademark owners have
a duty to police their marks and to prevent other parties from in-
fringing on them (Nolo, 2006).
In 2001, John Zuccarini gained notoriety because of a num-
ber of domain name violations of the U.S. A n t i c y b e r s q u a t t i n g
Consumer Protection Act. By deﬁnition, cyber-squatting is regis-
tering, trafﬁcking in, or using domain names that are the same as
or confusingly similar to existing trademarks—with the “bad
faith” intention of proﬁting from the goodwill of the trademark.
C y b e r-squatters are like the sooners in pioneer days—people
who snatched land before it could be legally claimed and taken as
their own (Hampton and McCue, 2005).
On October 30, 2000, the U.S. District Court in Pennsylvania
o rd e red Zuccarini to pay damages of $500,000 (plus more than
Internet Legislation in the U.S.
195

$30,000 in attorneys’ fees and costs) arising from ﬁve Internet do-
main names he got and used—in violation of the Anticybersquat-
ting Consumer Protection Act. Zuccarini ﬁled an appeal, but the
Appeals Court on June 15, 2001, supported the U.S. District
Court’s decision. Zuccarini ran more than 3,000 Websites, netting
himself a proﬁt of between $800,000 to $1,000,000 a year. He reg-
i s t e red hundreds of Internet domain names that were mis-
spellings of, but remarkably similar to, famous people’s names,
marketing brands, company names, actors, television shows, and
movies—including Budget Rent a Car Corporation, America On-
line, Saks and Company, Dow Jones and Company, Nicole Kid-
man, Minolta, and Microsoft Corporation (Keyt, 2001).
Besides trademark infringement, companies are often
highly concerned about patent infringement. In the United
States and Canada, patent infringement occurs when an individ-
ual makes or sells a patented invention in the said jurisdiction
without obtaining authority from the patent owner. Vi r t u a l l y
anything “new” can be, arg u a b l y, patentable. Recently, patent
laws in North America have recognized that software inventions
a re, for the most part, patentable—as well as methods of doing
business. In the United States and in Canada, the limitation
period for patent infringement litigation is six years. If a party is
found guilty of infringing another’s patent, with re g a rd to dam-
ages, U.S. patent laws, in particular, say that the court shall
a w a rd damages adequate to compensate the owner of the
patent—such as not less than a reasonable royalty along with in-
t e rest and costs ﬁxed by the court (Patent Enforcement and Roy-
alties, Ltd., 2002).
Some infringement cases in recent years have resulted in
costly legal bills, as lawyers have battled it out in courtro o m s
over companies’ patent rights. One such case was fought over the
past four years between EMC Corporation and the Hewlett-
P a c k a rd Company. Although neither company admitted to any
wrongdoing, as part of the settlement ﬁnally reached, both com-
panies agreed to a five-year patent cross-licensing agre e m e n t ,
and Hewlett-Packard agreed to pay EMC Corporation $325 mil-
lion or to buy that amount of EMC Corporation products within
ﬁve years (In Brief, 2005).
Meanwhile, the patent war between Canadian ﬁrm Research
in Motion (RIM), Ltd., and the U.S. firm NTP, Inc., continued.
Nasty allegations were thrown by one company at the other, de-
spite a recent warning from a U.S. federal judge to settle the
196
Data and Documents

patent fight before he enforces a resolution to the five-year- o l d
ﬁght. The judge scolded the executives and lawyers representing
the two companies, saying that both should have found a solu-
tion by now; he afﬁrmed that if the court had to impose a solu-
tion, it would be imperfect. An earlier 2002 jury had found RIM
guilty of infringing on ﬁve patents belonging to NTP (a Virginia
company created to protect the patents of the late high-tech in-
ventor Thomas Campana, Jr.). RIM later lost on appeal as well,
and the company failed to convince the U.S. Supreme Court to re-
view the case. (Avery and Waldie, 2006). The case ended in a ne-
gotiated settlement in March 2006. RIM’s CEO agreed to pay NTP
a one-time payment of U.S.$612.5 million. RIM, in return, re-
ceived a license to NTP’s patents going forward.
USA Patriot Act of 2001
and Patriot Act II
On October 27, 2001, the USA Patriot (that is, Uniting and
Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required
to Intercept and Obstruct Te r rorism) Act was enacted into law.
Congressman Ron Paul told the Washington Times that no one in
Congress had been permitted to read in full the Patriot Act I text,
which was passed very quickly by the House on October 27,
2001. That event, when unveiled, upset many civil libertarians
and constitutional scholars. William Safire, writing for the N e w
York Times, said that with the passing of Patriot Act I, President
Bush was, in effect, seizing dictatorial control.
M o re heat was added to the debate when, on February 7,
2003, the Center for Public Integrity, a public interest think tank
in Washington, D.C., disclosed the entire text (eighty-seven
pages) of the Domestic Security Enhancement Act of 2003 (more
widely referred to as Patriot Act II), along with a section-by-sec-
tion analysis of the proposed legislation. The classiﬁed document
had allegedly been leaked to the Center for Public Integrity by a
s o u rce inside the federal government whose identity was not
made known (Jones, 2006).
Homeland Security Act of 2002
In 2002, the United States passed the Homeland Security Act. Sec-
tion 225, known as the Cyber Security Enhancement Act of 2002,
Internet Legislation in the U.S.
197

had the following subsections (U.S. Department of Homeland
Security, 2006):
Title I: The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and its
missions and functions.
Title II: Information analysis and infrastructure protection.
Title III: Chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear
countermeasures.
Title IV: Border and transportation security.
Title V: Emergency preparedness and response.
Title VI: Internal management of the DHS.
Title VII: General provisions and coordination with nonfed-
eral entities, the inspector general, and the U.S. Secret
Service.
Title VIII: Transitional items.
Title IX: Conforming and other technical amendments.
The U.S. Homeland Security Act of 2002 was brought by
Richard Armey to the Standing Committee in the House on July
10, 2002. Amendments were made by the Committee on Home-
land Security on July 24, 2002. The legislation passed the House
on July 26, 2002, was received in the Senate on November 19,
2002, and was passed by the Senate on November 25, 2002.
Called the Homeland Security Act of 2002, it was signed by the
president of the United States as Public Law 107–296 to establish
the Department of Homeland Security (Center for Democracy
and Technology, 2005).
Cyber Security Research and 
Development Act of 2002
Introduced by Sherwood Boehlert on December 3, 2001, the Cy-
ber Security Research and Development Act was meant to pro-
vide money for computer and network security research and for
re s e a rch fellowship programs in the United States. The act was
sent to the Committee on Science and to the Committee on Edu-
cation and the Workforce. On February 7, 2002, the House of Rep-
resentatives passed the bill. It was read twice before the Senate,
198
Data and Documents

was sent to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Tr a n s-
portation, and became Public Law No. 107–305 (ibid.).
PROTECT Act of 2003, COPPA of 1998, 
and CIPA of 2000
An important piece of legislation passed in the United States 
in 2003 to fight Internet-based child pornography was the
PROTECT Act—the Prosecutorial Remedies and Tools against the
Exploitation of Children Today Act. This act was passed by the
U.S. Senate in February 2003, with an extraordinary vote of 84
senators in favor and 0 senators opposed. The objective of this
piece of legislation was to assist law enforcement agents in their
attempts not only to identify but also to track pedophiles using
the Internet to seduce minors. This piece of legislation was seen
as a response to the April 16, 2002, Supreme Court decision that
overturned most of the CPPA, also known as the Child Pornogra-
phy Prevention Act of 1966. The case, in point, was Ashcroft v. Free
Speech Coalition (00–795), 198F.3d 1083.
In other words, the PROTECT Act of 2003 was meant to
s t rengthen the U.S. government’s ability to prosecute crimes in-
volving child pornography. The PROTECT Act of 2003 also at-
tempted to extend prosecutorial power beyond U.S. jurisdic-
t i o n s .
The latter implemented the Amber Alert communication sys-
tem—which allows for nationwide alerts when children go miss-
ing or are kidnapped—and redefined child pornography to in-
clude not only images of real children engaging in sexually
explicit conduct but also computer-generated depictions indistin-
guishable from real children engaging in such acts. Indistinguish-
able was further deﬁned as that which an ordinary person view-
ing the image would conclude is a real child engaging in sexually
explicit acts. However, cartoons, drawings, paintings, and sculp-
t u res depicting minors or adults engaging in sexually explicit
acts, as well as depictions of actual adults that look like minors
engaging in sexually explicit acts, are excluded from the deﬁn i-
tion of child pornography (ibid.).
Also, the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA)
of 1998, effective April 21, 2000, applied to the online collection of
personal information from children under the age of thirteen. The
Internet Legislation in the U.S.
199

rules detailed what a Website operator must include in a privacy
policy, when and how to seek veriﬁable consent from parents or
g u a rdians, and what actions an operator must take to pro t e c t
children’s privacy and safety online. It is important to note that
these Internet safety policies required the use of ﬁlters to protect
against access to visual depictions considered obscene or harmful
to minors.
A filter is a device or material for suppressing or minimiz-
ing waves or oscillations of certain frequencies. There f o re, fil-
tering software should block access to Internet Websites listed
in an internal database of the product, block access to Internet
Websites listed in a database maintained external to the pro d-
uct itself, block access to Internet Websites carrying certain rat-
ings assigned to those Websites by a third party or that are un-
rated under such a system, and block access based on the
p resence of certain words or phrases on those Websites. In
short, software filters use an algorithm to test for appro p r i a t e-
ness of Internet material—in this case, for minors. Websites are
first filtered based on IP a d d resses or domain names. Since that
p rocess is based on predefined lists of appropriate and inap-
p ropriate Websites, relying totally on such lists is ineff e c t i v e
because Internet Websites come and go so quickly. More o v e r,
though minors often frequent online chat rooms, instant
messaging, and newsgroups, these are not under the filtering
s y s t e m .
Under the Children’s Internet Protection Act (CIPA) of 2000,
U.S. libraries receiving e-rate discounts, or grants for Internet ac-
cess, are re q u i red to enforce policies using technological pro t e c-
tion measures—particularly filters—to prevent minors fro m
viewing visual depictions falling into three categories: child
p o r n o g r a p h y, obscenity, and information that is generally harm-
ful to minors. However, this law does not re q u i re ﬁlters to block
other text-based material (Minow, 2003).
Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) corporal Jim
Gillis, head of Project Horizon, a policing initiative dealing with
online child pornography and based in Halifax, Nova Scotia,
Canada, maintains that the Internet pornography industry gen-
erates a whopping $57 billion annually worldwide and supports
m o re than 4 million Websites. In that group, notes Jim Gillis,
t h e re are more than 100,000 child pornography sites cre a t i n g
about $2.5 billion a year in revenues (Butters, 2005; Mahoney,
2 0 0 5 ) .
200
Data and Documents

CAN-SPAM Act of 2003
The CAN-SPAM Act was passed by the U.S. Senate on November
25, 2003, with the purpose of doing what its name implies: Con-
trolling the Assault of Non-Solicited Pornography and Marketing
Act of 2003.
The objective was to target, in particular, spammers and
massive e-mailers whose objectives—according to the e-mail
headers—appeared to be legitimate but were not. The reason that
Congress made this daring move was that, according to 2003 esti-
mates, unsolicited commercial e-mail was estimated to account
for more than half of all e-mail trafﬁc, a rise from an estimated 
7 percent just two years earlier. Moreover, the U.S. Congress af-
ﬁrmed that the volume of spam continues to rise—and that most
of these electronic messages are fraudulent or deceptive.
Under the CAN-SPAM Act, chapter 47 of title 18, U.S. Code,
was amended at the end of new section 1037, Fraud and Related
Activity in Connection with Electronic Mail. Offenders of the act
are considered to be those individuals in or affecting interstate or
foreign commerce who knowingly:
• Gain access to a protected computer without authoriza-
tion and intentionally initiate the sending of multiple
commercial e-mail messages from or through that com-
puter and a connection to the Internet.
• Use a protected computer to relay or retransmit multiple
commercial e-mail messages to either intentionally de-
ceive or to mislead receivers or any Internet access ser-
vice as to the origin of such e-mail messages.
• Intentionally falsify header information in multiple com-
mercial e-mail messages and intentionally initiate the
sending of such messages.
• Register using information that falsiﬁes the identity of the
actual registrant for ﬁve or more e-mail accounts, or on-
line user accounts of two or more domain names, and in-
tentionally initiate the sending of multiple commercial
e-mails from any combination of these accounts or do-
main names.
• Intentionally falsely represent oneself as a legitimate reg-
istrant of ﬁve or more Internet Protocol (IP) addresses,
and then intentionally initiate the sending of many com-
mercial e-mail messages from such addresses.
Internet Legislation in the U.S.
201

Those breaching this act receive a ﬁne, imprisonment for not
m o re than ﬁve years, or both. The act is enforced by the U.S. Fed-
eral Trade Commission (FTC), and within six months of its en-
actment, the FTC sent to the Senate Committee on Commerc e ,
Science and Transportation as well as to the House of Repre s e n-
tatives Committee on Energy and Commerce a report detailing a
plan and a timetable for establishing a U.S.-wide marketing 
Do-Not-E-Mail registry (Sorkin, 2006).
P rovisions of many of the following state laws re g a rd i n g
spam may be pre-empted by the CAN-SPAM Act of 2003: A l-
abama, Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Connecticut,
Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Idaho, Illinois, Kansas, Kentucky,
Louisiana, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, and Rhode Is-
land—to name just a few.
Other jurisdictions around the globe have passed similar an-
tispam laws. For example, the European Union (EU) has a num-
ber of pieces of legislation, including: the E-Privacy Directive, the
E-Commerce Directive, and the Data Protection Directive (ibid.)
M o re o v e r, Canada’s anti-intrusion legislation involves sec-
tion 342.1 of the Canadian Criminal Code, aimed at several po-
tential harms to property and persons, including stealing com-
puter services, invading individuals’ privacy, and trading in
computers’ passwords or cracking encryption systems. Charg e s
for such breaches are usually made with regard to applicable sec-
tions of the Criminal Code—theft, fraud, computer abuse, infor-
mation abuse, and the interception of communications.
Cyber Security Enhancement Act 
of 2005/2001
The Cyber Security Enhancement Act of 2001 was introduced and
sent to the House Judiciary by Lamar Smith on December 13,
2001, to provide for greater cyber-security for the United States. A
hearing was held in the Crime Subcommittee on February 26,
2002. On July 16, 2002, it was sent to the Senate committee, read
two times, and then sent to the Committee on the Judiciary.
On April 20, 2005, the House Homeland Security Subcom-
mittee on Economic Security, Infrastru c t u re Protection, and Cy-
bersecurity passed HR 285, the Cyber Security Enhancement Act
of 2005. The act stated not only that the assistant secretary for
c y b e r-security would be the head of the Directorate’s National
202
Data and Documents

Cyber Security Division but also that the divisions would iden-
tify and reduce vulnerabilities and threats, as well as create cy-
ber-attack warning systems (Dizzard III, 2005).
A Sampling of Recent
Internet Crime Cases
A number of interesting Internet crime cases have occurred over
the past ﬁve years. All of these are press releases listed under the
U.S. Department of Justice Website, http://www. u s d o j . g o v /
(which is in the public domain), and pertain to individuals
charged and convicted under the U.S. Computer Crime Statute,
U.S.C. section 1030.
Before detailing ten of these court cases—meant to be a rep-
resentative rather than a comprehensive listing of the Internet le-
gal cases detailed on this Department of Justice Website over the
past ﬁve years—it is important to note that, as of May 23, 2001,
the FBI and the Department of Justice announced a nationwide
sweep into Internet fraud. The project, called Operation Cyber
Loss, was started by the FBI’s Internet Fraud Complaint Center
(IFCC). The project has been coordinated by FBI ofﬁces, the U.S.
Postal Inspection Service (USPIS), the Internal Revenue Service
(Criminal Investigative Division), U.S. Customs Service, the U.S.
S e c ret Service, and many other state and local law enforc e m e n t
arms (Kubic, 2001).
The Internet fraud schemes exposed as part of this investiga-
tion have re p resented more than 56,000 online users who have
claimed cumulative losses exceeding $117 million. The schemes
highlighted by the project have included online auction fraud,
the regular nondelivery of merchandise bought over the Net,
debit and credit card fraud, identity theft, security fraud, and
multilevel marketing or pyramid schemes. As a result of this pro-
ject, more than ninety Internet crime perpetrators have been
c h a rged with a variety of crimes, including wire fraud, mail
fraud, conspiracy to commit fraud, bank fraud, money launder-
ing, and Intellectual Property Rights infringement. As is typical
of Internet fraud, the perpetrators and the targets involved in this
operation have been scattered throughout the world, with many
of the schemes being multijurisdictional in nature. Moreover, the
cases tend to reﬂect the propensities of those committing fraud:
A Sampling of Recent Internet Crime Cases
203

they tend to go from one fraud scheme to another trying to “rip
o ff” others for their own personal gain. The only way to stop
them in their tracks is to charge them and convict them (ibid.).
2002
Russian Computer Hacker Sentenced to Three Years in Prison 
(October 4) [United States v. Gorshkov]
At age twenty-seven, Vasiliy Gorshkov, a Russian, was sentenced
to three years in jail for charges including network cracking, con-
spiracy, and fraud committed against the Speakeasy Network of
Seattle, Washington; the Nara Bank of Los Angeles, California;
and the online credit card payment company PayPal of Palo Alto,
California. Gorshkov also had to pay nearly $700,000 in re s t i t u-
tion for losses he caused to Speakeasy and PayPal.
Vasiliy was one of two men from Russia (the other being
Alexy Ivanov, age twenty-three) conned into traveling to the
United States as part of an FBI undercover operation to get the in-
dividuals responsible for these crimes. A nationwide investiga-
tion was started by the FBI into Russian computer intrusions di-
rected at U.S. Internet service providers, e-commerce We b s i t e s ,
and online banks. The FBI was able to determine that the crackers
gained unauthorized access to the targeted computers to steal
credit card information and other personal ﬁnancial information.
The perpetrators also often tried to extort money from the targets
with threats of exposing sensitive data to the public, or of damag-
ing the targeted computers. The crackers also defrauded PayPal
through a plot in which stolen credit cards were used to generate
money and to pay for computer parts purchased from companies
in the United States.
C reator of Melissa Computer Vi rus Sentenced to Twenty Months 
in Federal Prison (May 1) [United States v. Smith]
The creator of the Melissa computer virus, David L. Smith, age
t h i r t y - f o u r, of New Jersey, pleaded guilty in court of developing
the destructive virus. The accused said he recognized that his
Melissa virus had caused more than $80 million in damages be-
cause of disruptions to computer networks in businesses and gov-
ernment ofﬁces. The judge hearing the case ord e red Smith to serve
t h ree years of supervised release after he finished serving a
twenty-month prison sentence. Smith was also ﬁned $5,000 and
was told that he could not be involved with computer networks,
204
Data and Documents

the Internet, or Internet bulletin board systems unless authorized
by the court. He also had to serve 100 hours of community service
in a way that would best make use of his technology know-how.
2003
D i s g runtled Philadelphia Phillies Fan Charged with Hacking 
into Computers Triggering Spam E-Mail Attacks (October 7) 
[United States v. Carlson]
An interesting court case occurred in the fall of 2000. A disgrun-
tled Philadelphia Phillies baseball fan by the name of Allan Eric
Carlson was arrested at his home and charged by FBI agents with
cracking into computers around the United States and using
them as launch sites for his cyber exploits in 2001 and 2002. He
hijacked or spoofed the return addresses of reporters at the
Philadelphia Inquire r n e w s p a p e r, the Philadelphia Daily News, a n d
the Philadelphia Phillies’ ofﬁces and then used those e-mail ad-
d resses to launch spam e-mail attacks. The FBI agents also
c h a rged Carlson with identity theft for illegally utilizing the e-
mail addresses of the newspaper reporters.
The judge hearing the case said that fans have the right to
voice their displeasure, but these acts committed by Carlson were
electronic attacks with serious consequences, for by ﬂooding the
targeted computer systems with spam e-mails, those systems as
well as the businesses in which they were placed were seriously
harmed. The judge affirmed that disgruntled fans can boo and
they can turn off the television, but they cannot hijack the e-mail
addresses of unsuspecting users and call it a passion. The judge
also afﬁrmed that this was the ﬁrst use of an identity theft statute
against an e-mail spammer. The accused faced a maximum possi-
ble sentence of 471 years’ imprisonment, $117,250,000 in fines,
and a special assessment of $7,800.
Los Angeles, California, Man Sentenced to Prison for Role in
I n t e rnational Computer Hacking and Internet Fraud Scheme 
( F e b ru a ry 28) [United States v. Pae] 
In February 2003, a twenty-year-old named Thomas Pae was sen-
tenced in the United States on charges of wire fraud, credit card
fraud, and conspiracy. He was a partner in a seven-person inter-
national computer cracking and Internet fraud scheme. The tar-
get was Ingram Micro, a wholesale distributor of technology
products based in Santa Ana, California.
A Sampling of Recent Internet Crime Cases
205

Pae pleaded guilty to the charges and admitted that in 2001
he had partaken in a scheme with others in Romania to gain
unauthorized access to Ingram Micro’s online ordering system
to place hundreds of thousands of dollars worth of computer
equipment orders. The equipment was then sent to destinations
c o n t rolled by Pae and other team players in the Los A n g e l e s
a rea. This equipment was then repackaged and sent to Eastern
E u rope, where it was likely resold. During his hearing, Pae also
said that he had purchased credit card numbers from crackers on
the Internet and used them to buy computer chips, hard drives,
PDAs, and other tech items from e-commerce Websites like
Handspring, Amazon, and Egghead. He also said that he and his
team members had tried to buy more than $500,000 in computer
equipment and other items from Ingram Micro and the other on-
line re t a i l e r s .
In the end, Pae was ordered to pay $324,061 in restitution to
the targets and to spend thirty-three months behind bars. A f t e r
his release, Pae was to serve three years of supervised release.
2004
U.S. Charges Hacker with Illegally Accessing New York Ti m e s
Computer Network (January 8) [United States v. Lamo]
Adrian Lamo, age twenty-two, a friend of infamous cracker
Kevin Mitnick, was charged in a New York court with cracking
into the N e w York Ti m e s newspaper computer network in 2002
and accessing a database having personal information (such as
the home telephone numbers and Social Security numbers) of
more than 3,000 contributors to the op-ed page of the paper.
Lamo added an entry to the database for himself; he listed
his personal information (such as his cell phone number—
which was 415-505-HACK) and a summary of his areas of
expertise: “computer hacking, national security, communica-
tions intelligence.” While inside the internal network, he cre-
ated five fake user ID names and passwords for the New Yo r k
Ti m e s ’s account with LexisNexis, an Internet-based subscription
service providing legal, news, and other useful information.
Then, over a three-month period, Lamo used these five fictitious
user IDs and passwords to complete more than 3,000 searc h e s
on LexisNexis, at a total cost of about $300,000. After pleading
guilty to his cyber exploits, Lamo received six months’ deten-
206
Data and Documents

tion at his parents’ home, was placed on two years’ pro b a t i o n
after his completion of that term, and was ord e red to pay
$65,000 in re s t i t u t i o n .
Justice Department Sues to Halt Alleged Internet Tax Scam 
(September 9) [United States v. Luman]
The U.S. Justice Department requested on September 9, 2004, that
a federal court in Georgia bar Jonathan Luman from selling a tax
scam through the Internet. According to the civil injunction com-
plaint, this individual operated Websites selling fake documents
as well as a “Tax Buster Guide”—with forms that purc h a s e r s
could submit to the Internal Revenue Service instead of the usual
tax return forms.
Luman informed potential customers that his documents
would let them reclaim their “sovereign citizen” status and elimi-
nate liability for federal income taxes. His guide sold for $50. The
guide and completed forms were sold for about $200 to cus-
tomers in more than forty U.S. states. The Justice Department
also wanted an order directing the perpetrator to give them any
re c o rds identifying his Internet clients and an order to re q u i re
him to post the court order on his Websites. The assistant attor-
ney general for the Justice Department’s Tax Division said that il-
legal tax scams utilizing the Internet are costing honest taxpayers
billions of dollars annually. Such scams are listed on the Internal
Revenue Service’s “Dirty Dozen” list, at http://www. i r s . g o v /
newsroom/article/0,id=120803,00.html.
2005
I n t e rnet Pharmacy Operator Receives 51-Month Prison Sentence
( J a n u a ry 21) [United States v. Kolowich]
A U.S. district court judge sentenced Mark Kolowich to federal
prison for ﬁfty-one months and repayment of a large amount of
cash proceeds for operating one of the largest Internet pharmacy
schemes ever prosecuted in the United States. His online com-
pany was known as World Express RX.
Kolowich pleaded guilty to selling counterfeit pharmaceuti-
cals over the Internet, committing mail fraud, smuggling phar-
maceuticals, and conspiring to launder money. In a related case,
he also pleaded guilty to importing unapproved drugs into the
United States, introducing those unapproved drugs to interstate
A Sampling of Recent Internet Crime Cases
207

c o m m e rce, and smuggling unapproved drugs into the country.
The attorney for the Department of Justice said that he should get
criminal penalties for diverting and counterfeiting pre s c r i p t i o n
drugs for proﬁt. When consumers use the Net to get prescription
d rugs, they take a risk that the drugs sold to them may not be
what they appear to be.
The perpetrator ran the pharmacy Website at www.WorldEx-
pressRx.com, and consumers could buy prescription drugs with-
out a prescription. The Website told potential customers simply
to complete a health questionnaire and pay a $35 flat fee for a
doctor’s consultation. In fact, the Website falsely represented that
a physician would review the questionnaire and afterward issue
a lawful prescription before the drugs would be shipped.
Kolowich had no physician afﬁliated with this scheme. The dis-
tributed drugs contained active ingredients for such prescription
drugs as Viagra, Cialis, Levitra, Propecia, Celebrex, and Xenical.
Apparently, the drugs were made in Mexico and smuggled into
California. They were then packaged and sent to online cus-
tomers throughout the United States and elsewhere around the
globe. Some of the ingredients were imported from China and In-
dia with false shipping documents.
This case was investigated by the Federal Bureau of Investi-
gation, the Food and Drug Administration Ofﬁce of Criminal In-
vestigations, the Internal Revenue Service Criminal Investiga-
tions Division, the Immigration and Customs Enforc e m e n t
Division of the Department of Homeland Security, the U.S. Postal
Inspection Service, and the Chula Vista Police Department.
First Criminal Defendants Plead Guilty in Peer-to-Peer Copyright
Piracy Crackdown (January 18) [United States v. Trobridge and
C h i c o i n e ]
In a U.S. courtroom, William Trowbridge, age ﬁfty, and Michael
Chicoine, age forty-seven, of Texas both pleaded guilty to con-
spiracy and committing felony copyright infringement. This was
the first federal conviction in the United States for copyright
piracy using peer-to-peer (P2P) networks.
The attorney for the Department of Justice said that the theft
of Intellectual Property victimizes the owners of the cre a t i v e
works as well as the American people—who are then forced to
shoulder the burden of increased costs for such goods and ser-
vices. The pair were caught through an FBI operation known as
Operation Digital Gridlock, targeted at illegal file-sharing of
208
Data and Documents

copyrighted information over ﬁve Direct Connect P2P networks
belonging to an online group of hubs known as The Under-
g round Network. These networks operated by having users
share large quantities of computer ﬁles with other Internet users,
all of whom could download each other’s ﬁles.
For two years Trowbridge owned and operated a Direct Con-
nect hub called the Movie ®oom, and Chicoine owned and oper-
ated a hub named Ãçhènøñ’s Alley™ (pronounced “Achenon’s
Alley”). The accused off e red a wide variety of computer soft-
ware, computer games, music, and movies in digital format, in-
cluding some software titles selling on the normal market for
thousands of dollars.
During the investigation, government agents downloaded
t h i r t y - ﬁve copyrighted works worth about $5,000 from Chicoine’s
hub, and more than seventy copyrighted works worth about
$21,000 from Trowbridge’s hub. The pair pleaded guilty. The max-
imum penalties for a ﬁrst-time offender convicted of conspiracy to
commit felony criminal copyright infringement in violation of
Title 17, U.S. Code, Section 506, and Title 18, U.S. Code, Sections
371 and 2319, are ﬁve years in prison, a ﬁne of $250,000, re s t i t u t i o n
paid to the targets, and the release to authorities and destru c t i o n
of infringing copies and all equipment used to manufacture such
illegal copies.
2006
Second Defendant Pleads Guilty in Prosecution of 
Major International Spam Operation (January 31) 
[United States v. Rogers]
A California man named Kirk Rogers, age forty-three, pleaded
guilty to aiding and abetting others to violate the CAN-SPA M
Act of 2003. This was the California man’s second conviction re-
lated to the sending of obscene e-mails through the Internet.
Rogers agreed to forfeit money obtained by those crimes, and he
faces a maximum sentence of ﬁve years in prison if found guilty.
His sentencing will not take place until after June 2006.
A c c o rding to the plea agreement, he helped three people
send spam e-mails containing graphic pornographic images.
Rogers developed and managed the computer system used to
send spam e-mail on behalf of two of his partners. The attorney
re p resenting the Justice Department said that this pro s e c u t i o n
addresses two of the most signiﬁcant problems arising with the
A Sampling of Recent Internet Crime Cases
209

Internet: online obscenity and the intrusive, costly, and often
harmful practice of e-mail spam. The prosecution of this case
would also help stop pornographers wanting to enter houses un-
invited and threaten children’s innocence. This case, the ﬁrst in
the country, should send a strong message to other pornogra-
phers, afﬁrmed the attorney.
Apparently America Online, Inc., received more than 600,000
complaints between January 30, 2004, and June 9, 2004, from its
online users regarding spam e-mails that had allegedly been sent
by this spamming operation. The indictment further alleged that
the spam e-mails sent by the accused marketed pornographic In-
ternet Websites to earn commissions for directing Internet trafﬁc
to these Websites. It was also alleged that graphic pornographic
images were embedded in each of the defendants’ e-mails. Four
counts of the indictment charged felony obscenity offenses for
the sending of hard-core pornographic images of adults engaged
in explicit sexual conduct, meeting the Supreme Court’s test for
adult obscenity.
According to the indictment, the spam e-mails were sent in a
way that would impair the ability of recipients, Internet service
providers processing the e-mails on behalf of recipients, and law
e n f o rcement agencies to identify, locate, or respond to the
senders. The indictment further alleged that Rogers’s two part-
ners in crime created and used overseas companies named the
Compliance Company and Ganymede Marketing to hide their
exploits. His two partners in Internet crime also used overseas
bank accounts in Mauritius and the Isle of Man to launder and
distribute proceeds from the spamming exploits.
Vi rginia Man Pleads Guilty to Child Pornography Charges 
( J a n u a ry 27) [United States v. Mitchel]
A Virginia man by the name of Gregory Mitchel, age thirty-eight,
pleaded guilty to multiple charges involving the sexual exploita-
tion of minor boys and operating child pornography Websites on
the Internet. He was charged with four counts, including the pro-
duction and selling of child porn through the Net through child
pornography Websites. In court, Mitchel pleaded guilty to the
production, distribution, and sale of child pornography.
An investigation by the FBI ended in his arrest on September
12, 2005. Mitchel operated a Website called Justinsfriends.com—
which sold membership subscriptions to online users wanting to
get videos of minor boys engaging in sexually explicit conduct.
210
Data and Documents

Mitchel was also responsible for producing content for the Web-
sites by filming videos of minors engaging in explicit sex acts.
Mitchel and other partners then received the proceeds fro m
membership subscriptions.
Because of a previous child pornography conviction, Mitchel
faces a mandatory minimum sentence of not less than twenty-ﬁv e
years to a maximum of ﬁfty years for both the production and dis-
tribution of child pornography. The charge of selling child pornog-
raphy carries a sentence of not less than ﬁfteen to forty years in
prison. Finally, the charge of possession of child pornography car-
ries a sentence of not less than ten years to a maximum of twenty
years. The accused also faces lifetime supervised release if he is
ever released from prison. The United States is also seeking forfei-
t u re of the proceeds used in committing these Internet exploits.
Data Regarding Internet Use and 
Prevalence Worldwide
TABLE 6.1: Top 15 Internet-Using Countries
Year-end 2004:
Internet Users (#K)
Share %
1. United States
< 1 8 6 , 0 0 0
<2 0
2. China
< 1 0 0 , 0 0 0
<1 1
3. Japan
<7 9 , 0 0 0
<9
4. Germ a n y
<4 2 , 0 0 0
<5
5. India
<3 7 , 0 0 0
<4
6. United Kingdom
<3 4 , 0 0 0
<4
7. South Kore a
<3 2 , 0 0 0
<4
8. Italy
<2 6 , 0 0 0
<3
9. France
<2 6 , 0 0 0
<3
10. Brazil
<2 3 , 0 0 0
<3
11. Russia
<2 2 , 0 0 0
<3
12. Canada
<2 1 , 0 0 0
<3
13. Mexico
< 1 4 , 0 0 0
<2
14. Spain
< 1 4 , 0 0 0
<2
15. Australia
<1 4 , 0 0 0
<2
Top 15 Countries
<6 6 3 , 0 0 0
< 7 1
Worldwide To t a l
<9 3 5 , 0 0 0
S o u rc e : Computer Industry Almanac, Inc., 2004.
A Sampling of Recent Internet Crime Cases
211

TABLE 6.2:
Selected 2006 Internet2 Connectivity Survey Findings
Regarding Internet Connectivity in U.S. Educational Environments
State Network Overview: 
• About 35 networks are connected to the high-perf o rmance Internet2 backbone.
• The average State Education Network connects to Internet2 at 756 Mbps, 
up from 467 Mbps in 2004 and from 138 Mbps in 2002.
• Almost 70% of the state education networks connected to the Intern e t 2
backbone network are multicast-enabled.
• About 60% of the state education networks accessing the Internet2 backbone
network provide other video service, such as MPEG. 
Four-Year Colleges and Universities:
• About 1,002 of 2,026, or 49%, of the four-year colleges and universities in the
United States are connected to Intern e t 2 .
• About 69 of these 1,002, or 57%, of the four-year colleges and universities in
the United States connect to the Internet2 backbone network at or more than 
10 Mbps.
Community Colleges:
• About 677 of 1,252, or 54%, of the community colleges in the United States 
a re connected to Intern e t 2 .
• About 328 of 677, or 48%, of community colleges connect to the Intern e t 2
backbone network at or more than 10 Mbps.
• About 17% of state education networks re p o rt that between half to all of the
community colleges they connect are  multicast-enabled.
Elementary Schools:
• About 35,971 of 98,335, or 37%, of the elementary schools in the United States
a re connected to Intern e t 2 .
• About 4,350 of 35,971, or 12%, of elementary schools connect to the Intern e t 2
backbone network at or more than 10 Mbps.
• About 17% of state education networks re p o rt that between half to all of the
e l e m e n t a ry schools they connect are multicast-enabled.
• State education networks re p o rt that, on average, 44% of the elementary
schools they connect have MPEG or other video conferencing equipment
a v a i l a b l e .
Public Libraries:
• About 3,325 of 16,991, or 20%, of the public libraries in the United States are
connected to Intern e t 2 .
• About 229 of 3,325, or 7%, of public libraries connect to the Intern e t 2
backbone network at or more than10 Mbps.
212
Data and Documents

TABLE 6.2: Continued
Museums, Historical, and Cultural Centers:
• About 28 of 80, or 35%, of museums, historical, and cultural centers connect to
the Internet2 backbone network at or more than 10 Mbps.
• About 19 of 24, or 79%, of perf o rming arts centers connect to the Intern e t 2
backbone network at or more than 10 Mbps.
Science Centers, Planetariums, and Observatories:
• About 36 of 228, or 16%, of the science centers, planetariums, and
o b s e rvatories in the United States are connected to Intern e t 2 .
• About 25 of 36, or 68%, of science centers, planetariums, and observ a t o r i e s
connect to the Internet2 backbone network at or more than 10 Mbps.
Zoos and Aquariums:
• About 12 of 203, or 6%, of the zoos and aquariums in the United States are
connected to Intern e t 2 .
• About 2 of 12, or 17%, of zoos and aquariums connect to the Intern e t 2
backbone network at or more than 10 Mbps.
S o u rc e : Rotman, Lauren. “Internet Survey Finds over 46,000 K20 Institutions Connected 
to Its Next-generation Network.” Lauren Rotman, https://mail.intern e t 2 . e d u / w w s / a rc /
i2-news/2006–03/msg00004.html (accessed March 24, 2006).
TABLE 6.3: Top 15 Internet-Using Countries in Asia
Year-end 2005:
Internet Users 
Share %
1. China
1 1 1 , 0 0 0 , 0 0 0
<3 1
2. Japan
8 6 , 0 5 0 , 0 0 0
<2 4
3. India
5 0 , 6 0 0 , 0 0 0
<1 4
4. South Kore a
3 3 , 9 0 0 , 0 0 0
<1 0
5. Indonesia
1 8 , 0 0 0 , 0 0 0
<5
6. Ta i w a n
1 3 , 8 0 0 , 0 0 0
<4
7. Malaysia 
1 0 , 0 4 0 , 0 0 0
<3
8. Thailand
8 , 4 2 0 , 0 0 0
<3
9. Philippines
7 , 8 2 0 , 0 0 0
<3
10. Pakistan
7 , 5 0 0 , 0 0 0
<3
11. Vi e t n a m
5 , 8 7 0 , 0 0 0
<2
12. Hong Kong
4 , 8 7 8 , 7 1 3
<2
13. Singapore
2 , 4 2 1 , 0 0 0
<1
14. Uzbekistan
8 8 0 , 0 0 0
<1
15. Azerbaijan
4 0 8 , 0 0 0
<1
Total Asia
3 6 4 , 2 7 0 , 7 1 3
S o u rce: www. I n t e rnetworldstats.com, 2006.
A Sampling of Recent Internet Crime Cases
213

TABLE 6.4: Internet Pornography Statistics
Pornography Industry Revenue Statistics:
Size of the Industry: $57 billion worldwide
Adult Videos: $20 billion
I n t e rnet Materials: $2.5 billion
Child Pornography: $3 billion
Internet Pornography Statistics:
P o rnographic Websites: 4.2 million
P o rnographic Pages: 372 million
Daily Pornographic Search Engine Requests: 68 million
Monthly Pornographic Downloads/user: 4.5
Websites Offering Illegal Child Porn: 100,000
Sexual Solicitation of Minors in Chat Rooms: 89%
Children Internet Pornography Statistics:
Average Age of Exposure to Internet Porn: 11 years
L a rgest Consumers of Internet Porn: 12-17 years
P e rcentage of 8- to 16-year-olds Viewing Online Porn: 90%
Adult Internet Pornography Statistics:
U.S. Adults Who Regularly Visit Online Porn Sites: 40 million
B reakdown of Male-Female Visitors to Online Porn Sites: 72% Male, 28% Female
Adults Admitting to Online Sexual Addiction: 10%
S o u rc e : Ropelato, Jerry. “Internet Pornography Statistics.” Internet Filter Review, http://
i n t e rn e t - f i l t e r- re v i e w. t o p t e n re v i e w s . c o m / i n t e rn e t - p o rnography-statistics.html (accessed
2 0 0 5 ) .
References
Avery, S., and P. Waldie. “RIM, NTP Escalate Their War of Words.” Globe
and Mail, February 28, 2006, p. B5.
Butters, George. “Criminal Activity: Your Computer May Be Housing
Child Porn,” Globe and Mail, January 27, 2005, p. B14.
Center for Democracy and Technology. “Legislation Affecting the Inter-
net.” Center for Democracy and Te c h n o l o g y, http:// w w w. c d t . o rg /
legislation/107th/wiretaps/ (accessed 2005).
Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services. “The Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA).” Centers for Medic-
aid and Medicare Services, http:// w w w.cms.hhs.gov/hipaa/ (accessed
October 16, 2002).
214
Data and Documents

Computer Industry Almanac, Inc. “Worldwide Internet Users Will To p
One Billion in 2005.” Computer Industry Almanac, http:// w w w
.c-i-a.com/pr0904.htm (accessed September 3, 2004).
D i z z a rd III, Wilson. “Bill to Promote Cyber Security Chief Moves For-
w a rd.” Post-Newsweek Media, Inc., http:// w w w. g c n . c o m / v o l 1 _ n o 1 /
daily-updates/35577–1.html (accessed April 20, 2005).
E l e c t ronic Privacy Information Center. “The Gramm-Leach-Bliley A c t . ”
E l e c t ronic Privacy Information Center, http:// w w w. e p i c . o rg / p r i v a c y /
glba/ (accessed January 21, 2005).
Hampton, P., and J. McCue. “Internet Corporation for Assigned Names
and Numbers/Anticybersquatting Consumer Protection Act of 1999:
Dealing with Cyber Claims.” www. d i c k s t e i n s h a p i ro . c o m / f i l e s /
P u b l i c a t i o n / c 7 5 2 3 9 3 e d c 1 c – 4 5 6 2 – 8 4 2 b – 2 e f 4 e e 1 7 5 6 7 8 / P re s e n t a t i o n /
P u b l i c a t i o n A t t a c h m e n t / 7 8 4 e 1 9 1 0 – 3 c 6 9 – 4 d 5 4 – 9 0 7 4 – 3 3 4 4 e 6 e 4 f 4 7 1 / A L A
% 2 0 c l a s s % 2 0 J o u r n a l , % 2 0 I n t e r n e t % 2 0 C o r p o r a t i o n % 2 0 F o r % 2 0
Assigned%20Names,%2012–1.pdf (accessed December 2005).
Hoofnagle, C., and E. Honig. “Victoria’s Secret and Financial Privacy. ”
Epic, http://www.epic.org/privacy/glba/victoriassecret.html (accessed
January 25, 2005).
In Brief. “HP and EMC Settle Patent Infringement Case.” Globe and Mail,
May 5, 2005, p. B25.
Jones, Alex. “Secret Patriot Act II Destroys Remaining US Liberty. ”
Rense.com, http:// w w w. re n s e . c o m / g e n e r a l 3 4 / t a k e o v e r.htm (accessed
February 25, 2006).
Keyt, Richard. “Notorious Cybersquatter Liable for $500,000 under the
Anticybersquatting Consumer Protection Act.” Keyt Law, http:// w w w
.keytlaw.com/urls/zuccarini.htm (accessed June 30, 2001).
Kubic, Thomas. “Congressional Testimony.” U.S. Department of Justice,
h t t p :// w w w. f b i . g o v / c o n g re s s / c o n g ress01/kubic052301.htm (accessed
May 23, 2001).
M a h o n e y, Jill. “Child-porn Charges Up, Statistics Canada Says.” G l o b e
and Mail, April 21, 2005, p. A6.
M i n o w, Mary. “Children’s Internet Protection Act (CIPA): Legal Deﬁn i-
tions of Child Pornography, Obscenity and ‘Harmful to Minors.’” Law Li-
brary Resource Exchange, http://w w w. l l r x . c o m / f e a t u re s / u p d a t e c i p a
.htm. (accessed August 31, 2003).
Nolo, Inc. “Trademarks and Copyright.” Nolo, Inc., http:// w w w
. n o l o . c o m / l a w c e n t e r / e n c y / i n d e x . c f m / c a t I D / 8 0 4 B 8 5 E 3 – 9 2 2 4 –
47A9–7E6B5BD92AACD48 (accessed March 1, 2006).
References
215

Patent Enforcement and Royalties, Ltd. (Pearl). “All About Patents:
What Is Intellectual Property?” Pearl, Ltd., http:// w w w. p e a r l l t d
.com/content/all_about_patents.html (accessed February 13, 2002).
Ropelato, Jerry. “Internet Pornography Statistics.” Internet Filter Review,
h t t p :// i n t e r n e t - f i l t e r- re v i e w. t o p t e n re v i e w s . c o m / i n t e r n e t - p o r n o g r a p h y -
statistics.html (accessed 2005).
Rotman, Lauren. “Internet Survey Finds over 46,000 K20 Institutions Con-
nected to Its Next-generation Network.” Lauren Rotman, https://
m a i l . i n t e r n e t 2 . e d u / w w s / a rc/i2-news/2006–03/msg00004.html (accessed
M a rch 24, 2006).
Sorkin, David. “Spam Laws: United States: Federal Laws.”
SpamLaws.com, http:// w w w.spamlaws.com/federal/index.shtml (ac-
cessed February 27, 2006).
U.S. Department of Homeland Security. “Homeland Security Act of 2002.”
U.S. 
Government, 
http://w w w. w h i t e h o u s e . g o v / d e p t o f h o m e l a n d /
analysis (accessed March 1, 2006).
U.S. Department of Justice. “Press Releases.” U.S. Department of Justice,
http://www.usdoj.gov (accessed March 1, 2006).
w w w.Internetworldstats.com. “Internet Usage in Asia.” Internet Wo r l d
Stats, http:// w w w.internetworldstats.com/stats3.htm#asia (accessed
April 9, 2006).
216
Data and Documents

7
Directory of Organizations
T
his chapter gives readers an overview of the agencies and or-
ganizations related to Internet standards development and
maintenance, as well as those safeguarding privacy, security,
and trust issues. The first part of the chapter presents govern-
ment and government-affiliated agencies having those objec-
tives. The next part lists independent organizations, and the last
part gives educational institutions offering degrees in Internet
safety and security.
G o v e rnment Agencies
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
J. Edgar Hoover Building
935 Pennsylvania Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20535–001
Tel: (202) 324–2000
Fax: (202) 324–3367
Web: www.fbi.gov
The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Website, besides pro-
viding updates on the “most wanted” criminals and terro r i s t s
who have been caught working with partners around the globe,
has listed these priorities: counterterrorism, counterintelligence,
c y b e r-crime and Internet crime cases, public corruption, civil
rights issues, organized crime, and white collar crime.
217

Federal Trade Commission (FTC)
600 Pennsylvania Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20580
Tel: Consumer Response Center: (877) 382–4357
Identity Theft Complaint Center: (877) 438–4338 
Fax: (202) 326–2034
Web: www.ftc.gov
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC), headquartered in Wa s h-
ington, D.C., developed a national spam database in 2003. The
FTC asked e-mail users disgusted with spam to forward to them
spam messages so that the FTC could better track the pro b l e m
n a t i o n a l l y. The FTC affirmed that in one year, alone, they re-
ceived more than 17 million complaints about spam, and they re-
ceived almost 110,000 complaints daily. Prior to the CAN-SPAM
Act’s passage, on April 17, 2003, the FTC asked an Illinois judge
to block a spam operation of Brian Westby, who used a combina-
tion of bland subject lines, fake return addresses, and false “reply
to” links to con naive clients to visit Websites offering porno-
graphic material.
Designating March as Fraud Prevention Month, the FTC en-
courages Internet users to contact them to report incidents of on-
line fraud, spam, and identity theft.
Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3)
Web: www.ic3.gov/
Internet fraud includes a wide range of online criminal activities
that harm targets. Internet fraud encompasses credit card fraud,
online auction fraud, unsolicited e-mail (spam) fraud, and online
child pornography. In the United States, the Internet Crime Com-
plaint Center (IC3), a partnership between the FBI and the Na-
tional White Collar Crime Center (NW3C), was created to ad-
dress Internet fraud.
IC3’s mission is to act as a channel to receive, develop, and
refer criminal complaints regarding Internet crime to the FBI and
the National White Collar Crime Center. The IC3 gives targets a
user-friendly way of alerting authorities of suspected criminal or
civil violations through the IC3 Website. For law enforc e m e n t
and regulatory agencies at the federal, state, local, and interna-
tional levels, IC3 provides a central referral service for complaints
regarding Internet abuses.
218
Directory of Organizations

National Infrastructure Protection Center (NIPC)
Information Analysis Infrastructure Protection
Washington, DC 20528
Tel: (202) 323–3205
Fax: (202) 323–2079
Web: www.nipc.gov/
The NIPC is operated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI),
in cooperation with the U.S. Department of Homeland Security.
Besides the NIPC, the FBI has also set up a number of Internet
abuse units across the United States. A c c o rding to the NIPC We b-
site, the NIPC acts as a critical infrastru c t u re threat assessment
unit, a warning unit, a threat vulnerability unit, and a law enforc e-
ment investigation and response unit. The NIPC provides timely
warnings of international threats and gives details to law enforc e-
ment about how best to respond to homeland security thre a t s .
National Security Agency (NSA)
Tel: (301) 688–6524
Web: www.nsa.gov/home_html.cfm
The National Security Agency/Central Security Service is the key
cryptologic organization in the United States, whose function it is
to coordinate, direct, and conduct specialized activities to safe-
g u a rd the government’s IT networks and to produce foreign sig-
nals intelligence data. A high-tech organization, the NSA is contin-
uously on top of the evolving frontier of Internet communications
and data processing. The NSA also acts as an important center for
f o reign-language analysis and re s e a rc h .
Ofﬁce of Critical Infrastructure Protection and Emergency
Preparedness (OCIPEP) and Public Safety and Emergency
Preparedness Canada (PSEPC)
340 Laurier Ave. West 
Ottawa, Canada K1A 0P8
Tel: (613) 991–3283
Fax: (613) 998–9589
Web: http://www.psepc-spcc.gc.ca/index-en.asp
Canadian prime minister Jean Chrétien announced on Febru a r y
5, 2001, the development of OCIPEP. The OCIPEP ( O ffice of
Critical Infrastru c t u re Protection and Emergency Pre p a re d n e s s )
took over the functions of the former Emergency Pre p a re d n e s s
Government Agencies
219

Canada. The role of OCIPEP was to protect Canada’s critical in-
f r a s t ru c t u res from disruption or complete failure and to ensure
the health, safety, and economic well-being of Canadians. Wi t h-
out question, a prolonged disruption or failure in one utility con-
tributing to the critical infrastru c t u re could produce cascading
d i s ruptions or failures across a number of other infrastru c t u re s ,
with major negative economic and social re p e rcussions for
C a n a d i a n s .
In December 2003, Canadian prime minister Paul Martin
said that OCIPEP would be integrated into a new department
known as Public Safety and Emergency Pre p a redness Canada
(known as PSEPC).
U.S.-Computer Emergency Response Team (US-CERT)
Web: www.us-cert.gov
U S - C E RT is a partnership between the U.S. Department of
Homeland Security and the public and private sectors. Estab-
lished in 2003 to protect the nation’s Internet infrastructure, US-
CERT analyzes and reduces cyber-threats and vulnerabilities, dis-
seminates cyber- t h reat warning information across the nation,
and coordinates incident responses. The system is used to report
c y b e r- related incidents to US-CERT. “Incidents” include the fol-
lowing:
• attempts (failed or successful) to gain unauthorized ac-
cess to a computer system or its data.
• undesired disruptions or denial of service to authorized
Internet users.
• unauthorized use of a computer system for the process-
ing or storage of data.
• changes to computer system hardware, ﬁrmware, or soft-
ware characteristics without the owner’s knowledge, in-
struction, or consent.
Incidents should be reported to https:// f o r m s . u s - c e r t . g o v /
report/. Phishing e-mail should be sent to phishing-re p o r t @
us-cert.gov.
U.S. Department of Homeland Security
Homeland Security Operations Center
Washington, DC 20528
220
Directory of Organizations

Tel: (202) 282–8101
E-mail: HSCenter@dhs.gov
Web: www.dhs.gov
After the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the World Trade
Center and the Pentagon, President George W. Bush decided that
twenty-two previously disparate domestic agencies should be co-
o rdinated into one department to provide for better homeland
p rotection and to prevent future terrorist attacks. Thus, the De-
partment of Homeland Security was created.
Component agencies assist in a variety of ways, including
analyzing threats and intelligence, guarding surrounding borders
and airports, protecting critical infrastructures, and coordinating
responses to future emergencies. Besides providing increased se-
curity to the U.S. homeland, the department is also committed to
p rotecting the rights of U.S. citizens and enhancing public ser-
vices (such as natural disaster assistance—evident following hur-
ricane Katrina) by dedicating ofﬁces to those important missions.
A six-point agenda for the Department of Homeland Secu-
rity was recently updated and includes the need to:
• Increase overall preparedness, especially for events
deemed to be catastrophic.
• Create improved transportation security systems to trans-
port both persons and cargo more efﬁciently and safely.
• Strengthen and improve border security and reform im-
migration processes.
• Enhance intelligence information-sharing with partnering
nations, including through the Internet.
• Improve human resource development for members of
the Department of Homeland Security, promote and fol-
low sound ﬁscal management, and optimize procurement
and Information Technology issues (including the use of
the Internet).
• Realign the Department of Homeland Security’s organi-
zation so as to maximize mission objectives and perfor-
mance.
U.S. Department of Justice
10th and Constitution Ave. NW
Criminal Division (Computer Crime and Intellectual Property
Section)
Government Agencies
221

John C. Keeney Building, Suite 600
Washington, DC 20530
Tel: (202) 514–1026
Fax: (202) 514–3546
Web: www.cybercrime.gov
The U.S. Department of Justice (whose general Website is found
at www.usdoj.gov) created the Computer Crime and Intellectual
Property Section (CCIPS) to deal speciﬁcally with Internet crime.
This special CCIPS Website has very useful information on the
following:
• Cracking policy, cyber-crime and Internet legal cases,
laws, and relevant documents.
• Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) policy, cyber-crime and
Internet legal cases, laws, relevant documents, and eco-
nomic espionage.
• Cyber-crime and Internet documents, press releases, re-
ports, manuals, and speeches.
• Cyber-ethics information for children, parents, and teach-
ers as well as related Websites.
U.S. Intelligence Community
The U.S. Intelligence Community is composed of ﬁfteen agencies,
including the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)—with its clan-
destine spies and numerous analysts, as well as the large Defense
Intelligence Agency—specializing in intercepting global commu-
nications. Other intelligence-gathering groups in the United
States include the FBI, the National Security Agency (NSA), the
military (Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps), the Department
of State Bureau of Intelligence and Research, the Department of
Energy Atomic Energy Commission, the Department of Treasury
O ffice of Intelligence Support, and the National Imagery and
Mapping Agency. Each of these agencies has its own locator in-
formation (address, telephone, fax, and Website).
C o l l e c t i v e l y, these organizations spend more than $40 billion
a n n u a l l y. Like the CIA, they have been criticized by U.S. citizens
for failing to anticipate and thwart the terrorist attacks of Septem-
ber 11, 2001. Also, they have been accused of incorrectly assessing
the existence of banned weapons of mass destruction under former
dictator Saddam Hussein’s regime in Iraq, the argument posited
by the U.S. and British governments for waging war in Iraq.
222
Directory of Organizations

It seems that in recent times, the U.S. Intelligence Commu-
nity has been focusing on the security of the Internet. For exam-
ple, on August 15, 2005, the second-in-command public ofﬁcial at
the Pentagon sent a letter to department leaders advising them
to “Fight the Net.” He said in his letter that he wants all staffers
using a computer to take personal responsibility for pro t e c t i n g
the Global Information Grid, a network connecting the Depart-
ment of Defense and war-ﬁghting systems.
Tips in the letter included using information assurance “best
practices,” eliminating unsecure software (like P2P ﬁle-sharing)
and remote access, and minimizing access privileges with need-
to-know criteria.
Independent Org a n i z a t i o n s
African Internet Community (AfriNIC)
03B3, 3rd Floor, Ebène Cyber Tower
Cyber City, Ebène, Mauritius
Tel: (230) 466-6616
Fax: (230) 466-6758
Web: www.afrinic.net
AfriNIC is a nongovernmental and not-for- p rofit membership-
based organization. Its main role is to serve the African region as
the Regional Internet Registry. The four other continents have
their own Regional Internet Registries—ARIN, APNIC, RIPE,
and LACNIC. Membership is open to anybody who cares to join.
American Electronics Association (AEA)
5201 Great America Parkway #520
Santa Clara, CA 95054
Tel: (408) 987–4200 Toll Free Tel: (800) 284–4232
Fax: (408) 987–4298
601 Pennsylvania Ave. NW, Suite 600, North Building
Washington, DC 20004
Tel: (202) 682–9110
Fax: (202) 682–9111
Web: www.aeanet.org/AboutAeA/AeAContactInfo.asp
The AEA was created in 1943 to be a nationwide, nonproﬁt trade
association re p resenting the full range of technology industry
segments. It is dedicated to helping members succeed in their
Independent Organizations
223

businesses. The association partners with small-, medium-, and
large-member companies to lobby government at the state, fed-
eral, and international levels. The association also pro v i d e s
members with access to capital and business opportunities, as
well as offering members select business services and network-
ing programs.
American Registry for Internet Numbers (ARIN)
3635 Concorde Parkway, Suite 200
Chantilly, VA 20151–1130
Tel: (703) 227–9840
Fax: (703) 227–0671
Web: www.arin.net
The American Registry for Internet Numbers, ARIN, is a non-
p rofit organization. Originally it was established to administer
and register Internet Protocol (IP) numbers for North A m e r i c a ,
parts of the Caribbean, and subequatorial Africa. ARIN is one of
the five Regional Internet Registries collectively providing IP
registration services globally—with the newest taking over the
Caribbean and Africa. ARIN, it should be noted, is not an Inter-
net Service Provider (ISP). The mission statement of ARIN notes
that this organization allocates Internet Protocol re s o u rces, de-
velops consensus-based policies, and facilitates the healthy ad-
vancement of the Internet through positive information and edu-
cation.
Amnesty International
322 8th Ave.
New York, NY 10001
Tel: (212) 807–8400
Web: www.amnestyusa.org/
Amnesty International is an organization dedicated to pro m o t-
ing human rights in all countries. The organization is also inter-
ested in preventing abuse, particularly sexual assault and vio-
lence against women and children.
Asia Paciﬁc Network Information Centre (APNIC)
Level 1, 33 Park Road
Milton, Brisbane, Australia
Tel: +61–7–3858–3100
224
Directory of Organizations

Fax: +61–7–3858–3199
Web: www.apnic.net
APNIC, or Asia Paciﬁc Network Information Centre, one of ﬁve
Regional Internet Registries operating globally to register and ad-
minister IP a d d resses, serves the Asia Paciﬁc region. A n o t - f o r-
p ro ﬁt organization, its constituents consist of sixty-two economies
and include Internet Service Providers and National Internet
Registries. Membership in APNIC gives organizations access to
all services, including requests for allocation and registration of
IP address resources, as well as registration at specialized train-
ing courses. Membership also gives organizations an opportu-
nity to participate in policy development processes and to have
voting rights at membership meetings.
Center for Democracy and Technology
1634 Eye St. NW, #1100
Washington, DC, 20006
Tel: (202) 637–9800
Web: www.cdt.org/about/contact.php
The Center for Democracy and Technology promotes democratic
values and constitutional liberties in the digital age. With experts
in law, technology, and policy, the center searches for real-world
answers to promote free expression and privacy in global com-
munications technologies. The center brings together parties
wanting to improve the future of the Internet.
CERT Coordination Center Software Engineering Institute
(CERT/CC)
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave.
Pittsburgh, PA 15213–3890
Tel: (412) 268–7090 (24-hr hotline)
Fax: (412) 268–6989
Web to report incidents:
www.cert.org/reporting/incident_form.txt
Web to report system vulnerabilities:
www.cert.org/reporting/vulnerability_form.txt
The CERT Coordination Center (CERT/CC), a center for Internet
s e c u r i t y, was created in 1988, in large part as a response to the
Morris Internet worm incident. The damage incurred was the
Independent Organizations
225

shutdown of about 10 percent of the existing Internet systems in
November of that year. At the time of the incident, the Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) charged the Soft-
w a re Engineering Institute (SEI) at Carnegie Mellon University
with creating a center to coordinate communication among ex-
perts, particularly during times of emergency.
Because of the rapid development of the Internet over the
last decade and its growth in applications, the amount of dam-
age that could be done and the difficulties in detecting intru-
sions have grown exponentially. There f o re, the role of the
C E RT/CC has been expanded in recent years. It has become
part of the SEI Networked Systems Survivability Pro g r a m —
having as its main goal ensuring that appropriate technology
and systems management practices are used to prevent crack at-
tacks on networked systems. If intrusions do occur, the objective
is to limit the damage incurred and to ensure continuity of criti-
cal services.
Computer and Communications Industry Association (CCIA)
666 11th St. NW
Washington, DC 20001
Tel: (202) 783–0070
Fax: (202) 783–0534
Web: www.ccianet.org/index.php
CCIA, a nonproﬁt organization for a wide range of companies in
the computer, Internet, information technology, and telecommu-
nications industries, was formed thirty years ago to pro m o t e
open markets, open systems, open networks, and fair and open
competition. The organization’s goal is to protect and pro m o t e
the broader interests of industry members. Today the organiza-
tion assesses and shapes legislative and regulatory activities
with executives from member companies—which vary in size
and operate in the United States and globally. Members include
computer and communications companies, equipment manufac-
turers, software developers, and ﬁnancial service companies, as
well as Internet Service Providers.
Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility (CPSR)
P.O. Box 717
Palo Alto, CA 94302
Tel: (650) 322–3778
226
Directory of Organizations

Fax: (650) 322–4748
Web: www.cpsr.org/about
CPSR, a global organization promoting the responsible use of
computer technology, was created in 1981 to educate the public
and policy-makers on a wide range of topics relating to comput-
ers, professionals, and social re s p o n s i b i l i t y. Projects started by
CPSR include EPIC (the Electronic Privacy Information Center)
and the Civil Society Project. CPSR also created the CFP (Com-
puters, Freedom and Privacy) Conference. Although the organi-
zation was initially formed by U.S. computer scientists, it now
boasts a healthy membership in more than thirty countries on six
continents.
CyberAngels
P.O. Box 3171
Allentown, PA 18106
Tel: (610) 377–2966
Fax: (610) 377–3381
Web: www.cyberangels.org
In 1995 (less than two years after the World Wide Web was acti-
vated), the anticriminal activist arm of the hacker community
known as the CyberAngels started to appear online. Cy-
berAngels began after a telephone call was made to Curtis
Sliwa, the founder and president of Guardian Angels and a ra-
dio talk show host for WABC in New York. At that time, a
woman asked him on his talk show what he was going to do
about safety in cyberspace. Sliwa faced up to the challenge 
by forming the first cyber-stalking help program on Internet
Relay Chat.
Today the CyberAngels have more than 6,000 volunteers re-
siding in seventy countries. Their role is to patrol the World Wide
Web around the clock in the battle against child pornography
and cyber-stalking. In 1998, President Bill Clinton honored the
CyberAngels with the prestigious President’s Service Award. Cy-
berAngels is, in fact, the world’s oldest and largest online safety
organization. According to their Website, their mission is to func-
tion as a “virtual 411” safety destination. Also, the organization
wants to address the Internet concerns of parents, the safety
needs of children when they go online, and the prevention of on-
line abuses and cyber-crimes—without interfering with online
users’ right to free speech.
Independent Organizations
227

Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC)
1718 Connecticut Ave. NW, Suite 200
Washington, DC 20009
Tel: (202) 483–1140
Web: www.epic.org/epic/about.html
EPIC, a public interest research center in Washington, D.C., was
created in 1994 to focus public attention on emerging civil liber-
ties issues and to safeguard privacy, the First Amendment, and
U.S. constitutional values. The center publishes e-mail and on-
line newsletters on civil liberties in the information age, reports
and books on privacy, and other important topics related to civil
liberties.
Free Software Foundation (FSF)
59 Temple Place, Suite 330
Boston, MA 02111–1307
Tel: (617) 542–5942
Fax: (617) 542–2652
Web: www.fsf.org
Richard Stallman, an elite hacker who was at the Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence (AI) Lab at MIT in the early 1970s, was the founder of the
F ree Software Foundation (FSF) in 1985. The FSF promotes the
concept of free software—which pertains to the users’ freedom to
change and improve, copy, distribute, run, or study the software.
Speciﬁcally, “free” applies to four types of freedom for the users
of the software: (1) the ability to run the program for any func-
tion; (2) the ability to investigate how the software works and
adapt it to one’s own needs—with access to the source code be-
ing a precondition; (3) the ability to give copies to other users;
and (4) the ability to improve the software and to release im-
provements to the community so that the community can bene-
ﬁt. This opening quotation on the FSF Website summarizes their
philosophy: “Free software is a matter of liberty, not price. You
should think of ‘free’ as in ‘free speech.’”
Although other organizations freely distribute what soft-
w a re happens to be available, the FSF focuses on the develop-
ment of new free software. The FSF also makes free software into
a coherent system, thus reducing users’ needs to buy proprietary
software (such as that produced by the Microsoft Corporation).
The FSF promotes the development and use of the GNU operat-
ing system, used widely in its GNU/Linux variant. Although the
228
Directory of Organizations

FSF distributes copies of the GNU software and manuals for a
small distribution fee, it accepts tax-deductible gifts from users
to help defray the cost of further GNU development. In fact,
most of FSF’s operating funds are derived from distribution ser-
vice revenues and gifts.
Human Rights Watch
350 Fifth Ave., 34th Floor
New York, NY 10118–3299
Tel: (212) 290–4700
Web: www.hrw.org/
Human Rights Watch, an independent organization that is non-
governmental in nature, investigates and produces information
on human rights abuses around the globe. The Website covers
painful stories about the abuse that street children around the
world suffer, including victims of cyber child pornography.
Information Technology Association of America (ITAA)
1401 Wilson Blvd., Suite 100
Arlington, VA 22209
Tel: (703) 522–5055
Fax: (703) 525–2279
Web: www.itaa.org/about/staff.cfm
ITAA is an Information Technology Trade Association that offers
a wide assortment of public policy, business development, and
P 2 P networking programs. Privacy, trust, and security issues
dealing with Information Technology are of particular interest to
members.
Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers
(ICANN)
4676 Admiralty Way, Suite 330
Marina del Rey, CA 90292–6601
Tel: (310) 823–9358
Fax: (310) 823–8649
Web: www.icann.org
In 1998, a group of Internet stakeholders—including academics,
businesses and technological experts, and online users—started
the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names (ICAN) and Num-
bers (ICANN) to act as a technical coordination arm for the Inter-
Independent Organizations
229

net. ICANN is a nonpro ﬁt, private-sector corporation. Pre v i o u s l y,
the U.S. Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) assigned
the identiﬁers that must be globally unique for the World Wi d e
Web to function pro p e r l y. To d a y, ICANN manages domain
names, IP a d d resses, protocol parameters, and port numbers.
ICANN also takes care of the Internet’s root server system.
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)
IETF Secretariat c/o Corporation for National Research
Initiatives
1895 Preston White Dr., Suite 100
Reston, VA 20191–5434
Tel: (703) 620–8990
Fax: (703) 620–9071
Web: www.ietf.org
The IETF, or Internet Engineering Task Force, can best be de-
scribed as an international community of individuals con-
cerned with the ongoing evolution of the Internet. Network de-
signers, vendors, operators, and academics are members,
bound by an interest in the World Wide Web’s arc h i t e c t u re and
smooth operation. Membership to the IETF is open, with work-
ing groups organized along the lines of routing, transport, and
s e c u r i t y.
Most member interactions are conducted by mailing lists, as
meetings are held only three times annually. The working groups
are managed by area directors, who are members of the Internet
Engineering Steering Group (IESG). Moreover, an Internet Archi-
tecture Board (IAB) provides architectural oversight and adjudi-
cates appeals if an individual or group complains that the IESG
has not met its objectives. Both the IAB and the IESG are char-
tered by ISOC. The general area director acts as chair of the IESG
and of the IETF and is an ex ofﬁcio member of the IAB.
Internet Public Library (IPL)
University of Michigan School of Information
304 West Hall 
Ann Arbor, MI 48109–1092
Web: www.ipl.org/div/contact/
The Internet Public Library (IPL) is a public service organization
and learning/teaching environment located at the University of
Michigan’s School of Information. The IPL does the following:
230
Directory of Organizations

• Provides library services to Internet users;
• Trains information professionals and students so they
can work better in a digital environment;
• Develops technology and best practices for providing li-
brary services through the Internet, including digital ref-
erence services and collection management, and con-
ducts research aimed at increasing knowledge about
digital libraries and librarianship.
Internet Society (ISOC)
Internet Society International Secretariat
1775 Wiehle Ave., Suite 102
Reston, VA 20190
Tel: (703) 326–9880
Fax: (703) 326–9881
Web: www.isoc.org
The Internet Society (ISOC) is a professional membership society
with more than 150 organizations and 20,000 individual mem-
bers in over 180 nations. Its role is to provide leadership by ad-
dressing issues related to the future of the Internet. ISOC is the
home for groups responsible for Internet infrastru c t u re stan-
dards—such as the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF). Since
1992, ISOC has served as the international organization for
global coordination and cooperation on the Internet, with its pri-
mary function being the promotion of a wide range of activities
related to the Internet’s development, its ongoing availability,
and its ever-evolving technologies.
Latin America and Caribbean Internet Addresses Registry
(LACNIC)
Potosi 1517
Montevideo, 11500 Uruguay
Tel: +598 2 604222
Fax: +598 2 6042222 int. 112
Web: http://lacnic.net/sp/
The Latin America and Caribbean Internet A d d resses Registry
(LACNIC) is an independent, not-for- p rofit organization sup-
porting the Internet’s infrastructure through technical coordina-
tion in Latin America and the Caribbean. It is one of five Re-
gional Internet Registries that provides global Internet resources
and related services to members in the LACNIC service region.
Independent Organizations
231

As in other areas, membership consists mostly of Internet Service
Providers, telecommunication organizations, and large corpora-
tions.
National Center for Missing and Exploited Children
Charles B. Wang International Children’s Building
699 Prince St.
Alexandria, VA 22314–3175
Tel: (703) 274–3900
Hotline: 1–800-THE-LOST
Web: www.missingkids.com/
The National Center for Missing and Exploited Children is a pri-
vate, nonproﬁt organization. The Website of this center provides
recent and updated information on missing and abused children.
The Website has many useful features, including a cyber tipline,
links and realistic information for parents about keeping their
c h i l d ren safe online, and up-to-date international coverage of
child pornography. It also features timely news. For example, the
Website reports that a new study of child pornography laws in
184 Interpol member countries around the world has produced
alarming results: more than half of the member countries—at
least ninety-five—have no laws addressing child pornography,
and in many other countries, existing laws are inadequate.
National High-Tech Crime Unit (NHTCU)
PO Box 10101
London E14 9NF
Tel: +44 (0) 870 241 0549
Fax: +44 (0) 870 241 5729
Web: www.nhtcu.org/nqcontent.cfm?a_id=12261
The National High-Tech Crime Unit (NHTCU), located in the
United Kingdom, has this mission posted on their Website: To
combat national and transnational Internet crime, especially that
which adversely impacts on the United Kingdom.
The NHTCU conducted a survey among businesses in 2003
to determine how much money they lost from Internet and com-
puter security breaches over the previous twelve months. The
NHTCU found that security breaches cost UK businesses an esti-
mated £143 million during that period. The 105 businesses sur-
veyed said that there were 3,000 incidents among them. The
breaches included information theft, virus attacks, and the phys-
232
Directory of Organizations

ical loss of hard w a re (such as laptops). Similar surveys have
been jointly conducted in the United States by the FBI. As is the
case with these annual U.S. surveys, a number of companies
chose not to participate in the survey.
Northern Virginia Technology Council (NVTC)
2214 Rock Hill Road, Suite 300
Herndon, VA 20170
Tel: (703) 904–7878
Fax: (703) 904–8008
Web: www.nvtc.org/about/bdstaff.htm#staff
The Northern Virginia Technology Council (NVTC) is the trade
association for the technology community in northern Vi rg i n i a ,
the largest technology council in the United States. The council
has more than 1,100 member companies, re p resenting about
160,000 employees. Members include companies from all sectors
of the technology industry—IT, software, hardware, the Internet,
Internet Service Providers, telecommunications, bioinformatics,
aerospace, and nanotechnology. Also, members include universi-
ties, embassies, nonproﬁt companies, and government agencies.
The organization has progressed from a small association to
a mature and respected one, with partnership relations re g i o n-
ally, as well as at the state, national, and international levels. Its
mission is to provide leadership to the technology community
through networking and educational events, public policy advo-
cacy, and promoting IT initiatives in targeted business sectors.
Privacy International (PI)
6–8 Amwell St., Clerkenwell
London, England EC1R 1UQ
Tel: +44 7947 778247
Web: www.privacyinternational.org/
Privacy International (PI), a human rights group created in 1990
as a watchdog on surveillance and privacy invasions by govern-
ments and corporations, is located in London, England, and has
a U.S. office in Washington, D.C. The organization has raised
a w a reness with campaigns and re s e a rch throughout the world
not only on issues related to wiretapping, national security, iden-
tiﬁcation cards, medical privacy, and privacy of health informa-
tion but also on freedom of information and expression in a
broader sense.
Independent Organizations
233

Rape, Abuse, and Incest National Network (RAINN)
635-B Pennsylvania Ave., SE
Washington, DC 20003
Tel: (202) 922–1560
Web: www.rainn.org/
RAINN administers the National Sexual Assault Hotline and
provides education about sexual assault to women and children.
RAINN also gives information on incest prevention, prosecution,
and recovery for victims. The Website has a wealth of informa-
tion re g a rding relevant news, statistics, and links to sites dis-
cussing rape, abuse, and sexual violence. The site also has pro-
moted special events, such as the “Race to Stop the Silence: Stop
Child Sexual Abuse” on April 15, 2006, in downtown Washing-
ton, D.C.
Réseaux IP Européens (RIPE NCC)
Singel 258 1016 AB
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Tel: +31 20 535 4444
Fax: +31 20 535 4445
Web: www.ripe.net
The RIPE NCC is an independent, not-for- p rofit org a n i z a t i o n
supporting the Internet’s infrastructure through technical coordi-
nation in Europe, the Middle East, and parts of Central Asia. It is
one of ﬁve Regional Internet Registries that provides global In-
ternet re s o u rces and related services to members in the RIPE
NCC service region. As in other regions, membership consists
mostly of Internet Service Providers, telecommunication organi-
zations, and large corporations.
SANS Institute
8120 Woodmont Ave., Suite 205
Bethesda, MD 20814
Tel: (301) 654–7267
Fax: (301) 951–0140
Web: www.sans.org/
The SANS Institute is likely the largest information security
training and certiﬁcation source in the world. The SANS Institute
develops, maintains, and makes available for free an impressive
234
Directory of Organizations

collection of research documents about information security. The
SANS Institute also operates the Internet‘s early-warning system
known as the Internet Storm Center.
The SANS (SysAdmin, Audit, Network, Security) Institute
was started in 1989 as a re s e a rch and education organization. To-
day its programs get to more than 165,000 auditors, chief informa-
tion ofﬁcers (CIOs), network administrators, and security pro f e s-
sionals who share with each other lessons they have learned about
information security and the Internet. Importantly, the SANS Insti-
tute tries to ﬁnd solutions to the cyber challenges unveiled.
The SANS Institute shared resources include a weekly vul-
nerability digest (@RISK), a weekly NewsBites news digest, the
Internet Storm Center warning system for the Internet, ﬂash se-
curity alerts, and more than 1,200 award-winning re s e a rch pa-
pers. During the ﬁrst week of May 2005, for example, the SANS
Institute warned that in the ﬁrst quarter of 2005, over 600 new
system vulnerabilities were detected, including flaws in pro d-
ucts by Microsoft, Computer Associates, Oracle, McAfee and F-
Secure, TrendMicro, Symantec Corporation, and some relatively
new players such as RealPlayer, iTunes, and WinAmp.
Symantec Corporation
20330 Stevens Creek Blvd.
Cupertino, CA 95014
Tel: (408) 517–8000
Web: www.symantec.com
Founded in 1982, Symantec Corporation, with its headquarters in
Cupertino, California, is a trusted security partner. The company
has over 5,500 employees and operations in more than thirty-ﬁv e
countries. Considered by many to be a global leader in informa-
tion security, the Symantec Corporation provides a broad range of
IT security appliances, software, and services for home computer
users and businesses of all sizes. More o v e r, Symantec’s Norton
p roduct brand is a leader in consumer security solutions.
On March 21, 2005, Symantec Corporation issued a re p o r t
noting that Internet attacks grew by 28 percent in the second half
of 2004, relative to the first half of the year. On average, busi-
nesses and other agencies received 13.6 attacks on their com-
puter networks daily in the second half of 2004, they said—rela-
tive to 10.6 attacks in the first six months of that year. The
Independent Organizations
235

financial sector was apparently the favored hack attack targ e t .
Moreover, crackers now seem to be setting their sights on mobile
computers, noted the security experts at Symantec. According to
this same Symantec Corporation report, the favored attack tools
included adware and spyware, as well as phishing. The reported
cost to U.S. ﬁrms in 2004 from phishing scams alone was in ex-
cess of $1.2 billion.
U.S. Council of International Business (USCIB)
1212 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10036
Tel: (212) 354–4480
Policy Advocacy Fax: (212) 575–0327
Membership Fax: (212) 391–6568
Web: www.uscib.org/
The U.S. Council for International Business (USCIB) pre s e n t s
American business ideas, values, and answers to problems on
wide-ranging issues, including the environment, e-commerc e ,
and labor relations. Relationships exist with U.S. policy-makers
and ofﬁcials in the United Nations, the European Union (the EU),
and a number of other governments and groups. Originally
founded in 1945 to promote free trade and to help represent busi-
ness in the United Nations, USCIB is currently viewed as a
global network of industry partners having a ﬁne reputation for
giving reliable policy advice. The group is particularly interested
in exchanging views on regulatory issues and best business prac-
tices globally.
U.S. Internet Caucus
Eye St. NW, #1107
Washington, DC 20006
Tel: (202) 638–4370
Fax: (202) 637–0968
Web: www.netcaucus.org/contact.shtml
This caucus is a broad and diverse group of public interest, non-
p rofit, and industry groups that wish to educate the Congre s s
and the public about important Internet-related policy issues.
U.S. Internet Service Provider Association (USISPA)
1330 Connecticut Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20036
236
Directory of Organizations

Tel: (202) 862–3816
Fax: (202) 261–0604
Web: www.cix.org/contactusispa.html
The U.S. Internet Provider Association (USISPA) acts as the Inter-
net Service Pro v i d e r’s community re p resentative during policy
debates as well as a venue where members can exchange infor-
mation and develop best practices for handling Internet-related
legal issues. Although the association’s principal focus is on legal
and policy matters in the United States, the organization also
monitors and engages in international developments. Also, the
organization focuses on U.S. legal and federal matters; when nec-
essary, it addresses state-level issues.
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C)
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)
Computer Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL)
200 Technology Square
Cambridge, MA 02139
Tel: (617) 253–2613
Fax: (617) 258–5999
Web: www.w3.org
Tim Berners-Lee started the World Wide Web (W3C) Consortium
at the MIT Laboratory for Computer Science in 1994. He collabo-
rated with CERN, a European Organization for Nuclear Re-
s e a rch, the world’s largest particle physics center and the cre-
ative inventor of many advances in information technologies.
The function of the W3C is to promote interoperability and to
p rovide a forum for discussing the World Wide Web’s ongoing
evolution and development. To that end, W3C promotes and de-
velops its vision for the future of the Web, designs technologies
to realize this vision, and standardizes Web technologies (which
is what interoperability is all about).
Academic Degrees in Internet Security
A number of universities in the United States and elsewhere have
i d e n t i ﬁed Internet security as an independent area of study and
specialization. Thus there are a growing number of dedicated un-
d e rgraduate and graduate degrees with an Information Te c h n o l-
ogy and Internet Security specialization. Most of these re q u i re the
Academic Degrees in Internet Security
237

student to have residency on campus. Some of these educational
institutions are listed below. The Liverpool University, however,
o ffers a fully online master’s degree on the Internet.
Idaho State University
Computer Information Systems Department
921 S. 8th Ave.
Pocatello, ID 83209
Tel: (208) 282–3585
Web: www.isu.edu/
James Madison University
Commonwealth Information Security Center
800 S. Main St.
Harrisonburg, VA 22807
Tel: (540) 568–6211
Web: www.jmu.edu/
Mary Washington College
James Monroe Center
1301 College Ave.
Fredericksburg, VA 22401
Tel: (540) 654–1000
Web: www.collegeproﬁles.com/marywashington.html
University of Advancing Technology (UAT)
2625 W. Baseline Rd.
Tempe, AZ 85283–1042
Tel: (602) 383–8228
Web: http://www.uat.edu/
University of Liverpool
Liverpool, England L69 3BX
Tel: +44 (0) 151 794 2000
Web: www.liv.ac.uk/contacts/index.htm
The University of Liverpool is internationally recognized for ex-
cellence in teaching, research, and innovation. It is a member of
the elite Russell Group of nineteen research-driven UK universi-
ties, including Oxford and Cambridge. It was awarded a Royal
Charter in 1903. The university offers a totally online master of
science degree in IT-Internet Computing. Study modules include
238
Directory of Organizations

Internet and Multimedia Te c h n o l o g y, Web XML A p p l i c a t i o n s ,
various programming languages, and applications.
University of Ontario Institute of Technology (UOIT)
Faculty of Business and Information Technology
2000 Simcoe St. N.
Oshawa, ON, Canada L1H 7K4
Tel: (905) 721–8668
Web: www.uoit.ca
This Canadian university offers a bachelor of information tech-
nology degree in networking, security, and game development
entrepreneurship, as well as a master’s in IT security. At the pre-
sent time, some residency is required.
Academic Degrees in Internet Security
239


8
Selected Print and
Nonprint Resources
R
esource materials about Internet crime have focused over the
past several years on such topics as identity theft, cracking,
spamming, and Intellectual Property (IP) infringement. Be-
cause of citizens’ and industries’ concerns about such cyber-
t h reats, re s o u rce materials related to these topics have become
increasingly abundant. This chapter focuses on three types of re-
s o u rce materials available to the public: books detailing social
and technical aspects of such Internet crimes, company Websites
offering protection for such problems, and ﬁlms capitalizing on
cyber-threat story lines.
Because every day new Internet crimes are reported by the
U.S. Department of Justice’s Intellectual Property Section, indi-
viduals wanting to keep abreast of new cases and laws can do so
by visiting the U.S. Department of Justice’s Website <www
. u s d o j . g o v / c r i m i n a l / c y b e r-crime/index.html>. Besides off e r i n g
re s o u rce materials on cracking, Intellectual Property infringe-
ment, Internet crime documents, and cyber-ethics topics, this
government Website allows individuals wanting specialized In-
ternet abuse information to receive it through their e-mail. The
following key words can be entered for specific information
searches of interest to these online user segments:
• Parents, teachers, and students
• Police ofﬁcers and law enforcement agents
• Citizens wanting to know more about Internet and cyber
policies
• Targets of Internet crime
• High-tech industry experts
241

• Media professionals
• Citizens wanting to know more about Internet and high-
tech privacy issues
F i n a l l y, this U.S. Department of Justice Website has some very
practical Internet crime information, such as how to report Inter-
n e t - related crimes; how industry partners can help ﬁght Internet
abuses; law enforcement coordination of Internet-related crimes;
legal issues dealing with e-commerce, encryption, and Internet
crime; federal and state laws related to Internet crime; Intellectual
P roperty laws and breaches of those laws; international aspects of
Internet crime (such as the Council of Europe Convention on Cy-
b e r-crime); how to protect critical infrastru c t u res; the free speech
issues of controversy; and privacy, security, and trust issues re-
lated to the Internet.
Books
Anguilla, J., and D. Ronfeldt. 2001. Networks and Netwars: The
Future of Terror, Crime, and Militancy. Santa Monica, CA: Rand.
This book presents a fascinating new spectrum of cyber-con-
ﬂict. Among other topics, the books discusses netwars—conﬂicts
that terrorists, criminals, gangs, and ethnic extremists wage—and
how to combat them.
Bakardjieva, M. 2005. Internet Society: The Internet in Everyday
Life. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Bakardjieva examines how people integrate the Internet into
their ordinary lives and adapt their activities, as appropriate, to
cope with technology.
Benedict, H. R e c o v e r y. 1994. New York: Columbia University
Press.
This book is a sound resource for information on surviving
and healing from rape and sexual assault. Very useful informa-
tion is given for victims, family members, and friends.
Berkowitz, B. 2003. The New Face of War: How War Will Be
Fought in the 21st Century. New York: Simon and Schuster.
With the growth of the Internet in developing nations,
Berkowitz presents a fascinating treatment of how information
242
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

wars have revolutionized modern-day combat. The book ad-
dresses the important topic of how the war against cyber-terror-
ists can be fought—and won.
Blane, J. 2003. C y b e rcrime and Cyberterrorism: Current Issues.
Comack, NY: Nova Science.
With the evolution of the Internet, new ways of committing
old-fashioned crimes like fraud, stalking, and identity theft have
emerged. This book discusses some very important topics on cy-
b e r-crime and cyber- t e r rorism—including how those two con-
cepts are quite distinct.
Brill, A., F. Baldwin, and R. Munro. 1998. Cybercrime and Secu-
rity. New York: Oceana.
This three-binder set presents a rather advanced publication
on cyber-crime and security. Prepared by leading experts in these
ﬁelds, the book gives useful management strategies and solutions
for system administrators who want to keep their networks safe.
The book also alerts readers about potential threats to networks,
discusses pertinent cyber-crime laws, and details privacy issues,
as well as encryption and computer security.
Casey, E. 2000. Digital Evidence and Computer Crime. San Diego,
CA: Academic.
Meant primarily for a legal audience, this book discusses le-
gal aspects of computer network crimes. It describes how evi-
dence stored on or transmitted by computers can play a role in
the ever-growing ﬁeld of cyber-crime, including stalking, online
harassment, fraud, theft, terrorism, and child pornography.
Castells, M. 2003. Internet Galaxy: Reflections on the Internet,
Business, and Society. New York: Oxford University Press USA.
This book speculates about how the Internet will change
aspects of human life—such as politics, businesses, and
economies in the future. This is a nontechnical book intended
for professionals and graduate/undergraduate students of soci-
ology and computer science. One of the major contributions of
this book is its ability to point out the Internet’s capacity to lib-
erate. It also points out that the Internet can marginalize those
who have no access to it. Another important factor addressed in
this fascinating work is the Internet’s effect on interpersonal re-
l a t i o n s h i p s .
Books
243

Berkowitz, B. 2000. Rise of the Network Society. [First volume of
trilogy: The Information Age: Economy, Society, and Culture].
Malden, MA: Blackwell.
This book presents an analysis of the economical, political,
and social effects of Information Technology (IT) in our contem-
porary world. One of the main points of this work is the poten-
tial exclusion of information to countries with limited access to
the Internet, while in developed countries, the flow of informa-
tion exchange in the new age of information increases at un-
p recedented rates. Castell’s intended audience is pro f e s s i o n a l s
and college/university students of sociology and computer
s c i e n c e .
Bragg, R., M. Rhodes-Ousley, K. Strassberg, and B. Buege. 2004.
Network Security: The Complete Reference. New York: McGraw
Hill-Osborne.
A complete review of network-security issues that will be
helpful to amateurs and experts alike. Especially good for those
interested in risk management and the creation of policies related
to network security.
Chirillo, J. 2001. Hack Attacks Encyclopedia: A Complete History
of Hacks, Phreaks, and Spies over Ti m e . New York: John Wi l e y
and Sons.
This book, written by a computer security expert, contains
historic texts, program ﬁles, code snippets, cracking and security
tools, and some quite advanced topics—such as password pro-
grams, Unix and Linux systems, scanners, sniffers, spoofers, and
ﬂooders. This book is not intended for a neophyte audience.
C l i ff o rd, R. 2001. C y b e rcrime: The Investigation, Pro s e c u t i o n ,
and Defense of a Computer-Related Crime. D u rham, NC: Car-
olina Academic.
This book was written primarily for a legal audience. To that
end it presents legal topics such as what conduct is considered to
be a cyber-crime, investigating improper cyber-conduct, trying a
cyber-crime case as a prosecuting or defending attorney, and han-
dling integral international aspects of cyber-crimes, particularly
when more than one jurisdiction is involved.
Cole, E., and J. Riley. 2001. Hackers Beware: The Ultimate Guide
to Network Security. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education.
244
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

This book, penned by experts in computer security, is in-
tended for the advanced network security professional. To that
end, it describes UNIX and Microsoft software vulnerabilities. It
also discusses protection against system intrusions. Also, it docu-
ments trends and gives critical thoughts re g a rding system ad-
ministration, network, security, and trust.
Feinstein, D. 2003. I m p roving Our Ability to Fight Cyberc r i m e :
Oversight of the National Infrastructure Protection Center: Con-
gressional Hearing. Collingdale, PA: Diane.
This current book discusses in frank terms how the United
States needs to protect its citizens following the terrorist attacks
on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon on September 11 ,
2001. Important issues center on the National Infrastructure Pro-
tection Center.
Furnell, S. 2001. C y b e rcrime: Vandalizing the Information Soci-
ety. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
This book is useful because one does not have to be a cyber
expert to understand what the author is relating. Written by a
British computer security expert, it gives a thorough overview of
cracking, viral code, and electronic fraud. It details a wide range
of cyber-crimes and abuses.
Garfinkel, W., G. Spaff o rd, and D. Russell. 2001. Web Security,
Privacy, and Commerce. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly and Associates.
Given the importance of electronic business in society today,
this book does a ﬁne job of detailing issues related to Web-based
security, privacy, and online commerce. Topics include public key
i n f r a s t ru c t u re, digital signatures, digital certiﬁcates, hostile mo-
bile code, and Web publishing.
Goodman, D., and A. Sofaer. 2001. The Transnational Dimension
of Cybercrime and Terrorism. Prague: Hoover Institute.
Given the importance of transnational issues in cyberspace,
this book is written to help readers better understand its com-
plexity. Interesting portions cover cyber-terrorism.
Gunkel, D. 2000. Hacking Cyberspace. Boulder, CO: Westview.
This book is intended for a rather advanced audience, since
it examines in some detail the metaphors of new technology and
how those metaphors affect the implementation of technology in
Books
245

today’s World Wide Web. The book touches on philosophy, com-
munication theory, and computer history to tell its important
story.
Himanen, P., M. Castells, and L. Torvald. 2001. The Hacker Ethic
and the Spirit of the Information Age. New York: Random
House.
This book is one of the few that offers insights into White
Hat hackers and the positive hacker ethic that motivates them to
do what they are, technically speaking, very capable of doing. It
talks about how White Hats from the 1960s through the present
have been able to create great things by joining forces and using
information in very creative ways.
J u e rg e n s m e y e r, M. 2000. Te r ror in the Mind of God. B e r k e l e y :
University of California Press.
Focusing on recent events not unlike the Muslim cartoon
that caused havoc in parts of the world in 2006, the first part of
this book explores the use of violence by marginal gro u p s
within five major religions. The author details the theological
justifications for violence and the bases for its authorization.
The second part of this book describes common themes and pat-
terns in the cultures of violence detailed in the first part. This in-
triguing book closes with suggestions for the future of re l i g i o u s
v i o l e n c e .
Levy, S. 2001. Hackers: Heroes of the Computer Revolution. New
York: Penguin.
This book is meant to be a positive influence on those inter-
ested in hacking for all the right reasons; it describes, in a very
u s e r-friendly way, the pranks played at MIT’s Tech Model Rail-
road Club and the very famous computer security experts who
had their roots planted there. This is a must-read for those
wanting to know about how the Computer Underg round was
s t a r t e d .
Lilley, P. 2003. Hacked, Attacked, and Abused: Digital Crime Ex-
posed. London: Kogan Page.
Given that the business audience is concerned about keeping
networks safe from intrusions, this book provides sound, practi-
cal advice in that regard. Topics include digital crime, cyber-laun-
dering, fraudulent Internet Websites, viruses, Website deface-
246
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

ment, identity theft, information warfare, Denial of Service (DoS)
attacks, and digital privacy invasion.
L o a d e r, B., and T. Douglas. 2000. C y b e rcrime: Security and Sur-
veillance in the Information Age. New York: Routledge.
This pair of authors focus on the increasing concern experts
have over the use of electronic communications for criminal ac-
tivities and the controversies surrounding countermeasures cur-
rently used by governments to combat cyber-crime. This book
covers a wide range of topics, including legal, psychological, and
sociological aspects of cyber-crime.
Maiwald, E. 2001. Network Security: A B e g i n n e r’s Guide. N e w
York: McGraw-Hill.
Despite its soothing title, this book is quite far from a begin-
ner’s textbook on network security. The book seems to be written
for network administrators running a network but needing to se-
c u re it as well. Topics include antivirus software, ﬁrewalls, and
intrusion detection systems (IDS).
M c C l u re, S., S. Shah, and S. Shah. 2002. Web Hacking: Attacks
and Defense. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
This interesting book discusses what happens when vulnera-
bilities in networks go unrepaired. It is an informative guide for
Web security professionals.
McIntosh, N. 2002. Cybercrime. Chicago: Heinemann.
This is one of a few books on the market that gives rational
but rather elementary information to those wanting to know
more about cyber-crime. It is written so that those students aged
nine through twelve will understand its main points.
Meinel, C. 2001. The Happy Hacker.4th ed. Show Low, AZ: A m e r-
ican Eagle.
This book instructs readers on how to hack their computers—
s a f e l y. Especially useful for newcomers to the hacking field, this
book teaches in simple language how to get on the Internet like
an experienced hacker, how to map the Internet, how to find
computers to crack, how to construct e-mail bombs, and how 
to track Black Hats and spammers on the Internet. Other unique
topics include “how to meet other hackers” and “hacker hu-
m o u r. ”
Books
247

Mitnick, K., and W. Simon. 2002. The Art of Deception: Contro l-
ling the Human Element of Security. New York: John Wiley 
and Sons.
Infamous cracker Kevin Mitnick, who spent a number of
years behind prison bars for his cracking exploits, joins forc e s
with William Simon to write about the importance of social engi-
neering in gaining successful crack attacks. These two authors
also offer some useful advice to readers about securing business
computer networks. The two authors also have a similar but up-
dated 2005 book release titled The Art of Intrusion: The Real Sto-
ries behind the Exploits of Hackers, Intruders, and Deceivers.
Newman, J. 1999. Identity Theft: The Cybecrime of the Millen-
nium. Port Townsend, WA: Loompanics.
The title of the book describes the important topic of concern
for citizens around the globe: identity theft. It gives a nontechni-
cal treatment of the topic and deals with the complexity of the is-
sue in the United States, in particular.
Nichols, R., and P. Lekkas. 2002. Wi reless Security: Models,
Threats, and Solutions. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Given the rise in Internet and wireless cracking exploits in
recent years, these authors do a ﬁne job of presenting some tech-
nical solutions for voice, data, and mobile commerce breaches.
Raymond, E. 1996. The New Hacker’s Dictionary. Boston: MIT
Press.
This book deﬁnes the words used by computer hackers and
programmers from the start of the underground movement until
the mid-1990s. It is required reading for anyone caring about the
history of the computer industry and the dynamics of the infor-
mation economy.
Richards, J. 1998. Transnational Criminal Organizations, Cyber-
crime, and Money Laundering: A Handbook for Law Enforcement
O fficers, Auditors, and Financial Investigators. Boca Raton, 
FL: CRC.
Given the transnational nature of cyber-crime, this book is an
essential read for those in the law enforcement profession. The
book covers the workings of organized criminals and groups tran-
scending national borders. Topics include how criminals interna-
tionally launder money, how law enforcement curbs such activi-
248
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

ties, and new methods of counteracting cro s s - b o rder crimes, in-
cluding those using the Internet.
Schell, B., and J. Dodge, with S. Moutsatsos. 2002. The Hacking of
America: Who’s Doing It, Why, and How. Westport, CT: Quorum.
Written by two university professors and a lawyer specializ-
ing in cyber-crime, this book used psychological inventories to
study more than 200 hackers and crackers who attended the Def-
Con and Hackers on Planet Earth (HOPE) hacking conventions in
2000. The personalities and behavioral traits of male and female
hackers are detailed, and an intriguing question—Is the viliﬁca-
tion of hackers justified?—is answered. Very interesting case
studies on hackers—young and old—are presented.
Schell, B., and N. Lanteigne. 2000. Stalking, Harassment, and
Murder in the Workplace: Guidelines for Protection and Preven-
tion. Westport, CT: Quorum.
This book provides a clear, objective, responsible, and read-
able analysis of the facts of stalking crimes, including cyber-stalk-
ing. It also provides a practical guide for individuals and organi-
zations trying to protect themselves from the harms associated
with stalking and cyber-stalking. It provides insights into why
stalkers and cyber-stalkers behave the way they do.
Schell, B., and C. Martin. 2004. Contemporary World Issues: Cy-
bercrime. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
This book examines many forms of computer exploits—
some positively motivated by the White Hats—and some nega-
tively motivated by the Black Hats—from the Hacking Prehistory
Era before 1969 through the present. Interesting topics include so-
cial engineering and its importance in cracking, famous cyber-
crime exploits targeting property and persons, and the technical
but understandable differences between cracking, ﬂooding, virus
and worm production and release, spoofing, phreaking, and
p i r a c y. Solutions for dealing with these exploits are also ad-
dressed.
Schell, B., and C. Martin. 2006. Webster’s New World Hacker Dic-
tionary. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
This dictionary has about 900 entries on important people,
terms, laws, and references related to hacking and to Internet-re-
lated crime. A preface, timeline on critical cracking and technol-
Books
249

ogy improvement events, and an appendix by Carolyn Meinel on
“How Do Hackers Break into Computers?” are included. Some
i n t e resting legal cases on crackers and cyber-criminals are also
outlined.
S c h n e i e r, B. 2000. S e c rets and Lies: Digital Security in a Net-
worked World. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Written by an information security expert and intended for a
more mature business audience, this book tells industry leaders
what they must know about computer security in order to keep
the business prepared for cyber-intrusions and disaster recovery.
Although for the most part this book is rather technical in focus,
it does give some insights into the digital world. Also, the reali-
ties of a networked society—good and bad—are illustrated
through interesting sidebars.
Shimomura, T., and J. Markoff. 1996. Takedown: The Pursuit and
C a p t u re of Kevin Mitnick, America’s Most Wanted Computer
Outlaw, by the Man Who Did It. New York: Warner.
This book is a fascinating read, for it describes the capture of
one of America’s most wanted Internet criminals, later turned IT
security guru, Kevin Mitnick. It includes some details of Shimo-
mura’s personal life as a White Hat hacker, as well as some of the
technical, legal, and ethical questions regarding the case.
S h i n d e r, D., and E. Tittel. 2002. Scene of the Cybercrime: Com-
puter Forensics Handbook. Rockland, MA: Syngress.
The purpose of this book is to introduce IT experts responsi-
ble for building and maintaining computer systems to stop cyber-
crime by giving them an understanding of the principles of law
enforcement. Also, law enforcement ofﬁcers are helped to gain an
understanding of the technical aspects of cyber-crime and how
technology can be applied to solve such crimes.
Smith, M. 2004. Encyclopedia of Rape. Westport, CT: Greenwood.
This book takes a novel approach to the examination and un-
derstanding of rape and sexual assault, including that involving
children. Besides discussing pertinent issues regarding sexual as-
sault, the authors detail the places, laws, and customs globally re-
garding rape and sexual assault. Also, literature and artistic de-
250
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

pictions of rape and sexual assault are described, as well as the
social and political events concerning these heinous crimes. Re-
lated readings are given, along with encyclopedia entries.
Spinello, R., and H. Tavani. 2001. Readings in CyberEthics. B o s t o n :
Jones and Bartlett.
This anthology of more than forty essays presents some very
i n t e resting but conflicting points of view about evolving moral
and ethical questions raised by the Internet. Topics include fre e
speech versus content controls and censorship, Intellectual Prop-
erty infringement versus open-source access, and online profes-
sional ethics and codes of conduct.
Tavani, H. T. 2004. Ethics and Technology: Ethical Issues in an
Age of Information and Communications Technology. Hoboken,
NJ: Wiley. 
A good, lay-oriented resource. 
We s t b y, J. 2003. International Guide to Combating Cyberc r i m e .
Chicago: ABA.
Giving the international nature of cyber-crime, this book is
timely and important. It discusses the complex jurisdictional is-
sues pertaining to the curbing of international crime related to
the Internet.
Internet-Related
Journals and Magazines
Journals
Academic Open Internet Journal
http://www.acadjournal.com/Default.asp
This online journal was created by Sotir Sotiroy and A n d re y
Nonov in April 2000 to publish papers from scientists aro u n d
the globe promoting technical advances of the century. The jour-
nal’s motto states: “Let’s make science closer to Information
technologies.” To that end, the journal promotes the use of the
Internet and the development of network re s o u rces to help
Internet-Related Journals and Magazines
251

scientists to communicate. Topics of interest include new tech-
niques and databases advancing the evolution of science and
the Internet.
Digital Humanities Quarterly
http://www.noraproject.org/dhq/index.shtml
This new journal was first published in March 2006. This quar-
t e r l y, meant to be an open-access, peer- reviewed digital journal
covering the full range of digital and Internet-driven media in
the humanities—including scholarly articles, experiments in
interactive media, and reviews of books, Websites, and new
media art installations—is published by the Alliance of Digital
Humanities Organizations (http://w w w. d i g i t a l h u m a n i t i e s
. o rg/). The alliance also supports other Internet-related jour-
nals such as Literary and Computing Linguistic ( h t t p ://l l c
. o u p j o u r n a l s . o rg/), a print journal published by Oxford Uni-
versity Pre s s .
EJournal
http://www.ucalgary.ca/ejournal/
This rather broad-based electronic journal is concerned with the
implications of electronic networks and texts. Produced since
1991, the journal publishes articles on both theories and prac-
tices relating to the production, transmission, storage, interpre-
tation, alteration, and replication of electronic text—including
the full range of social, psychological, literary, and economic
implications of computer networks and the Internet. An inter-
esting article featured in the September 2004 issue was titled
“What Makes Web Pages Diff e rent: Reemphasizing the Role of
Hypertext to Develop Rhetorical We b s . ”
Information Research
http://informationr.net/ir/
This journal is an open-access, international scholarly journal,
c reated to make accessible to readers around the globe the re-
sults of re s e a rch re g a rding a full range of information-re l a t e d
disciplines and including topics relating to the transmission of
information over the Internet. The journal is edited by Pro f e s s o r
Tom Wilson and is hosted by Lund University Libraries, the
252
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Swedish School of Library and Information Science, and
G o t h e n b u rg University in Borås.
Information Society Journal
http://www.indiana.edu/~tisj/
This journal has been published since 1981 and is considered to
be an important forum for the cutting-edge analysis of the im-
pacts, policies, and methodologies relating to information tech-
nologies and the changes that they bring to society and culture .
Topics of interest include computers and telecommunications,
the Internet, and innovative social forms in cyberspace. A re f e r-
eed journal, it originates in the Department of Te l e c o m m u n i c a-
tions at Indiana University.
International Journal on Digital Libraries
h t t p ://l i n k . s p r i n g e r. d e / l i n k / s e r v i c e / j o u r n a l s / 0 0 7 9 9 / i n d e x . h t m
This international quarterly journal was created to advance the
theory and practice of the acquisition, definition, org a n i z a t i o n ,
and management and dissemination of information thro u g h
global networking, including the World Wide Web. To that end,
topics of interest include digital information production and
management in high-speed networks, the seamless integration
of information over networks and the Internet, the security and
privacy of individuals and of business transactions conducted
over the Internet, and designing efficient, effective business
p rocesses involving the Internet.
Internet and Higher Education
http://www.elsevier.com/locate/iheduc
This quarterly journal was created to address modern-day is-
sues and future developments related to online learning, teach-
ing, and the administration of the Internet in postsecondary set-
tings. This peer- reviewed journal publishes articles addre s s i n g
innovative deployments of Internet technology in instru c t i o n
and, in particular, on re s e a rch demonstrating the effects of the
Internet and Information Technology on instruction in the post-
secondary classroom. The journal is both international and in-
t e rdisciplinary in focus, with topics including online teaching,
learning, management, and administration; Internet technology
Internet-Related Journals and Magazines
253

design and use; and issues and trends in synchronous, asyn-
c h ronous, and hybrid online learning.
The Internet Journal of Allied Health Sciences and Practice
http://ijahsp.nova.edu/
This quarterly, online, peer- reviewed scholarly journal is dedi-
cated to the exploration of allied health professional practice
and education using modern technologies, such as the Internet,
for communications. The journal was established to meet a
g rowing interest in the advancement of allied health pro f e s s i o n-
als as integral members of the health care team, and to that end
the journal provides an interdisciplinary forum in which allied
health professionals may share initiatives involving science,
practice, and education.
Journal of Internet Banking and Commerce
http://www.arraydev.com/commerce/jibc/index.htm
This journal, published since 1996, was created to inform bank-
ing and e-commerce academics and executives about key devel-
opments in electronic commerce, profit-oriented business arc h i-
t e c t u re, key e-commerce benchmarking practices, risk and
a c c o u n t a b i l i t y, and present and future trends in Internet-based
e - c o m m e rce and banking. This free online journal acts as a vehi-
cle for banking professionals to discuss critical e-commerce is-
sues through published articles and to establish re s e a rch and
business contact networking. To that end, the journal publishes
original articles describing e-commerce theory and practice, im-
portant announcements, guest columns, letters to the editor,
and surveys advancing e-commerce and banking. In the A p r i l
2006 issue, for example, the journal published an interesting ar-
ticle by Lior Shamir of Michigan Tech University, titled “A S e c u-
rity Concern in MS-Windows: Stealing User Information fro m
Internet Browsers Using Faked Wi n d o w s . ”
Journal of Internet Technology and Secured Transactions
http://www.inderscience.com/browse/index.php?journal
CODE=ijitst
This journal, published four times a year, is an international
journal dedicated to the advancement of theory and the practi-
cal implementation of secured Internet transactions. It strives to
254
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

foster informed discussions on Information Technology and the
Internet’s evolution. The objective of the journal is to pro m o t e
World Wide Web excellence by bridging the knowledge gap be-
tween scholars and industrial practitioners by promoting the
exchange of ideas aimed at secured Internet transactions and
encompassing conceptual analysis, design implementation, and
performance evaluation.
Michigan Telecommunications and Technology Law Review
http://www.law.umich.edu/JournalsandOrgs/mttlr.htm
This journal is said to be one of the first law journals to capital-
ize on the use of interactive media to promote informed discus-
sions and debates about the intertwined legal, social, business,
and public policy issues raised by emerging technologies, such
as the Internet. More o v e r, the journal is concerned, in general,
with the emergence of new techniques and technologies in com-
puting, telecommunications, multimedia, networking and in-
formation services, and, in particular, with the tensions cre a t e d
within society as a result of such changes. Journal topics include
administrative law, communications and constitutional law, In-
tellectual Property Rights law, and international law. In Marc h
2006 the journal hosted a symposium titled “21st Century
Copyright Law in the Digital Domain,” a conference meant to
bring together scholars, legal practitioners, policy-makers, and
technologists to address the legal and policy questions bro u g h t
about by major changes in copyright law as a result of the Inter-
net’s evolution.
Public-Access Computer Systems Review
http://info.lib.uh.edu/pr/pacsrev.html
Although no longer in operation, this electronic journal was fo-
cused on end-user computer systems in libraries. Established in
1989 by Charles Bailey, Jr., who was the editor-in-chief until
1996, the journal was published by the University of Houston Li-
braries three times a year. In 1991 the journal moved to a double-
blind review process, publishing articles on broad network-
based information issues. For example, one of the editor- i n -
c h i e f’s published articles was titled “Network-based Electro n i c
Publishing of Scholarly Works: A Selective Bibliography.” A f t e r
Charles Bailey’s reign ended, Pat Ensor and Thomas Wilson be-
came the editors-in-chief in January 1997. The journal’s closing
Internet-Related Journals and Magazines
255

announcement was made on June 18, 1998, but submitted papers
remained under consideration for publication until August 2000,
when the journal ceased operations altogether. During its nine
years of publication, the journal published forty-two issues that
included more than 100 articles, columns, reviews, and editorials
on network-based information topics. Readers can still access
these published articles.
Richmond Journal of Law and Technology
http://law.richmond.edu/jolt/index.asp
This journal was purportedly one of the first law reviews in the
world to be published exclusively online. First published on
April 10, 1995, the journal focused on the impact that computer-
related and other emerging technologies have on law. To d a y, the
journal’s articles reach thousands of readers per month in more
than seventy countries, with four or five issues being published
per year. Journal topics include the ongoing legal issues re l a t e d
to the Internet and to issues in biotechnology and the emerg i n g
a reas of constitutional and technology law.
Magazines
Byte Magazine Online
http://www.byte.com/byte.htm
This magazine, with Jonathan Erickson as the editorial dire c t o r,
f e a t u res news items and up-to-date articles dealing with tech-
n o l o g y - related topics, including the Internet.
Computers & Texts
http://users.ox.ac.uk/~ctitext2/publish/comtxt/
This magazine, with editor Michael Fraser, was formerly pub-
lished between March and August of each year in the United
Kingdom and dealt with articles relating computers to texts.
The journal ceased publication with volume 19.
Java Developer’s Journal
http://www.sys-con/com/java/
This online magazine is devoted to pieces of interest to Java lan-
guage developers and provides updates on the Java pro g r a m-
ming language and its applications.
256
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Linux Journal 
http://www.linuxjournal.com/
Since 1994, this online magazine has provided monthly news
and pieces of interest to the Linux community.
Network Magazine Online 
http://www.itarchitect.com/
This online magazine, now called IT Arc h i t e c t , p rovides news
and practical articles related to standards and technologies of
i n t e rest to the IT architect community.
PC WORLD.COM
http://www.pcworld.com/
This online magazine publishes topics relating to Personal
Computers (PCs) and modern-day computer technology. Indi-
viduals having a magazine subscription can have full and fre e
access to the most current online magazine edition, as well as to
all of the copy archives dating back to 1998.
Perl Journal
http://www.tpj.com/
This journal, founded in 1996 by Jon Orwant, was published un-
til January 2006. It was considered to be a leading publication
for and about Perl programming. A rchives of the magazine can
be found at http://w w w.tpj.com/. Individuals wishing to sub-
mit articles on Perl or any other Lightweight Language software
development are encouraged to do so in the Dr. Dobb’s Portal,
known as the Lightweight Languages Department and located
at http://w w w. d d j . c o m / d e p t / l i g h t l a n g / ; j s e s s i o n i d = W X D F O U
5 B S L U H S Q S N D B C C K H 0 C J U M E K J V N .
TechWeb 
http://www.techweb.com/
This online magazine, dedicated to business network pro f e s-
sionals, has news and up-to-date Internet articles related to elec-
t ronic business transactions and online security topics such as
identity theft.
Internet-Related Journals and Magazines
257

Ubiquity 
http://www.acm.org/ubiquity/homepage.html
This online magazine, an ACM (Association for Computing Ma-
chinery) Information Technology magazine, presents articles
and news features of interest to Information Technology special-
ists. For example, the May 2006 featured article had a quotation
by Espen Andersen of the Norwegian School of Management,
who claimed that the Internet is the fastest medium of all time,
swarming with updates, links, and searchability features. Influ-
ence on the Internet, he affirmed, is determined primarily by its
readers, who, using dialogue and re f e rences, feed priorities to
the search engines. Media companies who do not shape their
p roduct to this evolution, warned Andersen, will gradually lose
their ability to decide what is important.
UnixReview.com
http://www.unixreview.com/
This online magazine publishes articles on computer server man-
agement and features updates on programming languages (such
as Unix, Perl, Python, and Shell) and on operating systems (such
as Linux and Solaris).
WindoWatch
http://www.windowatch.com/
This online magazine closed its digital doors in January 2006. Lois
Bleichfeld Laulicht, the magazine’s editor and founder, notes on
the Website that the ﬁrst issue was posted in October 1994 and re-
mained in operation for eleven years. The objective of the maga-
zine was to bring to the public well-informed discussions by those
understanding computers and their systems, as well as those hav-
ing broad and informed interests in less “techie” subjects.
ZD Net
http://www.zdnet.com/
This online magazine has news, blogs, and white papers deal-
ing with secure transactions over the Internet. More o v e r, the
magazine’s white paper directory is said to be the Web’s larg e s t
library containing free Information Technology white papers
and numerous case studies on data management, IT manage-
ment, networking, communications, enterprise applications,
and IT privacy, security, and trust issues.
258
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Online Newspapers,
Scholarly and Literary Journals,
and E-Zines 
The Internet provides online users with access to numero u s
newspapers, scholarly and literary journals, and e-zines (that is,
e l e c t ronic magazines) around the globe—just with the click of a
computer mouse. Below is a list of URLs to such online re-
s o u rces, meant to be illustrative of the wide-ranging availability
of online popular media. It is interesting to note that although
the online versions of newspapers and scholarly and literary
journals are not unlike those available in hard copy, the e-zines,
in particular, tend to be geared toward the arts and ﬁction com-
munities as well as hacktivists and, there f o re, are often quite
c o n t roversial in nature .
URLs of Selected Online Newspapers 
AlterNet. http://www.alternet.org/
Arts & Letters Daily. http://www.aldaily.com/
The Atlantic. http://www.theatlantic.com/
Austin American-Statesman. http://www.austin360.com/aas/
Boston Globe. http://www.boston.com/globe/
Boston Review. http://bostonreview.net/
British Media Online. http://www.wrx.zen.co.uk/britnews.htm
Chicago Tribune. http://chicagotribune.com/
Christian Science Monitor. http://www.csmonitor.com/
Chronicle of Higher Education. http://chronicle.com/
Commentary. http://www.commentarymagazine.com/
Common Dreams. http://www.commondreams.org/
CounterPunch. http://counterpunch.com/
CNN Web. http://www.cnn.com/
Cursor. http://www.cursor.org/toc.htm
Daily Mirror. http://www.mirror.co.uk/
Daily Newspaper.co.uk. http://dailynewspaper.co.uk/
Dallas Morning News. http://www.dallasnews.com
Daypop. http://www.daypop.com/
Detroit News Online. http://www.detnews.com/
Online Newspapers, Scholarly and Literary Journals, and E-Zines
259

EBR: Electronic Book Review. http://www.altx.com/ebr/
Edge. http://www.edge.org/
Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/
HotWired. http://www.hotwired.com/
Houston Chronicle. http://houstonchronicle.com/
Human Events Online. http://www.humaneventsonline.com/
Independent. http://news.independent.co.uk/
Information Clearing House. h t t p :// w w w. i n f o r m a t i o n c l e a r i n g-
house.info/index.htm/
London Review of Books. http://www.lrb.co.uk/
Los Angeles Times. http://www.latimes.com/
Media Times Review.
h t t p :// w w w. m e d i a t i m e s re v i e w. c o m /
indexEN.php
Miami Herald. http://www.miami.com/mld/miamiherald/
MotherJones. http://www.motherjones.com/index.html
Nation. http://www.thenation.com/
National Review Online. http://www.nationalreview.com/
New Republic. http://www.thenewrepublic.com/
New Yorker. http://www.newyorker.com/ 
New York Review of Books. http://www.nybooks.com/ 
New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/ 
Palo Alto Weekly. http://www.service.com/PAW/home.html 
Philadelphia Inquirer. http://www.philly.com/mld/inquirer/ 
Reason Online. http://reason.com/ 
RollingStone. http://rollingstone.com/ 
Salon. http://www.salon.com/ 
San Antonio Express-News. http://www.express-news.com/ 
Schweriner Volkszeitung. http://www.svz.de/schwerin.html 
Slate. http://www.slate.msn.com/ 
Spiegel, Der. http://www.spiegel.de/ 
SunSpot. http://www.sunspot.net/ 
Tatler. http://www.tatler.co.uk/ 
260
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Texas Monthly. http://www.texasmonthly.com/ 
The Times. http://www.the-times.co.uk/ 
TLS: Times Literary Supplement. http://www.the-tls.co.uk/ 
Times-Picayune. http://www.timespicayune.com/ 
U.S. News & World Report. http://www.usnews.com/ 
Village Voice. http://www.villagevoice.com/ 
Wall Street Journal. http://public.wsj.com/home.html 
Washington Post. http://www.washingtonpost.com/ 
Washington Times. http://www.washingtontimes.com/ 
WEEK. http://metrotel.co.uk/theweek/ 
Weekly Standard. http://www.weeklystandard.com/ 
URLs of Selected Scholarly and Literary
Journals
American Drama. http://www.americandrama.org/
American Journalism Review. http://www.ajr.org/
American Political Science Review. h t t p :// w w w. j s t o r. o rg /
journals/00030554.html
American Quarterly. http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/aq/
ANQ: A Quarterly Journal of Short Articles, Notes, and Re-
views. http://www.heldref.org/html/body_anq.html
A n t h ro p o e t i c s. h t t p :// w w w. h u m n e t . u c l a . e d u / h u m n e t / a n t h ro
poetics/home.html
APS Publishing News—Online. http://publish.aps.org/
Arachnion: A Journal of Ancient Literature and History. http://
www.cisi.unito.it/arachne/arachne.html
Arid Lands Newsletter. h t t p :// a g . a r i z o n a . e d u / O A L S / A L N /
ALNHome.html
Arts Education Policy Review. h t t p :// h e l d re f . o rg / h t m l / b o d y _
aepr.html
Ascending Node. h t t p :// s e d s . l p l . a r i z o n a . e d u / n o d e s / a s s _ n o d e
.html
Asian Affairs. http://heldref.org/html/body_aa.html
Australian Humanities Review. h t t p :// w w w. l i b . l a t ro b e . e d u . a u /
AHR/
British Archaeology. http://www.britarch.ac.uk/ba/ba.html
Online Newspapers, Scholarly and Literary Journals, and E-Zines
261

British Journal of Sports Medicine. h t t p :// w w w. b j s p o r t m e d
.com/
British Medical Journal. http://www.bmj.com/current.shtml
Bryn Mawr Classical Review. h t t p :// c c a t . s a s . u p e n n . e d u /
bmcr/
Cambridge Journals. http://titles.cambridge.org/journals/
Change. http://heldref.org/html/body_chg.html
Classical Antiquity. http://www.ucpress.edu/scan/ca-e/
Classical Review. http://www3.oup.co.uk/clrevj/
Clearing House. http://www.heldref.org/html/body_tch.html
College Teaching. http://www.heldref.org/html/body_ct.html
Comparative Literature and Culture. h t t p :// c l c w e b j o u r n a l . l i b
.purdue.edu/
C o n f i g u r a t i o n s. h t t p :// m u s e . j h u . e d u / j o u r n a l s / c o n f i g u r a t i o n s /
index.html
Critique: Studies in Contemporary Fiction. h t t p ://w ww. h e l d re f
.org/html/body_crit.html
Cultivate Interactive. http://www.cultivate-int.org/
Cultronix. http://eserver.org/cultronix/
Current. http://www.heldref.org/html/body_curr.html
D e m o k r a t i z a t s i y a. h t t p :// w w w. h e l d re f . o rg / h t m l / b o d y _ d e m
.html
Digital Humanities Quarterly. h t t p :// w w w. n o r a p ro j e c t . o rg /
dhq/index.shtml
D-Lib Magazine. h t t p :// m i r ro re d . u k o l n . a c . u k / l i s - j o u r n a l s /
dlib/
Early Modern Literary Studies. h t t p :// w w w. s h u . a c . u k / e m l s /
emlshome.html
Education Policy Analysis Arc h i v e s. h t t p :// s e a m o n k e y. e d . a s u
.edu/epaa/
EJournal. http://www.ucalgary.ca/ejournal/
Electronic Journal of Analytic Philosophy. http://ejap.louisiana
.edu/
ELH. http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/elh/index.html
Esoterica: The Journal of Esoteric Studies. h t t p :// w ww
.esoteric.msu.edu/
European Review of History. http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/
titles/13507486.html
262
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

E u ropean Review of Private Law. h t t p :// w w w. k l u w e ro n l i n e
.com/issn/0928–9801/contents)
E u ropean 
Sociological 
Review. 
h t t p :// w w w 3 . o u p . c o . u k /
eursoj/
Explicator. http://www.heldref.org/html/body_expl.html
Explorations in Renaissance Culture. h t t p :// e n g p h i l . a s t a t e
.edu/ERIC/
Folklore. http://www.folklore.ee/folklore/
Forum Computerphilologie. h t t p :// c o m p u t e r p h i l o l o g i e . u n i -
muenchen.de/
FQS—Forum: Qualitative Social Researc h. h t t p :// q u a l i t a t i v e -
research.net/fqs/fqs-eng.htm
Germanic Review. h t t p :// w w w. h e l d re f . o rg / h t m l / b o d y _ g e r
.html
Heldref Publications. http://www.heldref.org/
Helios. http://www.helios.org/
H e roic Age. h t t p :// m e m b e r s . a o l . c o m / h e ro i c a g e 1 / h o m e p a g e
.html
HighWire Press. http://highwire.stanford.edu/
HINARI Health InterNetwork Access to Research Initiative.
http://www.who.int/hinari/en/
Historical Methods. h t t p :// w w w. h e l d re f . o rg / h t m l / b o d y _ h m
.html
History. http://www.heldref.org/html/body_his.html
Howard Hughes Medical Institute Bulletin. h t t p :// w w w. h h m i
.org/bulletin/
ImageText. http://www.english.uﬂ.edu/imagetext/
Indiana Journal of Global Legal Studies. h t t p :// i j g l s . i n d i a n a
.edu/
Information Research. http://informationr.net/ir/
Information Society Journal. http://www.indiana.edu/~tisj/
International Health News. http://vvv.com/HealthNews/
International Journal on Digital Libraries. h t t p :// l i n k . s p r i n g e r
.de/link/service/journals/00799/index.htm
Internet and Higher Education. h t t p :// w w w. e l s e v i e r. c o m / l o-
cate/iheduc)
Internet Archaeology. http://intarch.ac.uk/
Online Newspapers, Scholarly and Literary Journals, and E-Zines
263

JAC Online. http://nosferatu.cas.usf.edu/JAC/index.html
JAMA—Journal of the American Medical Association. h t t p ://
jama.ama.-assn.org/
John Donne Journal. http://social.chass.ncsu.edu/jdj/
Journal of American Studies. http://www.baas.ac.uk/resources/
jas/jas.asp)
Journal of Arts Management, Law, and Society. h t t p :// w w w
.heldref.org/html/body_jamls.html
Journal of Business Administration Online. h t t p :// j b a o . a t u
.edu/
Journal of Cell Biology. http://www.jcb.org/
Journal of Economic Education. h t t p :// w w w. h e l d re f . o rg /
html/body_jece.html
Journal of Education for Business. h t t p :// w w w. h e l d re f . o rg /
html/body_jeb.html
Journal of Educational Researc h. h t t p :// w w w. h e l d re f . o rg /
html/body_jer.html
Journal of Electronic Publishing. h t t p :// w w w. p re s s . u m i c h
.edu/jep/
Journal of English and Germanic Philology. h t t p :// w w w. p re s s
.uillinois.edu/journals/jegp.html
Journal of Environmental Education. h t t p :// w w w. h e l d re f . o rg /
html/body_jee.html
Journal of Evolutionary Biology. h t t p :// l i n k . s p r i n g e r. d e / l i n k /
service/journals/00036/index.html
Journal of Experimental Education. h t t p :// w w w. h e l d re f . o rg /
html/body_jxe.html
Journal of Internet Banking and Commerc e. h t t p :// w w w
.arraydev.com/commerce/jibc/index.htm
Journal of Internet Technology and Secured Transactions. http://
w w w. i n d e r s c i e n c e . c o m / b ro w s e / i n d e x . p h p ? j o u r n a l C O D E =
ijitst)
Journal of Military History. h t t p :// w w w. j s t o r. o rg / j o u r n a l s /
08993718.html
Journal of Popular Film and Te l e v i s i o n. h t t p :// w w w. h e l d re f
.org/html/body_jpft.html
Journal of Seventeenth-Century Music. h t t p :// s s c m - j s c m . p re s s
.uiuc.edu/jscm/
Journal of Southern Religion. http://jsr.as.wvu.edu/
JSTOR. http://www.jstor.org/
264
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

K a i ros: A Journal of Rhetoric, Te c h n o l o g y, and Pedagogy.
http://english.ttu.edu/kairos/
Keats-Shelley Journal. h t t p :// w w w. l u c . e d u / p u b l i c a t i o n s / k e a t s -
shelley/ksjweb.htm
Kluwer Online. http://www.kluweronline.com/
Knowledge Quest: Journal of the American Association of School
Librarians. http://www.ala.org/aasl/kqweb/index.html
Lion and the Unicorn. h t t p :// m u s e . j h u . e d u / j o u r n a l s / l i o n _
and_the_unicorn/index.html
Literary Imagination. h t t p :// w w w. b u . e d u / l i t e r a r y / i m a g i n a
tion/index.html
Logos. http://logosonline.home.igc.org/
Mäetagused. http://www.folklore.ee/tagused/
Mars Hill Review. http://www.marshillreview.com/
Mathematical Physics Electronic Journal. h t t p :// w w w. m a
.utexas.edu/mpej/MPEJ.html
Medieval Forum. http://www.sfsu.edu/~medieval/
Medieval Review. http://www.hti.umich.edu/b/bmr/tmr.html
Medknow Publications. http:www.medknow.com/journals.asp)
Michigan Telecommunications and Technology Law Review.
http://www. law.umich.edu/JournalsandOrgs/mttlr.htm
Mind. http://www.oup.co.uk/mind/
Minerva. http://www.ul.ie/~philos/
Mississippi Review. http://www.mississippireview.com/
MFS: Modern Fiction Studies. h t t p :// m u s e . j h u . e d u / j o u r n a l s /
mfs/index.html
M o d e r n i s m / M o d e r n i t y. h t t p :// m u s e . j h u . e d u / j o u r n a l s / m o d e r n i s m -
m o d e r n i t y /
M L N: Modern Language Notes. h t t p :// m u s e . j h u . e d u / j o u r n a l s /
mln.index.html
Montaigne Studies. h t t p :// h u m a n i t i e s . u c h i c a g o . e d u / o rg s /
montaigne/
naturalSCIENCE. http://naturalscience.com/ns/nshome.html
Nature. http://www.nature.com/
N e g a t i o n s. h t t p :// w w w. d a t a r a n g l e r s . c o m / n e g a t i o n s / i n d e x . h t m l
New England Journal of Medicine. http://www.nejm.org/
Noûs. http://www.jstor.org/journals/00294624.html
Online Newspapers, Scholarly and Literary Journals, and E-Zines
265

Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
Review. 
h t t p :// w w w
.ornl.gov/info/ornlreview/
Oral History Review. http://www.ucpress.edu/journals/ohr/
Oxford American. http://oxfordamericanmag.com/
Oxford Art Journal. http://www3.oup.co.uk/oxartj/
Oxford University Press Journals. h t t p :// w w w 3 . o u p . c o . u k /
jnls/list/
Perspectives on Political Science. h t t p :// w w w. h e l d re f . o rg /
html/body_pps.html
Philosophy and Literature. h t t p :// m u s e . j h u . e d u / j o u r n a l s /
philosophy_and_literature/
Philosophy and Rhetoric. http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/par/
P o e t i c s. h t t p :// w w w. e l s e v i e r. n l / i n c a / p u b l i c a t i o n s / s t o re / 5 / 0 /
5/5/9/2/
Poetics Today. http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/poet/
Population and Development Review. h t t p :// w w w. j s t o r. o rg /
journals/00987921.html
Postmodern Culture. h t t p :// j e ff e r s o n . v i l l a g e . v i rg i n i a . e d u / p m c /
contents.all.html
Project Muse. http://muse.jhu.edu/
Public-Access Computer Systems Review. h t t p :// i n f o . l i b . u h
.edu/pr/pacsrev.html
Renaissance Forum. h t t p :// w w w. h u l l . a c . u k / H u l l / E L _ We b /
renforum/
Renaissance Quarterly. h t t p :// w w w. j s t o r. o rg / j o u r n a l s / 0 0 3 4
4338.html
(Re)Soundings. http://www.millersv.edu/~resound/
Reviews in American History. h t t p :// m u s e . j h u . e d u / j o u r n a l s /
reviews_in_american_history/index.html
Rhetorica: A Journal of the History of Rhetoric. h t t p :// w w w
.ucpress.edu/journals/rh/
Richmond Journal of Law and Technology. http://law.richmond
.edu/jolt/index.asp)
Richmond Review. http://www.richmondreview.com/
Romance 
Quarterly. 
h t t p :// w w. h e l d re f . o rg / h t m l / b o d y _ rq
.html
Science. http://www.sciencemagazine.org/
Science as Culture. h t t p :// h u m a n - n a t u re . c o m / s c i e n c e - a s - c u l t u re /
266
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Scientist. http://www.the-scientist.com/
Sewanee Review. http://www.sewanee.edu/sreview.home.html
Sic et Non. http://www.cognito.de/sicetnon/
Society for Philosophy and Te c h n o l o g y. h t t p :// s c h o l a r. l i b
.vt.edu/journals/SPT/spt.html
South Dakota Review. http://www.usd.edu/engl/SDR/
Speculum: A Journal of Medieval Studies. http://www.jstor.org/
journals/00387134.html
Studies in Bibliography. h t t p :// e t e x t . l i b . v i rg i n i a . e d u / b s u v a / s b /
Style. http://www.style.niu.edu/
Symposium. http://www.heldref.org/html/body_sym.html
Taylor & Francis Journals. h t t p :// w w w. t a n d f . c o . u k / j o u r n a l s /
alphalist.html
Teacher Ta l k. h t t p :// e d u c a t i o n . i n d i a n a . e d u / c a s / t t / t t h m p g . h t m l
T h e a t re Journal. h t t p :// m u s e . j h u . e d u / j o u r n a l s / t h e a t re _ j o u r n a l /
t o d a y@ n a s a . g o v. h t t p :// w w w. h q . n a s a . g o v / o ff i c e / p a o / N e w s
Room/today/html
Vectors. http://www.vectorsjournal.org/
Victorian Literature and Culture. h t t p :// u k . c a m b r i d g e . o rg /
journals/vlc/
Victorian Poetry. h t t p :// m u s e . j h u . e d u / j o u r n a l s / v i c t o r i a n _
poetry/
Victorian Studies. http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/vic/
William and Mary Quarterly. h t t p :// i n d e x . u m d l . u m i c h . e d u /
journals/00435597.html
World Aff a i r s. h t t p :// w w w. h e l d re f . o rg / h t m l / b o d y _ w a . h t m l
URLs of Selected E-Zines
1099: The Magazine for Independent Professionals. http://www
.1099.com/
Abalone Moon. http://www.abalonemoon.com/
Access to the Music Zone. http://www.amzmusiczine.com/
Agni Magazine. http://www.bu.edu/agni/
AlterNETive. http://www.ufsm.br/alternet/
American Prospect. http://www.prospect.org/
Apple Valley Review. http://www.applevalleyreview.com/
Online Newspapers, Scholarly and Literary Journals, and E-Zines
267

Areté. http://www.aretemagazine.com/
Art Bin Magazine. http://art-bin.com/aaehome.html
Astronomer. http://www.theastronomer.com/
Bathyspheric Review. http://www.montereybaypoetry.com/
Bellevue Literary Review. http://www.blreview.org/
Big Bridge. http://www.bigbridge.com/
Blackbird. http://www.blackbird.vcu.edu/
Blithe House Quarterly. http://www.blithe.com/
Blue Ear. http://blueear.com/index1.html
California Literary Review. http://www.calitreview.com/
Career Magazine. http://www.careermag.com/
Cashiers du Cinemart. http://www.impossiblefunky.com/
Cat World. http://www.catworld.co.uk/
Computer-Mediated Communication Magazine. h t t p :// w w w
.december.com/cmc/mag/index.html
CyberKids. http://www.cyberkids.com/
Cyber Oasis. http://www.sunoasis.com/oasis.html
Dream People. http://www.dreampeople.com/
Drunken Boat. http://www.drunkenboat.com/
EContent Magazine. http://www.ecmag.net/
Edge. http://www.edge.org/
Elephant Rock Productions. http://www.erpmedia.net/
Exopa Terra. http://www.exopaterra.com/
Exquisite Corpse. http://corpse.org
Eyeshot. http://www.eyeshot.net/
ﬁction attic. http://www.ﬁctionattic.com/
First Things. http://www.ﬁrstthings.com/
Flying Inkpot. http://inkpot.com/contents.html
Frauennews. http://www.frauennews.de/
From Now On. http://www.paciﬁcrim.com/~mckenzie/
FrontPage Magazine. http://www.frontpagemag.com/
Full Moon. http://www.fullmoonlm.bravehost.com/
Global Inner Visions. http://www.give-zine.com/
Global Monitor. http://www.monitor.ca/monitor/
GoodBye!. http://www.goodbyemag.com/
268
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Ink Magazine. http://www.ink-mag.com/
International Journal of Inclusive Democracy. h t t p :// w w w
.inclusivedemocracy.org/journal/
Keep On Truckin’ Re-Visited. http://www.vipgrafx.com/hippy/
hippy.html
Kudzu. http://www.etext.org/Zines/Kudzu/
Like Water Burning. http://www.likewaterburning.com/
Literary Salt. http://www.literarysalt.com/
Little Magazine. http://www.albany.edu/~litmag/
MacUser. http://www.macuser.co.uk/
Mersey Beat. http://www.mersey-beat.net/
Mute Online. http://www.metamute.com/
nerve.com. http://www.nerve.com/
Newtopia: a magazine. http://www.newtopiamagazine.net/
Nova News Net. http://novanewsnet.ukings.ns.ca/
NovelAdvice Newsletter. http://www.noveladvice.com/
Onion. http://www.theonion.com/
Outland Ezine. http://members.tripod.com/jshultz/
Oyster Boy Review. http://www.oysterboyreview.com/
paperplates: a Magazine for 50 Readers. h t t p :// w w w. p a p e r
plates.org/
Per Contra. http://www.percontra.net/
Pigdog Journal. http://www.pigdog.org/
Pig Iron Malt. http://www.pigironmalt.com/
Plexus. http://www.plexus.org/
pLUNGElit.com. http://www.plungelit.com/
Postmodern Village. http://www.postmodernvillage.com/
Prose Ax. http://ww.proseax.com/
Quest of the Unquietmind. http://unquietmind.com/
Quiet Mountain Essays. h t t p :// w w w. q u i e t m o u n t a i n e s s a y s . c o m /
RALPH. http://www.ralphmag.org/
Rose & Thorn. http://theroseandthorezine.com/
Scroll. http://www.scroll.org/
SeanAlonzo. http://seanalonzo.com/
Online Newspapers, Scholarly and Literary Journals, and E-Zines
269

sendecki. http://www.sendecki.com/
SPIKE Magazine. http://spikemagazine.com/index.html
Square Table. http://www.thesquaretable.com/
Stone Soup. http://www.stonesoup.com/
Story Bytes. http://www.storybytes.com/
Subverse. http://www.subverse.net/
Tarpaulin Sky. http://www.tarpaulinsky.com/
3AM Magazine. http://www.3ammagazine.com/
Toasted Cheese: The Online Literary Journal. h t t p :// w w w
.toasted-cheese.com/ezine.htm
TREND Magazine. http://trendmag.com/
Underneath the Bunker. h t t p :// w w w. u n d e r n e a t h t h e b u n k e r. c o m /
Voices. http:www.1writersway.org/
Voltaire’s Inkwell. http://www.voltairesinkwell.com/
Wild Violet. http://www.wildviolet.net/
Wine and Dine. http://www.winedine.co.uk/
Wolf Moon Press: A Maine Journal of Art and Opinion. http://
www.wolfmoonpress.com/
Word. http://www.word.com/index.html
Wow Cool Comix. http://www.wowcool.com/
Websites
Websites of Companies 
Offering Antivirus Software
Two kinds of virus-scanning software exist to protect computer
networks. One type is used on individual computers, while the
other scans the traffic going to and from the Internet at a gate-
way—looking for potentially harmful code. Both types of soft-
ware not only try to remove any attached viruses, worms, or Tro-
jans from software programs and documents but also inform
users about the actions being taken.
The software company Websites listed below offer a wide
range of antivirus and antiworm products for gateway-based and
270
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

local installations. These products differ primarily in their licens-
ing and packaging schemes. It is important to note that these
p roducts are regularly tested by the computer security compa-
nies, and the companies’ Website content is, there f o re, continu-
ally updated to reﬂect the ﬁndings from those tests. Most of the
listed companies also provide information services to their cus-
tomers, as well as to the public, about newly released worms and
v i ruses on the Internet. The Website content also details known
countermeasures, commonly called patches or ﬁxes.
Aladdin-Esafe. Alladin Knowledge Systems, Ltd. Headquarters:
Arlington Heights, Illinois, and Tel Av i v, Israel. http:// w w w
.aladdin.com/
F - S e c u r e . F - S e c u re, Inc. Headquarters: San Jose, California, and
Helsinki, Finland. http://www.f-secure.com/
Network Associates— M c A f e e. McAfee, Inc. Headquarters:
Santa Clara, California. http://www.mcafee.com/
S o p h o s . Sophos, Inc. Headquarters: Abingdon, Oxford, and Ly n n -
ﬁeld, Massachusetts. http:// w w w. s o p h o s . c o m /
Symantec. Symantec Corporation. Headquarters: Cupertino, Cal-
ifornia. http://www.symantec.com
Trend Micro. Trend Micro, Inc. Headquarters: Cupertino, Califor-
nia. http://www.trendmicro.com
Websites of Companies
Offering Firewalls
Firewalls are devices used to control the data trafﬁc ﬂowing into
and out of a corporate network, to and from the Internet. By us-
ing firewalls, companies can block unwanted traffic and keep
unauthorized users from gaining access to the network. Many of
the available ﬁrewall products allow users to build a secure tun-
nel, or virtual private network, through the Internet so that two
or more sites of an organization can use the Internet as a safe
medium in which to communicate. Data are encrypted by one
Websites
271

ﬁrewall before being sent, and the receiving ﬁrewall decrypts the
data. This process minimizes the risks of various crack attacks.
The firewall suppliers listed below have all provided well-de-
signed products for these objectives in recent years.
Check Point. Check Point Software Technologies, Inc. Headquar-
ters: Redwood City, California. http://www.checkpt.com/
C i s c o . Cisco Systems, Inc. Headquarters: San Jose, California.
http://www.cisco.com
NetScreen. Jupiter Networks, Inc. Headquarters: Sunnyvale, Cal-
ifornia. http://www.juniper.net/company/
N o r t e l . Nortel Networks. Headquarters: Brampton, Ontario.
http://www.nortelnetworks.com/
SonicWall. SonicWall, Inc. Headquarters: Sunnyvale, California.
http://www.sonicwall.com/
Watchguard. Watchguard Technologies, Inc. Headquarters: Seat-
tle, Washington. http://www.watchguard.com/corporate/
Websites of Companies Offering 
Intrusion Detection Systems
Intrusion detection systems, abbreviated IDS, complete the set of
technical precautions that organizations typically take to keep
their computer networks safe. IDS assist system administrators in
detecting whether a security breach has actually occurred in a
computer network. IDS look for unwanted changes or data trans-
fers in the network and note any anomalies. The following com-
panies offer reputable intrusion detection systems.
Internet Security Systems. Internet Security Systems, Inc. Head-
quarters: Atlanta, Georgia. http://www.iss.net/
Tripware. Tripware, Inc. Headquarters: Portland, Oregon. http://
www.tripwire.com
272
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Websites Related to Sexual Assault, Cyber
Pornography, and Cyber Child Pornography
Boston Globe. “Spotlight Investigation: Abuse in the Catholic
Church.” http://www.boston.com/globe/spotlight/abuse/.
This Website, powerfully disturbing to some, was created after
the Boston Globe published a number of stories uncovering the
scandals in the Boston area Catholic churches re g a rding sexual
abuse of children. The site offers real-life documentary cases,
message boards, and links to the problem in modern-day society.
CyberAngels
http://www.cyberangels.org/
This Website, composed of cyber volunteers, was the re c i p i e n t
of a 1998 Presidential Service Aw a rd. The CyberAngels was
formed in 1995 and quickly became one of the most important
cyber “neighborhood watch” groups safeguarding the Internet
f rom stalkers, harassers, and child pornographers.
The CyberTipline
http://www.missingkids.com/cybertip/
This Website is designed to deal with leads from individuals
wanting to report the sexual exploitation of children. Contact
information is available to individuals wanting to assist in the
fight against child sexual exploitation. Information provided is
f o r w a rded to law enforcement for investigation and re v i e w,
and, when appropriate, to the Internet Service Pro v i d e r.
Regulation of Child Pornography on the Internet
http://www.cyber-rights.org/reports/child.htm
This Website, compiled by Yaman Akdeniz, outlines the re g u l a-
tion of child pornography on the Internet, as well as cases and
c redible materials.
Torture Survivors Network
http://www.pacinfo.com/eugene/tsnet/
This Website, created by the nonpro ﬁt Rehabilitation Project for
Survivors of To r t u re from Latin America and the Caribbean,
Websites
273

today still functions as a forum for torture survivors, therapists,
and the public.
WiredSafety Organization
http://www.wiredsafety.org/
This Website is the largest online safety, education, and assis-
tance group in the world. They are considered to be an online
“ n e i g h b o rhood watch” group, but they operate worldwide in
cyberspace. In total, there are about 9,000 volunteers worldwide.
They help online users deal with cyber-crime and online harass-
ment, assist law enforcement around the globe to prevent and
investigate cyber-crimes, educate online users about cyber-
crime, and give information about various aspects of online
s a f e t y, privacy, and security. With their affiliate, www. w i re d-
c o p s . o rg, specially trained volunteers patrol the Internet, searc h-
ing for child pornography, child molesters, and cyber- s t a l k e r s .
Volunteers also search for and review family-friendly We b s i t e s ,
filter software products, and Internet services. The volunteers
d e c l a re themselves a one-stop-shop for cyberspace safety.
Websites Related to Internet 
Periodicals and Journals
PubList.com
http://www.publist.com/about.html
PubList.com, the only Internet-based re f e rence for more than
150,000 U.S. and international print and electronic publications, in-
cludes magazines, journals, e-journals, newsletters, and mono-
graphs. PubList.com provides a means for quick and easy access to
detailed publication information, including titles, formats, pub-
lisher addresses, editor contacts, circulation data, and ISSN num-
bers. This Website also provides online users access to subscription
services and article-level information through rights and permis-
sions providers and document delivery services. The Website was
founded in 1998 by Frederick Bowes, III, and in 2000 the heavily
t r a fﬁcked Website was acquired by Infotrieve to expand its service
to information and re s e a rch professionals and to assist in online or-
dering. In that re g a rd, journal articles may be ord e red through In-
fotrieve’s online document delivery service, giving online users ac-
cess to the complete text (formatted text and graphics) of most
journal articles.
274
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Internet-Related Audios, 
Documentaries, and Films
Audios
Chuck Harder Interviews Eric Jackson (2006)
http://www.archive.org/details/Chuck_Harder_Interviews_
Eric_Jackson.
This audio features Chuck Harder interviewing Eric Jackson,
the writer of The PayPal Wa r s . Eric Jackson talks freely about
the possibility of financial losses on the Internet and how
thieves can use discarded canceled checks to create a PayPal ac-
count to steal money from checking accounts.
Cuba: We Want the Web! (February 9, 2003)
http://www.archive.org/details/Cuba_We_want_the_Web_1
In this 4-minute, 39-second audio, Thembi Mutch talks about
his trip to Havana, Cuba, to find out not only why citizens there
seem to have been gripped by a wave of enthusiasm for e-mail
and the Internet but also why not everyone there seems to be
able to get access to the Internet—and why people there are be-
ginning to get suspicious. Does the Cuban government fear that
citizens would become saturated by U.S. culture, or that the In-
ternet will be used for subversive purposes? Or are the re a s o n s
m o re of an economic and a technical nature ?
Department of Ongoing Digital Situations (April 8, 1994)
http://www.archive.org/details/DOODS_THE_SECRET_CITY
This audio is actually a mix that details some of the fascinating
c o n t roversies in the early 1990s, when the Internet was in its
early stages of development and when there were battles of
competing interests between the online community and those in
the corporate sector.
Governments Try to Control Internet (February 9, 2003)
http://www.archive.org/details/Governments_try_to_control
_Internet
Heather Ford, a leading expert on human rights and the Inter-
net, speaks about how governments around the world censor
the Internet because it is a powerful tool for dissenting voices.
Websites
275

In this 2-minute, 19-second audio, Ford outlines the latest gov-
ernment attitudes around the world re g a rding the Internet and
the freedom of speech. She focuses on Burma, Zimbabwe, and
I r a n .
Interview of Tom Munnecke for Pew Internet Survey (September
17, 2005).
http://www.archive.org/details/UpliftAcademyInterviewof
TomMunneckeforPewInternetSurvey.
In a production by Jenna Anderson of Elon University, To m
Munnecke is interviewed as part of the Pew-Elon University In-
ternet Predictions Survey at the Accelerating Change Confer-
ence, held at Stanford University on September 17, 2005. More
information on how 6 billion people can benefit from the Inter-
net can be found at http://www. u p l i f t a c a d e m y. o rg .
Jim Greenﬁeld: Is the Government Watching You? (2006)
http://www.archive.org/details/Jim_Greenﬁeld_Is_the_
Government_Watching_You.
In this audio, Dave, a call-in guest from California, claims that
he has government crackers blocking his telephone calls and
following him to Internet blog sites. Jim, the show’s host, thinks
that Dave is likely a paranoid delusional. Would the govern-
ment monitor a law-abiding citizen? Dave says “yes,” because
he blows the whistle on the government. This audio allows for a
fascinating debate and lets the audience decide who is right—
Jim or Dave.
Open Source in Educational IT (2006)
http://www.archive.org/details/WesleyAFryerOpenSourcein
EducationalIT.
This podcast by Wesley A. Fryer features a skypecast interview
with Afan Ottenheimer of JeoNet, an Internet applications devel-
opment company based in Iowa City, Iowa. The interview focuses
on the viability of using open-source software solutions in the ed-
ucational Information Technology environment. Issues covere d
include security, total cost of ownership, support, and usability. 
Podcasting for Fun and Pro ﬁt (2006)
h t t p ://w w w. a rc h i v e . o rg / d e t a i l s / P o d c a s t i n g _ f o r _ F u n _ a n d _ P ro ﬁt .
276
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

In this audio, Scott Paton discusses why podcasting can pro v i d e
a huge opportunity for Website owners as well as ways to earn
money with this new but largely untapped marketing medium.
Another related Website can be found at http://c o o l w e b t i p s
. c o m / p o d c a s t .
The Doctor Will Google You Now with Thomas Lee, Susan Love
and Deborah Wexler (2006)
http://www.archive.org/details/053105.
P roduced by Open Source Media, this audio asks the intere s t i n g
question, “Is the internet taking the mystery out of medicine?”.
Although access to health care has not improved vastly in some
of the poorer regions around the globe, access to medical infor-
mation online has improved. Thus, patients are now spending a
lot of time online at PubMed to learn more about their health
and health care issues. The effect of this Internet medium has
been “sobering” to physicians who have enjoyed a centuries-old
monopoly on medical terms and knowledge. This audio empha-
sizes that physicians, too, can gain from the Internet, for in the
not-too-distant future, they will be diagnosing patients with the
use of a wireless handheld like the BlackBerry. 
Documentaries
Alle Kennis van de Wereld: Biography of Paul Otlet (Noorederlicht, 1998).
This documentary, produced for Dutch television in 1998, fea-
tures Paul Otlet, considered by many to be the father of informa-
tion management. Narrated by W. Boyd Rayward, Otlet’s biogra-
pher, the documentary focuses on the late 1800s and early 1900s
when Otlet started what is today known as information science.
Amazingly, one hundred years before the Internet came into be-
ing, Otlet used terms like “web of knowledge,” “link,” and
“knowledge network” to describe his soon-to-be-developed vi-
sion for a central repository containing human knowledge.
BBS Documentary Interview Collection: Philip J. Kaplan (Bovine Ignition Sys-
tems, 2006). This documentary, directed and produced by Jason
Scott Sadofsky, presents an interview with Philip J. Kaplan of
FUCKEDCOMPANY.COM in 2002 for the BBS Documentary se-
ries. In New York City, Kaplan was asked questions about ru n-
ning the Internet forerunner, the Bulletin Board System, or BBS.
Kaplan also spoke about pirate groups, modem costs, why a Web
Websites
277

forum or BBS is useful for online users to post on, as well as tips
for producing exciting conversations with online users. He also
spoke about personality traits of BBS creators. Those wanting to
view this documentary should know that profanity prevails. The
director can be reached at Jason@textﬁles.com.
BBS Documentary Interview Collection: Ted Beatie (Bovine Ignition Sys-
tems, 2006). This documentary, directed and produced by Jason
Scott Sadofsky, presents a 2002 interview with Ted Beatie. Topics
include using early modems, how students could fit into their
schedules the dialing in of Bulletin Board Systems (BBSs), and a
comparison of the Internet Relay Chat systems with the MIT
Zephyr. The director can be reached at Jason@textﬁles.com.
BBS Documentary Interview Collection: Minor Threat (Bovine Ignition Sys-
tems, 2005). This interview with Minor Threat was made in
Austin, Texas, on January 30, 2004. The director and producer is
Jason Scott Sadofsky. Although Minor Threat is known in the In-
ternet community as the creator of Tone Loc, a war-dialer soft-
ware program connecting thousands of phones looking for carri-
ers and voices in a phone exchange, the documentary focuses on
this individual’s memories of public domain Bulletin Board Sys-
tems (BBSs) and cracking into them. The director can be reached
at Jason@textﬁles.com.
BBS Documentary Interview Collection: Tracer[ACiD] (Bovine Ignition Sys-
tems, 2005). Produced and directed by Jason Scott Sadofsky, this
interview with Tracer, an artist for the ANSI art group known as
ACiD, was made on March 8, 2004, in New York City. Interesting
subjects covered include ANSI art groups, creating art in both
ANSI and RIP computer graphics, and post-Bulletin Board Sys-
tem (BBS) events. The director can be reached at Jason@textﬁles
.com.
BBS Documentary Interview Collection: Mark Nasstrom (Bovine Ignition
Systems, 2005). Produced and directed by Jason Scott Sadofsky,
this interview with Mark Nasstrom was made in May 2003 in
Seal Rock, Oregon. The documentary features discussion topics
such as conducting election results using Bulletin Board Systems
(BBSs), communications challenges in areas having sparse popu-
lations, and the Boardwatch magazine. The director can be
reached at Jason@textﬁles.com.
278
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

BBS Documentary Interview Collection: John Sheetz (Bovine Ignition Sys-
tems, 2005). Produced and directed by Jason Scott Sadofsy on
M a rch 22, 2003, in New Providence, New Jersey, this documen-
tary focuses on teletype art and using Ham Radio to transfer text-
based messages. The documentary covers such technical issues as
c reating RT T Y art, the challenges of transferring artwork over
Ham Radio, and some copyright issues. Sadly, the interviewee
died before the documentary was released. The director can be
reached at Jason@textﬁles.com.
BBS Documentary Interview Collection: Loren Jones (Bovine Ignition Sys-
tems, 2005). Produced and directed by Jason Scott Sadofsky on
January 24, 2004, this documentary moves away from the more
technical side of Bulletin Board Systems (BBSs) and moves to-
w a rd discussing the social and friendship issues surro u n d i n g
BBSs. The interviewee was Loren Jones. The director can be
reached at Jason@textﬁles.com.
BBS Documentary Interview Collection: Ryan Brown (Bovine Ignition Sys-
tems, 2005). This interview, produced and directed by Jason
Scott Sadofsky on May 22, 2003, in Mountain Vi e w, California,
f e a t u res Ryan Brown. Brown discusses how he ran a Bulletin
B o a rd System (BBS) as a very young man, how to get to know
people strictly online, and how he won an award for running a
BBS using creative software. The director can be reached at 
Jason@textﬁles.com.
BBS Documentary Interview Collection: Rich Schinnell  (Bovine Ignition Sys-
tems, 2005). Produced and directed by Jason Scott Sadofsy, this
documentary features an interview with Rich Schinnell on Febru-
ary 29, 2004, in Rockville, Maryland. The discussion focuses on
the 1982 time period, when the early IBM Personal Computer–
compatible user groups were challenged by software and hard-
ware issues. Rich Schinnell discussed his personal views on shar-
ing software and proﬁting from public domain software. The di-
rector can be reached at Jason@textﬁles.com.
Martial Law 9/11: Rise of The Police State (Jones Productions, 2005). Di-
rected by Alex Jones and produced by Alex Jones and Kevin
Booth, this controversial documentary discusses the rise of the
police state in the United States since the terrorist attacks of Sep-
tember 11, 2001. Claims in the documentary are that the U.S.
Websites
279

Constitution has been shredded and that the United States now
ﬁnds itself in a police state, run by a high-tech control grid set up
a c ross the United States. This documentary allegedly exposes
who was behind the terrorist attacks, including the roots and his-
tory of its creators.
National Conference for Media Reform (Center for Media & Democracy,
2006). This 12-minute documentary, produced by the Center for
Media & Democracy and distributed by MediaPolicyBlog.org ,
was designed to promote free speech, a diversity of voices, and
an open and free Internet.
Recon 2005: Todd Macdermid on Encrypted P2P and VoIP Spaces with CUTLASS
(www.recon.cx, 2005). Todd MacDermid is known in the Internet
world for producing a number of open-source security tools, in-
cluding steganographic network tunnels, encrypted mailing lists,
and packet-mangling libraries. He has been a featured speaker at
computer hacking conferences such as Black Hat in Las Ve g a s
and Hackers on Planet Earth in New York City. In this documen-
t a r y, MacDermid speaks about the lack of security surro u n d i n g
P e e r-to-Peer (P2P) file transfer, voice chat, and text-messaging
systems. He also describes an open-source system known as
CUTLASS, a tool powerful enough to support encrypted voice,
chat, and ﬁle transfers.
Stop Identity Theft Now (Public Domain, 2004). This documentary
features Sandy Klein, afﬁliated with the U.S. Attorney’s Ofﬁce in
Los Angeles, California, who speaks on the fastest-growing crime
on the Internet—identity theft. The documentary was produced
to introduce the Stop Identity Theft Now Program and to answer
the following questions: What is identity theft? How does an
identity thief get personal information? How does an identity
thief use personal information? How can citizens protect them-
selves from identity theft? What should victims do? 
The Diary of a Network Administrator: Death of the Net ( L e e w a re Devel-
opment, 2005). In this documentary produced and directed by
Lee Evans, the perceptions of a network administrator are pre-
sented. The latter discusses the Internet from its humble begin-
nings to its present-day state, where it is a primary medium for
mass-marketing. The documentary also focuses on the pro b l e m s
280
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

c reated when there was increased access to the Internet by pub-
lic citizens.
The Globalization of Time and Space 5 of 9 (University of Lethbridge
Globalization Studies, 2004). This documentary, shown in lecture
format, was directed by Anthony J. Hall and produced by Matt
Sletto. The documentary focuses on a discussion of relationships
between human beings and computers, including the logic used
to make computers work. Other interesting social topics include
how the Internet has made inroads into time and space and the
challenges of expressing one’s identity and sexuality in cyber-
space.
The Internet and the Law (Ravensbourne College, 2004). Pro d u c e d
and directed by Ian Forrester, this documentary takes exception
to the claim that the Internet is a sort of digital Wild West—an an-
archic high-tech environment where there are few laws and regu-
lations. The documentary argues that most of the laws applying
to print and broadcast media apply equally to online media. Pro-
duced in seminar format, the documentary was made to raise
a w a reness about some of the more important laws applying to
online media.
Thomas Leighton: The Challenges of Delivering Content and Applications on the In-
t e rn e t (Northeastern University ACM, 2005). This documentary,
directed by Ravi Sundaram and produced by Chris Lambert, fea-
tures Thomas Leighton, the cofounder of Akamai Technologies in
September 1998. Currently a chief scientist at Akamai Technolo-
gies, Dr. Leighton is considered to be a technological visionary
and a top executive who determines the company’s strategies. As
one of the world’s authorities on algorithms for network applica-
tions, Dr. Leighton’s technological advances have earned him
recognition as one of the Top 10 Technology Innovators in U . S .
News & World Report. A p rofessor at MIT, Dr. Leighton has
served as the head of the Algorithms Group at MIT’s Laboratory
for Computer Science since its creation in 1996. As discussed in
the documentary, Dr. Leighton holds many patents related to
c r y p t o g r a p h y, digital rights management, and network algo-
rithms. In 2004 he was elected into the National Academy of En-
gineering for contributions to the design of networks and circuits
and for technology for Web content delivery.
Websites
281

Films
JuniorXDance Movie 2
Date: 2004
Length: 4 minutes, 28 seconds
P roduced by the United Canadian Alliance clan and directed by
JuniorX, this minidance movie was made in the World of Wa r-
craft MMORPG, beta version. As with most movies produced in
massively multiplayer games, the characters’ actions are limited
to e-motes and moves built into the game. In particular, JuniorX
relies on Orc dance and fighting moves set to MC Hammer’ s
tune “Can’t Touch This.”
Hackers
Date: 1995
Length: 107 minutes
Cast: Jonny Lee Miller, Angelia Jolie, Fisher Stevens, and
Lorraine Bracco
This intriguing story focuses on a young cracker who accesses
without authorization a highly secure computer system. Once
in, he comes upon an embezzling scheme that is masked by a
computer virus capable of destroying the world’s ecosystem.
The Net
Date: 1995
Length: 114 minutes
Cast: Sandra Bullock, Jeremy Northam, Dennis Miller, 
Diane Baker
The story line revolves around a computer expert named A n-
gela Bennett, a young, attractive computer analyst who is tied
to her computer and her mother. An internet friend sent her a
computer program to her to debug. The story gets intere s t i n g
when the night he is to meet her, he is killed in an airplane
crash. The story intensifies when Angela’s computer files are
erased and she is given a new identity.
Pirates of Silicon Valley
Date: 1999
Length: 95 minutes
282
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Cast: Anthony Michael Hall, Noah Wyle, Joey Slotnick, 
John Di Maggio
The story line is about the creative ones in Silicon Valley: the
c reators of Apple Computers and Microsoft Corporation.
War Games
Date: 1983
Length: 114 minutes
This movie falls in the category of cyber- t h r i l l e r. The story line
is about a computer cracker who taps into the Defense Depart-
ment’s war computer. Lacking the intent to do so, he starts a
c o n f rontation of global pro p o r t i o n s — World War III.
Warriors of the Net
Date: 2002
Length: 12 minutes, 40 seconds
This short animation film explains the way Internet Pro t o c o l
packets flow on the Internet. The movie is available for informa-
tion purposes by Ericsson Medialab. The film can be found at
w w w. w a r r i o r s o f t h e . n e t / .
Television Series
Net Café, one of the world’s most widely distributed television
series, was broadcast in the United States as well as in more than
100 other countries from 1996 through 2002. Hosted by Stewart
Cheifet, Jane Wither, and Andrew deVries, it covered the Internet
revolution during the peak of the dot.com boom. The weekly se-
ries talked about the people and the culture behind the Wo r l d
Wide Web. The show gave Internet tips and helpful Websites (in-
cluding Yahoo, Google, and eBay), talked about Internet startups,
and featured interviews with the pioneers behind the develop-
ment of the Internet. The winner of a number of journalistic ex-
cellence and broadcast awards, the show was produced on loca-
tion at various internet cafes around the Silicon Valley and the
San Francisco Bay areas.
Websites
283


Glossary
Access Controls The physical or logical safeguards preventing unau-
thorized access to information resources.
Actus Reus One of the four elements on which Anglo-American law
bases criminal liability. This element means a criminal action or a failure
to act when one is under a duty to do so.
Algorithm A set of rules and procedures for resolving a mathematical
or logical problem, much as a recipe in a cookbook helps bafﬂed cooks
in the kitchen resolve meal problems. A computer program can be
viewed as an elaborate algorithm, and in computer science, an algo-
rithm usually indicates a mathematical pro c e d u re for solving a re c u r-
rent problem. Information security professionals are concerned with
cryptographic algorithms—those used to encrypt, or encode, messages.
Different algorithms have different levels of complexity, which is related
to key size. For example, a 41-bit key is twice as hard to crack, or decode,
as a 40-bit key. A 128-bit key is a trillion times harder to crack than a 40-
bit key.
Anonymous Remailers A computer service that privatizes e-mail and
typically contains the sender’s identity. Anonymous remailers send e-
mail messages that arrive in a re c e i v e r’s inbox without a sender’ s
i d e n t i t y.
Antivirus Software Detects viruses and notiﬁes the user that the virus
is present. This type of software keeps a database of “ﬁngerprints,” a set
of characteristic bytes from known viruses, on ﬁle.
A R PA n e t The first transcontinental, high-speed computer network,
built by the U.S. Department of Defense as an experiment in digital
communications.
Attendant Circumstances One of the four elements on which A n g l o -
American law bases criminal liability. This element means the existence
of certain necessary conditions. With some crimes, it must be pro v e n
that certain events occurred, or certain facts are true, for a person to be
found guilty of the crime.
285

Black Hat Hackers Individuals who engage in destructive computer
exploits, motivated by revenge, sabotage, blackmail, or greed. These ex-
ploits can and often do result in harm to property or persons.
Blog Short for Web log, it is an online journal and forum for commen-
tary that doubles as a public discussion board. Blogs are Web pages on
which an individual posts diarylike entries. Blogs are gaining popular-
ity, particularly as a means of marketing one’s talents online—a replace-
ment for old-fashioned paper resumes.
“C” The computer language created in the 1970s by Dennis Ritchie.
C o d e The portion of the computer program that can be read, written,
and modiﬁed by humans.
Council of Europe Convention on Cybercrime The ﬁrst global legisla-
tive attempt of its kind to set standards on the deﬁnition of cyber-crime
and to develop policies and procedures governing international cooper-
ation to combat Internet crime.
Cracking Gaining unauthorized access to computer systems to commit
a crime.
CyberAngels A not-for-proﬁt organization of White Hat hackers assist-
ing targets of cyber-crimes, particularly of cyber-stalking and cyber-
pornography. This organization also helps legal authorities to ﬁght In-
ternet crime.
C y b e r- E t h i c s By definition, ethics applied to the online enviro n m e n t .
Although cyber-ethics has become an important topic for elementary
school children, high school students, college and university students,
and for those in the workplace in recent years, the treatment of what is
and is not cyber-ethical behavior varies from place to place. The gen-
eral principle is “do unto others online as you would have them do
unto you.”
C y b e r- p o r n o g r a p h y Using the Internet to possess, create, import, dis-
play, publish, or distribute pornography (especially child pornography)
or other obscene materials.
C y b e r s p a c e Composed of hundreds of thousand of interc o n n e c t e d
computers, servers, routers, switches, and fiber optic cables, cyber-
space allows the critical infrastru c t u res—telecommunications, energ y,
banking, water systems, government operations, and emergency ser-
vices—to work. Thus, cyberspace is the “nervous system” of the global
e c o n o m y.
Cyber-stalking Using cyberspace and the Internet to control, harass, or
terrorize a target to the point that he or she fears harm or death to self or
others close to the target.
C y b e r- t e r r o r i s m Unlawful attacks and threats of attack by terro r i s t s
against computers, networks, and the information stored within when
286
Glossary

done to scare or coerce a government or its citizens to further the perpe-
trator’s political objectives.
Cyber-vigilantism Using the Internet to conduct vigilante activities.
Decryption or Decipher This is the process of taking encrypted data
that has been put into a “secret” format called ciphertext and converting
it to the original, readable plaintext. To complete this process, a key or
password is needed.
D i ffie-Hellman Public-Key Algorithm (DH) An algorithm, the DH
was developed by Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellman in 1976. The
DH, an algorithm upon which a number of secure connectivity Pro t o-
cols on the Internet are built, is now celebrating more than thirty years
of use. In short, DH is a means of securely transmitting a secret to be
shared between two parties over an untrusted network in real time. A
s h a red secret is critical for two parties who likely have not communi-
cated before, so that they are able to encrypt communications. To d a y,
DH is used by protocols such as Internet Protocol Security (IPSec), Se-
cure Shell (SSH), and Secure Sockets Layer (SSL).
Directory Search Engines These search engines do not search on the In-
ternet for information but obtain it from individuals who enter it into
the search engine’s databases. Because each directory search engine has
its own way of categorizing information, multitudes of them exist.
Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) A c y b e r-attack whereby a
cracker bombards a targeted computer with thousands or more fake re-
quests for information, causing the computer to run out of memory and
other re s o u rces. There f o re, it is either slowed down dramatically, or
stopped altogether. In this exploit, the cracker uses many—often hun-
d reds or thousands—of previously cracked computers connected
through the Internet to originate the attack. The multiple origins of the
cyber-attack make it especially difﬁcult to defend against.
Domain Name System (DNS) The Domain Name System, or DNS, is a
h i e r a rchical system of naming hosts and placing these hosts into cate-
gories. The DNS is a way of translating numerical Internet addre s s e s
(which are hard to recall) into word strings (which are easier to recall) to
denote user names and locations.
E - m a i l Mail sent from one party to another through an electronic system.
E n c r y p t i o n The mathematical conversion of data into a form fro m
which the original information cannot be restored without using a spe-
cial key. In other words, algorithms are used.
E t h e r n e t In 1985, the U.S. Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engi-
neers (IEEE) developed standards for Local A rea Networks (LANs)
called the IEEE 802 standards. These standards presently form the basis
of most networks. One of the IEEE 802 standards—the IEEE 802.3—is
known as “Ethernet,” the most prevalently used LAN technology
Glossary
287

a round the globe. Ethernet was designed by the Xerox Corporation in
1972, and in its simplest form, it used a passive bus operated at 10 Mbps.
A 50-ohm coaxial cable connected the computers in the network.
File Transfer Protocol (FTP) A p rotocol used to transfer ﬁles between
systems over a network.
F i r e w a l l s P rograms used to provide additional security for networks
by blocking access from the public network to certain services in the pri-
vate network.
Fixes or Patches Updated system software, created by computer secu-
rity experts to close security gaps discovered in software after it has
been released into the marketplace.
Flooding A type of Internet vandalism resulting in Denial of Service to
authorized, legitimate users of a Website or computer network.
H a c k e r A c c o rding to those in the Computer Underg round (CU), a
hacker is a person who enjoys learning the details of computer systems
and how to stretch their capabilities to do creative things. Media profes-
sionals often use the word incorrectly to signify a cracker.
Hacktivism Using the Internet to promote one’s own political platform
or mission.
H T M L (Hyper Text Markup Language) A Web browser interpre t s
HTML, the programming language used to code Web pages on the In-
ternet, into words and graphics so that users can view the pages in their
intended layout and rendering.
HTTP (Hyper Text Transfer Protocol) A programming language used
to transfer data over the World Wide Web. All Internet Website ad-
dresses begin with http://. When a computer user types a URL, or Uni-
formed Resource Locator, into the browser (a software application used
to locate and display Web pages) and hits the “Enter” key,  the computer
sends an HTTP request to the correct Web server. The Web server, de-
signed to handle these kinds of requests, then sends the user the desired
HTML (Hyper Text Markup Language) page.
Identity Theft Stealing and then misusing someone else’s identity (of-
ten, using their social security number or credit card numbers) to com-
mit crimes. Identity theft may or may not employ computers.
Information Packet A piece of data of fixed or variable size sent
t h rough a communications network like the Internet. A message sent
over a network is broken into smaller data packets that are disassem-
bled and then reassembled.
Infringing Intellectual Property Rights and Copyright Infringing In-
tellectual Property Rights (IPR) and Copyright can occur online and,
thus, falls in the broad-based category of “cyberspace theft.” An exam-
288
Glossary

ple would be copying another person’s work from an online sourc e
without being authorized to do so or without giving proper credit for
the work—including songs, articles, movies, or software.
Intellectual Property (IP) IP treats the protection of creative products of
the human mind like the protection of property. IP laws, in particular,
grant certain kinds of exclusive rights over these creative products on
the analogy of property rights.
Internet A network connecting computer systems.
Internet Protocol (IP) The reason that networked computers can com-
municate with one another is a common communication protocol called
Internet Protocol, or IP. All applications utilized on the Internet have
been designed to make use of this IP—in earlier times and in the pre s e n t .
Internet Service Providers (ISPs) ISPs are companies that, for a fee,
provide online users with a software package, a username, a password,
and an access phone number so that, equipped with a modem, they can
log onto the Internet, browse the World Wide Web, or send and receive
e-mail. Lately, ISPs have been offering high-speed services.
Internet Usage Policies B e f o re giving employees access to the com-
pany’s Internet service, companies re q u i re would-be Internet users to
sign an “Internet Usage Policy” form, which has them agree that they
will be accountable for their online activities.
Internic An organization called the Internic maintains a database hav-
ing all registered domains for the world. Therefore, anyone can query its
database by means of a whois. Although several organizations maintain
whois databases, the Internic has the main database. Thus, any com-
pany, institution, or organization wanting to have its own domain name
must register it with Internic.
Intranet or Intranet Site An information system internal to an organi-
zation that is built with Web-based technology.
Intrusion Detection System (IDS) An Intrusion Detection System, or
IDS, is a security service that determines how computer system cracks
or attempted cracks are detected in real-time or in near- real-time and
p rovides warnings. Intrusion detection analysts review logs and other
available network information to look for suspected or real intrusions.
IDSs are commercially available.
Intrusion Recovery Recovering from a computer network incident,
whereby a cracker or a set of crackers has exploited vulnerabilities in a
computer network, usually to cause harm to the network.
IP Address A numerical identiﬁer divided into a part identifying a net-
work (such as a company, an educational institution, or a government
agency) and another part identifying each computer in the network.
Glossary
289

Thus an IP address is much like a street name and a house number in a
nonvirtual neighborhood.
L i n u x An operating system used prevalently on Internet servers and
utilized by many large corporations as an alternative to the Micro s o f t
operating system.
Listserv An online subscription to some topic of interest.
Local Area Network (LAN) Networks often contained in one or more
buildings in nearby locations.
Malicious Code S o f t w a re programs like viruses and worms designed
to exploit weaknesses in computer software. They may replicate and at-
tach themselves to other programs.
Mens Rea One of the four elements on which Anglo-American law
bases criminal liability. This element means a culpable mental state.
MMORPG (or Massively Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Game) A
form of computer entertainment played by one or more individuals us-
ing the Internet. It is commonly known as online gaming.
MOO An acronym for MUD, Object-Oriented.
M o o r e ’s Law Since the 1960s, the number of transistors per unit are a
has been doubling every one-and-a-half years—thus increasing com-
puter power. This pro g ression of circuit fabrication is called Moore ’ s
Law, named after Gordon Moore, a pioneer in the integrated circuit ﬁeld
and creator of the Intel Corporation.
MUD A multiuse dungeon scenario employed in computer gaming.
Newsgroups Users connected to the Internet can get articles posted to
thousands of discussion groups called newsgroups. The articles are
topic-arranged and are distributed through an electronic Bulletin Board
System called Usenet.
P h r e a k i n g Crackers using technology to their advantage to get fre e
long-distance telephone calls.
Piracy Illegally copying or distributing software using the Internet.
Podcasting Technology making it easy for Internet users to create their
own audio recordings and then post them on the World Wide Web.
Privacy The state of being free from unauthorized access.
Privacy Laws Laws that deal with the right of individual privacy, criti-
cal to maintaining the quality of life that citizens in a free society expect.
Privacy laws generally maintain that an individual’s privacy shall not
be violated unless the company (or the government) can show some
compelling reason to do so—such as by providing evidence that the
safety of the company (or of the nation) is at risk.
290
Glossary

Prohibited Result One of the four elements on which Anglo-American
law bases criminal liability. This element means a result that brings
harm to property or to persons.
P r o t o c o l A set of rules governing how communications between two
programs has to take place to be considered valid. Because information
is sent over the Internet in information packets that are disassembled
and then reassembled, the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and the
Internet Protocol (IP) are critical for the proper transmission and routing
of these information packets.
Remote Retrieval A common use of the Internet today is for users to
s e a rch for and retrieve information located on remote computers. There
a re primarily three ways that this search and retrieval on the Internet
can be accomplished, one of which is using the File Transfer Pro t o c o l
(or FTP) to transfer files between systems over the network, particu-
larly from a host (that is, server) to a remote computer (that is, client).
C o m m e rcial browsers like Netscape, for example, have built-in FTP
c a p a b i l i t i e s .
Robot A robot uses a software program to search, catalog, and then or-
ganize information on the Internet.
Root Servers A group of thirteen servers worldwide that are responsi-
ble for the basic level of the domain name system.
Routers Specialized computer devices at the border of an Internet-con-
nected network that store a specialized map of the Internet and con-
tribute to this map by telling its neighbors about what it knows about its
part of the Internet.
S e c u r i t y Being protected from one’s adversaries, particularly fro m
those who would do one harm—intentionally, or otherwise, to property
or to a person. Information Technology security issues, in particular, in-
clude but are not limited to authentication, critical infrastructure protec-
tion, disaster re c o v e r y, intrusion detection and network management,
malicious code software protection, physical security of networks, secu-
rity policies, the sharing of rights and directories, and wireless security.
S e r v e r A computer program carrying out some task on behalf of a
user—such as delivering a Website page or delivering e-mail. Comput-
ers on which these server applications are run are also called servers.
Social Engineering A deceptive process, whereby computer crackers
“engineer” a social situation to trick others into giving them access to an
otherwise closed network.
Spammers Individuals who send unsolicited e-mails to targets over the
Internet for commercial purposes. There is typically a criminal intent to
defraud the targets or to get them interested in some Website they
would typically avoid—such as those dealing with child pornography.
Glossary
291

Spooﬁng A type of appropriation of an online user’s identity by others
online, causing fraud or attempted fraud in some cases, as well as criti-
cal infrastructure breakdowns in other cases.
Telnet A terminal emulation program, or a program based on that pro-
tocol, allowing online users to log onto the Internet. That is, Telnet is an
Internet application allowing a user’s Personal Computer (PC) to act as
a terminal to a remote system. Telnet requires that the user be familiar
with UNIX operating system software.
Trademark Law Trademark law governs disputes between business
owners over the names, logos, and other means they use to identify
their products and services in the marketplace. It is interesting to note
that more than 33,000,000 Internet domain names have been registered,
including tens of thousands of domain names apparently infringing
trademark and service marks.
Trade Secret Law Trade secret laws protect trade secrets. In the United
States, for example, a trade secret can be a number of things—devices,
formulas, ideas, and processes—that give the owner a distinct market
advantage. Trade secrets could be movie scripts, customer lists, or spe-
cial types of computer hard w a re. For that reason, the owner would
want to have some trade secret protection to ensure that the public or
competitors could not get the trade secrets by improperly accessing
ﬁles containing those secrets (that is, proprietary information) stored in
c o m p u t e r s .
Tr o j a n (general term) Given its moniker after the Trojan Horse of an-
cient Greek history, a Trojan is a particular kind of network software ap-
plication developed to stay hidden on the computer where it has been
installed. Like worms, Trojans generally serve malicious purposes and
a re in the “malware” classiﬁcation. Trojans sometimes access personal
information stored on home or business computers and then send it to a
remote party via the Internet. Alternatively, Trojans may serve merely as
a “backdoor” application. Trojans can also launch DoS attacks. A combi-
nation of ﬁrewalls and antivirus software should be used to protect net-
works against Trojans.
Trust A complex concept studied by scholars from a number of acade-
mic disciplines, deﬁned to be present in a business relationship when
one partner willingly depends on an exchanging partner in whom one
has conﬁdence. The term depend can take on a number of meanings in
this context, including the willingness of one partner to be vulnerable to
the actions of the other, or the expectation of one partner to receive ethi-
cally bound behaviors from the other partner. Security issues regarding
Information Technology center on maintaining trust in e-commerc e
transactions.
Trusted Operating System or Secure Operating System Trusted and
secure operating systems are signiﬁcant terms in the information secu-
292
Glossary

rity profession. The basis of this terminology is that clients can place
their trust in the people and in the organization operating a trusted sys-
tem. Technically, a trusted, or secure operating system refers to one la-
beled as “hardened OS” (hardened operating system) or “trusted OS”
( t rusted operating system). Although the primary objective of both of
these is to provide a secure operating environment, each takes a differ-
ent approach for meeting that objective.
U N I X A widely used computer operating system, UNIX has a stan-
dardized and well-publicized set of rules and interfaces governing the
interactions of humans and programs. Therefore, it is considered to be
an “open” operating system rather than a proprietary system (such as a
Microsoft product), in which these rules and interfaces are not so easily
accessible.
Virus An often harmful computer program that is capable of replicat-
ing itself by embedding a copy of itself in other computer programs. A
virus is often sent through attachments in e-mail.
VoIP (Voice over Internet Protocol) Technology allowing telephone
calls to be placed over networks like the Internet—making it less expen-
sive than conventional land lines to place long-distance phone calls.
W3C Founded by Tim Berners-Lee, the W3C is a consortium of indus-
try leaders wanting to promote standards for the World Wide We b ’ s
(that is, the Internet’s) continued development and for greater interoper-
ability between Internet products.
White Hats Computer hackers having good intentions; they tend to
hack into systems with authorization to ﬁnd ﬂaws in the computer net-
work that could be exploited by unwanted cyber- i n t ruders (called
crackers or the Black Hats).
W h o i s (general term) Whois is a TCP/IP utility allowing system ad-
ministrators to query compatible servers to get detailed information
about other Internet users.
Wide Area Network (WAN) A network like the Internet that connects
physically distant locations.
Wi p h i s h i n g An act executed when an individual covertly sets up a
wireless-enabled laptop computer or access point to get other wireless-
enabled laptop computers to associate with it before launching a crack
attack.
Wired Equivalency Protocol (WEP, or Wi-Fi technology standard)
W E P, a protocol adding security to wireless LANs based on the IEEE
802.11 Wi-Fi standard, is an OSI Data Link layer technology that can be
turned “off” and “on.” WEP was developed to give wireless networks
the same level of privacy protection as a wired network. WEP is formu-
lated on a security notion called RC4, using a combination of system-
generated values and secret user keys. The first implementations of
Glossary
293

WEP supported only 40-bit encryption and had a key length of 40 bits
and 24 additional bits of system-generated data, resulting in a 64-bit to-
tal. Since its inception, computer scientists have determined that 40-bit
WEP encryption is too weak—which is why product vendors today uti-
lize 128-bit encryption (having key lengths of 104 bits) or higher. Wire-
less network devices utilize WEP keys to encrypt the data stream for
communications over the wire.
Worms Self-replicating computer programs that are self-contained and
do not need to be part of another program to replicate. In contrast, a
virus attaches itself to and becomes part of another executable program.
X M L (or Extensible Markup Language) An index developed by Ti m
Bray that makes online auctions possible. XML allows computer pro-
grammers to attach “tags” or universal codes to distinguish, say, busi-
ness names from telephone numbers.
Zombie A computer program awaiting a signal from a cracker to bom-
bard a particular Website. On command, multiple zombies can simulta-
neously transmit thousands or more of fake requests for information to
the targeted Website. As the computer tries to handle these requests, it
soon runs out of memory. It either slows down dramatically or stops al-
together.
294
Glossary

Index
295
Abdullah, Abraham, 109–110, 111
Academic Open Internet Journal,
251–252
Access Controls, 285
Achenon’s Alley, 209
Actus Reus, 285
Adobe eBook Reader, 115
Advancing Technology,
University of, 238
Adware, 168
AEA. See American Electronics
Association
African Internet Community, 223
AfriNIC. See African Internet
Community
AI. See Artiﬁcial Intelligence
AirPatrol Enterprise, 86
Akkari, Ahmed, 121–122
Aladdin-Esafe, 271
Algorithms, 285
Alle Kennis van de Wereld:
Biography of Paul Otlet, 277
Allen, Paul, 6, 145, 178
Amazon.com, 15, 152
Amber Alerts, 23, 90
America Online, 9, 38, 147
American Electronics Association,
223–224
American Library Association v. the
United States, 91–92
American Registry for Internet
Numbers, 16, 153, 224
Amnesty International, 224
Ancheta, Jeanson James, 34 
Anna Kournikova virus, 20, 157
Anonymous Remailers, 80, 285
Anticybersquatting Consumer
Protection Act, 195
Antivirus Software, 285
Websites, 270–271
AOL. See America Online
Apache Software Foundation and
servers, 15, 152
APNIC. See Asia Paciﬁc Network
Information Centre
Apple Computer, 6, 145
and Intel chips, 169
iPod, 158
See also Jobs, Steve; Macintosh
computers; Wozniak, Steve
ApplyYourself software, 70
ARIN. See American Registry for
Internet Numbers
ARPA. See U.S. Advanced
Research Projects Agency
ARPAnet, 1–2, 144
cessation of, 149
deﬁned, 285
The Art of Deception, 248
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 1–2, 144
Ashcroft, John, 75
Asia Paciﬁc Network Information
Centre, 224–225
Attendant Circumstances, 285

Auction sites
and censorship, 134–135
fraud and cyber-vigilantism,
88–89
Audios, 275–277
Baidu.com, 32, 136, 137–138, 169
Ballmer, Steve, 178
Bank of America, 59–60, 85, 167
Bank One, 59–60, 85
Baran, Paul, 4
Bardeen John, 3
BASIC language, 6, 145
BBS Documentary Interview
Collection: John Sheetz, 279
BBS Documentary Interview
Collection: Loren Jones, 279
BBS Documentary Interview
Collection: Mark Nasstrom, 278
BBS Documentary Interview
Collection: Minor Threat, 278
BBS Documentary Interview
Collection: Philip J. Kaplan,
277–278
BBS Documentary Interview
Collection: Rich Schinnell, 279
BBS Documentary Interview
Collection: Ryan Brown, 279
BBS Documentary Interview
Collection: Ted Beatie, 278
BBS Documentary Interview
Collection: Tracer 
(ACiD), 278
BBSs. See Bulletin Board Systems
Bechtolsheim, Andy, 7, 8
Bell Telephone Laboratories
and transistors, 3
and UNIX, 4, 144
Bennett, Charles, 9, 147
Berners-Lee, Tim, 12, 42–43, 149
biographical sketch, 175
Bezos, Jeffrey, 15, 152
Biometrics, 71
Black Hat Hackers, 286
BlackBerry, 97–98, 170
Blackout of 2003, 24, 161
Blaster worm, 24, 25, 161, 164
Blogs, 286
Boggs, David, 5, 144
Books, 242–251
Boston Globe (Website on child
sexual abuse), 273
Botnets, 34
Bots, 93
Brassard, Gilles, 9, 147
Brattain, Walter, 3
Bray, Tim, 16, 154
biographical sketch, 173–174
Brilliant, Larry, 174–175
Brin, Sergey, 26, 33, 164
biographical sketch, 174–175
See also Google; Page, Larry
BT Prestel, 119, 147
Buen, Michael, 156
BUGTRAQ, 13, 150
Bulletin Board Systems, 6, 145
Burns, Eric, 17, 154
Byte Magazine Online, 256
C language, 5, 185, 286
C#, 159
Cailliau, Robert, 12, 149
Callahan, Laura, 106
CAN-SPAM Act of 2003, 25–26,
111, 163, 201–202
Canada, 118–119
Carlson, Allan Eric, 205
Carnivore, 27, 62, 164
CCIA. See Computer and
Communications Industry
Association
Censorship, 106–107, 132–133
and auction sites, 134–135
China, 135–137
explanations for, 133–135
and online games, 134
and pornography, 133–134
Russia, 137
and vulnerable groups, 
133–134
296
Index

Center for Democracy and
Technology, 225
Center for Public Integrity, 197
Cerf, Vinton, 6–7
biographical sketch, 175–176
and Google, 176
CERT. See CERT Coordination
Center Software Engineering
Institute; Computer
Emergency Response Team;
U.S.-Computer Emergency
Response Team
CERT Coordination Center
Software Engineering
Institute, 225–226
Chaos Computer Club, 149
Chasin, Scott, 13, 150
Check Point, 272
Chen, Lisa, 22, 159
Chicoine, Michael, 208–209
Child cyber-pornography, 90–91,
93–95
Mitchel case, 210–211
Websites dealing with, 273–274
See also Children’s Internet
Protection Act of 2000;
PROTECT Act of 2000
Child Exploitation Tracking, 94
Child Online Protection Act, 133
Child Pornography Prevention
Act of 1996, 15–16, 23, 91, 153
Children’s Internet Protection Act
of 2000, 200
Children’s Online Privacy
Protection Act of 1998, 91–92
China
access to Internet, 106
censorship of Internet, 106–107,
135–137, 164, 169–170
economic conditions, 131
and Google, 171
internatonal business reactions
to censorship, 136–137
and Internet, 26–27, 32–33
ChoicePoint, Inc., 59, 85, 167
Choudary, Anjem, 127
Christiensen, Ward, 6, 145
Chuck Harder Interviews Eric
Jackson, 275
CIPA. See Children’s Internet
Protection Act of 2000
Cisco Systems, 8, 146–147, 272
Citibank, 59–60, 85, 151
Clipper, 151
Code, 286
Code Red worm, 20, 157
Cohen, Fred, 8, 146
Commodore 64, 7, 145–146
Communication modes, 38–41
Communications Decency Act, 37,
134, 152
Commwarrior virus, 29, 167
CompuServe, 38
Computer and Communications
Industry Association, 226
Computer Emergency Response
Team, 11, 148
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act
of 1986, 10, 11, 68, 82,
113–114, 148, 149, 191
Computer Misuse Act of 1990
(UK), 10, 119–120
Computer Professionals for Social
Responsibility, 226–227
Computer Underground, 2, 10, 11,
183
Computer viruses. See Viruses
Computers
networking, 4
1940s–1960s, 3, 143
1970s, 4–7, 144–145
1980s, 7–12
1990s, 12, 149
number of systems in use
(1970), 144
See also Personal computers
Computers & Texts, 256
Condor. See Mitnick, Kevin
Contemporary World Issues,
249
Index
297

Convention on Cybercrime
(Council of Europe), 21, 68,
120–121, 159, 286
Cook, Stephen, 4, 144
biographical sketch, 176
Cookies, 60
Cook’s Theorem, 4–5, 144, 176
COPPA. See Children’s Online
Privacy Protection Act of
1998
Copyright. See Digital Millennium
Copyright Act of 1998;
Intellectual Property Rights
Corbato, Fernando, 186
Corley, Eric, 8, 146, 155
Coyote Communications, 78–79
CPPA. See Child Pornography
Prevention Act of 1996
CPSR. See Computer Professionals
for Social Responsibility
Crack program, 13–14, 150, 151
Crackers, 6, 10, 33, 167. See also
Maﬁaboy; Mitnick, Kevin
Cracking, 286
Creditcards.com, 156
Criminal hackers, 147
Cryptography, 4–5, 6, 9
40-bit limit, 153
See also PGP (Pretty Good
Privacy) encryption
program; Secure transactions
CU. See Computer Underground
Cuba: We Want the Web!, 275
Curry, Adam, 49–50
Cyber Security Enhancement Act
of 2002, 22, 168, 197–198,
202–203
Cyber Security Research and
Development Act of 2002,
198–199
Cyber-apocalypse, 156, 157, 
161
Cyber-crime, 18–22, 73, 156
See also Botnets; Convention on
Cybercrime (Council of
Europe); Trojans; Viruses;
Worms
Cyber-crime
comparison with conventional
crime, 76–80
court cases, 203–211
and electrical distribution
systems, 21, 24, 157, 161
four elements of criminal
liability, 75–76
and harm to persons, 74
and harm to property, 73–74
and infrastructure, 23–25,
160–161
and online gaming, 80–84
technical nonoffenses, 74–75
and wireless networks, 29–30,
167
by women, 22
Cyber-espionage, 149
Cyber-Ethics, 286
Cyber-pornography, 74, 89–95,
214t.
deﬁned, 286
Websites dealing with, 
273–274
Cyber-stalking, 74, 76–80, 286
Cyber-terrorism, 35, 74, 158, 166
deﬁned, 286–287
evolving deﬁnition of, 128–129
See also Mohammed cartoons
incident
Cyber-vigilantism, 74
deﬁned, 287
and online auction fraud, 88–89
Cyber-war, 156
Indonesia vs. Malaysia, 28–29,
166
CyberAngels, 15, 78, 94, 152, 227,
286
Website, 273
Cybercrime, 247
Cybercrime: Security and
Surveillance in the Information
Age, 247
298
Index

Cybercrime: The Investigation,
Prosecution, and Defense of a
Computer-Related Crime, 244
Cybercrime: Vandalizing the
Information Society, 245
Cybercrime and Cyberterrorism, 243
Cybercrime and Security, 243
CyberSnitch, 79
Cyberspace, 8, 146, 286
Cybertip.ca, 94
The CyberTipline, 273
de Wit, Jan, 20, 157
Decipher, deﬁned, 287
Decryption, 287
DeCSS, 17–18, 95–96, 115, 116–177,
155
different nations’ reactions,
117–118
See also Johansen, Johan
Def Con, 150, 185
Denial-of-service attacks, 19, 30,
35, 155, 156, 167–168
deﬁned, 287
See also Maﬁaboy
Department of Ongoing Digital
Situations, 275
DH, 6, 145, 287
The Diary of a Network
Administrator, 280–281
Difﬁe, Whitﬁeld, 6, 145
Difﬁe-Hellman Public-Key
Agorithm. See DH
Digital certiﬁcates (keys), 71–72
Digital divide, 107
Digital Evidence and Computer
Crime, 243
Digital Humanities Quarterly, 252
Digital Millennium Copyright Act
of 1998, 17, 18, 95–96, 114,
130, 153, 193
court cases, 114–117
Digital Rights Management
software, 96–97
Digital versatile discs. See DVDs
Directory Search Engines, 287
Distance education. See Online
education
DMCA. See Digital Millennium
Copyright Act of 1998
DNS. See Domain Name System
The Doctor Will Google You Now
with Thomas Lee, Susan Love
and Deborah Wexler, 277–278
Documentaries, 277–281
Domain Name System, 43, 287
Domain names
extensions, 42, 43
ﬁrst, 9, 147
obtaining, 42–44
Domains, 43–44
Domestic Security Enhancement
Act of 2003, 197
Dual-core multi-processing, 50–51
Durst, Fred, 167
DVD X Copy, 96
DVD-Jon. See Johansen, Johan
DVDs, 16, 153
eBay, 33–34, 184–184. See also
Omidyar, Pierre
E–commerce, 45, 103
Education and the Internet,
103–104
EFF. See Electronic Frontier
Foundation
18 U.S.C., 191–191
EJournal, 252
ElcomSoft, 20–21, 115–116, 185.
See also Sklyarov, Dmitry
Electronic Frontier Foundation,
20–21, 96, 97, 157, 185. See
also Wozniak, Steve
Electronic Privacy Information
Center, 228
E-mail, 38
deﬁned, 287
invention of, 4, 186
See also Tomlinson, Ray
EMC Corporation, 196
Index
299

Emoticons, 8, 146
Encryption, 287
Encyclopedia of Rape, 250–251
Enterprise Strategy Group, 168
EPIC. See Electronic Privacy
Information Center
Ethernet, 5, 144, 287–288
European Union Directive for the
Enforcement of Intellectual
Property Rights, 132
Extensible Markup Language. See
XML
E-zines, 267–270
Fahlman, Scott, 8, 146
Fairchild Camera, 3
Fanning, Shawn, 18, 155
biographical sketch, 176–177
See also Napster; Parker, Sean
Farmer, Dan, 67
fatso.a worm, 29, 167
FBI. See Federal Bureau of
Investigation
Federal Bureau of Investigation,
217
Federal Trade Commission, 163,
218
File Transfer Protocol, 5, 40, 145
deﬁned, 287
Films, 282–283
Filo, David, 14, 151
biographical sketch, 177–178
See also Yahoo; Yang, Jerry
Filters, 91
Financial Anti-Terrorism Act, 
158
Firewalls
deﬁned, 288
Websites, 271–272
Fixes, 288
Flooding, 73, 288
Fraud, 87–89, 203
Pae case, 205–206
wireless service subscriptions,
64
See also Computer Fraud and
Abuse Act of 1986; Internet
Fraud Complaint Center
Free Software Foundation, 9, 147,
228–229
Frontier justice, 110–111
F-Secure, 271
FSF. See Free Software Foundation
FTC. See Federal Trade
Commission
FTP. See File Transfer Protocol
Gates, William H. (Bill), 6, 145
biographical sketch, 178–179
See also Microsoft
General Services Administration,
59–60, 167
Gibson, William, 8, 146
Gigabyte (cracker), 159
Global Information Grid, 223
The Globalization of Time and Space
5 of 9, 281
GNU, 8–9, 147
Gold, Steven, 10, 119, 147, 148
Goldstein, Emmanuel. See Corley,
Eric
Google, 33–34, 44, 170
and China, 137, 171
and intellectual property rights,
25, 162
and subpoenas of information,
171
initial public offering, 26, 164
See also Brin, Sergey; Page,
Larry
Gopher control, 40
Gorman, Sean, 23, 160–161
Gorshkov, Vasiliy, 204
Gosling, James, 14, 151
biographical sketch, 179–180
See also Java
Government regulation of
Internet, 61–62
Governments Try to Control
Internet, 275–276
300
Index

Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999,
18, 154, 193–195
Grove, Andy, 143
Guillot v. Istek Corporation, 119
Guzman, Onel de, 156
Hack Attacks Encyclopedia, 244
Hacked, Attacked, and Abused,
246–247
Hacker Ethic, 8, 146
The Hacker Ethic and the Spirit of
the Information Age, 246
Hackers, 10, 148
deﬁned, 288
Hackers, 282
Hackers Beware, 244–245
Hackers: Heroes of the Computer
Revolution, 8, 146, 246
Hacking Cyberspace, 245–246
The Hacking of America, 249
Hacktivism, 14–15, 74, 151
and Communications Decency
Act, 152
deﬁned, 288
Halo, 48
Handhelds, 35
The Happy Hacker, 247
Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act of 1996,
192–193
Hellman, Martin, 6, 145
Henry, Paul, 23, 160
Hewlett-Packard Company, 
196
Hilton, Paris, 165, 169
HIPAA. See Health Insurance
Portability and
Accountability Act of 1996
Homeland Security Act of 2002,
159, 197–198
Homeland Security Department.
See U.S. Department of
Homeland Security
HTML, 2, 15, 40–41
deﬁned, 288
HTTP, 15, 41
deﬁned, 288
Human Rights Watch, 229
Hyper Text Markup Language.
See HTML
HyperText Transfer Protocol. See
HTTP
IBM PC, 7, 145
IC3. See Internet Crime Complaint
Center
ICANN. See Internet Corporation
for Assigned Names and
Numbers
ICDs, 32
Idaho State University, 238
Identity
authentication, 71–72
questions of, 70
Identity theft, 28, 64, 84–85
Abdullah case, 109–110
deﬁned, 288
Identity Theft, 248
IEEE. See U.S. Institute of
Electrical and Electronic
Engineers
IETF. See Internet Engineering
Task Force
IFCC. See Internet Fraud
Complaint Center
IM. See Instant messaging
Implantable cardioverter-
deﬁbrillators. See ICDs
Improving Our Ability to Fight
Cybercrime, 245
India
anti-terrorism training, 170
economic conditions, 132
INDUCE Act, 97
Information Ethics, 62
Information Packet, 288
Information Research, 252–253
Information Society Journal,
253
Information Technology, 2, 144
Index
301

Information Technology
Association of America, 229
Ingram Micro, 205–206
INRIA, 42
Instant messaging, 45–46
Integrated circuits, 3, 143
Intel Corporation, 3, 143
Intellectual Property, 289
Intellectual Property Rights, 25,
35, 62
Europe, 132
infringement deﬁned, 288–289
infringements, 74, 95–98
piracy tolerance, 130–131
Trowbridge-Chicoine case,
208–209
and World Intellectual Property
Organization, 130
Intelligence community, 222–223
International Guide to Combating
Cybercrime, 251
International Journal on Digital
Libraries, 253
Internet
and access to personal
information, 27–28, 29,
57–58, 164–166, 167
connected countries in Asia,
213t.
connectivity in U.S. educational
environments, 212t.–213t.
as decentralized group of
redundant computer links,
37
deﬁned, 1, 289
founding of, 1–2, 146
growth of use in 2000s, 26–27,
32
information not available, 106
initial business access to, 12,
150
and intelligence community,
223
limits to access, 106–107
1990s, 12–18, 149–156
number of users (1980), 7
number of users (1989), 12
number of users (1993), 13
numbers of users by country,
107–108
pharmacy, 207–208
world use and prevalence, 211t.
See also Intranets; World Wide
Web
Internet addresses. See URLs
Internet and Higher Education,
253–254
The Internet and the Law, 281
Internet Corporation for Assigned
Names and Numbers, 176,
229–230
Internet Crime Complaint Center,
89, 218
Internet Engineering Task Force,
10, 148, 230
Internet Fraud Complaint Center,
89
Internet Galaxy, 243
The Internet Journal of Allied Health
Sciences and Practice, 254
Internet Protocol. See IP
Internet Public Library, 230–231
Internet Relay Chat, 39
Internet security, 30–31, 63
academic degrees in, 237–239
checklist, 65–66
deﬁned, 63
and ﬁle-sharing, 64
international consortium, 162
proposed solutions, 66–68
standards, 68
zones, 67–68
Internet Security Systems, 272
Internet Service Providers, 16, 38,
153
deﬁned, 289
Internet Society, 231
Internet Society, 242
Internet usage policies, 58,
289
302
Index

Internet use
developing countries, 108
and gender, 109
and life stage, 109
and socioeconomic status, 108
and urban vs. rural
populations, 108
Internet videoconferencing, 48
Internic, 44, 289
Interview of Tom Munnecke for Pew
Internet Survey, 276
Intranets, 42
deﬁned, 2, 289
use of, 2
Intrusion detection systems
deﬁned, 289
Websites, 272
Intrusion Recovery, 289
IP, 6–7, 37, 145
deﬁned, 289
IP Address, 43, 289–290
IPL. See Internet Public Library
iPod, 158
IRC. See Internet Relay Chat
ISOC. See Internet Society
ISPs. See Internet Service
Providers
IT. See Information Technology
ITAA. See Information Technology
Association of America
Ivanov, Alexy, 204
Jacobsen, Nicolas, 165–166
James Madison University, 238
Jaschan, Sven, 164
Java, 7, 14, 151, 179. See also
Gosling, James
Java Developer’s Journal, 256
Jaynes, Jeremy, 31, 111, 168
Jim Greenﬁeld: Is the Government
Watching You?, 276
Jobs, Steve, 6, 145
biographical sketch, 180
See also Apple Computer;
Macintosh computers; Pixar
Animation Studios; Wozniak,
Steve
Johansen, Johan, 17–18, 116–117,
155
biographical sketch, 180–181
See also DeCSS
Journal of Internet Banking and
Commerce, 254
Journal of Internet Technology and
Secured Transactions, 254–255
Journals, 251–256
directory of, 274
scholarly and literary (online),
261–267
Joy, Bill, 7
JuniorXDance Movie 2, 282
Jyllands-Posten, 122
Kahn, Robert, 7, 175
kelvir.b worm, 29, 167
Khosla, Vinod, 7
Kilby, Jack, 3
Kinderconsument, 93
Kleinrock, Leonard, 4
Koch, Karl, 11, 149
Kolowich, Mark, 207–208
Kutt, Mers, 5, 145
biographical sketch, 181–182
See also Personal computers
Lopht, 154
LACNIC. See Latin America and
Caribbean Internet
Addresses Registry
LambdaMOO, 80–82
Lamo, Adrian, 206–207
LANs. See Local area networks
Lashkar-e-Toiba, 166
Latin America and Caribbean
Internet Addresses Registry,
231–232
Legal issues, 110–112
Levin, Vladimir, 14, 151
Levy, Steven, 8, 146
LexisNexis Group, 84, 167
Index
303

Li, Robin, 32–33, 136, 169
Libraries and the Internet, 91–92,
104
Lineage, 22
Linux, 13, 16, 149–150, 151, 153
deﬁned, 290
source code accessed by
cracker, 162
Linux Journal, 257
Listservs, 39
deﬁned, 290
Liverpool, University of, 238–239
Local area networks, 2
deﬁned, 290
standards, 5
Love Bug virus, 156
Luman, Jonathan, 207
Macintosh computers
and Intel, 31–32
See also Apple Computer; 
Jobs, Steve; Wozniak, Steve
Maﬁaboy, 19, 118–119, 155
biographical sketch, 182
Magazines, 256–258
directory of, 274
Malicious Code, 290
Manchester Metropolitan
University, 106
Markoff, John, 152
Martial Law 9/11, 279–280
Mary Washington College, 238
Mazu Networks, 168
McAfee, John, 13, 24, 150, 161
MCM/70, 181–182
McNealy, Scott, 7
Meinel, Carolyn, 157
Melissa virus, 18, 154, 204–205
Mellon Bank, 59–60, 85
Mens Rea, 290
Metcalfe, Robert, 5, 144
Michelangelo virus, 13, 150
Michigan Telecommunications and
Technology Law Review,
255
Micro Computer Machines, 5, 145,
181
Microsoft Corporation
and China, 136–137
and chip-based security, 31, 169
cracking of corporate network,
156
and cyber-crime, 19, 25, 27,
162–163, 165
founding of, 6
Intranet software, 2
technical support to software
developers, 171
Windows 95, 152
See also Allen, Paul; Ballmer,
Steve; Gates, William H.
(Bill)
Microsoft Network, 38
MIT Laboratory for Computer
Science, 42
Mitchel, Gregory, 210–211
Mitnick, Kevin, 11, 148, 152
biographical sketch, 182–183
MMORPG (Massively
Multiplayer Online Role-
Playing Games), 290
Mobile services. See Wireless
networks
Mohammed cartoons incident,
121–123
and community standards
tolerance levels, 123, 125–128
and cyber-terrorism, 128–129
international reactions,
123–125, 127–128
legal issues, 125
MOO, 290
Moore, Gordon, 3, 143, 144
Moore’s Law, 3, 143, 144, 290
MoRE, 155
Morris, Robert, Jr., and Morris
worm, 10–11, 148
Mozilla Firefox, 44
Mr. Bungle, 82
MSN Messenger, 167
304
Index

MUD
deﬁned, 290
object-oriented, 80–81
MyDoom worm, 26, 163–164
Napster, 18, 154–155. See also
Fanning, Shawn; Parker,
Sean
Nara Bank, 204
National Center for Missing and
Exploited Children, 232
National Center for
Supercomputing
Applications, 5, 144
National Conference for Media
Reform, 280
National High-Tech Crime Unit
(Britain), 24, 162, 232–233
National Information
Infrastructure Protection Act
of 1996, 15, 113, 152–153, 191,
219
National Infrastructure Security
Coordination Center (UK),
162
National Security Agency, 219
National Technology Readiness
Survey, 165
NCSA. See National Center for
Supercomputing
Applications
Neidorf, Craig, 9, 147
Net Café (television series), 283
The Net, 282
NetScreen, 272
Network Associates, 271
Network Magazine Online, 257
Network Security, 247
Networks
linked to Internet, 37–38
See also Local area networks;
Wireless networks
Networks and Netwars, 242
Neumann, Peter G., 156
The New Face of War, 242–243
The New Hacker’s Dictionary,
248
New York Times, 206
Newsgroups, 39, 290
Newspapers, online, 259–261
NeXT Software, 180. See also Jobs,
Steve
Nexus, 12
NHTCU. See National High-Tech
Crime Unit (Britain)
NIIPA. See National Information
Infrastructure Protection Act
of 1996
NIMDA worm/virus, 20, 158
NIPC. See National Information
Infrastructure Protection Act
of 1996
NISCC. See National
Infrastructure Security
Coordination Center (UK)
Nortel, 272
Northern Virginia Technology
Council, 233
Noyce, Robert, 3, 143
NSA. See National Security
Agency
NTP, Inc., 35, 36, 97–98, 170,
196–197
NTRS. See National Technology
Readiness Survey
NVTC. See Northern Virginia
Technology Council
Obscenity, 125–126
OCIPEP. See Ofﬁce of Critical
Infrastructure Protection and
Emergency Preparedness
(Canada)
Ofﬁce of Critical Infrastructure
Protection and Emergency
Preparedness (Canada), 162,
219–220
Omidyar, Pierre
biographical sketch, 183–184
See also eBay
Index
305

Online education, 103–104
and false degrees, 105–106
Online gaming, 21–22, 158
and censorship, 134
and cyber-crime, 22–23, 
80–84
Online security. See also
Cryptography; PGP (Pretty
Good Privacy) encryption
program; Secure transactions
Online services, 38
Online voting, 47
Ontario, University of, Institute of
Technology, 239
Open Source in Educational IT,
276
Open Text Company, 173
Operation Cyber Loss, 203
Oxford English Dictionary, 
173
Packet switching, 4, 37
Pae, Thomas, 205–206
Page, Larry, 26, 33, 164
biographical sketch, 174–175
See also Brin, Sergey; Google
Parker, Sean, 18, 155. See also
Fanning, Shawn; Napster
Parson, Jeffrey Lee, 164
Patches, 288
Patent law, 196–197
Patriot Act II, 197. See also USA
Patriot Act of 2001
PayPal, 204
PC WORLD.COM, 257
Perl Journal, 257
Perry, Laurence, 105
Personal computers, 5–6, 7, 145.
See also Kutt, Mers
Personal Information Protection
and Electronic Documents
Act (Canada), 61
PGP (Pretty Good Privacy)
encryption program, 13,
71–72, 150
Pharmacy sites. See under Internet
Pharming, 86–87
Phishing, 31, 86, 168
Phrack, 9, 147
Phreaking, 74
deﬁned, 290
PI. See Privacy International
PIPEDA. See Personal Information
Protection and Electronic
Documents Act (Canada)
Piracy, 290
Pirates of Silicon Valley, 282–283
Pixar Animation Studios, 180. See
also Jobs, Steve
Plumtree Software, 2
Podcasting, 49–50, 290
Podcasting for Fun and Proﬁt,
276–277
Polly, Jean Armour, 13, 150
Privacy
and corporate Internet usage
policies, 58
deﬁned, 58–59, 290
issues, 59–60
laws deﬁned, 290
policies, 59
proposed solutons, 60–62
Privacy International, 233
Prohibited Result, 291
Project Horizon, 93
Project Safebid, 135
PROTECT Act of 2002, 23, 90–91,
160, 199
Protocol, deﬁned, 291
PSEPC. See Public Safety and
Emergency Preparedness
Canada
Public Safety and Emergency
Preparedness Canada,
219–220
Public-Access Computer Systems
Review, 255–256
Publishing on the Web, 41–42
Publist.com, 274
Puffer, Stefan, 23, 159
306
Index

RadioTarahumara.com, 170
RAINN. See Rape, Abuse, and
Incest National Network
Rand Institute, 4
Rape. See Virtual rape
Rape, 251
The Rape of Nanjing, 244
Rape, Abuse, and Incest National
Network, 234
Readings in CyberEthics, 251
Realfrench.net, 106
Recon 2005, 280
Recovery, 242
Regualtion of Child Pornography
on the Internet (Website), 273
Remote Electronic Voting, 36
Remote Retrieval, 40–41, 291
Reno v. ACLU, 37
Research in Motion (RIM), 108.
See also RIM, Ltd.
Réseaux IP Européens, 234
Richmond Journal of Law and
Technology, 256
RIM, Ltd., 35, 36, 97–98, 170,
196–197
RIPE NCC. See Réseaux IP
Européens
Rise of the Network Society, 244
Ritchie, Dennis, 4, 5, 144
biographical sketch, 184–185
See also C language; UNIX
Robots, 291
Rogers, Kirk, 209–210
Root Servers, 291
Routers, 291
RSA Security, 167
SafeTeens, 79
SANS (SysAdmin, Audit,
Network, Security) Institute,
162, 234–235
Sarbanes-Oxley Act, 28, 31, 87–88,
166, 168
Sasser worm, 164
SATAN, 67
Scene of the Cybercrime, 250
Schifreen, Robert, 10, 119, 147, 
148
Schwartz, Randal, 13–14, 150, 151
Search engines, 44
robots and directories, 44
Secrets and Lies, 250
Secure SHell. See SSH
Secure transactions, 6, 145
and Cook’s Theorem, 176
See also Cryptography, PGP
(Pretty Good Privacy)
encryption program
SecureID, 71
Security, deﬁned, 291. See also
Internet security
Sensenbrenner, James, 113
Serabian, John, 156
Servers, 291
SHARCNET, 40
Shared Hierarchical Academic
Research Computing
Network. See SHARCNET
Shimomura, Tsutomu, 152, 183
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol, 8,
146
Sims Online, 80
64-bit processors, 51
Sklyarov, Dmitry, 20–21, 115–116,
157
biographical sketch, 185
Skovorodnikov, Andrei, 137
Smart cards, 71
Smileys, 8, 146
S/MIME, 72
Smith, David, 18, 154, 204–205
SMTP. See Simple Mail Transfer
Protocol
Snocap, 177
SoBigF virus, 24, 25, 161
Social Engineering, 291
Song swapping, 26, 163
SonicWall, 272
Sony, 96–97
Sophos, 271
Index
307

Spam, 25–26, 31, 33, 69–70
Carlson case, 205
FTC database, 163
Jaynes case, 111, 168
Rogers case, 209–210
See also CAN-SPAM Act of 2003
SpamCop, 79
Spammers, 291
Speakeasy Network, 204
Spooﬁng, 73
deﬁned, 292
Spyware, 168
SSH, 152
Stalking, Harassment, and Murder
in the Workplace, 249
Stallman, Richard, 8–9, 147
Star Wars: Episode III—Revenge of
the Sith, 131
Stop Identity Theft Now, 280
Suess, Randy, 6, 145
Summer-Con, 148
Sun Microsystems, 7–8, 146
and Java, 14, 151, 179
Surﬁng the net, 13, 150
Symantec Corporation, 168,
235–236
Website, 271
Symbolics, Inc., 9, 147
Takedown, 250
Tax fraud, 207
TCP, 6–7, 145
TCP/IP, 175
TechWeb, 257
Television on the Web, 50
Television series, 283
Telnet, 40, 146
deﬁned, 292
Terror in the Mind of God, 246
Terrorism Act of 2000 (UK), 120
Thomas Leighton, 281
Thompson, Ken, 4, 144, 184
biographical sketch, 185–186
See also UNIX
Time Warner, 33–34
Tischler, Randy, 9, 147
Tomlinson, Ray, 4
biographical sketch, 186
See also E-mail
Torture Survivors Network,
273–274
Torvald, Linus, 13, 149–150
Trade Secret Law, 292
Trademark Law, 195–196, 292
Transistors, 3, 143
Transmission Control Protocol.
See TCP
Transnational Criminal
Organizations, Cybercrime, and
Money Laundering, 248–249
The Transnational Dimension of
Cybercrime and Terrorism, 245
Trend Micro, 271
Tripware, 272
Trojans, 34–35 
deﬁned, 292
Trowbridge, William, 208–209
TRS-80, 7, 145–146
Trust, 69
deﬁned, 69, 292
proposed solutions, 71–73
and spam, 69–70
Trust seals, 60–61
Trusted Operating System or
Secure Operating System,
292–293
2600: The Hacker Quarterly, 8,
95–96, 115, 146
and DeCSS, 155
Ubiquity, 258
Uniform Resource Locators. See
URLs
United Kingdom, 119–120
United States v. Carlson, 205
United States v. Gorshkov, 204
United States v. J.B. Weasel, 82–83
United States v. Kolowich, 207–208
United States v. Lamo, 206–207
United States v. Luman, 207
308
Index

United States v. Mitchel, 210–211
United States v. Pae, 205–206
United States v. Rogers, 209–210
United States v. Smith, 204–205
United States v. Thomas, 126–127
United States v. Trobridge and
Chicoine, 208–209
UNIX, 4, 144, 146
deﬁned, 293
See also Ritchie, Dennis;
Thompson, Ken
URLs, 12
and ARIN, 16, 153
US-CERT. See U.S.-Computer
Emergency Response Team
U.S. Advanced Research Projects
Agency, 1–2
U.S. Bank, 59–60, 85
U.S. Council of International
Business, 236
U.S. Department of Homeland
Security, 35–36, 162, 220–221
U.S. Department of Justice,
221–222
U.S. Internet Caucus, 236
U.S. Internet Service Provider
Association, 236–237
U.S.-Computer Emergency
Response Team, 24, 161–162,
220
USA Patriot Act of 2001, 10, 21,
74–75, 113, 148, 158, 197
USCIB. See U.S. Council of
International Business
USISPA. See U.S. Internet Service
Provider Association
Venema, Wieste, 67
Virtual property, 83–84
Virtual rape, 80–82
Viruses, 20, 73
deﬁned, 293
introduction of term, 8, 146
See also Anna Kournikova
virus; Commwarrior virus;
Love Bug virus; Melissa
virus; Michelangelo virus;
NIMDA worm/virus; SoBigF
virus; Worms
Voice over Internet Protocol. See
VoIP
VoIP, 47–48, 108
deﬁned, 293
W3C, 41–42, 175, 237
deﬁned, 293
protocol, 41
War Games, 283
Warriors of the Net, 283
Watchguard, 272
Weaving the Web, 175
Web Hacking, 247
Web Security, Privacy, and
Commerce, 245
Websites, creating, 42
Webster’s New World Dictionary,
249–250
Welchia worm, 24, 161
WEP. See Wired Equivalency
Protocol
White Hats, 293
Whois, 44
deﬁned, 293
Wi-Fi standards, 49
Wide Area Networks, 293
Wikipedia, 106–107, 170
WindoWatch, 258
Windows 95, 152
Winter, Alex, 177
Wiphishing, 86
deﬁned, 293
WIPO. See World Intellectual
Property Organization
Wippit, 177
Wired Equivalency Protocol,
293–294
WiredSafety Organization, 274
Wireless networks, 49
cracking, 165–166
device theft, 64
Index
309

Wireless networks, (continued)
and drive-by cracking, 29–30,
167
and security, 63
subscription fraud, 64
and trust, 72
Wireless Security, 248
World Express RX, 207–208
World Intellectual Property
Organization, 130
World Wide Web, 1
current uses, 45
ﬁrst domain name, 9, 147
founding of, 12, 149
and Java, 14, 151
number of hosts (1996), 15, 
153
use at work, 169
Web 2.0, 46–47
See also Internet
World Wide Web Consortium. See
W3C
Worms, 10–11, 20, 31, 73, 168
deﬁned, 294
See also Blaster worm; Code
Red worm; fatso.a worm;
kelvir.b worm; Morris, 
Robert, Jr., and Morris worm;
MyDoom worm; NIMDA
worm/virus; Sasser worm;
Viruses; Welchia worm
Wozniak, Steve, 6, 145
biographical sketch, 186–187
See also Apple Computer;
Electronic Frontier
Foundation; Jobs, Steve;
Macintosh computers
Xerox Corporation, 5, 144
XML, 16–17, 154, 173
deﬁned, 294
Yahoo, 14, 33, 151. See also Filo,
David; Yang, Jerry
Yang, Jerry, 14, 151
biographical sketch, 177–178
See also Filo, David; Yahoo
Ylonen, Tatu, 152
Y2K, 18
ZD Net, 258
Zimmermann, Phillip, 13, 150
Zinn, Herbert, 11, 149
Zombies, 294
Zuccarini, John, 195–196
310
Index

About the Author
Bernadette H. Schell is dean of the Faculty of Business and Information
Technology at Ontario’s only laptop university, the University of On-
tario Institute of Technology in Oshawa, Ontario, Canada. Dr. Schell is
the 2000 recipient of Laurentian University’s Research Excellence
Award. Formerly the director of the School of Business and Administra-
tion at Laurentian University, Dr. Schell authored four books with Quo-
rum Books on organizational and personal stress, corporate leader stress
and emotional dysfunction, stalking, and computer hacker pro f i l i n g .
She has also coauthored Cybercrime: A Reference Handbook, part of ABC-
CLIO’s Contemporary World Issues series. Dr. Schell's We b s t e r’s New
World Hacker Dictionary, published by Wiley, was released in September
2006. Dr. Schell also serves on a number of boards, including the Greater
Toronto Marketing Alliance.
311

