 
 
of The Growth Mindset

About Goals Infinite
Goals Infinite was founded with one goal: we want to help 
people to achieve their goals and adjust their mindset to 
be more efficient. This site is for those who want to become 
better. We are not here to convince you, you have to make 
the conscious decision to become better and we are here to 
help you with the rest.
Every Friday we post a new article on our site on various topics 
such as motivation, mindset, productivity, planning and more. 
If any of these sounds interesting to you, I encourage you to 
subscribe to our newsletter, which will inform you about the 
latest content, news and upcoming events. To see our most 
popular articles click here.

About the 
author
Gabor Hosszu is the founder and head article writer of Goals 
Infinite. His obsession with self-help books, the growth 
mindset, planning and productivity hacks made him realise 
early, that continuous self-improvement is what drives him 
forward. No matter if it’s finishing a master’s degree, getting 
into the top 10% of players in a video game or losing 25 
pounds, he was ready to take on the challenge.
Being passionate about personal development and helping 
others were the main reasons he launched this site. By trade 
Gabor is a mechanical engineer. His hobbies include being a 
chilli farmer, a video game nerd and a wannabe beer expert.
2

Introduction
In 2006 Carol S. Dweck presented the idea of mindsets 
in her book Mindset: The New Psychology of Success. This 
revolutionary piece of literature summarised decades of 
research on achievement and success. The book explains that 
our success is often based on how we approach our goals, 
not just on our talents. Dweck defines two mindsets, that 
have very different interpretations of the things happening 
around us and different approaches to problems. While the 
fixed mindset praises talent and innate abilities, the growth 
mindset focuses on learning, love of learning and effort 
leading to a more successfull life. Here you’ll find what are 
the key differences between the two mindsets.
The goal of this book is to help the reader to develop and 
maintain the growth mindset. To do this we chose the 
format of commandments, as it is a straight forward way to 
present Do’s and Don’ts. At the end of the book, you’ll find a 
workbook with a few exercises. This will help you identify the 
area where you need improvement and find out what is the 
desired behaviour for someone with the growth mindset.
I wish you willpower, discipline and the best of luck to your 
transformation to the growth mindset!
Gabor
3

Thou shall accept 
that intellect can be 
developed and not 
static
One of the core beliefs of the growth mindset is that 
intelligence is not fixed, but can be developed through effort. 
To get better is an ability we all have, from the day we were 
born. Understanding that no challenges exist that we are not 
able to overcome with time, is a key feature of someone with 
the growth mindset.
There’s a huge difference in saying “I can’t deal with this” and 
“I can’t deal with this yet”. That one small word, yet, points 
towards a future situation, where “I’m able to deal with this”. 
No matter if “this” is a difficult client, a hard math problem 
or a company project, we have the ability to learn all the 
necessary skills and knowledge, that is required to deal with 
it. No exceptions.
4

When it comes to personal growth looking smart will never 
be as important as getting smarter. Some people only want 
to prove their talents and show how good they are.
With the growth mindset, the focus is on getting better, 
instead of looking good.  This not only include learning, but 
love of learning as well.
A typical growth mindset question: why would you waste 
your time on proving how good you are, when you could be 
spending the same amount of time getting better?
5
Thou shall focus on 
improving intellect 
over proving intellect

Some of us are born talented, some of us are not. But the 
person with the growth mindset knows, that being talented 
is nothing more than a head start. Making an effort is the key 
to achieving, not being talented. The one with talent and no 
effort will soon be outperformed by the one who wasn’t born 
talented but makes a continuous effort.
While the fixed mindset says: “Making an effort is the sign of 
the weak” the growth mindset says: “Making excuses like that 
to not to make an effort is the sign of the weak”. Call it effort, 
practice or hard work it all comes down to the same thing, 
that we are able to improve and overcome our obstacles with 
time.
6
Thou shall value effort 
more than talent

Facing new challenges courageously is a key feature of the 
growth mindset. Understanding them and learning how to 
deal with them instead is personal growth in its purest form.
These experiences move you out of your comfort zone, 
just over the edge, where our performance is at its peak. 
With every conquered obstacle and defeated challenge, we 
improve as a person. Treat challenges as the cornerstones of 
self-improvement, not like chances to fail.
7
Thou shall challenge 
thyself, as challenge 
is the foundation of 
growth

People with the growth mindset knows that obstacles and 
setbacks are only bumps on the road to success, not the 
end. Overcoming them with effort and commitment is just 
another learning opportunity.
Persistence is what helps a baby to learn to walk, a student to 
deal with a difficult homework and an entrepreneur to build a 
business from the ground up. No one has ever succeeded by 
giving up and admitting defeat. The growth mindset pushes 
forward until the desired results are reached.
8
Thou shall face 
obstacles and setbacks 
with persistence

Learning what you have to do next time differently to succeed 
is what turns failure into a victory. The growth mindset 
wants to analyse and understand what went wrong when 
experiencing failure. Others feel shame, self-pity or anger 
and never want to try again. Learning from the experience 
and having a higher chance of success the next time is what 
makes the difference between a loser and a winner.
9
Thou shall treat 
failure as a learning 
opportunity, not as a 
defeat

Constructive criticism is a free lesson. When people with 
growth mindset hear feedback that can help them perform 
better, they take it seriously. While others make excuses and 
get mad while listening to negative feedback, people with 
growth mindset improve on it. As a defining feature, they are 
able to find the lesson in the harshest criticism as well. The 
worst thing you can do is to ignore supportive feedback as 
you’ll miss out on a great learning opportunity.
10
Thou shall take 
feedback to heart

The effort always comes before talents and traits. Giving 
feedback based on someone’s effort empowers the idea 
of hard work and strengthens the growth mindset. Giving 
feedback based on someone or someone’s abilities empowers 
their belief on their talents and strengthens the fixed mindset.
To focus on the effort say “Well done, your hard work really 
paid off” and “Good job with that excellent presentation” 
instead of “Wow, you are talented” and “You are so good 
at basketball” as these are focusing on the person and the 
person’s abilities. As a parent or a teacher, it can be hard 
to develop this skill as it is tempting to just praise the child 
instead of the effort.
11
Thou shall give 
feedback based on the 
effort, not the person

Many of us tend to feel envy when it comes to other people’s 
success. Instead of negative feelings focus on searching for 
the inspiration to make your own success happen. Someone 
with the growth mindset knows that working hard and 
commitment can get you the results you want. Seeing 
someone else rising to the top can be a great source of 
inspiration and motivation. Let yourself be inspired by success 
stories and make a continuous effort to achieve your goals.
12
Thou shall find 
inspiration in other 
people’s success

Many of our thoughts are generated automatically based on 
our beliefs. We accept these thoughts and act accordingly. If 
your beliefs represent a poor mindset, you act according to a 
poor mindset. To change this, you’ll have to be aware when 
such thoughts surface. If you are aware, you’ll have a choice. 
You can choose to act like before or to behave differently.
If you are aware of a poor mindset though popping into your 
head you’ll have the chance to act according to the growth 
mindset instead. Pay attention to your inner monologue as it 
is the key to developing the growth mindset.
13
Thou shall pay 
attention to the inner 
monologue

of The Growth Mindset
 Thou shall accept that intellect can be developed, 
not static
Thou shall focus on improving intellect over 
proving intellect
Thou shall value effort more than talent
Thou shall face obstacles and setbacks with persistence
Thou shall take feedback to heart
Thou shall give feedback based on the effort, 
not the person
Thou shall find inspiration in other people’s success
Thou shall pay attention to the inner monologue
Thou shall challenge thyself, as challenge is the 
foundation of growth
Thou shall treat failure as a learning opportunity, 
not as a defeat

Workbook
In this part of the book, we prepared a few exercises. 
Completing this workbook, you’ll identify what are the most 
common fixed mindset thoughts that you have. With the 
help of the commandments, you’ll be able to understand 
what do you have to change to think / feel / act according 
to the growth mindset. I encourage you to take your time 
with this workbook and do the best job can, to have the most 
impactful results.
15

Below you can see ten sentences. Each of them representing 
the fixed mindset version of the commandments from the 
first part of the book. Treat them as ideas in your head or part 
of your inner monologue. Read all of them carefully and rank 
them on how much they sound like your own thoughts. Give 
1 to the one that is most likely to be your thought or the most 
similar to you own thoughts. Give 10 to the one that sounds 
the least familiar. Write your rating on the lines in front of the 
sentences.
16
When I fail at something I feel terrible and don't want to 
try again.
I got stuck on this project, so I might as well give up.
I like dealing with easier tasks rather than difficult ones.
Sometimes, I just don't have what it takes to deal with the 
problem I'm facing.
Seeing someone else succeed makes me feel envious.
I wasn't born to be a winner who can make it to the top.
Criticism makes me come up with excuses and feel 
insecure.
I often think about my shortcomings.
I don't like asking questions in front of others when I don't 
understand something.
When I give a compliment I focus on traits and 
characteristics.

Now you have identified what are the most frequent fixed 
mindset thoughts in your head. According to Pareto’s Law, 
the two highest ranking (number 1 and number 2) are causing 
most of the problems. Please copy these sentences here. Feel 
free to alter the sentences, so they’ll sound more relatable, 
but make sure they don’t lose the core message.
17
1
2

Please write an example from your past, when you acted 
according to these thoughts. What happened? How did you 
feel? What were your thoughts? How did you act? Take your 
time to paint the most accurate picture.
18
1
2

Now, imagine how you should have acted according to the 
growth mindset. How would you feel? What would you think? 
How would you act? To make sure you give your best answer, 
read the commandments again.
Now you know the thoughts you should pay attention to 
during the day and what is the desired reaction / behavior. 
Now it is time to make a commitment!
19
1
2

On the lines below make a commitment to make an effort 
to develop the growth mindset. Come up with the growth 
mindset counterparts of the thoughts from the second 
exercise and write them down as well. To make these 
sentences more impactful, make sure you focus on what you 
want and not on what you want to avoid. Here’s an example:
“I, John Doe, am fully committed to paying attention to my 
thoughts and actions during the day to develop the growth 
mindset. Whenever I fail I’ll do my best to learn from it and find 
out what I have to do differently next time to succeed. When 
facing obstacles I’ll work hard until I get the best results I can get.”
For maximum effect write down this commitment every 
morning or keep it somewhere where you can see it every 
day (like your phone’s background or a framed picture on 
your desk). If you got this far and did your best during this 
exercise, well done! If you think you can do better, go back 
and adjust your answer to get the best results.
20

E-book cover and design by Nóra Déri
Feedback, so we can 
improve!
When you are finished reading I'd like to ask you for some 
feedback about the eBook itself. Please click the link below 
and share your thoughts with us!
I'd like to give feedback!

