

The Perception Machine


The Perception Machine
Our Photographic Future between the Eye and AI
Joanna Zylinska
The MIT Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England

© 2023 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
This work is subject to a Creative Commons CC-­BY-­NC-­ND license.
Subject to such license, all rights are reserved.
The MIT Press would like to thank the anonymous peer reviewers who provided 
comments on drafts of this book. The generous work of academic experts is essential 
for establishing the authority and quality of our publications. We acknowledge with 
gratitude the contributions of these otherwise uncredited readers.
This book was set in ITC Stone Serif Std and ITC Stone Sans Std by New Best-set 
Typesetters Ltd.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Zylinska, Joanna, 1971- author.
Title: The perception machine : our photographic future between the eye and AI / 
Joanna Zylinska.
Description: Cambridge, Massachusetts : The MIT Press, [2023] | Includes 
bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2022050332 (print) | LCCN 2022050333 (ebook) | 
ISBN 9780262546836 (paperback) | ISBN 9780262376624 (epub) | 
ISBN 9780262376631 (pdf)
Subjects: LCSH: Photography—Philosophy. | Digital images—Social aspects. | 
Image processing—Digital techniques. | Artificial intelligence.
Classification: LCC TR183 .Z955 2023  (print) | LCC TR183  (ebook) | 
DDC 770.1—dc23/eng/20230405
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022050332
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022050333
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1

Contents
Acknowledgments    vii
Preface: New Horizons    ix
	
Introduction: Photo Flows in the Perception Machine    1
1	
Does Photography Have a Future? (Does Anything Else?)    21
2	
A Philosophy of After-­Photography    49
3	
Screen Cuts, or How Not to Play Video Games    67
4	
From Machine Vision to a Nontrivial Perception Machine    95
5	
AUTO-­FOTO-­KINO: Photography after Cinema and AI    119
6	
Can You Photograph the Future?    147
7	
“Loser Images” for a Planetary Micro-­Vision    167
	
Conclusion: Future Sensing in the Metaverse    193
Notes    201
Bibliography    245
Index    263


Acknowledgments
Writing about our photographic future while going ever deeper into the 
perception machine of Zoom and MS Teams, Instagram, phones, and lap­
top cameras during the Covid-­19 pandemic created lab conditions for 
experiencing an intensified media life, where we all started functioning as 
images for one another. I am grateful to many colleagues, friends, and fam­
ily members who made that experience so much richer and better, against 
all the odds. To begin with, I owe a debt of gratitude to my previous work­
place. The wonderfully generous and creative Department of Media, Com­
munications, and Cultural Studies at Goldsmiths, University of London, 
granted me a period of sabbatical leave after my tenure as Head of Depart­
ment came to an end. It was during that period that a significant part of 
the book was written. I am also very grateful to my exciting new academic 
home, the Department of Digital Humanities at King’s College London, for 
offering me a hospitable welcome, intellectual stimulation, and a support­
ive ambience for pursuing my work in both media philosophy and criti­
cal digital practice. I am particularly indebted to my Head of Department, 
Stuart Dunn, my colleagues and interlocutors from the Creative AI Lab—­
Mercedes Bunz, Daniel Chávez Heras, Eva Jäger, and Alasdair Milne—­and 
to King’s Institute for Artificial Intelligence. Thanks also to Btihaj Ajana for 
great conversations, shared meals, and fun.
Many institutions and organizations have generously invited me to pre­
sent—­in variously mediated forms—­the material that eventually became 
this book: ABF (Workers’ Educational Association) Stockholm and Centrum 
för fotografi; Academy of Fine Arts in Warsaw; Aiiiii Art Center at the Art 
& Artificial Intelligence Lab at Tongji University, Shanghai; British Journal 
of Photography; Center for Culture and Technology at the University of 
Southern Denmark; Department of German at Princeton University and 

viii	
Acknowledgments
the Center for Cultural Studies at the University of Graz; European Network 
for Cinema and Media Studies; Flugschriften project (Dominic Pettman 
and Carla Nappi); Hadassah Academic College; Humboldt University Ber­
lin; International Association of Photography and Theory and the CYENS 
Research and Innovation Centre of Excellence, Cyprus; Łódź Film School; 
London Alternative Photography Collective; Malmö University; National 
College of Art and Design and the Digital Hub in Dublin; Onassis Founda­
tion in Athens; Royal Institute of British Architects; Sheffield University; 
University of Luxembourg and the Luxembourg pavilion at World Expo 
2022; University of Milan-­Bicocca; University of Porto; University of South­
ern California; and Uppsala University with the Sigtuna Foundation. The 
associated virtual and in-­person visits, collaborations, and conversations 
helped me immensely at different stages of developing this project.
I would also like to say a huge thank you to those friends and colleagues 
who inspired, nurtured, provoked, and provided all kinds of nourishment 
during the writing and making of this book. In particular I would like to 
thank Mark Amerika, Pola Borkiewicz, Marta Cabrera, Marco De Mutiis, Oscar 
Guarin, Gary Hall, Naomi House, Melanie King, Amanda Lagerkvist, Lila 
Lee-­Morrison, Alberto López Cuenca, Arianna Mainardi, Karolina Majewska-­
Guede, Kathrin Maurer, Benjamín Mayer Foulkes, Gabriela Méndez Cota, 
Jacek Nagłowski, Benita Opaczyk, Krzysztof Pijarski, Bo Reimer, raúl rodríguez 
freire, Bojana Romic, Dennis Schäfer, Mona Schubert, Nina Sellars, Antonio 
Somaini, Stelarc, David Turner, Salvatore Vitale, Bernadette Wegenstein, and 
Ana Zibelnik. I would also like to express my gratitude to the artists who 
have generously shared their work with me: Refik Anadol, Ian James, Gareth 
Damian Martin, Antje Van Wichelen, Michael Murtaugh, Nicolas Malevé, 
and my Goldsmiths MA student Ben Pritchard. Thank you also to my editor 
Noah J. Springer for his help, support, and excellent advice, and to Matthew 
Abbate for polishing my prose. Last but not least, I am grateful to my nieces 
and nephew: Julia Glembin, and Daniel and Jessica Hall, for showing me a 
different vantage point from which to experience the perception machine.
After I submitted the manuscript, Yanai Toister gave me a copy of his 
book Photography from the Turin Shroud to the Turing Machine. It was too late 
for me to comment in this volume on the multiple affinities between our 
respective modes of thinking, affinities that show how correct Flusser was 
in redefining creativity and originality in terms of probability distribution. 
I want to acknowledge, and second, Yanai’s proposition that “photography 
is a new type of machine.”

Preface: New Horizons

x	
Preface

New Horizons	
xi

xii	
Preface

New Horizons	
xiii

xiv	
Preface

New Horizons	
xv

xvi	
Preface

New Horizons	
xvii


Introduction: Photo Flows in the Perception Machine
Figure 0.1
Joanna Zylinska, grid of images automatically produced through a text-­to-­image 
generator known as DALL·E 2. Trained on text-­image pairs, the DALL·E 2 model 
responded to the words from the book’s title (“The Perception Machine Our Photo­
graphic Future Between the Eye and AI”). Image grid obtained on second attempt, as 
variations to one of the four images produced as a first response to the book’s title. 
The AI-­generated image echoes a famous avant-­garde poster from 1924 by Aleksandr 
Rodchenko, which featured a black-­and-­white image of a human eye, two cameras, 
and a doubled face of a young man, and was accompanied by the inscription Кино 
глаз (KINO-­EYE). Interestingly, the DALL·E 2 model seems to have treated the inscrip­
tion it created as an image rather than text, as evident by the ever more fascinatingly 
absurd variations it came up with. June 2022.
More images are being produced, shared, and seen today than ever in his­
tory. We are constantly photographing and being photographed, with 
imaging machines large and small capturing our every move. In the pub­
licity for their Galaxy S21 Ultra 5G phone Samsung have announced that 
they are enacting “a revolution in photography”;1 Tomáš Dvořák and Jussi 
Parikka have proclaimed, through the title of their recent edited collection, 
that photography has gone “off the scale”;2 while Lev Manovich, whose 
Cultural Analytics Lab and the accompanying book have investigated 

2	
Introduction
how we can see one billion images,3 has declared: “Photography is young 
again.”4 In the meantime, Andrew Dewdney, codirector of the Centre for 
the Study of the Networked Image at London South Bank University, has 
published a book with a title that was also a make-­no-­mistake exhorta­
tion: Forget Photography,5 while Ariel Goldberg and Yazan Khalili, cochairs of 
the photography department at Bard College, have declared: “We Stopped 
Taking Photos.”6 Something is therefore clearly going on with and around 
photography.
Picking up on those opposing statements and affects, the notion of 
“our photographic future” that frames this book is something of a dare. It 
probes this polarized decisiveness around photography and other forms of 
mechanical image-­making, while suggesting that photography cannot be 
so easily forgotten or abandoned because it has been actively involved in 
the shaping of our present onto-­epistemological horizon—­and its techni­
cal infrastructures. Nor can photography be simply replaced by the more 
encompassing (and perhaps more technically accurate) concept of “imag­
ing,” as there is so much invested in it, both on the level of platform capi­
tal and human affect. But the postulate of “our photographic future” also 
entails a reckoning with the fact that, as part of its technical and social 
activity, the photographic medium itself is undergoing a transformation. 
Its role as a printed memento or incontrovertible evidence of fact largely 
confined to the dustbin of history, it is currently being reconfigured in a 
way that has profound significance for our individual self-­image, our soci­
ety, economy, and politics. The distinction between image capture and 
image creation is now increasingly blurred—­in photogrammetry, computa­
tional photography, CGI, or algorithmic image generators trained on pho­
tographic images (figures 0.1, 0.2). And so, even though this book is about 
what could be described as “imaging after photography,” this after does 
not signify an overcoming but rather a form of mediation, a process that 
does not erase the technical, historical, or affective traces of its formative 
Figure 0.2
Joanna Zylinska, image automatically produced through the text-­to-­image art genera­
tor known as NightCafe, using the VQGAN+CLIP method. The algorithm responded 
to the words taken from this book’s title. Image obtained on first attempt. No modi­
fication, except for conversion to black and white. June 2022.

Photo Flows in the Perception Machine	
3

4	
Introduction
medium. The concept of “the perception machine” describes the evolving 
architecture of those photographic mediations.
Importantly, and in line with the widespread retention of this term in 
computation, the imaging industry, and, last but not least, its social use, 
my working definition of photography—­even if applied to images whose 
method of production exceeds pure “writing with light” to embrace calcu­
lation and selection—­is itself both residual and experiential. I call a given 
cluster of processes and practices “photography” if it remembers and resem­
bles photography—­and if it looks and feels like photography to the human 
observer. Photography therefore serves in this book as what Yanai Toister 
has called “a resemblance concept,” whereby “photographs form a fam­
ily group, with many overlapping sets of features, but there is no single 
set of features common to all the ‘things’ to which the word photograph 
pertains.”7 He adds: “photography is better served if understood as a set of 
media.”8 What does this remediated photography look and feel like to the 
human observer? And what kind of analytical framework might we adopt 
that would help us understand its transformation? To work toward answer­
ing these questions, it is worth recognizing that the interrogation of pho­
tography’s (and the photographic) future highlights a number of concerns 
regarding not just the status of a specific industry or media practice, but 
also some larger, or we might even say planetary-­level, concerns about our 
human positioning in the world and our relationship with technology, at a 
time when our very existence is being increasingly challenged by attempts 
to envisage what comes next. A climate collapse? Cross-­species extinction? 
Another pandemic? A planetary war? Death by AI? Or maybe a sunnier 
tomorrow, for all of us?
This may seem like too big a leap right now, but I want to suggest that, 
by pondering, with Dewdney and others, whether photography has any 
future, we are actually using this specific cultural-­technical practice to ask 
whether everything else we know—­including us humans as a species with 
particular cultural exigencies and technical affordances—­will soon be over 
too. We are therefore using photography, a par excellence practice of imaging 
and imagination (i.e., a practice of copying, making likenesses, mapping, 
making mental pictures, and ideating), although not always in a fully con­
scious way, as a conduit for asking bigger questions about our own situation 
in the world. What also precipitates this inquiry is the fact that some of 

Photo Flows in the Perception Machine	
5
the boldest and most surreal forms of generating novel images and forms 
of imagination are being offered today by algorithmic agents, be they GAN 
networks or more complex generative AI models such as DALL·E. Imaging 
and imagination are therefore now part of a planetary computational archi­
tecture described by Benjamin Bratton as “the stack.”9
Frequent climate “events,” experienced either as media events or as 
more immediate existential disasters, are inextricably coupled with the 
remediation of the environment as a computational media ecology. This 
state of events has resulted in a situation where humans in different geopo­
litical locations are less and less able to see themselves as inhabitants, or (if 
they belong to a more privileged class) as citizens, of the world. Instead, we 
are all being interpellated to recognize ourselves as planetary beings, unan­
chored and dislodged, a realization which involves having to deal with the 
fact that, as Dipesh Chakrabarty puts it, the planet “remains profoundly 
indifferent”10 to our existence. There exist an abundance of images to visu­
alize this condition, from space photography through to satellite and drone 
images depicting environmental devastation. It is in this sense that pho­
tography as a practice of imagination, representation, and visualization can 
be read as a case of what Amanda Lagerkvist has described as “existential 
media,” i.e., media that are capable of accounting for “the thrownness of 
the digital human condition.”11 This perspective analyzes digital media as 
an existential terrain which is irreducible “to the social, the cultural, the 
economic, or the political”12 even if it remains intertwined with all those 
domains. This existential mode of enquiry also prompts us to ask what 
comes after the human, while inviting us not just to imagine but also to 
image it. In the light of the current developments around artificial intel­
ligence (AI), this interrogation is particularly urgent. It must be highlighted 
right from the start that “AI” functions in this book not just as a technical 
term but also as a discursive-­affective network of practices and meanings. 
On a technical level, the term predominantly refers to outcomes of com­
puter and cognitive science research in machine learning, a field that trains 
computers in statistical data analysis and inference-­making so that their 
performance ends up looking “intelligent” to a human. AI thus conjures, 
in the public and media imagination, an illusion of sentience and sapi­
ence, enveloped in a misty cloud of existential promises and threats—­or 
what I previously called “machine visions and warped dreams.”13 Artificial 

6	
Introduction
intelligence is itself a form of Big Dream, but one that has material conse­
quences for our technical and sociopolitical existence.
Not insignificantly, all those contradictory pronouncements about pho­
tography that began this introduction were made in 2021: the second year 
of the global Covid-­19 pandemic and the start of what is now being called 
the Virocene. It was a year of accelerated mediation, when we all appeared 
as images to one another, on Zoom, MS Teams, or Skype, while feeding—­
and feeding off—­the insatiable global data machine with photos, memes, 
visualizations, and data points. Yet 2021 was just a catalyst for longer-­term 
processes of imaging, imagining, capturing, tracing, and shaping that have 
been organizing our knowledge horizon while furnishing us with a sense 
of self. Driven by AI, machine vision, computational image rendering, and 
VR, these processes call for an in-­depth investigation into what it means for 
humans to live surrounded by image flows and machine eyes.14 “Photog­
raphy” serves in this book as a thought device that will help me visualize, 
name, and analyze those processes. The key problem I thus want to investi­
gate concerns the future of mechanically produced images that come after, resem­
ble, and are still called photographs—­and the future of us humans as producers 
of, and as beings produced by, such photographic and after-­photographic images.
With the current outpouring of images, we can suggest that photogra­
phy is encountered by humans principally as a flow, be it on social media, 
on multiple screens in urban spaces, or as flickering data points in com­
puter vision databases. Yet photographic flows do not just flow: they often 
slow down, come to a halt, or wrap around us, creating photo-­envelopes 
which offer a particular way of encountering and sensing the world. As well 
as foregrounding the “flow” aspect of the medium, it is therefore impor­
tant to highlight that photography is experienced in the first place, that it 
comes to us as an experience—­and also, more crucially, that it envisages 
and forms experiences. Photography triggers and shapes emotions, drives 
our percepts, informs our cognition, and contributes to the emergence of 
human consciousness. We should note here the possibility of other modes 
of experiencing photography than just the visual, with a broad range of 
sensory experiences activated in the photographic process between a vari­
ety of human and nonhuman agents. My understanding of photography 
here borrows from Vilém Flusser’s theory of the image, in which it is “the 
technical image itself that is the message.”15 In-­forming, or giving form, 
becomes a way of organizing the chaos of the world in an attempt to slow 

Photo Flows in the Perception Machine	
7
down entropy—­to halt the end of the universe. This position extends the 
earlier claims about the formative role of photographs in our lives made 
by writers such as Roland Barthes, Pierre Bourdieu, or Susan Sontag.16 But 
it also recognizes that the primary role of images today, including pho­
tographs, is informational. Information here is understood in the classic 
engineering sense outlined by Claude E. Shannon and Warren Weaver in 
The Mathematical Theory of Communication as being nonsemantic,17 with the 
communication model applying to different agents, human and nonhu­
man. The principal meaning of an image is that there is an image, and that it 
is being transmitted, rather than that it is an image of, say, a cat (although 
the content of images does of course matter to individual humans). The 
majority of images are now processed quickly: they are not subject to pro­
longed contemplation or interpretation. Yet the photographic image today 
is not just seen—­and it is most certainly not always seen by humans. It is 
also always tagged, categorized, copied, coded, transmitted, networked, and 
platformed as part of the operations of the perception machine. The pho­
tographic image therefore does something (e.g., relates to another image or 
data sequence, triggers the execution of a command) within the machine 
network, rather than just meaning something to humans. It is, as scholars 
increasingly recognize, operational.
The theoretical impetus behind my interrogation of “our photographic 
future” also comes from the work of Flusser—­not just his well-­known texts 
on photography but also his thought-­provoking book Does Writing Have 
a Future?18 Flusser answers his own question in the negative, foreseeing a 
time when books become an obsolete medium, to be replaced with techni­
cal images (such as photographs). Yet rather than worry about our immi­
nent illiteracy, Flusser is intrigued by the coevolution of humans with our 
media. It is this “media-­genealogical” aspect of his analysis that I aim to 
extend in this book by looking at the future of the photographic medium, 
at the narratives about its future—­and, more broadly, at the role of photo­
graphs and other technical images in mapping our human future. My over­
arching proposition is that not only does photography have a future but 
also that it actually is the future. As we increasingly experience reality with, 
through, and as photography, the photographic medium functions as an 
active agent in shaping both “us” and “the world.” I am picking up here on 
process philosopher Henri Bergson’s intimation that “matter is an aggre­
gation of images,”19 with this aggregation (or ensemble) itself forming “a 

8	
Introduction
universe.”20 Importantly, this is more than a poetic turn of phrase. As I will 
show through the course of my argument, in its recognition of the forma­
tive role of imaging in the constitution of human consciousness as well as 
machine intelligence, contemporary neuroscience has strong Bergsonian 
undertones. But my goal in the book is also to propose that the current 
technoscientific conjuncture is radically altering the constitutive elements 
of this universe, while reprogramming or even redesigning the technical 
and sensory parameters of both ourselves and the world.
Drawing on research in computation and neuroscience, the book exam­
ines this posited “photographic future” through the lens of perception. In 
proposing to read the anxious exuberance in the current discourse on pho­
tography as a manifestation of both sociopolitical vulnerability and deeper 
existential anxiety, I will look at the altered practices and technologies of 
seeing, recording, and making images of the world—­and at the increasing 
role of automation in image-­making. With this, I want to examine some of 
the ways in which photography as both discourse and practice is actively 
involved in the reconfiguration of human perception—­and in the emer­
gence of a machinic network of perceiving agents whose image-­making role 
has serious consequences for our own self-­image, our view of the world, 
and our vision of the future. Perception is defined here as a way in which 
sensory information is selected, processed, and interpreted. The book’s 
argument is thus premised on the recognition of the key role of visuality in 
human perceptive experience, but I also challenge and expand upon this 
understanding by working with what has become known as an “ecologi­
cal model of perception”—­a model that is fundamentally multisensory. In 
the process, I investigate the role of photographs and cognate images as 
devices that help us see, sense, and grasp the world. I also recognize, follow­
ing Steve Anderson, that “humans in urban environments inhabit a shared 
visual field with a broad array of scanners, sensors, and algorithms.”21 In 
other words, the focal point of my discussion is provided by the problem 
of how we frame the world with mechanically produced images—­and how such 
images and their mechanical infrastructures frame us, i.e., how they frame our 
consciousness, cognition, and our whole cortico-­corporeal apparatus, but 
also our individual and political subjectivity. The framework of existential 
media will allow me to examine the photography of “our photographic 
future” as “both the priors and the limits, the frame and the edge, the 
building blocks and the brinks of being.”22 Taking as a given the message 

Photo Flows in the Perception Machine	
9
of critical posthumanities that it’s not all about us, my analysis is located 
against the wider context of image uses and actions, many of which bypass 
us humans. The concept of “the perception machine” offered in the book 
encapsulates this wider context, while also serving as an answer to the 
(implicit) question about whether our future will indeed be photographic, 
and, if so, what it will revolve about, feel like, and look like.
The notion of the machine, still apt for our increasingly algorithmic 
society, borrows from Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari’s conceptual expan­
sion of this term beyond its technical capabilities to encapsulate its social 
dimension.23 “The perception machine” is an aggregate, assemblage, or 
ensemble of the technical, the corporeal, and the social. Design-­wise, it 
is therefore more like a system than a single object. There are multiple, 
albeit interwoven, levels of meaning to what this concept stands for in 
the book. To begin with, it has biological connotations, signifying the 
system of perception in human and nonhuman animals. The perception 
machine is also a technical machine understood as an apparatus, or indeed 
a camera.24 Perception here is equivalent to image-­making, a process of 
the temporary stabilization of the optical flow that involves apparatuses 
such as cameras, telescopes, and scanners, but also the wider technical25 
infrastructure supporting those devices. The perception machine thus also 
names a machinic ensemble of perceiving and image-­making agents. Fur­
ther on, the term has connotations of the Foucauldian dispositif and Flus­
serian apparatus, whereby it stands for the bigger sociopolitical setup. Or, 
as Goldberg and Khalili put it even more explicitly, referring to the violent 
use of images in attempts to consolidate national power: “The state is the 
ultimate camera, the camera that eats all other cameras.”26 The concept 
of the perception machine—­which simultaneously functions as an image-­
making apparatus—­thus highlights the interlocking of scientific and cul­
tural discourses in the production of photography and photographs. It also 
foregrounds the production of subjectivity and objectivity as functions of 
all kinds of images.
In The Vision Machine, a survey of visuality of which my main title is a 
critical transposition, Paul Virilio agues that, “because the technical pro­
gress of photography brought daily proof of its advance, it became gradu­
ally more and more impossible to avoid the conclusion that, since every 
object is for us merely the sum of the qualities we attribute to it, the sum 
of information we derive from it at any given moment, the objective world 

10	
Introduction
could only exist as what we represent it to be and as a more or less endur­
ing mental construct.”27 In one of its conceptual iterations, the perception 
machine can therefore also be said to stand for nothing less than what we 
modern humans, in our attempt to delimit a dawning sense of planetarity, 
have called “the world.”28 This “global” version of the perception machine 
comprises various mechanisms responsible for the world’s accruing produc­
tion, in the form of images, for us humans—­and, increasingly, for other 
machines. Virilio’s The Vision Machine provides an important analysis of 
the transformation of seeing and visibility in the twentieth century, from 
the technology of warfare in World War I, which turned vision into visu­
alization, through to the industrialization of vision, which shifted the 
majority of activities unfolding within the field of visibility from humans 
to machines. This transformation of vision into a primarily machine-­
based process was accompanied by the “automation of perception” as a 
result of developments in artificial intelligence.29 Significant as it is, Viri­
lio’s argument is also steeped in metaphysical dualism, postulating as it 
does a clear shift from more organic and seemingly pretechnological vision 
to its machinic counterpart: “the relative fusion/confusion of the factual 
(or operational, if you prefer) and the virtual; the ascendancy of the ‘real­
ity effect’ over a reality principle.”30 He interprets this shift primarily in 
terms of disorientation and loss. While a political critique of the automa­
tion of perception is very much needed—­and Virilio does indeed offer it by 
looking at the visual technologies of war and the automation of vision in 
propaganda and marketing, and at the mechanization of justice in video-­
enabled courtrooms—­his ontological critique of the changes to vision ends 
up conserving the view of vision as both human and humanist. Borrowing 
some of his concepts, I will proceed with an understanding of machines as 
encapsulating organic and nonorganic components, as changing over time, 
and as constitutively shaping the human sensorium in different ways. The 
change from “vision” to “perception” in my own machinic rhetoric will 
allow me to outline a more multisensory and more agential model of cor­
poreal and sociopolitical relations.
Drawing on ideas from Bernard Stiegler and Gilles Deleuze, we could 
thus say that vision and perception have always been machinic—­but they 
have not always been mechanical or computational. The analysis of the 
working of these machines, and of their mechanics, in the current histori­
cal period, at different scales and levels, and of the role of photography and 

Photo Flows in the Perception Machine	
11
other forms of mechanical image-­making in sustaining their operations, 
will shape the argument of my book. Importantly, even though I recognize 
that, in its agency, destination, and communicative value, photography 
is to a large extent nonhuman, the line of the argument pursued here is 
that photography does not need to be antihuman. Indeed, it is in chal­
lenging the antihumanism of the perception machine as an image-­ and 
world-­producing apparatus that a better photographic future will be sought 
throughout this book.
While it is conceived as a stand-­alone volume, The Perception Machine 
develops from my 2017 book Nonhuman Photography.31 I argued there that 
the dominant analytical frameworks in photography theory—­those com­
ing from art history (where photography was seen as a series of individual 
artifacts displayed in a white cube), photojournalism (where photography 
was identified with professional practice), or social theory (where the focus 
was on everyday photographic practices)—­were inadequate for capturing 
the contemporary photographic landscape. The concept of “nonhuman 
photography” proposed in that earlier book was thus a provocation aimed 
at challenging those dominant frameworks, with their inherent humanism 
premised on the commonsense assumption that photography was a human 
practice. At a time when the majority of images were not just being taken 
by devices whose technical parameters far exceeded human vision, such as 
CCTV, drone media, endoscopy, and satellite cameras, but were even not 
being made for the human viewer, the humanist discourse of photography 
needed correcting, I thought. The concept of nonhuman photography thus 
referred to photographs that were not of, by, or for the human. Yet “non­
human” for me was not opposed to the human—­and it most certainly did 
not mean that no humans were involved in photography. There has been 
a nonhuman side to photography since its inception, as seen in Fox Tal­
bot’s description of the medium as “the pencil of nature,” the early links 
between photography and geology as parallel modes of making impres­
sions, or the fact that the majority of everyday images created across time, 
be it for family albums or social media—­landscapes, portraits, celebrations, 
food—­have been a product of technical and cultural algorithms, and not 
just human intentionality and free will.
The present volume picks up on this recognition of the nonhuman agency 
of photography, but it returns more explicitly to the problem of the human—­
although, to qualify, this is a human rethought through posthumanist 

12	
Introduction
critique. Raising a number of ethicopolitical questions about our existence 
in the world of high-­tech capitalism, the progressing automation of many 
spheres of life, increasing threats of global pandemics, rising inequality, 
and the economic and ecological crises, it foregrounds, as signaled earlier, 
the ontological problematic of existence as such: of us humans, of our ways 
of doing things in the world, of our media and communication networks 
and platforms—­and, last but not least, of photography as a medium that 
captures all those global unfoldings while capturing us humans in multiple 
ways. Yet the power of photography is not just ontological but also episte­
mological: photography, especially in its networked and platformed guise, 
radically reshapes our ways of knowing the world and ourselves in it. Criti­
cally engaging with current research in cognitive psychology and neurosci­
ence, the book thus deals with the problem of perception and cognition, 
while offering a cultural analysis of the making of worlds and worldviews—­
and of images that are part of those worldviews.
From this outline it may seem that my key conversational partners in the 
discussion about our photographic future are Western male philosophers 
and media theorists. And this is indeed where the conversation begins. This 
choice of my starting point is partly in recognition of the legacy and sig­
nificance of those particular debates on media, technology, and the image, 
but my motivation is somewhat more mischievous than that. I come to this 
tradition as an unruly daughter—­a Goneril or Regan without the malice, or 
a Cordelia without the death wish—­with an aim of reweaving the texture 
of the established discourse on technology and the image with my own 
silicon thread. In the process, I hope to make the still rather masculine field 
of media philosophy a little more my own. Starting from the book’s title—­a 
Virilio-­Flusser hybrid with a twist—­I aim to cut across positions, postulates, 
and postures to open a different mode of thinking about media objects and 
practices. This mode of thinking will also involve making. Departing from 
the traditional philosophical method of eschewing the present, doubting 
the example, and remaining suspicious about praxis, my media-­thinking 
about the present has for a long time also been a form of media-­making—­
and of future-­making. With this I aim to enact a media philosophy less in 
the genre of “me-­theory,” and more as a process of interweaving, intercon­
nectedness, and intellectual as well as bodily kinship made up with words, 
images, and corpora of various kinds.

Photo Flows in the Perception Machine	
13
I will be accompanied on this journey by other critical, feminist, and 
decolonial writers and artists, such as Ariella Aïsha Azoulay, Donna Har­
away, Ewa Majewska, Safia Noble, Griselda Pollock, Gayatri Chakravorty 
Spivak, and Hito Steyerl. Immersed in both critical thinking and feminist 
sensibilities, the concept of the perception machine outlined in the book 
is thus ultimately an attempt on my part to offer a more nuanced, more 
ecological, and less paternalistic understanding of what it means to live in 
a world which is increasingly dependent on the production and creation 
of mechanical images—­and whose own self-­image, increasingly expanded 
to a planetary scale, is a product of such images. Yet this is not a book writ­
ten from a planetary perspective, with its eye high in the sky: it emerges 
instead from among wire tangles, image torrents, and data flows, coming 
together as it does amidst the matter of media, the piles of techno-­rubbish, 
the threat of organic and nonorganic viruses. The book is driven by an 
awareness that “the planet” does not care, but also that this lack of care 
need not—­indeed should not—­be mutual. Its approach could be described 
as feminist eco-­eco-­punk, which is not an aesthetic stand but rather an 
ethical position on how to live in a media-­dirty world.32 A critical feminist 
sensibility shaping the argument of this book will build toward a pro­
posal for “a planetary micro-­vision for a world in crisis” outlined in the 
last chapter.
The echolalia-­sounding concept of “eco-­eco-­punk” riffs on variations 
of the science-­fiction genres that merge punk’s irreverent aesthetic with a 
creative mobilization of canceled futurity, while providing it with the rel­
evant cultural imprint: from cyberpunk, steampunk, and biopunk through 
to greenpunk and, last but not least, ecopunk.33 From the original punk, 
eco-­eco-­punk inherits “an adversarial relationship to consensus reality.”34 
From cyberpunk it borrows a gritty, dystopian view of the techno-­future 
in which one gets by by making do. Eco-­eco-­punk encapsulates the irrev­
erent and self-­sustaining spirit of punk, but it also reworks cyberpunk’s 
sense of general alienation into a form of active and creative engagement 
with the world’s decaying systems and infrastructures. In foregrounding 
the intertwined aspects of unfolding ecological-­economic disasters, eco-­eco-­
punk deromanticizes the decay while giving the situation a political twist. 
It also multiplies punk’s agency, beyond the heroism of the singular male 
outcast-­savior.

14	
Introduction
Eco-­eco-­punk involves acknowledging the huge—­and hugely complex—­
ensemble of images, data, and infrastructures, but refusing to hold any of it 
in my hand, mind, or eye as just an object of analysis. Instead, it involves 
countering with what it means to inhabit the perception machine. This 
eco-­eco-­punk engagement with a media-­dirty world will result in a neces­
sary, and indeed programmatic, conceptual tangle. This is why the book 
will develop a cluster of concepts with which to understand photography, 
imaging, and the wider image ecology today. Aside from the said “eco-­eco-­
punk” and the book’s organizing concept of the “perception machine,” 
throughout the course of the book I will outline a “philosophy of after-­
photography,” design an “AUTO-­FOTO-­KINO,” propose a “planetary 
micro-­vision” that will involve producing some “loser images,” and rethink 
photography as a form of “sensography.” This knotty and “messy-­media” 
approach has already been manifested in the visual preface to this book, 
which features a series of collages made by myself in an attempt to show, 
and allow readers to sense, what the book is about. The images themselves 
are media-­dirty, just like the wider environment from which the argument 
of the book flows.
And thus, while my argument in the book is theoretical, it is also an 
attempt to think about and with images seriously, an endeavor that reflects 
my ongoing mode of working with words and images in my interwoven 
scholarly and artistic practice. I recognize and embrace the formative role 
of linear signs, aka writing, in establishing a community of knowledge 
and knowers, and thus forming a historical consciousness. But I am also 
aware of the separate affordances—­affective, perceptive, and haptic—­that 
seeing and making images, including photographs, carry. The images this 
book engages with have been drawn from a wide set of registers and prac­
tices, although they have all been mechanically produced, in one way or 
another. Some of them are works identified as “art,” not so much because I 
consider art a privileged mode of studying phenomena, but rather because 
I value the expertise and labor of art schools, art institutions, and art cura­
tors in teaching us to notice things worth noticing, while stabilizing the 
flows of images into meaningful experiences. Image-­based projects recog­
nized as “art” therefore serve here as conceptual shortcuts, showing us 
something as worth seeing—­although many of the projects I look at defi­
nitely have more of an “infra-­artistic” character.35 My own creative prac­
tice involving image-­making appears in the argument at times, cutting 

Photo Flows in the Perception Machine	
15
through the linear text with an attempt to see and convey something in a 
different mode.
With this, my goal is to acknowledge the richness of the universe of 
mechanical images being produced today, by a variety of human and non­
human actors, and aimed at a variety of human and nonhuman recipients. 
The image cloud that envelops the book’s creation—­and that envelops us 
all—­is thus also being made from social media feeds featuring anything 
from photojournalism to selfie journalism, Internet memes, Instagram ads, 
Snapchat ephemera, Tinder faces, dick pics, lol cats, online shopping grids, 
security cameras’ facial records, and QR codes, to list just some of the streams 
and particles that constitute it. All those image flows can also be reconceived 
as transfers and exchanges of seemingly limitless amounts of image data. I 
am thus interested not just in images but also in their infrastructures—­from 
the human architecture of our eyes, brains, and whole bodies through to 
the image-­making equipment, the flows of electricity in different bodies 
and media, the wired and wireless connections between media systems, the 
machine learning algorithms and the neural networks they work across, 
and, last but not least, the data centers and server farms hosting them.
Even though the rationale for trying to understand the perception 
machine is ethical, it does not offer a prescription for how to live. Instead, 
it makes some modest propositions for living in, with, and as images, in the 
planetary context by developing an awareness of a condition that has been 
enveloping us with an increasing intensity and speed. The model of the 
machine adopted in this book embraces both the regulatory and promis­
sory aspects of this concept as outlined in the work of Deleuze and Guattari. 
As Maurizio Lazzarato puts it with reference to those thinkers’ key idea, 
“The machine is open in many ways because it is a relation and a multiplic­
ity of relations: a relation with its own components, with other machines, 
with the world (its own associated milieu) and with humanity.”36 The inde­
terminacy of those relations, which is an inherent aspect of all relationality, 
means that they can always be redrawn, beyond the machine’s push toward 
performativity, efficiency, and exploitation—­in the direction of something 
we do not recognize yet. Exploring possibilities for making things better, 
the book is thus ultimately oriented toward activating the radical-­critical 
potential of the distributed and embodied perception machine. To put it in 
more figurative terms, it is about photographing ourselves a better future—­for 
human and nonhuman “us.”

16	
Introduction
The problem of a photographic future, which also entails dealing with 
the future of photography and everything else in the world, frames chapter 
1. After offering a historical overview of the medium’s exuberant life and 
frequently predicted demise, this chapter investigates to what extent the 
incessant posing of the question about photography’s future can be seen 
as a reflection of our human anxiety about the disappearance of our sub­
jectivity, and of our picture of ourselves and the world—­or even, tout court, 
about the disappearance of ourselves and the world. Engaging closely with 
Flusser’s writings as well as my experience of teaching photography and 
creative media, the chapter enquires whether we can mobilize photography 
to enable a different modality of capturing perception, knowledge, and self-­
knowledge, beyond the linear structure of the book.
Chapter 2, “A Philosophy of After-­Photography,” discusses the affective 
and material forces that drive the photographic medium today—­from the 
desires of its users, who are constantly making and sharing digital snaps 
while being captured as images, through to the (il)logic of machine learn­
ing databases, which is increasingly shaping our self-­image, society, and 
politics. The philosophy of after-­photography outlined in this chapter goes 
beyond the focus on the objecthood of the image-­making medium to high­
light a time “after photography.” It offers a mode of thinking and seeing for 
a future that will be photographic—­for better or for worse. Demonstrating 
that it is through the discourses of neuroscience and computation that 
photography has been framed and reframed through its different technical 
iterations, the chapter assembles a stock of conceptual building blocks to 
be used in the construction of “the perception machine” in the chapters 
that follow.
Chapter 3 takes a proof-­of-­concept approach to explore the working of 
“the perception machine.” It proposes that the practice of screenshotting 
(“cutting” into the media flow of a video game by a player to collect photo-­
like mementos from the game) can be seen as paradigmatic of human per­
ception. Screenshotting can also become a way of retraining players’ eyes, 
bodies, and minds in both seeing the world and understanding perception 
better. I suggest that this experience generates new forms of sensation and 
cognition for experienced gamers as well as game novices. It offers valuable 
lessons for future developments in modeling human vision in machines. 
The argument of this chapter is built around images from my artwork 

Photo Flows in the Perception Machine	
17
Flowcuts (2020), shot in two postapocalyptic video games, Everybody’s Gone 
to the Rapture and The Last of Us.
Continuing with the interrogation of imaging and perception, the argu­
ment of chapter 4 focuses on the problem of machine vision—­as well as 
highlighting the problem with machine vision. The chapter’s title, “From 
Machine Vision to a Nontrivial Perception Machine,” draws on two sci­
ence papers by authors who made a significant contribution to the debate 
on the relationship between humans and machines: Heinz von Foerster’s 
1971 article “Perception of the Future and the Future of Perception,” in 
which the concept of a “non-­trivial machine” is introduced; and Gerald 
M. Edelman and George N. Reeke Jr.’s 1990 article “Is It Possible to Con­
struct a Perception Machine?” I engage with these papers in an attempt to 
construct a conceptual scaffolding for a non-­Google-­led theory and praxis 
of machine perception while interrogating the role of photography and 
other forms of imaging in industry efforts to get machines to “see.” After 
analysis of bias and other forms of discrimination in machine vision, and 
the wider infrastructures that underpin it, the chapter concludes by pos­
tulating that a nontrivial perception machine must be both antiracist and 
counterimperialist.
While the previous chapter explored some possible ways of not just con­
structing but also reprogramming the perception machine, chapter 5 zooms 
in on one particular technology of vision in which visual culture theorists 
have traditionally sought a perceptive opening: cinema. In his essay “After 
Cinema,” Lazzarato argues that cinema is “no longer representative of the 
conditions of collective perception.”37 Any smartphone can now shoot 
photos at a speed of video—­and it can shoot video in photo resolution. 
Building on Lazzarato’s argument, I discuss the increasing overlap between 
still and moving images in digital practice. I also propose the concept and 
practice of AUTO-­FOTO-­KINO as one possible enactment of emancipatory 
agency from within the algorithmically driven image complex. The chapter 
discusses my reworking, with the help of AI, of the best-­known photofilm, 
Chris Marker’s postapocalyptic La Jetée, as a gender-­fluid feminist counter­
apocalypse. Through this, I explore some ways of creatively engaging auto­
mation to offer a different vision of the future.
The above-­described experiments lead me to pose, in chapter 6, a ques­
tion about the possibility of photographing the future. Starting from the TV 

18	
Introduction
series Devs (dir. Alex Garland, 2020), which visualizes the problem of pre­
dicting the future by capturing an image of it, I move on to the mobilization 
of photography and other forms of imaging in constructing predictions in 
different disciplines. Mindful of the fact that “the image” is a cornerstone 
of the neuroscientific rhetorical register, I look at the use of this concept in 
the theories of consciousness outlined by two leading researchers: Anto­
nio Damasio and Anil Seth. Specifically, I analyze the role of images in 
Dama­sio’s and Seth’s respective theories of perception, and the possibil­
ity of conceptualizing consciousness as a person’s orientation toward the 
future, which involves making images of that future. The automaticity of 
this process, be it in mental-­image making or in the production of mechan­
ical—­or, to use Flusser’s term, technical—­images of the future, leads to the 
discussion of predictive technology, widely applied in areas such as weather 
forecasts, stock markets, epidemiology, and consumer behavior.
The book’s final chapter involves an actual attempt to image a (better) 
future. Engaging with planetarity as an important trope in contemporary 
cultural and visual theory, it offers two alternative ways of performing it, 
encapsulated by two case studies. The first one investigates still and mov­
ing images of picturesque locations, taken by drones and collected on social 
media. The focus of my critique is not on the machinic aspect of vision 
per se or on its aerial elevation, but rather on the assumed heroism of the 
eye-­in-­the-­sky drone acrobatics. In response, I propose a case study from 
my own art practice, titled Feminist with a Drone. Presented in the form of 
images and field notes, the work explores ways of mobilizing drone tech­
nology to enact a less masterful and less heroic viewpoint. Working against 
the register of “amazing” views produced from high in the sky, I outline, 
with a nod to writer-­artist Hito Steyerl, the concept of “loser images” as a 
feminist rejoinder to the dominant aerial aesthetics. I then consider to what 
extent the production and curation of such loser images can be deployed 
toward an enactment of a different relationship to our habitat.
Summarizing the book’s findings, the conclusion suggests that photog­
raphy is changing in its encounter with other media technologies (comput­
ers, sensors) to become a form of “sensography.” These changes lead to a 
reconfiguration of perception on an individual, societal, and infrastructural 
level. I then pose the question of whether this ever-­enclosing image enve­
lope, recently dubbed “the metaverse,” can be more than another business 
venture for Global Tech.

Photo Flows in the Perception Machine	
19
To access the images from my practice discussed in the book and the two 
films, visit https://www.nonhuman.photography/perception-machine, or scan 
the QR code below for direct access.


1  Does Photography Have a Future? (Does Anything Else?)
Figure 1.1
Screenshot from the YouTube version of Vilém Flusser’s Towards a Philosophy of 
Photography as Performed by Ian James, 2015. Featuring the video An Assortment of 
Waiting Areas, HD animation, 2014.

22	
Chapter 1
Photography’s modern past
Although its specter had haunted the domains of science and art on both 
sides of the English Channel since the early days of the nineteenth century, 
the technology of photography as a way of making singular monochrome 
pictures on a metal plate was made public in 1839, in Louis-­Jacques-­Mandé 
Daguerre’s presentation to the French Academy of Sciences on January 7. 
Its arrival was met with much initial enthusiasm—­John Ruskin portrayed 
daguerreotypes as “glorious things” and “the most marvellous invention of 
the century,” while Edgar Allan Poe saw in photography “the most impor­
tant and perhaps the most extraordinary triumph of modern science.”1 Yet, 
as with the invention of many other media that have significantly altered 
the way humans see themselves, communicate with one another, and pic­
ture the world, the arrival of photography—­although largely welcomed by 
the growing middle class, whose status it represented and consolidated in 
France, England, and the United States2—­also generated anxiety in some 
sectors of society. As Philip McCouat reports,
One outraged German newspaper thundered, “To fix fleeting images is not only 
impossible . . . it is a sacrilege . . . God has created man in his image and no human 
machine can capture the image of God. He would have to betray all his Eternal 
Principles to allow a Frenchman in Paris to unleash such a diabolical invention 
upon the world.” Baudelaire described photography as “art’s most mortal enemy” 
and as “that upstart art form, the natural and pitifully literal medium of expression 
for a self-­congratulatory, materialist bourgeois class.” Other reputed doom-­laden 
predictions were that photography signified “the end of art” (J.M.W. Turner); and 
that painting would become “dead” (Delaroche) or “obsolete” (Flaubert).
3
The anxiety generated by photography’s arrival can perhaps be explained 
by the fact that photography was seen to be altering the spatiotemporal 
organization of the world. As an “impressioning” medium, it was capable 
of carving time and fixing it by imprinting it on different surfaces. William 
Henry Fox Talbot, English inventor of a paper-­based, reversed photographic 
process which initially gained less popularity than the one rolled out by 
Daguerre, even claimed “that the primary subject of every photograph 
was . . . time itself.”4 Photography made time visible while foregrounding its 
framing—­and hence also its finitude for individual modern subjects. Those 
very subjects did not preexist the photographic medium but were rather 
constituted in its representational and communicative loop. Jonathan 

Does Photography Have a Future? (Does Anything Else?)	
23
Crary points out that “the shifting process of one’s own subjectivity expe­
rienced in time became synonymous with the act of seeing, dissolving the 
Cartesian ideal completely focused on an object.”5 This development took 
place against the background of the wider socioeconomic transformation 
across Europe and the United States, with progressing industrialization, 
expanding railway networks, and the appearance of the telegraph. Those 
changes were accompanied by a radical shift in the modes of knowing 
the world, with attempts to understand the workings of God the creator 
gradually giving way to trying to understand the machinations of nature. 
It has been argued that various social groups, from middle classes to labor­
ers, across different continents, became ready for their own constitution 
as modern subjects: they were part of the fomentation of the “burning” 
desire6 for both seeing photographs and seeing themselves photographed. 
The arrival of instantaneous photography in 1877 thanks to Eadweard 
Muybridge’s experiments with “stopping time” by photographing animals 
and humans in motion, frame by frame, was seen, to cite Rebecca Sol­
nit, as “violent, abrupt, glorious, like lightning, a sudden shock showing a 
transformed world.”7
That there exists a mutually constitutive relationship between photog­
raphy and modernity has been argued by many writers, from Walter Benja­
min through to Susan Sontag and Solnit.8 In recent years scholars such as 
Ariella Aïsha Azoulay, Jonathan Beller, and Andrew Dewdney have explored 
darker aspects of this relationship.9 The point I want to make in the open­
ing section of this chapter on the future of the photographic medium is 
that there exist three key “lightening” moments in the history of photogra­
phy when a given stage of technological development became a conduit for 
the articulation of wider social concerns not just about the present but also 
about the future. Photography is of course not the only medium through 
which concerns are articulated, but, due to its role as a pencil of nature and 
a mirror of the world, it allows each subsequent generation to ask questions 
about its own self-­image and self-­projection—­a process unfolding across 
the increasing liquidation of social foundations and structures. The three 
key moments I associate with the posing of some fundamental or indeed 
existential questions raised by, and by means of, photography can be con­
nected with the following three instances: the invention and populariza­
tion of the photographic medium in the early to mid-­nineteenth century, 
the shift from analog to digital photography in the last two decades of the 

24	
Chapter 1
twentieth century, and the present rise of “after-­photography” as a result 
of developments in computation, specifically in CGI and AI. To paint in 
somewhat thick brushstrokes, these three instances coincide with specific 
moments in the industrial history of the modern world: (1) the expansion of 
the world for certain classes as a result of the development of transport and 
communication networks (the railway, the steamship, and the telegraph), 
coupled with the facilitation of imperialist politics, (2) the fantasy of the 
unification of the world promoted by globalization, with the increased flow 
of goods, services, and people, the rise of technological obsolescence, and 
the expansion of a throwaway culture, and (3) the dematerialization of “the 
world” into what used to be called “the cloud” but is now being renamed 
“the metaverse,” with an increasing automation of both labor and leisure, 
and an impending planetary threat of the human—­and human habitat—­
being designed into nonexistence.
The reports of photography’s death are greatly exaggerated
Given photography’s foundational role in the emergence of modern West­
ern subjectivity and its associated modes of perception and knowledge-­
building—­a role which arguably continues to this day—­it is understandable 
that its own ongoing transformation should evoke so much anxiety. As a 
medium designed to fix things, its instability serves as a constant reminder 
of the fact that things cannot be fixed once and for all, that the world is in 
flux, and that any picture we make of it is only ever a temporary stabiliza­
tion of molecules, be it as an image or thing. Moreover, photography can 
play the role of a displacement object, one that is made to carry the worry 
about the flux while offering to hold it at bay. This perhaps explains why, 
as put, somewhat tongue-­in-­cheek, by Geoffrey Batchen in the “Epitaph” 
to his Burning with Desire, “everyone seems to want to talk about photogra­
phy’s death.”10 Yet Batchen goes on to point out that not only has photog­
raphy “been associated with death since the beginning,” with the medium’s 
arrival coinciding “with the demise of the pre-­modern episteme,” but also 
that “death has been part and parcel of photography’s life.”11 This “perverse 
interweave of life and death”12 is partly technology-­specific: the low sensi­
tivity of photographic materials in the early days of the medium, requiring 
long exposure times, resulted in living bodies looking as if they were dead. 
For generations of photography students, the medium was memorialized 

Does Photography Have a Future? (Does Anything Else?)	
25
by Roland Barthes in his field-­defining Camera Lucida13—­as a mausoleum 
for his departed mother and an empty tomb for himself.
I staged a symbolic burial of photography’s compulsive attachment to 
death in a previous work, in which I offered to read photography as first 
and foremost a vital, life-­shaping force. This was because photography not 
only shapes our everyday existence but also partakes of the Earth’s and 
Sun’s vibrant and life-­giving properties.14 To revisit the matter in more fune­
real terms here is not to change my position but rather to recognize, with 
Batchen, the persistence of death as a trope in debates on the medium. This 
persistence functions on two levels: one positions photographs as remind­
ers of death, its representations or even enactments, the other sees photog­
raphy itself as dying—­and us humans as dying with it, as its subjects. One 
does not need a complex psychoanalytic reading to see this tendency as an 
attempt to ward off death by means of fixing the photographic discourse 
and its object, for a little while at least.
Yet I would like to explore whether we can do better than this, whether 
an alternative model—­more satisfactory on a philosophical level and more 
sound psychologically—­could emerge from this perverse interweave of life 
and death Batchen talks about. If the incessant posing of the question about 
photography’s future is primarily a reflection of our human anxiety about 
the disappearance of our subjectivity, and of our picture of ourselves and 
the world, or even, tout court, about the disappearance of ourselves and the 
world, can we mobilize photography to enable a different mode of percep­
tion and self-­knowledge? Batchen himself ends his “Epitaph” by suggesting 
that “Photography’s passing must necessarily entail the inscription of 
another way of seeing—­and of being.”15 His own response to this (some­
what circular) argument is disappointingly, and limitedly, humanist. In 
stating that “while the human survives, so will human values and human 
culture,”16 he confines photography to the enactment of those human val­
ues and the “human culture” they supposedly belong to, while prohibiting 
them from challenging them while radically changing the human. I would 
like to pick up the challenge offered by Batchen’s earlier statement and 
investigate, with the full mobilization of the theoretical apparatus and vari­
ous image practices, whether what I call “a philosophy of after-­photography” 
(which I will expound more fully in chapter 2) could lead us to another way 
of seeing and being. Can the current moment of both photographic and 
existential instability serve as this opening toward something new? Can the 

26	
Chapter 1
photographic medium “as we know it”—­and as we perhaps do not know it 
yet—­offer us a new way of picturing and understanding that opening? Can 
it help ensure a photographic future?
Media existentialism: Vilém Flusser redux
The present context for the exploration of these mortal anxieties has been 
provided by a secular return of all sorts of existential finalisms, unfolding 
across different scales: some of them taking place on a species level (“end of 
man,” the Sixth Extinction, Covid-­19), others on a planetary one (Anthro­
pocene, heat death, nuclear obliteration). Photography and other forms of 
mechanical images such as films and TV have certainly played a role in 
aiding us in envisaging our demise. Yet, its representational role aside, it 
is worth delving deeper into photographic practice, with its apparatuses 
and networks, to trace the constitutive role of mechanical image-­making in 
enacting a certain vision of the future—­or even enacting a certain future, 
full stop. One thinker who can help us with developing such a new analytic 
framework for understanding the world today—­which for him is equivalent 
with the world of images—­is the Czech-­born writer and philosopher Vilém 
Flusser (1920–­1991). A nomad at heart, if not always by choice, with the 
ruinous legacy of the Holocaust and antisemitism casting a dark shadow 
over both his family history and his work, Flusser wrote in multiple lan­
guages, disciplines, registers, and styles, across several continents, decades, 
and intellectual currents. His work on photography and other media was 
shaped largely in the early 1980s. This was a time when media production 
had already become mechanized in the Benjaminian sense, with photo­
graphs’ and films’ reproducibility in the early twentieth century leading 
to the loss of cultural artifacts’ uniqueness as singular objects endowed 
with a special aura and value, and also to their democratization and their 
becoming-­media, but it had not yet entered the era of mass digitization. 
Yet Flusser’s analyses are uncannily prescient in grasping the consequences 
of the automation of image production, perception, and reception, conse­
quences that we see today not just in photography, video, and other forms 
of communication such as journalism and literature, but also in politics.
In outlining what we might term a “nomadic media existentialism,” 
Flusser pays particular attention to images, and even more to techni­
cal images, which he defines as “mosaics assembled from particles.”17 He 

Does Photography Have a Future? (Does Anything Else?)	
27
differentiates them from “traditional images” such as cave or oil paint­
ings, which for him have a different relationship to reality: the former are 
mimetic, the latter function as visualizations, i.e., models. “Traditional 
images,” created by hand, are two-­dimensional surfaces made up of their 
background (cave wall, canvas) and inscription (pigment, oil paint), while 
technical images, created by machines, are “without dimension”18 because 
they are made from mathematical code. Traditional images, which are akin 
to representations, are to be apprehended as ensembles of features, in their 
totality, with the human eye having to scan them in a circular manner 
in an attempt to grasp their meaning. They thus introduce the viewer to 
recurrent, or eternal, time, creating a sense of a reality which is itself cir­
cular. Technical images, in turn, are much more abstract. They have been 
mathematically programmed and thus require linear processing to emerge 
as images. Through this course of action, they introduce viewers to the idea 
of linear time. Mark Poster was right to raise a suspicion about the rigidity 
or even accuracy of this distinction between the two types of images,19 one 
that was premised on the excessive ontologization of the earlier forms of 
visual expression as ritualistic and magic-­driven, at the expense of appre­
ciating their specific technicity. Yet this reservation does not diminish the 
significance of Flusser’s argument, which is premised on noticing the tech­
nicity of (at least some) images in the first place, i.e., noticing their infor­
mational value.
Photographs, addressed most explicitly in Flusser’s book Towards a Phi­
losophy of Photography, are one class of such technical images, alongside 
film, television, video, and other hybrid media. Taking analog photographs 
and other mechanically reproduced images as his starting point, we must 
note that Flusser is not really looking at them—­but rather far beyond them, 
into the future of both images and humanity. This future is looking rather 
bleak: Flusser goes so far as to describe it as an ultimate catastrophe, because 
“images themselves are apocalyptic.”20 We will come back to this provoca­
tive formulation later on. For now, let us ask whether, by not really looking 
at photographs, Flusser is not repeating the error of many other theorists 
who have thought about media without actually using them in any mean­
ingful way, thus reducing the operational technicity of those media and 
the outcomes of those operations to the banality of a mere example—­or, 
worse, to a figment of their imagination. He would be in good company 
here: as Flusser’s translator and writer Nancy Roth observes, “Virtually all 

28	
Chapter 1
of the voices that have substantially shaped contemporary photographic 
‘orthodoxy,’ not only the historians, but critics, including Benjamin (1968), 
Barthes (1981), Sontag (1978), . . . wrote as receivers and judges of pho­
tographs, from the position Barthes designated the Spectator.”21 Yet Roth 
jumps to Flusser’s defense by making an important differentiation: “As 
Barthes is looking at photographs, Flusser is looking at photographing. . . . 
[B]y framing his topic as a gesture, a particular kind of movement between 
states of consciousness and states of affairs, Flusser was able, in a way no 
other writer on photography has been, to take the photographer’s part.”22 
There is therefore a rationale for Flusser’s avoidance of looking not just at 
photographs but also at photographed objects. Instead of looking at them, 
Flusser is looking through the photographic flow of images, and toward a 
future that, to cite Poster, entails “a more complex possibility for multi­
ple assemblages of the human and the machine, not as prostheses for the 
human but as mixtures of human-­machine in which the outcome or spe­
cific forms of the relation are not prefigured in the initial conceptualization 
of the relation.”23 Flusser himself argues that interest in technical images 
on the part of “future men and women” will have “existential” value,24 as it 
will allow them to dream up new visions of the world, and of their place in 
it. Images for him thus serve as devices, offering an insight into the modern 
world in which we are all being constituted by the technical apparatus, 
becoming its functionaries.
The apparatus as an image-­capture and world-­capture machine
The notion of the apparatus is crucial in Flusser’s theory. A kin concept to 
Foucault’s dispositif, a sociopolitical arrangement whose role was to enact 
something by delimitation, regulation, and governance, the Flusserian 
apparatus—­especially as introduced in Towards a Philosophy of Photography—­
evokes clear associations with the (Foto)apparat as a camera, a perception 
machine that generates visual outputs in the world in a mechanical way. 
Yet Flusser, as is often his way, plays with this concept, turning it around 
and twisting both its etymology and its function to arrive at something 
much more expansive and potent. Derived from the Latin word apparare, 
“to prepare,” an apparatus is “a thing that lies in wait or in readiness.”25 In 
other words, it is waiting to be actualized, being a function in need of an 
operator. It is in this sense perhaps that “apparatuses are not machines,”26 

Does Photography Have a Future? (Does Anything Else?)	
29
or not just machines. Extrapolating from the black box of the photographic 
camera, the concept embraces, in a nested manner, different layers of 
reality that enact functions of different levels of complexity. Flusser thus 
explains that the “camera functions on behalf of the photographic indus­
try, which functions on behalf of the industrial complex, which functions 
on behalf of the socio-­economic apparatus, and so on.”27 The rationale for 
using the term “apparatus” for naming all these different levels of real­
ity becomes clear when Flusser reveals that the key issue “is who devel­
ops its program.”28 His ultimate concern is therefore with the multilayered 
automation of our lives as enacted in and by its institutions, machines, 
and media. They all have been preprogrammed in advance, with our role 
reduced to that of functionaries, or operators of apparatuses. Our task, in 
turn, lies not so much in understanding those programs—­a task Flusser has 
already assumed is to a large extent futile—­but rather in producing better 
images of the world. Those images will need to be capable of in-­forming the 
world rather than mindlessly executing its operating commands, repeating 
the already known.
In his essay on the continued relevance of Flusser published in the Los 
Angeles Review of Books, writer Ken Goldsmith proclaims:
After Flusser, the photo criticism of Sontag or Barthes, each of whom mostly 
ignores the apparatus in favor of the artifact, appears to miss the point entirely. 
Their achingly beautiful literary readings of the photograph as memento mori 
or studies in studium and punctum have no place in the Flusserian universe. 
While Sontag makes pronouncements like, “Photography is an elegiac art, a twi­
light art. Most subjects photographed are, just by virtue of being photographed, 
touched with pathos,” Flusser counters that readings like Sontag’s are simply 
more fodder for the apparatus: “A number of human beings are struggling against 
this automatic programming . . . attempting to create a space for human inten­
tion in a world dominated by apparatuses. However, the apparatuses themselves 
automatically assimilate these attempts at liberation and enrich their programs 
with them.”
29
This reading offers a useful explanation of Flusser’s claim, one which echoes 
Marshall McLuhan’s communication model, that “it is not what is shown 
in a technical image but rather the technical image itself that is the mes­
sage.”30 With this, Flusser provides a deep insight into the technologi­
cal setup of the world we have constructed—­a world that also constructs 
us humans on a number of levels, with the message of technical images 
being “significant” and “commanding.”31 Flusser goes on to argue that 

30	
Chapter 1
the technical images that surround us “signify models, instructions about 
the way society should experience, perceive, evaluate, and behave.”32 His 
intimations were developed at the dawn of the digital era, long before the 
outpouring of social media influencers, with their image-­based communi­
cation platforms. Yet his conclusions seem to have become validated by the 
fact that, today, restaurants, museum attractions, holiday destinations, and 
whole cities are being designed to look good on Instagram, thus feeding, 
via the flow of images, our desires, experiences, and purchases while also 
serving as blueprints for altering our environment. Our faces and bodies are 
changing too: cosmetic doctor Tijion Esho has coined the term “Snapchat 
dysmorphia” to refer to the “phenomenon of people requesting procedures 
to resemble their digital image,”33 which had been manipulated with apps 
such as Facetune.
The image apocalypse
This mode of looking through the image flow does not mean that Flusser 
would not be able to recognize or acknowledge the content of a particular 
image: the specific arrangement of particles into what to a human viewer 
looks like a conventionally happy wedding party, a birthday celebration, or 
a holiday in the sun. It is just that these images are so predictable, so cli­
chéd, and hence so redundant in the informational sense that Flusser moves 
beyond their superficial value and looks at them as objects in a broader 
communicative sense. (It goes without saying that I myself have taken a fair 
number of all those types of “redundant” images, recognizing the unique 
human pleasure and compulsion involved in both taking them and look­
ing at them.) Yet we could perhaps go so far as to say that Flusser perceives 
images the way computers—­and specifically, machine vision systems—­do: 
breaking an image into a cluster of pixels to be analyzed for similarity and 
difference with other clusters in the database, and then matching it against 
the available categories and labels. Importantly, Flusser’s theory allows us to 
concede that this machinic way of looking is not just a feature of machines, 
or an eccentric philosopher looking, literally, against the grain. Using his 
theory, we can perhaps surmise that most humans now look at most images 
automatically, scanning them for similarity and difference, engaging in 
quick categorization (on a binary level: like/not like; or a semantic one, via 
comments and hashtags), and going along with the image flow.

Does Photography Have a Future? (Does Anything Else?)	
31
The framing process for Flusser’s theory of images and, more broadly, for 
his theory of media is provided by a nexus of disciplines, from philosophy 
through to cybernetics and communication theory, all the way to thermo­
dynamics and particle physics. But he also reveals a strong commitment 
to writing as a form of zigzagging through ideas, concepts, and modes of 
expression to produce what could be described as thinking in action. This 
is undertaken in spite of Flusser’s broader prophecy about the waning of 
writing as a mode expression for the contemporary human, offering instead 
that we are moving toward a postwriting form of culture, driven by techni­
cal images. Indeed, for Flusser writing as the dominant mode of develop­
ing and transmitting a linear argument has no future: it has already been 
replaced, to a large extent, by communication via technical images. Given 
that Flusser was writing in the early 1980s, before digital technology radi­
cally altered our speed and form of communication, before blogging gave 
way to image sharing via Instagram, Snapchat, and WeChat, and before 
reading was largely replaced by scrolling and touching, his theory of the 
end of print is indeed nothing short of prophetic. In a now-­classic 2008 
essay analyzing the state of photography in the age of the phone camera, 
digital snapshot, and broadband, Daniel Rubinstein and Katrina Sluis look 
at a research project analyzing the practice of users of the photo-­sharing 
platform Flickr, many of whom said they had given up blogging because 
it was “too much work” and who now favored photography as a way of 
sharing their experiences. Rubinstein and Sluis argue that “the practices 
of moblogging (blogging with a mobile phone) and photoblogging (blog­
ging with photographs rather then text) further exploit the way in which 
mobile phone images have become a kind of visual speech—­an immediate, 
intimate form of communication that replaces writing.”34 Contemporary 
users of digital platforms and media thus seem to be confirming Flusser’s 
tongue-­in-­cheek assessment that “images . . . are not so repulsive as massive 
rows of fat books.”35
It is worth probing further why Flusser would resort to the idea of the 
image apocalypse when looking through images into the future. One 
may be tempted to equate his conceptualization with the dismissal of the 
increasing photographic output in terms of an image deluge. This latter 
metaphor was poignantly encapsulated by Erik Kessels—­a Dutch photogra­
pher, curator, advertiser, and designer whose mode of operating makes him 
a Jeff Koons of the photography world—­in his installation 24 HRS in Photos. 

32	
Chapter 1
In November 2011 Kessels filled an Amsterdam art gallery with prints of 
images that had been uploaded to Flickr over a twenty-­four-­hour period. 
The visitors were presented with heaps of what looked like debris, spilling 
everywhere. The fact that this spillage had been carefully controlled by a 
number of wooden frames into which it had been placed to create this illu­
sion of a “flow” not only tells us something about the artist’s visual cant 
but also points to our wider desire for beautiful ruins, with the aestheticiza­
tion of the apocalypse often having an anesthetic function. And thus the 
project could easily be read as an indictment of photography today, with its 
pointless content and visual sameness. Yet, following Elizabeth Kessler, it is 
also possible to read the installation as revealing the Flusserian apparatus 
in action, demonstrating human and machinic forces at work in the pro­
duction of (the picture of) the world, while bringing forth a shared “thing­
ness” of our media ecologies. “A person chose when and how to take each 
picture, but broader influences—­human and nonhuman—­shape the way 
we represent, see, and live in the world.”36 The image apocalypse does not 
therefore have to mean humans perishing in the debris of the world, but 
rather the expiration of the Anthropocene hubris enacted by the drowning 
of its core subject. Well versed in the canonical texts of Western culture, 
including its religious writings, Flusser was no doubt aware that the apoca­
lypse is not just a catastrophe and that its occurrence, come what may, also 
carries a redemptive potential.
Before we move on to the redemptive aspects of the apocalypse, though, 
we need to recognize that there are different levels of there being “no 
future” announced in Flusser’s work, with entropy, or heat death—­an occur­
rence resulting from the dissipation of information as encompassed by the 
second law of thermodynamics—­constituting our world’s event horizon. 
Finalist expectations have organized the worldview of many continental 
philosophers, from the singular human’s horizon of death as encountered 
in the writing of Martin Heidegger and Jean-­Paul Sartre through to the 
death of the Sun as the star that nourishes our planet in the writings of 
Jean-­François Lyotard. In a similar vein, Flusser’s planetary perspective is 
meant to allow us to come to terms with the absurdity of the world, with 
its ultimate lack of meaning. But this is a form of pragmatic absurdism, one 
devoid of wallowing in tragedy and loss. Flusser accepts from the word go 
that the fate of the universe is subject to chance, that the endgame of this 
chance is entropy, and that any occurrences, be they “galactic spirals, living 

Does Photography Have a Future? (Does Anything Else?)	
33
cells, or human brains,” are the result of improbable coincidences, “errone­
ous” exceptions “to the general rule of increasing entropy.”37 Yet he quickly 
moves beyond that realization to introduce a differentiation between the 
cosmic program of the universe, which we cannot do very much about, and 
the human-­designed program of the apparatus, which remains subject to 
human control—­or which at least entails the possibility of the human wresting 
away some degree of control, be it through insurgence or chance. “Envisioners 
are people who try to turn an automatic apparatus against its own condi­
tion of being automatic.”38 Any act of resistance can therefore only come 
from within and via the apparatus. Flusser may be no photographer but he 
himself takes on the role of an enframer and an informer: someone who 
can rearrange particles, or pixels, to create a new “mosaic,” provide new 
information, and offer a new vision. Creativity as an act of working against 
the machine, not in a Luddite manner that rejects it completely but rather 
in defiance of its program, is a task he implores us all to adopt, while there 
is still time.
Flusser is thus interested in photography as a mode of thinking and see­
ing to come, or one that has already partly come. His assessment that “we 
live in an illusory world of technical images, and we increasingly experi­
ence, recognize, evaluate, and act as a function of these images,” refers to 
the fact that the world is not “immediately accessible” to us.39 We need 
images to make it “comprehensible.”40 This diagnosis applies even more 
aptly to the era of social media and wide image sharing, although it is fair to 
conclude that this pedagogic and mediating function of images is gradually 
forgotten, with images losing their character of maps guiding us through 
the world, as Flusser points out in Towards a Philosophy of Photography, and 
beginning instead to function as objects projected into the world. Even­
tually the whole world will become a screen, with our creative power of 
imagination giving way to collective hallucination. For Flusser, photogra­
phy serves as a model for understanding the functioning of the apparatus, 
with us becoming its functionaries—­but it also entails the possibility of 
taking the apparatus to task. It can thus also serve as a laboratory for seeing 
otherwise, for reprogramming our vision of the world by creating better, 
more in-­formed, pictures of it, with technical images being “phantoms that 
can give the world, and us, meaning.”41 It is in this sense that photography 
for Flusser has existential significance. While he recognizes that entropic 
decay is already part of our everyday experience, expressing itself “in the 

34	
Chapter 1
receivers’ zeal for the sensational—­there have always to be new images 
because all images have long since begun to get boring,”42 he also observes, 
perhaps jokingly to some extent, that no apocalyptic catastrophe of nuclear 
or similar finalist kind is needed as “technical images are themselves the 
end.”43 Images themselves are thus “apocalyptic”44 because they replace the 
linearity of writing, and thus of history, with the cybernetic feedback loop 
of the image flow—­which becomes a magic circle of eternal return.
In the poignant assessment of the Instagram culture writer Dayna Tor­
torici has provided the following visceral account of what this image loop 
actually looks like in the age of social media:
What would I see? A fitness personality lunging across the sand. An adopted cat 
squirming in a paper bag. A Frank Lloyd Wright building. A sourdough loaf. A 
friend coming out as nonbinary. A mirror selfie. A handstand tutorial. Gallery 
opening. Nightclub candid. Outfit of the day. Medal from the Brooklyn half-­
marathon. New floating shelves. A screenshot of an article titled: “A 140-­year-­old 
tortoise wearing her 5-­day-­old son as a hat.” Protest. Crashing waves. Gabrielle 
Union’s baby. Wedding kiss. Friend’s young mother at the peak of her beauty for 
Mother’s Day. Ina Garten in a witch’s hat. Detail of a Bruegel painting. Brown 
egg in a white void, posted to @world_record_egg [verified blue checkmark], with 
the caption, “Let’s set a world record together and get the most liked post on 
Instagram, beating the current world record held by Kylie Jenner (18 million)! We 
got this [hands up emoji].” By the time I saw it, the egg had 53,764,664 likes. The 
comments read:
“What does the egg mean?”
“That’s a trick question.”
“The egg doesn’t mean anything.”
World records are meaningless in a culture defined by historical amnesia and the 
relentless invention of categories, I thought, and double tapped to like the egg.
45
Tortorici describes the experience of the human viewer of images (in this 
case, herself) being faced with an Instagram flow in terms of entering into 
a loop of exchanges not only with other human photographers but also 
with the platform’s algorithms. The loops of her brain activity generated by 
the intensifying visual stimuli coming from the pictures of friends, strang­
ers, objects, and places eventually lead to affective overdrive. This state of 
high agitation is being sustained by the repetitive behavior of sliding and 
tapping, with the viewer’s eyes and fingers enacting their own loopy dance 
in search of yet another dopamine hit. Flusser points out that the “general 
consensus between images and people”46—­as evidenced in the popularity 

Does Photography Have a Future? (Does Anything Else?)	
35
scores achieved by various images—­inscribes itself in the repetitive cycle: 
nature—­culture—­waste—­nature.47 We may update it as “Flower—­like—skip
—­the great outdoors. Someone I vaguely know—­heart—­unheart—­God I 
hate them. Food—­avo on toast—­skip—­#sohungry.” But there is an escape 
from, or at least an opening within, that world of “meaninglessness” and 
“historical amnesia” on its way to heat death. The redemptive aspect of 
Flusser’s apocalypse lies in the redefinition of the human as part of the 
“composting”48 loop. This entails dissolving the myth of the human “I” 
as “a core that must be preserved and developed.”49 Repositioned as “an 
abstract hook on which to hang concrete circumstances, the ‘I’ reveals itself 
to be nothing.”50 The Flusserian apocalypse thus involves destroying the 
Judeo-­Christian image of the human as a being made, albeit imperfectly, in 
the image of God and equipped with some core qualities, qualities whose 
nature has to be both veiled and revered. For Flusser, the “I” only emerges 
in a dialogue. Building on the philosophy of Martin Buber while giving it a 
cybernetic twist through his image of society as a “dialogical cerebral web,” 
Flusser claims that the “‘I’ is the one to whom someone says ‘you.’”51 The 
communication model of subjectivity is not just linked to acts of speech: as 
previously stated, for Flusser the medium really becomes the message—­and 
the messenger. Our consciousness is thus seen as being shaped by the media 
we make and use, and which also make and use us. This model of (say, 
Instagram-­driven) subjectivity dispenses with universal humanist signal 
points such as choice, decision, and free will. Flusser does nevertheless offer 
an opening within this cybernetic-­naturalistic theorization of the human. 
A being produced, literally, from media res, one whose brain “appeared as an 
accident in the natural game of chance,”52 the human has the possibility 
of mobilizing this aleatory game as a strategy. S/he can do this because the 
brain has an inbuilt tendency to turn against chance, defy accident, and 
reject entropy. However, for the human’s negentropic tendency to be actu­
alized, certain conditions need to be created. Flusser’s whole oeuvre, one 
might argue, is premised on identifying those conditions.
Photography and future-­making
As well as being authors of their own destruction, human beings—­who 
have inaugurated and then labeled a geological epoch in their name—­are 
also a hope for our planet’s survival. We can thus be said to have an inbuilt 

36	
Chapter 1
counterapocalyptic tendency. Even if this survival is just a delay, humans 
are an opportunity for the world, as well as functioning as its existential 
threat. The answer about the future—­of images, writing, the world, or any­
thing else—­is therefore also a matter of temporal scale. Images themselves, 
and, in particular, technical images as produced and exchanged via plat­
forms such as Instagram, Facebook, TikTok, or Snapchat, can serve as delay­
ing tactics in this process of information dissipation, even if the majority 
of them do nothing of the kind. As an Instagram user Flusser would have 
no doubt been bemused by the banality, sameness, and predictability of the 
output. Yet his existential-­level conclusion, “I play with images . . . to coex­
ist,”53 would surely serve as an encouragement not to sign off too quickly—­
from social media, from sociality, and from the world as we know it.
The answer to the question: “Does photography have a future?” thus 
depends on who is posing it and what time scale they operate on. If it 
is a curator or a gallery owner interested in securing investment in their 
Henri Cartier-­Bresson or Ansel Adams, they probably have a few good years 
left. If it is a photojournalist or professional wedding photographer, the 
writing is on the wall, at least as far as high income is concerned—­unless 
they can undergo a cross-­media shift to become a personal TV channel. 
For those who are too busy posting on Instagram or editing their selfies 
to be even interested in posing it, because most of the things they know 
come from living in the constant image flow, some other questions may be 
more pertinent than the one about the state of the photographic medium, 
its supporting institutions and its industry: When looking at, sharing, and 
contributing to the media flow, what kind of future do you see, for yourself 
and the world? What kind of existence can you carve out and enframe from 
the media and image flow?
Flusser himself already pronounced in 1985, several decades before the 
wide adoption of photogrammetry, CGI, and AI-­driven image-­making, that 
“photography is about to become redundant.”54 With this, he was refer­
ring to the increased generation of synthetic images, as a result of which 
it became impossible to “distinguish between depictions and models.”55 
Yet, even if the medium and practice of photography as we know them 
may indeed become obsolete, the function of photography will no doubt 
survive for a long time yet—­although its execution, in the fully informa­
tional guise, will perhaps only be performed by the very few. Like writ­
ing, which is “a mesh of accident and necessity” yet which is nevertheless 

Does Photography Have a Future? (Does Anything Else?)	
37
“experienced” by us (partially) code-­driven and (occasionally) code-­making 
humans “as a free gesture,”56 photography will present us with new oppor­
tunities, beyond trying to seek meaning and order in the world, be it via 
religion or everyday semiosis. To approach the medium of photography 
through the “existential register” outlined by Amanda Lagerkvist57 is to 
shift photography’s role from memory-­making to future-­making, while 
repositioning the photographer as the very maker (or, to use Flusser’s term, 
“envisioner”) of those futures. The future photographer’s gesture of point­
ing at the world can be expected to generate a whole new “revolutionary 
attitude,”58 one that will involve projecting meaning onto the world. Techni­
cal images, whether in their photographic or post-­photographic guises, will 
function as such projections. Through this process photography will have 
the potential to “give absurdity a meaning”59—­not in a semiotic sense, but 
rather through reframing the photographic act and gesture as meaningful 
in themselves—­and thus to serve as a life force, a generator of experiences 
transmitted as images. Transcending its representative function as the “pen­
cil of nature” or “the mirror of life,” future photography can instead become 
the future.
The world as an image
Already in the 1980s, long before the cross-­generational shift to hand­
held screens as a primary interface of content acquisition, Flusser was also 
predicting that the culture of linear writing, and of historical conscious­
ness associated with it, would soon give way to “a concrete experience of 
the present.”60 Rather than mediate the world via the system of notation 
that produces literature, historical narratives, and philosophical treatises, 
we will start absorbing it more directly, claimed Flusser, via apparatuses 
plugged more immediately into our own system of perception. Leaving 
writing, whether as recorder of history or creative analyst of the present, to 
apparatuses—­which were supposedly able to do a “better” job at “historical 
thinking and action”—­we were meant to be then able to “focus our atten­
tion on making and looking at images.”61 Flusser’s diagnosis can be seen 
as partly ironic, evoking the future in which we all live in a version of a 
giant VR set fueled by ever-­new iterations of ChatGPT, with the typewriter 
migrating “into our brains,”62 as he playfully put it. Yet it is also tinged 
with a degree of melancholia, signaling the philosopher’s awareness of the 

38	
Chapter 1
progressing evanescence of our engagement with the world by means of 
writing and reading.
Stories about the end of literacy and of the ensuing image deluge that 
will bring all sorts of intellectual and moral catastrophe go back a long 
time. In The End of Reading: From Gutenberg to Grand Theft Auto David Trend 
offers a historical overview of the role of visuality in human culture. Look­
ing at the example of paintings in the Lascaux and Altamira caves dating 
back 30,000–­40,000 years, he points out that “for much of the early devel­
opment of the creatures we now consider modern humans, communica­
tion was pictorial and aural rather than written.”63 He goes on to remind us 
that the visual image, which was a dominant vehicle of communication in 
the pre-­Enlightenment era, “ultimately was devalued and distrusted in the 
age of reason. To many people visual imagery became synonymous with 
propaganda and, eventually, with marketing.”64 By the twentieth century 
educators thus began to issue warnings about youngsters’ “overexposure 
to visual media,” from movies through to TV, which were all seen to be 
destroying young people’s minds.65
Those sentiments and reactions have acquired a new legitimacy in the 
era of “neuroscience.” Pronouncements such as the one below by cogni­
tive neuroscientist and dyslexia expert Maryanne Wolf set the tone for the 
scholarly debate on reading today:
Look around on your next plane trip. The iPad is the new pacifier for babies and 
toddlers. Younger school-­aged children read stories on smartphones; older boys 
don’t read at all, but hunch over video games. Parents and other passengers read 
on Kindles or skim a flotilla of email and news feeds. Unbeknownst to most of 
us, an invisible, game-­changing transformation links everyone in this picture: 
the neuronal circuit that underlies the brain’s ability to read is subtly, rapidly 
changing—­a change with implications for everyone from the pre-­reading toddler 
to the expert adult.
66
Even though Wolf does recognize that reading is not a hard-­wired activity 
but rather a specific cultural practice, her work, laid out in her popular-­
science book Reader, Come Home: The Reading Brain in a Digital World as 
well as many scholarly articles, focuses on demonstrating what is lost 
for us as readers in our encounters with digital screens. The first casualty 
seems to be the volume of reading, a conclusion seemingly confirmed by 
Jean M. Twenge and colleagues’ findings that the “extraordinary amount 
of time iGen adolescents spend on digital media . . . appears to have taken 

Does Photography Have a Future? (Does Anything Else?)	
39
time away from legacy media, especially print.”67 This “displacement,” as 
Twenge et al. term it,68 is coupled with the supposed loss of analogical rea­
soning and inference, empathy, and the ability to formulate insights or 
even perceive beauty. Once again, the transformation is said to affect pri­
marily “young people,” who, owing to this new mode of engaging with the 
world, end up “short-­circuiting their reading brains.”69 Reading is also said 
to have given way to “browsing,” “skimming” and “scanning,” with the 
reader “mov[ing] across surfaces”70 as if they were a collection of images. 
“Many readers now use an F or Z pattern . . . in which they sample the first 
line and then word-­spot through the rest of the text.”71
The seductiveness of those one-­directional narratives about the end of 
literacy, and about the wider cultural loss ensuing from this proclaimed 
end, can perhaps be explained by the fact that they “feel” right. Inscrib­
ing themselves in the cognitive structure of “moral panics” (stories that 
establish and legitimate a given society’s principles of social conduct and 
civic duty), these narratives feel right because they provide a firm explana­
tory framework to a variety of sociopolitical phenomena, from poverty and 
spending inequities in education (if you are a liberal) through to immigra­
tion and popular culture (if you are a conservative).72 Yet we would be wise 
to listen to Flusser’s diagnosis that “every epoch has its prophets of doom. 
There is nothing simpler, nothing more comfortable, essentially, there is 
nothing more optimistic than to predict the ultimate catastrophe.”73 This 
wallowing in the catastrophe allows its prophets to reaffirm their vision 
of the world without realizing, as Flusser acerbically put it, that “the very 
prophets of the catastrophe are the ones who cause it.”74 Literacy is com­
ing to an end, we might therefore conclude, because its proclaimers are 
unable to see beyond the limitations of their own goals and worldviews, 
mistaking the finitude of their imagination for existential-­level finalism. 
Without denying that the modes of literacy are indeed perhaps undergo­
ing a significant change at the moment, or even that “literacy levels in the 
general population among both children and adults are falling,”75 while 
acknowledging that engagement with media, including books, has always 
been in flux, and that it has always depended on the complex network of 
material and cultural forces such as class, access, education, and upbring­
ing, Flusser’s critique can thus encourage us to pose a different question: 
Was widespread linear reading just a transitory phase in human history? 
Trend points out that “reading is not natural . . .—­it is a social convention 

40	
Chapter 1
adapted by Western civilization at the expense of other forms of communi­
cation.”76 What would need to change if we were to accept that our mode 
of engaging with the world was to be, once again, predominantly visual? 
Could anything be actually gained through this?
Flusser’s diagnosis about the “end of reading” and about the ensuing 
“image apocalypse” therefore has a different tenor than many of the doom 
prophecies about “how the Internet is changing the way we think, read and 
remember.”77 His narrative, as argued earlier, carries a promise of a renewal, 
in the form of an opening beyond the seemingly impossible choice between 
consumption and refusal. In the introduction to his manuscript The Last 
Judgement: Generations penned in the mid-­1960s,78 Flusser offers the following 
assessment of the choices that await us in a modern technological society:
The world of instruments (the world around us) seems destined, by its very struc­
ture of things already manipulated, to annihilation. The attitude I am describing 
lies in accepting the instruments as problems. This attitude is the consequence of 
a moment of choice; it means the existential choice of not accepting the instru­
ments passively. And this resides in the experiential opening toward the world of 
technology, which means the existential decision to overcome the world of tech­
nology. Not by ever increasing consumption, not by angry and bored refusal, but 
by the manipulation and transformation of technology. Technology, to be over­
come, needs to be transformed into something else. In this existential decision, 
in this choice of attitude, a different movement begins in the world around us.
79
The Last Judgement focuses on the inevitable yet productive tensions 
between subsequent generations. We can see that Flusser’s existential phi­
losophy literally unfolds in media res, in the midst of the technical appa­
ratus of which we are part—­and which we can alter from within. Indeed, 
Flusser looks to the apparatus as an enframing and enabling device that can 
execute historical transformation. This apparatus can thus be read as both 
a framing device for societies, generations, and individuals and a subjec­
tivation machine. Flusser’s argument with regard to the impasse between 
passive consumption and equally passive refusal is that, for a truly mean­
ingful change to occur, we need to change both our technology and our 
subjectivity. The latter, as we know from other thinkers of technology such 
as Gilbert Simondon and Bernard Stiegler, emerges in ensemble with our 
technologies. As Flusser’s translator Rodrigo Maltez-­Novaes puts it: “It is 
only through an existential dive into the programmatic dimension of the 
apparatus that we can save ourselves.”80

Does Photography Have a Future? (Does Anything Else?)	
41
Tempting as it might be to see the world become an image in the age of 
digital media screens, with our brains being directly plugged into Netflix or 
Hulu, a better model for understanding this relationship with the incessant 
media flow is needed if we are not to fall prey to the prejudices and blind 
spots of the aforementioned prophets of doom. Postulating an uncritical 
retreat to some kind of “legacy media” or a fantasy escape from technology 
is therefore not the most prudent or responsible position to take. As part 
of the transformation of technology “towards something else,” we need to 
acknowledge not only that “people now face a world in which one form 
of ‘reading’ really isn’t enough”81 but also that reading is currently also 
being undertaken by machines, at vast intensity and speed. Those forms 
of machine reading, from automatic translation, fact checking, and senti­
ment analysis through to code and instruction execution and automatic 
text generation, start forming a continuum with our human practice in 
which our “eyes take in the raw visual data of letter and word shapes and 
match them with remembered patterns of familiar utterances.”82 Taking to 
a new level ideas from biosemiotics, a field which postulates that commu­
nication and interpretation unfold across all living systems, we can perhaps 
describe the world as a giant reading machine in which the very relation­
ship between the living and the nonliving is subject to reinscription. And 
it is within the lightning-­speed operations of this machine that the dis­
tinction between linear machine reading and instant image recognition is 
increasingly becoming blurred.
In the Judeo-­Christian culture, the world was seen as “an image made 
in God’s likeness.”83 It was a representational model of the world, whereby 
humans were seen as part of God’s creation. In the reading machine which 
also operates as an image machine, the world is an image without a divine 
origin. What is more, it has become increasingly impossible to distinguish 
between a representation and a model. We could go so far as to argue that 
now all images have become what filmmaker Harun Farocki has termed 
“operational images,”84 carrying the potential of an execution of a function. 
According to Flusser, “From now on, we are the ones who project meaning 
on the world. And technical images are such projections.”85 Reprogram­
ming the apparatus thus also means taking responsibility for our role in 
the co-­creation of images, whether with technical devices or our cortico-­
corporeal apparatus, in full knowledge that we are neither sole authors nor 
sole recipients of the incessant media and image flow—­although we may be 

42	
Chapter 1
the only ones for whom shaping this flow into a set of meanings becomes 
an ethicopolitical task, rather than just a preprogrammed function to be 
executed. The fact that the majority of people function as if that was not 
the case, running the programs of the apparatus in and with their lives, 
cameras, phones, and other media, only makes this task more urgent.
Photography as a unified perception machine
I want to conclude this chapter by looking at two examples of projects in 
which the overlap of functionality between pictograms and pictures, and 
hence between the reading machine and the image machine, is both tested 
and contested. The first is a four-­hour-­long performance of Flusser’s Towards 
a Philosophy of Photography by artist Ian James (figures 1.1, 1.2). Originally 
Figure 1.2
Screenshot from the YouTube version of Vilém Flusser’s Towards a Philosophy of 
Photography as Performed by Ian James, 2015. Featuring the video An Assortment of 
Waiting Areas, HD animation, 2014.

Does Photography Have a Future? (Does Anything Else?)	
43
produced as a three-­cassette audiobook edition of the unabridged book read­
ing by James, accompanied by “binaural brainwave patterns, field record­
ings, product unboxings and other treats,” it was presented at REDCAT, 
Los Angeles, in the Hotel Theory exhibition curated by Sohrab Mohebbi 
in 2015. It was then made available on YouTube, accompanied by an HD 
animation.86 The final result is a meditative video of slow-­moving pieces 
of photographic equipment (camera, printer, lab printing machine) and 
paraphernalia (prints, framed images, print storage cabinet) surrounded by 
furniture (sofa, coffee table, plant), all floating around like Photoshop cut-­
outs or Thomas Demand-­like paper sculptures in a white space. The effect is 
that of a de-­montage, an opposite of Moholy-­Nagy’s “New Vision,” where 
revolution may emerge at the slow interstices of a fluid optical mergence. 
But you really need to pay attention as there is a danger you may miss it. 
To some extent it looks like the video has taken over the process of making 
itself, running through the display formats (old-­school 4:3, 16:9 vertical) 
and the previously used images in the ever-­increasing entropic disarray. The 
idea of reading aloud, for a prolonged period of time, Flusser’s classic text on 
photography does not resolve the philosopher’s question posed in a differ­
ent volume as to whether writing does or does not have a future—­but it does 
foreground the mediatic character of both reading and writing. Situating 
those practices on a continuum with photographic acts, artifacts, and tech­
nologies, James’s installation-­video brings to the fore the fact that not only 
is reading a form of seeing and hearing but also that, for us humans at least, 
writing and photography are experiences. They are multisensuous zones of 
sensory stimulation which mobilize perception via vision, sound, and hap­
tics to create sensations that are subjectively describable and qualifiable—­
and yet that (so far) escape computational logic. Human preferences, likes, 
and dislikes can of course be metricized and thus predicted with a consid­
erable degree of success—­to an extent that some algorithms are said to be 
better at knowing us than we know ourselves. Yet the subjective quality of 
experience, i.e., what it feels like to be me or you (or a bat), and to have an 
experience (i.e., what analytical philosophers have described as “qualia”), is 
something that does not yield itself to computational translatability in any 
straightforward way.
Investigating the terrains on which such experiences can take place has 
been of interest to me not just in my theoretical investigations and photo­
media art practice but also in my pedagogic activities. The second example 

44	
Chapter 1
I want to present is thus related to my work as an educator. As discussed 
earlier in this chapter, I am wary of stories about the supposed progress­
ing illiteracy amongst the young generations serving as evidence for the 
“end of reading.” Yet during over twenty years of my teaching practice, I 
have indeed observed some changes in the way university students engage 
with textual and visual material. This has encouraged me to explore—­
experientially, so to speak—­how the relationship between texts and images 
in the digital age is being played out in the pedagogic context. With a view 
to this, I designed two courses at my previous academic institution (Gold­
smiths, University of London): a first-­year (freshman) course called Media 
Arts and a master’s-­level course called Photography and After. Blurring 
the boundary between “theory” and “practice,” the goal of both courses 
was to encourage students to think about media and make media as part of 
the same classroom experience and course assignment. In the process of 
designing them I was mindful of an anecdote from what seems like a dif­
ferent era, from a conversation between two philosophers whose work has 
been formative to my understanding of technology in theoretical terms: a 
book titled Echographies of Television featuring a series of dialogues between 
Jacques Derrida and Bernard Stiegler. In that book, Derrida recounts a time 
when, in a seminar he taught “in California” (most probably at UC Irvine), 
two students presented him with “videocassettes” in lieu of the written 
paper. Although seeing himself as being open to all sorts of experiments 
and intrigued by their “innovation,” Derrida eventually decided against 
accepting the assessment presented to him in the moving image format, 
because, as he admitted, “I had the impression, in reading or in watching 
their production, that what I was expecting from a discourse, from a theo­
retical elaboration, had suffered from this passage to the image.”87 He was 
keen to emphasize, however, that he had not rejected the image-­based sub­
missions because of the image, but rather “because it had rather clumsily 
taken the place of what I think could have and should have been elaborated 
more precisely with discourse of writing.”88 Derrida was of course no Ludd­
ite, and he put a great amount of thought into analyzing our relationship 
with technology. The interview with Stiegler was conducted in 1993, a time 
when university education and philosophical praxis remained in a different 
relationship to media technologies as both everyday devices and pedagogic 
tools than it is today, when smartphones, laptops, virtual learning environ­
ments, editing software, PowerPoint, and Zoom organize our cognitive and 

Does Photography Have a Future? (Does Anything Else?)	
45
conceptual horizon in a new way, beyond a strict distinction between texts 
and images.
Derrida already predicted that moment when he said that “there will 
come a time when, in effect, one will be able to and will have to integrate 
images into the presentation of knowledge,”89 although he also issued a 
warning against using images “to the detriment of the rigor of anterior 
knowledge.”90 It was the desire to examine this tension between rigor 
and innovation, between “anterior knowledge” and new media, that has 
directed me to rethink and reimagine my teaching over the last decade. 
And thus my Media Arts course, which examined different ways in which 
artists have used media and technology across different historical periods, 
opened with the following questions: How do we decide if a piece of media 
art or a YouTube clip is any good? How do we combine critical thinking 
about the media with making interesting media? In the age of social media 
and user generated content, are we all artists now? But the course also chal­
lenged the notion of “art” as a unified field of specialist cultural production 
when placed in the context of the wider enactments of creativity and ama­
teur media practices.
The similar attempt at boundary-­crossing, whether between text and 
image, theory and practice, or old and new media, shaped my graduate-­level 
course, Photography and After (the preparation for which planted seeds for 
the development of the argument of this book). This course analyzed the 
contemporary condition of living with photographs, approaching them 
not only as individual art objects, memory devices, or (increasingly doubt­
ful) photojournalistic evidence, but also as flows of data that touched, ani­
mated, shaped, and regulated us in multiple ways. Through this, it explored 
sociopolitical implications of the fact that our ways of understanding the 
world and making meanings in it, as well as our social relations, were 
increasingly mediated by images, whether in their photographic or post-­
photographic forms.
The principal aim of Photography and After was not just to think about 
photographs but also to think photographically, with the theory-­practice 
division crossed in both taught sessions and assessment. For their assess­
ment, students needed to produce a photographic or photomedia work, 
involving a series of original photographs, a video, an online project, a 
hybrid media work, or a curatorial submission, and accompanied by an 
essay. Unlike in many other “practice” courses taught in the department, 

46	
Chapter 1
where advanced image-­making technology was prized, whether in ana-
log or digital guises, for me students had to use a low-­fi camera (e.g., one 
included with their cell phone), Internet resources, or found images. Imag-
ination and creativity were seen as more important aspects of the work 
than any advanced technology, although the “rigor” mentioned by Der-
rida and the recognition of the forms of “anterior knowledge” were equally 
important. The course involved extensive engagement with Flusser’s work, 
among other texts, but it also built on his insights about the coproduction 
of media, including texts, with the “programmed instrument,” be it a type-
writer or a camera. The significance of the class for me, as both a creden-
tializing activity and an ontological encounter with one’s own networked 
autonomy, lay in the importance of experiencing the human creative act 
“as a free gesture.”91
This sense of working with but also against the apparatus while trying to 
negotiate its constraints was interestingly captured by one of the students, 
Ben Prideaux,92 in his project for the 2020 class. Applying this logic to the 
image recognition system devised by Google, he fed into its Cloud’s Vision 
API a series of images of objects that, in some way, resembled the basic 
features of a human face: an electricity socket sporting two oblong “eyes” 
and a gaping ghostlike “mouth,” doorknobs and a drawer handle making a 
stick-­man face, a banana “smile” (figure 1.3). This was done in recognition 
of the fact that humans not only are drawn to faces (for example, when 
watching films or looking at websites)93 but also tend to see faces in random 
objects and patterns—­e.g., Jesus on a piece of toast, or a friendly mascot 
on the car bonnet. This phenomenon, known as “pareidolia,” is explained 
by psychologists as an evolutionary trait that initially enabled differentia-
tion between one’s friends and enemies and hence, ultimately, one’s sur-
vival. It developed due to the sheer frequency of having been exposed to 
other people’s faces—­and the significant roles those faces (and their “own-
ers”) played in navigating the environment. In the accompanying essay, 
Pri­deaux suggested that this trait “can be seen as the automaticity of the 
human subverting the program of the apparatus,” thus reflecting Flusser’s 
view that “everything to some extent follows a program, even the universe.” 
Yet he also noted that, while human observers would easily identify the col-
lected images as “stickman-­faces,” the image recognition system failed to 
make such identification. While he was aware that a more sophisticated 
algorithm could no doubt eventually be trained in matching humans in 

Does Photography Have a Future? (Does Anything Else?)	
47
Figure 1.3
Ben Prideaux, screenshot of MA student project, Anti-­apparatus, 2020. Used with stu­
dent’s permission.

48	
Chapter 1
pareidolia, Prideaux was more interested in enacting, in the context of our 
class and the project on Flusser, a small trick that was able to challenge the 
apparatus as it became more automated and continued to “mechanise”94 
thought. These kinds of small gestures and creative interventions can also 
“help humans learn about the existence of ubiquitous sensing,”95 beyond 
conscious theoretical reflection and rational analysis.
In the closing pages of The End of Reading David Trend looks at differ­
ent media as generators of multisensory experience—­but also as training 
devices that teach us how to experience. He writes,
Isolated forms of communication like books, CDs, photographs, or movies offer 
us parts of the overall experience of perception that we experience in daily life. 
As these forms of media become more complex to become sounds, images, and 
events unfolding over time, the media come ever closer to replicating our uni­
fied field of perception. The closer media come in achieving this model, the more 
excited and interested audiences become. This is why photography became such 
a marvel when it came onto the scene in the mid-­1800s and why multimedia 
experiences such as game playing in virtual worlds are even more captivating.
96
We could perhaps thus claim that media become spaces through which we 
can better see and understand perception, and hence ourselves, because 
they allow us to grasp how we see and sense the world. In other words, 
media frame the world for us while also revealing that there are frames in 
the world, that we make the world through putting frames into it, and that 
perception is needed for us to have a sense of the world. Photography as a 
quintessential enframing practice plays a key role in this process. Marvin 
Heiferman claims that photography is an “existential, philosophical kind 
of medium” and that “there’s no other experience like it. . . . For a moment, 
you can stop something and look at it in a way that you normally wouldn’t 
see it.”97 We could therefore go so far as to suggest that photography and 
other media constitute a unified perception machine: they unify percep­
tion for us, within us, and between us.

2  A Philosophy of After-­Photography
Figure 2.1
Screenshot from Refik Anadol, Archive Dreaming, 2017.
I’m not sure what photography is. It’s everything and everywhere, like a spirit 
that’s left its body. Photography is not tied to the camera—­or any apparatus—­
anymore. As many thinkers have postulated, photography is now more of a state 
of being, an event. It has become a fiction; a fabrication. I know it when I see 
it; I can feel it in the air around me when it’s happening, with or without an 
apparatus present. Maybe it’s a statement of our surveilled and documented exis­
tences. We and the world around us are reconstituted in parallel image universes. 
It seems impossible to make work that doesn’t use or acknowledge photography, 
because it’s now an elemental part of being.
Artist Victoria Fu in Why Photography?
1

50	
Chapter 2
“Is Photography as We Know It Dying?”
Despite the proliferation of photographic images and the expansion of 
the “photographer” designation from professionals and hobbyists (aka 
“amateurs”) to arguably “everyone,” the question of photography’s future 
haunts the image-­making industry, its clients, and users—­as well as those 
occupying that narrower sliver of photography’s art-­based milieu, which 
is to say photographic artists and curators. In November 2019 the popu­
lar photonews website Petapixel published an article about what it meant 
to be a photographer at the present time. The article, as is often the case 
with online “content” these days, featured a video conversation between 
photographer-­journalists from cognate websites, Patrick Hall of Fstop­
pers and Pye Jirsa of SLR Lounge, titled “Is Photography as We Know It 
Dying?”2 Aimed at a wide variety of visitors, websites such as Petapixel, 
Fstoppers, and SLR Lounge operate by delivering news, equipment reviews, 
and photography tutorials, but they are sustained by an active community 
of commentators and forum posters. Interestingly, the dynamic vitality of 
those websites’ ecosystems is ensured by establishing and maintaining an 
informal boundary between the “pros” (usually evoked as an aspiration) 
and the “serious amateurs,” all of whom distance themselves from “mere” 
phone photographers. This video conversation is worth looking at more 
closely because the issues it raised are indicative of the broader tendencies 
in current photographic consumption, both discursive and material. The 
debate will also provide us with some conceptual tools and ideas for how 
we can talk about photography today—­and for how we can locate photog­
raphy in disciplinary and technical terms. The positioning of photogra­
phy between industry, art, and everyday practice, and its current framing 
through technologies, concepts, and metaphors drawn from computation 
and neuroscience, is the main concern of this chapter. Its main function 
is to lay theoretical and disciplinary foundations for talking about “our 
photographic future,” while furnishing us with some conceptual building 
blocks for the construction of the “perception machine” in the rest of this 
volume. As part of this journey, I will take some tentative steps toward out­
lining what I will term “a philosophy of after-­photography.”
The key tendencies in photography identified by the two experts on 
the Petapixel website seemingly go against the grain of the beliefs held by 
photography websites’ most faithful readers. Having acknowledged that 

A Philosophy of After-­Photography	
51
the digital has both democratized photography and raised the bar, Hall 
and Jirsa admit that photographic practice itself is changing, with a lot of 
things “falling to the wayside”: heavy gear, strobes, complex editing. With 
the industry moving more and more toward phone photography, “all that 
matters is the final image,” they conclude—­a statement that must seem 
anathema to “serious photographers,”3 whether artists or amateurs. This 
statement recognizes the fact that the ability to engage an audience and 
having a following matter more than any single image, with a photogra­
pher having to be “like a TV channel or TV show.” The more nebulous cate­
gories of enjoyment and authenticity are said to have replaced the old-­style 
expectations of technical perfection and expert professionalism. Confirm­
ing that photography as we know it is indeed dying, with that “we” referring 
to the upholders of the photographic tradition and expertise—­which the 
core readers of Petapixel are largely expected to be—­Petapixel author DL 
Cade nonetheless summarizes the analysis on an upbeat note: “As the bar 
to entry drops and more and more people outsource their creativity to the 
latest Instagram trend or some AI-­powered post-­processing slider, creativ­
ity and technical know-­how are only becoming more rare and valuable 
than ever.”4
This discussion has identified some important trends with regard to pho­
tographic practice today. These trends include miniaturization; the 
increased role of software in image-­making, including at the image genera­
tion stage; closer integration between photographic gear, clothing, and the 
photographer’s body—­which is another step in what used to be known as 
“media convergence” and which now involves many photographers 
becoming one with their cameras; and, last but not least, the proliferation 
of images that are produced neither by nor for the human. Indeed, algorith­
mic image generation enabled by models such as DALL·E, Midjourney, or 
Stable Diffusion problematizes even further the agency of the photographer 
as image creator and copyright owner. Echoing Paul Virilio’s argument from 
The Vision Machine, artist Trevor Paglen, who uses images from satellites, 
surveillance cameras, and AI databases in his work, goes so far as to argue: 
“Something dramatic has happened to the world of images: they have 
become detached from human eyes. Our machines have learned to see 
[w]ithout us.”5 In response to the question posed in one of his online con­
tributions written for Fotomuseum Winterthur, “Is Photography Over?,” 
Paglen claims that “‘photography,’ as it has been traditionally understood 

52	
Chapter 2
in theory and practice, has undergone a transition—­it has become some­
thing else, something that’s difficult to make sense of within the existing 
analytic framework.”6
A new analytic framework therefore needs to be envisaged—­not just to 
understand photography but also to get a clearer picture of the world that 
is being imagined and imaged by it. Building on the legacy of ghost and 
spirit photography, a practice combining imagination and charlatanerie to 
make up for personal losses before the Great War, and collective loss in its 
aftermath, I suggest that photography and postdigital image-­making can 
be mobilized today to help us imagine, visualize, and frame not just the 
present but also the future—­and to image and imagine ourselves as part 
of that future. This link between photography, image-­making, and imagi­
nation was already encapsulated at the end of the nineteenth century by 
French photographer Nadar in his poetic description of the supposed magic 
of the medium: “Everything that unhinges the mind was gathered together 
there: hydroscopy, bewitchment, conjuration, apparitions. Night, so dear 
to every thaumaturge, reigned supreme in the gloomy recesses of the dark­
room, making it the ideal home for the Prince of Darkness. It would not 
have taken much to transform our filters into philters.”7
Machine dreaming
Refik Anadol’s Archive Dreaming (figures 2.1, 2.2), a haunting remediation of 
the photographic past in which we all become swept up in an image flow, 
offers a suitable illustration of the approach to photography adopted in this 
book. Drawing on the experience gained at Google’s Artists and Machine 
Intelligence Program residency, Anadol collaborated with the SALT cultural 
center in Istanbul to revisit and reanimate its archive featuring images and 
documents concerning Ottoman culture. As part of this work, he mobi­
lized machine learning algorithms to establish relations among 1,700,000 
photographs and other documents included in the archive. The digitized 
images were then presented as part of an interactive and immersive media 
installation: surrounded by an “envelope” made up of curved screens, 
visitors navigated their journey via a panel while being enveloped by the 
mobile flows of images, texts, and data. The active experience, with the visi­
tor seeing the images at different scales by “picking them up” from the wall 
to look at them up close and then returning them to their place, was akin 

A Philosophy of After-­Photography	
53
to a photographic dance. Yet the most interesting aspect of the installation 
was not its dreamy choreography with the human viewer at its center, but 
rather the fact that, while idle, the installation “dreamt” “of unexpected 
correlations among documents,” as well as producing some new visualiza­
tions in the process.8 With machine intelligence continuing the labor of 
sifting through the huge database—­a task too enormous for any human 
visitor to undertake on their own—­the installation’s neural network took 
on the job not just of seeing at a nonhuman scale but also of redefining 
how to present material from a cultural repository whose size exceeded 
the cognitive capacity of a human user. A technological sublime for the AI 
age, Archive Dreaming enacted the limits of human perception and cogni­
tion, while offering the solace—­and an aesthetic pleasure (at least for this 
human viewer)—­of experiencing this impossibility as an all-­encompassing 
yet strangely soothing sensation.
Anadol’s work encapsulates the key characteristics of the photographic 
landscape today. Foregrounding the impossibility of the human seeing it 
all, it points to the fact that images now come to us principally in flows to 
be experienced, rather than as single-­frame pictures to be decoded. It also 
shows that the majority of images today are not generated with a human 
viewer in mind but are instead produced for this or that part of a distributed 
Figure 2.2
Screenshot from Refik Anadol, Archive Dreaming, 2017.

54	
Chapter 2
planetary computational array. The framework adopted in my book builds 
on the prior work in which theorists, artists, and curators have proposed to 
venture beyond the photographic index and the photographic frame—­and 
toward what used to be known as “the networked image”9 but what should 
perhaps be more appropriately described now as “the platformed image.” It 
is also aligned with scholarship that analyzes the current state of events in 
more ecological terms, shifting focus from the image itself to its machinic 
infrastructure.
There is an affinity here between my perception of the current moment 
and what Anthony McCosker and Rowan Wilken have called, in their 
book Automating Vision, “the new camera consciousness.”10 McCosker and 
Wilken trace back the origins of their concept to the awareness of camera 
presence at a time when stage performers had become cinema actors. And 
it is this role of enhanced camera experience as a result of the progressive 
automation of our lives that the two authors want to highlight with their 
term, drawing attention to the way smart camera and machine vision sys­
tems “make themselves felt.”11 McCosker and Wilken go on to explain that 
the “problem of camera consciousness is one of awareness and attention. 
Sometimes it’s too much, sometimes it’s not enough.”12 Importantly, this 
does not just mean for them the awareness of cameras’ ubiquitous presence 
but also “a self-­conscious reaction to their power to make visible, to reveal, 
to capture and hold their target and to fix it for scrutiny, analysis and judg­
ment.”13 Yet McCosker and Wilken’s book focuses specifically on the social 
impact of automation and machine vision via the study of smart cameras 
(in face recognition, drones, mobile media, and self-­driving cars). Inter­
estingly for my argument here, their concept of “camera consciousness” 
has clear neuroscientific connotations, but the authors do not extensively 
engage with work in cognitive psychology and neuroscience. In many ways 
their analysis of the operations of “seeing machines” in our automated soci­
ety is more akin, thematically, to my earlier book Nonhuman Photography.14 
My concept of “the perception machine” outlined in the present volume is 
broader than McCosker and Wilken’s “camera consciousness,” embracing 
not only machine vision at the multiple levels of technical infrastructure, 
but also human perception and its reconfigurations—­as well as the organi­
zation of society as an all-­perceiving machine, in a way that goes beyond 
just examining the impact of technology upon society. It is therefore more 
in line with the mode of theorizing that posits all media as parts of an 

A Philosophy of After-­Photography	
55
“all-­encompassing and indivisible”15 process of mediation, of which “we” 
are also part—­be it as singular subjects or a social ensemble.
Recognizing that photography is ubiquitous,16 that it is not just everywhere 
but also even everyware,17 my argument here embraces the vaporous, tran­
sient, yet (literally) atmospheric language of grids, networks, flows, streams, 
feeds, and clouds. We need to be mindful of the fact that this very language is 
a product of the current state of scientific knowledge and engineering, with 
the now dominant computational paradigm framing the debate in many 
disciplines and fields, from neuroscience, health, and IT through to policing 
and education. Science and engineering concepts such as automation, data 
(and metadata), databases, algorithms, AI, machine learning, and machine 
vision, which underpin this paradigm, end up shaping the way we describe 
and understand many cultural processes and artifacts. This tendency is evi­
dent in the recent turn in photography theory to the networked and mobile 
articulation of the image, coupled with the consideration of distributed 
images and infrastructures precisely in terms of data flows.
Yet the way scientists think—­“including the questions they can ask and 
the experiments they can imagine—­is partly framed and limited by techno­
logical metaphors,”18 as pointed out by Matthew Cobb in his illuminating 
study, The Idea of the Brain: The Past and Future of Neuroscience. Those meta­
phors themselves are tightly coupled with the state of technical knowledge, 
including its discourses and vocabularies. This is not just how “scientists” 
think, of course, as the dominant modes of thinking about technology and 
their underpinning metaphors make their way to other spheres of society. 
Cobb points out that the metaphor of the “machine” has been fundamental 
for centuries in articulating scientific knowledge—­be it about the human 
and human faculties or the universe—­but the understanding of what that 
machine meant has also changed over time in response to emergent tech­
nologies, with consequences for ways in which new knowledge was being 
produced and framed. He offers an interesting example of such metaphori­
cal journeying in neuroscience, focusing on the example of the brain:
With the discovery that nerves respond to electrical stimulation, in the nineteenth 
century the brain was seen first as some kind of telegraph network and then, 
following the identification of neurons and synapses, as a telephone exchange, 
allowing for a flexible organisation and output. . . . Since the 1950s our ideas have 
been dominated by concepts that surged into biology from computing—­feedback 
loops, information, codes and computation.
19

56	
Chapter 2
Recognizing the validity of using the computational model to describe vari­
ous functions of the brain, Cobb also highlights that many of the intuitions 
about how the nervous system “computes” things have turned out to be 
entirely wrong, because, unlike the computer upon which this model is 
premised, “the brain is not digital”—­although it is “more like a computer 
than it is like a clock.”20 This is to say that technological metaphors bor­
rowed from cognate experiments and practices can bring something new 
to the understanding of phenomena, while allowing for the emergence of 
novel conceptual and material connections.
The computer, the brain, and the imprint
There are two reasons I am drawing on Cobb’s book on the story of the brain 
to explain the current register of photographic knowledge with its accom­
panying dominant metaphors, or, to put it in figurative terms, to explain 
photography’s “word cloud.” One is that photography has arguably been 
intrinsically linked with neuroscience since the medium’s invention in the 
early nineteenth century. Teodora Cosman points out that the conceptual­
ization of photography in terms of making impressions on a light-­sensitive 
surface established a parallel with the way memory was understood to 
work: as a process of making imprints on the tissue of the brain.21 The rela­
tionship between photography and neurology was mutually constitutive: 
Cosman indicates that French neurologist Jules Bernard Luys “used photog­
raphy to create an iconography of the nervous centres, applying it not only 
as a tool but also as an experimental and analogic model of the functioning 
of memory.”22 This led to photography being seen as a process of making 
impressions on two levels: that of the light-­sensitive substrate, resulting in 
an image, and that of the brain itself, producing memories. This notion of 
the photograph as a material imprint on a surface became encapsulated in 
one of the most fundamental concepts of photography theory: the index.23 
It was only with the emergence of digital photography toward the end of 
the twentieth century that the conceptual force of the index began to give 
way to other notions and modes of presenting the photographic medium. 
Traditionally (and literally) understood as writing with light, i.e., as making 
changes to a light-­sensitive surface as a result of a chemical reaction driven 
by light’s energy, in the digital age photography became a more superfi­
cial operation—­in the sense that it was no longer seen as an intervention 

A Philosophy of After-­Photography	
57
in the material layers on which an image was to be imprinted, such as a 
metal plate or paper, but rather as rearranging immaterial digits of its code. 
In computational photography, light “is no longer interpreted as a direct 
impression of electromagnetic energy in the optical spectrum,” but as “the 
weights and biases of an archive’s afterglow,” explains computer vision art­
ist Adam Harvey.24
The second reason for my turning to Cobb’s work is that neurological 
perspectives have become an increasing presence in the arts and humanities 
in recent years, especially when it comes to addressing problems of affect, 
perception, and cognition. Consequently, some sections of photography 
theory have entered a nested metaphorical loop created by computation 
and neuroscience, with the discursive framework of the latter partly shaped 
by photography. Yet the key aspect in Cobb’s analysis to which I want to 
return now is his explanation of how technologies of a given period influ­
ence the conceptual and discursive frameworks through which everything 
else is perceived. This realization has led him to an important conclusion 
that, “by holding tightly to metaphors, we end up limiting what and how we 
can think.”25 Metaphors can thus be constraining as well as enabling, send­
ing us down thought pathways and conceptual loops that reinforce the 
current state of knowledge. (My own turn to cybernetic and computational 
metaphors here to explain this process is a case in point.)
While it has been extremely productive and, dare I say, exciting to wit­
ness the introduction of the interwoven computational and neuroscientific 
language, with its metaphorical register of networks, flows, and feeds, into 
the study of photography in recent years, my assumption in this book is that 
this may not be enough. And thus, while I propose to explore the current 
framing of photography, especially in its digital guises, in computational 
and neuroscientific terms, I also want to test the limits of such framing. 
More importantly, though, I want to consider a possible opening toward 
what and how we can think about the ongoing transformation of photography—­
and about the perceptive processes enabled by and enabling photography, 
now and in the future. It is also in this sense that the book serves as an 
attempt to map out what I am calling “our photographic future.”
Let me clarify that I am not positioning science here as a higher author­
ity that can provide a corrective to our prior understanding of either pho­
tography or perception as developed in the humanities. Indeed, I would go 
so far as to claim that science is by itself incapable of providing a satisfactory 

58	
Chapter 2
explanatory framework for either perceptual or imaging processes, precisely 
because, in its foundational assumptions, claims, discourses, and meta­
phors, it already relies on fields of knowledge and practices that exceed its 
remit, from philosophy and politics through to engineering and art. Yet, 
in recognition of the increased importance of scientific concepts in discus­
sions about human and nonhuman imaging, I want to engage with those 
concepts, their legacies, and strictures—­and also with the promises they 
bring to the humanities’ understanding of how we see the world.
Looking at photography’s epistemological and ontological significance, 
my book embraces the view of photography as existential, as a world-­
making force. We can recall here curator Marvin Heiferman’s polyvocal 
manifesto Photography Changes Everything, in which he argues that “pho­
tographs don’t only show us things, they do things. They engage us opti­
cally, neurologically, intellectually, emotionally, viscerally, physically.”26 In 
recognizing photography’s transformative agency, Heiferman also acknowl­
edges that the medium itself is in flux: “as photography changes every­
thing, it changes itself as well.”27
A philosophy of after-­photography
To understand the full significance of this moment of change, and to be 
able to look into a future it may lead to, we need a way of framing photog­
raphy that will let us capture that moment. As a first step in my efforts to 
develop a new way of framing the field, I will join Flusser on his journey 
“towards a philosophy of photography,” with that “towards” (or “für” in 
its German original, Für eine Philosophie der Fotografie) signaling the open-­
endedness of the project.28 Flusser is worth paying attention to not only 
because of his attempt to think about photography philosophically, but 
also, as discussed in the previous chapter, because he treated photography 
seriously as a medium, one located in the wider technological context of 
energy and communication flows. I argued there that Flusser’s intima­
tion may indeed be correct that writing as a “linear alignment of signs”29 
does not have much of a long-­term future, because it is being increasingly 
replaced by more immediate—­and more viscerally satisfactory—­forms of 
information, image, and affect transfer. The culture of TL;DR, bite-­sized 
Twitter wars, and politics by Internet meme all seem to indicate that his 
prophecy has perhaps already come to pass. Yet, if writing is a medium 

A Philosophy of After-­Photography	
59
that enables us to “think logically, calculate, criticize, pursue knowledge, 
[and] philosophize,”30 it may be worth sticking with it for a little while yet. 
An attempt to philosophize about photography, even if it is to take images 
seriously, cannot just be conducted by means of images—­although photo­
graphs do deserve more of a place in any philosophy of photography worth 
its (silver) salt.
The image and network cloud sketched out above will help me when 
taking some steps to develop a new way of framing the field. My overall 
ambition with this book is to interrogate the ongoing transformation of 
the photographic medium, from the transformation “of everything,” as 
Heiferman suggests, to its own evolution—­which will always be a coevolu­
tion with human and nonhuman agents. Practices such as photorealistic 
imagining in computer games and other forms of rendered images that 
“look like” photographs offer a backdrop to this enquiry. The uncertain 
provenience and ontology of various photographic artifacts today can be 
read in the context of the wider social anxieties about truth and authentic­
ity at a time when digital media allow for an easy fabrication of deepfakes, 
from made-­up news pictures and text-­to-­image algorithmic “art” through 
to realistic-­looking lip-­synched videos.
The theoretical intervention I want to make here involves outlining 
what I would like to call “a philosophy of after-­photography.” There is a 
critical dimension to this “afterness,” a term proposed by Gerhard Rich­
ter to refer to “a particular figure of modernity, that of following, coming 
after, having survived, outlived, or succeeded something or someone.”31 
For Richter afterness is a form of spectrality that involves a debt and a 
haunting to what precedes it: it is a transposition but not an overcoming. 
The afterness of photography I am proposing in this book is perhaps best 
encapsulated by Hubertus von Amelunxen’s remark (made with a nod to 
Jean-­François Lyotard): “After photography comes photography. But it is 
altered by the after.”32 Yet I also want to push through the modernist sense 
of the loss and trauma echoed in Richter’s concept—­and in the work of his 
philosophical interlocutors, from Hegel, Freud, and Benjamin through to 
Heidegger, Lyotard, and Levinas. While the experience of “loss, trauma, and 
survival; and the inexplicable emotions connected with living on”33 are one 
aspect of the existential condition of photography I deal with in this vol­
ume, I am keen to mobilize a register of affects that go beyond the modern­
ist binary of euphoria (“We have never had it so good!”) and despair (“This 

60	
Chapter 2
is the end!”): curiosity, contentment, amusement, glee, irony, frustration, 
anger, burnout, and stoic relief. The philosophy of after-­photography (cos)
plays (with) photography, while being serious about the wider conditions 
of its production—­and of our own production and reproduction as subjects 
through photography in its visible and invisible guises.
Importantly, this (somewhat cumbersome perhaps) articulation differs 
from “post-­photography,” a term that has become prominent in the last 
decade to describe the novel condition of the photographic medium.34 
This latter term first made an appearance in photography theory in the 
early days of digital imaging and the accompanying shift to broadband 
connectivity. Liz Wells offered an overview of its use by theorists such as 
W. J. T. Mitchell and Kevin Robins,35 who both treated the idea of “post-­
photography” somewhat dismissively, as overstating the claim about the 
supposed novelty of the digital. Fred Ritchin, in his tellingly titled 2009 
book After Photography, referred to “post-­photography” as part of the con­
dition of the emergence of citizen photojournalism.36 Ritchin’s primary 
concern was the loss of the medium’s authority and truth value as a result 
of photographs’ increasingly uncertain authorship and their undetectable 
manipulation.
The debate on the similarities and differences between analog and digi­
tal photography, and on the rise of the role of those who used to be called 
“amateurs” in photographic production, eventually subsided, but the term 
“post-­photography” caught a second wind in 2011 when artist and theo­
rist Joan Fontcuberta put it in a manifesto written for the Spanish news­
paper La Vanguardia. He argued that photography’s historical mandate as 
a guardian of truth and memory, and its role as a witness, had come to 
an end. Photography was “whatever was left from photography.”37 (Let us 
note here that the abandonment of this mandate has not actually occurred 
among the digital-­first generation that grew up surrounded by images, even 
though they have a much more knowing acceptance of the constructed­
ness of images. People, especially young people, still use photographs on 
a daily basis, more than ever before, to show things and affects as they 
supposedly are, as evidenced by the Internet-­era quip “pics or it didn’t hap­
pen,” with those pictures often being seen as both having been manipulated 
and having a veridical value.) In the introduction to The Post-­Photographic 
Condition catalog for the 2015 Mois de la Photo à Montréal biennale, which 
Fontcuberta had been invited to curate in recognition of his role in taking 

A Philosophy of After-­Photography	
61
the debate on photography’s future in a new direction, he wrote that “Post-­
photography is photography that flows in the hybrid space of digital socia­
bility and is a consequence of visual overabundance. The iconosphere is no 
longer just a metaphor: we inhabit the image and the image inhabits us.”38
Picking up on Fontcuberta’s ideas, Camila Moreiras has defined the phe­
nomenon of post-­photography as standing for an “inorganic image: a com­
posite of littered information—­collected, ordered, layered, buried, stored 
and discarded.”39 Moreiras does use the term “after-­photography” in her 
article, but she does so in a rather literal way, as a way of signifying leaving 
photography behind, whereas the concept of “post-­photography” allows 
her to pose the question about “how to see an image beyond the visual.”40 
In both cases, though, Moreiras, like many other theorists using the term 
“post-­photography,” is principally interested in what happens to the image, 
rather than in the wider condition of the world affected by photography. 
Thinking very much in this vein, in his 2014 photo-­book Post-­Photography 
journalist Robert Shore defined the concept as referring to artists’ way of 
working with photographic images that do not involve any actual taking 
of them.41 There are many other uses of this term in both the scholarly 
literature and photography criticism of the early twenty-­first century, all 
of which converge around the balance of losses (of truth, order, anchoring, 
accountability, human agency) and gains (of data, volume, saturation, con­
nectivity, sociality). What brings them together is that, in all of them, post-­
photography indicates objecthood: a set of practices (usually distributed and 
mobile) and their outcomes that depart from the traditional understanding 
of the photographic medium in indexical and representational terms, while 
channeling its legacy.
“After-­photography,” which is the term I propose to adopt, points instead to 
temporality. It signifies a time that has been shaped by photography, rather 
than any specific medium that developed from photography. It is a mode 
of thinking that is itself after-­modernist, because it attempts to recuper­
ate the future beyond melancholia and mourning. A philosophy of after-­
photography is thus a mode of thinking and seeing for a future that will be 
photographic—­but in a way that we may not always be able to recognize as 
such. (There may not even be a unified “we” to enact such recognition.)42
Another reason to reach for a different term from the one that has under­
pinned the debate on photography’s future so far is that, even though I appre­
ciate the significance of the work undertaken under the cognate concepts in 

62	
Chapter 2
photography and media theory, I am also mindful of Cobb’s warning men­
tioned above against working with the familiar, “because we end up limiting 
what and how we can think.”43 Importantly, even though (or even precisely 
because) the moment I am analyzing here is designated as being temporally 
and materially located “after photography,” photography remains my prin­
cipal thought device and object of analysis—­although, to reiterate, it is not 
so much its objecthood but rather its agential force and timeline that are of 
interest to me. No matter if we are talking here about analog differentiation 
in “patterns of light and shade,”44 a record of intensities in a visual field in 
the form of an “array of integers,”45 or—­more controversially perhaps—­a 
synthesized image that looks like a photograph, I retain the concept of pho­
tography to encapsulate all these objects and phenomena.
I call it photography, even if it hurts you
Already in 1992 William J. Mitchell stated that “with the appearance of 
digital camera systems the distinction between photography and computer 
graphics completely dissolved.”46 And thus for me photography is first and 
foremost a percept: it is what is perceived and hence named as photography, 
be it on the level of visuality (news images, pictures taken and processed 
with a mobile phone, the Instagram flow) or functionality (ID pictures used 
in security systems, photos in AI training databases such as ImageNet, QR 
codes), with the perceiver thus not always having to be human. In other 
words, “photography” functions in this book as a heuristic, one that is 
adopted in a way that may look somewhat unproblematic, but undertaken 
with a hope of solving some other, more complex problems about differ­
ent ways of being and seeing. This approach builds on Mitchell’s definition 
of photographs as informationally redundant objects characterized by an 
“unrelenting internal consistency,” which is another way of saying that if 
it looks like a photograph to the human eye-­brain array then it is one. Should 
this conceptual impurity be a problem for some readers, I want to join 
curators Marco De Mutiis, Katrina Sluis, and Jon Uriarte in their playfully 
perverse call, which is a simultaneous act of naming and disavowal: “You 
Must Not Call It Photography If This Expression Hurts You.”47 In a spirit 
of obstreperous disavowal (to which the title of this section is testament), 
I am happy to take this gesture even further. We also need to bear in mind 
that perception is not just a matter of logical, even if not always conscious, 

A Philosophy of After-­Photography	
63
working out of rules and resolution of contradictions: it is also an affective 
process underpinned by desire, fantasy, and all sorts of other acknowledged 
and unacknowledged attachments. So my choice of this heuristic is also an 
affective declaration: I want photography to go on—­even if, at the end of the 
day, it may end up functioning operationally not like “photography” at all.
My position may seem like a repudiation of Andrew Dewdney’s call in 
Forget Photography to abandon the term “photography” altogether because 
it serves as “a barrier to understanding the altered state of the default visual 
image”48 in the age of computation and online media. Yet there is much 
alignment between my and Dewdney’s respective ways of thinking. For 
Dewdney “photography” has become a zombie that does not want to die, 
overstaying its welcome while preventing any meaningful engagement with 
the new condition of the image (which he prefers to call “network image”), 
beyond the conceptual constraints of art history and photography theory. 
We could say that photography insists on being seen, while obscuring its 
own infrastructural and infrapolitical conditions of possibility. Dewdney’s 
argument is about more than just terminology or disciplinary constraints. 
Rather, he is deeply concerned about the historical injustice photography 
has wielded as part of the project of modernity. Photography was not just 
“an innocent bystander in the historical events it has performed,”49 as he 
poignantly observes: it was a participating agent in those events’ constitu­
tion. As we know from scholars such as Ariella Aïsha Azoulay, Jonathan 
Beller, Tina Campt, and Mark Sealy,50 photography was foundational to 
the establishment and perpetuation of the colonial, imperial, and capitalist 
nexus which is still with us—­but which we cannot just “unsee” because any 
attempt to do this remains too focused on photographic representations. 
We could thus say that we cannot see photography for all the photographs 
that abound. The only way to approach this visual and ethical aporia is 
to cut through it, hoping for something not just new but also better in an 
ethicopolitical sense (although the nature of this goodness will still need to 
be elaborated).
Dewdney is of course aware that any attempt at forgetting anything, 
including photography, inaugurates an active process of remembrance, 
especially of photography’s multiple uses—­and that his appeal is therefore 
bound to fail. He calls his rhetorical provocation “a polemic,” one described 
in the final pages of his book as “a productive strategy for understanding 
photography afresh.”51 Bringing in mediation as an ontological condition 

64	
Chapter 2
of both our life, “in which hybrids are manifest,” and the life of all hybrid 
images, including photographs, he points out that “the image no longer 
stands outside of what it previously sought to represent, or mediate.”52 
While I share Dewdney’s recognition of the ontological impurity of the 
image landscape and also appreciate the ethical demand of his provocation, 
I cannot help remaining suspicious of such heroic theoretical gestures—­and 
of their own implicit modernist impulse. Many a man has declared the 
end of an era, pronounced a radical turn, and declared a paradigm shift—­
with such pronouncements nevertheless falling on deaf ears of the user 
base, which is usually too unruly, too preoccupied, or indeed too hybrid to 
just do what the critic asks of it. Also, while the critique of the inhumane 
uses that photography has been put to, often in the name of humanism, is 
more than justified, would we not then need to bury or forget many other 
structuring devices of our modern episteme: the camera, the computer, the 
pen, the printed book? While I thus understand Dewdney’s disappoint­
ment with the fact that “photography’s once radical modernist promise” 
has now become “a conservative force,”53 something is arguably lost in this 
diagnosis. This something is the exuberant pleasure that many still derive 
from taking, sending, receiving, and editing photographs, from having 
their lives photographically imaged, from living in and through the cam­
era eye. Perhaps the critic who has forgotten how to be joyful, for whom 
the disappointment “motivated by an enduring frustration with successive 
deformations of the revolutionary spirit of modernity since 1968, then liv­
ing through and embracing the condition of postmodernity, only to find 
[himself] back in a culture of deep conservatism and reaction,”54 has thus 
obscured the potential delight of living with and in media.
The figure of the perception machine I am working with through this 
book does recognize the imperial-­colonial-­capitalist structuration of the 
state, technical, and cultural apparatus that we live in and that shapes us, 
but it does not ignore or try to squash the flows of pleasure and desire 
as affective and potentially political countercurrents to (or within) the 
machine’s operations. There is something else: photography is more than 
just a zombie that refuses to go away: this “nineteenth-­century way of look­
ing,” as Harvey pointed out, informs and haunts “the ways computer vision 
interprets and misinterprets the world today and into the future.”55 Pho­
tography thus not only shapes our experiences and lives but also furnishes 
platforms; it is both a hidden and constitutive content of machine vision 

A Philosophy of After-­Photography	
65
databases that spawn algorithms aimed at getting machines to learn to be 
not just “like us” but also “more than us.” This is why, claims Harvey, pho­
tographic practice and expertise are not going away: “Photographers have 
a new and important role to play today in shaping the datasets that shape 
algorithms, which in turn reflect how we see the world and each other. 
Photographers, as one of the primary visual data creators, can affect the 
way people see the world by changing the way computers see the world 
because we now see the world through computers, and computers in turn 
see the world through us.”56 The perception machine reveals the ambiguity 
of photographs and other technical objects—­which are always, as we have 
learnt from Simondon, Stiegler, and many anticapitalist and postcolonial 
theorists, also agential forces. To concede this is to accept that any simple 
forgetting or rejection of the structuring tools of modernity will not do, 
because there is no safe position outside of them. It is not just the image 
that is hybrid, but we ourselves too—­and so is the world of which we are 
part. Photography is still very much part of this world. But it may, just 
maybe, help us also envisage a better one.
“We haven’t seen anything yet”
To recap, my primary concern in the book is not so much an ontology of 
the photographic image, although some diagnostic work on what is happen­
ing to photographs and other mechanically produced images today will be under­
taken in what follows, but rather a photographic future. I am mindful here 
of David Campany’s warning that, “if you start attributing temporalities to 
technologies or platforms, before long you end up making a whole set of 
presumptions about how viewers interact with them. It can be reactionary 
and very passive.”57 I am therefore more interested in what is happening to 
us humans—­and to what we humans have called the world, with its plethora 
of other inhabitants and forces—­as surrounded or even shaped by photo­
graphic and after-­photographic images. Drawing on the atmospheric imag­
ery of picture clouds and data flows outlined earlier, we can conclude that 
this world as we know it can be defined as a universe of (technical) images.58 
In other words, a philosophy of after-­photography embraces the forma­
tive role of imaging, including photography in all its historical and techni­
cal incarnations, in the shaping of the world—­but this is a much stronger 
claim than the one about photography’s influence upon the world. I am wary 

66	
Chapter 2
of overstating my case here, or perhaps even being accused of smuggling 
some form of species chauvinism through the back door of my inquiry into 
humans’ relationship with images in the world, as if we were somehow sep­
arate from it. I also recognize, of course, that images are not the only agen­
tial force worth reckoning with. Yet I will go so far as to claim that images 
cannot ever be fully discretized from our human affective, cognitive, and 
material frameworks and modes of framing “the world”—­and, even more 
strongly, that the formation of images through perception is a driving force 
of life in various organisms, from people through to paramecia. Imaging is 
therefore assumed to be a primary and constitutive force of life, and a con­
dition of the emergence of intelligent behavior. Consequently, I see images 
as existing with us humans in a dynamic relationship of mediation, being 
constitutive of the formation of our memory, perception, cognition, and 
consciousness—­and also of our world-­building. We could say that the phi­
losophy of after-­photography proposed here is first and foremost interested 
in the ontology of the photographic event rather than that of the photo­
graphic object, even if the nature of this event—­its temporality, frequency, 
and scale—­will needed to be subjected to an investigation.
The Perception Machine is therefore designed as a reckoning with the force 
of the photographic legacy, imagery—­and imagination. It is also an attempt 
to re-­view and re-­vision ourselves as photographic agents and subjects, at 
a time when our future as the dominant species is being increasingly put 
into question, be it by neural networks or image networks, virus clouds or 
data clouds. There is a lot at stake in this re-­vision, but there is also a lot to 
look forward to. I want to finish this chapter by embracing Paglen’s joyfully 
exuberant proclamation, which could also be read as a warning:
Without question, the 21st Century will be a photographic century. Photography 
will play a more fundamental role in the functioning of 21st Century societies 
than 20th Century practitioners working with light-­sensitive emulsions and pho­
tographic papers could have ever dreamed. So while in one sense photography 
might be “over,” in another, it’s barely gotten going. And we haven’t seen any­
thing yet.
59
The following chapters will examine in more detail what we may see while 
investigating the role of the perception machine in calibrating, regulating, 
automating, and opening up all these different modalities of “seeing,” in 
humans and machines.

3  Screen Cuts, or How Not to Play Video Games

68	
Chapter 3

Screen Cuts, or How Not to Play Video Games	
69

70	
Chapter 3

Screen Cuts, or How Not to Play Video Games	
71
Figure 3.1
Joanna Zylinska, Flowcuts (EBG and TLOU), 2020.

72	
Chapter 3
Flowcuts I
I am dead, again. I am restarting Joel, or rather restarting myself walking as Joel, 
trying to sneak through the plague-­infested streets of some godforsaken city in 
which the end of the world has already happened. My job is to smuggle Ellie, a 
teenage girl who has lost her parents in a large-­scale apocalypse in which most 
humans seem to have perished, across the country. I don’t quite understand what 
happened then and I don’t really know what’s happening now. I duck and dive, 
grab a brick, follow a green triangle, while all the time hacking furiously at the 
plastic buttons of a device I’m holding in my hand, one whose functions, shape, 
and mode of behavior don’t seem to be making any sense. And I’m dead again. 
A bullet came from around the corner, with Ellie cowering behind a pile of rub­
bish. I failed her again. I failed again. This is not good. This is not fun. Get me out 
of here.
And yet I keep coming back, returning over and over again to the same level of 
The Last of Us Remastered,
1 an adventure-­survival video game set in an undefined 
near-­future in which all the hope is gone and yet you keep going. My progress 
is minimal, my speed almost static. It is as if the game is playing me while I am 
trying to run away. But I keep returning. My experience of being in the game is 
of someone who is not a gamer, who doesn’t understand the rules, the principles, 
the proprioceptive expectations, the whole navigational dynamics between the 
screen, the interface, and their own body and mind. I keep returning because I’m 
pulled in by the oddity of being so spectacularly bad at something that, at first 
glance, looks quite simple. And I’m not really getting much better at it, despite my 
multiple attempts at pointing, turning, clicking, and moving. I am also strangely 
drawn to the ruin porn of the game setup, to its weird scenarios and improbable 
architectures. I want to linger there, to spend time among the debris of this post-­
global universe which has been taken over by a mysterious fungal infection but 
which has retained many traces of the world that once was. It is precisely this 
uncanny familiarity of the spaces around me that makes me go back to the game 
again and again, to see it afresh. Yet where is the “me” in all this? And what am I 
really seeing? How am I seeing it, and with what?
I forget about Ellie, about Joel, about myself as Joel, and about the whole 
improbable story about the Cordyceps fungus that is haunting the world I am 
traversing. I slow down to the point of stopping, I want to take it all in. I pause, 
I look around, I don’t care about being shot anymore. I am interested in a differ­
ent kind of shooting, one that doesn’t kill, that doesn’t use a gun as its mode of 
access. I screen-­shoot, or rather Joel as me, together with this whole unwieldy 
operation that involves the black thing in my hand attached with a cord to the 
black box, my body, Joel’s body, all of us, we take the world around us in, we 
freeze it, we temporarily make it ours (figure 3.1).

Screen Cuts, or How Not to Play Video Games	
73
Screenshotting, aka in-­game photography
This chapter takes a proof-­of-­concept approach to exploring the working 
of the perception machine. It starts from a proposition that we need to 
rethink, via media practice, both the way we see the world and the way 
we understand “seeing.” While a more theoretical account of the concept 
of perception—­and of the way it relates to image production and, more 
broadly, our ways of being in and capturing the world—­will be provided in 
a further part of the chapter, I also want to study perception in more a bot­
tom-­up way here. This will involve engaging in a hybrid visual-­corporeal 
practice that involves capturing images in a controlled environment. Spe­
cifically, I propose that the photographic activity known as screenshot­
ting (“cutting” into the media flow of a video game by a player to collect 
memories from the game in the form of images) can be seen as an exer­
cise in foregrounding human perception, in making it seen and felt. I am 
taking up here Jonathan Crary’s understanding of perception (a term he 
already acknowledges to be “problematic”2 and “ultimately idealist”3) as 
“primarily a way of indicating a subject definable in terms of more than the 
single-­sense modality of sight, in terms also of hearing and touch and, most 
importantly, of irreducibly mixed modalities.”4 Shifting the human percep­
tive apparatus beyond its conceptual lodging in the eye, screenshotting as 
enacted in 3D game environments allows players to become more attentive 
to the distributed nature of perception and vision, a process in which the 
whole of the human body is mobilized to produce images and thus enable 
players to see the world. Screenshotting can therefore be positioned as a 
way of training players’ eyes, bodies, and minds in both seeing the world 
and understanding perception better. This experience generates new forms 
of sensation and cognition for experienced gamers as well as game nov­
ices. It can also offer valuable lessons for future developments in modeling 
human vision in machines. In proposing this exercise in corporeal medi­
ated perception I am mindful of Norman Bryson’s claim that “the visual 
field we inhabit is one of meanings and not just shapes, that it is permeated 
by verbal and visual discourses, by signs; and that these signs are socially 
constructed, as are we.”5 (In other ways, it does of course matter which game 
is being played, who plays it, when, and what for.)
There is a long history of gamers taking screenshot images of their 
achievements, memorializing interesting-­looking locations discovered on 

74	
Chapter 3
their game quests, and distributing the images on social media. Recog­
nizing in those voluntarily shared digital mementoes an opportunity for 
free and “authentic” publicity, conducted by “real players” committing so 
much of their time to playboring in virtual environments, game companies 
identified a PR opportunity. Developers legitimized the ongoing practice by 
introducing a dedicated camera mode to their games—­from a simple cam­
era device held by a character, such as a reporter in Beyond Good and Evil, 
through to a sophisticated camera function transforming the whole screen 
into a camera while mimicking the exposure and processing of a real-­life 
optical device, as in The Last of Us, or even an option for augmented-­reality 
capture, as in Pokémon Go. The technical affordance, coupled with gamers’ 
desire to shape, save, and share, led to the emergence of a new paraphoto­
graphic genre.
I am using the notion of in-­game photography in this chapter to refer 
to both the activity of capturing screen images by the player who is posi­
tioned in front of the screen and the activity of the player’s character taking 
“photos” inside a game with a camera designed as a virtual object within 
that game. We could even argue that the latter activity is just a literalization 
(and marketization) of the former. This expanded definition recognizes the 
multiple processes of mediation involved in both sets of activities, their 
shared photographic legacy at the level of design and functionality—­and, 
most importantly for my argument here, the similar mechanisms of cor­
poreal perception on the “other” side of the screen activated in both.6 As 
Matteo Bittanti, who also includes both modes of capturing game images 
in his definition, explains, “‘Screenshoting’ [sic] or ‘screengrabbing’ is an 
umbrella term that defines a variety of in-­game photography performances 
whose common denominator is the collection of visual mementos by the 
player. Rather than using a virtual gun to destroy the environments they 
encounter, the gamer becomes a collector, an avatar-­with-­a-­photo-­camera, 
a flaneur of virtual spaces. The collected pictures are subsequently enhanced 
with the aid of Photoshop and similar tools and shared online, via flickr or 
tumblr.”7 For many gamers, screenshotting has become an activity in its 
own right, with online realities now functioning, as games scholar Cindy 
Poremba explains, as legitimate sites for photographic voyeurism. “If the 
process and ritual behind this image making is similar, the players them­
selves are validating the reality of their subjects simply by creating a docu­
ment of these experiences. In this sense, players are taking real photos, just 

Screen Cuts, or How Not to Play Video Games	
75
in virtual spaces,”8 argues Poremba. What allows her to claim the ontologi­
cal continuity of this new practice of image-­making with its light-­induced 
predecessor is the continuity of function—­but also, as noted by Seth Gid­
dings, of affect and intentionality on the part of the players involved.9
This continuity does not apply to all aspects of photographic practice. 
Imagistic verisimilitude, fueled by indexical fantasies associated with the 
photographic medium, has been abandoned by some more creative in-­
game photographers, who recognize the medium’s legacy while producing 
something new. Remediating the aesthetic trends of analog photography, 
artist-­gamer Gareth Damian Martin (they/them) has scoured the hidden 
nooks of the popular action-­adventure game Grand Theft Auto V to produce 
moody anti-­utopian shots of what are literally no-­places. Carefully framed 
and shot with an analog camera, in black and white, with filmic grain 
becoming part of the process,10 their images create a haunting panorama 
of the game’s outskirts (figure 3.2). Part documentary, part street photogra­
phy, part cyberpunk, Damian Martin’s “heterotopias,” as they term those 
images, evoke an uncanny sensation of the world’s liminal zones. Riffing on 
the postapocalyptic tenor and visuality of many popular games, the images 
help us envisage this world’s edges (and also the end of this world, and of our 
world on the other side of the screen), while framing it for our comfort and 
pleasure. The practice of photographing games’ edges has inevitably led to 
Figure 3.2
Gareth Damian Martin, Pathways (Grand Theft Auto V), 2017.

76	
Chapter 3
a heated discussion about the frayed edges of the very medium involved. 
Traditionalists, such as Wasim Ahmad, writer for the photographic website 
Fstoppers, have insisted: “It May Be Art, but In-­Game Images Aren’t ‘Pho­
tography.’”11 Damian Martin, in turn, has been adamant that “photogra­
phy is a useful term” for this practice “as it connects the work to a heritage 
and history of conceptual, still-­life and object photography that stretches 
all the way back to the beginning of the medium.”12
I came to in-­game photography at a workshop run by Damian Martin 
at The Photographers’ Gallery in London in July 2018.13 The least experi­
enced in the group when it came to gaming, and probably far less keen 
than the other participants on upholding the conventions of the photo­
graphic medium, I found myself mesmerized by the visual and conceptual 
experiment unfolding on multiple screens. That workshop was my calling 
card for getting involved in an alternative way of sensing and seeing and 
an alternative mode of producing technical images,14 one that bore resem­
blance to what was familiar and yet that shifted the parameters of the 
game. Navigating the generational and kinetic difficulties of a nongamer 
in the visually attractive, high-­resolution 3D game environment of The Last 
of Us—­the first game I subsequently bought, together with a PlayStation 4 
console—­I turned a blind eye and deaf ear to the somewhat clunky story 
and its wooden dialogues, and followed instead the enthralling visuality 
unfolding on the screen in front of me. Like Damian Martin, I was drawn 
to the game’s edges, spaces half-­gratuitously put in by the designers and 
not really designed for the player to spend too much time in. Forfeiting 
the speed, the action, the trophies that presented themselves to me on the 
way, the whole gamey premise of the game, I mobilized my photographic 
apparatus—­my technical knowhow and ways of seeing photographi­
cally developed over the years—­to start making the gameworld a little 
more mine.
Even if not explicitly engaging with image-­making as part of their plot, 
most 3D games rely on camera technology to navigate their characters. 
And it was this navigable “camera-­body” as “the primary vehicle of per­
ceptual immersion”15 that presented an affordance which drew me in, in 
every sense of the term. I became particularly intrigued by the two vantage 
points respectively offered by first-­ and third-­person games. First-­person 
games, such as the walking game Everybody’s Gone to the Rapture (which 
shares a postapocalyptic story and look with The Last of Us), developed 

Screen Cuts, or How Not to Play Video Games	
77
from first-­person shooters, i.e., games in which the player sees the action 
through the avatar’s eyes while becoming an extension of the shooting 
device, be it a gun or a camera. In third-­person games, such as The Last of 
Us, the camera is placed slightly behind and above the avatar, although 
its angles and positioning can vary and change, depending on the game. 
The player is then linked to the avatar, via the camera and the controller, 
through an invisible “ray of light.” In both types of games, players ulti­
mately take on the camera function, whether or not they engage in the 
practice of screenshotting. I became entranced by the virtual environment 
of 3D games because it offered me a space in which I could test or even con­
test the legacy of the photographic medium by virtualizing different pos­
sibilities, simulating different outcomes, and framing different viewpoints. 
Yet the experience offered me more than that: I saw in the game environ­
ment a laboratory for experimenting with possibilities of retraining percep­
tion and vision, of reframing what and how I (or, dare I say, “we”) see the 
world, of learning some new affordances. In other words, I saw it as a space 
for retuning the perception machine.
How we see the world
Why was this retraining, reframing, and retuning needed? And do we fully 
understand and agree, across disciplines and fields of enquiry, on how we 
see the world in the first place? Before I attempt to answer these questions, 
let me provide some terminological clarification. In line with many stud­
ies of human sight, whether based in psychology or in visual culture, I am 
using concepts such as “visual perception” and “vision” interchangeably 
in this book,16 although, strictly speaking, the former refers to the act of 
obtaining information from the world from light entering our eyes, while 
the latter stands for the ability to see. Visual perception is thus a process, 
vision the outcome of this process. But, given that the outcome is never 
stabilized but rather constantly reviewed through recurrent feedback loops, 
the elision of the difference between the two terms is perhaps justified. In 
his field-­defining book Vision, which, rather controversially, set the ground 
for redefining vision as computational at the neurological level, David Marr 
states that “vision is the process of discovering from images what is present 
in the world, and where it is.”17 (Chapter 4 will offer a more thorough—­and 
critical—­engagement with Marr’s definition of vision.) But then Marr adds 

78	
Chapter 3
that vision is not “just a process,” and that temporary stabilizations, which 
he calls representations, need to be recognized within this process to enable 
human actions and decisions.18 It also needs to be pointed out that, due to 
the dominance of the eye in our everyday understanding of how we see 
the world, “perception” (without the qualifier “visual”) and “vision” are 
often treated as equivalent not only in everyday parlance but also in much 
of scholarly literature. Yet we need to be mindful of neuroscientist Beau 
Lotto’s observation that, “in terms of the sheer number of neural connec­
tions, just 10 percent of the information our brains use to see comes from 
our eyes. . . . Perception derives not just from our five senses but from our 
brain’s seemingly infinitely sophisticated network that makes sense of all 
the incoming information.”19
My argument in this book assumes that visual perception always involves 
other senses—­and that it is embodied and enacted, and not just passively 
received. Vision is thus never just visual. Additionally, as already stated ear­
lier, to understand vision—­and, in a somewhat meta way, to understand 
our evolving ways of understanding it—­we need to draw on the disciplin­
ary nexus of the sciences and the humanities, because vision is never just 
physiological either: it is always shaped by cultural assumptions and social 
practices. By saying this I want to highlight not only that our concept of 
vision is inherently cultural but also that what and how we actually see is a 
hybrid “naturecultural” (to use Donna Haraway’s term) phenomenon.20 In 
his preface to the edited volume Vision and Visuality, which explores “how 
we see, how we are able, allowed, or made to see, and how we see this see­
ing or the unseen therein,”21 Hal Foster insists on the mutual constitution 
of the two terms in his title. Even though vision typically positions sight as 
a “physical operation,” while visuality defines it as a “social fact,” for Foster 
“vision is social and historical too, and visuality involves the body and the 
psyche.”22 Vision already has physiological, psychological, and social lay­
ers, being involved in the production of subjectivity and the social while 
also being produced by them. The inflection of those modes of production 
changes across history, alongside the changes to technical infrastructures 
and apparatuses. This is why what is really at stake in trying to understand 
vision, as suggested by Bryson, “is a politics of vision.”23
This embodied and enculturated mode of theorizing vision builds 
on some earlier critiques: that of “the ‘Cartesian perspectivalism’ which 

Screen Cuts, or How Not to Play Video Games	
79
separates subject and object, renders the first transcendental and the sec­
ond inert, and so subtends metaphysical thought, empirical science, and 
capitalist logic all at once,”24 and that of the monocular immobile eye as 
the agent of perception. Up until the early nineteenth century the domi­
nant model of vision was premised on the idea that the eye was a passive 
vehicle of image reception. Conceptually modeled on the operations of 
the camera obscura since at least Descartes’s 1637 treatise Dioptrics, vision 
was thus understood to happen to the human subject—­or rather, to the 
human’s “static, unblinking, and fixated” eye.25 Drawing on astronomer 
Johannes Kepler’s discovery of the retinal image in 1604—­an image of 
an external object projected, in reverse and upside down, onto the retina 
by the eye’s optical system—­and on its posited parallelism with an image 
obtained within a camera obscura, Descartes ended up consolidating the 
understanding of vision as autonomous and disembodied. Vision only 
became dislodged “from the stable and fixed relations incarnated in the 
camera obscura”26 as a result of modern visual experiments, including those 
with early forms of photography.
Flowcuts II
The Flowcuts project presented as part of this chapter has allowed me to explore 
both the working of visual perception and the way we can understand it, concep­
tually and experientially. My investigation commenced with images; the written 
material was only developed in response to the image-­making process. By reveal­
ing my method, I am not in any way promoting immersion in “pure experience,” 
or advocating the superiority of practice over theory. My experience of screen­
shotting within gameworlds was mediated by both my ongoing photographic 
practice and my knowledge of philosophy and media theory. The images that 
form the Flowcuts series were all captured from multiple angles around various 
scenes and locations I had come across, using the embedded camera function in 
the two games featuring postapocalyptic scenarios I mentioned earlier, The Last 
of Us and Everyone Has Gone to the Rapture. Each image had been produced from 
overlaying, in Photoshop, views of the same scene captured from several different 
angles. It was then edited according to my own aesthetic preferences, inspired by 
the two games’ end-­of-­the-­world landscapes and scenarios, in the photo-­editing 
program called Lightroom. The retaining of the traces of multiple singular shots 
within the images was a nod on my part to various theories of perception. It was 
also an attempt to show the process of navigation between seeing movement and 
enacting cuts in the optical flow, a process that our visual apparatus constantly 
performs as part of what we know as “seeing.” The final images became what I 
began to call “image-­concepts.”

80	
Chapter 3
The long shadow of the retinal image
The concept of the retinal image casts a long shadow over our modern 
understanding of both vision and image-­making—­in its still and moving 
guises. Notwithstanding the evolving research into human and computer 
vision, and the more advanced understanding of how visual perception 
works (on which more below), the disciplines of film and media stud­
ies continue to make use of older image-­making technologies to explain 
both physiological and mechanical image production—­often with a full 
awareness of the metaphorical status of those explanations. This is perhaps 
because, on a subjective level, we still seem to be grappling to find adequate 
vocabularies to describe how we see the world—­and, more importantly for 
my argument here, how we experience seeing. Image-­making technologies 
seem to provide useful metaphors for articulating this subjective uncer­
tainty. And thus some scholars describe vision as photographic, as premised 
on us taking sequences of “pictures” with our visual apparatus which we 
then animate as we move with and through the world. Others perceive 
vision as being more akin to cinema. With the latter, our visual apparatus 
is seen as being reminiscent of either the film camera (capturing and thus 
shaping the optical-­visual flow) or of the cinematograph, a device which 
projects a film onto the screen of the world for us to see, allowing us then 
to discretize individual images by way of stabilizing the world into objects 
and states.
In Light Moving in Time William C. Wees traces the discursive articulation 
of early filmmaking technology primarily through its relationship to move­
ment and light.27 He then observes that “the same terms can be applied 
to visual perception. The basic requirements for seeing are also light, 
movement, and time. As one researcher [Gunnar Johansson] has put it, 
‘The eye is basically an instrument for analyzing changes in light flux over 
time.’ That succinct statement delineates a common ground for vision and 
film.”28 In this account, cinema seems to just happen to humans, although 
it still needs to be discretized, captured, and named. While the avant-­garde 
cinematic tradition established a parallelism between human and cinemat­
ographic vision, Hollywood cinema went so far as to elide the difference 
between the two, creating an illusion of the transparent image “modelled 
on human vision, whereby cinematic conventions are broadly directed 
towards creating a semblance of human perception.”29 This functional 

Screen Cuts, or How Not to Play Video Games	
81
parallelism between human and cinematic vision was inspired by the trans­
formation in the understanding of subjectivity and perception at the end 
of the nineteenth century, as proposed in Henri Bergson’s philosophical 
writings on memory, movement, and time. Yet Bergson himself did not use 
the cinematic metaphor. Instead, he argued that our visual perception oper­
ated more like a photographic camera, cutting reality into discrete images 
and then stitching them together into a relatively coherent and fluid pic­
ture of the world. In a somewhat begrudging account attempting to casti­
gate his fellow humans for being unable to grasp life in all its dynamism 
and exuberance, Bergson described our way of seeing the world in the fol­
lowing terms:
We take snapshots, as it were, of the passing reality, and, as these are characteris­
tic of the reality, we have only to string them on a becoming, abstract, uniform 
and invisible, situated at the back of the apparatus of knowledge, in order to 
imitate what there is that is characteristic in this becoming itself. Perception, 
intellection, language so proceed in general. Whether we would think becoming, 
or express it, or even perceive it, we hardly do anything else than set going a kind 
of cinematograph inside us.
30
Bergson thus posited the photographic model as primary in the production 
of our inner film not so much to help us understand perception, but rather 
to demonstrate that we saw the world in the wrong way. Unable to grasp 
life’s becoming via intuition due to an epistemological mental blockage, 
for him we resorted instead to the mechanical process of cutting duration 
into slices, i.e., snapshots.31 Fluid perception, or our inner cinematography, 
was thus only secondary for him, with the cinematograph reduced to a 
machine for animating the still images of our own making. Life itself is a 
form of cinematography, we could say—­as, indeed, did Deleuze, picking up 
on Bergson’s argument32—­yet, instead of making use of its infinite power 
and fluid movement, we learn to see and know the world by mentally pick­
ing up what Bergson no doubt saw as a clunkier device: a still camera.
Flowcuts III
My venture into the neuroscience research on perception outlined in this chapter 
is not an attempt to justify or prove the correctness of my intimations about per­
ception enacted in the images. Rather, I draw on the science material to develop 
a satisfactory mode of “cutting” through the flow of ideas, affects, and percepts 
with a view to temporarily stabilizing them into images. This approach is partly 
indebted to Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, who in What Is Philosophy? came 
up with a strategy, with the help of “Chaoids,” for taming the chaos of the world 

82	
Chapter 3
and the multiple sensations it exerts on us. Chaoids was the name Deleuze and 
Guattari gave to art, science, and philosophy, three creative practices which they 
identified as the daughters of Chaos. Chaoids took on the function of enablers for 
organizing matter and ideas into forms in three different registers and genres—­
and for creating concepts out of chaos. Importantly, for Deleuze and Guattari 
concepts do not serve “to replicate accurately in discourse specific segments of 
the world as it really is (as science does), but to propose articulations of and/or 
solutions to problems, to offer new and different perspectives on orientations 
toward the world.”
33 Every concept is thus a “matter of articulation, of cutting 
and cross-­cutting.”
34
As Sarah Kember and I have argued elsewhere, the process of cutting needs 
to be seen as “one of the most fundamental and originary processes through 
which we emerge as ‘selves’ as we engage with matter and attempt to give it (and 
ourselves) form. Cutting reality into small pieces—­with our eyes, our bodily and 
cognitive apparatus, our language, our memory, and our technologies—­we enact 
separation and relationality as the two dominant aspects of material locatedness 
in time.”
35 The image-­concepts presented here are therefore not just illustrations 
or visual metaphors of a philosophical or scientific problem: they are temporary 
stabilizations at the crossroads of art, science, and philosophy. They also serve as 
devices that can help me (and hopefully others) to approach and think through 
that problem. Once again, science is thus not evoked here as evidence but is 
rather mobilized in recognition of the fact that scientific research into cognition, 
perception, and vision has already been part of, or that it has in fact shaped, the 
philosophical understanding of those concepts since ancient times—­and that it 
has also generated (and been furthered by) artistic practice. Also, as discussed 
earlier, film and media theory has always been premised upon, and engaged with, 
scientific knowledge about perception. The recent shift from the eye to the brain, 
from the after-­image to the neuro-­image,
36 is a testament to this engagement.
The photo lab of the eye-­brain
Early photographic cameras were themselves modeled on this very idea of 
the disembodied and static eye that merely captured images coming “from 
the world.”37 While up until the early twentieth century it was assumed that 
we saw reality via an array of still images, our ability to perceive motion was 
explained by the aforementioned “retinal image,” an optical illusion that 
involved each singular image supposedly “lingering” on the viewer’s retina. 
The overlapping of those singular images was said to create the illusion of 
movement. This conviction led to the emergence of the “unifying myth”38 
of film studies: that is, the “persistence of vision” theory. In their tell­
ingly titled “The Myth of Persistence of Vision,” published in 1978, Joseph 

Screen Cuts, or How Not to Play Video Games	
83
Anderson and Barbara Fisher pointed out that “after-­images, since they are 
in fact tracings of stimulation left upon the retina, yield stabilized images.”39 
If afterimages were actually involved in the creation of the illusion of move­
ment, “the result would be a plethora of images resulting from the tracings 
scattered about the retina according to each separate fixation of the eye,”40 
rather than smooth movement.
The afterimage theory of perception was originally refuted by psy­
chologist Max Wertheimer. In 1912 Wertheimer published an article titled 
“Experimental Studies on the Seeing of Motion,”41 in which he demon­
strated that the belief that we saw still images first, with motion some­
how “added” afterward, was incorrect. Many film scholars subsequently 
attempted to reconcile their own earlier intuitions about perception with 
the new state of knowledge. In his 1914 Moving Pictures: How They Are Made 
and Worked, Frederick A. Talbot suggested:
The eye is in itself a wonderful camera. . . . The picture is photographed in the 
eye and transmitted from that point to the brain. . . . When it reaches the brain, 
a length of time is required to bring about its construction, for the brain is some­
thing like the photographic plate, and the picture requires developing. In this 
respect the brain is somewhat sluggish, for when it has formulated the picture 
imprinted upon the eye, it will retain the picture even after the reality has disap­
peared from sight.
42
With this description of the perception of movement, Talbot produced a 
delightful mergence of organs, with the eye-­brain conjuncture becoming a 
kind of photo lab. It is important to notice that the notion of “persistence 
of vision,” which was premised upon the retinal imprint of an image, did 
not entirely disappear from this theory: it only shifted to a different section 
of the “lab.”
Since the 1960s perceptual and cognitive psychology has widely adopted 
the assumption, supported by numerous experiments, that the brain is 
indeed the primary location where the data received to produce an image is 
visually processed. The following explanation for how we see the world is 
currently shared by the majority of scientists working with vision, whether 
in perceptive psychology, cognitive science, or neuroscience. Light coming 
from an object is said to stimulate the cells in our eye, producing electrical 
impulses as a result of the stimulation. Those impulses, containing infor­
mation about light and color, function as raw data that is then transmitted, 
via the optic nerve, to the brain. The brain refines and translates the data 

84	
Chapter 3
into what we subsequently recognize as images. The perception of move­
ment arises from noticing the small difference between a series of radically 
changing stationary images (rather than afterimages left on the retina) and 
(involuntarily) interpreting it as movement.43 Drawing on a 2006 paper 
by Marc A. Sommer and Robert H. Wurtz,44 science writer Julia Layton has 
attempted to clarify how the picture of the world we obtain ends up being 
so stable even though our eyes themselves are in constant movement, 
which involves exploration, scanning, low-­frequency tremor, and saccadic 
jumps. Using Sommer and Wurtz’s discovery that “the brain keeps track of 
self-­movement . . . by monitoring an internal copy, or corollary discharge, 
of motor commands,”45 Layton has described our eyes as “the video cam­
eras of our brain.”46 Yet her actual explanation is more reminiscent of the 
working of a still camera: “They take before and after shots of every focused 
image and compare them in order to confirm stability.”47 She clarifies the 
process further:
Before your eyes actually sense an object, your brain takes its own picture of that 
object for comparison purposes. It knows where your eyes are going to move next, 
and it forms an image of the object that precedes our conscious, visual percep­
tion of it. Then, when our eyes do perceive that object in a sensory way (meaning 
we can see it), our brain has already laid the framework for a smooth transition. 
There’s no shakiness and no instability. The brain has anticipated what our eyes 
are going to see, and it uses that anticipatory image for comparison to make sure 
the world has indeed remained stable in the split-­second between the before shot 
and the after shot.
48
Even though present-­day research into visual perception challenges models 
based on the belief in one-­to-­one correspondence between physical stimuli 
and perceptual experiences, this does not stop science writers, philosophers, 
as well as film and media theorists from seeking such correspondences. In 
the process—­and this is the point of key interest to me here—­they often 
reach for concepts borrowed from the image-­making industry: from Julia 
Layton’s report on the experiment in the brain correlates of vision through 
to Gilles Deleuze’s acknowledgment that “the circuits and linkages of the 
brain don’t pre-­exist the stimuli, corpuscles and particles that trace them,” 
which is summed up in his oft-­cited quip: “The brain is the screen.”49 For 
neuroscientist Beau Lotto, in turn, “the world out there is . . . our three-­
dimensional screen. Our receptors take the meaningless information they 
receive; then our brain, through interacting with the world, encodes the 

Screen Cuts, or How Not to Play Video Games	
85
historical meaning of that information, and projects our subjective versions 
of color, shape, and distance onto things.”50 Photographic and film tech­
nology therefore exists in a mutually constitutive relationship with tech­
nologies and narratives of vision.
The constitutive role of photo-­technical metaphors in explaining vision 
is likely a symptom of that fact that, as Anderson and Fisher highlight in 
the sobering conclusion to their article, “even though we have been look­
ing at motion pictures for three quarters of a century, we still do not under­
stand the most basic perceptual principles.”51 This sense of perplexity is 
reiterated in the classic textbook of visual perception, Eye and Brain by Rich­
ard L. Gregory. The author admits that, although we now know much more 
about the organization of the visual cortex, “how this is related to seeing 
the complex shapes of objects remains unclear.”52 The lack of clarity refers 
specifically to understanding how nerve impulses, or sodium and potas­
sium molecules flying across a membrane, produce subjective perceptual 
experiences. In other words, advanced multidisciplinary research in neuro­
science has not yet found a way to explain how the subjective experience 
of perception and the awareness of it are constituted for us—­a conundrum 
described by David Chalmers as a “hard problem of consciousness,”53 with 
perception arguably being foundational to the emergence of consciousness, 
while also being a principal mode of generating subjective experiences. This 
blind spot at the heart of visual perception studies perhaps explains why 
the shift from the retina to the brain in cognitive psychology has not really 
put to rest the mechanical metaphors of a human organ, be it the eye or 
the brain, as a camera, or more broadly an image-­making apparatus, both in 
media-­theoretical discussions and in scientific descriptions of the problem 
of vision.54 The metaphors’ seductiveness lies in their ability to explain a 
complex process through familiar actions such as recording and copying, 
while also offering a promise of fixing, both in the sense of stabilizing and 
repairing, the perceptive “machine” should it get out of sync. This very 
promise lies at the heart of computer and machine vision.55
Yet the lingering photo-­mechanical metaphors can also be a potent 
conceptual opportunity. Indeed, as mentioned earlier, many humanities 
scholars are aware of the metaphorical aspect of all forms of message trans­
mission, including scientific communication. We use metaphors readily 
and playfully—­while remaining attuned to the historical specificity of what 
gets positioned as experience and evidence. The awareness that the eye is 

86	
Chapter 3
not a camera, that it does not see in frames per second and that it does not 
capture ready-­made images which it then “sends” to the brain, has thus 
enabled a new articulation of the process of perception. The demise of the 
persistence of vision model, with all its scientific error and metaphorical 
charm, has given way to its opposite: the premonition of vision, with the 
brain playing a much more active role in image construction. (Chapter 6 
will explore this in more detail.) This is, however, not a straightforward 
conclusion that, while the eye is not a camera, the brain perhaps might be. 
A much more creative model of perception emerges here instead, requir­
ing us to rethink “the brain”—­which really needs to be put in inverted 
commas—­to refer to a whole apparatus that includes the observer and the 
thing observed, us and the world.
This phenomenological model, deemed an “ecology of perception,”56 
was originally associated with the work of psychologist James J. Gibson. 
The foundations of this model can be traced back to Johann Wolfgang von 
Goethe’s 1810 treatise on color theory,57 a work which put forward the idea 
“of subjective vision in which the body is introduced in all its physiological 
density as the ground on which vision is possible.”58 Crary suggests that 
what was new about Goethe’s visual framework, the key element of which 
was the afterimage left on the retina by light stimulation, was that it pos­
tulated an active observer whose body was capable of generating a whole 
range of visual experiences. This mode of reconceiving the observer as an 
active subject prepared the ground for understanding perception as a kines­
thetic and not just visual process, one that engages the body moving in the 
world.59 The “enactivist” model of perception has recently been developed 
further by philosophers Alva Noë and Shaun Gallagher.60 It has also been 
taken up by many creative disciplines, from dance through to architecture 
and design. Perception here stands for capturing what the world affords us 
and remaining open to it—­but it also involves introducing cuts to what 
Gibson termed an “optic flow” by way of discretizing this flow into lines, 
edges, objects, and, consequently, images. The optic flow names the appar­
ent flow of objects experienced by the observer in their visual field as they 
move through space.61
Gibson’s The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception, published in 
1979, challenged the model of perception as a transmission of an image 
from an object to the eye—­and then the brain—­with a view to building 

Screen Cuts, or How Not to Play Video Games	
87
models of the world. In its place Gibson offered the idea that perception 
was mobile, distributed, kinesthetic, and largely unconscious, and that it 
encapsulated the whole of the corporeal apparatus. In other words, vision 
for him required a movement of the perceiving agent’s body, delivering 
simultaneous information about, and awareness of, “the world” and “the 
self in the world.”62 Building on the subsequent research in neuroscience 
and cognitive psychology in their article “The Myth of Persistence of Vision 
Revisited,” which was another attempt to debunk a model that had cast a 
shadow for longer than expected, Anderson and Anderson similarly con­
cluded that perception was an active process, one in which the corporeal 
apparatus of the observer—­their eyes, brain, and whole body—­participated: 
“We rapidly sample the world about us, noting the things that change and 
the things that do not change. We turn our heads for a better view; we 
move left or right to gain additional information provided by a different 
angle. We move closer or farther away. We actively seek more information 
about things that interest us.”63 Perception thus extends from the brain into 
the world, with “the brain” standing for the dynamic space between the 
observer and the world. It is also inherently coupled with action. It would 
not therefore be too much of an exaggeration to say that I perceive therefore 
I act. (Chapter 6 will explore both the scientific underpinnings and the 
consequences of this statement.)
The key problem that emerges here is the need to understand the mecha­
nism through which cuts are made in the optic flow. As discussed above, 
our eyes are in constant movement of several different kinds. They are also 
“drawn to hard edges,”64 which become points of stoppage on this inevita­
bly blurry journey of perceptive movement. Rebekah Modrak explains that 
“the eye and the brain are accustomed to using contours as a way to under­
stand the environment.”65 Even though nothing in the world is actually 
made up of lines and edges, “the eye and brain have evolved systems that 
encode these differentiating signals and process the information in such a 
deceptively casual manner that we start to believe that edges and lines are 
visible components of the ‘real world.’”66 We could therefore go so far as to 
suggest that “the brain,” which by now, as we have established, stands for a 
wider perceptive apparatus extending to our whole body and reaching out 
into the world, introduces edges and cuts into the imagistic flow: it cuts 
the environment for us to see it, and then helps us stitch it back together.

88	
Chapter 3
Cutting and framing the optic flow
As Lyle Rexer points out, “Enshrined in modern mythology is the image of 
the street photographer, the boulevardier, usually a male, making pictures 
as he goes, shooting, and moving on, a tactical animal on the hunt.”67 
The foregrounding of the embodiment and embeddedness of vision, cou­
pled with its refiguration “as a becoming-­with or being-­with, as opposed 
to surveying-­from,”68 to borrow a phrase from Haraway, calls for a devel­
opment of new strategies of visual—­and photographic—­perception. Offer­
ing a more dynamic and engaged, less conquering, model for being in the 
world, it also severs the link between the eye, the camera, and the gun. In 
line with this proposition, screenshotting, a process where the game player 
either captures the screen by using the “screen capture” function or uses 
the camera or camera-­function provided within a game to capture a scene 
from the point of view of the playing character, should perhaps be renamed 
as screencutting. Even though a certain violence is implied by both terms, 
cutting involves a more multidimensional and less targeted operation. Its 
endpoint is not the arrival of a bullet (or bullet-­like ray of light) that razors 
the world into submission, but rather the creation of a temporary 3D shape 
that subsequently becomes flattened and recognized as an image. The expe­
rience of capturing screens, in whole or in part, as images in a 3D game 
environment allows us to move beyond the camera/shutter model of per­
ception, enacted by the supposedly fixed eyes which neatly slice the world 
into stills. This model, whose shadow still lingers in many contemporary 
conceptualizations of vision as stable, acute, and anchored, was based, as 
previously mentioned, on the architecture of the camera obscura. The cam­
era obscura’s monocular aperture became “a more perfect terminus for a 
cone of vision, a more perfect incarnation of a single point than the awk­
ward binocular body of the human subject.”69 In-­game camera activity can 
allow us to reclaim and reengage the body’s mobility and awkwardness. It 
can do this not so much by offering a prosthesis of vision in the gameworld 
but rather by becoming “an extension of our moving-­and-­perceiving body, 
in its dual nature as both subject and object in the world.”70 As well as 
allowing for an experiential enactment of some learned behaviors around 
perception, vision, mobility, and action in a controlled environment of the 
game, gaming can also facilitate the exploration of framing as a corporeal-­
conceptual device for organizing the world.

Screen Cuts, or How Not to Play Video Games	
89
Framing is of course an artifice, as the world does not present itself to us 
in frames—­although, as we saw in the earlier discussion, there is no verifi­
able theory of how it does present itself to us. To push this idea further, it is 
worth mentioning that many contemporary theories of perception adopt 
what cognitive psychologist Donald E. Hoffman has termed “conscious 
realism,” an updated yet reversed version of Bishop Berkeley’s conviction 
that reality, or at least what we humans call and perceive as reality, is only 
ever a product of our senses.71 Unlike Berkeley’s subjective idealism, this 
theory does not negate the existence of reality, that is, of the actual material 
“stuff” that makes up the world; it only challenges the possibility of us ever 
accessing that reality in a true, unmediated way. In other words, we could 
say that we see what we need to see rather than what is “really” out there, 
while there is no one to assess and guarantee what this out-­thereness looks 
like, as any attempt to describe, capture, and measure it is inevitably entan­
gled with the very devices, be they human or machinic, that undertake the 
process of description, capture, and measurement. Framing is an important 
part of this process, especially as knowledge and understanding, increas­
ingly produced in a visual form today, often come to us framed, from the 
rectangle of the book block to the square of Instagram. We could therefore 
go so far as to suggest that we frame the world in rectangles not because 
our visual apparatus encourages us to do so, but rather because rectangular 
frames, in the shape of mirrors, windows, books, and pictures, are already 
part of our established epistemological repertoire.
Cutting the gameworld into rectangles and squares, screenshotting in 
gameworlds offers gamers an opportunity to enact the fantasy of the early 
industrial age: that of becoming an eye. With its antecedents in the wide 
range of optical instruments—­such as opera glasses, bi-­ and monoculars, 
and spyglasses72—­made for the pleasure of the eighteenth-­century urban 
voyeur, this fantasy has been rechanneled by many recent experiments, 
from the ill-­fated Google Glass through to wearable cameras. Indeed, the 
frequency and semiautomation with which camera phones are now used 
have created a situation in which perception, experience, and conscious­
ness are permanently coupled with framing and capturing the world 
through a handheld rectangular glass device. The artificial, laboratory-­like 
aspect of the game environment is therefore getting ever closer to the expe­
rience one has in the world outside the game. Game theorist Rune Klevjer 
argues that in “navigable 3D environments, the main ‘body’ of the avatar, 

90	
Chapter 3
in the phenomenological sense, is not the controllable marionette itself (for 
example Mario or Lara), but the navigable virtual camera, which becomes 
an extension of the player’s locomotive vision during play.”73 3D games can 
thus be said to facilitate the enactment of a mediated desire for “becom­
ing an eye”: that of “becoming a camera.” There is a long history of artists 
experimenting with image-­making and vision in this way, from Aleksandr 
Rodchenko’s and László Moholy-­Nagy’s adoption of the floating viewpoint 
of a bird or the angular perception of an insect through to Lindsay Seers 
literally becoming a camera by taking photos with her mouth.74 In game­
worlds, this artist is no longer avant-­garde, and they are no longer even 
an “artist.” In the plethora of possibilities and angles on offer—­2½D, over 
the player’s shoulder, camera-­centered behind the player, unbroken first-­
person perspective, perspective switch, freelook—­screencutting allows any 
player to produce a multiperspectival, multilayered tissue of images that 
are a direct result of them approaching a scene in a certain way, be it from 
within the game (as a character) or from outside (as a player). The images 
produced are therefore an outcome of the interwoven and mutually con­
stitutive ecologies of perception and media. With this proposition I am 
adopting a somewhat different stand, and a more fluid understanding of 
photography, from the one proposed by Giddings, for whom in-­game pho­
tography is just a simulation of photography, its “mere trace” or “ghost,”75 
because it does not emerge as a result of light’s direct impact upon the sen­
sitive surface. It is thus rather a form of “virtual heliography,” freezing the 
game’s virtual environment as a picture. For me the image-­making act is not 
confined to what happens on the level of screen or code: it encompasses 
the whole environment in which the gamer, the game, and the gaming 
platform are located. Light is of course never absent from this process—­
which is what allows me to treat it as an extension of photography rather 
than just its mere trace.
In-­game photography in the simulated space of the gameworld also allows 
for the denaturalization of perception: it reconnects the perceiving agent with 
the mechanics of its perceptive apparatus, while foregrounding the latter’s 
technical aspects. It is therefore perhaps more apposite to say that screenshot­
ting does not so much denaturalize perception as a specific learned behavior 
but rather demechanizes it. It also reframes being in the world as being a 
sensing agent, one whose openness to the world comes not just through 
the primary sensory organs such as the eyes or the ears but also through 
the distributed perceptive multiorgan that entails the whole body—­an 

Screen Cuts, or How Not to Play Video Games	
91
organ that is often referred to, somewhat reductively, as “the brain.” It thus 
allows us to see better, and to understand seeing not just corporally but also 
as a fundamentally haptic process. Indeed, for me the game environment 
became a space for reorienting myself as a distributed subject of perception 
and action, and for taking in this knowledge, mentally and corporeally.
This kind of experience could of course be undertaken in a different 
visual environment—­an immersive art installation or even a city walk, 
not to mention a walk with a camera. However, the photographic act as 
it is traditionally conceived, especially in street photography, remains too 
tied to the masterful notion of capturing a Cartier-­Bressonesque “decisive 
moment,” a flattened picture that looks like a disembodied snapshot of 
a reality unfolding “out there,” rather than an outcome of an active pro­
cess of the photographer cutting into the optic flow with their complex 
perceptive-­technical apparatus to produce such an image. What thus tends 
to get forgotten or overlooked in traditional camera-­based photography is 
the dynamic relationship between the optic flow—­which is also a potential 
media flow—­and the perceiving subject. Rexer claims that the majority of 
attitudes to the photographic medium since its nascence have assumed “an 
independence for the photographer, a sovereign position of outsider and 
roving eye. They also assume the self-­sufficiency of each captured moment, 
as if it were distinct, discontinuous, and capable of containing whatever 
might be significant about the reality of that place and time.”76 In the more 
traditional photographic practice, the photographer’s physical and techni­
cal corpus all converge to become a disembodied eye.
The mediated experience of being in a video game could be said to chal­
lenge the naturalized enculturation of photographic image-­making as an 
objective representation of reality, while also opening the apparatus beyond 
the eye-­hand-­world triangle. Both embracing and eliding the experience of 
mediation, the game environment stages worldliness for us as a mobile task 
to explore and engage with, with players’ eyes, hands, brains, and bodies 
all participating in seeing and/as doing. In Mobile Screens: The Visual Regime 
of Navigation Nanna Verhoeff suggests that “interaction with screen-­based 
interfaces already entails a performative, creative act.”77 She argues that in 
the visual regime of navigation movement itself is both performative and 
creative because it “not only transports the physical body, but affects the 
virtual realm of spatial representation. This implies a temporal collapse 
between making images and perceiving them.”78 Here perception reveals 
itself to be an inherently creative task. In screenshotting the photographer’s 

92	
Chapter 3
eye extends beyond the optical apparatus with its line of vision to reach 
into the world in a more dynamic and enfolded way. Screenshotting, I thus 
want to suggest, can offer a corrective to the representationalist under­
standing of photography by reversing the schema: in the game the whole 
body becomes a camera, with the photographer’s eye extended beyond the 
optical apparatus with its line of vision to reach into the world in a more 
dynamic and enfolded way.
Given that the camera often remains invisible in a game, in-­game pho­
tography is particularly predisposed to enact the process of repositioning 
human perception as ecological. Indeed, as mentioned earlier, in many 
instances the whole body becomes, or maybe even morphs with, a camera, 
because walking itself is an actively engaged mode of seeing and sensing. 
In certain first-­person games a reversal of this process also occurs, with the 
camera becoming a body by simulating the body’s functions without the 
need for any actual presence of the body on the screen—­as the camera is 
already enacting those functions.79 The coupling of the activities of walk­
ing, seeing, and sensing that result in the production of what Poremba has 
called a “camera avatar”80 is actually imperative for the survival of the play­
ing character in many games: otherwise, they simply get shot. Screenshot­
ting thus allows the (insubordinate) player to escape, at least temporarily, 
the logic of screen shooting that many games are premised on by allowing 
them to linger in in-­between spaces not designed for action. By slowing 
down the game and spending “unnecessary” time in such spaces, the player 
learns, via their character, how to navigate the world, while also taking 
on and enacting perception with their whole body. Poignantly illustrating 
the error of the persistence of vision theory, screenshotting also playfully 
engages with it as a lingering shadow in understanding our perception of 
motion, in film and “in life.” If our “brain” has indeed evolved not to see 
“reality” but to help us survive,81 the constant flood of intermixed stimuli 
would be impossible to process as discrete pieces of information. Life can 
thus be redescribed as an ongoing process of navigating between cinema 
and photography, with image-­making becoming a mode of world-­making, 
for gamers and nongamers alike.
Flowcuts IV: (Fore)seeing the end of the world
In a somewhat uncanny turn of events, I took first steps toward this project on 
perception and gaming in 2018, but the majority of the Flowcuts images were 
made in early 2020. This meant that I was screenshotting the gameworlds that 

Screen Cuts, or How Not to Play Video Games	
93
had been abandoned by their inhabitants as a result of some vaguely specified 
global-­scale pandemics while becoming increasingly aware of the Covid-­19 epi­
demic developing in Wuhan, China. By the time I completed the set of images in 
March 2020, the World Health Organization had announced a worldwide pan­
demic, with my home city of London, UK, going into partial lockdown. I started 
wondering whether I should pull the project altogether, rewrite it, or replay it 
through other games. I became anxious about the timing, about the work being 
seen as an example of disaster scholarship or trauma art, a cynical attempt to 
milk public anxiety for my own visual experimentation—­and this is where we 
come to the point I made earlier about the experience of perception and gaming 
never being context-­ or content-­free, and about how it matters which game is 
being played, who plays it, when, and what for. In the end, I decided to retain 
the images. Even though the project is ostensibly about perception, and it could 
therefore have been illustrated with a whole variety of other, visually “nicer” 
and safer, games, I cannot deny my own premonitory turn to postapocalyptic 
scenarios to think about how we see and frame the world.
There are of course good epistemological—­and ontological—­reasons for this 
premonition. Indeed, I have been concerned with the apocalypse in my work for 
a while now. This concern has been fueled by the dual eco-­eco crisis—­the unfold­
ing climate catastrophe and the accompanying economic disasters in different 
parts of the world in the aftermath of the global financial crash of 2008—­but also 
by the increasing reorganization of our perception and cognition by algorithms. 
I have also been intrigued by the ongoing popularity of stories about our human 
collapse as a civilization and species, with or without the possibility of redemp­
tion. It is important to note that it is not the apocalypse as such that enthralls 
me, but rather the way it is being mobilized and utilized in concepts, words, 
and images. As part of this exploration, I have become increasingly suspicious 
of the so-­called “ruin porn” associated with the representation of dilapidated 
landscapes, abandoned buildings, and soon-­to-­expire worlds.
82 In proposing the 
notion of a “feminist counterapocalypse” in a recent book,
83 I wanted to raise 
questions about the modes of knowledge and visualization, and the paternalistic 
articulations related to them, offered by some contemporary prophets of doom 
and gloom. At the end of the day, many such prophets seem more interested 
in peddling their wares, be it the latest techno-­fixes or the latest Great Ideas, 
than in developing more workable ways of collaboration and coexistence on our 
planet, for humans and nonhumans alike. Such totalized imaginings of the end 
of the world seem to forget that the apocalypse itself is not distributed equally. 
Many groups, tribes, peoples, and nations throughout our human history have 
already experienced vital threats to their existence, via environmental or socio­
political means. There is thus something politically disabling in adopting this 
all-­encompassing apocalyptic tenor to describe the fate of the world for “us all.”
The Covid-­19 pandemic created a new enactment of the end of the world as 
“we” know it, while creating a temporary illusion of a unified global humanity. 

94	
Chapter 3
Yet, as with the previous crises, the corona-­apocalypse did not affect everyone 
with the same intensity, with geographical, ethnic, and class fault lines delin­
eating numerous zones of exclusion and exception. Nor did it forecast an equal 
prognosis for all: while many were looking at a future of economic, social, and 
environmental distress, with the indigenous populations across the Amazon 
region, for example, made even more vulnerable due to strongman Jair Bolso­
naro’s opportunistic mismanagement of the response to the virus in Brazil raising 
fears of land grab or even genocide,
84 the online giant Amazon “emerged as one 
of the big winners of the coronavirus pandemic . . . , announcing it had revenues 
of $75.4bn in the first three months of the year [2020].”
85
This hopefully goes some way toward explaining why, in my first-­ever venture 
into videogaming, I chose games that dealt with imagining the apocalypse—­a 
popular entertainment genre in different media in recent times, but one that 
offers particularly rich material for both training our imagination and exploring 
behavioral simulation in gameworlds. Yet we must remember that fascination 
with disaster kitsch is also a psychological mechanism, allowing us to cope with 
anxiety about the end of the world, whether this means the end of our planet or 
of our everyday ways of going about things. Indeed, ruin porn has a mollifying 
nature: it projects and forecasts horror and trauma for us so that we do not have 
to spend time and energy imagining it, while also enclosing it for us in a series of 
palatable albeit horror-­inducing images. Apocalyptic imagery gives us the relief of 
being able to stare at a disaster from a distance, in the safety of our own home, 
computer, or phone, while being able to slowly take it in. But it also becomes a 
carrier of our anxiety, framing disaster for us as pictures while taking it away, for 
a short while at least.
Eschewing any form of romantic environmentalism while drawing on the 
available repertoire of media images, my own mode of showcasing the apoca­
lypse operates within the register of “eco-­eco-­punk.” The dual “eco-­eco” prefix 
functions here as a form of mirroring, signaling a mediation of environmental 
and planetary politics via technological praxis and an active engagement with 
media setups. Echoing the culture of remix, eco-­eco-­punk mixes punk’s aesthetics 
of bricolage with the environmental commitment to reworlding while redrawing 
the limits of what can be seen and sensed. In any kind of political or existential 
crisis, the question of perception, of our bodies and minds interacting with the 
world of which they are part to make meanings and interventions in it, remains 
fundamental. Because, before we figure out how we can mobilize the redemptive 
promise entailed in any apocalyptic narrative to try to make our world more liv­
able, we need to ask a number of fundamental questions: How do we see what’s 
around us? How do we organize the flow of images, data, figures, affects, and 
percepts to construct a coherent picture of the world? When do we become ready 
to see things? How do we frame what we see? And how can we reframe it?

4  From Machine Vision to a Nontrivial Perception Machine
Figure 4.1
Stills from Joanna Zylinska, Neuromatic, 2020.

96	
Chapter 4
Neuromatic
The images that open this chapter (figure 4.1) come from a video work of 
mine called Neuromatic, which frames the key issues of the chapter. To make 
the video, I reanimated, with the help of a BigGAN algorithm (available via 
ArtBreeder), some historical and contemporary images of eyes and brains. 
The images had been drawn from the Wellcome Collection, a UK reposi­
tory of medical images. The idea behind Neuromatic was to explore percep­
tion as a process unfolding between the eye, the brain, and the world—­in 
humans and machines. The video’s title is constructed from two terms: 
neuro, referring to the nervous system, and matic, standing for something 
pertaining to the eye (mati in modern Greek), but also sharing the meaning 
of the -­matic suffix (as in automatic, “willing to perform”). Neuromatic aims 
to capture this link between the eye and the brain in the visual apparatus. 
It also invites a reflection on whether vision itself can be understood in 
machinic terms.
How to see better than humans
This chapter continues the interrogation of imaging and perception by 
focusing on the problem of machine vision, but it also analyzes the prob­
lem with machine vision. As part of this analysis, I will embark on an exper­
iment in “conceptual engineering,” an approach that links the pragmatism 
of the machine-­building discipline with its Latin etymology in ingeniare, 
meaning to devise, create, or contrive—­and thus also to play. With some 
help from select computer scientists and neuroscientists, I will explore the 
possibility of building a perception machine—­of a nontrivial variety, no 
less. The chapter draws on two science papers, separated by a couple of 
decades, by authors who made significant contributions to the debate on 
the relationship between humans and machines: Heinz von Foerster’s 1971 
“Perception of the Future and the Future of Perception,” which introduced 
the concept of a “non-­trivial machine,” and Gerald M. Edelman and George 
N. Reeke Jr.’s 1990 “Is It Possible to Construct a Perception Machine?” I will 
engage with those papers in an attempt to construct a conceptual scaffold­
ing for a theory and praxis of machine perception, while interrogating the 
role of photography and other forms of imaging in industry efforts to get 
machines to “see.”

From Machine Vision to a Nontrivial Perception Machine	
97
Mindful of Andreas Broeckmann’s indication that “machine” “is a 
complicated concept that, if used carelessly, troubles any thought about 
technology more than it clarifies,”1 I want to explain and contextualize 
the key terms and concepts that shape my argument. The term “machine 
vision” refers to the systems engineering discipline that works on the auto­
matic extraction of information from digital images to enable machines 
to perform tasks requiring human sight—­and to do it faster and more effi­
ciently than human sight could. Such tasks may include quality control, 
identification, verification, positioning, and measurement, and can be 
found in applications such as detection systems in self-­driving cars, man­
ufacturing, security, or space exploration. Machine vision systems rely 
on cameras with sensors, processing hardware, and software algorithms. 
Their software side is underpinned by a cognate discipline called “com­
puter vision,” a subfield of the broad area of artificial intelligence, which 
theorizes how the extraction of information from digital images actually 
occurs—­although the two terms, “machine vision” and “computer vision,” 
are sometimes used interchangeably. The primary goal of research in com­
puter vision is to teach computers to see, and to make this seeing meaning­
ful to them, at least within the parameters of the set tasks. In its current 
iteration, machine vision is aimed at imitating the way humans see the 
world, but this imitation attempt occurs only after human visual processes 
have been redefined in computational terms.2 The ultimate goal of machine 
vision is to learn how to see better, that is faster and more efficiently, than 
humans.
The methodological premises for teaching computers to see were laid in 
the late 1950s; a 1959 paper by two neurophysiologists, David Hubel and 
Torsten Wiesel, titled “Receptive Fields of Single Neurons in the Cat’s Striate 
Cortex,” is widely referenced as foundational to the subsequent develop­
ments in computer vision. The paper was based on a series of experiments 
conducted by the two researchers on “lightly anaesthetized”3 felines whose 
eyes had been “immobilized by continuous intravenous injection of suc­
cinylcholine”4 to eliminate unpredictable eye movement. The cats were 
being shown pictures of various dots and light shapes, or were having such 
shapes projected onto their retinas, with a view to assessing the felines’ 
brain activity and thus identifying cortical correlates of vision. While 
failing to detect any significant changes to the cats’ neuronal activity as 
a result of being exposed to the light projections of various shapes, the 

98	
Chapter 4
experimenters had a breakthrough when some of the cats’ cortical neurons 
started firing furiously in reaction to the cats being exposed to slits of 
light. Hubel and Wiesel eventually realized that what the cats’ retinas were 
reacting to was not any specific shape, such as a dot or a line, but rather 
change in light intensity at the edge of a slide frame. The two researchers 
traced this activity to what they ended up calling “simple cells” in (what is 
now known as) the primary visual cortex. This experiment, conducted as 
it was on immobile nonhuman subjects, under laboratory conditions, led 
to the inauguration of one of the foundational assumptions—­or, indeed, 
myths—­of computer vision: the belief that the process of vision is multi­
layered and hierarchical, that it is possible to extricate the essence of vision 
in various animals (including those of a human variety), that the mecha­
nism of edge perception is what lies at the core of vision, that the process is 
physiological and content-­independent, and that machines can be taught 
to see “like humans” by mimicking this process of pattern perception at 
the level of pixels.
These formalist parameters were consolidated by a 1982 textbook of 
computer vision, simply titled Vision, by MIT neuroscientist David Marr. 
For Marr, vision was primarily a phenomenon of information processing.5 
“In this framework, the process of vision proceeds by constructing a set of 
representations, starting from a description of the input image, and culmi­
nating with a description of three-­dimensional objects in the surrounding 
environment.”6 The framework assumes that the mechanism of primary 
visual processes such as edge detection or binocular vision is computational 
and that it works its way from those primary processes upward in its study 
of the neural circuitry supposedly enabling vision, all the way to the brain.7 
It is this understanding of “computer vision,” and of its engineering coun­
terpart, “machine vision,” that I aim to critically interrogate here. My over­
all goal is to probe how, or indeed whether, machines can actually see at 
all. I am also interested in what it means for us humans to endow machines 
with the capacity for seeing, or rather, to classify as seeing their ability to 
differentiate between objects in the world on the basis of the light reflected 
off them and transmitted as data to those machines’ processors. This critical 
investigation will allow me to explore the possibility of building a percep­
tion machine, on terms that engage with, but also go beyond, those delin­
eated by biology and computer science.

From Machine Vision to a Nontrivial Perception Machine	
99
From machine vision to machine perception
The shift from vision to perception enacted as part of my experiment is not 
entirely mine: in recent years many AI researchers have gone beyond the 
explicit ocularcentrism of machine vision to extend the study of machines’ 
data capture operations to other senses, such as hearing, touch, and olfac­
tion. Expanding their data sources from still images to sounds, music, 
and video, Google is now using the term “machine perception” in lieu of 
“machine vision.” Indeed, this is the second most popular category, after 
“machine intelligence,” in its database of AI research.8 Object recognition 
premised on algorithms trained on processing large, partially labeled data­
sets using parallel computing clusters, originally trained on optical images 
but now expanded to sound, music, and video, forms the basis of its func­
tioning.9 The notion of machine perception shifts the focus from the flat­
ness of 2D images to the 3D environment which produces them, and which 
hosts the seeing machine, yet it still retains the sense of predefined objects, 
with their corresponding categories.
The notion of “machine perception” I am proposing here, adopted in 
a wider sense than the one offered by Google, aims to address one of the 
key blind spots of computer vision today: its inability to fully account for 
how our brains actually work and how the translation process from retinal 
stimulation (which used to be known as a “retinal image,” as discussed in 
chapter 3) through to the neural circuits of the brain occurs, while produc­
ing a sensation and an awareness of this sensation (recognized in the form 
of an image that we “see”) in humans. It also aims to raise questions for 
the postulation of the discrete physiological unity called “the brain” as the 
core organ of perception. This is not just humanities-­scholar talk, driven 
by imprecision and the bending of categories for the sake of intellectual 
delight. A well-­known 1959 paper by cognitive scientist J. Y. Lettvin et al., 
“What the Frog’s Eye Tells the Frog’s Brain,” demonstrated that perceptive 
activity that had been assumed to take place in the brain as a consequence 
of the retina being stimulated by light in fact had already begun in the 
eye. “The eye speaks to the brain in a language already highly organized 
and interpreted, instead of transmitting some more or less accurate copy of 
the distribution of light on the receptors,” Lettvin and colleagues argued.10 
The exact location of perceptive processes and the exact working of their 

100	
Chapter 4
operative mechanisms remain difficult to pin down not just in frogs but 
also in humans. Machines, in turn, are designed to “interpret images very 
simply: as a series of pixels, each with their own set of color values.”11 My 
notion of machine perception aims to complicate the simplicity of this 
model—­and to explore a different way of understanding what it might 
mean for machines to see.
Perception of the future
The “conceptual engineering” aspect of this chapter departs somewhat 
from the recent uses of this term in analytic philosophy, where it serves 
as a more programmatic and less playful thought device. David Chalmers, 
for example, defines conceptual engineering as “the process of designing, 
implementing, and evaluating concepts.”12 Fixing and hence stabilizing 
concepts is at least as important to him as the act of inventing them. For 
me, however, conceptual engineering has something of feminist cyborg 
bricolage about it: it is less permanent, less intent on fortifying edifices—­
and much more mischievous and punk. Bringing together the two aspects 
of Chalmers’s proposition, “de novo engineering” and “re-­engineering,” 
it retraces the patterns and scaffoldings of the established ideas and texts 
to arrange some new, albeit temporary, constructions—­while looking for 
safety exits.
As indicated earlier, there are good reasons for turning to the papers by 
von Foerster and by Edelman and Reeke, as these authors played an impor­
tant role in redefining physiological phenomena such as perception and 
vision as programmable. As part of their research, they set out to redraw 
traditional disciplinary boundaries in an attempt to find a new way of 
understanding humans and machines, or even humans as machines. Von 
Foerster was an Austrian physicist and engineer with an active interest in 
biology who spent most of his working life in the United States. He was one 
of the key participants in the Macy conferences, a series of meetings that 
took place between 1940 and 1961 which led to the emergence of cybernet­
ics as a transdisciplinary field studying biological and mechanical systems. 
Von Foerster gained recognition for his work on second-­level cybernetics, 
i.e., the proposition that the system’s feedback loop needed to incorporate 
the observer into its operations, with human self-­reflexivity becoming part 
of the cross-­systemic operations across different levels. Von Foerster was a 

From Machine Vision to a Nontrivial Perception Machine	
101
prolific writer, often veering beyond the confines of his discipline or even 
beyond science as such to offer a wider commentary on society and the 
world. “Perception of the Future and the Future of Perception,” first pre­
sented at the opening of the Annual Conference on World Affairs at the 
University of Colorado, Boulder, in 1971, is an example of this approach.
The paper opens with a turn to systems theory as a way of thinking 
about sociocultural change, while also pointing out the limitations of the 
static model of the system, whereby change is seen as an aberration to be 
corrected rather than an incentive to perform alteration at the systemic 
level. Taking account of systemic operations, von Foerster goes on to seek 
an opening within the system, toward an execution of human freedom and 
agency—­and it is perception that he turns to for this purpose. (We can see 
similar intimations in Flusser’s work, which was largely inspired by cyber­
netic thinking.) Specifically, von Foerster advises us that “if we wish to be 
subjects, rather than objects, what we see now, that is, our perception, must 
be foresight rather than hindsight.”13 In other words, he calls on us not to 
fall back on the established patterns of seeing things but rather to follow 
unexpected routes and pathways, taking a lesson from children. So far, so 
pastoral. He is of course not the first thinker to evoke the idea of original 
untarnished vision as a supposedly better entry point into the truth of the 
world: Enlightenment philosophers advocating a return to the “state of 
nature,” romantic poets, and surrealist artists were there before him. Yet 
von Foerster has some interesting things to say about the current atrophy 
(or, as he terms it, “castration”) of perception, for which he blames the 
commodification of information and “an educational system that confuses 
the process of creating new processes with the dispensing of goods called 
‘knowledge.’”14 To offer a remedy for this state of affairs, von Foerster intro­
duces the concept of a “non-­trivial machine,” where the “machine” “refers 
to well-­defined functional properties of an abstract entity rather than to an 
assembly of cogwheels, buttons and levers, although such assemblies may 
represent embodiments of these abstract functional entities.”15
While a “trivial machine” is premised on a one-­to-­one relationship 
between its “input” and its “output,” thus delivering predictable, indeed 
consistently identical, results (at least in theory), in a nontrivial machine 
“its previous steps determine its present reactions.”16 While both systems are 
deterministic, the second one is unpredictable because its output changes 
with what it has picked up in the previous cycles of its operation. Von 

102	
Chapter 4
Foerster does appreciate the reliable predictability of various trivial systems, 
such as toasters or cars, but raises concerns about the application of trivial­
ization to other system—­and this is where his concept of the machine and 
his argument become particularly interesting. He takes the example of a stu­
dent, whom von Foerster sees as a potentially nontrivial machine, becom­
ing completely “trivialized” when he (sic) enters a higher-­level machine, 
i.e., a university, with its predictable teaching and uncreative testing. “Tests 
are devices to establish a measure of trivialization,” von Foerster proclaims. 
“A perfect score in a test is indicative of perfect trivialization: the student is 
completely predictable and thus can be admitted into society. He will cause 
neither any surprises nor any trouble.”17 While the human (the student) is 
seen here as a machine, still in the process of being constructed in his rela­
tively young age, the higher-­level operations of the recursive loops enable 
the possibility of creativity within the system, made up of other machines 
(educators, forms of knowledge and ways of their transmission, pedagogies, 
buildings, and infrastructures)—­but only if the human agents execute their 
potential: in other terms, when they embrace the incomputable as part of 
systemic rationality.18
It may seem obvious that educators or indeed most humans would want 
to do this, and that they would reach for the systemically determined yet 
ultimately undefined degree of freedom available to them. Yet, as confirmed 
both by von Foerster (who sees reluctance to exercise freedom as a form of 
illness) and Flusser (for whom we always operate under the condition of 
systemic predictability, be it on the level of the technical apparatus, society, 
or the inevitably entropic universe),19 such acts of reaching out toward free­
dom, i.e., attempting to change the system’s course of action, are quite rare. 
Von Foerster’s paper ends with a rather humanist call to cherish the “trou­
blemakers,” whom he says we will recognize “by an act of creation: ‘Let 
there be vision: and there was light.’”20 Interestingly, though, it is through 
perception, i.e., the way of seeing attentively,21 that we (as educators and 
assessors of students) are said to be able to introduce novelty into the input-­
output process and thus create a systemic opening. This could be a first step 
in attempting to build a nontrivial perception machine.
But how do we make students, or indeed anyone, see better, without 
knowing in advance what we want them to see, what kind of frameworks 
we are looking through and aiming for? Is there not a danger that this call 
on the part of von Foerster will ultimately sound banal, or in fact trivial: 

From Machine Vision to a Nontrivial Perception Machine	
103
at best vaguely humanist, at worst a recipe for all sorts of educational lib­
ertarians to break with the expertise and care developed within the educa­
tional system? Frequently described as a “polymath,” von Foerster is one of 
a long line of (predominantly male) scientists who opine on wider societal 
issues, making quick excursions to scientific models and protocols in order 
to develop explanations of the world while demonstrating strange blind 
spots when it comes to the cultural aspects of the systems they write about, 
including the terminological and ideological determination of their con­
cepts. (Of course, all conceptual frameworks are ideologically determined, 
but it is the unawareness or obfuscation of this phenomenon, coupled with 
the ascription of “ideology” to one’s intellectual opponents, that I am high­
lighting as a problem here.)
This model of what we might term “truncated rationality” is still very 
much at work in the very hotbed of cybernetic and postcybernetic think­
ing: Silicon Valley. In his poignantly titled What Tech Calls Thinking: An 
Inquiry into the Intellectual Bedrock of Silicon Valley, Stanford literature profes­
sor Adrian Daub points to an “amnesia around the concepts that tech com­
panies draw on to make public policy,”22 coupled with the fetishization of 
the novelty of the problem. This approach is premised on the overlooking or 
even negation of the critical and analytic tools that had previously been used 
by others to deal with similar problems. Through their pronouncements and 
publicity campaigns, Silicon Valley entrepreneurs can position themselves 
as visionaries, while disenfranchising “all of the people with a long tradition 
of analyzing these problems—­whether they’re experts, activists, academics, 
union organizers, journalists, or politicians.”23 What tech calls thinking is 
thus a form of instrumental rationality which has been shaped by the Rand­
ian myth of individualism and the logic of capital.24 It is not only profoundly 
anti-­intellectual but also, contrary to its own self-­image, counterrevolution­
ary. “This is where the limits of our thinking very quickly become the lim­
its of our politics,”25 adds Daub. But while Silicon Valley is its most visible 
actualization, this form of truncated rationality exists and indeed thrives in 
scholarly disciplines such as analytic philosophy, linguistics, biology, cog­
nitive psychology, and neuroscience—­a cluster of disciplines that provide 
intellectual foundations for the field of artificial intelligence, and which fre­
quently rely on copious amounts of technological and military funding.
By way of responding to the omnipresent working of truncated rational­
ity in our increasingly automated and datafied society, Luciana Parisi has 

104	
Chapter 4
come up with what she has termed the “Alien Hypothesis,” a proposition 
which embraces “an abductive, constructionist, experimental envisioning 
of the working of logic . . . as part of a speculative image of the alien subject 
of AI.”26 What is interesting about her idea is that it comes from within the 
logical parameters of cybernetic thought. Her hypothesis is designed as an 
alternative to both the Cybernetic Hypothesis, positing that the only possi­
ble escape from the constraints of the computational system is a flight into 
zones of opacity and invisibility involving the total negation of the logic of 
the system, and the Accelerationist Hypothesis, which advocates disman­
tling the system’s power from within by exhausting its operations. Instead, 
Parisi proposes to engage with the systemic operations on their own logical 
terms with a view to discovering “an alien space of reasoning”27 within the 
system. Drawing on the consequences of mathematician Gregory Chaitin’s 
identification of incomputables within computational systems,28 she argues 
for the possibility of finding such a space beneath the scripted and looped 
servomechanics of the system that make it seem like there is no other way. 
“The challenge,” she suggests “is to determine the kind of appropriation 
that can open political possibilities with technology from within its mode 
of existence.”29 Parisi’s solution lies in reconceptualizing the medium of 
thought beyond its automation and instrumentalization within the current 
machinic systems. Mine here, in turn, involves taking a step back alongside 
our cognitive-­sensory spectrum to offer perception rather than thought as 
a primary mode of engaging with the world, one through which such an 
attempt at undoing the system’s operations is most likely to succeed.30
Vision beyond the brain
So, is it possible to construct a perception machine? This question was origi­
nally posed by biologist and Nobel laureate Gerald M. Edelman and his col­
laborator George N. Reeke Jr. in their 1990 paper. Edelman and Reeke’s work 
was part of their wider project on the neglect of findings from evolutionary 
biology in AI research. In an article written two years prior, they chastised 
AI researchers for remaining too wedded to “epistemological assumptions 
drawn on the one hand from the arguments of Alan Turing and Alonzo 
Church about the universal problem-­solving capabilities of comput­
ers (suggesting that the brain may be understood as a computer) and on 
the other hand from the reductionism of molecular biology (suggesting 

From Machine Vision to a Nontrivial Perception Machine	
105
that the brain may be understood as a collection of units that exchange 
chemical signals).”31 They also had some rather critical things to say about 
“neural network computing”32 as an approach that promised to develop 
machine vision by modeling it on the operations of the human brain. For 
them “neural network computing” is a misnomer because the approach 
that underpins it is premised on a badly conceived analogy between neural 
networks in the brain and computer networks, and not on the way biology 
actually understands and works with neural structures. The strictly compu­
tational approach, they argued, cannot really tell us much about percep­
tion because of its foundational error—­namely, the belief that “objects and 
events, categories and logic are given and that the nature of the task for the 
brain is to process information about the world with algorithms to arrive at 
conclusions leading to behavior. . . . This ‘category problem’ leads directly 
to the inability of AI systems to cope with the complexity and unpredict­
ability of the real world.”33
Recursive neural networks used in machine (aka deep) learning that con­
sist of layers of nodes can be said to have partly addressed the problem of 
being unable to deal with the increasing complexity and uncertainty of 
the world. Indeed, they have had significant successes in identifying pat­
terns and trends in imprecise data, as evident in applications such as face 
recognition, medical data analysis, weather prediction, or natural language 
translation. Yet neural networks as currently conceived in AI research still 
do not ultimately challenge the assumption “that information exists in the 
world,” while the organism “is a receiver rather than a creator of criteria lead­
ing to information.”34 I am particularly interested in Edelman and Reeke’s 
critique of the idea of objects and events existing in the world out there, 
to be seen, grasped, and manipulated by us. This critique corresponds to 
the philosophical position of “conscious realism” espoused by Donald D. 
Hoffman discussed in the previous chapter. This is not to say that there is 
nothing in the world, only that the preconceived and discretized objects 
that allegedly present themselves for our vision to capture are outcomes of 
a creative, dynamic yet ultimately undetermined process.35 We see what we 
need to see, argues Hoffman. For him, the nature of this need is biological, 
or, more precisely, evolutionary, in the sense that the purpose of our seeing 
is our survival—­and this is where his intellectual trajectory coincides with 
Edelman and Reeke’s. Indeed, as a riposte to computational schematism in 
physics, Edelman and Reeke suggest that any viable theory of categorization 

106	
Chapter 4
and intelligence to be used in AI research needs to embrace the Darwin­
ian model of selection, but adjusted for the working of the neurons of a 
single organism operating during its lifetime. This conclusion serves as the 
grounding for their 1990 paper about the possibility of constructing a per­
ception machine.36
And, indeed, in the paper they propose such a construct. Named, with­
out any equivocation or irony, Darwin III,37 this machine’s architecture is 
premised on their proposition that categorization (rather than the more 
straightforward object recognition as applied in computer vision systems) 
is a critical component of perceptual systems. Perception does involve “the 
adaptive discrimination of objects or events through one or more sensory 
modalities, separating them from the background and from other objects 
or events,”38 but the difference here is that these objects are not predeter­
mined. Instead, for Edelman and Reeke perception is not about grasping 
representations, as the categories used by the organism or machine do not 
exist in the world to be recognized by this organism or machine: rather, 
those categories are actively constructed (or, as Edelman and Reeke put 
it, they are meaningful to the perceiver “in a given situation”).39 Percep­
tion thus becomes redefined as “an active sensorimotor process, requiring 
exploration and depending on past experience.”40 In this model categoriza­
tion needs to be seen as biological, not mathematical, because it cannot be 
solely expressed in symbolic form. The biological aspect of these organisms 
implies that movement through the world is needed for recognition, and 
hence perception and intelligence, to be enacted. This model is premised 
on the interesting idea, formulated in the authors’ earlier paper, of the 
brain as “a selective system operating in somatic time,”41 one which reso­
nates with the phenomenological approach to AI design, which is increas­
ing in popularity.
Yet Edelman and Reeke’s concept of the perception machine itself remains 
hamstrung in this acultural model, with machinic operations positioned as 
primarily driven by natural selection. Cultural transmission of information 
is dismissed by them as not being relevant to the evolutionary development 
of working perceptual systems. Even though Darwin III is supposedly more 
firmly placed in the world, its orientation, vision, and goals are crippled by 
the temporality of its movement, with “somatic time” requiring an erasure 
of the said soma’s singularity at the expense of the (supposedly) timeless 
operations of natural selection. There is therefore a danger that Edelman 

From Machine Vision to a Nontrivial Perception Machine	
107
and Reeke’s perception machine may end up being rather trivial, because 
the information it will pick up to develop its categories, even if collected 
in a more dynamic and embedded way, will by design have been stripped 
of any cultural specificities—­which here only amount to noise. However, 
designating which aspects of the surroundings can be classified as nature 
and which belong to the realm of culture is not straightforward.42
Anthropologist Tim Ingold argues that the difference between nature 
and culture is just a matter of temporality: history (which manifests as “cul­
ture” in different epochs) simply operates on shorter time scales than evo­
lution (which proceeds according to laws of “nature”). Ingold goes on to 
show how Darwin’s Origin of Species challenged the eighteenth-­century view 
of “man” as a being equipped with special characteristics such as reason 
and morality, characteristics which were meant to separate him from the 
other species. Darwin postulated that the difference between the human 
and other animals was in fact one of degree, not of kind, and that evolu­
tion, which he had originally termed “descent with modification,” was the 
manner through which this change toward rational man, endowed with 
intellectual and moral faculties, actually occurred. Yet the problem with 
that view was that it inaugurated another differentiation which today we 
would (rightly) describe as racist: one between the savage and the civilized 
man. The only way out of this dilemma was to attribute “the movement 
of history to a process of culture that differs in kind, not degree, from the 
process of biological evolution,” explains Ingold.43 It was also to put for­
ward the idea of two parallel kinds of inheritance in human populations: 
one biological (involving the transmission of genetic information encoded 
in the DNA and referring to the core identity of the human—­e.g., walking), 
the other cultural (taking place through social learning—­e.g., being able 
to play an instrument). Yet Ingold argues, following many other cultural 
anthropologists, that there is nothing “purely” natural about walking—­and 
that neither is learning to play an instrument a fully cultural experience, 
separated from the transmission of embodiment. Instead, “those specific 
ways of acting, perceiving and knowing that we have been accustomed 
to call cultural are enfolded, in the course of ontogenetic development, 
into the constitution of the human organism,” which makes them equally 
“facts of biology.”44 At the heart of the problem lies not so much the confla­
tion of the biological with the genetic, Ingold points out. The decoupling of 
the processes of historical and biological change should therefore rather be 

108	
Chapter 4
treated as a detemporalization, a process premised on the fictitious positing 
of separate temporalities for certain kinds of changes over others. This fal­
lacious model is still very much with us. It subtends the present consensus 
with regard to science as a method—­and the disciplinary division between 
the sciences and the humanities.45
Machine vision and epistemic (in)justice
Ingold’s argument, which builds on the work of psychologist Daniel Lehr­
man, poses a challenge to any attempt to construct perceptual systems that 
will be capable of passing on their evolutionary traits to their offspring but 
will not be able to pass on any cultural influences (or, indeed, that will 
need to be free from such influences). Any traits that will get passed on will 
always carry both “natural” and “cultural” inscriptions, in a manner that 
will not allow for their easy decoupling, but the construction of culture 
as a separate domain of uninheritable features will perpetuate the distinc­
tion, while allowing computer scientists to forgo embodied and embedded 
modes of perception and cognition. This disembodied model of computer 
vision results in the preservation of one of the biggest science (and com­
puter science) myths: the belief that data bias understood as cultural bias, 
once eliminated, will result in data that is both pure and fair.46 We are regu­
larly presented with consequences of such essentialization of biology and 
“the brain,” at the expense of “cultural traits,” in cognitive and computer 
science. Two examples from 2020 include the video conferencing platform 
Zoom’s background algorithm, which removed the head of a Black aca­
demic any time he tried to use a virtual background, and the Twitter crop­
ping algorithm, which privileged the showing of white faces in cropped 
images in its timeline.
While the computer vision system reveals itself not to be particularly 
perceptive, the consequences of its racialized blind spots are anything but 
trivial. Indeed, the algorithms that run within it are the same ones that 
make decisions about people’s social, financial, or legal status, including 
punitive action at border control, denial of credit, prediction of educational 
failure, or assignment of criminality. While the early Google image rec­
ognition algorithm was shown in 2015 to auto-­tag pictures of Black peo­
ple as “gorillas,”47 there is an ongoing problem with face recognition of 
Black females, with the high false match rate justified by industry experts 

From Machine Vision to a Nontrivial Perception Machine	
109
as being the result of a combination of the difficulty of lighting a Black 
face and the makeup worn. Denying explicit bias, Thorsten Thies, direc­
tor of algorithm development of the German company Cognitec which 
supplies facial recognition systems to governments, explained in a trou­
blingly disarming manner that it is “harder to take a good picture of a 
person with dark skin than it is for a white person.”48 One factor is that 
the image databases that serve as training sets for the algorithms are not 
properly representative, being skewed, in terms of volume and quality, 
toward photographs of white males. But there is a deeper logic at work here, 
endemic to the whole systemic infrastructure involved in the production 
of cameras, lighting systems, image-­processing software, and the visual and 
cultural training of photographers and image technicians, that produces 
a particular set of internalized norms. These norms that can then be pre­
sented as posing an “objective” difficulty in taking a photo of a person with 
a dark skin. This mode of thinking, embedded in all sorts of technologies 
that precede the digital, is what Safia Noble has critiqued in her book Algo­
rithms of Oppression. Noble’s book analyzes the hidden operations of capital, 
race, and gender in algorithmic infrastructures, a process she terms “tech­
nological redlining.”49 Suggesting that “artificial intelligence will become a 
major human rights issue in the twenty-­first century,”50 she calls on us all to 
understand the architecture and logic of algorithmic decision-­making tools 
in masking and deepening social inequality. As part of her analysis, Noble 
puts to rest the belief that unfair systemic decisions are just occasional aber­
rations which can be easily eliminated for the functionality and efficiency 
of the supposedly neutral system to be restored.
Murad Khan and Shinji Toya’s project Identity Turns on a Pixel When the 
World Becomes a Picture poignantly illustrates the logic behind racial cat­
egorizations in machine learning and computer vision systems, an (il)logic 
that is premised on arbitrary categorizations replicating entrenched socio­
cultural perceptions of identity as only skin-­ (or hair-­)deep. For their project 
the artists had scanned a photo of a young male, which was labeled by a 
facial recognition algorithm of a commercial software package as “Asian.” 
They then morphed the photo in an AI-­based image manipulation pro­
gram, via the addition of facial hair and a cropped haircut, to create an 
image of a person that got labeled as White. Subsequently they analyzed 
the in-­between stages in the morphed image to identify the threshold 
image over which the “crossing” between the racial categories occurred. It 

110	
Chapter 4
turned out the difference between the two images boiled down to a single 
pixel. “The minute, discrete, and tangible nature of the pixel as a racial­
ized limit point between categories points to a social problem at the heart 
of abstraction in machine learning systems,”51 they concluded, revealing 
a gap between human vision, which is premised on an indeterminacy to 
be negotiated, over and over again, as part of our lived experience, and 
its machinic counterpart—­where such indeterminacy must be eliminated 
at all cost.
CDO at Twitter Dantley @dantley responded to the 2020 cropping algo­
rithm’s debacle discussed earlier with the chest thumping yet predictable: 
“It’s 100% our fault. No one should say otherwise. Now the next step is 
fixing it.”52 Yet Noble is very clear that “algorithmic oppression is not just a 
glitch in the system but, rather, is fundamental to the operating system of 
the web.”53 Mitra Azar, Geoff Cox, and Leonardo Impett similarly suggest 
that “in a structurally unequal society, it is exceedingly difficult to make a 
‘fair’ algorithm; and it is effectively impossible to make an algorithm which 
is both fair and effective. . . . In a society which is unfair, a classification-­
machine will always be unfair (in at least one sense).”54 It is therefore not 
enough to de-­bias the data. Instead, we need to ask bigger questions about 
the forms of injustice embedded in the systems that host it. We also have to 
ask what it means when the elimination of the glitch, while desirable from 
a technical point of view, ends up making the punitive surveillance run­
ning on this data even more efficient. The correction of the data bias does 
not correct the violently penetrative and extractivist logic of the computer 
vision system: it actually strengthens it. We could thus say that we need 
to identify the unjust operations of the nontrivial vision machine to start 
thinking of building a nontrivial perception machine.
With this, as part of the “conceptual engineering” project outlined at 
the outset of this chapter, we are now shifting toward a conceptual expan­
sion of the notion of the machine. In line with its cybernetic legacy from 
von Foerster and colleagues, the term “machine” departs from its strict 
engineering connotations to embrace any kind of system, be it mechani­
cal or biological, of varying degrees of complexity. In their Autopoiesis and 
Cognition, a key text of systems theory which paved the way for apply­
ing systemic thinking not only to biological organisms but also to forms 
of social organization,55 Humberto Maturana and Francisco Varela defined 
the machine as “a unity in the physical space defined by its organization, 

From Machine Vision to a Nontrivial Perception Machine	
111
which connotes a non-­animistic outlook, and whose dynamisms [sic] is 
apparent.”56 In this framework, systems are arranged in a nested manner, 
from the microscopic to the cosmic, while undergoing internal transforma­
tions or even cross-­systemic mutations. In the 1960s and 1970s the cyber­
netically inflected notion of the machine became a potent concept for 
philosophers and cultural theorists attempting to articulate different levels 
of sociopolitical complexity while taking into account the biological and 
technical constitution of both individuals and societies. We can mention 
here Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari’s war and desiring machines, Michel 
Foucault’s dispositive, and Vilém Flusser’s apparatus. Building on this leg­
acy, “the perception machine” embraces multiple, albeit interwoven, levels 
of meaning, from the biological level of the perception apparatus in human 
and nonhuman animals through the technical image-­making apparatus, 
all the way to the sociopolitical setup—­and to its technical infrastructures 
which have a planetary reach.
By now it should have become clear that in my attempt to build a non­
trivial perception machine I am not really constructing a device, at least not 
in any straightforward way, but rather a conceptual framework, a scaffold­
ing for both framing what we term the world and seeing this world better. 
Such a perception machine will have to do more than just identify symbols, 
avoid bias, or even account for the environment. In its architecture the 
idea of the brain as a discrete perceptive organ will need to give way to 
a dynamic interaction between the organism, with its constantly chang­
ing embodiment, and the environment—­which, in turn, is not a constant 
but which “exists only in relation to the organisms that inhabit it, and 
embodies a history of interactions with them.”57 Indeed, there is no per­
ception machine outside of its cultural and historical embeddedness. This 
acknowledgment calls for “nothing less than a new approach to evolution,” 
one that does not posit “a radical break between evolution and history, 
or between biological and cultural evolution” but rather sees history as a 
“continuation into the field of human relations of a process that is going 
on throughout the organic world.”58 The very gesture of embarking on the 
task of trying to build a nontrivial perception machine is also meant to 
serve as a multiscalar attempt to both rethink our human perception and 
vision, and challenge the parameters of the emergent vision machine in our 
globally networked world. (This approach sums up the rationale behind my 
“conceptual engineering” project.)

112	
Chapter 4
The parameters of such a vision machine have been poignantly analyzed 
by Virilio in his 1994 book. Initiated with the development of the prosthe­
ses of sight such as the telescope in 1608 but accelerated three centuries 
later with the proliferation of “seeing machines,” the transformation of 
vision is understood by Virilio in terms of a linear shift from the organic 
to the mechanical. It also entails an incontrovertible loss. Virilio’s vision 
machine thus ends up being posited as “an autonomous technological sys­
tem”59 which disturbs the original organic unity and purity of human sight. 
John Johnston observes that “in Virilio’s theory there is no positive side to 
the deregulation of perception (unlike Deleuze and Guattari’s deterritorial­
ization), no positive value, aesthetic or otherwise, to the freeing of percep­
tion from preestablished codes.”60
Drawing on some of Virilio’s concepts, as well as his political intimation 
with regard to the unjust and immoral uses of the visual technologies of 
surveillance, regulation, and control, in this book I go beyond his human­
ist melancholia to embrace an understanding of machines that encapsu­
lates their organic and nonorganic iterations, that changes over time, and 
that constitutively shapes the human sensorium in different ways, while 
also enabling its reframing and recoding. I am doing this with a conviction 
that it is only through an acknowledgment of our own technical heritage, 
and through a prudent and responsible engagement with machines as co-­
constitutive of our bodies, societies, and environments, that we will be able 
to design better ways of being in the world—­to develop an ethics and politics 
for a humachine world that is not just a form of organicist moralism. But, to 
do this, we will need not just a new ethical framework but also a new optics.
A nontrivial perception machine must be antiracist
The transformation of vision acquired a new intensity in the age of what 
Shoshana Zuboff has termed “surveillance capitalism.”61 For Zuboff the 
term describes a novel economic order, one that is characterized by par­
asitism and attempts at behavior modification, whereby human experi­
ence is reduced to raw material for the unprecedented operations of power 
wielded by technological companies. She defines this development “as 
a coup from above: an overthrow of the people’s sovereignty.”62 While 
Zuboff offers some insightful analyses of the working philosophies and 
practices of companies such as Apple, Google, Amazon, Microsoft, and 

From Machine Vision to a Nontrivial Perception Machine	
113
Facebook, her proposed solutions are arguably less discerning. Leif Weth­
erby critiques Zuboff’s study for being premised on a rather empty promise 
of systemic reform from inside. Wetherby argues that the metaphor of an 
all-­consuming surveillance machine her book embraces is too totalizing, 
and that this machine “is really a dispersed and uneven set of global infra­
structures.”63 “This system does not ‘see’ so much as it captures,” he sug­
gests, with the visual perception of our bodies being intertwined with the 
incessant seizure, processing, and distribution of abstract data about us, on 
multiple levels and in multiple domains.64 The current vision machine we 
are living in is thus both a surveillance machine and a data capture device. 
It is also, as rightly pointed out by Virilio, a war machine, serving as it does 
as a digitized battleground featuring multiple operations of capture and car­
nage, with real-­life consequences for human and nonhuman lives. Yet it is 
also, we must not forget, a pleasure machine, with photography and other 
forms of automated image-­making shaping the flows of desire of human 
users who cannot be reduced to mere cultural “dupes.”
My attempt to build a nontrivial perception machine presented here is 
thus aligned with Bernard Stiegler’s analysis of automation in pharmaco­
logical terms,65 where the process, although harmful to our individual and 
social life—­as evidenced in our overall “ill-­being,” “nihilism,” and “human­
ity’s doubt about its future”66—­can be worked through to release the 
machine’s curative properties. The nontrivial perception machine we are 
building here will need to be able to scan through the obscure logic of the 
surveillance machine, which is also a data apparatus and a mechanism of 
warfare. To do this, such a nontrivial machine would need to do more than 
just be neutral or unbiased (although it should be that too): it must also be 
decisively antiracist. We could go even further and suggest that, to counter 
both the racist legacy of the war machine and the capitalist extractivism 
that fuels it, it must also, following Ariella Aïsha Azoulay, be counterim­
perialist. In her magisterial volume Potential History: Unlearning Imperial­
ism Azoulay challenges the regime of rights and privileges that has shaped 
photography and the modes of perception and representation inaugurated 
by it since its early days, being designed as a medium through which “the 
world is made to be exhibited.” The world is thus offered “only for a select 
audience.”67 She goes so far as to claim that “Photography developed with 
imperialism; the camera made visible and acceptable world destruction and 
legitimated the world’s reconstruction on imperial terms.”68

114	
Chapter 4
It may seem at first glance that Azoulay’s argument is only aimed at 
humancentric photography, which is meant to be displayed and seen by 
(select groups of) humans—­and not at large datasets feeding and shaping 
machine vision today. Yet the same form of rationality arguably underpins 
the production, storage, and categorization of all photographic and para­
photographic images (including those rendered by CGI or GANs) because 
their constitutive logic, history, and modes of framing still hark back to 
the imperial mindset that legitimated classification as supposedly neutral, 
while putting it to work with Empire’s goals in mind. The location and for­
mat of imperial rule have shifted today: in their eponymous book Michael 
Hardt and Antonio Negri argue that Empire now has no specific bound­
aries or territorial center of power. It has become “a decentered and deter­
ritorializing apparatus of rule,”69 with global capital flows enacting a form 
of biopolitics by being involved in the production of social life itself as 
an overlapping nexus of economic, political, and cultural forces. The neo­
imperial war machine is thus first and foremost a hegemonic surveillance 
network: it conquers by implicit consent and by the scale and invisibility 
of its penetration. All this is not to say that no nodes of power’s concentra­
tion can be identified within this new imperial apparatus. However, the 
increasing shift of domination and decision-­making from governments to 
corporations, from Washington to Silicon Valley, from the United States 
to China, and from humans to algorithms creates an uncertain and fuzzy 
geopolitics in which political and technological black boxes obscure the 
location of power as well as its actual operations. It also shifts the onus 
of responsibility onto individual citizens—­whose primary yet already dual 
identity in this system is that of both network users and data points. The 
neoimperial surveillance machine is thus an updated version of Virilio’s 
vision machine. A nontrivial perception machine could be seen as its con­
ceptual and technical counterpart, one that offers an opening into a new 
vision of both ourselves and the world.
The Recognition Machine
The Recognition Machine by artists Antje Van Wichelen and SICV (Michael 
Murtaugh and Nicolas Malevé) can be seen as one possible enactment of 
such a nontrivial perception machine that is also actively counterimperial­
ist. I had an opportunity to interact with the version of the work presented 

From Machine Vision to a Nontrivial Perception Machine	
115
Figure 4.2
Antje Van Wichelen and SICV, The Recognition Machine, 2018.

116	
Chapter 4
at the Photoszene Cologne festival in May 2019, but the project also has 
an online counterpart. Looking like a photo booth, The Recognition Machine 
invites gallery visitors to enter and take a digital photo of themselves. The 
act of taking a photo activates an algorithm that attempts “to establish 
links between the pixels just recorded and those of images from a database 
of 19th century anthropometric photographs,” which have been trans­
formed by analog techniques. “The resulting print output links contempo­
rary regimes of surveillance to those of a colonial past.”70 The link between 
the images pivots around the emotions identified by the algorithm in the 
viewer’s face and linked with the emotions read in the archival photos. The 
reading was obtained by training the algorithm on the FER-­2013 dataset, in 
which each image had been assigned one of seven emotions: anger, disgust, 
fear, happiness, sadness, surprise, or neutral. Any possible misrecognition 
of emotions that occurs as part of the process serves as an alert to the sys­
tem of consequences that predictive technology is imbricated with: while 
labeling here is just an innocent game for art audiences, the misrecogni­
tion of image links, their wrong categorization and ascription, has serious 
consequences for the lived lives of many. The visitor may keep the print 
obtained, but they are also asked to explore further the posited analogy and 
thus go deeper both into the archive and the colonial history of portraiture. 
Demonstrating the pixel-­level slide between races as enacted by the logic of 
computer vision systems analyzed by Murad Khan and Shinji Toya, The Rec­
ognition Machine also shows us that all images exist as part of the imperial-­
colonial network of visuality, a network that renders some bodies as visible 
and proper while deeming others as illegible or illegal. What is particularly 
interesting about this project is that the artists dispense with the idea of a 
singular image as a stand-­alone artifact to be consumed, classified, and oth­
erwise exploited, showing that all images are part of multiple networks of 
knowledge and data exchange. The Recognition Machine thus offers a model 
of the perception machine as an invitation to study the production of visu­
ality, the image networks, and their infrastructures; their underlying data 
and databases; the algorithms that shape both their production and their 
networking.
We could therefore conclude that a nontrivial perception machine would 
need to encourage an ethicopolitical engagement with images, their histo­
ries, databases, and infrastructures. It should also entail strategies for enter­
ing the database on the part of the human, with a view to deindustrializing 

From Machine Vision to a Nontrivial Perception Machine	
117
visuality and vision. It is therefore not just a matter of seeing what is inside 
the archival machine and how “it” thinks but also of creating conditions 
for thinking about human and machine vision otherwise. The human may 
not be able to see all the available images contained in multiple databases 
and data clouds, trace all the possible connections between them, or take 
cognizance of all the categories and labels on offer. But what is possible—­
and indeed imperative—­is for the human viewer to take stock of the logic 
of opacity and scale that shapes the AI-­driven perception machine, to ask 
questions about its operations and to demand a better (fairer, more histori­
cal, more explicitly antiracist and counterimperialist) engagement with the 
image and data flow.
Unlearning imperialism, as Azoulay points out, needs to involve attend­
ing to “the conceptual origins of imperial violence, the violence that 
presumes people and worlds as raw material, as always already imperial 
resources.”71 The fuzzy borders of today’s Empire, coupled with the indi­
vidual benefits of becoming-­data for platform capitalism’s servotechnology, 
make it easier for this form of violence to be seen as consensual—­or not as 
violence at all. Taking first steps toward building a nontrivial perception 
machine can help us see this form of extractive biopolitical violence for 
what it is—­and then start devising operations for countering it. A nontrivial 
perception machine can also be mobilized to render visible an envisioning 
process that operates as a condition of speculative thought.72 We need to 
approach this task with the realization that, just as there is no space outside 
technicity (for us humans), there is no stepping outside visuality either. It 
goes without saying that such a machine cannot be built once and for all: it 
will need to be regularly rebuilt, retuned, and reprogrammed.


5  AUTO-­FOTO-­KINO: Photography after Cinema and AI
Photography as an (always) moving image
This chapter explores further the pharmacological aspect of the perception 
machine, looking for restorative properties within its regulatory operations 
concerning vision and visuality. Bouncing off Gilles Deleuze’s proposition 
that cinema is a medium that is capable of enacting the deterritorializa­
tion of vision by shifting it beyond its dominant corporeal parameters and 
sociopolitical fixtures—­a position Deleuze sustains by opposing cinema to 
photography1—­I will offer the concept and practice of AUTO-­FOTO-­KINO 
Figure 5.1
Joanna Zylinska, composite made from stills from A Gift of the World (Oedipus on the 
Jetty), 2021.

120	
Chapter 5
(figure 5.1) as a less antagonistic mode of understanding the relationship 
between the two media, especially in their transmutation through the tech­
nologies of computation and AI.
For decades scholars of visual culture foregrounded distinct ways in 
which cinema and photography dealt with the representation of the world 
and with the perception and capture of time. The dialectics of movement 
and stillness became a model through which the singularity of these two 
media forms was understood and perceived. Cinema was situated on the 
side of the present, of “being there,” even of life itself, with photography 
being assigned a more passive and moribund set of connotations: those 
signaling the past, “having been there,”2 and, as discussed in chapter 1, 
death. However, the differentiation between still and moving images has 
become more difficult to maintain nowadays. Any smartphone can shoot 
photos at the speed of video, and it can shoot video in photo resolution. 
Photographs are increasingly available to us as part of mobile image flows 
and data clouds. While in the past cinema was tasked with the role of teach­
ing us “to see movement and time,”3 in the world of digital media our visual 
apparatus gets lessons from a more diverse array of image forms and for­
mats. My analysis departs from the tendency to discuss photography in 
relation to cinema primarily in terms of stasis, loss, and lack, to offer a 
more life-­affirming or even life-­forming understanding of the photographic 
medium.
In the foreword to their edited collection Stillness and Time: Photogra­
phy and the Moving Image, David Green and Joanna Lowry argue that “the 
photograph now exists as only one option in an expanding menu of rep­
resentational and performative operations presented by the technology.”4 
In what follows, I want to consider to what extent this virtualization of 
photography—­the potentiality of the digital array presenting itself as 
sequences of different photographs at any one time (a potentiality that was 
already available in digital photography but that has intensified with the 
advent of its computationally generative variant)—­has provoked a reconfig­
uration of perception. While it may have been true in the past that we saw 
film images because they moved, and still images because our eyes moved over 
them,5 photography today is arguably a much more mobile and dynamic 
affair. Photography does not just move us, affectively and physically, but is 
also itself mobile. Ingrid Hoelzl and Rémi Marie go so far as to argue: “In 

AUTO-­FOTO-­KINO: Photography after Cinema and AI	
121
an age of general screenification, in which the image is always potentially 
moving, the distinction between a still image depicting stillness and a mov­
ing image depicting movement no longer holds.”6 Still images move on 
screens through being zoomed on, pinched, or incorporated into automatic 
slideshows; they also travel between screens—­from the constant exchange 
of images between our phones and social media feeds through to the mul­
tiple digital screens enveloping our urban spaces, and us in those spaces. 
However, Hoelzl and Marie also point out that the “convergence of moving 
and unmoving images in digital media (on the level of post-­production 
as well as on the level of display) is already laid out in the media history 
of photographic and filmic images and their hybrid forms,”7 from early 
experiments with optical toys through to flip books, lenticular images, and 
holograms. They highlight that “photographs (as objects in time) are also 
subordinate to time, even if the change occurring and observable is usually 
very slow”: a state of events aptly illustrated by Hollis Frampton’s short 
film Nostalgia (1971), in which twelve photographs are placed one after the 
other on a hotplate to burn slowly.8
We could therefore say, by way of a provocation, that the still image does 
not exist, or rather that its existence is the result of a temporary and percep­
tual stabilization. On a temporal scale long enough, every image is a moving 
image. Building on Maurizio Lazzarato’s essay “After Cinema,” and on my 
own experiments with various media, I want to analyze in this chapter 
some of the ramifications of this proposition by exploring the increasing 
overlap between still and moving images. I also want to look at the trans­
formation of the photographic medium and its affordances in its encounter 
with other forms of moving image, such as television and video, whereby 
images move faster. As part of my argument, I will offer the concept and 
practice of AUTO-­FOTO-­KINO as one possible enactment of emancipatory 
agency (desired, among others, by Deleuze, Flusser, and Lazzarato) from 
within the algorithmically driven image complex. Using machine learn­
ing and GAN networks to rework the best-­known photofilm, Chris Mar­
ker’s postapocalyptic La Jetée, I will explore the possibilities of creatively 
engaging automation to outline a different vision of the future as part of 
the AUTO-­FOTO-­KINO experiment. Through this experiment, I will also 
engage with ways of gender-­queering the perception machine as both an 
image-­making apparatus and a network of looks, percepts, and viewpoints.

122	
Chapter 5
Distraction as expanded watching
In “After Cinema,” Lazzarato argues that cinema is “no longer representa­
tive of the conditions of collective perception.”9 Drawing on Gilles Deleuze 
and Félix Guattari’s Anti-­Oedipus, he goes on to seek a sociopolitical open­
ing within the constraints of the perception machine in digital technology. 
As part of his diagnosis Lazzarato points out that the temporal separation 
between filming and screening disappears in television as a medium oper­
ating primarily in real time—­and thus effectively eliding the difference 
between reality and a picture of it, between the real and the imaginary. The 
shock enacted by cinema on our sense of space and time, the hijacking of 
our unconscious by illusion and magic which allowed for the creation of 
the sense of movement, has given way to a more immersive but also more 
mundane experience, he claims:
Now the flows are all around us: noi andiamo in onda (literally, “we are going 
into airwaves”), as the Italian language puts it so perfectly in reference to televi­
sion transmission. Not only television shows, but all reality is caught up in this 
movement: andare in onda. The image no longer shocks us because it is no longer 
outside our perception: it is we who have become images (Bergson).
10
Lazzarato’s argument also applies to other forms of more “immediate” 
media, such as video—­and to its remediation on platforms such as You­
Tube, Vimeo, and TikTok. The changes in collective perception he identifies 
as a result of the popularization of television in the middle of the twentieth 
century dispersed the mass audience, leading to the individualization of 
reception. In the digital formats that have followed terrestrial TV, reception 
as full engagement or even devotion has been replaced by a less focused 
mode of attention, with distraction becoming “the basic mode of percep­
tion” today.11 It is perhaps only a short step from here to the denouncing 
of TV, YouTube, and TikTok audiences as unfocused, lazy, and stupid—­the 
way some scholars have castigated today’s readers as less attentive and shal­
lower, as discussed in chapter 1. Yet it would be interesting to probe instead 
what the audiences are being distracted toward, what new orientations and 
bindings their attention now engages. Lazzarato himself sees this state of 
events as an opening of a possibility, calling on us “to reclaim the adventure 
of perception”12 and create something new. This possibility is entailed in 
the fact that a video image is “a tactile image, an image to be manipulated.” 
David Green has traced back this possibility to the early days of the activity 

AUTO-­FOTO-­KINO: Photography after Cinema and AI	
123
in the VCR, a technology which became, especially in the hands of artists, 
“a tool with which to dismember the moving image and, through that pro­
cess, produce new temporalities.”13 With image editing being democratized 
through the wide availability of easy image manipulation software on our 
laptops and phones, everyone is now invited to cut into the image timeline, 
with the image itself expanding beyond its frame.
Distracted watching is thus expanded watching: it is often more dis­
tributed and more social, involving a more intense set of relations with 
images and sounds, visual strategies, genres, as well as other viewers and the 
media they are connected to (e.g., instant messaging, WhatsApp, or Twitter 
as platforms for live commentary; “bullet screens” as ways of annotating 
a show with live text commentaries—­especially popular amidst Chinese 
audiences; screenshots used for memes or mashups; algorithms “curating” 
serendipitous viewing schedules and rhythms). Reception always involves 
the potential of remaking, be it through fan activities, memes, or group 
“hate watching.” Lazzarato takes this expansion of the image as a sign of 
political hope, entailing the possibility that the dominant way of seeing 
the world and acting in it can be reconfigured. He describes the current 
sociopolitical reality with the Deleuze-­and-­Guattari-­indebted notion of 
the social machine. The architecture of this social machine remains open 
because it is made up of complex relations extending from its own corpus 
through to many other entities (other “machines”), to embrace the whole 
of humanity and the whole of the human-­nonhuman world.14 The percep­
tion machine analyzed in this book—­a machine which is as much social 
as it is optical, neurological, and technical—­is part of this machinic setup. 
We could perhaps even go so far as to claim that the social machine as it 
operates today is also at the same time a perception machine. The relations 
between the machine’s components can always be redrawn, thus posing a 
challenge to the algorithmic imperative of performativity, efficiency, and 
exploitation that power it. Photography in its expanded mode can play an 
important role in this process.
A film that blinks for us
Chris Marker’s celebrated photofilm (1962), or rather, to use its self-­
description, photo-­novel (un photo-­roman), yields itself to our analysis of 
photography as a form of moving image on both formal and conceptual 

124	
Chapter 5
grounds. While the story is familiar to many photography and film schol­
ars, I would like to recap it by way of preparing the ground for my own 
experiment with the film’s material. La Jetée opens with a slow pan over a 
photograph of an open-­air viewing platform (“a jetty”) at the Orly airport 
in Paris. A short sequence of closely cut images later, including some close-­
ups of a blond woman (Hélène Chatelain) gazing tenderly into the frame, 
touching her face, then grabbing it, her hair tousled in the wind, we are 
told by a deadpan narrator that something violent has just occurred. This 
sequence of images is accompanied by a mysterious-­sounding opening line: 
“This is the story of a man marked by an image from his childhood.” We 
then encounter the said man (Davos Hanich) several years later in Paris—­
which, in the meantime, has been destroyed by World War III. Radioac­
tive contamination has pushed all the survivors underground. The man 
is imprisoned in a medical facility run by an army of German-­speaking 
“experimenters,” with an ominous-­looking Director at its head. Chosen for 
his ability to recall strong mental images, the man is being primed for time 
travel. He will need to go into the future to save humanity by finding “a 
hole in time through which to send food, energy, supplies.” He starts by 
journeying into the past, each time meeting a woman that looks familiar 
and with whom he has a warm closeness, even intimacy. Later we figure 
out, along with him, that this is the woman from the jetty. They spend 
time together through flashlight events that may be his memories or just 
dreams, a trip to a museum of natural history full of skeletons and fos­
sils being their last encounter. After that, the man is sent into the future, 
from which he accomplishes his mission of bringing back the power supply 
to restart the world’s industry in the ruined past. Seemingly a hero, he is 
no longer needed by the experimenters, his pleas to be reunited with the 
woman of (or perhaps from) his dreams falling on deaf ears. He knows he 
will have to be eliminated. We then realize, together with him, that the 
opening scene, in which he ended up running toward the woman, was the 
moment of his death.
Marker’s film, capturing the sense of the material and moral destruction 
brought on by World War II and a premonition of a nuclear apocalypse, is 
both a memory exercise and a lesson in how to remember well. As Griselda 
Pollock puts it, “Few films have ever captured as acutely the desolation of a 
generation caught between having traumatically witnessed all-­out industri­
alized war and fearing its repetition on an even more fearful post-­Hiroshima 

AUTO-­FOTO-­KINO: Photography after Cinema and AI	
125
scale.”15 La Jetée’s postapocalyptic tenor and its haunting narrative make it 
an apt reference point for the current moment of the multiple crises in 
which our world finds itself in the 2020s. The Covid-­19 pandemic with 
its multiple waves and its unequal distribution of mortality and health is 
reminiscent of the time loops enacted in La Jetée, whereby the past cuts 
across the present to leap into the future, and then back again. The renewed 
threat of World War III and nuclear annihilation generates a similar sense of 
anxiety. The premonition of an imminent end to the liberal fantasy of “our 
ways of life,” coupled with a desire for things to return to how they once 
were, fuel the imagination not only of climate change deniers, antivaxxers, 
and racists, but also of many others who carry a strong mental image of a 
better yesteryear, even if that image is just a dream.
The climate crisis and the premonition of the extinction of multiple spe­
cies, including our own, and the total destruction of our habitat make some 
reach for planetary escapism packaged as a solution to the depletion of the 
Earth’s resources. Like Marker’s time traveler, whose task was “to summon 
the past and future to the aid of the present,” our self-­appointed billionaire 
saviors such as Elon Musk, Jeff Bezos, and Richard Branson see abandoning 
planet Earth as the only exit strategy from the environmental destruction. 
(As a first step in practicing takeoff, during the Covid-­19 pandemic many 
of the ultrarich moved to the planetary safety of the “antipodes,” such as 
Australia and New Zealand—­or, in the case of Google’s Larry Page, Fiji.) 
Our tech bro planetary travelers lack the anonymity of Marker’s leading 
character, and they are not hamstrung by the powers that be. Instead, they 
are both Marker’s time traveler and his Director. Yet the tech entrepreneurs 
share with Marker’s lead, albeit without any acknowledged sense of their 
situation (which only compounds it), the premonition of an impending 
tragedy: they are also bound to fall. Building on my earlier analysis in The 
End of Man of the Silicon Valley tech bros’ hubris, I would suggest that 
in their planetary endeavors, Musk and other tech billionaires represent 
a collective failure of a particular masculinist story of self-­interested self-­
rescue repackaged as salvation.16 They also symbolize a crash of a particular 
form of hypercapitalism, whose only long-­term outcome can be multiple 
deaths—­of economy, society, the Earth systems. We could therefore suggest 
that, in the time of the climate crisis, La Jetée has returned to haunt us all 
today, sweeping us into its time loops while making us witness our own 
death, without being fully aware of what we are actually seeing.

126	
Chapter 5
The photofilm genre, in which still images function as cuts into our 
memories of the past and our mental renderings of the future on an indi­
vidual and collective level, is an apt medium for conveying the sense of 
being out of time, or at least out of sync with its logically expected linearity. 
La Jetée, the “ultimate photofilm,”17 serves as a perfect illustration of this 
condition. Made entirely from black-­and-­white still images, with only one 
short instance of moving footage inserted into it, it introduces movement 
into other sequences through the use of zooming and panning—­as well as 
creating an illusion of movement through rapid cuts, dynamic music, and 
sound effects. As Janet Harbord points out, “This is not a film composed 
of still images, where both cinema and photography remain distinct. This 
is a film that finds qualities of movement and stillness in each, that braids 
together remembering and forgetting, that points us in conflicting direc­
tions.”18 I would like to propose that, in forcing us to negotiate the tension 
between movement and stillness, between temporal flows and image cuts, 
La Jetée implicitly addresses the key problem that underpins this book—­the 
problem of what it means to live in the perception machine—­while also 
opening onto a wider existential enquiry into the nature of time and the 
future of existence—­ours and that of what we call “the world.” Importantly 
for my own mode of addressing this problem, La Jetée uses photography 
to pursue its enquiry. By choosing as its lead a character who is prone to 
recalling strong mental images, and whose mind serves as both a machinic 
projector and a cinema, with the film being made of photographic cuts, 
Marker’s photofilm stages what Nadine Boljkovac has described as “percep­
tion of perception.”19 For Chris Darke La Jetée unfolds “a matrix of looks: 
that of the subject, of Marker’s lens and of our own.”20 There is an inter­
esting dimension to these “‘auto-­perceptive’ moments,” to use Boljkovac’s 
term,21 with the film manifesting a vital agency of its own in its ability to 
loop and recoil back on itself—­and also to animate. La Jetée’s mechanical 
aspect is compounded by this very matrix of looks, whereby, as Harbord 
puts it, “The film’s brief animation of a woman as she blinks plays back to 
us the conditions of the cinematic experience: we see images but there is an 
interposing leaf, a blackness that gets in between.”22 Harbord suggests that 
blinking is itself a “bodily form of editing,”23 something we do on a daily 
basis in our encounter with the optical flow—­and something that cinema 
replicates as an experience that is already familiar to us on a corporeal-­
perceptive level. But it is not just our own bodily editing that La Jetée gives 

AUTO-­FOTO-­KINO: Photography after Cinema and AI	
127
back to us. With black leaders inserting gaps and cuts into vision alongside 
our own invisible and inadvertent blinks, in Marker’s film the blink is ele­
vated to a knowing imagistic cut. La Jetée blinks for us, we could say.
Marker’s film can therefore be said to be an enactment of the machine 
logic of perception that is already entailed within analog media. Through 
this, it anticipates some of the issues regarding machine perception within 
cinema brought to the fore by the project called Computers Watching Mov­
ies (2013) by Ben Grosser. Grosser’s work consists of a series of short videos 
purporting to show us what a computational system sees when it is made to 
watch films created for human viewers: 2001: A Space Odyssey, The Matrix, 
Taxi Driver. To make the videos, the artist programmed an AI algorithm to 
enable it to “watch” selected clips from those movies, which amounted to 
training the algorithm in specific pattern recognition, responding to vari­
ous colors, shapes, and outlines. Playing against the audio sequences from 
the original films, Grosser’s Computers Watching Movies videos illustrate, in 
a diagrammatic form, the linear zigzag movements of the computer vision 
system’s visual apparatus over the film material. Of course, it is impossible 
to gather from the moving diagrams thus obtained what the computers 
“really” saw, not least because of the untranslatability of the experien­
tial dimension of what we humans call vision across species and media 
platforms (which is arguably a logical blind spot of any research currently 
undertaken under the rubric of machine vision and machine perception), 
but also because of the lack of transparency about the training data for the 
viewing algorithm, of what it was exactly that the computers were meant 
to focus on and respond to. Yet Grosser’s project knowingly embraces this 
limitation, as the artist’s own description of the work demonstrates: “View­
ers are provoked to ask how computer vision differs from their own human 
vision, and what that difference reveals about our culturally-­developed 
ways of looking. Why do we watch what we watch when we watch it? Will a 
system without our sense of narrative or historical patterns of vision watch 
the same things?”24 Grosser’s clips thus hint at the fact that our own human 
viewing strategies and modes of looking are perhaps more preprogrammed 
than we often allow ourselves to imagine. Our sense of agency in watching 
anything, from a movie to a road accident or an Internet meme, is normally 
curtailed by neurological conditioning and algorithmic programming (of 
the historical, cultural, and technical variety). Besides, machinic agency 
plays an increasingly significant role in movie production and perception, 

128	
Chapter 5
as enacted by projectors with their intense luminosity or seductively backlit 
screens, as well as the software and large-­scale data helping movie execu­
tives to decide in advance which films to make—­and how to make them.
Images that make themselves
It is therefore perhaps not too much of an exaggeration to say that La Jetée is 
an avant la lettre exercise in machine perception and computational image-­
making. Its “matrix of looks” generates conditions where not only multiple 
viewing apparatuses, human and nonhuman, crisscross, but also the film is 
enabled to “watch itself,” at least in the prefigurative sense of the term used 
by Grosser. As Gusztáv Hámos, Katja Pratschke, and Thomas Tode wrote in 
the program for the PhotoFilm! series they curated for Tate Modern in 2010, 
“In so far as the scene appears a second time, the film recalls itself. And a 
film that can remember is a thinking entity. To remember is already a cre­
ative act in which transformations of what one has experienced occur, are 
reassembled, reorganised.”25 In La Jetée Marker embraced the automatism 
and algorithmic logic that would come to the fore more explicitly in both 
artistic and mainstream film production several decades later.26 The director 
himself admitted that the film “was made like a piece of automatic writ­
ing. . . . It was in the editing that the pieces of the puzzle came together, and 
it wasn’t me who designed the puzzle.”27 The partial renouncing of agency 
is also evident in the choice of photographs as its source material, a material 
that always already bears a nonhuman trace.28
Photography is partly nonhuman because, at the moment of taking a 
photograph, the photographer is taken over by the apparatus. The very 
act of taking an image, even if framed by the human subject, is passed 
on to the machine—­and, indeed, it has to be passed on to the machine 
for a photographic act to occur. As conveyed by Belgian photographic art­
ist Marc De Blieck, whose research into perception explores the constitu­
tion of viewpoints, “the apparatus . . . does not entirely coincide with my 
intentions: it is not an extension of the ‘I.’ There’s another form of intelli­
gence at work.”29 Automation has of course become an intrinsic part of the 
photographic process today, where computation produces the picture after 
the image (or, most often now, a series of images averaged into a “good” 
one) has been taken. Also, the singular act of framing a photo by a human 
equipped with a smartphone or another imaging device has become largely 

AUTO-­FOTO-­KINO: Photography after Cinema and AI	
129
automatic, as people’s Instagram feeds or “food porn” images testify. This 
is to say, the human act of taking a holiday snap or a picture of their #avo­
cadotoast inscribes itself in the cultural algorithm dictating what such a 
picture needs to look like, not to mention the machinic algorithm of auto­
matic post-­processing needed to make that picture look “good.” Echoing 
Flusser’s ideas, Steven Humblet argues that, “entangled in a technological 
performance that thwarts his own intentions, the operator of the apparatus 
enters a zone of mixed authorship,” a process Humblet describes as “co-­
creation.”30 Yet it is important to remember that this partial withdrawal of 
the human from the photographic moment has been a constitutive aspect 
of photography since its inception. In the early days of the medium the tak­
ing of an image was premised on the silencing and blinding of the photog­
rapher, who had to remain still, could not see when the shutter came down, 
and was not allowed to breathe in order to avoid camera shake. Our current 
technological condition only makes this phenomenon more explicit.
A vision is always a viewpoint
That originary kinship between the human and the machine, be it a cam­
era or another technical apparatus, presupposes the occurrence of blinks, 
cuts, and ruptures. But these ruptures should not be seen as destructive; 
they are instances, or even conditions, of the emergence of something, of 
the creation of (what we humans subsequently recognize as) images, ideas, 
and things. This parenthetical remark is important because, in inviting the 
critical posthumanist perspective31 into our discussion of human practices, 
that is, a perspective that positions the human viewpoint as precisely a 
viewpoint, while also recognizing the agential power of other animals, and 
of nonhuman entities and forces, we acknowledge that there are other ways 
of perceiving, engaging with, and encountering the world. And, even more 
radically, that what we humans understand as “the world” is itself only a 
vision. It is also always someone’s vision.32 To say this is not to deny the exis­
tence of a reality outside of human perception, only to assert that the break­
down of this reality into objects is the result of perception, of cuts made by 
a given species’ or even individual’s corticovisual apparatus. We also need 
to come to terms with the paradox that any such attempt to mobilize post­
humanist thinking is itself being articulated, by us and for us, in our human 
language, with its metaphysical connotations and age-­old valorizations.

130	
Chapter 5
At the level of the photograph, humans recognize certain things as 
objects—­photographic prints, screens, individual images on someone’s 
Facebook wall—­thanks to our perceptual ability to see edges and bound­
aries. But it is not just a matter of our perceptual apparatus being able to 
discretize objects within what psychologist James Gibson has termed “the 
optic flow.”33 We identify individual photographs as photographs thanks to 
our cultural training in awarding names and values to certain edges: being 
able to recognize a given arrangement of molecules as a photographic print, 
a screen, a phone, and being able to tell where the photograph begins and 
ends—­and that it is a “photograph.” A camera of course does not “know” 
that. Also, different animal species would perceive the very same arrange­
ment of molecules in a different way, and it would “mean” different things 
to them: it would be less colorful if they were dogs, at night it would fea­
ture a much richer color palette if they were geckos, and it would lose its 
“thingness” if viewed by pinhole-­eyed giant clams, to become a sequence 
of garishly colorful yet undefined blobs. (Even a “molecule” is an arbitrarily 
discretized unit we humans came up with at a certain point in time to 
describe the binding of what we thought were the smallest units we called 
“atoms,” until we identified what we describe as subatomic particles.)
But it is not just that the camera does not “know” what a photograph is; 
it also does not “see” in its own way. As discussed in the previous chapter, 
developments with machine vision, currently undertaken as part of artifi­
cial intelligence research, are premised on an attempt to replicate human 
vision in machine systems: to teach machines to trace the edges (i.e., areas 
of radical contrast between light and darkness) as perceived by the human 
eye, and to recognize those distinctions as meaningful. Even in its more 
classic model, the camera does not see as such, given that the concept of 
“seeing” we are operating with here remains inextricably rooted in the 
Western epistemological paradigm, where the Latin videre and ver (seeing 
and truth) are interlinked. So, rather than the camera functioning as our 
prosthesis, helping us see and capture things, we humans become a pros­
thetic attachment for the camera-­led acts of cutting the world by discretiz­
ing the flow of particles passing through it as images, and by giving them 
names, identities, and functions in our cultural repertoire of objects and 
behaviors. This is precisely what I have attempted to convey via the notion 
of “the cut” in my work. I previously offered this term—­a term which is 
so easy for photographers to grasp intuitively—­to explore the process of 

AUTO-­FOTO-­KINO: Photography after Cinema and AI	
131
temporarily stabilizing the imagistic, or optic, flow the human observer 
is experiencing. I was also highlighting the interweaving of human and 
nonhuman agency in mechanical image production.34 However, “the cut” 
not only foregrounds the problem of human and machinic perception but 
also raises the question of agency. Who or what is it that “takes” the pho­
tograph? Is it not rather the human that is taken over by the apparatus? 
Can the human then ever really take a photograph? And can we genuinely 
describe any film as human-­authored? Who and what is it that does the 
viewing of images? Is human perception only ever just human?
Arguably, all photographs and, to a large degree, all films open them­
selves to this kind of interrogation. Yet La Jetée serves as an ideal case study 
for probing the question of distributed agency, “mixed authorship,” and 
humachinic perception, not just because of the knowing embrace of the 
idea of automatic creation on the part of its maker but also because it per­
forms the relationship between stillness and movement precisely as a rela­
tion. This is why I have used it as inspiration and source material in my own 
experiment with automaticity and image-­making—­an experiment which 
was conducted in an attempt to enact, rather than just think about, “pho­
tography after cinema and AI.”
Model dreams
My experiment consisted in making a 9-­minute film, A Gift of the World 
(Oedipus on the Jetty) (2021) (figure 5.2), by way of an AI remix, or reme­
diation, of La Jetée through the sociopolitical concerns of the present 
moment—­including those of gender, masculinity, and heroism—­in the face 
of an apocalyptic crisis. The first step of my project, from which I present 
some stills and the script below, involved training a generative adversarial 
network (GAN) model called StyleGAN2 on a database of stills extracted 
from La Jetée. GANs are machine learning programs that use two neural 
networks, i.e., algorithms designed in an open-­ended manner, from the 
bottom up, in a way that is meant to imitate, or rather schematize, the way 
the human brain works. The two neural networks in a GAN are positioned 
as adversaries, with one programmed to generate convincing and correct 
input, the other to control and improve upon this input according to the 
truth/falsehood criterion. Their ongoing interaction makes both networks 
improve with time, learning from each other while trying to outperform 

132	
Chapter 5

AUTO-­FOTO-­KINO: Photography after Cinema and AI	
133

134	
Chapter 5

AUTO-­FOTO-­KINO: Photography after Cinema and AI	
135
Figure 5.2
Joanna Zylinska, stills from A Gift of the World (Oedipus on the Jetty), 2021.

136	
Chapter 5
each other in obtaining satisfactory results. The GAN model I used had 
been designed to mimic the style of the images fed into it to train it, with a 
view to generating an infinite number of similar-­looking images.
Launched in 2014, GANs gained mainstream recognition several years 
later through websites such as This Person Does Not Exist, which generated 
realistic-­looking photographic images of people of various ages, genders, 
and races.35 GAN-­based artworks became the most visible—­and most com­
mented on—­application of machine learning and AI in artistic image prac­
tice over recent years, producing dreamy yet creepy still images and video 
morphs in a style that can be described as “cubism meets Francis Bacon by 
way of a mushroom trip,” as seen in the works of Mario Klingemann, Gene 
Kogan, Mike Tyka, and Memo Akten. Computational error in the form of a 
slight mismatch between the realist representations of humans and of non­
human objects, and the more eerie approximations of them, was seen as a 
source of aesthetic pleasure and success in such works. In a book published 
in 2020 called AI Art, I offered a critique of the rise of machinic creativity 
driven by AI. I was particularly rancorous about GANs: about their seductive 
yet frequently banal visuality that was reminiscent of Candy Crush, about 
how they principally served as a PR campaign for the gung-­ho progressiv­
ism of the AI 2.0 era driven by Google.36 Yet I decided to turn to GANs to 
produce my own film for the project that accompanies this chapter. This 
was partly driven by a desire to explore on a practical level the promises 
and limitations of creativity implied by the generative algorithmic technol­
ogy, at a time when this technology was on the cusp of becoming replaced 
by much more photorealistic AI methods, combining a variety of models 
such as GANs, GPT, Diffusion, and CLIP.37 Feeding my model limited visual 
data, I was trying to explore what artist David Young called “little AI”38 by 
highlighting a stage in the technology’s development when it was still pos­
sible to see errors and glitches, both machinic and social. As a report on AI 
art produced by the Oxford Internet Institute—­for which Young had been 
interviewed alongside several other artists working with machine learning 
(ML) and AI—­put it, “The history of art shows that glitches are often artisti­
cally desirable. ML art is no exception to this: while the capabilities of ML 
models are valued by our respondents, most were particularly interested 
in their edges: the artistic potential of machine failure.”39 I was also keen 
to put to the test my own earlier proposition that artworks produced by 
means of GANs, or, indeed, any other AI-­driven art algorithms, became 

AUTO-­FOTO-­KINO: Photography after Cinema and AI	
137
more interesting when they executed and acknowledged their “parergonal” 
(framing) function,40 invoking their audience to engage not just with the 
artifacts produced but also with the narratives about AI and machine vision, 
about the limits of human creativity, and about the sociopolitical role and 
positioning of art and media production. The book you are currently read­
ing is very much part of this parergon, i.e., this attempt to frame—­and also 
reframe—­the debate on human and machine vision, and, in particular, on 
photography after cinema and AI.
A Gift of the World (Oedipus on the Jetty)
This is the story of a man marked by an image from his childhood. He was the son 
of a Roman Catholic father and a Catholic mother. His mother was an itinerant 
widow, and he had a sister who was a British officer. He had no family and was 
just a man. His mother was a white-­haired woman who had grown up in a thug­
gish Paris, with her eyes wide open, hair that was tied in a ponytail, and her voice 
echoing in the distant roar of the engine.
“Why do you look so different?” she asked.
“Because I am a young man. I am a vanguard of the revolution,” he replied.
“I have been told that the revolution is a long way from being realized,” 
she said.
He didn’t look up.
“And yet I am the only one who is able to say that,” she said.
He would have thought of the woman as a baby. He was already a soldier, a 
member of the great army.
Now, he had lost all his memories. He had lost all the strength he had. He had 
lost his identity. He had lost his sanity. He had lost his reason. He had lost all the 
emotions he had ever had.
He huddled in his bed, in his thoughts, in his dreams, in his nightmares.
His face was broken. He was shattered. He was shattered by the memories. The 
images he’d had of him. The love he had for her. The fear he had felt for her. The 
terror he had felt for her. The sadness he had felt for her.
A decade later, a nuclear disaster killed a lot of people. It destroyed almost all 
of the city.
The “social” prisoners, the most ardent of the anarchists, were subjected to an 
experiment which proved that they were not only mentally but also physically 
unfit.
The process was so extensive that many of the prisoners who had bribed the 
experimenters, and who had been exposed to it, had to undergo a “disciplining” 
for three months, in order to keep their sanity. In order to keep their sanity, the 
experimenters placed a great deal of effort into making the prisoners seem sane. 
They made the prisoners stand in a row, as if they were in a trance. They took 
their time to do so, and kept their eyes closed.

138	
Chapter 5
After a few days of intense concentration, the subjects were finally freed. In 
order to get the subjects to feel comfortable, the experimenters placed them in 
a room with a long desk, and placed thorns in the desk, to keep them from fall­
ing asleep.
When he recovers from his trance, the woman is gone. And his mother is gone. 
He feels the thoughts and feelings of his world—­in a world where he is dead.
Then, as he hears her voice, he becomes aware of her, and sees her. The words 
that he hears are so clearly imprinted on his mind that he cannot quite tell what 
she means, but he can feel ills in her mind, and this makes him understand what 
she is saying. She is, in fact, a gift of the world.
He remembers what she said, and he tries to make sense of it. It is an idea he 
had once experienced. It is a mental phenomenon, he thinks.
The conversation is a kind of sexual act. He is on his way to his bedroom to 
find out if he can talk to the woman who brought him to this world. He can’t. 
He doesn’t want to.
“What’s the matter?” he asks.
“She’s got some problems, so I’ll have to get rid of her,” she says. “You’ll be fine.”
“She’s not really like that,” he says. “I’ve got a good sense of what she’s like.”
“I’ve got a good sense of what she’s like, too,” she says. “I know what she’s 
like, and I’m not going to change it.”
They are without plans, without memories. They are without focus, and with­
out freedom. They are without a choice, without a right. Their eyes are fixed 
on the stone, and they watch him as he drifts through the canyon, head-­first 
through a waterway, his arms held high. His arms drift into the water, and he 
picks up the boat and shifts it to the right.
“A day goes by, and we are on our way,” he tells her. “A day goes by. I am 
waiting for you, for you to come with me. You will stay with me. And I will give 
you your dream.”
“I am a dreamer, a man,” she says, “a man who will love you. I follow you 
to the end of your life. You will be my first gift, and I will take you from here. I 
will have you with me forever. And I will never forget you. And you will be your 
friend, your god, your father. And your father will never forget you. And I will 
never forget you.”
He is a dreamer, a man who will love you.
The villagers are not waiting for a new adventure, but for something else. They 
are ready to share their own dream. They are not waiting for a future of freedom, 
but for freedom with a better life.
She says that she is the girl who was brought back to the family, but that the 
power she had is not hers. He wants her to take him to the beginning of time, 
and then tell her to return to the present. He says she will die in a few hours, and 
then he will tell her to bring him back to the world. She will never return to the 
family, but he is going to take her back to the world and he will keep her alive. 
She is not going to die.

AUTO-­FOTO-­KINO: Photography after Cinema and AI	
139
The film can be viewed at https://www.nonhuman.photography/perception
-machine
Gender-­fluid dreams on the jetty
The script of my film was created with the assistance of GPT-­2, an unsuper­
vised AI language model that had been trained on the WebText dataset con­
taining millions of webpages. Intent on creating a Chris Marker-­WebText 
remix, I started by feeding the model La Jetée’s famous opening line: “This 
is the story of a man marked by an image from his childhood.” The model 
responded by taking the story in an unexpected direction. I cut across it 
several times with a few more lines from the original Marker script. Any 
edits I subsequently made to the script were only minor, with some of 
the linguistic divergences or plain language errors identified as important 
moments in my experiment and hence retained. In making the film, I chan­
neled Marker’s own semiautomatic mode of working, including his use of 
found images and stock music. In an attempt to mimic the pathos of his 
horror scenes and his evocative church choir, the soundtrack for my film 
was produced from sound clips drawn from a stock repository to include 
a mix of an ambient sound from an ethnographic research project about 
truck driver culture recorded in Germany, a “low” remix filtered sample of 
a female voice band, and some choral-­sounding vocal chords.41 The edit­
ing of the film was intuitive and consisted of my own visual and corpo­
real responses to both the script and the GAN images. Interestingly, the 
images themselves, produced by an algorithm that tried to remake Marker’s 
film by picking up its key visual features (and, especially, those pertain­
ing to humans, as is often the case in such generative programs that had 
been trained on photos of human faces), manifested various body parts, 
frequently multiplied: noses, hair, eyes, kidneys, kidney-­like eyes. The way 
generative neural networks operate is by repeatedly optimizing pixels in an 
image “to achieve some desired state of activations.”42 That “desired state” 
is compared against the source material, i.e., its training set. Developers 
frequently resort to the metaphor of a dream to describe the working of 
neural nets, suggesting that such networks find patterns in images not so 
much in a logical preprogrammed way but rather by using previous data 

140	
Chapter 5
and memories as prompts for making new connections between data points 
and for generating new data.43 Their operations are presented as being akin 
to what human minds do while at rest, either asleep or daydreaming. By 
anthropomorphizing their products, engineers and the technology com­
panies they work for absolve themselves of the responsibility for their pro­
gramming decisions—­and for those decisions’ unintended consequences.
In my own work with GANs I let myself dream with but also against the 
AI algorithm underpinning the model. In being faced with several hun­
dred Inception-­like images produced from the La Jetée dataset, I felt as if 
certain images blinked at me, inserting themselves into the timeline of my 
film by visual and conceptual association—­or perhaps even bodily touch. 
I was aware that the playful sense of experimentation I had adopted as 
my method was tinged with the more ominous undertones of the experi­
ments conducted on Marker’s main character in the underground camp. 
The “counterdream” aspect was also important for me given the sociopo­
litical limitations of AI technology, which have been well documented by 
feminist and decolonial cultural critics,44 revealing not only gender and 
racial bias but also the exclusionary and unjust logic underlying many of 
its founding principles, not to mention its extractivism when it comes to 
both human and natural resources. I was curious about what AI would do 
to the original source material, but I knew I would need to step in as both a 
dream catcher and analyst.
It was the gender aspect of Marker’s film—­but also of the wider script 
with regard to family dynamics and individual heroism as played out in 
narratives of destruction, rescue, and salvation in the Judeo-­Christian 
culture—­that had always troubled me. Griselda Pollock has described La 
Jetée as a “deeply fetishistic, psychically masculine film.”45 She identifies 
the close-­up image of the woman’s face as the structuring fetish of Marker’s 
story, bearing the dual role of the screen (and hence disavowal), protecting 
the hero against pain and death—­and of commemoration. Pointing to the 
overdetermination of the close-­up as a vehicle for the cinematic inscrip­
tion of the feminine, Pollock has analyzed the intricacies of the Oedipal 
drama unfolding both in La Jetée and in our wider image culture in rather 
critical terms:
This is nothing so crass as the image of the mother. Yet it is the image form of that 
non-­figurative Other that forms the dense tapestry of affects and intensities from 
which the outlines of the subject will be traced and, eventually under the law of 

AUTO-­FOTO-­KINO: Photography after Cinema and AI	
141
castration, cut out. She, this woman, is not his mother. This image of the femi­
nine as desired and remote, as looking back across a space that cinema deludes 
us by compressing through the mechanics of the zoom, the close-­up holds some­
thing before us visually that is saturated with affect and yet is the very face of the 
traumatic. It is an imaginary screen, veiling and marking what it veils, holding its 
double burden of allure and dread in carefully calculated and historically chang­
ing aesthetic formulations of the feminine as face.
46
The woman on and as screen is positioned to replace the horror of the 
apocalypse, be it of individual or generational death or even species extinc­
tion, with a benevolent Madonna-­like smile. She is both the lost object of 
a safe home from before time and the fantasized future of a happy return. 
Yet Pollock also identifies a “counter current” of Marker’s film that allows 
for it to be watched and seen beyond the masculine—­beyond the castrat­
ing eye of the Director (who reappears at the Orly airport as a man with 
extended eyes) and the feminine fetish of the main hero. She locates this 
counter current in the “beautiful” aesthetics of the film as a way of opening 
up another pleasure and another form of touch. Pollock goes on to investi­
gate the possibility of viewing the film beyond the heterosexual masculine 
fetish trapped in the Oedipal drama, asking what the woman’s face and 
gaze would mean to a subject who inscribes themselves differently into 
the gender matrix. “What if the feminine symbolically signified or, given 
phantasmatic form in the image, echoed another stratum of subjectivity, 
in which subjectivity was foundationally connective, shared, co-­emergent, 
several?” she ponders.47 “What if the death drive did not lead back through 
the screen of the feminine to a trauma premised on the either/or—­life or 
death?”48 Pollock finds the promise of a different matrix of gender and plea­
sure in the very fact that La Jetée will go on, being shown over and over 
again. “It can repeat and we, its witnesses, do not die. It becomes its own 
experimental site.”49 The film can also be recut, remade, and redreamt, as 
my own experiment demonstrates.
This may explain further why I turned to La Jetée in my own attempt to 
think about the future of the world and everything else through thinking 
the future of photography. I wanted to see into it as deeply as I could—­but 
also to mobilize the algorithmic force of machine vision and AI by way 
of renouncing control over what is always already uncontrollable. What 
the GPT-­2 model came up with as part of our co-­creation turned out to be 
both interesting and surprising, as it seems to have embraced full-­on the 

142	
Chapter 5
implicit desire on my part to go all the way in. We can recognize in the 
generated script traces of its training material: fairytales, hero quest stories, 
videogame narratives, sci-­fi. The model clearly tried to remain faithful to 
the spirit and sense of Marker’s opening line by reenacting the personal 
and global apocalypse as an Oedipal drama. The AI engines deployed in 
the visual and textual models ended up producing a more multilayered 
show, one that unfolded as much on the gender front as it did on the 
human(ist)-­existential one. We could perhaps say that the film dreamt itself 
as a feminist-­genderqueer intervention into the heteronormative fetishism 
of the apocalypse as dreamt up in key Western cultural texts, from the Bible 
through to Marker’s photo-­roman—­and into the myth of the White male 
savior that props it up. What starts as a conversation between mother and 
son ends up, through a series of algorithmic glitches, as a sequence of slip­
pages that enter a gender vortex in which man becomes woman, mother 
becomes father, he becomes she. With the dissolution of the nuclear family, 
the Oedipal drama as the structuring device of our cultural script disap­
pears. The sense of premonition still lingers, but it is now accompanied by 
the possibility of an opening—­and a liberation. This possibility can be read 
as a feminist gift, a gift “of what the feminine can be thought to be if we 
emerge from the exclusivity of the Oedipal logic of the phallus as the only 
arbiter of psychic life and signification.”50
With its nonnormative cross-­species kinship ties, A Gift of the World 
(Oedipus on the Jetty) can be said to enact, in the bricolage spirit of eco-­eco-­
punk, what Nicole Seymour has described in her book Bad Environmental­
ism as a “queer sensibility”: an approach to planetary-­scale environmental 
issues that not only challenges supposedly “normal” sexualities but also 
troubles the normative language typically used to describe all sorts of eco­
logical crises. Pointing to terms such as “unnatural, diseased, pathologi­
cal, risky, contaminated,” which “have been used historically to stigmatize 
sexual misfits and to instigate social panic and apocalyptic threat,”51 and 
which are now used to describe the condition of our planet with its mul­
tiple crises, Seymour refuses “the affective vocabulary of crisis, panic, and 
apocalypse.”52 This is because such an apocalyptic register tends to leave its 
actors—­including, frequently, the scientists conducting the foundational 
research on the subject or medics involved in fighting the next wave of the 
pandemic—­burnt out, distressed, and depressed.53 Yet Seymour is not satis­
fied with just flipping burnout into optimism and hope. She sees all those 

AUTO-­FOTO-­KINO: Photography after Cinema and AI	
143
affects as sides of the same coin, representing humans’ desire for certainty 
and closure. She delves instead into a richer and more nuanced affective 
and cognitive repertoire, the stock of which includes “absurdity and irony, 
as well as related affects and sensibilities such as . . . frivolity, indecorum, 
awkwardness, sardonicism, perversity [and] playfulness.” Her bad environ­
mentalism also embraces “camp, frivolity, indecorum, ambivalence, and 
glee.”54 In its irreverent playfulness and messy kinship between human and 
nonhuman agents, bodies, and media, eco-­eco-­punk draws from such a 
counterapocalyptic repertoire of affects and acts with a view to envisaging 
a new world of ties and connections after the ruin. But, given the expiration 
of the dominant models and frameworks for both politics and activism, 
a state of events that has left many of us immobilized, unsure what to do 
and how to act—­and whether any individual activity is actually meaning­
ful at all—­it also recognizes that we need some new visions that will sus­
tain both us and the planet, longer-­term. When I was finishing the film, 
a newer version of the language model, called GPT-­3, became available. 
GPT-­3 had been trained on a much larger body of texts, generating texts 
that mimicked human discourse and conversation more successfully and 
seamlessly.55 However, the statistical analysis and the decontextualization 
issues—­coupled with the philosophical problem of when and to whom a 
given meaning is actually meaningful—­did not disappear in GPT-­3; they 
just became more obscured. The GPT-­3 model was superseded in late 2022 
by the much more potent ChatGPT—­a model that brought AI-­composed 
texts to the awareness of the wider public. Working with the visual and 
linguistic clumsiness of the earlier models such as GANs and GPT-­2 allowed 
me to capture in my film that short span of time when those technologies 
were still weird enough to reveal their conditions of existence, their (il)
logics—­but also the missed opportunities underpinning their development. 
Ian Bogost has remarked that, “as the novelty of that surprise wears off, it 
is becoming clear that ChatGPT is less a magical wish-­granting machine 
than an interpretive sparring partner, a tool that’s most interesting when it’s 
bad rather than good at its job.”56 Given the push to implement “creative AI” 
in routine products such as search engines, word processors, and image 
manipulation software, not to mention vast areas of the already-­banalized 
“content creation,” there will soon come a time when the algorithmicity 
of our behavior merges even more seamlessly with that of AI-­enabled mod­
els. It is therefore understandable that artists should want to test and tease 

144	
Chapter 5
these models while we still can see (and enjoy) the glitch. The implicit 
obsolescence of the models’ subsequent iterations is the feature of those 
artworks—­including my own project discussed here.
Working with the “good-­enough” visual and textual models of 2021 
thus allowed me to enjoy a particular instant when the AI-­driven technol­
ogy was revealing its uncanniness quite explicitly, thus lending itself more 
easily to artistic experimentation. It may be that it was a unique moment in 
time when both human agency and human intervention into the AI-­fueled 
perception machine were still possible, before the weirdness of AI on both 
textual and visual levels would have been overcome by successful stochas­
tic mimicry, thus making critical interventions into the technology and its 
underpinning logic more difficult to stage, or even argue for. Yet I want to 
believe that this moment will stay with us for a little longer, offering us, 
in a Flusserian vein, a small margin of freedom where we can imagine and 
enact things to be otherwise from within the algorithmic system that is clos­
ing around us.
Dreaming Big
While the current discourse on AI remains trapped between the hurrah-­
optimism of Big Tech and its critical assessment by scholars and activists, 
while political debate is increasingly polarized, could AI itself play the role 
of a philosopher-­visionary that will show us a way out? Could it get beyond 
the limitations of our human frames of mind to imagine a different set 
of propositions and arrangements for us? Could it actually envisage a bet­
ter future for humans and nonhumans alike while showing us how to get 
there? History, sci-­fi, and the current model of extractive capitalism which 
repurposes all openings as resources for its own growth all indicate that 
this idea is unlikely to succeed. But, given how stuck we currently are—­
politically, economically, and climatologically—­it seems worth dreaming 
up some literally unthinkable visions for our planetary survival and coex­
istence. Harbord suggests that the hope of future salvation rests on the 
human capacity “to mentally imagine, to be affected by the image.”57 As a 
first step, AI-­driven AUTO-­FOTO-­KINO may thus become a space for pictur­
ing a better future, beyond our wildest (human) dreams. AI may indeed be 
the radical new (film) Director we desperately need. But its algorithms, put 
to work in progressive university labs, research and policy centers, and art 

AUTO-­FOTO-­KINO: Photography after Cinema and AI	
145
organizations could also perhaps envisage ways of coengineering this bet­
ter future, beyond the stuckness of the present modernist paradigm that we 
seem unable to shake off.
To return to Lazzarato’s diagnosis from the beginning of this chapter, the 
current condition of life sees us as permanently enveloped by image and data 
flows. Importantly, images do not just surround us but also move through 
and with us; they animate us into forms of becoming they have envisaged 
for us, catching us (up) in a relentless flow. As Lazzarato recognizes, we have 
all become images, serving as both producers and audience for the AUTO-­
FOTO-­KINO project unfolding between bodies, platforms, and screens. But, 
amidst all this, we can also recognize the need to make better cuts into the 
image flow—­and to create our own versions of the AUTO-­FOTO-­KINO that 
will offer some counternarratives and counteraffects.
Photographs can play a unique role in this process because they are 
“part of a tradition of image-­thinking that resists the constraints of the 
written text, its tenses, its forward movement and its regimentation of 
reading from left to right.”58 Challenging their association with floods and 
swamps, Flusser has described photographs as “dams placed in the way 
of the stream of history, jamming historical happenings.”59 Evoking the 
“magical consciousness”60 of prehistoric images, photographs can recon­
nect us to a “consciousness enchanted,”61 by retuning our perception 
apparatus, and the larger perception machine of which it is part, to a dif­
ferent temporality, different rhythm—­and different logic. In “Photography 
and History,” Flusser suggests that photographs “are not only models of 
behavior, but also models of perception and experience. The programmers 
of photographs (from their perspective, photographers—­as long as they 
are not replaceable—­are nothing more than human factors built into the 
apparatus) hover above history, and they project a potentially alternative 
future.”62 Moving beyond their association with the past and the linear­
ity of history they were said to map out, we could therefore follow Flusser 
in seeing photographs as future-­looking. We can even propose, perhaps 
counterintuitively, that photographs can become ways of rendering the 
future. It is because photographs are already models; they are, according to 
Flusser, computed possibilities which project onto the environment. Mov­
ing beyond the linearity of the book (and the prescriptive closeness of The 
Book), they can instantiate another mode of relating and thus conceiving 
the world. This is a form of knowledge Flusser terms “image thinking,”63 a 

146	
Chapter 5
mode of thinking in which the link between perception and cognition is 
embedded into an epistemological proposition, rather than wished away as 
something primitive and childish that needs to be superseded.
Naturally, there is no guarantee of this magic thinking remaining on 
the side of the angels (and elves). Daniel Chávez Heras points out that 
high-­tech and AI companies already present their own developments and 
products as “a series of magic tricks . . . : they are deployed as forms of 
alchemy (with the right algorithm you can convert your data into gold), 
animism (the machine thinks and speaks for itself), divination (big data 
and predictive analytics), and healing (genome decoding and editing).”64 
The idea here would be to pose a challenge to the magical spectacle of 
the machine, which mesmerizes human viewers with the deluge of image 
flows, and to the mobile fantasmagoria of GANs. If, as Ben Burbridge indi­
cates, advertisers want access to “truthful data,” with Mark Zuckerberg 
supposedly suggesting that users who adopted multiple identities online 
“lacked integrity,”65 AUTO-­FOTO-­KINO understood as a form of micro-­art 
that goes beyond “computational spectatorship”66 can show us visual and 
perceptual alternatives to the platform capitalism’s humanism, used as a 
monetization ploy. If today “there is less value to be extracted from indi­
vidual images than from relations between them,”67 micro-­art projects such 
as AUTO-­FOTO-­KINO can be mobilized to break the link between image 
production, monetization, and authenticity. They can even perhaps end up 
jamming the perception machine.

6  Can You Photograph the Future?
Ten seconds into the future
A small group of people are sitting around a table in what seems like a cross 
between a corporate meeting and university lab seminar, looking at screens 
big and small. Their attention is on a moving image of a worm, overlaid with 
the graphic visualization of its movements. The two moving lines converge 
nicely (figure 6.1). The group are looking ten seconds into the future—­the 
worm’s future, that is. This is a restaging of the WormBot project,1 a digital 
simulation of the behavior of a nematode worm represented in the form 
of time-­lapse images with a view to predicting the worm’s death, and it 
is happening as part of the first episode of a TV series Devs, created and 
directed by Alex Garland (2020, FX on Hulu). The idea is to recreate a living 
Figure 6.1
Screenshot from Devs, 2020. Dir. Alex Garland. FX on Hulu.

148	
Chapter 6
organism in a computer system by rendering all of its neural connections 
in a digital form. After ten seconds the correlation between the simulated 
screen movement and its predicted graphic visualization is lost, but the 
professor-­lookalike boss is impressed enough to elevate the young Russian 
AI programmer to the next phase of his company’s project: the eponymous 
Devs. The project lab, hosted in a vacuum-­protected Faraday cage in the 
middle of a forest, contains a hugely powerful quantum computer whose 
goal is to achieve for the billions of neurons in the human brain what 
the WormBot-­lookalike did for nematode’s 302. The (mad) professor-­boss, 
a deus-­like character called Forest, has built his whole enterprise to generate 
an alternative version of reality online, one in which his wife and young 
daughter do not die in a car accident (inadvertently caused by him). In 
other words, Forest wants to overcome the causality of the physical world 
by creating one in which a different future can unfold—­a future he will be 
able to inhabit together with his digitally restored family. The Devs series 
deals with the age-­old problem of determinism versus free will, packaging it 
as a fairly conventional story of a heterosexual white nuclear family (and its 
multiethnic romantic counterparts) experiencing life’s travails.
What is of particular interest to me about Devs in the context of this 
book is its visualization of the problem of predicting the future by captur­
ing an image of it. The first step involves the mobilization of the power of 
the quantum computer to render detailed images from a remote past. Bor­
rowing from the past’s “multiverse” simulations allows the Devs developers 
to obtain a rich enough dataset to generate adequate images of the past: 
Jesus on the cross or prehistorical people making cave art. The next step will 
involve using the technology and data from Forest’s more recent past to 
render a new version of the future for him and his kin. I would like to pro­
pose we bracket for now the determinism debate and the rather implausible 
quantum frippery of the series’ plot to focus on the very idea of rendering 
the future as an image. For me, Devs serves as a framing device for the key 
question that will drive this chapter: Can you photograph the future?
To explore this question, I will look at the temporality of the photo­
graphic image while engaging with the latest developments in CGI, compu­
tational photography, and machine vision—­technologies that are premised 
on forecasting an image and then making it look real. Drawing on neuro­
science research on the role of prediction in human consciousness, and 
the application of machine learning to developing machine consciousness, 

Can You Photograph the Future?	
149
I will then move to a brief overview of the mobilization of photography 
and photo-­rendering in predictive technology, in areas such as weather 
forecasts, stock markets, epidemiology, and consumer behavior. I will also 
consider the sociopolitical consequences of the wide implementation of 
predictive technology in our lives. Last but not least—­and in line with the 
overall ambitions of this book—­I will explore the possibility of imaging and 
imagining better futures.
Time is just change when there is no one to track it
The question about the possibility of photographing the future may seem 
both absurd and out-­of-­date—­Marty McFly already videoed it back in 
1985!2—­yet the premise behind it underpins many of the current develop­
ments in imaging technology, computation, and AI. Indeed, photography 
poses us a temporal conundrum, on the level both of physics and common 
sense. As a medium, photography has typically been associated with the 
past: it has been constituted as a quintessential medium of memory, of 
time gone by, or even, as discussed in chapter 1, of death. Logically, it is 
only “the present” that can ever be photographed, but the present itself is 
an illusive concept, unable to be captured in an image or thought about 
without simultaneously receding to the past. Photographic technology has 
always played with logic and physics to create a spectral ambience around 
its practices. We can think here of long-­exposure photography, where sev­
eral hours were required to obtain an image trace on the not-­so-­sensitive 
substrate in the early days of the medium, or about stop-­motion imagin­
ing, intended to explicitly show the passage of time, be it over the period 
of one day or several years. There are also photographic dispatches from a 
prehuman past, such as the visual rendering of the data captured by a radio 
telescope, in June 2005, of solar dust cloud radiation in the Taurus Molecu­
lar Cloud, where the data represented an event that “took place in 1585, or 
thereabouts,”3 or even a “baby picture” of our universe, produced by NASA 
between 1990 and 1992 and showing the map of the cosmic microwave 
background radiation supposedly released as heat during the Big Bang.4 The 
temporal determination of a photograph depends on the point of refer­
ence: specifically, on the positioning of the observer within the system. 
Time is what it (supposedly) is only for an observer whose life is grasped as 
a timeline; outside the (human) observer there is just change.

150	
Chapter 6
In its computational guise, photography can therefore be said to have 
warped the arrow of time, displacing temporality as we know and sense it 
with our bodies and minds with the machinic logic of multiplication and 
nonlinear choice. Reflecting on Google’s Pixel 3 smartphone and its sophis­
ticated camera, Sy Taffel explains that a photograph is now an extraction 
of an image from a sequence, coupled with an averaging of that sequence. 
Or, as developer Vasily Zubarev puts it, “When you tap the ‘take a photo’ 
button, the photo has actually already been taken.”5 Taffel clarifies further 
that, unlike in traditional cameras,
where the photographer pressing the shutter-­release triggers the recording pro­
cess, hitting the record button signals the mid-­point within a 15-­frame image 
stream the camera sends for computational processing. The significance is not 
just that the camera composites these images, the practice of taking a photograph 
is transformed from a human operator capturing a moment of choice, to delin­
eating a sequence of images to begin working backwards and forwards in time 
from. Using data from those 15 frames, the Pixel 3 generates a composite image 
containing HDR, greater resolution and lower levels of noise than would be pos­
sible with a single exposure.
6
In the computational images of the world as deployed by the latest smart­
phone cameras, such as Google’s Pixel or Apple’s iPhone, the future literally 
influences the past.
Even though it reaches beyond human scales, photography gains a sym­
bolic value in our human-­centered universe as a practice of stopping time—­
but also, perhaps more strongly, a practice of making time. Photography 
allows us to make cuts in the optic flow unfolding around us. Yet it is not so 
much the already well-­studied relationship between photography and time 
that interests me here but rather, and more specifically, the relationship 
between photography and the future. I want to approach it by looking at 
the problem of prediction—­and the mobilization of photography and other 
forms of imaging in constructing predictions in different disciplines—­from 
cognitive psychology and neuroscience through to AI, machine learning, 
and computer vision. I am mindful here of Matthew Cobb’s suggestion in 
The Idea of the Brain that our scientific horizon at any given time depends 
on the technological metaphors we use, but also that those very metaphors 
reflect the technical knowledge of the time, its discourses and vocabularies. 
“Metaphors can flow both ways,” says Cobb.7 As discussed in chapter 2, 
since the medium’s invention in the early nineteenth century photography 

Can You Photograph the Future?	
151
has been intrinsically linked with neuroscience, both enabling the neuro­
scientific imaging practice and shaping the understanding of the working 
of neurological processes, from memory through to learning. Indeed, it was 
in terms of “imprinting” on the brain’s tissue and its neural extensions that 
early research in neurology explained perception and action in humans.8 
This perhaps goes some way toward explaining the key role of the concept 
of “the mental image” in cognitive psychology and neuroscience. Yet since 
the middle of the twentieth century the photographic discourse has been 
supplemented by concepts and metaphors from computing, describing the 
working of the neural system with reference to “feedback loops, informa­
tion, codes and computation.”9
Interestingly, Cobb points out that, even though we now “stand on the 
brink of understanding how patterns of activity in networks of neurons 
create perception,” some scientists “sense we are approaching an impasse 
in how we understand the brain.”10 The computer metaphor in particular 
is said to have reached its limit, with the proliferation of brain data being 
accompanied by frequent resignation on the part of its human interpreters 
to its voluminous excess and unexplainability. It is therefore worth probing 
whether current changes to the photographic medium through its encoun­
ter with computation, network technologies, and AI are altering in any way 
the neuroscientific horizon, and, in particular, our understanding of neu­
ral processes related to imaging and perception. What is the mental image 
today—­and what can it become? Can we learn to see ourselves and our 
world better once we have changed our metaphors? And, picking up on this 
bidirectional flow of metaphors, can the reframing of key concepts lead to 
a different understanding of photography and imaging?
We need to go deeper
The concept of the mental image, referring to quasi-­perceptual experience 
which is prelinguistic, and which forms the basis of what we now understand 
as consciousness, has a long history in Western epistemology. An aspect of 
representationalist thinking unfolding across centuries, it originally posited 
that ideas were just pictures in our mind, things we saw “with our mind’s 
eye.” The concept has now lost its literal connotations without challeng­
ing the implicit primacy of visuality in our understanding of knowledge 
production. Indeed “‘imagery’ has become the generally accepted term 

152	
Chapter 6
amongst cognitive scientists for quasi-­perceptual experience in any sense 
mode,” with the term embracing auditory, olfactory, kinesthetic, and hap­
tic images alongside visual ones.11 The fact that the image still constitutes a 
cornerstone of the neuroscientific rhetorical register delineates a particular 
conceptual trajectory for the discipline: it prescribes what can be seen and 
said, and how.
In what follows, I want to look at the use of the concept of the image 
in the current theories of consciousness as outlined by two of its leading 
researchers who are also known for writing for wider audiences: neuroscien­
tists Antonio Damasio and Anil Seth. Damasio and Seth are physicalists (aka 
materialists), yet in their respective theories they go beyond single-organ 
functionalism. This is to say, they recognize the role of the body and its 
situatedness in the world in the making of consciousness, a shared assump­
tion that differentiates them from a variety of cognitive scientists currently 
involved in modeling human intelligence and human vision in machines. 
But they are also interesting for me because of the different rhetorical reg­
isters through which they articulate their positions, coming, respectively, 
from image theory and information science. In the further part of the chap­
ter I will look at the role of images in Damasio’s and Seth’s respective theo­
ries of perception; at the link between perception, prediction, and imaging 
in those theories; and, last but not least, at the possibility of conceptualizing 
consciousness as a person’s orientation toward the future, which involves mak­
ing images of that future. The automaticity of this process, be it in men­
tal image-­making or in the production of mechanical—­or, to use Flusser’s 
term, technical—­images of the future, will allow me to take further steps in 
my own investigation of the possibility of photographing a future.
Readers may have assumed all along that this this idea about photograph­
ing a future is a metaphor. I would not deny this, but my understanding of 
the metaphor in this chapter, and in the book as a whole, positions it as an 
agentic entity which enacts something, rather than just being an articula­
tion of an otherwise stable “something” in a purposefully figurative sense, 
for poetic or rhetorical effect. I am following here Jacques Derrida’s intima­
tion, outlined in his well-­known essay, “White Mythology,” that metaphors 
are philosophemes (i.e., concepts), that they are foundational to philoso­
phy (even if many philosophers would deny this state of events), and that 
they also exceed the boundaries of any philosophical system.12 The best 
we can therefore do with metaphors is “use” them with more awareness 

Can You Photograph the Future?	
153
as to their modus operandi, while giving up on the fantasy of any pure, 
original, uncontaminated meaning “before the metaphor.” In other words, 
we can try to make better metaphors, by way of challenging the “white 
mythology which reassembles and reflects the culture of the West,” the 
white man’s mythos that passes for universal Reason.13 An attempt to imag­
ine photographing the future is therefore also an attempt, metaphorical 
and hence also ontological—­as well as, inevitably, political—­to figure out 
ways of making better futures, beyond the fixed frames of our present-­day 
images and imaginations.
For years avoided by scientists as exclusively focused on an individual 
self and hence impossible to study objectively, consciousness has recently 
gained a new respectability as a domain of scientific inquiry, partly thanks 
to the encounter between neuroscience and the multidisciplinary field of 
artificial intelligence. (Some go so far as to argue that work on artificial 
intelligence should in fact be recognized as an attempt to create artificial 
consciousness.)14 Defined by Damasio as “an organism’s awareness of its 
own self and surroundings,”15 consciousness is broadly understood as a 
first-­person phenomenon which unfolds as part of a private, first-­person 
process to which we give the name “mind.” Damasio distinguishes between 
core consciousness, which is a sense of the here and now, and is also likely 
to be found in other animals, and extended consciousness, which spans 
one’s lifetime, requires memory and attention, and is enhanced by lan­
guage. Interestingly, it is through references to the metaphorical apparatus 
of image-­making that Damasio explains the working of those two types 
of consciousness. He proposes that “core consciousness includes an inner 
sense based on images,”16 and that those are images of feelings. Responding 
to stimuli, which are experienced by us as feelings, the brain makes pat­
terns in the circuits of its neural cells. In line with the metaphoricity of the 
wider approach of this chapter, we could call these patterns “impressions” 
or “imprints.”
Damasio concludes that to understand consciousness we primarily need 
to understand the problem of mental images—­i.e., of “how the brain inside 
the human organism engenders the mental patterns we call, for lack of a 
better term, the images of an object,”17 where that object may be material 
(a person, a place) or immaterial (a melody, a toothache). An image, in 
turn, stands for “a mental pattern in any of the sensory modalities, e.g., 
a sound image, a tactile image, the image of a state of well-­being.”18 But 

154	
Chapter 6
then a shift happens in Damasio’s narrative, where he is getting his media 
purposefully yet somewhat unexpectedly mixed. He says: “the first problem 
of consciousness is the problem of how we get a ‘movie-­in-­the-­brain,’” rely­
ing on what he himself describes as a “rough metaphor.”19 He also high­
lights that “the movie has as many sensory tracks as our nervous system has 
sensory portals—­sight, sound, taste, and olfaction, touch, inner senses.”20 
Some interesting forms of mediation are activated here, with the brain posi­
tioned as the cinematic screen (which we already encountered in chapter 
3, via Deleuze). Also, an odd circularity creeps into Damasio’s argument as 
part of the mediation process, with images functioning as stand-­ins for his 
(and everyone else’s) inability to clearly explain the sequence of events in 
the production of consciousness. Damasio goes so far as to acknowledge 
that we have to explain not only how the movie-­in-­the-­brain is generated 
(assuming that there is a movie, of course) but also how the brain “gener­
ates the sense that there is an owner and observer for that movie.”21 If con­
sciousness does behave like a movie, it is like a retro silent one, as language 
is only believed to arise at a “later” stage.
The brain-­as-­screen is perhaps less like a conventional cinema screen 
and more like the 1950s Circarama, renamed Circle-­Vision a decade later, 
with screens surrounding the viewer from all angles but also requiring the 
viewer’s corporeal movement to appreciate the experience fully. The viewer 
only becomes a viewer through their 360-­degree mobility in the image space. 
This sense of the image envelope that requires mobile attention from the 
viewer returns in VR and 3D gaming, with the viewer’s/player’s position­
ing resembling an M. C. Escher drawing in which the movie dreams itself 
up as a movie, playing in a theater with an audience. The viewer is thus 
both inside the image and watching the image. That sense of the self-­
generativity of experience from within the image envelope is being used in 
current experiments with machine learning and AI that involve an attempt 
to recreate the human experience of perception—­or rather the externally 
perceptible aspects of that experience—­in machines.
Google’s DeepDream algorithm developed in 2015 allowed for the 
production of images in which nonexistent objects were “discovered” by 
running previously trained neural network models on those images mul­
tiple times.22 This resulted in infamous images showing spaghetti with 
eyes, camel-­birds, and psychedelic squiggles covering familiar landscapes. 
This aesthetic, short-­lived as it was, became known as “Inceptionism,” a 

Can You Photograph the Future?	
155
term derived “from the Network in network paper by Lin et al. in con­
junction with the famous ‘we need to go deeper’ internet meme.”23 Lin et 
al.’s 2013 paper proposed a deep network structure called “Network In Net­
work,” which was to be “used to enhance model discriminability for local 
patches within the receptive field.”24 The operations of recurrent neural 
networks are meant to recreate the (posited) experience of human percep­
tion and human learning, producing images and then feeding them into 
the network to create more—­and more detailed, or “deeper”—­images. As 
we already discussed in chapter 4, the computational model of perception 
in AI research can be described as reductionist, as it brackets off both the 
human body and its movement in the environment as not so vital aspects 
of the perceptive process. This (il)logic is replicated in the current design 
of neural networks—­algorithms whose name is strictly, and restrictively, 
metaphorical, as there is nothing “neural” about those networks. Yet what 
is modeled more accurately from the human organism is the sense of recur­
rence, or circularity, whereby the elements produced as part of the work of 
the machine’s posited “intelligence” are themselves producing that intel­
ligence. (As mentioned before, consciousness would be a more apposite 
term here, or, more accurately, behavior that presents as consciousness to 
a human observer.)
Bringing together all the constitutive elements, Damasio puts forward 
the following schema for the image-­based operations of consciousness in 
humans:
The wordless narrative . . . is based on neural patterns which become images, 
images being the same fundamental currency in which the description of the 
consciousness-­causing object is also carried out. Most importantly, the images 
that constitute this narrative are incorporated in the stream of thoughts. The 
images in the consciousness narrative flow like shadows along with the images 
of the object for which they are providing an unwitting, unsolicited comment. 
To come back to the metaphor of movie-­in-­the-­brain, they are within the movie. 
There is no external spectator.
25
A number of things are intriguing about this schema. First is the per­
ceived need to split the process of the emergence of consciousness into 
two phases: the wordless narrative of images (even though it is still called 
a narrative, its role consisting in having to describe the object perceived or 
comment on images of that object) and a subsequent timeline of thoughts 
(which are not yet words). Second is the distinction between “images in 

156	
Chapter 6
the consciousness narrative” and “images of the object.” The first kind of 
images function like cybernetic mirrors: they produce consciousness by 
providing an image of the self (or, more precisely, of the self’s body) that is 
then being incorporated into the picture of the self. I am calling this mirror 
cybernetic because of the feedback loop effect required for its operation. Yet 
it is not a straightforward device that forms images by reflection. The cyber­
netic mirror producing consciousness by way of making images is more like 
the Magic Mirror envisaged by Escher, where the reflection becomes part 
of the scene being reflected. The two strands and two timelines of those 
images seem to overlap and merge, collapsing the odd Platonism of Dama­
sio’s theater of consciousness in which shadows appear before objects into 
a more contemporary version of the screening venue: a movie theater. The 
supposed cinematic experience is staged by “the brain” for us, an experi­
ence that is also said to generate “us” in the process.
Yet it is worth delving a little deeper into the mixed media metaphors 
here and realize that consciousness does not really have the designed 
smoothness of a VR or immersive gaming experience. Damasio himself 
acknowledges that “core consciousness is generated in pulselike fashion, 
for each content of which we are to be conscious.”26 Indeed, we flit in and 
out of consciousness, both during our sleep (when it is only in the rela­
tively short time of deep sleep that our consciousness is suspended) and in 
daytime. To continue with the media metaphor, consciousness is therefore 
perhaps more like an experimental modernist short, one that is made up 
of still photographs, multiple exposure frames, slow-­mo animations, and 
material scratches to the film’s surface. The role of the body, foregrounded 
in the formal experiments of modernist filmmakers such as Sergei Eisen­
stein, Hans Richter, or Aleksandr Rodchenko, is crucial in the creation and, 
of course, perception of that movie. We could say that there is no movie 
without a body. As Damasio puts it, “the images you form in your mind 
always signal to the organism [which stands for a material bodily entity] its 
own engagement with the business of making images.”27 The human body 
therefore presents itself as a self(ie)-­camera. The images are needed to gen­
erate us, but this sense of “us” emerges through our “action.” We become 
us by imaging and hence imagining ourselves into being, we could say. The 
image of “the organism” that we internally create for ourselves to map out 
(not yet quite) our external boundaries, and hence help maintain our life, 

Can You Photograph the Future?	
157
becomes a blueprint for the imaging of the self that is subsequently seen as 
living that life.
Importantly, this ur-­image of the organism needs to be followed by many 
others. Indeed, in order to know how to act, we need what Damasio refers 
to as “good images.” He writes: “Images allow us to choose among reper­
toires of previously available patterns of action and optimize the delivery 
of the chosen action—­we can, more or less deliberately, more or less auto­
matically, review mentally the images which represent different options of 
action, different scenarios, different outcomes of action. We can pick and 
choose the most appropriate and reject the bad ones.”28 Yet it is not only 
through somewhat confusing spatiality in which a reflection becomes an 
image that Damasio conveys the working of consciousness to us. His model 
also entails a warped temporality. While core consciousness, as he figura­
tively puts it, “does not illuminate the future,”29 extended consciousness 
involves “holding an image over time,”30 which is another name for the 
process of memory. Drawing on the famous experiment conducted in the 
1980s by Benjamin Libet on the relationship between stimulus, reaction, 
and consciousness, which showed a delay in our consciousness catching 
up with our body,31 Damasio points out that “we are always hopelessly 
late for consciousness,”32 the lateness amounting to about five hundred 
milliseconds. This presumed lateness has led philosophers and neuroscien­
tists to interrogate whether our actions are indeed caused by brain activity 
or whether they are preprogrammed all along. In the latter scenario, con­
sciousness only catches up with our activity five hundred milliseconds later 
and thus only provides a report on the activity, rather than being its source 
of origin. The varied responses in the science community to the relation­
ship between consciousness, brain, and body reflect the diverse set of posi­
tions on consciousness today, which are in turn underpinned by diverse 
approaches to the age-­old problem of determinism and free will.
Devs could be read as a parable for illustrating this problem. The orches­
trator of the Devs enterprise, mad-­professor-­cum-­entrepreneur Forest, 
believes there is no such thing as free will. As mentioned previously, For­
est is mourning his family’s death in a car crash, which was caused by his 
wife while she was on the phone to him—­making him a contributor to the 
crash. Yet for Forest we all run on “tramlines.” This means that his wife and 
daughter died in that car crash because they were always going to die in it, 

158	
Chapter 6
with the tracks of causality extending well beyond and ahead of any indi­
vidual’s actions or acts of will. The belief in the determinism of the universe 
provides solace to his guilt but also a recipe for trying to recreate another 
universe in which a different set of events would be guaranteed to unfold, 
one that would be more satisfactory to its designer’s wishes. Through a trick 
of smoke and mirrors involving a lot of misuse of the term “quantum,” 
things both do and do not go to plan. A young programmer called Lily—­a 
heroine on a quest to revenge the death of her Russian-­spy boyfriend and 
save the world from Forest’s divine machinations, and one whose heroic 
adventure has already been predicted by Forest’s all-­seeing computer—­at 
the last moment throws out the gun she was supposed to use to kill the 
evil Devs-­master, thus messing up the prediction algorithm. Yet both Lily 
and Forest do die in the altercation anyway once the cage that held them 
drops down, joining the rendered universe on the other side of the screen 
in which Forest is reunited with his family while Lily is dating her other 
(good) boyfriend. The philosophical dilemma as to whether they are still 
themselves in that rendered universe, or whether they are mere digital cop­
ies of themselves that just look like them to an outside observer, is closed 
off by the foundational assumption that drives the show (as well as much 
current AI research) that both perception and consciousness are computa­
tional. For Devs it also means that it is possible for the characters to experi­
ence themselves as “continuous and unified” not just across time (which 
we all do, every day, on waking up)33 but also across platforms and media.
Commenting on the science behind the show, computer science profes­
sor Scott Aaronson is rather skeptical about the show’s overuse of the term 
“quantum” with reference to what is complexity. Indeed, complexity is the 
reason computer developers from the scene discussed at the beginning of 
this chapter are unable to see more than ten seconds into the nematode 
worm’s future. Aaronson then adds, acerbically: “Predicting the weather 
three weeks from now might be forever impossible.”34
The perception machine as a prediction machine
A number of successful predictions do nevertheless happen everyday, albeit 
at smaller scales and temporal ranges, and they do have profound signifi­
cance not just for how we can live our lives but also for how we can under­
stand ourselves better. Yet their operating model is somewhat different than 

Can You Photograph the Future?	
159
claimed by Libet and taken up by Devs. Neuroscientist Anil Seth draws on 
more recent research by Aeron Schurger to provide an interpretation of 
Libet’s experiment which suggests that the assessment of the brain’s “readi­
ness potential” to initiate a given action was itself an artifact of the process 
of measuring this potential, and something that could only be captured 
retrospectively. According to Seth, “you will see something that looks 
like a readiness potential if you look back in time from moments of fast 
responses.”35 This allows him to interpret the brain’s supposed readiness as 
an accumulation of sensory data from which the brain can make the best 
guess. The brain is therefore not ready for a specific action; it has to create 
this action by envisaging the external state of events—­and those events’ 
unfolding. The act of envisaging itself is a simulation of probabilities, a 
prediction or “best guess,” not a foretelling of what will most definitely 
happen. This statement supports Seth’s account of consciousness as the 
organism’s ability to make predictions. We will return to this point shortly. 
But, for now, I want to focus on another aspect of Seth’s argument, namely, 
his conclusion that free will is a “perceptual experience,” a statement that 
allows him to reconcile our inner sense of agency with the causality of 
the laws of physics as we know them.36 This is a stronger claim than it 
might initially seem, because for Seth the only way we can access anything, 
internally (in ourselves) or externally (in the world), is through our experi­
ences of it, which are clusters of perceptions. We could go so far as to say, 
as Seth indeed does, that our sense of self is produced through the process 
of future-­forwarding, i.e., looking at (what becomes) ourselves, at regu­
lar intervals, while trying to guess the causes of the sensory signals being 
received. For Seth, Descartes’s “I think, therefore I am” becomes “I predict 
(myself), therefore I am.” This argument is encapsulated by his proposition 
that our brains are (Bayesian) prediction machines, attempting to guess the 
causes of sensory signals from the perceptual inferences they receive.37
I am interested in this formulation and the idea behind this concept 
of the prediction machine for two reasons, both related to core aspects of 
this book: the posited role of perception in the constitution of the self, 
and the figure of the machine in explaining consciousness. In Seth’s frame­
work, prediction and perception are inextricably interwoven: “The brain is 
continually generating predictions about sensory signals and comparing 
these predictions with the sensory signals that arrive at the eyes and the 
ears—­and the nose, and the skin, and so on.”38 His post-­Cartesian quip 

160	
Chapter 6
could thus also be articulated as “I perceive (myself), therefore I am.” This 
theory confirms the constitutive role of perception in the emergence of 
both our self and what we call the world. Yet, even though multisensory 
perception is such a strong aspect of his framework of thought, Seth is far 
less inclined than Damasio to resort to media metaphors, whether based on 
still or moving images, to explain it. Instead, his rhetorical register, with its 
signals, inputs, outputs, inferences, controls, and Bayesian guesses, is pri­
marily drawn from cybernetics, information theory, and computer science. 
For Seth we are “beast machines—­self-­sustaining flesh-­bags that care about 
their own persistence.”39 He traces his use of the concept of the machine to 
L’Homme machine (Machine Man) published in 1747 by Julien Offray de La 
Mettrie, explaining the workings of both the body and the mind solely in 
materialist terms, and thus overcoming Descartes’s infamous dualism that 
still shapes much of metaphysics, as well as most religious beliefs. Yet Seth’s 
model of consciousness and selfhood is not computational in the sense 
used in Devs, or applied in the machine vision research discussed in chapter 
4. For him consciousness is phenomenological; it is always a consciousness 
of something, which means it is embodied and embedded in the world.
Echoing the sentiment well known to Marxists, visual culture theorists, 
and other humanities scholars for decades—­namely, that “how things seem 
is a poor guide to how they actually are”—­Seth’s theory redefines perception 
as “controlled hallucination.” The notion of systemic control is important 
to it, with conscious experiences being described, to use Giulio Tononi and 
Gerald M. Edelman’s term, as “informative and integrated.”40 This sense of 
integration is needed for the execution of the ultimate function of percep­
tion: to enable, via a series of prediction-­driven actions, our survival in the 
world. We could perhaps suggest that the role of perception is to enable 
control over (what we might call, contra Damasio) our self-­image, or to 
go all the way down the imagistic metaphorical whirlwind, to photograph 
ourselves into existence. If memory, for Damasio as much as for Bergson, 
involves holding an image over time, selfhood—­and self-­consciousness, 
which is its foundational aspect—­requires an incessant production of such 
images. Another way of putting it, in line with the structuring philosophi­
cal approach of this book, would be that we photograph ourselves into being. 
The model that emerges here is not that of a movie-­in-­the-­brain, an avant-­
garde silent film, or even a poorly edited and choppy YouTube video, but 
rather that of a Polaroid print (albeit one updated for the digital age). But 

Can You Photograph the Future?	
161
we also make the world by making images of it. This is to say that not only do 
we photograph ourselves into being, we also make the world into what it is 
(for us) by making images of it, over and over again. It needs to be acknowl­
edged, as I have several times previously in this volume, that “stuff” (aka 
“matter”) does exist “out there” without our perception or other form of 
intervention, but for it to become what we see as and call the world, it 
needs this imagistic process to be instantiated. Needless to say, the outcome 
of the process could look very different for different species.
Seth explicitly rejects the idea of the brain as a kind of computer in the 
skull, “processing sensory information to build an inner picture of the out­
side world for the benefit of the self” through feature detection. Nor does 
he partake of the image register to explain what happens, only resorting 
to the metaphor of “pictures” in order to dismiss the imaging model. So 
the brain is not an imaging machine for him, transmitting results from 
features detected in the world and thus producing their mere reflections. 
In Seth’s model, perceptions do not come directly from outside, i.e., from 
sensory impulses or inputs; they come from the brain’s predictions about 
the causes of these sensory signals. Building on the notion of perception as 
inference by nineteenth-­century physicist and philosopher Hermann von 
Helmholtz, Seth puts forward his idea of a prediction machine, which is a 
creative and interpretive device, not just a recording one.
Yet this is perhaps too rigid an opposition, given that prediction and 
imaging cannot be so easily decoupled, or that they are in fact being increas­
ingly linked in various imaging technologies, from computational photog­
raphy and CGI through to what has become known as “predtech.” We are 
of course dealing here with an expanded understanding of imagining, and 
of photography in particular, one that involves a shift from seeing photog­
raphy as a passive transmission of what is out there in the world through to 
an active creation of “the world” through the conjoined human-­machinic 
apparatus. Even if we are to agree that perception is not a reading of the 
world out there and that it is a “controlled hallucination,” a way of dream­
ing up the world on the basis of the “data” received from it, that proposi­
tion surely calls for an expanded sense of media through which such a 
hallucination can occur and present itself to us. Although Seth explicitly 
rejects the model of the computer, his preference for information theory as 
the organizer of his metaphorical horizon effectively ends up turning the 
brain into a high-­level processing unit that transforms sensory signal inputs 

162	
Chapter 6
into abstract predictions, and then spits them out as perceptions. What for­
mat and what medium these predictions come in remains unanswered in 
his theory. Seth emphasizes that “brains are not computers made of meat” 
but rather “chemical machines,” and that every brain is “part of a living 
body, embedded in and interacting with its environment—­an environment 
which in many cases contains other embodied brains.”41 Putting the image 
of meat at the center of his argument, he does not follow through on its 
consequences. The linguistic paradigm, which is inadvertently introduced 
into Seth’s information-­driven model—­as evidenced, for example, in his 
claim that “we never experience sensory signals themselves, we only ever 
experience interpretations of them”42—­misses out on the creative possibil­
ity of the imagistic apparatus. What is more concerning for me is that his 
model also plays into the hands of those who want to posit prediction 
as a medium-­independent process that can be done better and faster by 
machines, especially those of nonhuman variety. With this we enter the 
weird world of predtech: predictive technology.
Predtech and the capitalization of perception
This development, long predating advanced research in machine vision and 
machine learning, was already envisaged by Virilio in his Vision Machine. 
Virilio posited that
the act of seeing is an act that [precedes] action, a kind of pre-­action partly 
explained by Searle’s studies of “intentionality.” If seeing is in fact foreseeing, no 
wonder forecasting has recently become an industry in its own right, with the 
rapid rise of professional simulation and company projections, and ultimately, 
hypothetically, the advent of “vision machines” designed to see and foresee in 
our place. These synthetic-­perception machines will be capable of replacing us in 
certain domains, in certain ultra high-­speed operations for which our own visual 
capacities are inadequate, not because of our ocular system’s limited depth of 
focus, as was the case with the telescope and the microscope, but because of the 
limited depth of time of our physiological “take.”
43
Virilio’s analysis was premised on developments taking place in “artificial 
intelligence,” a term curiously yet not wrongly placed by him in quota­
tion marks, in the 1980s, long before the emergence of deep learning and 
machine vision premised on “Inceptionism,” i.e., recursive neural nets. 
The angle of Virilio’s prophetic analysis was sociopolitical. He warned us 

Can You Photograph the Future?	
163
against “the automation of perception,”44 coupled with the production of 
synthetic imagery that had no indexical reference to anything we recog­
nized as reality, beyond its verisimilitude. Virilio thus knew already in 1988 
(the year the French edition of his book came out) that prediction was 
in fact a creation. The obfuscation of this fact by the photorealism of the 
media through which the forecasting is delivered has serious consequences 
for ourselves as both individual selves and political subjects.
Virilio analyzed the use of prediction in military technology, with war 
maneuvers and wars’ outcomes increasingly being simulated on geographi­
cally remote screens, where action on the ground serves as a singular 
actualization of the virtual possibilities run on prediction machines in a 
different part of the globe. Today predtech is widely deployed in areas such 
as finance, weather prediction, epidemiology, cancer detection, consumer 
behavior, and crime prevention. Combining data mining, neural network 
analysis, and visual rendering, it stages virtual scenarios while also mak­
ing realities. To explain the working of predtech, marketing technology 
company Bluecore uses the example of a fuzzy picture which is gradually 
filled in with more data. Comparing traditional marketing to “taking a very 
zoomed in view of a photograph,”45 they pride themselves on using AI to 
provide “a bigger picture.” Yet the process of rendering this picture not 
only creates an image of their client’s customers but also creates customers: 
shaping their desires, choices, and actions while simultaneously rendering 
the very idea of a desirable customer base for the client using Blucore’s pre­
dictive technology. For example, “you can use it to calculate a customer’s 
predicted lifetime value, helping your team focus on customers that will 
drive the most revenue long term.”46 This process is also in operation in 
other areas where the use of resources, especially those of human nature, 
is to be optimized. “As of 2013, Hewlett-­Packard was predictively scoring 
its more than 300,000 workers with the probability of whether they’d quit 
their job—­HP called this the Flight Risk score, and it was delivered to man­
agers.”47 Predtech therefore not only predicts what is going to happen but 
also makes things happen. Not only can it create “bad workers” by reporting 
on them as potentially less reliable and steady in advance of anything they 
actually do while also shaping punitive management tactics, it also desig­
nates certain areas and certain groups of people as less desirable and less 
valuable, as poorer, weaker, and more prone to crime.

164	
Chapter 6
And thus machines photograph the future for us, imaging into existence 
through publicity and simulation both our desires and the world to come. 
It was recently reported that AI will not “just help us find things, it will 
generate what we’re actually seeking.”48 Even though the generation of 
new images through compositing has shaped photographic practice since 
its inception, with AI-­enhanced computation the technique has shifted to 
the center of image production, while not requiring any expertise from the 
user anymore. Scott Prevost of Adobe Sensei, an AI and machine learning 
section of the creative imaging software company, explains that soon the 
search function “will be able to apply machine learning to blend assets and 
create an image that never existed before—­an image that’s exactly what 
you had in your imagination.”49 The more recent “text-­to-­image” genera­
tors such as Open AI’s DALL·E have already been able to generate what we 
ourselves cannot yet quite imagine. Although presented as a useful feature 
for all sorts of creatives, it is easy to envisage this technology being utilized 
to enhance the (mal)functioning of platform capitalism. Following Bernard 
Stiegler, Taffel describes this process, “whereby knowledge is displaced from 
humans into machines designed to commodify, privatise and monetise 
data, information and experience,”50 as a proletarianization of the user. The 
impending metaverse as envisaged by the tech companies will perhaps be a 
final installation in this attempt to not only fully automate our perception 
but also commodify it.
Of course, things do not have to be this way. Prediction need not be 
seen as a passive enterprise, an impassionate observation of what will have 
happened. Having buried the indexical fantasies of photography, we can 
instead explore the idea of photographing the future as a form of creation, 
an imaginative rendering of a future we would like to see. This open-­ended 
concept of the future is already (albeit implicitly) embraced by Adobe, Meta, 
and other giants of the tech industry, although, in supporting a particular 
form of popular and populist data exchange on their platforms, they end 
up consolidating the contrary belief that “the future is inevitable, some­
thing that can at best be predicted,” a belief that of course works in the 
service of those companies. Yet, as Nick Montfort phrased it, “The future is 
not something to be predicted, but to be made.”51 We must not therefore 
just respond to the tech companies’ visions and vistas but offer a vision our 
own—­an approach Montfort describes as “future-­making.” John Norton, a 
technology writer for the Observer and a self-­confessed recovering utopian, 

Can You Photograph the Future?	
165
recognizes that “if we want to make things better, our focus has to be on 
changing the machine’s purpose and obligations”52—­with “the machine” 
standing for him not just for the tech companies of Silicon Valley, but also 
for their financial enablers, political endorsers, and infrastructural sup­
porters. We must therefore change the key parameters of the prediction 
machine, while making use of its warped temporality. Photographing the 
future can become a way not just of seeing what will happen but of creating 
images of what we want to happen—­and of how we want the world to look—­
and making better choices from within the image stack. This shift is to 
take cognizance of the fact that, as discussed in this chapter, computational 
imaging is always a form of buffering, with a singular photograph being 
just a cut in a range of possibilities. The next chapter will offer a singular 
attempt to make better cuts in the image flow—­and, with this, to envisage 
ourselves a better future.


7  “Loser Images” for a Planetary Micro-­Vision
Figure 7.1
Joanna Zylinska, Planetary Exhalation, 2021.

168	
Chapter 7
#WhatPlanet?
What planet are you on? Or, as Twitter has it, #WhatPlanet? Most often 
used as a jibe, this question is intended to challenge an alien-­sounding 
interlocutor spouting absurd ideas and inculcate in them a sense of real­
ity—­a reality which the speaker considers themselves to possess. In recent 
years this question has been used by broadcast media, from the BBC to 
RTÉ, more literally, as a way of urging the public to pay attention to envi­
ronmental and climate issues.1 What fascinates me about this formulation 
is its ability not only to deploy both the emotive and conative (“hey you”) 
functions of language, to use Roman Jakobson’s slightly old-­fashioned ter­
minology, but also to articulate the epistemological problem of seeing and 
knowing what one is talking about, and of seeing and feeling the ground on 
which one stands—­as well as all the other territories to which this ground is 
connected. And it is precisely this problem of the perception of “our” world 
and “our” planet that will be the subject of this chapter. In what follows, I 
will engage with planetarity as a popular visual and conceptual trope, with 
a view to developing “a planetary micro-­vision.” And thus, while the previ­
ous chapter dealt with the possibility of predicting the future by rendering 
it as an image, in what follows I will attempt to imagine and image such 
a future. I will follow up here on Nick Montfort’s intimation about future-­
making: namely, that “utopian ideas don’t have to be entirely serious to 
have some bite to them, and to be effective in provoking people to change 
their thinking and move toward a better future.”2
In a way that is perhaps apposite to the nature of the object being exam­
ined, this attempt at future-­making will consist of two case studies which 
take as their inspiration the notion and visuality of what have become 
known as “architectures of the post-­Anthropocene.” This term was pro­
posed by Liam Young in the 2019 issue of Architectural Design he edited. 
Illustrated with elegantly crisp photographs of “architecture without peo­
ple,” the volume demonstrated the recent emergence of “landscapes made 
for or by machines,”3 featuring data centers, giant distribution warehouses, 
telecommunications infrastructures, and industrialized agriculture lots. 
Many of the images in that special issue had been created with the help of 
drone camera technology, flattened perspective, and CGI, resulting in an 
oddly detached picture of our planet. But, even if this new planetarity looks 
distinctly posthuman, the all-­conquering visual apparatus used to conjure 

“Loser Images” for a Planetary Micro-­Vision	
169
it has ended up elevating Man as the creator and destroyer of worlds. My 
case studies respond to this mode of visualizing the planet and its structur­
ing logic—­as well as its politics.
My first case study will explore a specific incarnation of such “architec­
tures of the post-­Anthropocene”: still and moving images of picturesque 
locations captured by drones and collected on social media. I will analyze 
the aesthetics and politics that this kind of “planetary vision” embraces, 
and the picture of the world it constructs. Yet rather than stage a return 
to a more human or humane perspective, I will interrogate the technical 
affordances and potentialities of distributed perception and vision—­in 
machines and humans. The focus of my critique will therefore not be on 
the machinic aspect of vision, or on its aerial elevation per se. It will rather 
be on the assumed heroism of the eye-­in-­the-­sky, enacted via the unique 
coupling of drone vision and the view from GoPro Hero action cameras and 
their kin. In response, I will propose a second case study from my own art 
practice, titled Feminist with a Drone. Presented in the form of field notes, 
it will explore ways of mobilizing the very same technology to enact a less 
masterful and less heroic viewpoint. Working against the register of #amaz­
ingviews produced from high in the sky, with this amazingness referring to 
both those views’ breathtaking scope and high image quality, I will outline, 
with a nod to writer-­artist Hito Steyerl, the concept of “loser images” as a 
feminist rejoinder to the magnificent drone image aesthetics. I will then 
consider to what extent the production and curation of such loser images 
can be deployed toward an enactment of a different relationship to our 
habitat and to ourselves as its inhabitants—­with a view to building a femi­
nist multi-­kin ecology in the spirit of “eco-­eco-­punk” (figure 7.1).
Given the complexity and scale of the environmental crisis manifesting 
itself in rising sea levels, air pollution, accelerated species extinction, and a 
climate shift, it is understandable that “planetarity” has played an increas­
ingly prominent role in the arts, humanities, and social sciences in recent 
years. Positioned as a concept that can help us understand these changes, it 
has been used as an injunction—­in the editorial for the 2020 special issue 
of the influential arts journal eflux, “You and I Don’t Live on the Same 
Planet” by Martin Guinard, Bruno Latour, et al.; or as a framing device—­in 
the books Planetary Social Thought: The Anthropocene Challenge to the Social 
Sciences by Nigel Clark and Bronislaw Szerszynski and The Climate of History 
in a Planetary Age by Dipesh Chakrabarty. Indeed, it is within the framework 

170	
Chapter 7
of the recently postulated epoch of the Anthropocene, an epoch in which 
the human is said to have become a significant geological agent, that plan­
etary thinking has most often been outlined. Chakrabarty makes a strong 
plea for adopting the planet as a particularly relevant concept in the cur­
rent geopolitical moment due to its ability to grasp “a dynamic ensemble of 
relationships—­much as G. W. F. Hegel’s state or Karl Marx’s capital were—­an 
ensemble that constitutes the Earth system.”4 Many of the theorists engag­
ing with issues of planetarity today do so in dialogue with postcolonial 
writer Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak; specifically, with the final chapter titled 
“Planetarity” in her short polemical book Death of a Discipline, published 
in 2002. The book analyzed the transformation of humanities disciplines 
such as area studies, cultural studies, and, Spivak’s own intellectual love, 
comparative literature at the turn of the twenty-­first century.
In her book Spivak was very critical of the marketization of what had 
become known as “world literature” in North American universities, with 
literature and literary study being transformed into a rootless product to 
be consumed on a globalized educational market. In its place she offered a 
much more anchored, distributed, and embodied mode of engaging with 
the world and its literary and cultural artifacts. With her argument, Spivak 
opposed the abstraction of globalization, which she saw as “the imposi­
tion of the same system of exchange everywhere,”5 to the differentiated 
political space of planetarity. “The globe is on our computers. No one lives 
there. It allows us to think that we can aim to control it. The planet is in the 
species of alterity, belonging to another system; and yet we inhabit it, on 
loan,”6 she wrote. The planetary perspective she embraced was, paradoxi­
cally yet importantly, always partial. Introducing the sense of the uncanny 
in the reader, it was also presented as a demand and a call to responsibility. 
Even though Spivak’s text did not explicitly engage with environmental 
themes, there was a premonition in it of the ecological perspective that 
would become an important focus of work in the humanities and social 
sciences two decades later, around issues concerning the Anthropocene. 
It is therefore perhaps unsurprising that, at the present time, when disap­
pointment with the untrammeled flow of capital is matched by fear of the 
unrestricted flow of viruses around the globe, Spivak’s concept of planetar­
ity as an embodied response and responsibility to the Earth understood 
as our habitat—­and a recognition that this habitat is not given to us in 

“Loser Images” for a Planetary Micro-­Vision	
171
perpetuity—­has found a wide new audience. Intriguingly, Spivak already 
had an intimation of this happening when she declared in her book: “I 
write for a future reader.”7
In the context of fossil fuel depletion and impending climate catastro­
phe, the “planetary turn” in the humanities and social sciences we are cur­
rently experiencing responds to a concern, as Clark and Szerszynski put 
it, “not simply with the direction the future will take but [with] whether 
there will be a future at all.”8 There is an urgency to the present situation, 
they claim, which is driven by an increasing plausibility of a “planetary 
state shift.”9 The two authors, perhaps in an attempt to strengthen their 
own forthcoming proposition, also complain about the dearth of “sto­
ries, theories or concepts fit for the task of explaining what it means for 
human agents to find themselves behaving like Earth or cosmic forces.”10 
In response, they offer the concept of a planetary multiplicity, which stands 
for the Earth’s capacity, at every scale, “to become other to itself, to self-­
differentiate.”11 Such discursive and conceptual visualization is a frequent 
response by theorists concerned with the fate of our planet today. As part 
of the process, many seem keen to throw some new concepts and images 
into the planetary basket. Martin Guinard, Eva Lin, and Bruno Latour, for 
instance, have recently proposed to replace the image of the globe with that 
of an orange, with its skin, standing for “the upper near-­surface layer of the 
earth,” understood as a “critical zone.”12 Writing in the same issue of e-­flux 
as Guinard, Lin, Latour, et al., Yuk Hui has offered the term “planetariza­
tion” as an image of “the total mobilization of matter and energy,” with 
different energy channels (petrolic, hydraulic, electrical, psychic, sexual) 
presented as flowing above and beneath the earth.13 Unlike the other think­
ers, however, Hui does not quote Spivak (or, indeed, any other women—­
which seems rather odd, given his call for the restructuring of knowledge 
and practice in the university of the twenty-­first century). He does instead 
tell us, in no uncertain terms—­and in a strictly normative language, full 
of “musts,” “have tos” and “requireds”—­that technological planetarization 
has an “essence” and that “we must” understand it. This essence, claims 
Hui, is revealed in proletarianization but it also stands for a requirement to 
recognize “that we are in and will remain in a state of catastrophe.”14 With 
Hui’s philosophical balls landing rather heavily on the hard discursive sur­
face of his planet figure, his is just a more extreme example of a planetary 

172	
Chapter 7
thinking that, notwithstanding its political commitment, loses sight of the 
planet’s textured and meaty messiness.
Amidst all this philosophical-­planetary shifting, orange peeling, and 
ball throwing, I find myself somewhat apprehensive about this (re)turn 
to planetarity—­and, in particular, about the image of the planet (and the 
planetarium) that is produced in some of the recent theorizations on the 
subject. It is the gender and race aspects of the planetary setup that cause 
me particular concern. While many recent writers on planetarity (such as 
Clark, Szerszynski, and Chakrabarty) do indeed recognize the importance 
of bringing issues of race, gender, and sexuality to the discussion, alongside 
questions of class, many such accounts nevertheless end up with a model 
of the planetary theorist as a cosmonaut. This mode of theorizing flirts with 
an openness to cosmic multiplicity and other forms of difference without 
really being able to overcome its own distancing from its object of study, 
or its own linguistic and conceptual enclosure. Planetary theory in most 
guises today is a theory afloat, with the planet reduced to a toylike globe 
that the gravity-­free theorist can bounce against and around. In “Planetar­
ity” Spivak already offered an interesting diagnosis of the emergence of 
this mode of enquiry. Even though, as shown earlier, her text was primar­
ily about literature and ways of studying it, it was also very imagistic, with 
the argument constructed via a sequence of pictures of the world. Spivak 
made a daring proposition there that the distancing from the planet that 
occurred in many accounts which attempted to transcend cultural or geo­
graphical localism could be explained by a shift of the discursive system 
“from vagina to planet as the signifier of the uncanny, by way of national­
ist colonialism and postcoloniality.”15 This is the way in which “neurotic 
men” (to cite Spivak after Freud) attempt to exercise power over spaces that 
give them anxiety: from the disavowal of the birth canal to the dominance 
of lands deemed barren and ready to be captured, whether in the shape of 
remote continents or remote planets (exhibit A: Elon Musk).
Why haven’t we seen a photograph of the whole Universe yet?
With this critique of the planetary imaginary I am not trying to dismiss 
planetarity altogether. I am in agreement with Chakrabarty’s proposition 
that a comprehensive politics of climate change has to begin from a plan­
etary perspective, while taking into account our own insignificant timeline. 

“Loser Images” for a Planetary Micro-­Vision	
173
As he poignantly observes, “The realization that humans—­all humans, rich 
or poor—­come late in the planet’s life and dwell more in the position of 
passing guests than possessive hosts has to be an integral part of the per­
spective from which we pursue our all-­too-­human but legitimate quest for 
justice on issues to do with the iniquitous impact of anthropogenic climate 
change.”16 With my critique, I am therefore only proposing that, if we are 
to enact the ethicopolitical injunction of Spivak’s original idea, we need 
better conceptualizations and better images of the planet.
In an attempt to bypass editor and writer Stuart Brand’s cosmonautic 
fantasies encapsulated in his use of the Earthrise and Blue Marble images in 
his countercultural Whole Earth Catalog, art historian John Tresch turns to 
the work of artist Aspen Mays. Mays’s plastic button, available in unlim­
ited editions (2009) and inscribed with the query “Why haven’t we seen a 
photograph of the whole Universe yet?,” is a transposed replica of a badge 
distributed by Brand around college campuses in the late 1960s, after an 
LSD trip experienced from the rooftops had led him to believe that being 
able to see the Earth as a round and finite object would help people develop 
a collective sense of planetary responsibility.17 Mays’s expansion of Brand’s 
query, from the Earth to the Universe, foregrounds the absurdity of the 
idea of a single image being able to capture the whole cosmos (of which 
it will always be part)—­and of a desire to make such a globalizing image 
in the first place. It also suggests that we may need a “synthetic, anamor­
phic view from multiple perspectives at once—­harmoniously, discordantly, 
or unthinkably joined.”18 Tresch goes on to make an ontological point, 
claiming that “how we live on earth is closely tied to how we address the 
immensely difficult task of picturing the universe. If we want to come back 
‘down to earth,’ we need to think these two scales together—­the cosmic 
and the terrestrial—­and consider how our depictions of the universe have 
intersected, or bypassed, our ways of inhabiting the planet.”19 It is this dual 
visuality that is arguably lacking from most pictures of the planetary today, 
pictures that seem to be stuck within the visual logic of politician-­turned-­
environmentalist Al Gore’s “Digital Earth.”
Gore’s 1998 proposal for “Digital Earth,” “a multi-­resolution, three-­
dimensional representation of the planet, into which we can embed vast 
quantities of geo-­referenced data,” outlined a haptic visuality that turned 
our planet into a graspable (and manipulable) object—­even for a child.20 
The idea has been partially realized in online browser installations such as 

174	
Chapter 7
Google Earth and NASA’s WorldWind. Yet such images and visualizations 
end up removing the theorist—­but often also the artist, the photographer, 
and the filmmaker as well as the engineer, the data analyst, and the average 
Internet user—­from the channels of energy and light transfer, and resitu­
ating them instead in orbit, looking down. It is also the media aspect of 
energy and light, their role as constitutive part of the imaging and sighting 
process, that is being overlooked in many attempts at, as well as analyses 
of, planetary imaging. Leon Gurevitch argues that platforms such as Google 
Earth end up rationalizing “the planet’s eco/mineral systems and human­
ity’s eco/social interactions within the logic of the computer-­generated sim­
ulated model,”21 placing their user “in the position of divine manufacturer 
of the very environments they wish to travel through.”22
Building on the above critique, I am interested in probing further how 
we can see the planet—­how it arrives to us as an image, be it a photograph 
or a CGI rendering—­and how particular images of planetarity shape our 
imagination and conceptual horizon. I am also interested in how we can 
mobilize the power of Spivak’s planetarity in terms of the human’s ethical 
encounter with the alienness of the Earth, and how we can recognize, with 
anthropologist Elizabeth Povinelli and her Karrabing interlocutors in the 
Northern Territory of Australia, the planet’s outside-­the-­human gestational­
ity.23 We know that our perception of the world is affected by the changes 
to particulate matter that moves in the air—­and to the nature of light that 
travels through it while enabling perception in us. Amanda Boetzkes has 
pointed out that “planetarity of vision necessarily emerges from the embry­
onic agents from which the human emerged, and the dusts, sediments, 
crystals and mire into which we give way. Yet it also emerges from the 
geochemical materials we create and which integrate into the planetary 
fabric.”24 We are now also aware that the Anthropocene literally changes 
how we see the world. It is thus both the historically specific concrescences 
of matter and energy that we humans recognize as images and the material 
substrate of such images, and of the visual processes that affect us, that 
we need to consider when exploring planetary seeing. In other words, to 
understand the condition of our planet, we need to look at images but 
also across and beyond them, into those images’ “atmospheres.” With this 
I want to suggest that today, a time when, in the words of philosopher-­
activist Franco “Bifo” Berardi, “history has been replaced by the endless 

“Loser Images” for a Planetary Micro-­Vision	
175
flowing recombination of fragmentary images,”25 this ecological model of 
perception, inspired by the work of James Gibson, requires a temporary 
readjustment to human timescales. This is to say, to the analysis of the 
concrescence of particles into things that present as images to us, we need 
to add the study of the concretization of those images as particular histori­
cal formations that mean something to us. This will allow us to look into the 
consequences of this pixelation of history for our cognitive and perceptive 
framing of the world.
#amazingdroneposts
On what plane should such an analysis unfold? Where should it start? 
Boetzkes has suggested that technologically driven contemporary art 
involving robotics, digital practice, biomaterial, and virtual exhibition 
spaces has altered “the perceptual capabilities and cognitive orienta­
tion of human bodies.”26 But it is not just within the realm of art that 
the reconfiguration of our sensorium is occurring. Daily imagistic prac­
tices in online spaces, including social media, arguably serve as a more 
extensive and impactful laboratory for enacting and experiencing such a 
transformation. This brings me to my first case study: the widely popular 
images of different parts of the Earth taken by amateur and semiprofes­
sional drone operators and presented on social media. Two types of image 
experiences stand out here. First, we have a flow of conventionally beauti­
ful photographic stills (and occasional short videos) of various picturesque 
locations and impressive buildings—­New Zealand’s Mount Taranaki, 
coastal ice formations somewhere in Canada, Dubai’s nightlit cityscape, 
Zaha Hadid’s Galaxy Soho building in Beijing, China—­all posted on Insta­
gram under the apposite hashtag, #amazingdroneposts (figure 7.2). Yet no 
matter whether they feature natural land formations or humanmade arti­
facts, the drone gaze those images espouse is determinedly architectural. 
Eschewing any pretense at naturalism, they present the world as a time-­ 
and labor-­led formation, even if the temporal scales of the laborer are not 
always human.
The machine eye of the drone camera (in many cases, as is evident from 
the accompanying hashtag, belonging to one of the Mavic or Mini drones 
from the industry leader DJI), is deployed to see for us humans—­but also, 

176	
Chapter 7
Figure 7.2
Screenshot from the @amazingdroneposts account, Instagram, March 8, 2021.

“Loser Images” for a Planetary Micro-­Vision	
177
of course, to see better than us. Even though many of the images presented 
would have no doubt been edited post-­capture to enhance their visual 
appeal, the drone cameras are already sophisticated pieces of equipment, 
featuring relatively large sensors, multiple camera angles, and the ability 
to use high dynamic range (HDR). The hyperrealist imagery posted on the 
#amazingdroneposts feed deploys high contrast and geometrical lines. 
These images are easy to see and be amazed by because they inscribe them­
selves in the schematism of human perception outlined by Gibson, serving 
the world to us as a “layout of surfaces,”27 and not a sequence of three-­
dimensional Cartesian coordinates. According to Gibson humans have no 
depth perception, with the traditional distinction between two-­ and three-­
dimensional vision being a myth. What we in fact see are edges, layouts, 
surfaces—­and their affordances “for benefit or injury to someone,”28 with 
the image gradually emerging as an image through our movement in the 
world. It is the transformation of those edges, layouts, and surfaces as a 
result of our changed position in relation to them that produces vision. 
“What the eye picks up is sequential transformation, not a form,” suggest 
Gibson29—­an intimation that is developed further in the work of contem­
porary philosopher of perception Alva Noë.30
Without giving up on the objectivism of the existence of stuff “out 
there,” Gibson’s ecological theory of visual perception offers a dynamic 
account not only of how we see the world but also of how the world 
becomes something to us. Noë puts it clearly: “the perceptual world is the 
world for us.”31 If the purpose of vision “is to be aware of the surround­
ings, the ambient environment,”32 perception involves information pickup 
from the world, but it also involves gathering information about ourselves 
by moving through the world—­and, in the process, sensing ourselves as 
different from it. Vision, as I have attempted to demonstrate throughout 
this book, is thus proprioceptive and kinesthetic. Importantly, in Gibson’s 
framework it is also presented as both self-­forming and terra-­forming. (To 
reiterate, the stuff of “the world,” or what Gibson calls “invariants,” exists 
independently of us, but it becomes something for us, i.e., it becomes our 
environment, through an active and mobile process of perception.) Like 
many other theorists of vision, Gibson turns to the image-­making appa­
ratus to explain his theory, which leads him to propose that “moviemak­
ers are closer to life than picture makers.”33 As registered in chapter 5, I 
have doubts about the posited lifelessness of still imaging in comparison to 

178	
Chapter 7
film—­an assumption we see not only in Gibson but also in his intellectual 
predecessor, philosopher Henri Bergson. And thus, even if we agree with 
Gibson to “treat the motion picture as the basic form of depiction and the 
painting or a photograph as a special form of it,”34 I would suggest that we 
need to move beyond the understanding of the photograph as a mere film 
still, an “arrested picture” as opposed to a “progressive” one.35 Instead, we 
should consider all of these different types of images as being forms of time-­ 
and space-­carving, temporary enclosures on a particular scale of duration, 
with some of those scales being imperceptible to us. But no still photograph 
is ever just encountered as (a) still: it becomes something for the viewer in 
their movement in front of or around it. The lines and edges within and 
around the image discretize it, but they also link back to the antecedent 
motions and decisions of their makers, printers, editors, framers, scanning 
technicians, and network operators.
How does this model of vision help us see and understand the Insta­
gram flow of #amazingdroneposts? The images posted under this hashtag 
represent the world reduced to surfaces. To say this is not to castigate those 
images for their superficiality or banality—­although there is a visual same­
ness to the #amazingdroneposts image flow, with the relatively narrow set 
of aesthetic and technical criteria for what this amazingness represents (flat­
tened perspective, strong lines cutting across the image surface, unusual 
shapes, deep colors, high contrast, rich textures). However, they are primar­
ily surfaces the way all technical images are, as understood by Vilém Flusser. 
Technical images for Flusser, whether photographs or video, represent a 
two-­dimensional flattening of the world, a transformation of its linearity 
into code.36 Yet even if this process is entailed in all imaging practices, the 
drone images under discussion achieve something unique, in the sense that 
the schematism of their representation, the reduction of the world to lines 
and edges, ends up producing images that look more like graphs than pho­
tographs. Those images thus serve as visualizations of the world and not as 
its representations. Partaking of the current visual sensibility whereby “the 
planet turns into a massive diagram of anthropogenic destruction, reveal­
ing itself in hurricanes, heatwaves, droughts, sea level rises, loss of wildlife 
or the acidification of the oceans,”37 they renege on its underlying message 
by turning the diagram into replacement object—­while offering a lesson in 
how not to see the planet.

“Loser Images” for a Planetary Micro-­Vision	
179
Even though, to reiterate, all images are obtained, as images, in such a 
schematizing way, we need to ask further questions about the aesthetics 
and politics of this particular mode of visualization—­and about the poli­
tics of vision implied by the “amazing drones” model. Produced by the 
machine vision of advanced drone cameras, the #amazingdroneposts serve 
as schematic test cases for how human vision works. They are exercises in 
the mobile perception of lines and edges enabling us to build a picture of 
the world. In many ways these images are easy to take in: they afford the 
world to us as both a surface and an uninterrupted flow. And yet, because 
they are to be consumed by largely immobile human bodies placed in 
front of screens, with movement limited to the eye scan and finger scroll, 
they outsource the action of terra-­forming mobility to the drone machine. 
Gibson had already predicted this experience when he wrote nearly three 
decades ago: “We modern, civilized, indoor adults are so accustomed to 
looking at a page or a picture, or through a window, that we often lose the 
feeling of being surrounded by the environment, our sense of the ambient 
array of light. . . . We live boxed up lives.”38 In the era of pandemic-­induced 
lockdowns, working from home, and Zoom education, this experience was 
expanded to the almost universal form of epistemological encounter with 
images—­and with people reduced to images. This semi-­immersive experi­
ence creates a sense of easy and total accessibility, an illusion of the world 
being there on demand, subject to our gaze and capital’s desire. In this way, 
it becomes a model of globalization, articulated by Spivak as “the imposi­
tion of the same system of exchange everywhere,” presenting “that abstract 
ball covered in latitudes and longitudes, cut by virtual lines, once the equa­
tor and the tropics and so on, now drawn by the requirements of Geo­
graphical Information Systems.”39
There exists another class of such globalizing drone images, where the 
containment and frozenness of movement in the #amazingdroneposts is 
overcome without transcending the visual limit points of globalization. 
These are scenic drone videos, several hours long, shot in 4K and set to 
“relaxing” music, and then posted to YouTube (figure 7.3). The majority of 
such videos are human-­free, treating viewers to sprawling landscape vistas 
of nature scenes on “planet Earth” (Croatia, Hawaii, Seychelles). Spectacu­
lar cityscapes, whether in Hong Kong or the Dolomites, seamlessly transi­
tion between urban canyons and mountain gorges, with similar geometric 

180	
Chapter 7
patterns of strong vertical lines and contrasting lights and shadows. Some 
of the videos include humans as insignificant moving points, usually per­
forming superhuman feats such as jogging at the edge of a cliff or scaling 
a vertical rock. Such scenes are then cut through with close-­up machine-­
eye shots from the GoPro Hero action camera and its kin, worn on bod­
ies. Whether humans are included in those videos or not, there is heroism 
implied in all of them, with the masterful eye of the drone performing 
amazing acts, notwithstanding the elements. The videos are sometimes 
accompanied by heroic narratives of the (predominantly invisible) opera­
tor almost losing the drone, and then having to scale icebergs and plunge 
into volcanoes to rescue it.
The “aerial view” in the #amazingdroneposts on Instagram and in the 
scenic drone videos on YouTube encapsulates all three of its modes identi­
fied by architecture theorist Mark Dorrian: the oblique image, the vertical 
image, and the diagram.40 In some of the images the eye of the drone (and, 
by extension, of the viewer on the other side of the screen) is “directed both 
downwards and laterally.”41 Dorrian argues that the oblique view allowed 
new landholders in eighteenth-­century England to naturalize their claim to 
the land. It also enacted “a possessive, expropriating mode of vision,” with 
the “landscape idea” emerging “as a crucial ideological support to what was 
Figure 7.3
Screenshot from multiple drone videos opened on YouTube in individual windows, 
March 8, 2021.

“Loser Images” for a Planetary Micro-­Vision	
181
historically a kind of internal colonialism.”42 In the drone images of planet 
Earth this form of internal colonialism, the reinforcement of ownership 
over our habitat, consolidates the subjectivity of the viewer as the globe 
master, being able to move fluidly through beautiful spaces in a relaxed and 
serene manner. Dorrian is quite blunt in his assessment of the ideological 
effects of the techniques of estrangement mobilized for transforming “the 
quotidian reality of the city” into a “distanced object of visual consump­
tion”: the reality of life on the ground, including the violence that is an 
inevitable part of it, “is sublimated into the quasi-­pastoral spectacle of the 
‘urban landscape.’”43 We could therefore suggest that seeing planet Earth 
through the eye of the drone is one way of avoiding seeing planetarity. The 
vertical view, originally associated with flight and perfected in World War I’s 
heavy aircraft, deaestheticized the ground view to the point of abstraction, 
in order to excuse military operations to be performed upon it. The terrain 
that was to be annihilated “was no longer a landscape but a topography 
that had become almost cinematic in its constant reconfiguration under 
the pressure of heavy artillery.”44 Any such explicit destructive fantasies are 
absent from the drone representations of planet Earth, but what they share 
with the earlier images of the vertical view is the severing of the ethical 
bond with the land and a suspension of human responsibility for it. The 
aesthetic response of giddy awe evoked in many viewers of such posts or 
videos replaces the embodied and embedded bond with the terrain of our 
inhabitation. The three-­dimensional environment thus gives way to a flat 
surface—­which is only a small step from becoming a diagram. The exces­
sive elevation of the drone, reminiscent of the visuality of satellite images, 
eliminates the “unnecessary” visual debris from the picture, transforming 
culture, experience, and lived life into noise.
Feminist with a Drone
In an attempt to identify technical and conceptual openings within the 
dominant structures of planetary visibility, I developed an art project called 
Feminist with a Drone, which serves here as my second case study. The 
(mock-­ethnographic) “field notes” presented below, and the accompany­
ing images (figure 7.4), are part of this project. Feminist with a Drone is not 
just an artwork but also a thinkwork: it is an attempt to outline ideas and 
concepts with practices and things.

182	
Chapter 7
Figure 7.4
Joanna Zylinska, Loser Images 1.0 (Feminist with a Drone), 2021.

Feminist with a Drone: Field Notes
Date, time, and place of observation
December 12, 2020–­January 12, 2021, south-­west London, UK
Specific data, facts, and information on what happened on the site
On December 12, 2020, I purchased a Ryze Tello Drone. Designed by industry 
giant DJI, this mini drone, marketed as “the most fun drone ever,” is aimed 
at teaching kids and adults “how awesome flying can be.” The exploration of 
this awesomeness was the key goal of my fieldwork.
My first outing with the Tello took place on December 24, 2020, in a small 
park in a residential area of south-­west London. During the flight times of 
up to 13 minutes, I captured a sequence of still and moving images from the 
height of between 2 and 10 meters. The experiment came to a halt when the 
drone flew away on descent. The follow-­up search didn’t yield any results, the 
situation compounded by unpropitious weather conditions and approaching 
dusk, with the drone then considered lost. The following day the drone was 
located in a different part of the park. The experiment in testing the drone’s 
awesomeness was resumed the following week. Some images were taken dur­
ing the first flight. On its second ascent the drone lost one of its propellers, 
with the propeller itself getting lost among the park’s vegetation. A replace­
ment propeller was installed, but this made the drone inoperative, with the 
device losing the capacity to fully lift off the ground. This concluded my 
attempt to fly the drone and take images with it.
Personal reflections on the observation
The Ryze Tello Drone had been chosen for this fieldwork on the basis of its 
size, design, and marketing literature, with a view to reconciling drone tech­
nology’s military legacy with my critical (cyber)feminist sensibility. Unfortu­
nately, I was unable to corroborate the producer’s promise that “Flying has 
never been so fun and easy!” Loss was a key characteristic of my experience 
with the Ryze Tello.
The hypothesis and questions about the observation
Could things have gone any worse? Was the fieldwork conducted as part of 
my project a failure? Crucially, should I have bought a better, more manly 
and more high-­tech drone? In the spirit of feminist bricolage, an approach 
which remains aware of power relations, while foregrounding “the practices 
of shaping, crafting, and producing that academics usually hide (and often 
hide behind) in the production of beautiful and polished surfaces, unpunc­
tured by doubts, hesitations and incompletion,”
45 I decided to repurpose my 
losses. The limited sample of images obtained from the drone’s camera and 
their relatively low quality, coupled with the loss of the drone’s functionality, 
led to the development of a hypothesis about the possibility of constructing 
an alternative drone visuality, which I termed “loser images.” This hypothesis 
will require further research.

184	
Chapter 7
As a feminist rejoinder to the “amazing” drone views discussed in my first 
case study, I want to offer “loser images” as a figuration that channels some 
of the potential of the multiperspectival, humachinic worldview without 
falling for its grandeur of scale. Figurations as used in the work of feminist 
thinkers of technology are thought devices aimed at “shaping a different 
political imaginary or performing an alternative image of the future.”46 Yet 
rather than propose a straightforward return to a more human or humane 
perspective in response to this master aerial vision, I aim to probe further 
the creative potential of decoupling sight from a bipedal human body and 
dispersing it across the environment. I am thus interested in mobilizing the 
same image-­making technology to enact a less masterful, less domineering, 
and less heroic way of visioning and imaging. Mindful of the military ori­
gin of drone technology, I want to recognize the trajectory of its feminist 
repurposing, from abortion pill delivery devices through to femicide map­
ping tools.47 My project thus inscribes itself in Anna Feigenbaum’s concept 
of “drone feminism,” an approach which “seeks to remember its cyborgian 
legacies, constructing a political economic reading of how the ‘administra­
tion of life and death’ is always bound up in the pursuit of profits and a 
masculinist drive to see from on top.”48 Offering up new sites and languages 
for feminist activism, “drone feminism attempts to reveal the myriad ways 
that gender matters in the infrastructures and psychologies of drone execu­
tions.”49 The alternative form of post-­Anthropocene visuality enacted by 
my non-­awesome toy drone does not flatten the world into a postcard 
while excising its inhabitants of different scales from the picture. Instead, 
it envisages a more porous planetscape—­and a more entangled and messy 
ecology, in the style of feminist eco-­eco-­punk.
Loser images: a feminist proposal for post-­Anthropocene visuality
The minor intervention into the grand problem of planetarity I am present­
ing in this chapter has an affinity with geographer Heather McLean’s “praise 
of chaotic research pathways.”50 McLean offers her chaotic methodology by 
way of “a feminist response to planetary urbanization.”51 Specifically, she is 
responding to the planetary approach to the study of cities offered by Neil 
Brenner and Christian Schmid. McLean recognizes the value of her col­
leagues’ critique of globalized yet static approaches to urbanism, approaches 
which uncritically praise creativity, innovation and sustainability without 

“Loser Images” for a Planetary Micro-­Vision	
185
taking into account “contradictory geo-­economic forces that constitute cit­
ies and regions.”52 Yet she also points out that there is something both 
totalizing and limiting about the planetary approach they offer in response, 
in that it “privileges a lineage of particular white, male, and European 
Marxist and neo-­Marxist political economists at the expense of feminist, 
queer, and anti-­colonial contributions to this sub-­field.”53 It also positions 
researchers as preconstituted and monadic entities, not as living, breathing 
beings emerging as part of their work, praxis, or struggle. This is precisely 
the problem I raised in the earlier part of this chapter with regard to the 
cosmonaut theorists of planetarity, floating above and around their object 
of study without getting their lungs and hands dirty.
My “loser images” go beyond the perfect planetary vision of the drone 
eye—­but they also transcend the airy planetarity of much of contemporary 
theory, which seems to have left behind Spivak’s commitment to partial 
views, inhabitation, and an alterity that makes a difference. Conceptu­
ally, Feminist with a Drone engages humor, irony, and partiality as femi­
nist methods for conducting work in technoscience and technoculture.54 
Those modes of affectively remodulating the traditional framework of what 
counts as knowledge and scholarship proper open up alternative ways of 
seeing and doing. McLean also works in this vein—­for example, with her 
drag king performance at a cabaret called Fail Better, a Glasgow space fea­
turing artists of color and queer and working-­class artists. Adopting a drag 
king persona of an urban think-­tank expert Toby Sharp, promoting “tools 
for urban change” as part of the creative cities agenda, she engaged feminist 
critique not only in her scholarly research but also in her cabaret act. Cre­
ative urban communities are therefore treated by her as not just objects of 
study: they become research partners. McLean admits that “from a plane­
tary standpoint” promoted by theorists such as Brenner and Schmid, activi­
ties such as those taking place at the Fail Better cabaret could be positioned 
as, at best, ineffective. She also fears that “through a lens pre-­occupied with 
mapping flows of capital,” local sites of activism can end up looking “as 
weak and useless in the face of steamroller-­like neoliberal policies.”55
I share McLean’s concerns. Like her, I have experienced challenges to 
my attempts to enact alternative modes of producing academic knowl­
edge. (The normalizing statement, “Please let’s not make fools of our­
selves,” heard after conference presentations or panel discussions, still rings 
in my ears.) Yet, like her, I believe there is too much at stake to just give 

186	
Chapter 7
up—­especially as the accusation of weakness is itself a gendered strategy 
aimed at renormalizing the “militant and heroic/victorious”56 ways of act­
ing, be it as knowledge producer, political actor, or artist. Polish philoso­
pher Ewa Majewska has gone so far as to propose what she has termed “the 
avant-­garde of the weak,” a mode of working which “combines the feminist 
rejections of patriarchal visions of genius and creativity and emancipatory 
claims originating in the peripheries, with their demand for an expanded 
epistemology—­one including marginalized and colonized territories in art 
history and practice.”57 Feminist with a Drone was thus designed as a per­
formance of planetarity as a research problem, but it also was already a form 
of research designed as a performance. My goal with this was to perform the 
study of planetarity, and of the associated disciplines of art history, ethnog­
raphy, geography, urban studies, architecture, and design, with their colo­
nial histories and epistemological exclusions, differently. Even though the 
method and the tools used (a toy drone, a beach ball in the parallel project 
called Planetary Exhalation, figure 7.1) may seem naïve and childlike, their 
underlying ambition—­to challenge our ongoing planetary foolishness as 
well as our partial vision—­are very serious indeed.
Arguably, the photographic tradition has always had a “loser” track 
within its practices. Almost since the medium’s inception, this track has 
been embraced by those interested in strategies of countervisuality, as a 
challenge to the narrative of technical progress or to the imperative of 
verisimilitude. “Bad” images—­on the level of representation, resolution, 
or material imprint—­have been embraced as good by photographic avant-­
gardes, with abstraction as a negation of a clear image often underpinned 
by sociopolitical desires to offer a new vision of the world. Ernst van Alphen 
offers the notion of “failed images,” i.e., “images that fail to comply with 
the dominant notion of photography,”58 as a description of this alterna­
tive trajectory in photographic history. He lists blurred images, under-­ and 
overexposed shots, staged photographs, and archival practices as examples 
of the failure to comply with “the photographic approach”—­which he 
defines, pace German critic Siegfried Kracauer, as “the effort to utilize the 
inherent properties of the camera.”59 An odd normativity thus creeps into 
van Alphen’s quasi-­scientific taxonomy, with its rather rigid determination 
of the primacy of the normal, the successful, and the proper overshadowing 
the possibility that “failure” could have been the raison d’être of photogra­
phy’s development, rather than just an alternative enabled by a departure 

“Loser Images” for a Planetary Micro-­Vision	
187
from the “good” use of the photographic apparatus.60 Yet his book provides 
an interesting link between the early practices of photographers such as 
Hippolyte Bayard, Julia Margaret Cameron, Oscar Gustave Rejlander, Anna 
Atkins, Man Ray, and Anton Giulio Bragaglia, and the contemporary works 
of photographic artists such as Hiroshi Sugimoto, Thomas Ruff, Francesca 
Woodman, Awoiska van der Molen, and Fiona Tan. Differentiating them 
from accidental errors of photographic amateurs, he links all of these pho­
tographic “counter-­practices” with the Flusserian imperative to open up 
“the unconscious of the photographic image” and “bring the programme 
of the photographic image to light.”61 Their producers perform the role 
of what Flusser calls “envisioners,” i.e., “people who try to turn an auto­
matic apparatus against its own condition of being automatic.”62 Yet there 
is arguably something romantic about van Alphen’s reading of Flusser, with 
the circuit-­breaking and black-­box-­opening aspect of image practices left to 
individuals deemed “artists” across history.
The notion of “loser images” I am working with here partakes of the 
circuit-­breaking spirit envisaged by Flusser and embraced by van Alphen—­
but it also blurs the boundaries between human intentionality, machinic 
agency, and infrastructural embedding. To say this is not to deny human 
image makers any agency whatsoever. It is only to recognize, with Lyle 
Rexer, the possibility of seeing abstraction, the way many modern art­
ists have done, “as a way around the notion of individual production, a 
search for unconditioned forms of communication that, in some sense, do 
not depend on individual consciousness and its messy historical circum­
stances.”63 This determinedly modernist desire to rise above the everyday 
fabric of mass culture and the “mass image,”64 be it through formal experi­
mentation with the disembodied camera eye or image blur, could perhaps 
be coupled with another instinct: to reach beyond and outside of oneself, 
and embrace a more multiple network of productive agents and forces. This 
would perhaps be a more grounded, more responsible, and more ethical 
way of developing counterpractices.
The “loser images” figuration produced in the process follows in the 
footsteps of Hito Steyerl, whose kin notion of “poor images” has become 
an important trope in contemporary critical studies of the image.65 Stey­
erl used the term to describe lossy digital images traversing the networked 
personal computers of our globe. Their poverty referred to their low qual­
ity and low resolution—­as a result of their incessant replication on ever 

188	
Chapter 7
cheaper media—­but it also pointed to the wider condition of cultural dis­
juncture, where the impoverishment of many image producers and imaged 
subjects went hand in hand with the enrichment of those in control of the 
digital infrastructures. My “loser images” are precisely such poor images of 
the world: serving as counterpoints to the #amazingdroneposts of planet 
Earth, they are a testament to the poor quality of the camera and the lim­
ited skills of its operator. There is something not quite right with them 
as both representations and captures. The worldview they present is out 
of sync: wobbly, smeary, somehow degraded. They belong to the onto­
logical register of Amanda Lagerkvist’s “existential media,” that is, media 
driven by the fundamental insight “that there is a limit to life, to energy, to 
bodily and mental strength, to desire, to beauty, to youth, to intelligence, 
to achievement, to movement, to success, to resilience, to clout, to power, 
to energy, to communication.”66
Yet these “loser images” are not just mine: the concept is primarily 
meant to serve as a viewing, structuring, and archiving device, allowing us 
to develop a countervisuality to what is already there. In her article “Online 
Weak and Poor Images: On Contemporary Visual Politics,” Tereza Stejska­
lová has made an appeal to “make use of online images in a way that pre­
sents [a] challenge to the mass-­image, profit-­driven networked platform,” 
and to seek oppositional agency for images posted on social platforms.67 In 
this very spirit, I have mined, with the help of the deep learning similarity 
algorithm of the visual search engine Same Energy (which is like Google’s 
“search by image,” but more look-­ and mood-­based), millions of images 
from Reddit, Instagram, and Pinterest with a view to developing visual 
affinities with my own “failed images.”68 The grids obtained transcend both 
the modernist elegance of Bernd and Hilla Becher’s industrial typologies 
and the colorful seamlessness of the #amazingdroneposts Instagram flow, 
to inaugurate an open-­ended noisy archive from which a different picture 
of the planet can emerge (figure 7.5).
In the spirit of “the avant-­garde of the weak,” the project offers “a pos­
sibility to overcome [the] individualism of performance and spectatorship 
via a commonality of experiencing failure and weakness”69—­or at least to 
stage this failure and weakness as a shared experience. Today’s artist, as Stej­
skalová aptly observes, needs to understand “that she is not anyone special 
nor is she doing anything special but is, in principle, like any other social 
network user who makes manifest the (crisis of) emotions, relations and 

“Loser Images” for a Planetary Micro-­Vision	
189
labour which sustain life itself.”70 Picking up a baton from Steyerl, I am thus 
speaking here in defense of the poor image of the world: low-­resolution, widely 
accessible, pirated. In other words, I am speaking for what we might term, 
with a nod to Gary Hall, an ethical piracy. In Pirate Philosophy, Hall revisits 
the word’s origins in a Greek verb which meant to “make an attempt, try, 
test . . . endeavour, attack,”71 to refer to piratic practices in texts and images 
which go against the grain of traditional knowledge production, its classifi­
cation and distribution. Loser images are pirate images because they “tease 
[and] give trouble,”72 as per the word’s Greek etymology. Loser images also 
drop out of the competitive system of accolades, prizes, and totems. They 
Figure 7.5
Joanna Zylinska, Loser Images 2.0 (Same Energy), 2021.

190	
Chapter 7
drop out of individual authorship. Yet their marginal cultural status is not 
by itself a guarantee of progressivism: as recent years have aptly demon­
strated, the extreme right can meme very well indeed!
Loser images embrace their machinic heritage, but they also take on 
board the inevitable failures of human bodies and machinic infrastructures. 
As part of their weak feminist efficacy, they thus show up the dominant 
perception machine that we all inhabit as structurally and politically bro­
ken. Channeling the politics of Sarah Sharma’s “Manifesto for the Broken 
Machine,” another powerful feminist figuration whereby “feminists are 
rendered . . . the faulty aberration in a long line of otherwise efficient tech­
nologies that have been designed for caretaking and reciprocating love in a 
male-­dominated world,”73 loser images challenge the macho-­heroism of the 
drone eye and the GoPro Hero camera. Offering a fragile yet tender look, 
loser images differ from “ruin porn”: the aestheticization of loss, decay, 
and poverty which is part of the dominant Anthropocene visuality. They 
restage planetarity as a call for help, enacting the collective “exhaustion 
of humans, machines and the environment.”74 Loser images are therefore 
unproductive, because they work against the logic of planetary extractiv­
ism (the depletion of natural and human resources; planetary management 
via technological improvement). Eschewing the hipster retrovisuality of 
the “failed images that fail in their failing,”75 such as Lomography, they 
challenge the seemingly inevitable upgrade culture—­of machines and 
humans—­not just in an aesthetic gesture but also in an attempt to make a 
difference.
To speak in defense of the poor image of the world is to mobilize an 
ethical injunction to see the world better—­and to make better things in 
and with it. It is an injunction to look around and askew, to look obliquely, 
to work against the limitations of the image, and to know that pictures are 
always partial. There is something not quite right with them, but they are 
not wrong either. A post-­Anthropocene loser image flow: it tries to fail better 
every time, with every new arrangement of the grid.
A slightly better Anthropocene: or how to live in a media-­dirty world
My loser images inscribe themselves in the ecology of what I am calling in 
this book “eco-­eco-­punk.” In its alliterative ec(h)oing of the dual ecologi­
cal and economic crises, eco-­eco-­punk goes beyond the (whitewashed and 

“Loser Images” for a Planetary Micro-­Vision	
191
masculinist) singularity of the rouge punk hero-­savior. In the media ecol­
ogy of eco-­eco-­punk, the hero’s name is legion, and they may not even be 
just human. With this, eco-­eco-­punk enacts a “reaction to a world in which 
humanity must constantly be renegotiated.”76 As well as envisaging new 
ways of engaging with the environment while showing it as always already 
mediated, this mode of practice opens up a traditional cyberpunk ethos to 
the plurality of voices, sensibilities, and sensations. The concept of eco-­
eco-­punk encapsulates this very spirit of “more than one,” a community 
of confluences and contaminations that goes beyond the experience of a 
“disaffected loner from outside the cultural mainstream,”77 fighting totali­
tarian corporations with his wit and kit. Eco-­eco-­punk reverberates with 
the multiplicity of actors, human and nonhuman, who are at work in the 
system. The recognition of this plural and entangled ontology of our ecolo­
gies, which are always already media ecologies, is a first step toward outlin­
ing contours of an eco-­eco-­punk ethos which has progressive ramifications. 
This commitment to “more than one” can be found, for example, in media 
artist Nam June Paik’s early practice, as he later corroborated: “To take fame 
out of art, well that’s the most important thing. . . . To take fame out of the 
art-­world. That was the spirit of Fluxus.”78 In its first decade in particular, 
in the 1960s, the artists involved with Fluxus were attempting to move 
away from the idea of the art object and from the monadic trappings of 
singular recognition. Instead, they worked toward developing what could 
be described as an ecology of relations, premised on submerging their own 
individual egos.79 Embracing the nascent spirit of cybernetics that saw indi­
vidual entities as emerging only from relations, Fluxus also drew from the 
Zen tradition of understanding the world, as evidenced in both Paik’s and 
John Cage’s work. Yet Paik’s engagement with different types of systems, 
biological as well as technical—­as evident, for example, in his Family of 
Robot or TV Buddha video sculptures—­shows him reconciling seemingly 
contradictory personas in his work: that of a Zen master and that of an 
eco-­eco punk.
Eco-­eco-­punk recognizes not only the benefits of living with advanced 
technology, but also the fact that humans are originarily technical beings, 
that we have emerged and evolved with, and via, diverse objects and prac­
tices such as plows, fire, wheels, agriculture, cooking, and transportation. A 
mode of breaking out of the ec(h)o chamber of the conventional responses 
to the Anthropocene that remain rooted in affects such as “gloom and 

192	
Chapter 7
doom, . . . guilt, shame, didacticism, prescriptiveness, sentimentality, rev­
erence, seriousness, sincerity, earnestness [and] sanctimony,”80 eco-­eco-­
punk sees the world as always already “media-­dirty”: embroiled, entangled, 
enmeshed. Yet dirt is not positioned here as something to be overcome for 
a civilization to take place and hold together: it is rather seen as our civiliza­
tion’s constitutive element. Dirt is also a reminder of the remainder and a 
conduit of mediation. Eco-­eco-­punk thus becomes a proposal for those who 
recognize themselves, and the world around them, as always already media 
dirty. It is a mode of acting for those for whom ecology connects, via wires 
and wirelessly, to the media infrastructures that organize the world and that 
shape our position in the world. Last but not least, eco-­eco-­punk speaks 
to those who would rather be cyborgs than goddesses, and for whom art-­
making functions as an inevitable technical prosthesis for a human embed­
ded in the world—­and becoming with the world. Mobilizing a particular 
DIY-­media aesthetics, it “utilizes the dissonance of the ugly” to “monkey­
wrench” an imagistic repertoire, with a view to introducing “an aesthetic 
delay or suspension that makes its easy consumption by the viewer more 
difficult and more deliberate.”81 It is therefore more than an aesthetic: it 
becomes an ethical mode of intervening into the landscapes and architec­
tures of the post-­Anthropocene.

Conclusion: Future Sensing in the Metaverse
Figure 8.1
Joanna Zylinska, image automatically produced through the text-­to-­image generator 
known as DALL·E 2. In producing the image, the algorithm responded to the query, 
“What will our future look like?” Image obtained on first attempt. No modification, 
except for conversion to black and white. July 2022.

194	
Conclusion
This book opened with some reflections on the weirdness of 2021 as a cata­
lyst year for reimagining the future as part zombie apocalypse, part robot 
park. Images, especially photographically influenced images, are a key com­
ponent of the imaginarium of that future—­or, indeed, any future. Recogniz­
ing the role of photographs and their algorithmic correlates in video games, 
cinema, social media platforms, machine vision, and prediction technology, 
I have aimed throughout this volume to showcase the operations of the per­
ception machine we are currently inhabiting while going ever deeper into 
it—­from the environmental and the social, through the computational, all 
the way to the neural. I have also argued that we are increasingly seeing our­
selves being seen, tracked, and touched by an ever-­growing volume of cam­
eras, scanners, and sensors, while emerging as “us” precisely through this 
process of machinic perception. The machinic image apparatus therefore 
has a predictive function: it forecasts us into the future by means of images, 
while playing a certain version of this future before our eyes. Its genre is an 
after-­photographic hybrid: it is increasingly looking like an Instagram story 
intercut with a horror film, creepily reimagined by AI (figure 8.1).
As we have seen, the photographic medium itself has changed dramati­
cally in its encounter with other media technologies and infrastructures. We 
could perhaps go so far as to say that photography is now becoming a “sen­
sography,” a multisensory medium whose operative mode relies on sensors 
and various measuring and calculating instruments as much as it does on 
optical devices. Yet the book’s argument has not just focused on what has 
happened to the photographic medium, or even on what it means for us to 
live surrounded by image flows and machine eyes. I have also attempted to 
point to some possible openings within the operability and logic of the per­
ception machine by trying to identify moments when the programmability 
of its system fails—­and thus also, in another sense, gains something. These 
moments have involved individual and collective actions of shared human-­
machinic obstreperousness manifesting as systemic glitch, from feminist 
eco-­eco-­punk to the avant-­garde of the weak. Importantly, and following 
Vilém Flusser’s lead, this has always been a form of opening performed 
from within the machine—­rather than simply against it. “The perception 
machine” has thus served in this book as both a metaphor for a visual and 
cognitive enclosure and as a sociopolitical and affective opening.
Yet the postulation of the “perception machine” has been more than just 
an analytic gesture: I have also used to it convey, albeit implicitly, an ethical 

Future Sensing in the Metaverse	
195
injunction. This injunction is shaped by a complex set of responsibilities 
exerted not only by humans toward one another but also by nonhuman 
beings—­including planet Earth as our habitation partner and life source. 
Responding to the dynamic of visible and invisible images, and to their 
infrastructures across planetary scales, my hybrid method of working in 
this volume, combining philosophical enquiry and artistic research, has 
been adopted with a view to expanding our epistemological horizon as out­
lined by academic convention and human cognitive practice. With this, 
my goal has been to allow myself and others to see, sense, and say (more) 
things via a variety of modes and media. Yet it has been equally important 
for me to keep a check on the hubris that sometimes underpins theorists’ 
or artists’ pronouncements about our work and its purported impact and 
influence. In the vein of my earlier work on “minimal ethics,”1 my modest 
attempt to make a critical intervention in the world through a variety of 
media can perhaps be described as a “planetary praxis that attempts to make 
a small difference.” Imagining a slightly better future, while accounting for 
the imaging apparatus that can assist us in—­yet also at times impede—­this 
task, has been part of this attempt.
*
*
*
When 2021 was coming to a close and hope was emerging for the world 
to start coming out of the Covid-­19 pandemic, another form of enclo­
sure dawned on the horizon. In October 2021 Mark Zuckerberg excitedly 
announced that Facebook was to become unironically known as Meta, and 
that the company would invest billions of dollars into building a virtual 
reality platform (VR) to be known as a “metaverse.” The unstable and jaggy 
“after-­photographic” architecture of pictures and data flows, occasionally 
warping into image envelopes, was to become a full-­blown 360-­degree 
image sphere. The perception machine was to be both privatized and “per­
sonalized,” projecting (the fantasy of) many different worlds and many dif­
ferent futures for us all. Facebook had been investing in VR technology for 
some time already, having developed a successful Oculus headset which 
only made users feel a little bit nauseous. The Meta announcement sig­
naled a clear repositioning from a “rhetorically social” platform to an all-­
encompassing branded loop, one in which Neil Stephenson’s dystopia was 
to meet Dave Egger’s circle2 by forming a ring of virtual steel around our 
eyes, bodies, and brains. Zuckerberg’s metaverse promised to be a universal 

196	
Conclusion
perception machine, one in which we should be able to have business meet­
ings, go on vacation, and buy real and virtual goods without thinking twice 
about that old-­style Cartesian dualism. The future as photographed, graphi­
cally rendered, and stitched together into a seamless whole will thus turn 
our current Google World (where there still exists some perceptive and cog­
nitive distance between what you search for and the technical infrastruc­
ture that delivers it) into Goggle World. Indeed, Google itself is developing 
Project Iris by focusing on an AR-­enhancement headset, Apple is heavily 
investing in VR, while Microsoft has had some successes with its “mixed 
reality” headset called HoloLens, which uses sensors, optics, and hologra­
phy to seamlessly meld with its environment—­and which is aimed at areas 
as diverse as entertainment, medicine, and combat. It does not therefore 
matter that, by 2023, media commentators were already announcing the 
death of the metaverse as dreamt by Zuckerberg, with Meta having burned 
through huge sums of money without much to show for it. The  desire to 
enclose ever more spheres of our perception is not likely to subside. It will 
probably just undergo a rebranding—and a technical reboot. So this is what 
“photography after platform capitalism,” to paraphrase Ben Burbridge’s per­
ceptive analysis of the current image landscape,3 will look like—­although 
whether “we” will actually be able to see it, and whether a discrete human 
“we,” with its unique signal points such as consciousness and propriocep­
tion, will continue existing in this metaverse, is not quite clear as yet.
It is surely not accidental that the metaverse technology is being rolled 
out at a time when the horizon before our eyes is not looking all too rosy. 
Our planet is facing a number of problems that will only be exacerbated in 
the coming decades: from the climate crisis through to the automation of 
labor and other domains of our lives, coupled with the growing inequality 
and the accumulation of both capital and decision-­making powers by an 
ever-­smaller group of actors. Cyberwarfare, coupled with many localized 
on-­the-­ground conflicts and the renewed threat of nuclear annihilation, 
add another level of threat. This state of events, as argued in the opening 
pages, is turning most humans into unwitting existentialists. No matter 
what our social class, education, or geographical location, we increasingly 
need to understand and manage, in our minds and lives, various apocalyp­
tic scenarios concerning the possible destruction of life on our planet, both 
in its social and organic guises—­or even the destruction of the planet as 
such. This trend will no doubt continue. What is particularly concerning is 
that those apocalyptic scenarios are being rebranded by some as business 

Future Sensing in the Metaverse	
197
opportunities, with a secular form of solutionism, dressed up as techno-­age 
salvation, offered to us by a whole series of digital messiahs such as Elon 
Musk, Jeff Bezos, or (maybe slightly less evil but not any less narcissistic) 
Bill Gates. This mix of arrogance and capital, coupled with a hypermascu­
linist sociopathy, tends to be presented as a form of genius.
In an attempt to immerse myself in the future while continuing to hone 
my dubious gaming skills, I recently picked up an Oculus 2 (now rebranded 
as Meta 2) VR headset loaded with the National Geographic Explore VR app 
“to discover two of the most iconic locations on the planet”: Antarctica and 
Machu Picchu. Importantly, the app itself was not being marketed as a game 
but rather as an “experience.” What was of particular interest to me was that 
it contained a mission to capture photographs for the National Geographic 
magazine with a virtual camera, thus letting “the entire family discover the 
world without ever leaving home.”4 There were some in-­game tips about 
photography within the narrative, training the user in the art of framing 
and light capture. What surprised me, in turn, was that—­unlike in console 
games, where in-­game photography is promoted by the manufacturers as 
a sharable activity, with an easy way to download the captured images—­in 
its VR counterpart there was no easy way of accessing the photos, even in 
the game experience premised on photography. In what seemed like labo­
ratory testing for an NFT-­driven logic of digital exchange, the only way to 
engage with the captured photos was to display them in a picture gallery (in 
specially prepared frames) within the app, with no evident traces of those 
images in any of the storage spaces within the system.5 I therefore had to 
resort to manual screenshotting and heavy editing, including cropping and 
uprezzing, to take my images outside the VR “experience” (figure 8.2).
Being in the Explore world of Antarctica and Machu Picchu felt both very 
real and very photographic. The designers had used photogrammetry—­
the technique of taking measurements from 2D photographs to generate 
realistic-­looking 3D renderings of spatial objects—­to produce those visu­
als. The process involved capturing around 50,000 still images of the two 
locations, then stitching them together to generate a sense of an all-­round 
experience, while correcting data errors and adding individual small ele­
ments by hand. What was more ominous perhaps was that this may be the 
only way to see the icebergs in years to come—­not just because “the fam­
ily” will not want, or be able, to travel to them but also, of course, because 
global sea ice is irreversibly shrinking,6 while indigenous cultures are con­
tinuously exposed to cultural and material expropriation.

198	
Conclusion
Figure 8.2
Joanna Zylinska, screenshots from National Geographic Explore VR, Oculus 2, 2022.
Naturally, things do not have to be this way. After-­photographic VR 
does not just have to serve as an anesthetic replacement for the world 
gone by. Zuckerberg and his ilk do not own the concept of the metaverse 
and were not even the first to announce it. Other incarnations of it exist, 
where the perception machine enables some other forms of aesthetic and 
ethical experience, rather than serving primarily as a supermarket of data 
points rendered as photorealistic images, moving or still. Serpentine Galler­
ies’ polyvocal second volume of Future Art Ecosystems, titled Art x Metaverse 
and published several months before Facebook’s announcement, offers 

Future Sensing in the Metaverse	
199
guidance “for the construction of 21st-­century cultural infrastructure”7 as 
an alternative to the narrative about platform-­ and world-­building shaped 
by large corporations. Recognizing the planetary scale of the metaverse proj­
ect, the authors advocate for the construction of an open and accountable 
system that builds on the expertise of public interest organizations, while 
serving public interests.8 Importantly, it is not just in the domain of art 
that they seek spaces for metaverse experiences, pointing to “art-­adjacent” 
fields such as gaming, blockchain, film, video, and architecture. Photogra­
phy is notably absent from their list of references, yet my argument would 
be—­indeed, has been in this book—­that our current cultural and visual 
experience and technology are significantly shaped, or even haunted, by 
photography. While current visual technology, in its computational, gam­
ing, or metaversal guise, is intent on rendering the photographic legacy 
invisible, we absolutely must not forget (about) photography. Because what 
is at stake here is not really the future of a particular medium, be it as 
an art historical artifact or financial investment (a future trajectory about 
which, similarly to Andrew Dewdney in Forget Photography, I could not care 
less), but rather the future of all of us. We should thus do our best to try to 
grasp how the after-­photographic images have been stitched into a seam­
less Circa-­Vision 2.0.
Amanda Lagerkvist poignantly observes that “existential media . . . may 
furnish a foundation for us; they may also throw us. They may remind us 
of our frailty, our desires to (dis)connect, and our need to ethically contain 
the technologies we live and die by.”9 In spite of the serious or even per­
haps ominous tenor of its conclusion, this book’s study of the existential 
aspects not just of photography but also of after-­photographic temporality 
has also been intended as a celebration. The book celebrates both this after-­
photographic moment, when the exuberance of the imagistic life is creating 
new ways of seeing and experiencing ourselves and the world, and ourselves 
as media subjects coevolving with our machines. But The Perception Machine 
is also, of course, a warning. More importantly, it is intended as an invita­
tion to a shared conversation and practice, extended to designers, program­
mers, photographers, artists, writers, thinkers, activists, white hats, and all 
sorts of eco-­bio-­feminist-­queer-­trans punks, to experiment with, retune, or 
hack the perception machine. While we still can. While we can still see and 
feel its edges and limits. While we can still see and feel anything . . .


Notes
Preface
This short photo essay, introducing in a visual form the key themes of my book 
while aiming to enact what it means to live in a media-­dirty world, is made up of 
collages which combine my own and found images. Image credits and references:
Page ix: (1) Image from Ophthalmodouleia: Das ist Augendienst, the first Renais-
sance manuscript on ophthalmic disorders and eye surgery, published in 1583 
by German physician Georg Bartisch (1535–­1607), considered by many to be the 
“father of modern ophthalmology,” https://publicdomainreview.org/collection 
/images-from-johann-zahn-s-oculus-artificialis-1685. (2) Still from a promotional 
film titled To New Horizons from General Motors. The film was created to promote 
their “Highways and Horizons” exhibit at the 1939–­1940 New York World’s Fair. 
“The film presents a vision of the future, namely of 1960 seen through the eyes 
of those living in 1940, and imagines the world of tomorrow which the narra-
tor describes as ‘A greater world, a better world, a world which always will grow 
forward,’” https://publicdomainreview.org/collection/to-new-horizons-1940. (3)  
Collage from randomly selected photos from my cell phone, made with the 
Gandr app.
Page x: (1) Still from my Neuromatic video, featuring a reworking, through a GAN 
algorithm, of images of eyes and brains taken from the Wellcome Collection, and 
annotated by myself with a memelike slogan and typeface.
Page xi: (1) Back to the Future meme made for the 2020 pandemic—­and updated 
by myself for 2021. (2) No-­photography symbol found on the Internet. (3) Cur-
tain for the theater performance of the Back to the Future musical staged at the 
Adelphi Theatre in London in December 2021, photo by myself. (4) Collage from 
randomly selected photos from my cell phone, made with the Gandr app.
Page xii: (1) Johann Zahn, two images from Oculus artificialis teledioptricus sive 
telescopium (The long-­distance artificial eye, or telescope) (Herbipoli [Wurzburg]: 
Quirini Heyl, 1685–­1686), part I, https://publicdomainreview.org/collection/images 

202	
Notes
-from-johann-zahn-s-oculus-artificialis-1685. (2) Indoor dome security camera, 
found image. (3) Image of Abraham Lincoln as a matrix of pixel values, in 
Thomas Smits and Melvin Wevers, “The Visual Digital Turn: Using Neural Net-
works to Study Historical Images,” Digital Scholarship in the Humanities 35, no. 1 
(January 2020), 197. (4) Collage from randomly selected photos from my cell 
phone, made with the Gandr app.
Page xiii: (1) Collage from randomly selected photos from my cell phone, made with  
the Gandr app. (2) Quote from Vilém Flusser, Into the Universe of Technical Images, 
trans. Nancy Ann Roth (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2011), 127.
Page xiv: (1) Still from my Neuromatic video.
Page xv: (1) Fundus photo from my eye examination at Boots, London. (2) No-­
profile icon from mobile applications; found image.
Page xvi: (1) Stills from my Neuromatic video. (2) Meme from Know Your Meme 
online encyclopedia, submitted by My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic.
Page xvii: (1) Poem generated by an AI algorithm (seemingly trained on a poetry 
database), in response to a one-­word prompt offered by myself—­“perception.” 
Poem Pavilion, UK, designed by Es Devlin, Expo Dubai 2020, October 1, 2021–­
March 31, 2022. (2) Surgeon and assistant performing cataract surgery on a 
patient and various surgical instruments, tables XXXVIII–­XXXIX from A Medici-
nal Dictionary (1743–­1745), https://publicdomainreview.org/collection/denis 
-diderot-letter-on-the-blind.
Introduction
1.  As the Samsung website described it, “Designed with a unique contour-­cut camera 
to create a revolution in photography—­letting you capture cinematic 8K video 
and snap epic stills, all in one go” (https://www.samsung.com/uk/smartphones 
/galaxy-s21-ultra-5g/).
2.  Tomáš Dvořák and Jussi Parikka, eds., Photography Off the Scale: Technologies and 
Theories of the Mass Image (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2021).
3.  Lev Manovich, “Introduction: How to See One Billion Images,” in Cultural Ana-
lytics (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2020).
4.  Lev Manovich speaking at “Scales, Collections, and Quantities,” launch event for 
Parikka and Dvořák’s book, Zoom, March 25, 2021.
5.  Andrew Dewdney, Forget Photography (London: Goldsmiths Press, 2021).
6.  Ariel Goldberg and Yazan Khalili, “We Stopped Taking Photos,” e-­flux Journal, 
no. 115 (February 2021), https://www.e-flux.com/journal/115/374500/we-stopped 
-taking-photos/

Notes	
203
7.  Yanai Toister, Photography from the Turin Shroud to the Turing Machine (Bristol: 
Intellect, 2020), 53.
8.  Ibid.
9.  Benjamin H. Bratton, The Stack: On Software and Sovereignty (Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 2016).
10.  Dipesh Chakrabarty, The Climate of History in a Planetary Age (Chicago: Univer­
sity of Chicago Press, 2021), 78. Chakrabarty postulates that “the planet,” which he 
equates with the Earth Systems, should become a key category of the humanities, 
replacing the human-­centric “globe,” “world,” and “earth.”
11.  Amanda Lagerkvist, “Existential Media: Toward a Theorization of Digital 
Thrownness,” New Media and Society 19, no. 1 (2017): 96. Lagerkvist has developed 
this concept in her follow-­up book, Existential Media: A Media Theory of the Limit 
Situation (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2022). She suggests there that existential 
media “constitute the antinomies of the modern human situation, and they there­
fore require responsivity and responsibility. In our present datafied world, it is thus 
a truism to say that media matter. Yet this fact is now greatly magnified, as con­
temporary life finds itself perched on the limits” (3). Lagerkvist anchors her leading 
concept in the work of philosopher Karl Jaspers, but she also seeks resonances for 
its (unwitting) reverberations in the work of many media scholars, including John 
Durham Peters, Sarah Pink, and broadly conceived “communication theory.” In the 
book she goes so far as to postulate that “our media have always been existential—­a 
fact that has not been sufficiently recognized in media research” (64).
12.  See Joanna Zylinska, AI Art: Machine Visions and Warped Dreams (London: Open 
Humanities Press, 2020).
13.  Lagerkvist, “Existential Media,” 106.
14.  As Steve F. Anderson put it, “we are witnessing—­and participating actively 
in—­a remarkable transition in visual culture, the root of which lies in the evolving 
relationship between data and images.” Anderson, Technologies of Vision: The War 
between Data and Images (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2017), 4.
15.  Vilém Flusser, Into the Universe of Technical Images, trans. Nancy Ann Roth (Min­
neapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2011), 49.
16.  See Roland Barthes, Camera Lucida, trans. Richard Howard (New York: Hill and 
Wang, 1981); Pierre Bourdieu, Photography: A Middle-­Brow Art, trans. Shaun White­
side (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1990); and Susan Sontag, On Photography 
(New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1977).
17.  See Claude E. Shannon and Warren Weaver, The Mathematical Theory of Com­
munication (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1949).

204	
Notes
18.  Vilém Flusser’s renowned books on photography are Towards a Philosophy of 
Photography, trans. Anthony Mathews (London: Reaktion Books, 2000), and Into the 
Universe of Technical Images. I am referring here, in turn, to his Does Writing Have a 
Future?, trans. Nancy Ann Roth (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2011).
19.  Henri Bergson, Matter and Memory, trans. Nancy Margaret Paul and W. Scott 
Palmer (London: George Allen & Unwin, 1911), vii.
20.  Ibid., 3.
21.  Anderson, Technologies of Vision, 230.
22.  Lagerkvist, Existential Media, 3.
23.  Borrowing from Lewis Mumford’s description of a society as a “megamachine,” 
in Anti-­Oedipus Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari position both capitalism and soci­
ety as machines. They outline their nested model of machinic organization, whose 
underlying logic they understand to be cybernetic, in the following terms: “The 
social machine . . . has men for its parts, even if we view them with their machines, 
and integrate them, internalize them in an institutional model at every stage of 
action, transmission, and motricity. Hence the social machine fashions a memory 
without which there would be no synergy of man and his (technical) machines.” 
Deleuze and Guattari, Anti-­Oedipus, trans. Robert Hurley, Mark Seem, and Helen R. 
Lane (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1983), 141.
24.  In her introduction to the poignantly titled The Camera as Actor: Photography and 
the Embodiment of Technology (London: Routledge, 2021), Amy Cox Hall claims that 
“the photographer is increasingly intertwined with the machine” (16). She describes 
the multiplicity of early camera technologies, from Fox Talbot’s “mousetrap” 
cameras that popularized the negative process through to stereo cameras, imaging 
devices designed for use in outer space, and Harold Edgerton’s repatronic camera 
developed to photograph atomic bomb explosions as “machinic enterprises” (17). 
She also points out, importantly for my argument here, that “the digital is bringing 
our attention back to the machine” (19).
25.  As Goldberg and Khalili put it in “We Stopped Taking Photos,” “The role of 
images in consolidating power could be evidenced by the desire by some to stop 
the production or circulation of images: no photography at a checkpoint; arresting 
journalists; a right-­wing mob knocks over video cameras, then attacks a whole pile 
of equipment—­the crowd around them cheers, stomping on the idea of information 
that operates against their delusions.”
26.  Ibid.
27.  Paul Virilio, The Vision Machine, trans. Julie Rose (Bloomington: Indiana Univer­
sity Press, 1994), 22.
28.  Reflecting on the loss of this modernist delimitation, Dipesh Chakrabarty points 
out: “Facing the planetary . . . requires us to acknowledge that the communicative 

Notes	
205
setup within which humans saw themselves as naturally situated through categories 
like earth, world, and globe has now broken down, at least partially. Many traditions 
of thought, including some religious ones, may have considered the earth-­human 
relationship special; with regard to the planet, though, we are no more special than 
other forms of life” (The Climate of History in a Planetary Age, 98).
29.  Virilio, The Vision Machine, 59.
30.  Ibid., 36.
31.  Joanna Zylinska, Nonhuman Photography (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2017).
32.  I first proposed the concept of “eco-­eco-­punk” in Joanna Zylinska, “Eco-­eco-­
punk: Mediating the Anthropocene with Nam June Paik,” in Media Ecology: Revisiting 
TV Garden (Gyeonggi-­do: Nam June Paik Art Center, 2021) (published in English and 
Korean). Some of the theoretical material from that earlier essay has been reworked 
for this volume. I have been using the “eco-­eco crisis” formulation in my previ­
ous works, but the phrase was originally proposed by Tom Cohen in “Introduction: 
Murmurations—­‘Climate Change’ and the Defacement of Theory,” in Cohen, ed., 
Telemorphosis: Theory in the Era of Climate Change, vol. 1 (Ann Arbor: Open Humani­
ties Press, 2012), 13–­42.
33.  Presenting a gritty and dystopian vision of the future, cyberpunk is the original 
sci-­fi genre exploring high-­tech heroism in a society on the verge of civilizational 
collapse, spawning a number of subsequent variants. Steampunk offers a more 
romanticized response to the threat of civilizational collapse, foregrounding the 
retrofuturistic aesthetic inspired by the steam engine technology of the early indus­
trial era. Biopunk is a subgenre of cyberpunk that focuses on the biotechnological 
aspects of the societal transformation (including bioaugmentation and genetic 
engineering)—­and not so much on information technology. Greenpunk is a tech­
nophilic movement centered on individuals using, and being affected by the use 
of, DIY renewable resources, recycling, and repurposing. Ecopunk focuses on infra­
structure, production cycles, trade, and trying to make a living in an ecologically 
depleted world.
34.  James Patrick Kelly and John Kessel, “Introduction: Hacking Cyberpunk,” in 
Kelly and Kessel, eds., Rewired: The Post-­Cyberpunk Anthology (San Francisco: Tachyon 
Publications, 2007), xii.
35.  I first outlined these ideas around my use of artistic and other images in my 
theoretical work in “Nonhuman Photography: Andrew Dewdney Interviews Joanna 
Zylinska for unthinking.photography,” The Photographers’ Gallery, February 11, 
2019. I am grateful to Andrew for the provocation and prompt.
36.  Maurizio Lazzarato, “After Cinema,” in Peter Szendy with Emmanuel Alloa and 
Marta Ponsa, eds., The Supermarket of Images (Paris: Gallimard / Jeu de Paume, 2020), 155.
37.  Ibid., 150.

206	
Notes
Chapter 1
An earlier and shorter version of this chapter, prefaced by the opening of chapter 
2, came out in Joanna Zylinska with Goldsmiths Media, eds., The Future of Media 
(London: Goldsmiths Press, 2022).
1.  Quoted in Philip McCouat, “Early Influences of Photography on Art,” Journal of 
Art in Society (2012–­2015), http://www.artinsociety.com/pt-1-initial-impacts.html
2.  Naomi Rosenblum claims that “only in the three primary industrial powers—­
England, France, and the United States—­was this group able to sustain the invest­
ment of time and energy necessary to develop the medium technically and in terms 
of significant use.” Rosenblum, The World History of Photography, 3rd ed. (New York: 
Abbeville Press, 1997), 23.
3.  McCouat, “Early Influences of Photography on Art.”
4.  Geoffrey Batchen, Burning with Desire: The Conception of Photography (Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 1997), 93.
5.  Jonathan Crary, Techniques of the Observer: On Vision and Modernity in the Nine­
teenth Century (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1990), 10.
6.  See Batchen, Burning with Desire.
7.  Rebecca Solnit, River of Shadows: Eadweard Muybridge and the Technological Wild 
West (London: Penguin, 2004), 81.
8.  See Walter Benjamin, On Photography, trans. Esther Leslie (London: Reaktion 
Books, 2015); Susan Sontag, On Photography (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 
1977); Solnit, River of Shadows.
9.  See Ariella Aïsha Azoulay, Potential History: Unlearning Imperialism (London: 
Verso, 2019); Jonathan Beller, The Message Is Murder: Substrates of Computational 
Capital (London: Pluto Press, 2017); Andrew Dewdney, Forget Photography (London: 
Goldsmiths Press, 2021).
10.  Batchen, Burning with Desire, 207.
11.  Ibid., 208–­211.
12.  Ibid., 208.
13.  Roland Barthes, Camera Lucida, trans. Richard Howard (New York: Hill and 
Wang, 1981).
14.  See Joanna Zylinska, Nonhuman Photography (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2017), 
113.
15.  Batchen, Burning with Desire, 216.

Notes	
207
16.  Ibid., 214.
17.  Vilém Flusser, Into the Universe of Technical Images, trans. Nancy Ann Roth (Min­
neapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2011), 6.
18.  Ibid., 6.
19.  See Mark Poster, “An Introduction to Vilém Flusser’s Into the Universe of Techni­
cal Images and Does Writing Have a Future?,” in Flusser, Into the Universe of Technical 
Images, ix–­xxv.
20.  Flusser, Into the Universe of Technical Images, 60.
21.  Nancy Roth, “The Photographer’s Part,” Flusser Studies 10 (November 2011): 14.
22.  Ibid.
23.  Poster, “An Introduction,” xviii–­xix.
24.  Flusser, Into the Universe of Technical Images, 4.
25.  Vilém Flusser, Towards a Philosophy of Photography, trans. Anthony Mathews 
(London: Reaktion Books, 2000), 21.
26.  Ibid., 29.
27.  Ibid., 29–­30.
28.  Ibid., 30. Google AI researcher Blaise Aguera y Arcas has explained:
The flexibility of code allows us to make cameras that do much more than producing images 
that can pass for natural. Researchers like those at MIT Media Lab’s Camera Culture group 
have developed software-­enabled nontraditional cameras (many of which still use ordinary 
hardware) that can sense depth, see around corners, or see through skin; Abe Davis and col­
laborators have even developed a computational camera that can “see” sound, by decoding 
the tiny vibrations of houseplant leaves and potato chip bags. So, Flusser was perhaps even 
more right than he realized in asserting that cameras follow programs, and that their soft­
ware has progressively become more important than their hardware. Cameras are “thinking 
machines.”
Aguera y Arcas, “Art in the Age of Machine Intelligence,” AMI at Medium, Feb­
ruary 23, 2016, https://medium.com/artists-and-machine-intelligence/what-is-ami
-ccd936394a83#.9r2o4bgvq
29.  Kenneth Goldsmith, “It’s a Mistake to Mistake Content for Content,” Los Ange­
les Review of Books, June 14, 2015, https://lareviewofbooks.org/article/its-a-mistake
-to-mistake-content-for-content/
30.  Flusser, Towards a Philosophy of Photography, 49.
31.  Ibid., 49.
32.  Ibid., 50.

208	
Notes
33.  Elle Hunt, “Faking It: How Selfie Dysmorphia Is Driving People to Seek Surgery,” 
January 23, 2019, The Guardian, https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2019/jan
/23/faking-it-how-selfie-dysmorphia-is-driving-people-to-seek-surgery
34.  Daniel Rubinstein and Katrina Sluis, “A Life More Photographic: Mapping the 
Networked Image,” Photographies 1, no. 1 (March 2008): 17–­18.
35.  Flusser, Into the Universe of Technical Images, 132.
36.  Elizabeth A. Kessler, “Review of Joanna Zylinska’s Nonhuman Photography,” CAA 
Reviews, February 11, 2019, doi: 10.3202/caa.reviews.2019.18
37.  Flusser, Into the Universe of Technical Images, 17.
38.  Ibid., 19.
39.  Ibid., 38, 9.
40.  Ibid., 9.
41.  Ibid., 32.
42.  Ibid., 59.
43.  Ibid.
44.  Ibid., 60.
45.  Dayna Tortorici, “Infinite Scroll: Life under Instagram,” The Guardian, January 
31, 2020, https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2020/jan/31/infinite-scroll-life
-under-instagram
46.  Flusser, Into the Universe of Technical Images, 66.
47.  See ibid., 109.
48.  Flusser’s implicit use of the composting metaphor in his nature—­culture—­
waste—­nature cycle has affinities with Donna Haraway’s use of the term “compost.” 
Since 2016, “compost” has played an increasingly important role in her organicist 
and messy ontology of “humusities.” See Donna Haraway, Staying with the Trouble: 
Making Kin in the Chthulucene (Durham: Duke University Press, 2016), 32. She writes 
there: “Staying with the trouble requires making oddkin; we require each other in 
unexpected collaborations and combinations, in hot compost piles. We become-­
with each other or not at all” (4).
49.  Flusser, Into the Universe of Technical Images, 93.
50.  Ibid.
51.  Ibid.
52.  Ibid., 94.

Notes	
209
53.  Ibid., 127.
54.  Ibid., 45.
55.  Ibid., 44.
56.  Ibid., 28, emphasis added.
57.  Amanda Lagerkvist, “Existential Media: Toward a Theorization of Digital 
Thrownness,” New Media and Society 19, no. 1 (2017): 96.
58.  Ibid., 56.
59.  Ibid., 49.
60.  Vilém Flusser, Does Writing Have a Future?, trans. Nancy Ann Roth (Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 2011), 21.
61.  Ibid.
62.  Ibid., 120.
63.  David Trend, The End of Reading: From Gutenberg to Grand Theft Auto (Frankfurt 
am Main: Peter Lang, 2010), 19.
64.  Ibid., 28.
65.  Ibid., 28–­29.
66.  Maryanne Wolf, “Skim Reading Is the New Normal. The Effect on Society Is 
Profound,” The Guardian, August 25, 2018, https://www.theguardian.com/commen
tisfree/2018/aug/25/skim-reading-new-normal-maryanne-wolf. See also Maryanne 
Wolf, Reader Come Home: The Reading Brain in a Digital World (New York: Harper, 
2018).
67.  Jean M. Twenge, Gabrielle N. Martin, and Brian H. Spitzberg, “Trends in U.S. 
Adolescents’ Media Use, 1976–­2016: The Rise of Digital Media, the Decline of TV, 
and the (Near) Demise of Print,” Psychology of Popular Media Culture 8, no. 4 (2019): 
342.
68.  Ibid., 332.
69.  Maryanne Wolf, “There’s a Crisis of Reading among Generation Z,” Pacific 
Standard, April 29, 2019, https://psmag.com/ideas/theres-a-crisis-of-reading-among
-generation-z
70.  Wolf, “Skim Reading Is the New Normal.” See also Ziming Liu, “Digital Read­
ing,” Chinese Journal of Library and Information Science (English edition) (2012): 86.
71.  Wolf, “Skim Reading Is the New Normal.”
72.  See Trend, The End of Reading, 11.

210	
Notes
73.  Vilém Flusser, The Holy See: An Extract from The Last Judgment: Generations (Pitts­
burgh and New York: Flugschriften, 2019), 13.
74.  Ibid., 17.
75.  Trend, The End of Reading, 10.
76.  Ibid., 17.
77.  See Nicholas Carr, The Shallows: How the Internet Is Changing the Way We Think, 
Read and Remember (London: Atlantic Books, 2010)
78.  Only an excerpt from this work has been published in English so far. See Flusser, 
The Holy See.
79.  Flusser, The Holy See, 17–­18.
80.  Rodrigo Maltez-­Novaes, “Translator’s Introduction” to Flusser, The Holy See, 7–­9.
81.  Trend, The End of Reading, 2.
82.  Ibid., 10.
83.  Theodor W. Adorno, Aesthetic Theory (London: Athlone Press, 1997), 143.
84.  Harun Farocki, Eye/Machine I, II and III. DVD (Video Data Bank, 2001).
85.  Flusser, Into the Universe of Technical Images, 46–­47.
86.  See https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FV42ocdV6ZA
87.  Derrida in Bernard Stiegler and Jacques Derrida, Echographies of Television 
(London: Polity, 2002), 142–­143.
88.  Ibid., 143.
89.  Ibid., 142.
90.  Ibid.
91.  Flusser, Into the Universe of Technical Images, 28.
92.  Project used and quoted with the student’s permission.
93.  https://www.psychologytoday.com/gb/blog/what-shapes-film/201311/3
-reasons-why-were-drawn-faces-in-film; https://www.researchgate.net/publication/22
1513968_Are_people_drawn_to_faces_on_webpages
94.  Flusser, Towards a Philosophy of Photography, 32.
95.  Trevor Paglen, “Invisible Images (Your Pictures Are Looking at You),” New 
Inquiry, December 8, 2016, https://thenewinquiry.com/invisible-images-your-pictures
-are-looking-at-you/

Notes	
211
96.  Trend, The End of Reading, 134.
97.  “Interview with Marvin Heiferman,” included as part of the Seeing Through 
Photographs course, MoMA, available on Coursera (undated, accessed June 20, 
2020).
Chapter 2
1.  Victoria Fu in Behzad Farazollahi, Bjarne Bare, and Christian Tunge with Susanne 
Østby, eds., Why Photography (Milan: Skira, 2020), 77.
2.  In DL Cade, “Photography as We Know Is Changing, and It’s Your Job to 
Change with It,” Petapixel, November 8, 2019, https://petapixel.com/2019/11/08
/photography-as-we-know-is-changing-and-its-your-job-to-change-with-it/?mc_cid
=947c856268&mc_eid=5bb11290a7.
3.  Ibid.
4.  Ibid.
5.  Trevor Paglen, “Artist’s Notes” for the exhibition A Study of Invisible Images, Sep­
tember 8–­October 21, 2017, Metro Pictures, New York. There are clear resonances 
between Paglen’s aesthetico-­political philosophy and Virilio’s earlier argument 
developed in The Vision Machine (trans. Julie Rose, Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press, 1994), especially Virilio’s recognition that the perception of the environment 
is now being shared “between the animate (the living subject) and the inanimate 
(the object, the seeing machine)” (59–­60). Virilio’s concept of “seeing machines,” 
and his idea that “sightless vision” (62) is at the heart of the vision machine, have 
been formative for Paglen’s project.
6.  Paglen did four postings for the Fotomuseum Winterthur blog under the overall 
title “Is Photography Over?” This quote comes from posting 2, “Seeing Machines,” 
which develops ideas raised in the first posting (“Is Photography Over?”), March 13, 
2014, https://www.fotomuseum.ch/en/explore/still-searching/articles/26978_seeing
_machines
7.  Félix Nadar, When I Was a Photographer, trans. Eduardo Cadava and Liana The­
odoratou (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2015), 3.
8.  Refik Anadol, Archive Dreaming, 2017, https://refikanadol.com/works/archive
-dreaming/
9.  See Daniel Rubinstein and Katrina Sluis, “A Life More Photographic: Mapping the 
Networked Image,” Photographies 1, no. 1 (March 2008): 9–­28.
10.  Anthony McCosker and Rowan Wilken, Automating Vision: The Social Impact of 
the New Camera Consciousness (London: Routledge, 2020).

212	
Notes
11.  Ibid., 3, emphasis in the original.
12.  Ibid.
13.  Ibid., 4.
14.  Joanna Zylinska, Nonhuman Photography (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2017).
15.  In Life after New Media: Mediation as a Vital Process (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
2012), Sarah Kember and I have proposed the concept of mediation as “a key trope 
for understanding and articulating our being in, and becoming with, the technological 
world, our emergence and ways of intraacting with it, as well as the acts and processes of 
temporarily stabilizing the world into media, agents, relations, and networks” (xv, empha­
sis in the original).
16.  See Martin Hand, Ubiquitous Photography (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2012).
17.  See Sarah Kember, “Ambient Intelligent Photography,” in Martin Lister, ed., 
The Photographic Image in Digital Culture, 2nd ed. (Abingdon, UK: Routledge, 2013), 
56–­76.
18.  Matthew Cobb, The Idea of the Brain: The Past and Future of Neuroscience (London: 
Profile Books, 2020), Kindle edition.
19.  Ibid.
20.  Ibid.
21.  In Teodora Cosman, “The Metaphors of Photography and the Metaphors of 
Memory—­Artistic Reflections on an Album of Family Photographs,” Philobiblon 17, 
no. 1 (2012): 268–­291.
22.  Ibid., 274.
23.  Rosalind Krauss states that “every photograph is the result of a physical imprint 
transferred by light reflections onto a sensitive surface. The photograph is thus a 
type of icon, or visual likeness, which bears an indexical relationship to its object. Its 
separation from true icons is felt through the absoluteness of this physical genesis, 
one that seems to short-­circuit or disallow those processes of schematization or sym­
bolic intervention that operate within the graphic representations of most paint­
ings.” Krauss, “Notes on the Index: Seventies Art in America,” October 3 (1977): 75.
24.  Adam Harvey, “On Computer Vision,” Umbau, no. 1: “Political Bodies” (2021), 
Karlsruhe University of Arts and Design (HfG), https://umbau.hfg-karlsruhe.de
/posts/on-computer-vision.
25.  Cobb, The Idea of the Brain, emphasis added.
26.  Marvin Heiferman, “Introduction,” in Heiferman, ed., Photography Changes 
Everything (New York: Aperture/Smithsonian, 2012), 16

Notes	
213
27.  Ibid., 20.
28.  See Vilém Flusser, Towards a Philosophy of Photography, trans. Anthony Mathews 
(London: Reaktion Books, 2000).
29.  Vilém Flusser, Does Writing Have a Future?, trans. Nancy Ann Roth (Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 2011), 7.
30.  Ibid.
31.  Gerhard Richter, Afterness: Figures of Following in Modern Thought and Aesthetics 
(New York: Columbia University Press, 2011), 15.
32.  Hubertus von Amelunxen, “Photography after Photography: The Terror of the 
Body in Digital Space,” in von Amelunxen et al., eds, Photography after Photography: 
Memory and Representation in the Digital Age, trans. Pauline Cumbers (Munich: G+B 
Arts, 1996), 119.
33.  Richter, Afterness, 23.
34.  See the catalog published on the occasion of the “postphotography” exhibition 
From Here On, presented at Arts Santa Monica in Barcelona, Spain, and then at Ren­
contres d’Arles in 2013: Joan Fontcuberta et al., From Here On: PostPhotography in the 
Age of Internet and the Mobile Phone (Barcelona: RM Verlag, 2013).
35.  Liz Wells, “The Limits of Critical Thought about Post-­photography,” in Wells, 
ed., Photography: A Critical Introduction, 2nd ed. (London: Routledge, 2000), 343.
36.  Fred Ritchin, After Photography (New York: W. W. Norton, 2009), 183.
37.  See Camila Moreiras, “Joan Fontcuberta: Post-­photography and the Spectral 
Image of Saturation,” Journal of Spanish Cultural Studies 18, no. 1 (2017): 58.
38.  Joan Fontcuberta, The Post-Photographic Condition (Montreal: Le mois de la photo 
à Montréal, 2015), 6.
39.  Moreiras, “Joan Fontcuberta,” 57.
40.  Ibid.
41.  See Robert Shore, Post-­Photography: The Artist with a Camera (London: Laurence 
King, 2014).
42.  My formulation also differs from the term “softimage” offered, very much in 
a post-­photographic vein, by Ingrid Hoelzl and Rémi Marie in their book of that 
name, whereby “the image is not only part of a programme, but it contains its own 
‘operation code’: It is a programme in itself.” While I value, and concur with, many 
of Hoelzl and Marie’s analytical insights about the current state of the digital image 
and its operative agency, my own goal is to examine the force of photographic acts 
and actions upon us and the world (the latter partly being formed by us through 

214	
Notes
photographic images), rather than the agential objecthood of the digital image 
within the computational system of which it is part (i.e., the image become soft­
ware). In Ingrid Hoelzl and Rémi Marie, Softimage: Towards a New Theory of the Digi­
tal Image (Bristol, UK: Intellect, 2015), 132.
43.  Cobb, The Idea of the Brain.
44.  William J. Mitchell, The Reconfigured Eye: Visual Truth in the Post-­Photographic Era 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992), 3.
45.  Ibid., 6–­7.
46.  Ibid., 18.
47.  The phrase is a transposition of John Cage’s response, offered in Milan in 1959, 
to someone enquiring about whether Cage’s Fontana Mix was still be to considered 
music: “You must not call it music, if this expression hurts you.” See the website of 
the You Must Not Call It Photography If This Expression Hurts You project: http://
youmustnotcallit.photography/index.html
48.  Andrew Dewdney, Forget Photography (London: Goldsmiths Press, 2021), 3.
49.  Ibid., 28.
50.  Ariella Aïsha Azoulay, Potential History: Unlearning Imperialism (London: Verso, 
2019); Jonathan Beller, The World Computer: Derivative Conditions of Racial Capitalism 
(Durham: Duke University Press, 2021); Tina Campt, Listening to Images (Durham: 
Duke University Press, 2017); Mark Sealy Decolonising the Camera: Photography in 
Racial Time (London: Lawrence & Wishart, 2019).
51.  Dewdney, Forget Photography, 189.
52.  Ibid., 196.
53.  Ibid., 189.
54.  Ibid., 13.
55.  Harvey, “On Computer Vision.”
56.  Ibid.
57.  David Campany interviewed by Duncan Wooldridge, “Tomorrow’s Headlines 
Are Today’s Fish and Chip Papers: Some Thoughts on ‘Response-­ability,’” in Ben 
Burbridge and Annebella Pollen, eds., Photography Reframed: New Visions in Contem­
porary Photographic Culture, 2019 edition (London: Bloomsbury Visual Arts, 2019), 
32.
58.  See Vilém Flusser, Into the Universe of Technical Images, trans. Nancy Ann Roth 
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2011).

Notes	
215
59.  Trevor Paglen, “Is Photography Over?,” posting on a blog for Fotomuseum 
Winterthur, March 3, 2014, https://www.fotomuseum.ch/en/explore/still-searching
/articles/26977_is_photography_over
Chapter 3
An earlier and much shorter version of this chapter, together with the accompany­
ing images, was first published as an electronic artbook: Joanna Zylinska, Perception 
at the End of the World, or How Not to Play Video Games (Pittsburgh and New York: 
Flugschriften, 2020).
1.  The Last of Us, one of the most highly rated and best-­selling games of all time, 
was created by developers Naught Dog for the game console PlayStation 3 in 2013. 
It was remastered for PlayStation 4 in 2014 and subsequently became known as The 
Last of Us Remastered. This is the version of the game I played, but for the sake of 
simplicity, I will be referring to The Last of Us from now on. In 2020, in the middle 
of the Covid-­19 pandemic, Naught Dog released a sequel, The Last of Us Part II. A TV 
series based on the game premiered on HBO in 2023.
2.  Jonathan Crary, Suspensions of Perception: Attention, Spectacle, and Modern Culture 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999), 3.
3.  Jonathan Crary, Techniques of the Observer: On Vision and Modernity in the Nine­
teenth Century (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1990), 5.
4.  Crary, Suspensions of Perception, 3.
5.  Norman Bryson, “The Gaze in the Expanded Field,” in Hal Foster, ed., Vision and 
Visuality (Seattle: Bay Press, 1988), 107.
6.  With this, my argument differs from the one outlined by Winfried Gerling, for 
whom “The practices of the screenshot and photography in computer games must 
be differentiated by use and function. If the screenshot is more the spontaneous 
capture or documentation of a temporary status of the computer for various goals 
such as retaining the settings in a program, a glitch (disturbance), or a constellation 
on a website, then photography in the computer is more a photographic activity. Its 
goal is to retain a specific theme: a situation or a scene.” Gerling, “Photography in 
the Digital,” Photographies 11, no. 2–­3 (September 2, 2018): 157. Gerling’s article is 
fascinating in its tracing of the legacy of the game screenshot back to earlier screen 
capture techniques in medical and technical photography, but it seems less convinc­
ing in imposing such a strict caesura between setting-­capture and image-­capture, 
without really taking cognizance of the rich array of artistic practices that playfully 
veer between screenshotting, in-­game photography—­and, indeed, the taking of 
actual photographs of a screen with a camera. The shared kinesthetic aspect of all 
three, on the level of both the character and the player, is significant for my argu­
ment here, even if it manifests itself differently in each case.

216	
Notes
7.  Matteo Bittanti, “The Art of Screenshoot-­ing: Joshua Taylor, Videogame Photog­
rapher,” in Mister Bit—­Wired IT, December 24, 2011; http://blog.wired.it/misterbit
/2011/12/24/the-art-of-screenshoot-ing-joshua-taylor-videogame-photographer.html
8.  Cindy Poremba, “Point and Shoot: Remediating Photography in Gamespace,” 
Games and Culture 2, no. 1 (2007): 50.
9.  See Seth Giddings, “Drawing with Light: Simulated Photography in Videogames,” 
in Martin Lister, ed., The Photographic Image in Digital Culture, 2nd ed. (Abingdon, 
UK: Routledge, 2013), 46.
10.  This is the explanation of Damian Martin’s technique as provided by the games 
website Kotaku: “I use a DLP projector connected up to a console or PC and a projec­
tion screen. . . . I then photograph the game as it’s projected on the screen using two 
different 35mm cameras and a very high ISO black and white film stock. The reason 
for this is that photographing a game from a screen would mean the image is broken 
down into RGB pixels creating a ‘screendoor’ effect across the image making it obvi­
ously digital. The interaction of the soft DLP image and the heavy grain of the 3200 
ISO film stock I use is what creates the strange reality of the images—­our minds 
automatically fill in the detail that the grain suggests, making the image feel more 
real than it does in the game.” Rich Stanton, “These Photographs Make Video Game 
Worlds Look Real,” Kotaku, March 22, 2018, https://www.kotaku.co.uk/2018/03/22
/these-photographs-make-video-game-worlds-look-real
11.  Wasim Ahmad, “It May Be Art, but In-­Game Images Aren’t ‘Photography’,” 
Fstoppers, March 24, 2017, https://fstoppers.com/originals/it-may-be-art-game-images
-arent-photography-170382
12.  Matteo Bittanti, “Interview: Gareth Damian Martin: The Aesthetics of Analogue 
Game Photography,” GameScenes, February 4, 2018, https://www.gamescenes.org
/2018/04/interview-gareth-damian-martin-the-aesthetics-of-analogue-game-photo
graphy.html
13.  It was “Shooting Virtual Cities: In-­Game Photography Workshop,” held on July 
7, 2018. I am grateful to Gareth Damian Martin for the inspiration the workshop 
provided me with—­and for bearing with me when I didn’t know how to hold a 
game controller properly.
14.  See Vilém Flusser, Into the Universe of Technical Images, trans. Nancy Ann Roth 
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2011), 6.
15.  Rune Klevjer, “Enter the Avatar: The Phenomenology of Prosthetic Telepresence 
in Computer Games,” in Hallvard Fossheim, Tarjei Mandt Larsen, and John Richard 
Sageng, eds., The Philosophy of Computer Games (London: Springer, 2012), 17–­38. 
Accessed as a preprint on the author’s academia.edu page. I am grateful to Agata 
Zarzycka for pointing me toward Klevjer’s work.

Notes	
217
16.  For example, in the foreword to David Marr’s Vision, which is key a reference 
point in the computer vision field, Shimon Ullman writes: “The book describes a 
general framework proposed by Marr for studying and understanding visual per­
ception” (xvii). In David Marr, Vision: A Computational Investigation into the Human 
Representation and Processing of Visual Information (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1990).
17.  Marr, Vision, 3.
18.  Ibid.
19.  Beau Lotto, Deviate: The Science of Seeing Differently (London: Weidenfeld & 
Nicolson, 2017), Kindle edition.
20.  The concept of “naturecultures,” signaling a mutually constitutive relationship 
in the world’s ecologies between what Western epistemology has designated as sepa­
rate domains of “nature” and “culture,” arguably organizes the whole of Haraway’s 
oeuvre, but one text where it features particularly prominently is The Companion 
Species Manifesto: Dogs, People, and Significant Otherness (Chicago: Prickly Paradigm 
Press, 2003).
21.  Hal Foster, preface to Foster, Vision and Visuality, ix.
22.  Ibid., ix.
23.  Bryson, “The Gaze in the Expanded Field,” 107, emphasis added.
24.  Foster, preface to Vision and Visuality, x.
25.  Martin Jay, “Scopic Regimes of Modernity,” in Foster, Vision and Visuality, 7.
26.  Crary, Techniques of the Observer, 14.
27.  He writes: “‘Light, color, movement,’ ‘the movement of light,’ ‘the quick projec­
tion of light impulses,’ ‘light and time,’ ‘a time form’—­such phrases reflect the spe­
cific interests of individual filmmakers but taken together they specify film’s ‘true 
essence’ in terms appropriate to the avant-­garde’s ‘mystique of purity’: ‘light-­space-­
time continuity in the synthesis of motion,’ in Moholy-­Nagy’s neat formulation.” 
William C. Wees, Light Moving in Time: Studies in the Visual Aesthetics of Avant-­Garde 
Film (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992), 12–­13.
28.  Ibid., 13.
29.  Kjetil Rødje, “Lens-­Sense: On Seeing a World as Sensed by a Camera,” Screening 
the Past, no. 43 (April 2018), http://www.screeningthepast.com/2018/02/lens-sense
-on-seeing-a-world-as-sensed-by-a-camera/#_ednref11
30.  Henri Bergson, Creative Evolution, trans. Arthur Mitchell (New York: Modern 
Library, 1944), 362.

218	
Notes
31.  Alexander Sekatskiy has argued that Bergson’s snapshots should really be inter­
preted as film stills, a shift which allows for a subsequent redemption of photogra­
phy as a more dynamic and “lively” medium, rather than a mere deadly record of 
sliced life. Sarah Kember and I made this point in Life after New Media: Mediation as 
a Vital Process (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2012), 78–­79. See also Alexander Sekat­
skiy, “The Photographic Argument of Philosophy,” Philosophy of Photography 1, no. 
1 (2010): 83.
32.  See Gilles Deleuze, Cinema 1: The Movement-­Image, trans. Hugh Tomlinson and 
Barbara Habberjam (London: Athlone Press, 1986).
33.  Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, What Is Philosophy?, trans. Hugh Tomlinson 
and Graham Burchell (New York: Columbia University Press, 1994), 208.
34.  Ibid.
35.  Kember and Zylinska, Life after New Media, 75.
36.  See Patricia Pisters, The Neuro-­Image: A Deleuzian Filmphilosophy of Digital Screen 
Culture (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2012).
37.  Rebekah Modrak observes that several early theories of vision, developed, 
among others, by Plato and Euclid, already hinted at a more dynamic process, posit­
ing that light particles “were projected out of the eye onto objects,” with the eye 
actively creating the image. This latter model is indeed much closer to our current 
understanding of perception and vision. Rebekah Modrak with Bill Anthes, Refram­
ing Photography: Theory and Practice (London: Routledge, 2011), 4.
38.  Joseph Anderson and Barbara Fisher, “The Myth of Persistence of Vision,” Jour­
nal of the University Film Association 30, no. 4 (Fall 1978): 3.
39.  Ibid., 6, emphasis added.
40.  Ibid.
41.  Max Wertheimer, “Experimentelle Studien über das Sehen von Bewegung,” 
Zeitschrift für Psychologie 61 (1912): 161–­265.
42.  Cited in Joseph Anderson and Barbara Anderson (née Fisher), “The Myth of 
Persistence of Vision Revisited,” Journal of Film and Video 45, no. 1 (Spring 1993): 7.
43.  This is a phenomenon described as beta movement. It is a cognate phenomenon 
to “phi motion,” a concept introduced by Wertheimer in his 1912 paper. Anderson 
and Anderson offer their own term for what became known as beta movement, 
arguing as follows: “Since we know that the individual pictures of a motion picture 
are not really moving, and that our perception of motion is therefore an illusion, 
and since we now know that the effect has nothing to do with persistence of vision 
or phi movement, we suggest that henceforth the phenomenon of motion in the 
motion picture be called by the name used in the literature of perception: short-­range 

Notes	
219
apparent motion” (“The Myth of Persistence of Vision Revisited,” 10). They also 
indicate that human perception cannot distinguish between apparent short-­range 
motion and actual motion in the natural world. “To the visual system, the motion 
in a motion picture is real motion,” they claim (10).
44.  Marc Sommer and Robert Wurtz, “Influence of the Thalamus on Spatial Visual 
Processing in Frontal Cortex,” Nature 444 (2006): 374–­377.
45.  Ibid., 374.
46.  Julia Layton, “How Does the Brain Create an Uninterrupted View of the 
World?,” HowStuffWorks.com, November 15, 2006, https://science.howstuffworks
.com/life/steady-view.htm
47.  Ibid.
48.  Ibid. Photographer Brian Dilg has challenged any ongoing attempts to see 
human vision as photographic. Drawing on the latest research in the neurophysi­
ology of perception, Dilg has argued that, unlike a camera, we do not look at a 
scene once but rather look around it, with our eyes jumping in rapid movements 
known as saccades. We thus “have a dynamic view, not a camera’s fixed perspec­
tive.” What’s more, our gaze is “constantly changing, and we never stop updating 
our view. Cameras, on the other hand, ‘look’ once and record the entire scene in a 
single, static frame.” Our vision “is actually a collage of quick snapshots,” as what 
we see is a fluid, constantly updated stream of images. This process is extremely 
selective, focusing on certain sections of the image stream, comparing them with 
past ones to make memories—­and envisaging some future ones to make predictions. 
As a result of this frantic activity, “we miss a great deal of what’s happening in the 
present.” For Dilg, photography’s greatest strength lies in being able to see differ­
ently from us—­and “to show us what we’ve missed.” Brian Dilg, Why You Like This 
Photo: The Science of Perception (London: Octopus, 2018), Kindle edition.
49.  “The Brain Is the Screen: An Interview with Gilles Deleuze,” in The Brain Is the 
Screen: Deleuze and the Philosophy of Cinema, ed. Gregory Flaxman (Minneapolis: Uni­
versity of Minnesota Press, 2000), 366.
50.  Lotto, Deviate.
51.  Anderson and Fisher, “The Myth of Persistence of Vision,” 7.
52.  Richard L. Gregory, Eye and Brain: The Psychology of Seeing (Princeton, NJ: Prince­
ton University Press, 1997), 5th ed., 79.
53.  David J. Chalmers, “Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness,” Journal of Con­
sciousness Studies 2 (1995): 200–­219.
54.  As argued by Joseph and Barbara Anderson (“The Myth of Persistence of Vision 
Revisited,” 7),

220	
Notes
Theories such as Werthiemer’s [sic] which emphasize a central fusion process were reflected in 
early film literature, but with little understanding of the physiological mechanisms involved. 
Frederick A. Talbot, for example, in Moving Pictures: How They Are Made and Worked offered 
an account of this central fusion variation of the persistence of vision theme. The cinema­
tographer, according to Talbot, takes advantage of a “deficiency” of the human eye: “This 
wonderful organ of ours has a defect which is known as ‘visual persistence’.” (Talbot 3) Tal­
bot provided one of the most colorful explanations of this so-­called defect: “The eye is in 
itself a wonderful camera. . . . The picture is photographed in the eye and transmitted from 
that point to the brain. . . . When it reaches the brain, a length of time is required to bring 
about its construction, for the brain is something like the photographic plate, and the picture 
requires developing. In this respect the brain is somewhat sluggish, for when it has formu­
lated the picture imprinted upon the eye, it will retain the picture even after the reality has 
disappeared from sight.” (Talbot 4)
According to Talbot, then, each two contiguous images blend or fuse together in the 
brain, allowing for the perception of smooth, continuous movement. He further compares 
the brain to a then-­contemporary apparatus for slide projection, known as a “dissolving lan­
tern,” by means of which one view is “dissolved” into another. (Talbot 5)
55.  As Gregory puts it, “Perhaps we won’t fully understand the visual brain before 
we design and make a machine with sophisticated vision” (Gregory, Eye and Brain, 
79).
56.  Two contrasting accounts of visual perception are predominant in the cogni­
tive sciences: the theory of inferential perception, premised on cognitivist thinking, 
whereby the subject establishes a relationship between the environment and the 
percept by means of a rational inference, i.e., interpretation, and the theory of direct 
perception, one that involves a more direct grasping of the relationship between the 
percept and the information provided by the stimulus. This second theory is the 
one known as “ecology of perception.” Even though I am explicitly identifying with 
the latter, I do not think the two need to be positioned as strict opposites. In other 
words, I do not think ecological perception needs to remain completely free from 
cognitive input for my overall position and argument to stand.
57.  Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Theory of Colours, trans. Charles Easdake (1840; 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1970), x.
58.  Jonathan Crary, “Modernizing Vision,” in Foster, Vision and Visuality, 34.
59.  We should make a sideways nod here to Maurice Merleau-­Ponty’s phenomenol­
ogy of perception and the perceiving body, although we also need to be mindful 
of Bryson’s critique of what he sees as corporeal simplification in Merleau-­Ponty, 
with the body positioned as the center from which one looks out onto the world, 
and not a dynamic agent co-­constituted by the living matter around it. See Bryson, 
“The Gaze in the Expanded Field,” 120. However, the metaphysical intimations of 
Merleau-­Ponty’s phenomenology of perception, and of his model of the human, are 
the principal reason for why my journey through theories of perception and vision 
bypasses his work here—­even though I do of course acknowledge Merleau-­Ponty’s 

Notes	
221
enormous influence on disciplines such as philosophy of mind, cognitive science, 
and environmental philosophy.
60.  Alva Noë, Action in Perception (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004); Shaun Gal­
lagher, How the Body Shapes the Mind (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005).
61.  See James J. Gibson, The Perception of the Visual World (Boston: Houghton Mif­
flin, 1950).
62.  James J. Gibson, The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception (Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin, 1979), 187. This paragraph and the next one have been reworked from my 
book Nonhuman Photography (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2017).
63.  Anderson and Anderson, “The Myth of Persistence of Vision Revisited,” 11.
64.  Modrak, Reframing Photography, 10.
65.  Ibid., 11.
66.  Ibid.
67.  Lyle Rexer, The Critical Eye: Fifteen Pictures to Understand Photography (Bristol, UK: 
Intellect, 2019), 59.
68.  “Anthropocene, Capitalocene, Chthulucene: Donna Haraway in Conversation 
with Martha Kenney,” in Heather Davis and Etienne Turpin, eds., Art in the Anthro­
pocene: Encounters among Aesthetics, Politics, Environments and Epistemologies (London: 
Open Humanities Press, 2015), 258.
69.  Crary, Techniques of the Observer, 53.
70.  Klevjer, “Enter the Avatar,” 32.
71.  See Donald D. Hoffman, “Conscious Realism and the Mind-­Body Problem,” 
Mind and Matter 6, no. 1 (2008): 87–­121.
72.  See Hanneke Grootenboer, Treasuring the Gaze: Intimate Vision in Late Eighteenth-­
Century Eye Miniatures (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012), 82–­88.
73.  Klevjer, “Enter the Avatar,” 3.
74.  Rodchenko and Moholy-­Nagy were involved in photographic experiments 
aimed at displacing human vision by adopting the viewpoint of bird or insect. 
These radical new viewpoints amounted to what Moholy-­Nagy described as a “New 
Vision,” which the new society in the then nascent modern era required, according 
to his revolutionary intimations. I have read Seers’s Human Camera project, in which 
she takes photos with her mouth, as enacting the inherently photographic nature of 
life itself (see Zylinska, Nonhuman Photography, 75–­77).
75.  Giddings, “Drawing with Light,” 42.

222	
Notes
76.  Rexer, The Critical Eye, 59.
77.  Nanna Verhoeff, Mobile Screens: The Visual Regime of Navigation (Amsterdam: 
Amsterdam University Press, 2012), 15.
78.  Ibid., 13.
79.  I am grateful to Sebastian Möring for making this point to me.
80.  Poremba, “Point and Shoot,” 2.
81.  As Lotto argues, “The world exists. It’s just that we don’t see it. We do not expe­
rience the world as it is because our brain didn’t evolve to do so.” He then adds that 
“our brains developed not to see reality but just to help us survive the constant flood 
of intermixed stimuli that would be impossible to process as discrete pieces of infor­
mation, if it were even possible for them to appear that way.” For Lotto, perception 
is not an end in itself: he argues that we perceive so that we can move. Also, (eye) 
movement, “combined with a constant search for difference,” is the fundamental 
condition of sight (Lotto, Deviate, introduction, Kindle edition).
82.  See chapter 3, “Photography after the Human,” in Zylinska, Nonhuman 
Photography.
83.  See Joanna Zylinska, The End of Man: A Feminist Counterapocalypse (Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 2018).
84.  Dom Phillips, “Brazil Using Coronavirus to Cover Up Assaults on Amazon, Warn 
Activists,” The Guardian, May 6, 2020, https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020
/may/06/brazil-using-coronavirus-to-cover-up-assaults-on-amazon-warn-activists
85.  Dominic Rushe and Michael Sainato, “Amazon Posts $75bn First-­Quarter Reve­
nues but Expects to Spend $4bn in Covid-­19 Costs,” The Guardian, April 30, 2020, 
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2020/apr/30/amazon-revenues-jeff-bezos
-coronavirus-pandemic
Chapter 4
An earlier version of this chapter was published as “Beyond Machine Vision: How 
to Build a Non-­Trivial Perception Machine,” Transformations, no. 36 (2022), special 
issue on “Artificial Creativity” edited by Bo Reimer and Bojana Romnic.
1.  Andreas Broeckmann, “Optical Calculus,” paper presented at the conference 
“Images Beyond Control,” FAMU, Prague, November 6, 2020 (online), 1: 1–­7. What 
I am doing here may seem to go against Broeckman’s call to use the concept of 
the machine “only sparingly,” and not to extend it beyond specific apparatuses to 
larger symbolic and social systems. Yet I believe there is an affinity between our 
positions when it comes to the rationale for what we do. Our respective projects 

Notes	
223
are both underpinned by an ethical injunction to make knowledge that matters, 
knowledge that remains anchored in specific affordances—­and that can tell us 
something meaningful about us and the world. For me, however, it is through a 
radical conceptual expansion of the concept of the machine, with its nested layers 
of meanings, that we may approach this goal (rather than through its sparing and 
overcautious use). This is because machinic operations are not just metaphorical: 
there is a materiality to their different layers and functions. See also Andreas Broeck­
mann, “The Machine as Artist as Myth,” Arts 8, no. 25 (2019): 1–­10; doi: 10.3390/
arts8010025. I am grateful to Andreas for our discussion about these issues, and for 
sharing his texts with me.
2.  See Leonardo Impett, “The Image-­Theories behind Computer Vision,” paper 
presented at #DHNord2020 “The Measurement of Images,” MESHS, updated on 
November 2020, 10, https://www.meshs.fr/page/the_image-theory_behind_computer
_vision. There are some affinities between my approach in this chapter and Impett’s 
statement that the algorithms of computer vision have an ideology, and, more 
importantly, a philosophy—­even if both this ideology and this philosophy tend to 
remain latent in the dominant scholarship on computer vision.
3.  David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel, “Receptive Fields of Single Neurons in the Cat’s 
Striate Cortex,” Journal of Physiology 148 (1959): 589.
4.  Ibid., 575.
5.  See David Marr, Vision: A Computational Investigation into the Human Representa­
tion and Processing of Visual Information (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1982), 4.
6.  Shimon Ullman, foreword to Marr, Vision, xvii.
7.  The sense of perception as information processing which does not necessarily 
lead to the creation of subjective experience is adopted in the opening pages of 
Brian Rogers’s Perception: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2017, Kindle edition), with perception being defined as a set of processes that “allow 
us to extract information from the patterns of energy that impinge on our sense 
organs.” Rogers prefers this definition to the everyday understanding of perception 
as “our experience of seeing, hearing, touching, tasting, and smelling objects and 
individuals in the surrounding world.”
8.  It was the second most popular category in its research database featuring work 
on AI, with over 800 papers on September 23, 2020:
Research in machine perception tackles the hard problems of understanding images, sounds, 
music and video. In recent years, our computers have become much better at such tasks, 
enabling a variety of new applications such as: content-­based search in Google Photos and 
Image Search, natural handwriting interfaces for Android, optical character recognition for 
Google Drive documents, and recommendation systems that understand music and You­
Tube videos. Our approach is driven by algorithms that benefit from processing very large, 

224	
Notes
partially-­labeled datasets using parallel computing clusters. A good example is our recent 
work on object recognition using a novel deep convolutional neural network architecture 
known as Inception that achieves state-­of-­the-­art results on academic benchmarks and allows 
users to easily search through their large collection of Google Photos. The ability to mine 
meaningful information from multimedia is broadly applied throughout Google. (https://
research.google/pubs/?area=machine-perception)
9.  See ibid.
10.  J. Y. Lettvin et al., “What the Frog’s Eye Tells the Frog’s Brain,” Proceedings of the 
Institute of Radio Engineers 47 (1959): 1950.
11.  Algorithmia, “Introduction to Computer Vision: What It Is and How It Works,” 
Algorithmia blog, April 2, 2018, https://algorithmia.com/blog/introduction-to
-computer-vision
12.  David Chalmers, “What Is Conceptual Engineering and What Should It Be?,” 
Inquiry: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Philosophy, published online September 16, 
2020, https://doi.org/10.1080/0020174X.2020.1817141, page number refers to the 
preprint from the author’s website, 2.
13.  Heinz von Foerster, “Perception of the Future and the Future of Perception,” 
Instructional Science 1, no. 1 (1972): 31.
14.  Ibid., 33.
15.  Ibid., 40.
16.  Ibid.
17.  Ibid., 41.
18.  The concept of “incomputables,” derived from the work of mathematician 
Gregory Chaitin, is premised on the following understanding of computation 
outlined by Luciana Parisi in “The Alien Subject of AI,” Subjectivity 12 (2019): 27–­
48: “Computation involves a performative compression of random quantities (or 
incomputables) entering the general infrastructure of algorithmic patterning. It 
is here that machine learning becomes the subjective aim of artificial reasoning 
insofar as the computational manner of generating learning comes to constitute 
the machine’s structure of being as denaturalising the very image of automated 
thought” (30). Chaitin’s framework of “experimental axiomatics,” explains Parisi, 
involves “the ingression of contingency . . . in causality,” whereby “randomness or 
incomputables, infinite varieties of infinities, become the causal condition of com­
putational processing” (40).
19.  See Vilém Flusser, Towards a Philosophy of Photography, trans. Anthony Mathews 
(London: Reaktion Books, 2000), 26–­30, 82–­92; Vilém Flusser, Into the Universe of 
Technical Images, trans. Nancy Ann Roth (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press, 2011), 19.

Notes	
225
20.  Von Foerster, “Perception of the Future and the Future of Perception,” 43.
21.  See Jonathan Crary, Suspensions of Perception: Attention, Spectacle, and Modern 
Culture (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999).
22.  Adrian Daub, What Tech Calls Thinking: An Inquiry into the Intellectual Bedrock of 
Silicon Valley (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2020, Kindle edition).
23.  Ibid.
24.  Daub is quite blunt in his assessment: “The tech industry we know today is what 
happens when certain received notions meet with a massive amount of cash with 
nowhere else to go” (ibid.).
25.  Ibid.
26.  Parisi, “The Alien Subject of AI,” 32.
27.  Ibid., 30.
28.  Parisi writes, “Chaitin explains that computation is defined by the tendencies 
of information to increase in size. Like the infinite counting of numbers, there is no 
end to information. Deductive reasoning therefore cannot sufficiently describe what 
happens in the logical thinking of machines. From this standpoint, one can suggest 
that incomputables—­as infinite varieties of infinities (or randomness)—­delineate 
the trajectory of computation from and towards infinity. This already implies that 
computation as the current mode of instrumentalisation of reasoning does not 
directly correspond to the material-­historical constitution of media or the practical 
knowledge” (ibid., 48).
29.  Ibid., 38.
30.  In making this strategic distinction, I am mindful of Humberto Maturana 
and Francisco J. Varela’s intimation developed in Autopoiesis and Cognition: The 
Realization of the Living (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1972) that perception is already a form 
of cognition—­although cognition for them stands for more than pure thought. 
Indeed, they conceptualize both perception and cognition as distinctly biological 
phenomena.
31.  George N. Reeke Jr. and Gerald M. Edelman, “Real Brains and Artificial Intel­
ligence,” Daedalus 117, no. 1 (Winter 1988): 143.
32.  The concept of “neural networks” was introduced by two researchers at the Uni­
versity of Chicago, Warren McCullough and Walter Pitts, in 1944. Neural networks 
kept falling in and out of favor in AI research through the last century but came into 
their own with the recent developments in machine learning.
33.  Reeke and Edelman, “Real Brains and Artificial Intelligence,” 145.
34.  Ibid., 153.

226	
Notes
35.  See Donald D. Hoffman, The Case against Reality: How Evolution Hid the Truth 
from Our Eyes (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2019).
36.  As they argue, “It is clear that the notion of information preexisting in the 
world must be rejected. The essential requirement for learning, logic, and the other 
mental functions that are the usual subjects of AI research is the prior ability to 
categorize objects and events based on sensory signals reaching the brain. The 
variety of sensory experiences is both vast and unique for each individual. The cat­
egories themselves are not present in the environment but must be constructed by 
each individual according to what is adaptive for its species and its own particular 
circumstances. The a priori specification of rules for categorization, applicable to 
all individuals and all contexts, is precluded by the complexity, variability, and 
unpredictability of the macroscopic world. To make matters worse, the categories 
constructed by an organism cannot be fixed but must constantly change in response 
to new experiences and new realities in its part of the environment. The only way 
categories constructed in this individualistic manner can be validated is by constant 
coupling back to the world through behavior” (Reeke and Edelman, “Real Brains 
and Artificial Intelligence,” 155).
37.  “Phenotypically, Darwin III has three sensory modalities: vision, touch, and 
kinesthesia (or ‘joint sense’). It may have one or two eyes with lateral and verti­
cal orbital motions, and one or more arms with multiple joints, each controlled by 
motor neurons in specified repertoires.” Gerald M. Edelman and George N. Reeke 
Jr., “Is It Possible to Construct a Perception Machine?,” Proceedings of the American 
Philosophical Society 134, no. 1 (March 1990): 48.
38.  Ibid., 36.
39.  Ibid., 37. As they put it, “categorization can be seen in essence as an adaptive 
mapping of the external world onto impoverished representations of itself within a 
perceptual system” (ibid.).
40.  Ibid.
41.  Reeke and Edelman, “Real Brains and Artificial Intelligence,” 157.
42.  Tim Ingold, “Beyond Biology and Culture: The Meaning of Evolution in a Rela­
tional World,” Social Anthropology 12, no. 2 (2004), 209–­221.
43.  Ibid., 213.
44.  Ibid., 216.
45.  Ingold explains: “And if you ask how biological and cultural factors are distin­
guished, they will say that the former are genetically transmitted, whereas the latter 
are transmitted by such non-­genetic means as imitation or social learning. Thus, 
despite their initial denials, biology is tied to genes after all, as indeed the logic of 
neo-­Darwinism requires. The implied essentialisation of biology as a constant of 

Notes	
227
human being, and of culture as its variable and interactive complement, is not just 
clumsily imprecise. It is the single major stumbling block that up to now has pre­
vented us from moving towards an understanding of our human selves, and of our 
place in the living world, that does not endlessly recycle the polarities, paradoxes 
and prejudices of western thought” (ibid., 217).
46.  As Claudio Celis Bueno and María Jesús Schultz Abarca point put, drawing on 
Bernard Stiegler’s philosophy, “The ‘bracketing off’ of inherited prejudice to per­
ceive reality ‘in itself’ is an illusion that conceals the fact that technology perma­
nently modifies our internal senses of perception and memory. Naked human vision 
too is always already machine vision. Human vision, like machinic vision, depends 
on the surfaces of inscription that function as an external faculty of imagination.” 
Celis Bueno and Schultz Abarca, “Memo Akten’s Learning to See: From Machine 
Vision to the Machinic Unconscious,” AI and Society (2020), https://doi.org/10.1007
/s00146-020-01071-2
47.  Alex Hern, “Google’s Solution to Accidental Algorithmic Racism: Ban Gorillas,” 
The Guardian, January 12, 2018, https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2018/jan
/12/google-racism-ban-gorilla-black-people
48.  In Tom Simonite, “The Best Algorithms Struggle to Recognize Black Faces 
Equally,” Wired, July 22, 2019, https://www.wired.com/story/best-algorithms-struggle
-recognize-black-faces-equally/
49.  Safia Noble, Algorithms of Oppression: How Search Engines Reinforce Racism (New 
York: New York University Press, 2018, Kindle edition).
50.  Ibid.
51.  “Layers of Abstraction: A Pixel at the Heart of Identity,” https://shinjitoya.com
/space-art-tech/
52.  @Dantley on Twitter, September 19, 2020.
53.  Noble, Algorithms of Oppression.
54.  In Mitra Azar, Geoff Cox, and Leonardo Impett, “Introduction: Ways of Machine 
Seeing,” AI and Society 36 (2021): 1093–­1104, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-020
-01124-6. The special issue of the journal AI and Society titled “Ways of Machine 
Seeing,” edited by Azar, Cox, and Impett, explores the problems of (and with) 
machine vision through a multidisciplinary framework. Departing from John Ber­
ger’s proposition, made in his canonical Ways of Seeing (London: British Broadcast­
ing Corporation and Penguin Books, 1972), 10, that “every image embodies a way of 
seeing,” it explores how “machines, and, in particular, computational technologies, 
change the way we see the world.”
55.  Maturana and Varela themselves did not posit such a shift, but it was subse­
quently accomplished, building on their ideas, by sociologist Niklas Luhmann.

228	
Notes
56.  Maturana and Varela, Autopoiesis and Cognition, 136.
57.  Ingold, “Beyond Biology and Culture,” 218.
58.  Ibid.
59.  John Armitage, “Accelerated Aesthetics: Paul Virilio’s The Vision Machine,” 
Angelaki 2, no. 3 (1997): 203.
60.  John Johnston, “Machinic Vision,” Critical Inquiry 26 (Autumn 1999): 32.
61.  Shoshana Zuboff, The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a Human Future 
at the New Frontier of Power (New York: Public Affairs, 2019, Kindle edition).
62.  Ibid.
63.  Leif Wetherby, “Data and the Task of the Humanities,” in Creative AI Lab, ed., 
001: Aesthetics of New AI (London: Serpentine Galleries, October 2020), 47.
64.  Ibid.
65.  Pharmacology, a concept derived from Jacques Derrida (“The Pharmakon” in 
Dissemination, trans. Barbara Johnson [Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981], 
95–­119), became operative in many of Stiegler’s later works, which were devoted to 
the analysis of the conditions of computational capitalism—­and of the socioeco­
nomic misery this particular political formation had brought about. Importantly, 
Stiegler’s work was not just diagnostic: he was committed to finding openings 
within, and passages through, the desperation and nihilism enacted by the auto­
matic decision-­making and the disindividuation of the human under those politi­
cal and economic conditions. As he put it, “From such a perspective the question 
of innovation must be taken very seriously—­and not just treated as an ideological 
discourse based on the storytelling of marketing. Innovation clearly has a real eco­
nomic function: it evidently constitutes a production of negentropy. But what has 
now become obvious is that this negentropy produced in the short term generates 
far higher entropy in the long term. The whole question of organology and its phar­
macology in the neganthropic field resides in the fact that the pharmakon can be 
toxic and curative only to the extent (and in the excess) that it is both entropic and 
negentropic.” Bernard Stiegler, Automatic Society, vol. 1: The Future of Work, trans. 
Daniel Ross (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2017),100.
66.  Ibid., 9, 7.
67.  Ariella Aïsha Azoulay, Potential History: Unlearning Imperialism (London: Verso, 
2019), 4.
68.  Ibid., 5.
69.  Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri, Empire (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 2000), xii.

Notes	
229
70.  https://recognitionmachine.vandal.ist/
71.  Azoulay, Potential History, 8.
72.  I am grateful to Mark Amerika for this poetic-­philosophical formulation, offered 
to me as a question following my talk at the “Artificial Creativity” conference, 
Malmö University, Sweden, November 19–­20, 2020 (online).
Chapter 5
1.  Deleuze develops the argument about the force of cinema and its ability to 
shift our perception in many of his works, including Cinema 1 (London: Athlone 
Press, 1986) and Francis Bacon: The Logic of Sensation (London: Continuum, 2003). 
John Johnston points out that it is in the latter book, which engages with Bacon’s 
paintings, that Deleuze highlights photography’s inability to enact the deterritori­
alization of vision. The French philosopher sees the photographic medium as too 
banal and too static. Photography’s flatness (and hence weakness) is presented by 
Deleuze—­and, in his reading, by Bacon—­not only in relation to cinema but also 
to painting: “photographs operate by either resemblance or convention, analogy 
or code; in either case, they are not a means of seeing but are themselves what 
we see, and we end up seeing only them. . . . More to the point, unlike painting, 
photographs cannot produce an intensity of sensation or, rather, cannot produce 
differences within sensation.” John Johnston, “Machinic Vision,” Critical Inquiry 26 
(Autumn 1999): 34. My reading of photography is very different from Deleuze’s. 
I have previously discussed it in chapter 3 of Life after New Media: Mediation as a 
Vital Process, co-­written with Sarah Kember (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2012). This 
chapter does not therefore spend time on countering Deleuze’s position, but rather 
delves straight into the photography-­cinema nexus while seeing the relationship 
between the two media as less oppositional—­and as enabling a more hybrid novel 
practice to emerge from this relationship.
2.  The “radical opposition” between film understood in terms of the “being there” 
of the thing, and photography understood in terms of it “having been there,” was 
proposed by Roland Barthes in “The Rhetoric of the Image,” in Image, Music, Text, 
trans. Stephen Heath (New York: Hill and Wang, 1977), 45.
3.  Maurizio Lazzarato, “After Cinema,” in Peter Szendy with Emmanuel Alloa and 
Marta Ponsa, eds., The Supermarket of Images (Paris: Gallimard / Jeu de Paume, 2020), 
150.
4.  David Green and Joanna Lowry, foreword to Green and Lowry, eds., Stillness 
and Time: Photography and the Moving Image (Brighton: Photoworks; Photoforum, 
2006), 7.
5.  This proposition was made by Gusztáv Hámos, Katja Pratschke, and Thomas Tode 
in “Viva Photofilm: Moving / Non-­moving,” trans. Finbarr Morrin, text written for 

230	
Notes
the program of PhotoFilm!, a screening event held on March 5–­13, 2010, at Tate 
Modern, London, and organized by Tate Modern, the Goethe-­Institut London, and 
the CCW Graduate School, University of the Arts, London.
6.  Ingrid Hoelzl and Rémi Marie, Softimage: Towards a New Theory of the Digital Image 
(Bristol, UK: Intellect, 2015), 23.
7.  Ibid., 12.
8.  Ibid., 17.
9.  Lazzarato, “After Cinema,” 150.
10.  Ibid., 150–­151.
11.  Ibid., 151.
12.  Ibid., 152.
13.  David Green, “Marking Time: Photography, Film and Temporalities of the 
Image,” in Green and Lowry, Stillness and Time, 20.
14.  See Lazzarato, “After Cinema,” 155.
15.  Griselda Pollock, “Dreaming the Face, Screening the Death: Reflections for Jean-­
Louis Schefer on La Jetée,” Journal of Visual Culture 4, no. 3 (2005): 291.
16.  See Joanna Zylinska, The End of Man: A Feminist Counterapocalypse (Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 2018); and the accompanying photofilm, Exit Man 
(2018).
17.  Hámos, Pratschke, and Tode, “Viva Photofilm.”
18.  Janet Harbord, Chris Marker: La Jetée (London: Afterall Books, 2009), 2.
19.  Nadine Boljkovac, “Book Review: La Jetée,” Studies in European Cinema, published 
online May 24, 2019, doi: 10.1080/17411548.2019.1621720.
20.  Chris Darke, La Jetée (London: BFI and Palgrave, 2016), 84.
21.  Boljkovac, “Book Review: La Jetée.”
22.  Harbord, Chris Marker, 4.
23.  Ibid.
24.  https://bengrosser.com/projects/computers-watching-movies/
25.  Hámos, Pratschke, and Tode, “Viva Photofilm.”
26.  Sy Taffel’s essay “Automating Creativity,” which includes a documentary made 
by the author (using automated software to produce the film’s soundtrack), explores 

Notes	
231
ways in which “Digital automation is . . . central to enabling forms of contemporary 
creative media production.” Taffel also explores how the progressing use of automa­
tion in creative practice can be “a potential source of concern surrounding precarity 
and the future of employment in the creative industries” (in Screenworks, September 
2019, https://doi.org/10.37186/swrks/10.1/2).
27.  Chris Marker, “Interview,” Film Comment 39, no. 4 (2003): 40, special edition 
“Around the World with Chris Marker: Part II Time Regained.”
28.  See Joanna Zylinska, Nonhuman Photography (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2017), 
51, 63, 126.
29.  Steven Humblet, “Interview with Marc De Blieck,” in Humblet, ed., Off Camera 
(Amsterdam: Roma Publications, 2021), ix.
30.  Steven Humblet, editorial text, in Humblet, Off Camera, xiv.
31.  We can borrow here, among others, from the work of Rosi Braidotti. In her 
book The Posthuman (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2013), Braidotti outlines an agenda 
for “post-­human Humanities,” a discipline premised on a radical reinvestment 
in critical thought and a creative engagement with technology. She writes: “The 
image of thought implied in the post-­anthropocentric definition of the Human . . . 
stresses radical relationality, that is to say non-­unitary identities and multiple alle­
giances. As this shift occurs in a globalized and conflict-­ridden world, it opens up 
new challenges in terms of both post-­secular and post-­nationalist perspectives. . . . 
Against the prophets of doom, I want to argue that technologically mediated post-­
anthropocentrism can enlist the resources of bio-­genetic codes, as well as telecom­
munication, new media and information technologies, to the task of renewing the 
Humanities. Posthuman subjectivity reshapes the identity of humanistic practices, 
by stressing heteronomy and multi-­faceted relationality, instead of autonomy and 
self-­referential disciplinary purity” (144–­145).
32.  For an expansion of this idea see Donna Haraway, “Situated Knowledges: The 
Science Question in Feminism and the Privilege of Partial Perspective,” Feminist 
Studies 14, no. 3 (Autumn 1998): 575–­599.
33.  The optic flow refers to the apparent flow of objects experienced by the observer 
in their visual field as they move through space. See James J. Gibson, The Perception 
of the Visual World (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1950).
34.  See Zylinska, Nonhuman Photography, 42–­43, 53, 191; and Kember and Zylinska, 
Life after New Media, 75.
35.  https://thispersondoesnotexist.com/
36.  See chapter 7 in Joanna Zylinska, AI Art: Machine Visions and Warped Dreams 
(London: Open Humanities Press, 2020).

232	
Notes
37.  All these are names of deep-­learning generative models using neural networks, 
which are algorithms partially modeled on the neural architecture of the human 
or animal brain. A GAN (generative adversarial network) is a generative technology 
using two neural networks positioned as opponents, with one generating convinc­
ing outputs, the other assessing them. GPT (generative pre-­trained transformer) is a 
natural language model that generates human-­like text using statistical probability. 
Originally applied to text, GPTs are now also embedded into more complex models 
that generate images. Diffusion is a two-­stage model that introduces noise into the 
dataset and then attempts to recover the original data by attempting to reverse the 
diffusion process. CLIP (contrastive language-­image pre-­training) is a model trained 
on image-­text pairs which is then used to categorize images and predict text that 
relates to them. The latest models that generate images (as well as generating public 
interest and anxiety) usually combine several models as part of their architecture.
38.  Young cited in A. Ploin, R. Eynon, I. Hjorth, and M. A. Osborne, AI and the Arts: 
How Machine Learning Is Changing Artistic Work, report from the Creative Algorith­
mic Intelligence Research Project (Oxford: Oxford Internet Institute, University of 
Oxford, 2022), 24.
39.  Ibid., 37.
40.  As I explained in AI Art, “the term parergon, referring to a supplementary remark, 
additional material or ornament whose function is merely to embellish the main 
work (i.e., the ergon), has been immortalised in art theory by Jacques Derrida. In his 
reading of Kant’s Critique of Judgement included in The Truth in Painting, Derrida takes 
issue with the idea of a self-­contained nature of the work of art, conveyed by the 
belief in its supposed intrinsic value and beauty, by literally bringing the work’s fram­
ing into the picture. ‘A parergon comes against, beside, and in addition to the ergon, 
the work done [fait], the fact [le fait], the work, but it does not fall to one side, it 
touches and cooperates within the operation, from a certain outside. Neither simply 
outside nor simply inside’ (Derrida 1987, 54). The supposedly secondary function of 
the framing, be it literal or conceptual, is argued to be actually foundational to the 
artwork’s existence and recognition as an artwork, as its very existence delineates 
and preserves the artwork’s identity. For Derrida, a work of art is therefore never self-­
contained, it always depends on its parerga—­frames, ornaments, commentaries—­if it 
is to be recognised in its proclaimed uniqueness and singularity” (95).
41.  The sound files came from the following sources: https://freesound.org/people
/miastodzwiekow/sounds/127244/ (miastodzwiekow); https://freesound.org/people
/PhonosUPF/sounds/487266/ (PhonosUPF); https://freesound.org/people/ITheReal
GooglekatClaire/sounds/496602/ (ITheRealGooglekatClaire).
42.  Gene Kogan and lkkchung, “Neural Synthesis, Feature Visualization, and Deep­
Dream Notes,” GitHub (2017), https://github.com/ml4a/ml4a-guides/blob/master
/notebooks/neural-synth.ipynb.

Notes	
233
43.  In 2015 Google released a computer vision program called DeepDream, which I 
discuss further in chapter 6. Designed by Alexander Mordvintsev and using a convo­
lutional neural network, it operated by attempting to identify and enhance patterns 
in images, leading to the algorithm “noticing” human eyes or puppies in any regular 
image—­because these were the things the program most often “saw” in its training 
phase.
44.  Safia Noble, Algorithms of Oppression: How Search Engines Reinforce Racism (New 
York: New York University Press, 2018); Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru, “Gender 
Shades: Intersectional Accuracy Disparities in Commercial Gender Classification,” 
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research 81 (2018): 1–­15, http://proceedings.mlr
.press/v81/buolamwini18a/buolamwini18a.pdf; 
Virginia 
Eubanks, 
Automating 
Inequality: How High-­Tech Tools Profile, Police, and Punish the Poor (New York: Mac­
millan Press, 2018); Catherine D’Ignazio and Lauren F. Klein, Data Feminism (Cam­
bridge, MA: MIT Press, 2020).
45.  Pollock, “Dreaming the Face,” 287.
46.  Ibid., 294.
47.  Ibid., 301.
48.  Ibid.
49.  Ibid., 304.
50.  Ibid., 302.
51.  Robert Azzarrello cited in Nicole Seymour, Bad Environmentalism: Irony and Irrev­
erence in the Ecological Age (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2018), 25.
52.  Seymour, Bad Environmentalism, 25.
53.  See ibid., 3.
54.  Ibid., 23.
55.  Astounded by GPT-­3’s results, on April 15, 2022, Steven Johnson published a 
gushing piece in the New York Times Magazine titled “A.I. Is Mastering Language. 
Should We Trust What It Says?” It led to linguist Emily Bender penning a rather 
sobering response, “On NYT Magazine on AI: Resist the Urge to Be Impressed,” 
Medium, April 18, 2022, in which she challenged the claim, made by both impres­
sionable journalists and the company behind GPT-­3, Open AI, that the model had 
“mastered” language. She explained that this supposed “mastery” amounted to 
GPT-­3 having “been programmed to produce strings of text that humans who speak 
that language find coherent”—­itself not an insignificant achievement, but one that 
was far from showing signs of what we humans understand as intelligence. Bender 
also warns us against conflating the model’s apparent textual coherence with under­
standing and trustworthiness. “Just because that answer was correct doesn’t mean 

234	
Notes
the next one will be,” she points out, while signaling that it is our mental labor of 
endowing the model with human traits and establishing an intersubjective relation­
ship with it that make it (seem to be) a credible conversational partner.
56.  Ian Bogost, “Generative Art Is Stupid,” Atlantic, January 13, 2023, https://www
.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2023/01/machine-learning-ai-art-creativity
-emptiness/672717/.
57.  Harbord, Chris Marker, 16.
58.  Ibid., 25–­26.
59.  Vilém Flusser, “Photography and History,” in Writings, ed. Andreas Ströhl, trans. 
Erik Eisel (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2002), 128.
60.  Ibid., 127.
61.  Harbord, Chris Marker, 26.
62.  Flusser, “Photography and History,” 130.
63.  Ibid., 126.
64.  Daniel A. Chávez Heras, “Spectacular Machinery and Encrypted Spectatorship,” 
APRJA 8, no. 1 (2019): 176.
65.  Ben Burbridge, Photography after Capitalism (London: Goldsmiths Press, 
2020), 74.
66.  Chávez Heras, “Spectacular Machinery and Encrypted Spectatorship,” 180.
67.  Katrina Sluis, “Collaborating with Machines,” Photoworks 21 (2014): 156.
Chapter 6
1.  See Jason N. Pitt et al., “WormBot, an Open-­Source Robotics Platform for Survival 
and Behavior Analysis in C. elegans,” GeroScience 41, no. 6 (2019): 961–­973, doi: 
10.1007/s11357-­019-­00124.
2.  In Back to the Future (1985, dir. Robert Zemeckis).
3.  John Tagg, “Mindless Photography,” in J. J. Long, Andrea Noble, and Edward 
Welch, eds., Photography: Theoretical Snapshots (London: Routledge, 2008), 21.
4.  See https://www.nasa.gov/topics/universe/features/cobe_20th.html
5.  Vasily Zubarev, “Computational Photography Part I: What Is Computational Pho­
tography?,” dpreview, June 3, 2020, https://www.dpreview.com/articles/9828658229
/computational-photography-part-i-what-is-computational-photography/2. Zubarev 
explains further: “That’s how any mobile camera works today. At least the top ones. 

Notes	
235
Buffering allows implementing not only zero shutter lag, which photographers 
begged for so long, but even a negative one. By pressing the button, the smartphone 
looks in the past, unloads 5–­10 last photos from the buffer and starts to analyze and 
combine them furiously. No need to wait till the phone snaps shots for HDR or a 
night mode—­let’s simply pick them up from the buffer, the user won’t even realize. 
In fact, that’s how Live Photo is implemented in iPhones, and HTC had it back in 
2013 under a strange name Zoe.”
6.  Sy Taffel, “Google’s Lens: Computational Photography and Platform Capitalism,” 
Media, Culture and Society 43, no. 2 (2021): 237–­255.
7.  Matthew Cobb, The Idea of the Brain: The Past and Future of Neuroscience (London: 
Profile Books, 2020, Kindle edition).
8.  Cobb points out that the very idea of sensation involving a physical change to 
the bodily substrate goes back to the seventeenth century. Evident in the notion 
of “impression,” it conveyed the belief “that perception involves a physical trace, 
altering the shape or function of the nerves, through some kind of pressure” (ibid.).
9.  Ibid.
10.  Ibid.
11.  Bence Nanay, “Mental Imagery,” in Edward N. Zalta, ed., The Stanford Ency­
clopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2021 edition), https://plato.stanford.edu/archives
/win2021/entries/mental-imagery/.
12.  Referring to a dialogue on the language of metaphysics between Aristos and 
Polyphilos in Anatole France’s The Garden of Epicurus, Derrida posits: “The primitive 
meaning, the original, and always sensory and material, figure . . . is not exactly a 
metaphor. It is a kind of transparent figure, equivalent to a literal meaning (sens 
propre). It becomes a metaphor when philosophical discourse puts it into circulation. 
Simultaneously the first meaning and the first displacement are then forgotten. The 
metaphor is no longer noticed, and it is taken for the proper meaning. A double 
effacement. Philosophy would be this process of metaphorization which gets car­
ried away in and of itself.” Jacques Derrida, Margins of Philosophy, trans. Alan Bass 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982), 211.
13.  Ibid., 213.
14.  See Ron Chrisley, “Philosophical Foundations of Artificial Consciousness,” Arti­
ficial Intelligence in Medicine 44 (2008): 119–­137; Giorgio Buttazzo, “Artificial Con­
sciousness: Utopia or Real Possibility?,” Computer 34 (2001): 24–­30, 0.1109/2.933500; 
Antonio Chella and Riccardo Manzotti, Artificial Consciousness (London: Imprint 
Academic, 2017).
15.  Antonio Damasio, The Feeling of What Happens: Body, Emotion and the Making of 
Consciousness (San Diego: Harcourt, 1999), 4.

236	
Notes
16.  Ibid., 125.
17.  Ibid., 9.
18.  Ibid.
19.  Ibid.
20.  Ibid.
21.  Ibid., 11.
22.  https://ai.googleblog.com/2015/06/inceptionism-going-deeper-into-neural.html
23.  Christian Szegedy et al., “Going Deeper with Convolutions,” eprint from 
arXiv:1409.4842, submitted September 17, 2014, 1.
24.  Min Lin, Qiang Chen, and Shuicheng Yan, “Network In Network,” CoRR, 
abs/1312.4400, 2013. In Network In Network, the general linear model of percep­
tion “is replaced with a ‘micro network’ structure which is a general nonlinear func­
tion approximator. In this work, we choose multilayer perception [i.e., an algorithm 
used for supervised learning of binary classifier] as the instantiation of the micro 
network, which is a universal function approximator and a neural network trainable 
by back-­propagation” (1).
25.  Damasio, The Feeling of What Happens, 171.
26.  Ibid., 126.
27.  Ibid., 148.
28.  Ibid., 24.
29.  Ibid., 16.
30.  Ibid., 122.
31.  Benjamin Libet et al., “Time of Conscious Intention to Act in Relation to Onset 
of Cerebral Activity (Readiness-­Potential)—­The Unconscious Initiation of a Freely 
Voluntary Act,” Brain 106, no. 3 (1983): 623–­642; and Benjamin Libet, “Unconscious 
Cerebral Initiative and the Role of Conscious Will in Voluntary Action,” Behavioral 
and Brain Sciences 8, no. 4 (1985): 529–­566.
32.  Damasio, The Feeling of What Happens, 127.
33.  Anil Seth states that “we generally experience ourselves as being continuous and 
unified across time. We can call this the subjective stability of the self.” Seth, Being 
You: A New Science of Consciousness (London: Faber & Faber, 2021, Kindle edition).
34.  Quoted in Ben Lindbergh, “Making Sense of the Science and Philosophy 
of ‘Devs,’” The Ringer, April 10, 2020, https://www.theringer.com/tv/2020/4/10
/21216149/devs-hulu-quantum-physics-philosophy-alex-garland

Notes	
237
35.  Seth, Being You.
36.  Seth argues: “The perceptual experience of volition is a self-­fulfilling perceptual 
prediction, another distinctive kind of controlled—­again perhaps a controlling—­
hallucination. . . . Experiences of volition are useful for guiding future behaviour, 
just as much as for guiding current behaviour [as] our sense of free will is very much 
about feeling we ‘could have done differently.’ . . . The feeling that I could have 
done differently does not mean that I actually could have done differently. Rather, 
the phenomenology of alternative possibilities is useful because in a future similar, 
but not identical, situation I might indeed do differently” (ibid.).
37.  For Seth, “what we experience as causality is a perceptual inference, in the same 
way that all our perceptions are projections of our brain’s structured expectations 
onto and into our sensory environment—­exercises in the beholder’s share.” This 
leads him to posit that “the self is another perception, another controlled hallucina­
tion, though of a very special kind. From the sense of personal identity—­like being 
a scientist, or a son—­to experiences of having a body, and of simply ‘being’ a body, 
the many and varied elements of selfhood are Bayesian best guesses, designed by 
evolution to keep you alive” (ibid.).
38.  Ibid.
39.  Ibid.
40.  See Giulio Tononi and Gerald M. Edelman, “Consciousness and Complexity,” 
Science 282, no. 5395 (1998): 1846–­1851.
41.  Seth, Being You.
42.  Ibid.
43.  Paul Virilio, The Vision Machine, trans. Julie Rose (Bloomington: Indiana Univer­
sity Press, 1994), 61.
44.  Ibid., 59.
45.  Bluecore website, https://www.bluecore.com/blog/pulling-back-curtain-value
-predictive-technology/
46.  Ibid.
47.  Quoted in Eric Siegel, “When Does Predictive Technology Become Unethi­
cal?,” Harvard Business Review, October 23, 2020, https://hbr.org/2020/10/when
-does-predictive-technology-become-unethical.
48.  Quoted in Scott Prevost, “Making Visual Search Smarter: How AI Understands 
Creative Intent,” Petapixel, March 29, 2021, https://petapixel.com/2021/03/29
/making-visual-search-smarter-how-ai-understands-creative-intent/.
49.  Ibid.

238	
Notes
50.  Taffel, “Google’s Lens,” 9.
51.  Nick Montfort, The Future (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2017), xii.
52.  John Naughton, “Forget Zuckerberg and Cook’s Hypocrisy—­It’s Their Com­
panies That Are the Real Problem,” The Guardian, February 6, 2021, https://www
.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2021/feb/06/mark-zuckerberg-tim-cook-facebook
-apple-problem.
Chapter 7
This chapter was developed from a short piece, “Loser Images: A Feminist Proposal 
for Post-­Anthropocene Visuality,” that I wrote for Harriet Harriss and Naomi House, 
eds., Design Studio, vol. 4: Working at the Intersection: Architecture after the Anthropo­
cene (London: RIBA Publishing, 2022).
1.  See the BBC Radio 5 podcast What Planet Are We On? (2020–­ongoing) and Ire­
land’s RTÉ reality TV show, What Planet Are You On? (2019–­2020).
2.  Nick Montfort, The Future (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2017), 35.
3.  Liam Young, ed., “Machine Landscapes: Architectures of the Post Anthropocene,” 
special issue of Architectural Design, no. 257 (January-­February 2019).
4.  Dipesh Chakrabarty, The Climate of History in a Planetary Age (Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 2021), 78.
5.  Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, “Planetarity,” in Death of a Discipline (New York: 
Columbia University Press, 2003), 72.
6.  Ibid.
7.  Ibid., 93.
8.  Nigel Clark and Bronislaw Szerszynski, Planetary Social Thought: The Anthropocene 
Challenge to the Social Sciences (London: Polity, 2020), 1.
9.  Barnosky et al. cited in ibid., 6.
10.  Clark and Szerszynski, Planetary Social Thought, 7.
11.  Ibid., 8.
12.  Martin Guinard, Eva Lin, and Bruno Latour, “Coping with Planetary Wars,” e-­flux 
Journal, no. 114 (December 2020), https://www.e-flux.com/journal/114/366104
/coping-with-planetary-wars/.
13.  Yuk Hui, “For a Planetary Thinking,” e-­flux Journal, no. 114 (December 2020), 
https://www.e-flux.com/journal/114/366703/for-a-planetary-thinking/.

Notes	
239
14.  Ibid.
15.  Spivak, “Planetarity,” 74.
16.  Chakrabarty, The Climate of History in a Planetary Age, 75.
17.  Brand’s original question was “Why Haven’t We Seen a Photograph of the 
Whole Earth Yet?”
18.  John Tresch, “Cosmic Terrains (of the Sun King, Son of Heaven, and Sovereign 
of the Seas),” e-­flux Journal, no. 114 (December 2020), https://www.e-flux.com
/journal/114/364980/cosmic-terrains-of-the-sun-king-son-of-heaven-and-sovereign
-of-the-seas/.
19.  Ibid.
20.  Al Gore, “The Digital Earth: Understanding Our Planet in the 21st Century,” 
speech given at the California Science Center in Los Angeles on January 31, 1998, 
and published as a leaflet by the Open GIS Consortium. This is the captivating vision 
Gore presented to his audience: “Imagine, for example, a young child going to a 
Digital Earth exhibit at a local museum. After donning a head-­mounted display, she 
sees Earth as it appears from space. Using a data glove, she zooms in, using higher 
and higher levels of resolution, to see continents, then regions, countries, cities, and 
finally individual houses, trees, and other natural and man-­made objects.”
21.  Leon Gurevitch, “Google Warming: Google Earth as Eco-­machinima,” Conver­
gence 20, no. 1 (2014): 89.
22.  Ibid., 97.
23.  Elizabeth A. Povinelli, Geontologies: A Requiem to Late Liberalism (Durham: Duke 
University Press, 2016, Kindle edition). As Povinelli points out, “it is increasingly 
clear that the anthropos remains an element in the set of life only insofar as Life can 
maintain its distinction from Death/Extinction and Nonlife.” She lists the following 
four principles which have been inspired by Karrabing analytics:
1.	 Things exist through an effort of mutual attention. This effort is not in the 
mind but in the activity of endurance.
2.	 Things are neither born nor die, though they can turn away from each other 
and change states.
3.	 In turning away from each other, entities withdraw care for each other. Thus 
the earth is not dying. But the earth may be turning away from certain forms 
of existence. In this way of thinking the Desert is not that in which life does 
not exist. A Desert is where a series of entities have withdrawn care for the 
kinds of entities humans are and thus has made humans into another form of 
existence: bone, mummy, ash, soil.
4.	 We must de-­dramatize human life as we squarely take responsibility for what 
we are doing.

240	
Notes
For a discussion of the Povinelli-­inspired concept of posthuman gestationality, 
see Amanda Boetzkes, “Posthuman Planetarity,” The Large Glass: Journal of Contem­
porary Art, Culture and Theory 27/28 (2019): 63–­66.
24.  Ibid.
25.  Franco “Bifo” Berardi, introduction to Hito Steyerl, The Wretched of the Screen 
(Berlin: Sternberg Press, 2012), 10.
26.  Boetzkes, “Posthuman Planetarity,” 62.
27.  James Gibson, The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception (Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin, 1979), 148.
28.  Ibid., 140.
29.  Ibid., 148.
30.  In a summary of his best-­known book, Noë explains the working of visual per­
ception in the following terms: “If we think of what is visible in terms of projective 
geometry and artificial perspective, then, however paradoxical it may sound, vision 
is not confined to the visible. We visually experience much more than that. We 
experience what is hidden (occluded) and what is out of view. For example, we have 
a sense of the visual presence of the back of a tomato when we look at one sitting 
before us, even though the back of the tomato is out of view; and we experience the 
circularity of a plate, its actual shape, even when, seen from an angle, the circularity 
itself can’t be seen. Or consider your sense of the detail of the scene before your eyes 
now. You have a sense of the presence [of] the detail; the scene is replete with detail. 
But it is not the case that you seem to yourself actually to see all the detail; you can 
no more see every bit of detail in sharp focus and high resolution than you can see 
the tomato from all sides at once. Just as the back of the tomato shows up in your 
experience although it is hidden from view, so the detailed scene before you shows 
up in your experience, although the detail outstrips by far what can be taken in at a 
glance. The world outstrips what we can take in at a glance; but we are not confined 
to what is available in a glance.” Alva Noë, “Précis of Action in Perception,” Philosophy 
and Phenomenological Research 76, no. 3 (May 2008): 660.
31.  Alva Noë, Action in Perception (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004), 156, emphasis 
in the original.
32.  Ibid., 112.
33.  Gibson, The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception, 293.
34.  Ibid.
35.  Ibid. I am building here on the argument proposed by Sarah Kember and me in 
chapter 3 of Life after New Media: Mediation as a Vital Process (Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 2012).

Notes	
241
36.  See Vilém Flusser, Into the Universe of Technical Images, trans. Nancy Ann Roth 
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2011).
37.  Lukáš Likavčan and Paul Heinicker, “Planetary Diagrams: Towards an Auto­
graphic Theory of Climate Emergency,” in Tomas Dvořák and Jussi Parikka, eds., 
Photography Off the Scale: Technologies and Theories of the Mass Image (Edinburgh: 
Edinburgh University Press, 2021), 211.
38.  Gibson, The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception, 203.
39.  Spivak, “Planetarity,” 72.
40.  Mark Dorrian, “The Aerial View: Notes for a Cultural History,” Strates 13 (2007), 
http://journals.openedition.org/strates/5573. In his piece Dorrian is primarily preoc­
cupied with static images of the solid ground, but his classification fits more than 
adequately the activity of the mobile drone eye.
41.  Ibid.
42.  Ibid.
43.  Ibid.
44.  Ibid.
45.  Rachel Handforth and Carol A. Taylor, “Doing Academic Writing Differently: A 
Feminist Bricolage,” Gender and Education 28, no. 5 (2016): 629.
46.  Sarah Kember and Joanna Zylinska, “Media Always and Everywhere: A Cosmic 
Approach,” in Ulrik Ekman et al., eds., Ubiquitous Computing, Complexity and Culture 
(New York: Routledge, 2016), 225.
47.  For an insightful discussion of the use of drones to deliver abortion pills in Poland 
and map state violence against women in Mexico see Erinne Paisley, “Catching a 
Glimpse of the Elusive ‘Feminist Drone,’” Datactive blog, March 31, 2020, https://data
-activism.net/2020/03/blogpost-catching-a-glimpse-of-the-elusive-feminist-drone/.
48.  Anna Feigenbaum, “From Cyborg Feminism to Drone Feminism: Remembering 
Women’s Anti-­Nuclear Activisms,” Feminist Theory 16, no. 3 (2015): 284.
49.  Ibid.
50.  Heather McLean, “In Praise of Chaotic Research Pathways: A Feminist Response 
to Planetary Urbanization,” Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 36, no. 3 
(2018): 547.
51.  Ibid.
52.  Ibid., 548.
53.  Ibid.

242	
Notes
54.  In my working method here I am indebted to Donna Haraway, especially her 
Modest_Witness@Second_Millennium: FemaleMan©_Meets_OncoMouse™ (New York: 
Routledge, 1997) and The Companion Species Manifesto: Dogs, People, and Significant 
Otherness (Chicago: Prickly Paradigm Press, 2003).
55.  McLean, “In Praise of Chaotic Research Pathways,” 552.
56.  Ewa Majewska, “Feminist Art of Failure, Ewa Partum and the Avant-­Garde of 
the Weak,” Widok / View: Theories and Practices of Visual Culture 16 (2016), http://
pismowidok.org/index.php/one/article/view/370/918/, 3.
57.  Ibid., 1.
58.  Ernst van Alphen, Failed Images: Photography and Its Counter-­Practices (Amster­
dam: Valiz, 2018), 56.
59.  Ibid., 12.
60.  See Lyle Rexer, The Edge of Vision: The Rise of Abstraction in Photography (New 
York: Aperture, 2013), for an exposition of that alternative view, one that claims 
that abstraction, with its failure to represent, has been a constitutive aspect of pho­
tographic history, and not just a mere aberration.
61.  Van Alphen, Failed Images, 39.
62.  Flusser, Into the Universe of Technical Images, 19.
63.  Rexer, The Edge of Vision, 13.
64.  See Sean Cubitt, “The Mass Image, the Anthropocene Image, the Image Com­
mons,” in Dvořák and Parikka, Photography Off the Scale, 25–­40.
65.  Hito Steyerl, “In Defense of the Poor Image,” e-­flux Journal, no. 10 (November 
2009), https://www.e-flux.com/journal/10/61362/in-defense-of-the-poor-image/.
66.  Amanda Lagerkvist, Existential Media: A Media Theory of the Limit Situation 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2022), 6.
67.  Tereza Stejskalová, “Online Weak and Poor Images: On Contemporary Feminist 
Visual Politics,” in Dvořák and Parikka, Photography Off the Scale, 98.
68.  Same Engine indexes 19 million images from Reddit, Instagram, and Pinterest. 
See https://same.energy/
69.  Majewska, “Feminist Art of Failure,” 21.
70.  Stejskalová, “Online Weak and Poor Images,” 101.
71.  Gary Hall, Pirate Philosophy: For a Digital Posthumanities (Cambridge: MIT Press, 
2016), 140.
72.  Ibid.

Notes	
243
73.  Sarah Sharma, “A Manifesto for the Broken Machine,” Camera Obscura 35, no. 2 
(2020): 173.
74.  Stejskalová, “Online Weak and Poor Images,” 107.
75.  Michal Šimůnek, “The Failed Photographs of Photography: On the Analogue 
and Slow Photography Movement,” in Dvořák and Parikka, Photography Off the 
Scale, 152.
76.  James Patrick Kelly and John Kessel, “Introduction: Hacking Cyberpunk,” in 
Kelly and Kessel, eds., Rewired: The Post-­Cyberpunk Anthology (San Francisco: Tachyon 
Publications, 2007), xii.
77.  Ibid., 11.
78.  Nam June Paik, interviewed by Nicholas Zurbrugg, Sydney, April 10, 1990, 
SCAN+, no. 3, 14.
79.  This point has been elaborated by Lars Movin in “The Zen Master of Video. 
Nam June Paik: Between Minimalism and Overkill,” in Nam June Paik: Driving Media, 
ed. Agnieszka Kubicka-­Dzieduszycka and Krzysztof Dobrowolski (Wrocław: WRO Art 
Center, 2009), 180.
80.  Nicole Seymour, Bad Environmentalism: Irony and Irreverence in the Ecological Age 
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2018), 4–­5.
81.  Graig Uhlin, “Monkeywrenched Images: Ecocinema and Sabotage,” New Review 
of Film and Television Studies 18, no. 3 (2020): 321, doi: 10.1080/17400309.2020
.1790480. Uhlin’s concept of monkeywrenching is borrowed from the practice of 
ecological sabotage and “involves the destruction of property and infrastructure to 
defend nature from industrial development.” He reappropriates this concept for fig­
urative use, to describe an aesthetic strategy whereby filmmakers adopt a visually 
destructive or “ugly” look in their work, often purposefully damaging the image or 
its substrate, for activist purposes. “A monkeywrenched cinema is one that produces 
an aesthetic suspension or temporal delay in film’s depiction of non-­human nature 
as a means of expressing a non-­interventionist ethical relation to the world,” he 
suggests (302).
Conclusion
1.  See Joanna Zylinska, Minimal Ethics for the Anthropocene (Ann Arbor: Open 
Humanities Press, 2014).
2.  See Neil Stephenson, Snow Crash (New York: Bantam Books, 1992), a novel in 
which the idea of the metaverse was first enacted—­although in a more explicitly 
dystopian way—­and Dave Eggers, The Circle (New York: Knopf, 2013).

244	
Notes
3.  See Ben Burbridge, Photography after Capitalism (London: Goldsmiths Press, 2020).
4.  https://www.oculus.com/experiences/quest/2046607608728563/?locale=en_GB
5.  The Oculus does have a functionality for storing screenshots from games and 
other apps, but it was not enabled for this particular “experience,” at least not in 
January 2022.
6.  Maria-­Jose Viñas and Mike Carlowicz, “Despite Antarctic Gains, Global Sea Ice Is 
Shrinking,” NOAA Climate.gov, March 5, 2019; updated June 3, 2021, https://www
.climate.gov/news-features/features/despite-antarctic-gains-global-sea-ice-shrinking.
7.  Victoria Ivanova and Kay Watson, Future Art Ecosystems, vol. 2, Art x Metaverse, 
ed. Sarah Shin (London: Serpentine Galleries, 2021), 5.
8.  See ibid., 19–­20.
9.  Amanda Lagerkvist, Existential Media: A Media Theory of the Limit Situation (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2022), 221.

Bibliography
Adorno, Theodor W. Aesthetic Theory. London: Athlone Press, 1997.
Aguera y Arcas, Blaise. “Art in the Age of Machine Intelligence.” AMI at Medium, 
February 23, 2016, https://medium.com/artists-and-machine-intelligence/what-is-ami
-ccd936394a83#.9r2o4bgvq.
Ahmad, Wasim. “It May Be Art, but In-­Game Images Aren’t ‘Photography.’” Fstop­
pers, March 24, 2017, https://fstoppers.com/originals/it-may-be-art-game-images
-arent-photography-170382.
Algorithmia. “Introduction to Computer Vision: What It Is and How It Works.” 
Algorithmia blog, April 2, 2018, https://algorithmia.com/blog/introduction-to-com
puter-vision.
Amelunxen, Hubertus von. “Photography after Photography: The Terror of the Body 
in Digital Space.” In Photography after Photography: Memory and Representation in the 
Digital Age, ed. Hubertus von Amelunxen et al., trans. Pauline Cumbers, 115–­123. 
Munich: G+B Arts, 1996.
Anadol, Refik. Archive Dreaming. 2017, https://refikanadol.com/works/archive
-dreaming/.
Anderson, Joseph, and Barbara Anderson [née Fisher]. “The Myth of Persistence of 
Vision Revisited.” Journal of Film and Video 45, no. 1 (Spring 1993): 3–­12.
Anderson, Joseph, and Barbara Fisher. “The Myth of Persistence of Vision.” Journal of 
the University Film Association 30, no. 4 (Fall 1978): 3–­8.
Anderson, Steve F. Technologies of Vision: The War between Data and Images. Cam­
bridge, MA: MIT Press, 2017.
Armitage, John. “Accelerated Aesthetics: Paul Virilio’s The Vision Machine.” Angelaki 
2, no. 3 (1997): 199–­209.
Azar, Mitra, Geoff Cox, and Leonardo Impett. “Introduction: Ways of Machine 
Seeing.” AI and Society 36 (2021): 1093–­1104, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-020
-01124-6.

246	
Bibliography
Azoulay, Ariella Aïsha. Potential History: Unlearning Imperialism. London: Verso, 2019.
Barthes, Roland. Camera Lucida. Trans. Richard Howard. New York: Hill and Wang, 
1981.
Barthes, Roland. “The Rhetoric of the Image.” In Image, Music, Text, trans. Stephen 
Heath. New York: Hill and Wang, 1977.
Batchen, Geoffrey. Burning with Desire: The Conception of Photography. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 1997.
Beller, Jonathan. The Message Is Murder: Substrates of Computational Capital. London: 
Pluto Press, 2017.
Beller, Jonathan. The World Computer: Derivative Conditions of Racial Capitalism. 
Durham: Duke University Press, 2021.
Bender, Emily. “On NYT Magazine on AI: Resist the Urge to Be Impressed.” Medium, 
April 18, 2022, https://medium.com/@emilymenonbender/on-nyt-magazine-on-ai
-resist-the-urge-to-be-impressed-3d92fd9a0edd.
Benjamin, Walter. On Photography. Trans. Esther Leslie. London: Reaktion Books, 
2015.
Berardi, Franco “Bifo.” Introduction to Hito Steyerl, The Wretched of the Screen. 
Berlin: Sternberg Press, 2012.
Berger, John. Ways of Seeing. London: British Broadcasting Corporation and Penguin 
Books, 1972.
Bergson, Henri. Creative Evolution. Trans. Arthur Mitchell. New York: Modern 
Library, 1944.
Bergson, Henri. Matter and Memory. Trans. Nancy Margaret Paul and W. Scott Palmer. 
London: George Allen & Unwin, 1911.
Bittanti, Matteo. “The Art of Screenshoot-­ing: Joshua Taylor, Videogame Photogra­
pher.” Mister Bit—­Wired IT, December 24, 2011, http://blog.wired.it/misterbit/2011
/12/24/the-art-of-screenshoot-ing-joshua-taylor-videogame-photographer.html.
Bittanti, Matteo. “Interview: Gareth Damian Martin: The Aesthetics of Analogue 
Game Photography.” GameScenes, February 4, 2018, https://www.gamescenes.org
/2018/04/interview-gareth-damian-martin-the-aesthetics-of-analogue-game-photo
graphy.html.
Boetzkes, Amanda. “Posthuman Planetarity.” The Large Glass: Journal of Contempo­
rary Art, Culture and Theory 27/28 (2019): 62–­71.
Bogost, Ian. “Generative Art Is Stupid.” Atlantic, January 13, 2023, https://www
.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2023/01/machine-learning-ai-art-creativity
-emptiness/672717/.

Bibliography	
247
Boljkovac, Nadine. “Book Review: La Jetée.” Studies in European Cinema, published 
online May 24, 2019, doi: 10.1080/17411548.2019.1621720.
Bourdieu, Pierre. Photography: A Middle-­Brow Art. Trans. Shaun Whiteside. Stanford: 
Stanford University Press, 1990.
Braidotti, Rosi. The Posthuman. Cambridge: Polity Press, 2013.
Bratton, Benjamin H. The Stack: On Software and Sovereignty. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 2016.
Broeckmann, Andreas. “The Machine as Artist as Myth.” Arts 8, no. 25 (2019): 1–­10, 
doi: 10.3390/arts8010025.
Broeckmann, Andreas. “Optical Calculus.” Paper presented at the conference 
“Images Beyond Control,” FAMU, Prague, November 6, 2020 (online), 1: 1–­7.
Bryson, Norman. “The Gaze in the Expanded Field.” In Vision and Visuality, ed. Hal 
Foster, 87–­113. Seattle: Bay Press, 1988.
Buolamwini, Joy, and Timnit Gebru. “Gender Shades: Intersectional Accuracy 
Disparities in Commercial Gender Classification.” Proceedings of Machine Learning 
Research 81 (2018): 1–­15, http://proceedings.mlr.press/v81/buolamwini18a/buolam
wini18a.pdf.
Burbridge, Ben. Photography after Capitalism. London: Goldsmiths Press, 2020.
Buttazzo, Giorgio. “Artificial Consciousness: Utopia or Real Possibility?” Computer 
34 (2001): 24–­30, 0.1109/2.933500.
Cade, DL. “Photography as We Know Is Changing, and It’s Your Job to Change 
with It.” Petapixel, November 8, 2019, https://petapixel.com/2019/11/08/photo
graphy-as-we-know-is-changing-and-its-your-job-to-change-with-it/?mc_cid=947
c856268&mc_eid=5bb11290a7.
Campany, David, interviewed by Duncan Wooldridge. “Tomorrow’s Headlines Are 
Today’s Fish and Chip Papers: Some Thoughts on ‘Response-­ability.’” In Photography 
Reframed: New Visions in Contemporary Photographic Culture, ed. Ben Burbridge and 
Annebella Pollen. 2019 edition. London: Bloomsbury Visual Arts, 2019.
Campt, Tina. Listening to Images. Durham: Duke University Press, 2017.
Carr, Nicholas. The Shallows: How the Internet Is Changing the Way We Think, Read 
and Remember. London: Atlantic Books, 2010.
Celis Bueno, Claudio, and María Jesús Schultz Abarca. “Memo Akten’s Learning to 
See: From Machine Vision to the Machinic Unconscious.” AI and Society (2020), 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-020-01071-2.
Chakrabarty, Dipesh. The Climate of History in a Planetary Age. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 2021.

248	
Bibliography
Chalmers, David. “Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness.” Journal of Conscious­
ness Studies 2 (1995): 200–­219.
Chalmers, David. “What Is Conceptual Engineering and What Should It Be?” 
Inquiry: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Philosophy, published online September 16, 
2020, https://doi.org/10.1080/0020174X.2020.1817141.
Chávez Heras, Daniel A. “Spectacular Machinery and Encrypted Spectatorship.” 
APRJA 8, no. 1 (2019): 170–­182.
Chella, Antonio, and Riccardo Manzotti. Artificial Consciousness. London: Imprint 
Academic, 2017.
Chrisley, Ron. “Philosophical Foundations of Artificial Consciousness.” Artificial 
Intelligence in Medicine 44 (2008): 119–­137.
Clark, Nigel, and Bronislaw Szerszynski. Planetary Social Thought: The Anthropocene 
Challenge to the Social Sciences. London: Polity, 2020.
Cobb, Matthew. The Idea of the Brain: The Past and Future of Neuroscience. London: 
Profile Books, 2020. Kindle edition.
Cohen, Tom. “Introduction: Murmurations—­‘Climate Change’ and the Defacement 
of Theory.” In Telemorphosis: Theory in the Era of Climate Change, vol. 1, ed. Tom 
Cohen, 13–­42. Ann Arbor: Open Humanities Press, 2012.
Cosman, Teodora. “The Metaphors of Photography and the Metaphors of Memory—­
Artistic Reflections on an Album of Family Photographs.” Philobiblon 17, no. 1 
(2012): 268–­291.
Cox Hall, Amy, ed. The Camera as Actor: Photography and the Embodiment of Technol­
ogy. London: Routledge, 2021.
Crary, Jonathan. “Modernizing Vision.” In Vision and Visuality, ed. Hal Foster, 29–­
44. Seattle: Bay Press, 1988.
Crary, Jonathan. Suspensions of Perception: Attention, Spectacle, and Modern Culture. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999.
Crary, Jonathan. Techniques of the Observer: On Vision and Modernity in the Nineteenth 
Century. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1990.
Cubitt, Sean. “The Mass Image, the Anthropocene Image, the Image Commons.” 
In Photography Off the Scale: Technologies and Theories of the Mass Image, ed. Tomas 
Dvořák and Jussi Parikka, 35–­40. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2021.
Damasio, Antonio. The Feeling of What Happens: Body, Emotion and the Making of Con­
sciousness. San Diego: Harcourt, 1999.
Darke, Chris. La Jetée. London: BFI and Palgrave, 2016.

Bibliography	
249
Daub, Adrian. What Tech Calls Thinking: An Inquiry into the Intellectual Bedrock of Sili­
con Valley. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2020. Kindle edition.
Deleuze, Gilles. “The Brain Is the Screen: An Interview with Gilles Deleuze.” In The 
Brain Is the Screen: Deleuze and the Philosophy of Cinema, ed. Gregory Flaxman, 365–­
374. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2000.
Deleuze, Gilles. Cinema 1: The Movement-­Image. Trans. Hugh Tomlinson and Barbara 
Habberjam. London: Athlone Press, 1986.
Deleuze, Gilles. Francis Bacon: The Logic of Sensation. Trans. Daniel W. Smith. 
London: Continuum, 2003.
Deleuze, Gilles, and Félix Guattari. Anti-­Oedipus. Trans. Robert Hurley, Mark Seem, 
and Helen R. Lane. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1983.
Deleuze, Gilles, and Félix Guattari. What Is Philosophy? Trans. Hugh Tomlinson and 
Graham Burchell. New York: Columbia University Press, 1994.
Derrida, Jacques. Margins of Philosophy. Trans. Alan Bass. Chicago: University of Chi­
cago Press, 1982.
Derrida, Jacques. “The Pharmakon.” In Dissemination, trans. Barbara Johnson, 95–­
119. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981.
Dewdney, Andrew. Forget Photography. London: Goldsmiths Press, 2021.
Dewdney, Andrew. “Nonhuman Photography: Andrew Dewdney Interviews Joanna 
Zylinska for unthinking.photography.” The Photographers’ Gallery, February 11, 
2019, https://unthinking.photography/articles/interview-with-joanna-zylinska.
D’Ignazio, Catherine, and Lauren F. Klein. Data Feminism. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 2020.
Dilg, Brian. Why You Like This Photo: The Science of Perception. London: Octopus, 
2018. Kindle edition.
Dorrian, Mark. “The Aerial View: Notes for a Cultural History.” Strates 13 (2007), 
http://journals.openedition.org/strates/5573.
Dvořák, Tomas, and Jussi Parikka, eds. Photography Off the Scale: Technologies and 
Theories of the Mass Image. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2021.
Edelman, Gerald M., and George N. Reeke Jr. “Is It Possible to Construct a Percep­
tion Machine?” Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 134, no. 1 (March 
1990): 36–­73.
Eggers, Dave. The Circle. New York: Knopf, 2013.
Eubanks, Virginia. Automating Inequality: How High-­Tech Tools Profile, Police, and 
Punish the Poor. New York: Macmillan, 2018.

250	
Bibliography
Farazollahi, Behzad, Bjarne Bare, and Christian Tunge with Susanne Østby, eds. Why 
Photography. Milan: Skira, 2020.
Farocki, Harun. Eye/Machine I, II and III. DVD. Video Data Bank, 2001.
Feigenbaum, Anna. “From Cyborg Feminism to Drone Feminism: Remembering 
Women’s Anti-­Nuclear Activisms.” Feminist Theory 16, no. 3 (2015): 265–­288.
Flusser, Vilém. Does Writing Have a Future? Trans. Nancy Ann Roth. Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 2011.
Flusser, Vilém. The Holy See: An Extract from The Last Judgment: Generations. Pitts­
burgh and New York: Flugschriften, 2019.
Flusser, Vilém. Into the Universe of Technical Images. Trans. Nancy Ann Roth. Min­
neapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2011.
Flusser, Vilém. “Photography and History.” In Writings, ed. Andreas Ströhl, trans. 
Erik Eisel, 126–­132. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2002.
Flusser, Vilém. Towards a Philosophy of Photography. Trans. Anthony Mathews. 
London: Reaktion Books, 2000.
Fontcuberta, Joan. The Post-Photographic Condition. Montreal: Le mois de la photo à 
Montréal, 2015.
Fontcuberta, Joan, et al. From Here On: PostPhotography in the Age of Internet and the 
Mobile Phone. Barcelona: RM Verlag, 2013.
Gallagher, Shaun. How the Body Shapes the Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2005.
Gerling, Winfried. “Photography in the Digital.” Photographies 11, no. 2–­3 (Septem­
ber 2, 2018): 149–­167.
Gibson, James J. The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Boston: Houghton Mif­
flin, 1979.
Gibson, James J. The Perception of the Visual World. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1950.
Giddings, Seth. “Drawing with Light: Simulated Photography in Videogames.” In 
The Photographic Image in Digital Culture, ed. Martin Lister, 2nd ed., 41–­55. Abing­
don, UK: Routledge, 2013.
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von. Theory of Colours. Trans. Charles Easdake (1840). 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1970.
Goldberg, Ariel, and Yazan Khalili. “We Stopped Taking Photos.” e-­flux Journal, no. 
115 (February 2021), https://www.e-flux.com/journal/115/374500/we-stopped-taking
-photos/.

Bibliography	
251
Goldsmith, Kenneth. “It’s a Mistake to Mistake Content for Content.” Los Angeles 
Review of Books, June 14, 2015, https://lareviewofbooks.org/article/its-a-mistake-to
-mistake-content-for-content/.
Gore, Al. “The Digital Earth: Understanding Our Planet in the 21st Century.” Speech 
given at the California Science Center in Los Angeles on January 31, 1998, and pub­
lished as a leaflet by Open GIS Consortium.
Green, David. “Marking Time: Photography, Film and Temporalities of the Image.” 
In Stillness and Time: Photography and the Moving Image, ed. David Green and Joanna 
Lowry, 9–­21. Brighton: Photoworks; Photoforum, 2006.
Green, David, and Joanna Lowry. Foreword to Stillness and Time: Photography and the 
Moving Image, ed. Green and Lowry, 7–­8. Brighton: Photoworks; Photoforum, 2006.
Gregory, Richard L. Eye and Brain: The Psychology of Seeing. 5th ed. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1997.
Grootenboer, Hanneke. Treasuring the Gaze: Intimate Vision in Late Eighteenth-­Century 
Eye Miniatures. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012.
Guinard, Martin, Eva Lin, and Bruno Latour. “Coping with Planetary Wars.” e-­flux 
Journal, no. 114 (December 2020), https://www.e-flux.com/journal/114/366104
/coping-with-planetary-wars/.
Gurevitch, Leon. “Google Warming: Google Earth as Eco-­machinima.” Convergence 
20, no. 1 (2014): 85–­107.
Hall, Gary. Pirate Philosophy: For a Digital Posthumanities. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
2016.
Hámos, Gusztáv, Katja Pratschke, and Thomas Tode. “Viva Photofilm: Moving / 
Non-­moving.” Trans. Finbarr Morrin. Text written for the program of PhotoFilm!, a 
screening event held March 5–­13, 2010, at Tate Modern, London, and organized by 
Tate Modern, the Goethe-­Institut London, and the CCW Graduate School, Univer­
sity of the Arts, London.
Hand, Martin. Ubiquitous Photography. Cambridge: Polity Press, 2012.
Handforth, Rachel, and Carol A. Taylor. “Doing Academic Writing Differently: A 
Feminist Bricolage.” Gender and Education 28, no. 5 (2016): 627–­643.
Haraway, Donna. “Anthropocene, Capitalocene, Chthulucene: Donna Haraway in 
Conversation with Martha Kenney.” In Art in the Anthropocene: Encounters among 
Aesthetics, Politics, Environments and Epistemologies, ed. Heather Davis and Etienne 
Turpin. London: Open Humanities Press, 2015.
Haraway, Donna. The Companion Species Manifesto: Dogs, People, and Significant Other­
ness. Chicago: Prickly Paradigm Press, 2003.

252	
Bibliography
Haraway, Donna. Modest_Witness@Second_Millennium: FemaleMan©_Meets_Onco­
Mouse.™ New York: Routledge, 1997.
Haraway, Donna. “Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism and 
the Privilege of Partial Perspective.” Feminist Studies 14, no. 3 (Autumn 1998): 575–­
599.
Haraway, Donna. Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene. Durham: 
Duke University Press, 2016.
Harbord, Janet. Chris Marker: La Jetée. London: Afterall Books, 2009.
Hardt, Michael, and Antonio Negri. Empire. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 2000.
Harvey, Adam. “On Computer Vision.” Umbau, no. 1: “Political Bodies” (2021). 
Karlsruhe University of Arts and Design (HfG), https://umbau.hfg-karlsruhe.de/posts
/on-computer-vision.
Heiferman, Marvin. “Introduction.” In Photography Changes Everything, ed. Heifer­
man. New York: Aperture/Smithsonian, 2012.
Hern, Alex. “Google’s Solution to Accidental Algorithmic Racism: Ban Gorillas.” The 
Guardian, January 12, 2018, https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2018/jan
/12/google-racism-ban-gorilla-black-people.
Hoelzl, Ingrid, and Rémi Marie. Softimage: Towards a New Theory of the Digital Image. 
Bristol, UK: Intellect, 2015.
Hoffman, Donald D. The Case against Reality: How Evolution Hid the Truth from Our 
Eyes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2019.
Hoffman, Donald D. “Conscious Realism and the Mind-­Body Problem.” Mind and 
Matter 6, no. 1 (2008): 87–­121.
Hubel, David, and Torsten Wiesel. “Receptive Fields of Single Neurons in the Cat’s 
Striate Cortex.” Journal of Physiology 148 (1959): 574–­591.
Hui, Yuk. “For a Planetary Thinking.” e-­flux Journal, no. 114 (December 2020), 
https://www.e-flux.com/journal/114/366703/for-a-planetary-thinking/.
Humblet, Steven. “Interview with Marc De Blieck.” In Off Camera, ed. Steven Hum­
blet, vii–­x. Amsterdam: Roma Publications, 2021.
Humblet, Steven, ed. Off Camera. Amsterdam: Roma Publications, 2021.
Hunt, Elle. “Faking It: How Selfie Dysmorphia Is Driving People to Seek Surgery.” The 
Guardian, January 23, 2019, https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2019/jan
/23/faking-it-how-selfie-dysmorphia-is-driving-people-to-seek-surgery.

Bibliography	
253
Impett, Leonardo. “The Image-­Theories behind Computer Vision.” Paper presented 
at #DHNord2020, “The Measurement of Images,” MESHS, updated on November 
2020, 10, https://www.meshs.fr/page/the_image-theory_behind_computer_vision.
Ingold, Tim. “Beyond Biology and Culture: The Meaning of Evolution in a Rela­
tional World.” Social Anthropology 12, no. 2 (2004): 209–­221.
Ivanova, Victoria, and Kay Watson. 2021. Future Art Ecosystems, vol. 2, Art x Meta­
verse, ed. Sarah Shin. London: Serpentine Galleries.
Jay, Martin. “Scopic Regimes of Modernity.” In Vision and Visuality, ed. Hal Foster, 
3–­23. Seattle: Bay Press, 1988.
Johnson, Stephen. “A.I. Is Mastering Language. Should We Trust What It Says?” New 
York Times Magazine, April 15, 2022, https://www.nytimes.com/2022/04/15/magazine
/ai-language.html.
Johnston, John. “Machinic Vision.” Critical Inquiry 26 (Autumn 1999): 27–­48.
Kelly, James Patrick, and John Kessel. “Introduction: Hacking Cyberpunk.” In 
Rewired: The Post-­Cyberpunk Anthology, ed. James Patrick Kelly and John Kessel. San 
Francisco: Tachyon Publications, 2007.
Kember, Sarah. “Ambient Intelligent Photography.” In The Photographic Image in 
Digital Culture, ed. Martin Lister, 2nd ed., 56–­76. Abingdon, UK: Routledge, 2013.
Kember, Sarah, and Joanna Zylinska. Life after New Media: Mediation as a Vital Pro­
cess. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2012.
Kember, Sarah, and Joanna Zylinska. “Media Always and Everywhere: A Cosmic 
Approach.” In Ubiquitous Computing, Complexity and Culture, ed. Ulrik Ekman et al., 
226–­236. New York: Routledge, 2016.
Kessler, Elizabeth A. “Review of Joanna Zylinska’s Nonhuman Photography.” CAA 
Reviews, February 11, 2019, doi: 10.3202/caa.reviews.2019.18.
Klevjer, Rune. “Enter the Avatar: The Phenomenology of Prosthetic Telepresence 
in Computer Games.” In The Philosophy of Computer Games, ed. Hallvard Fossheim, 
Tarjei Mandt Larsen, and John Richard Sageng, 17–­38. London: Springer, 2012.
Kogan, Gene, and lkkchung. “Neural Synthesis, Feature Visualization, and Deep­
Dream Notes.” GitHub (2017), https://github.com/ml4a/ml4a-guides/blob/master
/notebooks/neural-synth.ipynb.
Krauss, Rosalind. “Notes on the Index: Seventies Art in America.” October 3 (1977): 
68–­81.
Lagerkvist, Amanda. Existential Media: A Media Theory of the Limit Situation. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2022.

254	
Bibliography
Lagerkvist, Amanda. “Existential Media: Toward a Theorization of Digital Thrown­
ness.” New Media and Society 19, no. 1 (2017): 96–­110.
Layton, Julia. “How Does the Brain Create an Uninterrupted View of the World?” 
HowStuffWorks.com, November 15, 2006, https://science.howstuffworks.com/life
/steady-view.htm.
Lazzarato, Maurizio. “After Cinema.” In The Supermarket of Images, ed. Peter Szendy 
with Emmanuel Alloa and Marta Ponsa, 149–­156. Paris: Gallimard / Jeu de Paume, 
2020.
Lettvin, J. Y., et al. “What the Frog’s Eye Tells the Frog’s Brain.” Proceedings of the 
Institute of Radio Engineers 47 (1959): 1940–­1951.
Libet, Benjamin. “Unconscious Cerebral Initiative and the Role of Conscious Will in 
Voluntary Action.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 8, no. 4 (1985): 529–­566.
Libet, Benjamin, et al. “Time of Conscious Intention to Act in Relation to Onset 
of Cerebral Activity (Readiness-­Potential)—­The Unconscious Initiation of a Freely 
Voluntary Act.” Brain 106, no. 3 (1983): 623–­642.
Likavčan, Lukáš, and Paul Heinicker. “Planetary Diagrams: Towards an Autographic 
Theory of Climate Emergency.” In Photography Off the Scale: Technologies and Theories 
of the Mass Image, ed. Tomas Dvořák and Jussi Parikka, 211–­230. Edinburgh: Edin­
burgh University Press, 2021.
Lin, Min, Qiang Chen, and Shuicheng Yan. “Network in Network.” CoRR, abs
/1312.4400, 2013.
Lindbergh, Ben. “Making Sense of the Science and Philosophy of ‘Devs.’” The Ringer, 
April 10, 2020, https://www.theringer.com/tv/2020/4/10/21216149/devs-hulu-quantum
-physics-philosophy-alex-garland.
Liu, Ziming. “Digital Reading.” Chinese Journal of Library and Information Science 
(English edition) (2012): 85–­94.
Lotto, Beau. Deviate: The Science of Seeing Differently. London: Weidenfeld & Nicol­
son, 2017. Kindle edition.
Majewska, Ewa. “Feminist Art of Failure, Ewa Partum and the Avant-­Garde of the 
Weak.” Widok / View: Theories and Practices of Visual Culture 16 (2016), 1–­28, http://
pismowidok.org/index.php/one/article/view/370/918/.
Maltez-­Novaes, Rodrigo. Translator’s introduction to Vilém Flusser, The Holy See: An 
Extract from The Last Judgment: Generations. Pittsburgh and New York: Flugschriften, 
2019.
Manovich, Lev. “Introduction: How to See One Billion Images.” In Cultural Analyt­
ics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2020.

Bibliography	
255
Marker, Chris. “Interview.” Film Comment 39, no. 4 (2003), special edition, “Around 
the World with Chris Marker: Part II Time Regained.”
Marr, David. Vision: A Computational Investigation into the Human Representation and 
Processing of Visual Information. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1990.
Maturana, Humberto, and Francisco J. Varela. Autopoiesis and Cognition: The Realiza­
tion of the Living. Dordrecht: Reidel, 1972.
McCosker, Anthony, and Rowan Wilken. Automating Vision: The Social Impact of the 
New Camera Consciousness. London: Routledge, 2020.
McCouat, Philip. “Early Influences of Photography on Art.” Journal of Art in Society 
(2012–­2015), http://www.artinsociety.com/pt-1-initial-impacts.html.
McLean, Heather. “In Praise of Chaotic Research Pathways: A Feminist Response 
to Planetary Urbanization.” Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 36, no. 3 
(2018): 547–­555.
Mitchell, William J. The Reconfigured Eye: Visual Truth in the Post-­Photographic Era. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1994.
Modrak, Rebekah, with Bill Anthes. Reframing Photography: Theory and Practice. 
London: Routledge, 2011.
Montfort, Nick. The Future. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2017.
Moreiras, Camila. “Joan Fontcuberta: Post-­photography and the Spectral Image of 
Saturation.” Journal of Spanish Cultural Studies 18, no. 1 (2017): 57–­77.
Movin, Lars. “The Zen Master of Video. Nam June Paik: Between Minimalism and 
Overkill.” In Nam June Paik: Driving Media, ed. Agnieszka Kubicka-­Dzieduszycka and 
Krzysztof Dobrowolski, 166–­185. Wrocław: WRO Art Center, 2009.
Nadar, Félix. When I Was a Photographer. Trans. Eduardo Cadava and Liana Theodo­
ratou. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2015.
Nanay, Bence. “Mental Imagery.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 
2021 edition), ed. Edward N. Zalta, https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2021
/entries/mental-imagery/.
Naughton, John. “Forget Zuckerberg and Cook’s Hypocrisy—­It’s Their Companies 
That Are the Real Problem.” The Guardian, February 6, 2021, https://www.theguard
ian.com/commentisfree/2021/feb/06/mark-zuckerberg-tim-cook-facebook-apple
-problem.
Noble, Safia. Algorithms of Oppression: How Search Engines Reinforce Racism. New York: 
New York University Press, 2018. Kindle edition.
Noë, Alva. Action in Perception. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004.

256	
Bibliography
Noë, Alva. “Précis of Action in Perception.” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 
76, no. 3 (May 2008): 660–­665.
Paglen, Trevor. “Artist’s Notes.” For the exhibition A Study of Invisible Images, Sep­
tember 8–­October 21, 2017, Metro Pictures, New York.
Paglen, Trevor. “Invisible Images (Your Pictures Are Looking at You).” New Inquiry, 
December 8, 2016, https://thenewinquiry.com/invisible-images-your-pictures-are
-looking-at-you/.
Paglen, Trevor. “Is Photography Over?” Four postings for the Fotomuseum Win­
terthur blog, March 1–­April 15, 2014, https://www.fotomuseum.ch/de/series/is
-photography-over/.
Paik, Nam June. Interview by Nicholas Zurbrugg, Sydney, April 10, 1990. SCAN+, 
no. 3.
Paisley, Erinne. “Catching a Glimpse of the Elusive ‘Feminist Drone.’” Datactive 
blog, March 31, 2020, https://data-activism.net/2020/03/blogpost-catching-a-glimpse
-of-the-elusive-feminist-drone/.
Parisi, Luciana. “The Alien Subject of AI.” Subjectivity 12 (2019): 27–­48.
Phillips, Dom. “Brazil Using Coronavirus to Cover Up Assaults on Amazon, Warn 
Activists.” The Guardian, May 6, 2020, https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/may
/06/brazil-using-coronavirus-to-cover-up-assaults-on-amazon-warn-activists.
Pisters, Patricia. The Neuro-­Image: A Deleuzian Filmphilosophy of Digital Screen Culture. 
Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2012.
Pitt, Jason N., et al. “WormBot, an Open-­Source Robotics Platform for Survival and 
Behavior Analysis in C. elegans.” GeroScience 41, no. 6 (2019): 961–­973, doi:10.1007
/s11357-­019-­00124.
Ploin, A., R. Eynon, I. Hjorth, and M. A. Osborne. AI and the Arts: How Machine 
Learning Is Changing Artistic Work. Report from the Creative Algorithmic Intelligence 
Research Project. Oxford: Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford, 2022.
Pollock, Griselda. “Dreaming the Face, Screening the Death: Reflections for Jean-­
Louis Schefer on La Jetée.” Journal of Visual Culture 4, no. 3 (2005): 287–­305.
Poremba, Cindy. “Point and Shoot: Remediating Photography in Gamespace.” 
Games and Culture 2, no. 1 (2007): 49–­58.
Poster, Mark. “An Introduction to Vilém Flusser’s Into the Universe of Technical Images 
and Does Writing Have a Future?” In Vilém Flusser, Into the Universe of Technical 
Images, ix–­xxv. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2011.
Povinelli, Elizabeth A. Geontologies: A Requiem to Late Liberalism. Durham: Duke Uni­
versity Press, 2016. Kindle edition.

Bibliography	
257
Prevost, Scott. “Making Visual Search Smarter: How AI Understands Creative 
Intent.” Petapixel, March 29, 2021, https://petapixel.com/2021/03/29/making-visual
-search-smarter-how-ai-understands-creative-intent/.
Reeke Jr., George N., and Gerald M. Edelman. “Real Brains and Artificial Intelli­
gence.” Daedalus 117, no. 1 (Winter 1988): 143–­173.
Rexer, Lyle. The Critical Eye: Fifteen Pictures to Understand Photography. Bristol, UK: 
Intellect, 2019.
Rexer, Lyle. The Edge of Vision: The Rise of Abstraction in Photography. New York: Aper­
ture, 2013.
Richter, Gerhard. Afterness: Figures of Following in Modern Thought and Aesthetics. New 
York: Columbia University Press, 2011.
Ritchin, Fred. After Photography. New York: W. W. Norton, 2009.
Rødje, Kjetil. “Lens-­Sense: On Seeing a World as Sensed by a Camera.” Screening the 
Past, no. 43 (April 2018), http://www.screeningthepast.com/2018/02/lens-sense-on
-seeing-a-world-as-sensed-by-a-camera/#_ednref11.
Rogers, Brian. Perception: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2017. Kindle edition.
Rosenblum, Naomi. The World History of Photography. 3rd ed. New York: Abbeville 
Press, 1997.
Roth, Nancy. “The Photographer’s Part.” Flusser Studies 10 (November 2011).
Rubinstein, Daniel, and Katrina Sluis. “A Life More Photographic: Mapping the Net­
worked Image.” Photographies 1, no. 1 (March 2008): 9–­28.
Rushe, Dominic, and Michael Sainato. “Amazon Posts $75bn First-­Quarter Rev­
enues but Expects to Spend $4bn in Covid-­19 Costs.” The Guardian, April 30, 2020, 
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2020/apr/30/amazon-revenues-jeff-bezos
-coronavirus-pandemic.
Sealy, Mark. Decolonising the Camera: Photography in Racial Time. London: Lawrence 
& Wishart, 2019.
Sekatskiy, Alexander. “The Photographic Argument of Philosophy.” Philosophy of 
Photography 1, no. 1 (2010): 81–­88.
Seth, Anil. Being You: A New Science of Consciousness. London: Faber & Faber, 2021. 
Kindle edition.
Seymour, Nicole. Bad Environmentalism: Irony and Irreverence in the Ecological Age. 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2018.

258	
Bibliography
Shannon, Claude E., and Warren Weaver. The Mathematical Theory of Communica­
tion. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1949.
Sharma, Sarah. “A Manifesto for the Broken Machine.” Camera Obscura 35, no. 2 
(2020): 171–­178.
Shore, Robert. Post-­Photography: The Artist with a Camera. London: Laurence King, 
2014.
Siegel, Eric. “When Does Predictive Technology Become Unethical?” Harvard Business 
Review, October 23, 2020, https://hbr.org/2020/10/when-does-predictive-technology
-become-unethical.
Simonite, Tom. “The Best Algorithms Struggle to Recognize Black Faces Equally.” 
Wired, July 22, 2019, https://www.wired.com/story/best-algorithms-struggle-recognize
-black-faces-equally/.
Šimůnek, Michal. “The Failed Photographs of Photography: On the Analogue and 
Slow Photography Movement.” In Photography Off the Scale: Technologies and Theories 
of the Mass Image, ed. Tomas Dvořák and Jussi Parikka, 140–­157. Edinburgh: Edin­
burgh University Press, 2021.
Sluis, Katrina. “Collaborating with Machines.” Photoworks 21 (2014): 154–­156.
Solnit, Rebecca. River of Shadows: Eadweard Muybridge and the Technological Wild 
West. London: Penguin, 2004.
Sommer, Marc, and Robert Wurtz. “Influence of the Thalamus on Spatial Visual 
Processing in Frontal Cortex.” Nature 444 (2006): 374–­377.
Sontag, Susan. On Photography. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1977.
Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty. “Planetarity.” In Death of a Discipline. New York: 
Columbia University Press, 2003.
Stanton, Rich. “These Photographs Make Video Game Worlds Look Real.” Kotaku, 
March 22, 2018, https://www.kotaku.co.uk/2018/03/22/these-photographs-make
-video-game-worlds-look-real.
Stejskalová, Tereza. “Online Weak and Poor Images: On Contemporary Feminist 
Visual Politics.” In Photography Off the Scale: Technologies and Theories of the Mass 
Image, ed. Tomas Dvořák and Jussi Parikka, 97–­110. Edinburgh: Edinburgh Univer­
sity Press, 2021.
Stephenson, Neil. Snow Crash. New York: Bantam Books, 1992.
Steyerl, Hito. “In Defense of the Poor Image.” e-­flux Journal, no. 10 (November 2009), 
https://www.e-flux.com/journal/10/61362/in-defense-of-the-poor-image/.

Bibliography	
259
Stiegler, Bernard. Automatic Society, vol. 1: The Future of Work. Trans. Daniel Ross. 
Cambridge: Polity Press, 2017.
Stiegler, Bernard, and Jacques Derrida. Echographies of Television. London: Polity, 
2002.
Szegedy, Christian, et al. “Going Deeper with Convolutions.” Eprint from 
arXiv:1409.4842, submitted September 17, 2014.
Taffel, Sy. “Automating Creativity.” Screenworks, September 2019, https://doi.org
/10.37186/swrks/10.1/2.
Taffel, Sy. “Google’s Lens: Computational Photography and Platform Capitalism.” 
Media, Culture and Society 43, no. 2 (2021): 237–­255.
Tagg, John. “Mindless Photography.” In Photography: Theoretical Snapshots, ed. J. J. 
Long, Andrea Noble, and Edward Welch, 16–­30. London: Routledge, 2008.
Toister, Yanai. Photography from the Turin Shroud to the Turing Machine. Bristol: Intel­
lect, 2020.
Tononi, Giulio, and Gerald M. Edelman. “Consciousness and Complexity.” Science 
282, no. 5395 (1998): 1846–­1851.
Tortorici, Dayna. “Infinite Scroll: Life under Instagram.” The Guardian, January 31, 
2020, https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2020/jan/31/infinite-scroll-life-under
-instagram.
Trend, David. The End of Reading: From Gutenberg to Grand Theft Auto. Frankfurt am 
Main: Peter Lang, 2010.
Tresch, John. “Cosmic Terrains (of the Sun King, Son of Heaven, and Sovereign of 
the Seas).” e-­flux Journal, no. 114 (December 2020), https://www.e-flux.com/journal
/114/364980/cosmic-terrains-of-the-sun-king-son-of-heaven-and-sovereign-of-the
-seas/.
Twenge, Jean M., Gabrielle N. Martin, and Brian H. Spitzberg. “Trends in U.S. 
Adolescents’ Media Use, 1976–­2016: The Rise of Digital Media, the Decline of TV, 
and the (Near) Demise of Print.” Psychology of Popular Media Culture 8, no. 4 (2019): 
329–­345.
Uhlin, Graig. “Monkeywrenched Images: Ecocinema and Sabotage.” New Review of 
Film and Television Studies 18, no. 3 (2020): 301–­324, doi: 10.1080/17400309.2020
.1790480, 321.
Ullman, Shimon. Foreword to David Marr, Vision: A Computational Investigation into 
the Human Representation and Processing of Visual Information. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 1990.

260	
Bibliography
van Alphen, Ernst. Failed Images: Photography and Its Counter-­Practices. Amsterdam: 
Valiz, 2018.
Verhoeff, Nanna. Mobile Screens: The Visual Regime of Navigation. Amsterdam: 
Amsterdam University Press, 2012.
Viñas, Maria-­Jose, and Mike Carlowicz. “Despite Antarctic Gains, Global Sea Ice Is 
Shrinking.” NOAA Climate.gov, March 5, 2019; updated June 3, 2021, https://www
.climate.gov/news-features/features/despite-antarctic-gains-global-sea-ice-shrinking.
Virilio, Paul. The Vision Machine. Trans. Julie Rose. Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press, 1994.
von Foerster, Heinz. “Perception of the Future and the Future of Perception.” Instruc­
tional Science 1, no. 1 (1972): 31–­43.
Wees, William C. Light Moving in Time: Studies in the Visual Aesthetics of Avant-­Garde 
Film. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992.
Wells, Liz. “The Limits of Critical Thought about Post-­photography.” In Photography: 
A Critical Introduction, ed. Liz Wells. 2nd ed. London: Routledge, 2000.
Wertheimer, Max. “Experimentelle Studien über das Sehen von Bewegung.” 
Zeitschrift für Psychologie 61 (1912): 161–­265.
Wetherby, Leif. “Data and the Task of the Humanities.” In 001: Aesthetics of New AI, 
ed. Creative AI Lab, 36–­49. London: Serpentine Galleries, October 2020.
Wolf, Maryanne. Reader Come Home: The Reading Brain in a Digital World. New York: 
Harper, 2018.
Wolf, Maryanne. “Skim Reading Is the New Normal. The Effect on Society Is Pro­
found.” The Guardian, August 25, 2018, https://www.theguardian.com/commentis
free/2018/aug/25/skim-reading-new-normal-maryanne-wolf.
Wolf, Maryanne. “There’s a Crisis of Reading among Generation Z.” Pacific Standard, 
April 29, 2019, https://psmag.com/ideas/theres-a-crisis-of-reading-among-generation-z.
Young, Liam, ed. “Machine Landscapes: Architectures of the Post Anthropocene.” 
Special issue of Architectural Design, no. 257 (January-­February 2019).
Zubarev, Vasily. “Computational Photography Part I: What Is Computational Pho­
tography?” dpreview, June 3, 2020, https://www.dpreview.com/articles/9828658229
/computational-photography-part-i-what-is-computational-photography/2.
Zuboff, Shoshana. The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a Human Future at 
the New Frontier of Power. New York: Public Affairs, 2019. Kindle edition.
Zylinska, Joanna. AI Art: Machine Visions and Warped Dreams. London: Open 
Humanities Press, 2020.

Bibliography	
261
Zylinska, Joanna. “Eco-­eco-­punk: Mediating the Anthropocene with Nam June 
Paik.” In Media Ecology: Revisiting TV Garden. Gyeonggi-­do: Nam June Paik Art 
Center, 2021.
Zylinska, Joanna. The End of Man: A Feminist Counterapocalypse. Minneapolis: Uni­
versity of Minnesota Press, 2018.
Zylinska, Joanna. Minimal Ethics for the Anthropocene. Ann Arbor: Open Humanities 
Press, 2014.
Zylinska, Joanna. Nonhuman Photography. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2017.


Index
Agency, 11, 13, 17, 51, 58, 61, 101, 121, 
126–­128, 131, 144, 159, 187–­188, 
213n42
Algorithms, 2, 5, 8–­9, 11, 15, 34, 43, 46, 
51–­52, 55, 59, 63, 96–­97, 99, 105, 
108–­110, 114, 116, 123, 127–­129, 
131, 136, 139–­144, 146, 154–­155, 
158, 188, 194, 223n2, 232n37
Anadol, Refik, 52–­53
Anderson, Joseph, and Barbara 
Anderson (née Fisher), 83, 85, 87, 
218n43
Anderson, Steve F., 8, 203n14
Anthropocene, 26, 32, 168–­170, 174, 
184, 190–­192
Antiracist, 17, 112–­113, 117
Anxiety, 8, 16, 22, 24–­25, 93–­94, 125, 
172
Apocalypse, 30–­32, 35, 40, 72, 93–­94, 
124, 141–­142, 194
Apparatus, 8–­9, 11, 26, 28–­29, 32–­33, 
37, 40–­42, 46–­49, 64, 73, 76, 78–­82, 
85, 87, 89–­92, 96, 102, 111, 113–­
114, 120–­121, 127–­131, 145, 161–­
162, 168, 177, 187, 194–­195
Archive, 52–­53, 57, 116–­117, 186, 188
Automation, 8, 10, 12, 17, 24, 26, 29, 
54–­55, 104, 113, 121, 128, 163, 196, 
230n26
Avant-­garde, 1, 80, 90, 160, 186, 188, 
194, 217n27
Azar, Mitra, 110
Azoulay, Ariella Aïsha, 13, 23, 63, 113–­
114, 117
Barthes, Roland, 7, 25, 28–­29, 229n2
Batchen, Geoffrey, 24–­25
Benjamin, Walter, 23, 28, 59
Berardi, Franco “Bifo,” 174
Bergson, Henri, 7, 81, 122, 160, 178, 
218n31
Bias, 17, 57, 108–­111, 113, 140
Biology, 55, 98, 100, 103–­105, 107–­108, 
226n45
Bittanti, Matteo, 74
Boetzkes, Amanda, 174–­175
Boljkovac, Nadine, 126
Braidotti, Rosi, 231n31
Brain, 15, 33–­34, 37–­39, 41, 43, 55–­56, 
62, 78, 82–­87, 91–­92, 96–­99, 
104–­106, 108, 111, 131, 148, 
150–­162
Bratton, Benjamin, 5
Broeckmann, Andreas, 97, 222n1
Bryson, Norman, 73, 78, 220n59
Burbridge, Ben, 146, 196
Campany, David, 65
Capitalism, 12, 63–­64, 112–­113, 117, 
146, 164, 196, 204n23
CGI (computer-­generated imagery), 2, 
24, 36, 114, 148, 161, 168, 174

264	
Index
Chakrabarty, Dipesh, 5, 169–­170, 172, 
203n10, 204n28
Chalmers, David, 85, 100
ChatGPT, 37, 143
Chávez Heras, Daniel, 146
Cinema, 54, 80–­81, 119–­122, 126–­
127, 140–­141, 154, 156, 181, 194, 
229n1
Cinematograph, 80–­81
Clark, Nigel, 169, 171–­172
Climate, 4–­5, 93, 125, 168–­169, 171–­
173, 192
Cobb, Matthew, 55–­57, 62, 150–­151
Code, 27, 37, 41, 55, 57, 90, 151, 178, 
207n28
Cognition, 6, 8, 12, 16, 53, 57, 66, 73, 
82, 93, 108, 146, 225n30
Cognitive psychology, 12, 54, 83, 85, 
87, 103, 150–­151
Cognitive science, 23, 83, 220n59
Computation, 4, 8, 16, 24, 50, 55, 149, 
151, 164, 224n18, 225n28
Computational photography, 2, 57, 
148, 161
Computer games, 59, 215n6. See also 
Gaming; Video games
Computer science, 98, 108, 160
Computer vision, 6, 57, 64, 80, 97–­
99, 106, 108–­110, 116, 127, 150, 
217n16, 223n2. See also Machine 
vision
Consciousness, 6, 8, 18, 28, 35, 54, 66, 
85, 89, 148, 151–­160, 196
Control, 33, 112, 141, 160
Cosman, Teodora, 56
Covid-­19, 6, 26, 93, 125, 195. See also 
Pandemics
Crary, Jonathan, 23, 73, 86
Creativity, viii, 33, 45–­46, 51, 102, 136–­
137, 184, 186
Crises, 12–­13, 93–­94, 125, 131, 142, 
169, 188, 190, 196, 205n32
Cut, 127, 130–­131, 165
Cutting, 16, 73, 81–­82, 88–­89, 91, 130
Cyborgs, 100, 192
Daguerre, Louis-­Jacques-­Mandé, 22
DALL·E 2, 1, 5, 51, 164, 193
Damasio, Antonio, 152–­157, 160
Darke, Chris, 126
Database, 6, 16, 30, 51, 53, 55, 62, 65, 
99, 109, 116–­117, 131
Daub, Adrian, 103
Death, 4, 24–­26, 32, 35, 120, 124–­125, 
140–­141, 149, 157–­158, 184
Deleuze, Gilles, 9–­10, 15, 81–­82, 
84, 111–­112, 119, 121, 122–­123, 
204n23, 229n1
Derrida, Jacques, 44–­46, 152, 232n40
Devs, 147–­148, 157–­160
Dewdney, Andrew, 2, 4, 23, 63–­64, 
199
Disembodied, 79, 82, 91, 108, 187. See 
also Embodiment
Dorrian, Mark, 180–­181
Drones, 5, 11, 54, 168–­169, 175–­186, 
188, 190, 241n47
Dvořák, Tomas, 1
Earth, 25, 125, 170–­171, 173–­175, 179, 
181, 188, 195, 203n10, 204n28, 
239n20
Ecology, 12–­13, 54, 142, 169–­170, 184, 
190–­192, 217n20. See also Media 
ecology
Ecology of perception, 8, 86, 90, 92, 
175, 177, 220n56
Edelman, Gerald M., 96, 100, 104–­106, 
160
Emancipatory, 17, 121, 186. See also 
Freedom; Liberation
Embodiment, 15, 78, 88, 107–­108, 
111, 160, 162, 170, 181. See also 
Disembodied
Emotions, 6, 59, 116, 188
Empire, 114, 117

Index	
265
Entropy, 7, 32, 35, 228n65
Environment, 5, 8, 14, 30, 93–­94, 98–­
99, 111–­112, 125, 142, 145, 155, 
168–­170, 177, 179, 181, 184, 190–­
191, 194, 196, 220n56, 226n36. See 
also Game environment; Virtual 
environment
Envisioners, 33, 37, 187
Ethics, 112, 195
Evolution, 59, 107, 111
Existence, 4–­6, 8, 12, 25, 28, 33, 36–­37, 
39–­40, 48, 58–­59, 89, 93–­94, 104, 
121, 126, 129, 142–­143, 160, 164, 
177, 188, 199
Existential media, 5, 8, 26–­28, 188, 189, 
203n11
Extinction, 4, 26, 125, 141, 169
Facebook, 36, 113, 130, 195, 198. See 
also Meta
Failure, 63, 72, 108, 125, 136, 185–­186, 
188, 190, 194
Farocki, Harun, 41
Feigenbaum, Anna, 184
Feminism, 13, 17, 93, 100, 140, 142, 
169, 181–­186, 190, 194, 199
Flow, 6, 9, 13–­16, 24, 28, 30, 32, 34, 
36, 41, 44, 52–­53, 55, 57–­58, 61–­62, 
64–­65, 73, 79–­81, 94, 114, 117, 120, 
122, 126, 145–­146, 155–­156, 170, 
175, 178–­179, 185, 188, 190, 194–­
195. See also Optic flow
Flusser, Vilém, 6–­7, 9, 12, 26–­37, 39–­43, 
46, 48, 58, 101–­102, 111, 129, 145, 
152, 178, 187, 194, 204n18
Fontcuberta, Joan, 60–­61
Freedom, 101–­102, 138, 144. See also 
Emancipatory; Liberation
Game environment, 73–­77, 87–­91
Gaming, 76, 88, 90, 92–­94, 154, 156, 
197, 199. See also Computer games; 
Video games
Generative adversarial network (GAN), 
131, 232n37
Gibson, James J., 86–­87, 130, 175, 
177–­179
Giddings, Seth, 75, 90
Glitches, 110, 136, 142, 144, 194
Globalization, 24, 170, 179
Globe, 163, 170–­172, 181, 187, 203n10
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 86
Goldberg, Ariel, 2, 9
Goldsmith, Kenneth, 29
Google, 17, 46, 52, 89, 99, 108, 112, 
125, 136, 150, 154, 174, 188, 196, 
223n8
Gore, Al, 173, 239n20
Green, David, 120, 122
Gregory, Richard L., 85
Grosser, Ben, 127–­128
Guattari, Félix, 9, 15, 81–­82, 111–­112, 
122–­123, 204n23
Guinard, Martin, 169, 171
Gurevitch, Leon, 174
Hall, Gary, 189
Hallucination, 33, 160–­161, 237n36
Hámos, Gusztáv, 128
Haptic, 14, 43, 91, 152, 173
Harbord, Janet, 126, 144
Hardt, Michael, 114
Harvey, Adam, 57, 64–­65
Heiferman, Marvin, 48, 58–­59
Hoelzl, Ingrid, 120–­121, 213n42
Hoffman, Donald D., 89, 105
Hubel, David, 97–­98
Hui, Yuk, 171
Humblet, Steven, 129
Imperialism, 24, 113, 117
Impett, Leonardo, 110, 223n2
Information, 7–­9, 32–­33, 36, 55, 58, 61, 
77–­78, 83–­85, 87, 97–­98, 101, 105–­
107, 151–­152, 161–­162, 164, 167, 
177

266	
Index
Informer, 33
Infrastructures, 2, 8–­9, 13–­15, 54–­55, 
78, 102, 109, 111, 113, 116, 168, 
188, 190, 192, 194–­196, 199, 
243n81
Ingold, Tim, 107–­108
Instagram, 15, 30–­31, 34–­36, 51, 62, 89, 
129, 175, 178, 180, 188, 194
James, Ian, 42–­43
Jetée, La, 121, 124–­128, 131, 139–­141
Johnston, John, 112, 221n1
Kember, Sarah, 82, 212n15
Kessler, Elizabeth A., 32
Khalili, Yazan, 2, 9
Klevjer, Rune, 89
Knowledge, 6, 14, 16, 24, 45–­46, 55–­
59, 81–­83, 89, 91, 93, 101–­102, 116, 
145, 150–­151, 164, 171, 185–­186, 
189, 222n1
Laboratory, 33, 77, 89, 98, 175, 197
Lagerkvist, Amanda, 5, 37, 188, 199, 
203n11
Latour, Bruno, 169, 171
Lazzarato, Maurizio, 15, 121–­123, 145
Lettvin, J. Y., 99
Liberation, 17, 43, 89. See also 
Emancipatory; Freedom
Libet, Benjamin, 157, 159
Life, 12, 24–­25, 37, 64, 66, 81, 92, 113–­
114, 120, 141–­142, 145, 149, 156–­
157, 173, 177, 181, 184, 188–­189, 
195–­196, 199, 203n11, 204n28
Light, 4, 56–­57, 62, 66, 75, 77, 80, 83, 
86, 88, 90, 97–­99, 102, 130, 174, 
179, 187, 197, 212n23, 217n27, 
218n37
Lin, Eva, 155
Loser images, 14, 69, 183–­185, 187–­190
Loss, 10, 26, 32, 39, 52, 59–­60, 112, 120, 
178, 183, 190
Lotto, Beau, 84, 222n81
Lowry, Joanna, 120
Machine vision, 6, 30, 54–­55, 64, 85, 
96–­99, 105, 114, 117, 127, 130, 137, 
141, 162, 179, 194, 227n46, 227n54. 
See also Computer vision
Majewska, Ewa, 186
Malevé, Nicolas, 114
Maltez-­Novaes, Rodrigo, 40
Manovich, Lev, 1
Marie, Rémi, 120–­121, 213n42
Marker, Chris, 121, 123–­128, 139–­142
Marr, David, 77, 98, 217n16
Martin, Gareth Damian, 75–­76
Matter, 7, 82, 161, 171, 174, 220n59
Maturana, Humberto, 110, 225n30
McCosker, Anthony, 54
McCouat, Philip, 22
McLean, Heather, 184–­185
Media ecology, 5, 32, 90, 191
Mediation, 2, 4, 6, 55, 63, 66, 74, 
91, 94, 154, 192, 212n15. See also 
Remediation
Message, 6, 29, 35, 85
Meta, 164, 195–­197. See also Facebook
Metaphor, 31, 50, 55–­58, 61, 80–­82, 85, 
113, 139, 150–­156, 160–­161, 194, 
235n12
Metaverse, 24, 164, 195–­199, 243n2
Mind, 14, 16, 52, 72–­73, 94, 126, 138, 
140, 144, 150–­151, 153, 156, 160
Mitchell, William J., 60, 62
Modrak, Rebekah, 87, 218n37
Montfort, Nick, 164, 168
Moreiras, Camila, 61
Movement, 28, 40, 79–­84, 87, 91, 97, 
106–­107, 120–­122, 126–­127, 131, 
145, 147–­148, 154–­155, 177–­179, 
188, 217n27, 218n43, 219n48, 
222n81
Murtaugh, Michael, 114
Muybridge, Eadweard, 23

Index	
267
Nadar, Félix, 52
Negri, Antonio, 114
Network(ed) image, 2, 54, 63
Neural networks, 15, 53, 66, 105, 131, 
139, 154–­155, 162–­163, 225n32, 
232n37
Neuroscience, 8, 12, 38, 54–­57, 81, 83, 
85, 87, 103, 148, 150–­151, 153
Noble, Safia, 109–­110
Noë, Alva, 86, 177, 240n30
Nonhuman, 6–­7, 9, 11, 15, 32, 53–­54, 
58–­59, 98, 111, 113, 123, 128–­129, 
131, 136, 143–­144, 162, 191, 195
Optic flow, 86–­88, 91, 130–­131, 150, 
231n33
Paglen, Trevor, 51, 66, 211n5
Paik, Nam June, 191
Pandemics, 4, 6, 12, 93–­94, 125, 142, 
179, 195. See also Covid-­19
Parikka, Jussi, 1
Parisi, Luciana, 103–­104
Percepts, 6, 62, 81, 94, 121, 220
Photofilm, 121, 123, 126, 128
Pixels, 30, 33, 98, 100, 109–­110, 116, 
139
Planet, 5, 13, 32, 35, 93–­94, 125, 142–­
143, 168–­174, 178–­179, 181, 188, 
195–­197, 203n10
Planetarity, 10, 18, 168–­170, 172, 174, 
181, 184–­186, 190
Politics, 2, 16, 24, 26, 58, 78, 94, 103, 
112, 114, 143, 169, 172, 179
Pollock, Griselda, 124, 140–­141
Poremba, Cindy, 74–­75, 92
Poster, Mark, 27–­28
Posthuman, 168, 231n31
Post-­photography, 60–­61
Povinelli, Elizabeth A., 174, 239n23
Pratschke, Katja, 128
Predictions, 105, 108, 148, 150, 152, 
158–­165
Predtech (prediction technology), 
161–­163
Punk, 13–­14, 94, 100, 142–­143, 169, 
190–­192, 194, 205n33
Reading, 31, 38–­44, 48, 145, 161
Reeke, George N., Jr., 96, 100, 104–­106
Remediation, 5, 52, 122, 131. See also 
Mediation
Representation, 5, 27, 41, 63, 78, 91, 98, 
106, 113, 120, 136, 173, 178, 186, 
188
Revolution, 1, 43, 137
Rexer, Lyle, 88, 91, 187
Ritchin, Fred, 60
Roth, Nancy, 27–­28
Rubinstein, Daniel, 31
Satellites, 5, 11, 51, 181
Science fiction, 13, 142, 144
Screens, 6, 27–­38, 41, 52, 72, 74–­76, 80, 
84, 90–­93, 121, 123, 128, 130, 141, 
145, 154, 163, 179–­180
Screenshotting, 16, 73–­74, 77, 79, 88–­
92, 197, 215n6
Sensing, 6, 48, 76, 90, 92, 177
Sensors, 8, 97, 177, 194, 196
Seth, Anil, 152, 159–­162
Seymour, Nicole, 142
Shannon, Claude E., 7
Sharma, Sarah, 190
Shore, Robert, 61
Silicon Valley, 103, 114, 125, 165
Sluis, Katrina, 31, 62
Smartphones, 17, 38, 44, 120, 128, 150
Snapchat, 15, 30–­31, 36
Social media, 6, 11, 15, 18, 30, 33–­34, 
36, 45, 74, 121, 169, 175, 194
Softimage, 213n42
Solnit, Rebecca, 23
Sontag, Susan, 7, 23, 28–­29
Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty, 170–­174, 
179, 185

268	
Index
Stable Diffusion, 51
Stejskalová, Tereza, 188
Stephenson, Neil, 195
Steyerl, Hito, 169, 187, 189
Stiegler, Bernard, 10, 40, 44, 65, 113, 
164, 228n65
Surveillance, 51, 110, 112–­114, 116
Szerszynski, Bronislaw, 169, 171–­172
Taffel, Sy, 150, 164, 230n26
Talbot, William Henry Fox, 11, 22
Teaching, 14, 16, 44–­45, 97, 102
Television, 26–­27, 36, 38, 51, 121–­122
Tode, Thomas, 128
Tononi, Giulio, 160
Tortorici, Dayna, 34
Trend, David, 38–­39, 48
Tresch, John, 173
Twenge, Jean M., 38–­39
Van Alphen, Ernst, 186–­187
Van Wichelen, Antje, 114
Varela, Francisco J., 110, 225n30
Verhoeff, Nanna, 91
Video, 10, 17, 26–­27, 43, 50, 59, 94, 99, 
120–­122, 160, 178–­181, 199
Video games, 38, 72–­73, 91, 194. See 
also Computer games; Gaming
Viewpoint, 74, 90, 121, 128–­129, 169, 
221n74
Virilio, Paul, 9–­10, 12, 51, 112–­114, 
162–­163
Virtual environment, 74, 77, 90
Virtual reality (VR), 6, 37, 154, 156, 
195–­198
Visual culture, 17, 77, 120, 160, 203n14
Von Foerster, Heinz, 96, 100–­103, 110
War, 4, 10, 52, 113–­114, 124–­125, 163, 
181
Weaver, Warren, 7
Wees, William C., 80
Wells, Liz, 60
Wertheimer, Max, 83
Wetherby, Leif, 113
Wiesel, Torsten, 97–­98
Wilken, Rowan, 54
Wolf, Maryanne, 38
Writing, 4, 7, 14, 31, 34, 36–­38, 43–­44, 
56, 58, 128
Young, Liam, 168
YouTube, 43, 45, 122, 160, 179–­180
Zoom, 6, 44, 108, 179
Zubarev, Vasily, 150
Zuboff, Shoshana, 112–­113

