
 
 
 
 
 
The Art of
Psychological
Warfare
Discover How to Defend Yourself from Manipulation and
Learn Dark Techniques to Mislead, Intimidate,
Demoralise and Influence the Thinking or Behaviour of
Your Enemies
 
 
 
 
 
Christopher Kingler
 
 
 
© Copyright 2021 by Christopher Kingler - All rights reserved.

The content contained within this book may not be reproduced, duplicated
or transmitted without direct written permission from the author or the
publisher.
Under no circumstances will any blame or legal responsibility be held
against the publisher, or author, for any damages, reparation, or monetary
loss due to the information contained within this book; either directly or
indirectly.
Legal Notice:
This book is copyright protected. This book is only for personal use. You
cannot amend, distribute, sell, use, quote or paraphrase any part, or the
content within this book, without the consent of the author or publisher.
Disclaimer Notice:
Please note the information contained within this document is for
educational and entertainment purposes only. All effort has been executed
to present accurate, up-to-date, and reliable, complete information. No
warranties of any kind are declared or implied. Readers acknowledge that
the author is not engaging in the rendering of legal, financial, medical or
professional advice.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 1: Why You Should Know the Art of 
 
Psychological Warfare
CHAPTER 2: What Is Psychological Warfare Theory?
CHAPTER 3: The Greatest Exponents of the Art of 
 
Psychological Warfare
CHAPTER 4: What Can We Learn From Sun Tzu And Machiavelli?
CHAPTER 5: Dangerous Dark Personalities
CHAPTER 6: The Psychology of Deception, Influence 
 
and Domination
CHAPTER 7: The Art of Blackmail, Manipulation, and 
 
Brainwashing
CHAPTER 8: Manipulative Political Propaganda and Media Tactics
CHAPTER 9: What Is Psyop?
CHAPTER 10: Why Do People Join Cults? How Do Cults Work?
CHAPTER 11: Psychological Warfare and Strategic Thinking at Work
CHAPTER 12: Psychological Warfare and Strategic Thinking In
Relationships 
 
and the Power of Words
CHAPTER 13: Psychological Warfare and Strategic Thinking For
Entrepreneurs 
 
and Business
CHAPTER 14: Defense Strategies In Psychological Warfare
CHAPTER 15: Train Your Mind To Be Calm In Every Situation
CHAPTER 16: Persuasion vs Manipulation

CHAPTER 17: Earn Respect
CONCLUSION
 
 
 
 

 

P
INTRODUCTION
sychological warfare is the use of propaganda and psychological
manipulation to influence a target audience toward the
accomplishment of a political, economic, or military goal.
I am severely saddened and a little bit disturbed that the United States of
America, with all of its might, has used psychological warfare against its
own people. This psychological warfare has been going on for so long that
"We the People" have forgotten all about it and allowed it to continue. If a
country was being used as a guinea pig in a psychological warfare
experiment, and the results were not favorable, the experiment would be
discontinued.
The question is this, are we the guinea pigs? I don't know! But upon
researching the concept of psychological warfare, I have concluded, "well,
we sure might be."
From the birth of the United States of America, right up to the present day,
we the people have been subjected to an ongoing psychological warfare
program, and the war will never end. The war will never end because we
are unaware of the full extent of the loss of freedom that has occurred and is
still occurring.
From my own investigations into the topic, I do not believe the
psychological warfare program is only taking place in the United States, but
also in other nations in the world. Secret documents have been leaked to an
international news agency revealing that countries like Russia were also
singled out for their participation in a psychological warfare program. I'm
not making this up, I have read a ton of these leaked documents that a
national news agency obtained from one of the countries being subjected to
psychological warfare.

Psychological warfare also happens in our ordinary lives. Those who
practice psychology know it is possible to conduct surveillance on a person
based on subtle clues provided by that person. A common example would
be when someone is looking around at the paintings at a museum and then
later that person gets hit by a spell that was cast against that person just
because they looked at a bunch of paintings.
As I said before, psychological warfare is nothing new, it was being
practiced long before I was born, and I didn't grow up with the computer.
But the computer sure made it a hundred times easier to practice
psychological warfare, and made it harder to detect as well. We need to be
aware that we have been heavily programmed by the government and
television while we were in the womb – yes, while we were in the womb.
A major reason why it had to be done while we were in the womb is that we
are all born with a superpower called intuition. The government and
television program people in that area of the brain the least because that is
where people are stronger than them. The rest of the brain has been hard at
work since before we were born.
This psychological warfare program is used in all of society's sectors. An
example would be in the media. Investigative journalism has been around a
long time, but recently a lot of investigative journalists have been silenced
because of the psychological warfare program. The reason behind the attack
on the media is that the psychological warfare program is nothing more
than an attempt to sustain the illusion of a strong, powerful, invincible
USA.
I have also researched the Pentagon and have read about a few situations
where they have acted out psychological warfare programs by using the
services of individuals who have been trained in the art of covert warfare.
I will not go into the process of the psychological warfare program in any
great detail, as I am a writer, not a trained psychologist. However, this book
will cover the various branches of psychological warfare. This is so you
will be aware of the truth and be able to avoid psychological warfare

programs, thus reducing any damage that they may cause you. It is up to
you to decide what to do with this information; whether you will simply
ignore it, or whether you will react to it positively and vigorously.
The psychological warfare program, though it is a covert program, is not a
secret to journalists. While people like ourselves may feel naïve about some
of the things we have heard and read regarding psychological warfare, spies
think about us, “Hey, we all know about you.”
I've met with many reporters who have covered the psychological warfare
program, and none of them are aware of any of this information. You would
be surprised by the number of people who are aware of this information,
and they only talk to other individuals who are already aware of it – they
don't talk about it to the public.
Be aware that the psychological warfare program is always just around the
corner – nothing can be taken for granted.
I am of the opinion that the psychological warfare program is being carried
out by people in our own government. These people are professionals in
covert warfare, and they are professionals in psychological warfare as well.
It is up to you to decide what you will do about the psychological warfare
program. React positively or react negatively. How you choose to react will
have an effect on your life and the fate of your loved ones, so to speak. The
psychological warfare program is so subtle that it is virtually impossible to
avoid. Even the most experienced and dedicated truth-seekers may still be
subjected to the psychological warfare program.
There is one thing I do know. Our only hope is that we can change the way
we react to things for the better.
It is our duty to make positive changes in our lives; create change.

 

A
CHAPTER 1: WHY YOU SHOULD 
 
KNOW THE ART OF PSYCHOLOGICAL
WARFARE
ll people have a dark side. Some people just suppress that side
and don’t explore all the power it has to offer. You, on the other
hand, have decided to explore and even enrich your dark side.
Many benefits await you. Human beings are naturally ruthless and
competitive creatures. The only ones who succeed are people who are
willing to violate morals and ethics to get to the top. Now that you have
decided to do this, you will get to the top too. You will only fall behind and
lose in life if you don’t become cutthroat and shameless about going after
what you want.
But in our society, we have to at least pretend to follow the current social
code of morals and ethics. Otherwise, people will judge us harshly and
avoid us. They won’t be as willing to like you and to help you out. Your
psychological warfare training will not work if people start to dislike you
and avoid you. Therefore, you must create a façade that totally obscures
your dark side. You must hide behind an elaborate and beautiful façade that
fools people into liking and trusting you. It is the only way to get away with
psychological warfare.
 
 

Create a Foolproof Façade
So how do you create this lovely, warming façade that fools the world?
How should you look to others? How do you hide what you are really up
to? How do you make people believe that you mean only the best and that
you are not ruthless and self-serving?
Well, deception is part of it. But so is denial. And so is confidence. You can
create a very convincing façade if you blend these three elements into your
outward projection of yourself. You will create a façade is so convincing
that you will have everyone fooled.
Deception
It’s OK to lie about yourself and present yourself deceptively if it builds
your image. You can use deception to make yourself look good to others.
Just make sure that your lies are not blatant. You want to mislead people by
making yourself look good, but you don’t want to lie and look pathetic
should you get found out. Always tell at least most of the truth when you
talk about yourself.
Let’s say you are on a date. You want to make the best impression but you
don’t have a great job. You don’t want to lie outright about your job as you
might get caught. Instead, talk up your job and use words that exaggerate
the importance of your position.
Focus on your strengths when you speak about yourself, too. Try to show
off your strengths. Don’t show off your weaknesses. Downplay your
weaknesses to make yourself look better. The better your outward image is
and the more positive of a character you appear to have, the more people
will like you. Then you will have better luck with people.
Denial

Denial can help you appear innocent. There are many aspects to denial. You
should combine deception and denial in order to fool people into thinking
that you are incapable of wrongdoing.
The victim card is a good one to play. Deny that you have ever done wrong
and pretend to be an innocent victim to justify your actions.
You can also pretend that you didn’t know what you did was wrong. You
made an honest mistake. Now, you’re repenting and consumed with guilt.
Deny that you are immoral and pretend to be the grieving sinner. People
will feel that you have a good heart, even if you have messed up in the past.
They will forgive you and admire you for your bravery.
You can also just flatly deny that you have done what others say about you.
Act shocked when you hear stories about yourself. Then tell people some
stories of your own to discredit those who talk badly about you. Deny that
you had any involvement in any wrongdoing in the past.
Confidence
Confidence is the key to creating an innocent and believable façade. In fact,
confidence is the key to getting others to like you. People are attracted to
those who possess healthy confidence and ego. If you project confidence,
you will draw people to you. And then your façade will definitely work.
Have you noticed that vain, narcissistic people are usually the most popular
and well-liked? This is because they are totally confident and don’t let
others ruffle their feathers. Basically, they have such thick skins that
nothing can stir up their insecurities. They are bold and passionate about
who they are and what they want. You need to become this way.
Confidence is not just something that you must possess. You can fake it.
Faking it will actually make you confident over time. And you can convince
others that you possess lots of confidence, even if you really don’t. Start
acting confident today. It all lies in body language and speech. If you walk
with a straight spine, look people in the eyes, and speak first, you will
appear far more confident. You should also speak very directly and avoid

stuttering or being inarticulate. Doing this will make you appear as if you
have nothing to hide and nothing to be ashamed of, which will inspire trust
and admiration in others. This is partly why confidence is so attractive. You
may also establish dominance over others by being confident, which gives
you that authoritative edge that is so beneficial in persuasion.
You can also take being confident a bit further. Being cocky may go against
your nature and your sense of modesty, but it’s really the best way to charm
people. Yes, people claim that they are put off by cocky people, yet look
who gets the most women or men. Being cocky is not the same as being
confident. But it can work for you. Putting on a charmingly cocky façade is
a great way to make people feel attracted to you. They won’t know why, but
they will feel inexplicably drawn to your suave and vain nature. Be sure to
brag about yourself, while also complimenting others. Shamelessly talk to
people, forcing your nature on them and never taking no for an answer.
Don’t ever speak doubtfully or belittle yourself.
Confidence also helps you justify what you do to yourself. If you believe
that you are a great person who deserves the best and that there is nothing
wrong with what you are doing to others, then you won’t give away your
secret dark side out of guilt, doubt, or hesitation. You will simply act on
your desires boldly and shamelessly.
Shockingly, people will believe you more often than not if you act like you
are in the right.

 

CHAPTER 2: WHAT IS PSYCHOLOGICAL
WARFARE THEORY?
The term “mental fighting” or “psychological warfare” is utilized to mean
any activity which is rehearsed with the intention of inspiring an arranged
mental response in other people.
It is utilized to initiate admissions or strengthen dispositions and practices
ideal to the perpetrator’s goals, and often includes dark activities or bogus
strategies. It is additionally used to pulverize the confidence of foes.
There is proof of mental fighting throughout recorded history. On many
occasions, mental fighting endeavors have been utilized widely. Today, the
web causes numerous battles of disinformation and falsehood, perpetrated
by operators in any place on the planet.

Tactics of Psychological Warfare
Perpetrators of psychological warfare are advised to choose not just ONE of
the techniques available, but SEVERAL at the same time, organizing them
into a campaign that will mutually reinforce one other.
This is a key point, and you would do well to note it, because, in order to
accomplish true psychological warfare, it requires more than one person’s
involvement. It then becomes one of the classic meanings of the word
“conspiracy.”
Conspiracy—An agreement to perform together an illegal, wrongful, or
subversive act.
Subversive, in the context of this document, means:
A destructive, aggressive activity aimed to destroy your will to resist being
forced into conforming with an enemy’s view of who they want you to be,
how they want you to act, what views they want you to have, and what
decisions they want you to make.
It is a military term in its basic origin and is considered a war tactics.
Since psychological warfare requires a campaign in order to have any
chance of working, you can see that this would usually involve more than
one person trying to subvert you into giving up your will to fight. And at
that point?
You have a conspiracy.
This is why one of the first things trotted out by psychological warfare
supporters when they or someone they work for comes under fire publicly
for illegal, immoral, and undeserved acts are to call them a “conspiracy
theorist.”
See the thing is, in most cases, the people that trot out the Conspiracy
Theorist term know for a fact you are telling the truth. Or at least that you
are too close to the truth. Their first priority in a well-publicized situation is

to try and prevent others from realizing that it’s true. The goal is both to
discredit you by any means possible, and to distract from the hard, cold,
truth. Their second priority is to try and wear you down so you’ll stop. It’s
always a two-pronged approach that, as you can see, lines up perfectly with
their own guidelines for psychological warfare.
There exists in every person, a completely accurate perception of what IS,
at any given point in time. And things can change very fast—but so do you.
You don’t live in a void. Other people are always doing this, that, and the
other thing. It’s just the way it is. Take a “feeling of having done something
wrong.” You will usually have both the feeling that you have done
something wrong, and the feeling that THAT idea is wrong. They can both
be TRUE in that they both exist, but they cannot both be true as to accuracy.
As long as both are present and part of NOW, you see what is, so you will
see/perceive BOTH because they exist.
Food for thought.
And remember, it is exactly that kind of effect on a target’s mind that is
sought by psychological warfare tacticians.
You have a problem.
You can’t decide.
You can’t tell what is true.
Or how about this one…
Question everything.
Think that is a “good policy” to have?
No, actually it’s not—not as a policy, that’s for sure. It’s actually quite
subversive because it pre-supposes that you are an idiot who can’t tell the
truth about something, or that you are an idiot who just accepts whatever
passing data crosses your path instantly as truth. Either or both must be
taken as a given to even pre-suppose a NEEDING to “question everything.”

Well, here’s what my answer might be, to the person that invented that
particular subversive policy:
OK. Why should someone “question everything” when they don’t have a
question in the FIRST PLACE?
Sometimes there are things to question, but that’s not the same as actually
being uncertain and needing to question in order to find the truth. It’s more
of a rhetorical question.
I’ll give you a question that isn’t a question, because neither you nor I have
a question about what I’m going to ask. Some like to call this particular
rhetorical question “the real question.”
Question: Why are you trying to sell to the rest of us that we are inherently
blind, wrong, and ignorant and needing “fixing”?
Everyone’s words don’t need to be questioned as to their truthfulness, but
YOURS most certainly do.

Other Tactics of Psychological Warfare
Basically, all tactics of psychological warfare include using mind games on
enemies. These are some modern tactics that are extremely dangerous and
destructive, however they can be used in any situation:
(1) Heart reaping: This is a tactic where the enemy is successfully
distracted from his mission by hearing a suggestive conversation that is
directly related to the topic of the mission. His body and mind are disturbed
because the nerve synapses will light up and the brain will focus on this
feeling.
(2) Long-Distance Suggestion: The act of using expectations to build faith
that the mission is possible and that time is on their side. They will exhibit a
feeling of unwavering courage.
(3) Human Trafficking: To get the enemy from his position into ambush
tactics, illegally recruiting and changing the mind of the enemy.
(4) A Vigilant Disciple: A technique that makes the enemy despair and
abandon his mission.
(5) Psychological Intelligence: This is a technique that uses the enemy's
mind against him. It, like other psychological warfare techniques, uses
surprises to distract the enemy and cause him to abandon the plan, but this
also can actually defeat the enemy. This furthers the psychological warfare
tactics to keep the enemy's mind positioned in any unexpected situations, or
just to mess with their mind and make them doubt themselves in their
mission.
(6) Mind Reading: Another tactic is called mind reading where the enemy
is told to think of one thing and the person doing the reading will be able to
see what the enemy is thinking by indirect reasoning. This technique could
possibly work on the mind of an enemy that has advanced technology. This
could come from a futuristic alien or any kind of scientific advancement.

This is most effective when the enemy's mind is open to the mind-reading.
It will also work best on enemies who are naive.
(7) Monitoring Profile: This is a process where profiles of the enemies are
monitored in every way possible until it is possible to predict their
movements. This is done using a camera or any other type of viewing
device.
(8) Social Engineering: The idea here is to manipulate information and
excite the enemy and distract him from the goal of the mission by using a
series of propaganda and ideological beliefs.
Psychological warfare tactics will most likely evolve just as humans are
constantly evolving. Technology and science will probably come out with a
versions of this stuff. The idea is to keep disrupting your enemy's mind and
stop the mission from happening until the enemy is gone.

 

CHAPTER 3: THE GREATEST EXPONENTS
OF THE ART OF PSYCHOLOGICAL
WARFARE

L
Learn to Analyze Friends, Coworkers, Lovers
earning to apply psychology to friends, coworkers, and lovers is
primarily a matter of boundaries. Each person might have different
interests in their possible angle of manipulation. Each of us plays a
number of different roles throughout our lives. In one role, we are called to
be a family member. This might refer to your given or born family, or it
might refer to your chosen family. “Chosen family” refers to the people
who you include in your life to the closest degree. This might include
friends or other people to which you have chosen to be closest.
Coworkers include people we are often required to be around. Some lucky
people get to choose who they work with, but most of us are required to
work with people at random. Friends are a category of people who we
choose to spend our time with, mostly doing enjoyable activities. Lastly,
lovers include those with whom we choose to be romantic.
When dealing with friends, we must establish the types of boundaries we
want to have. Friendships should bolster your health and overall well-being.
Coworkers are a little trickier because these are not people we necessarily
choose to be around. Having a good relationship with coworkers means that
you are able to be pleasant and nice and effective in the workplace, while
not asking too much about the intimate details of their lives.
Family is yet another category of people with whom we must figure out our
relationships. In some cases, a relationship with family members is not
possible or necessary. For people who grew up with abusive parents, it can
be healthy to cut out traditional family members and grow a new chosen
family. However, for many people, family connections are deep and
important.
Once you have firmly established the different roles for the people in your
life, you can start analyzing whether or not the relationships are equitable.
You might find that someone has set up the relationship to be more

beneficial for them than for you. You might find that you are manipulating
someone else!

Confidence and Charisma
Confidence and charisma are ways to both employ dark psychological
tactics on others as well as protect yourself from being manipulated. What
do you think of when you think about confidence?
Rather than focusing on the modern conception of positive psychology’s
confidence, let’s roll back the tape of history a little bit and consider
Machiavelli’s style of confidence. Machiavellianism is defined as a cold
and calculating ability to work for and towards your own goals, for
yourself. It does not emphasize morality or empathy, and it is an essentially
cynical mindset.
Nice guys finish last. That’s the mindset of Machiavellianism. It is all about
strength. Cynicism helps to frame the world in a realistic way. People are
out to get you and they want to stop you from accomplishing your goals.
Think about it. There are not many people who are actually just in the
world. Justice is a concept that is very fluid, and it is rarely placed on the
right people. The world is filled with predators, people who want to take
advantage of other people. The world is filled with con artists, scams, mind
control, brainwashing, and darkness.

Looking Inward
One thing that many people have to do to reach this state of confidence is
address their unfinished business. This is not business in the conventional
meaning of the word. This is business in any form, whether it comes from
past relationships, things that happened, things that you have been putting
off for a while, or many other things. There can be many sources of
unfinished business that have to be addressed.

Non-verbal Communication
Non-verbal communication is a huge part of your life, whether you realize
it or not. Each time that you talk to a person, there are tons of messages that
are being conveyed through the slightest body movements. When you are
talking to someone, and you are listening to what they are saying, you are
using your mind to connect with them. However, your sight, smell, hearing,
and other senses also perceive tons of information that is processed
automatically.

Self-Realization
Self-realization is a term that comes from the humanistic school of
psychology. It references the idea that each person has an authentic self
somewhere that can be reached through the process of understanding the
self and doing work to achieve a more authentic and real you.

Communication
Communication is a huge part of being an effective leader, and it is very
important if you want to have charisma and confidence. We use words to
describe things, people, feelings, attitudes, theories, philosophies, and so
on. We can choose many different words to describe the same thing—and
this is where the trouble often starts.

You Are What You Think
Ever heard the expression, “you are what you eat”? There is a variation on
that phrase that I enjoy, it goes: “You are what you think.” When you think
negative thoughts about yourself, you are participating in a sort of self-
loathing, self-fulfilling prophecy. If you are always telling yourself that you
are lazy and worthless, you encourage yourself to do types of behaviors that
you consider worthless or lazy. You start to think about yourself as the
worst version of yourself. This is something that needs to be battled against.
Positive thinking is much better for your overall health. It will improve your
mood and attention span and even your physical health.

 

U
CHAPTER 4: WHAT CAN WE 
 
LEARN FROM SUN TZU AND
MACHIAVELLI?
ltimately, Sun Tzu and Machiavelli both discuss power. They do
this in different ways and have different areas of emphasis, but
the bottom line is that both sets of ideas are based on gaining,
maintaining, and exercising power. As a leader, power can seem like an
abstract concept that is difficult to grasp and put into actionable ideas. Two
very actionable concepts appear as key themes in both The Art of War and
The Prince—deception, and perception. This chapter explores how being
able to strategically deploy deception in a range of situations can lead to a
significant advantage for leaders. It also shows how being able to control,
influence, and even manipulate perception is a vital part of powerful
leadership.

Sun Tzu’s Deception—Updated and Applied
Let’s take a look at some of the ways that Sun Tzu spoke of deception in
The Art of War and how these can be interpreted and understood in the
modern era.
“When able to attack, seem unable” is one of the most famous sections of
The Art of War.
Essentially, we can apply the idea of “attack” in the sense of “an aggressive
or outgoing course of action.” Think of the term “plan of attack”—it does
not literally have to be violent. With this new, non-literal definition of
attack in mind, what are some of the ways we can apply Sun Tzu’s famous
maxim?
Personal Attacks
One of the key applications of seeming unable to attack is within the
personal sphere of career and business. Many corporate environments
feature a range of highly coveted promotions that are known about and
sought after by many. This is where the concept of “office politics” comes
from. Even the most mundane office environment is likely to have a range
of rivalries and dramas. Almost anyone who has ever worked in the modern
era will be aware of the focus of these dynamics—rivals trying to push each
other out, pull off feats of one-upmanship, and look better than their foes.
Guess what? The most effective way to attack is to do so when no one sees
it coming. If you are going for a promotion, keep it as secret as possible. If
you are not perceived as a threat, as a challenger, you will be off the radar
in terms of competition. If you are targeting someone’s job, keep it secret.
They will never know your attack is coming and will be unable to defend
themselves against your intentions in time.
Large Scale Attacks

The idea of hiding your intention to attack so your targets are unprepared
does not just apply on a small scale, personal level. It also works on a larger
scale, such as the actions and strategic plans of an entire organization. This
concept is easy to illustrate with an example—Apple product launches.
Think about the drama and excitement that comes with the launch of a new
Apple product. People speculate like crazy about what the new unveiling
will bring. Apple is as secretive as possible ahead of time. Then, on the day
of the launch, the product is revealed and usually announced to be on sale
within a very short period of time. As a result of this, competitors are on the
back foot. They never know exactly what is coming and what they should
do as a result. The launch of the original iPhone was a game-changer—
Apple did not necessarily seem set to attack the portion of the tech market
that they chose. As a result of this, competing firms had no real time to
prepare. Look at the fates of Blackberry and Motorola if you doubt this
concept.
Stealth
Another famous quote on deception from The Art of War states “when using
forces, seem inactive.” This is truer than ever these days. We live in an era
where people are encouraged to broadcast their every thought, plan, and
intention through social media. Countless cases of people being caught out
in terms of identity fraud, affairs, or going against workplace rules have
come to light because of people not being cautious enough. If you work
quietly and behind the scenes, you have a significant advantage over those
who do not.
One of the key areas in which working behind the scenes can work is
politics—both in the electoral sense and in general. Often, politicians focus
heavily on preparing their views, appearance, and perception in a way that
makes them seem favorable in comparison to a known rival, then out of
nowhere, a little-known challenger will make a massive push and catch the
favorites off guard. It’s not as if the newcomer started overnight—they
likely began to work diligently and quietly a long time before. They just

had the good sense to not make a big deal of what they were doing, which
would give their rivals a chance to prepare and take countermeasures.
It is not enough to just act quietly—it is sometimes vital to seem
specifically inactive. This can be done through sleight of hand. Let’s say,
for example, a skill is valued in a workplace. A number of people are
working hard to acquire this skill in the hope of advancing up the career
ladder. Someone else is also acquiring this skill—but in secret. They not
only do this secretly but make a point of seeming uninterested or
uninvolved whenever the topic of the new skill arises. This is an example of
proactively hiding one’s efforts in order to gain a strategic advantage.
The Illusion of Distance
“When near, make the enemy believe you are far away” states The Art of
War. This is a powerful concept that can be applied in a number of fields.
Human beings have evolved to be conscious of the immediate and obvious
threats to their safety and prosperity. If something is obviously dangerous
and nearby, our guard goes up and our defenses heighten. If something
seems like a distant prospect, however, we are less worried by it at the time.
Let’s look at modern warfare to see how this works.
Take two modern situations—the conflict in Korea between the North and
South, and the ongoing threat of terrorism. In Korea, the threat is obvious
and near. Troops are massed on either side of the border and there is a
constant awareness of the potential for conflict. Both sides are prepared and
ready, and therefore are in something of a stalemate. Terrorism, on the other
hand, remains under the radar. There is no formal membership structure.
People assume they are safe and then, suddenly, a bomb goes off. The
proximity of the threat is unknown at any given time and therefore cannot
be adequately expected.
So, what are some of the non-violent uses of strategic deception relating to
proximity?

Market entry is one area of business where seeming to be distant can
provide an advantage. If you wish to enter a new market, such as a region,
then it may be useful to prepare to do so quietly and discretely. If your
competitors don’t know you are close to entering a market, their attention is
not drawn to it. They are unlikely to assume the market is worthy of
consideration as a result of your interest in it.

The Power of Machiavellian Perception
One of the key recurring themes in The Prince is that a leader can get away
with almost anything if he appears a certain way in the eyes of the masses.
Therefore, almost any true nature can be covered up by careful management
of perception. Numerous examples show this is as true in the modern day as
it was in the time of Machiavelli.
Countless corporations are adept at using marketing to seem as if they are
ethical or praiseworthy while secretly pursuing entirely different motives.
Politicians are another prime example of this idea. How many candidates
running for office, or even prominent politicians, have claimed to be
wholesome and family-friendly and then have been exposed to be engaged
in infidelity or some other vice?
Interestingly, even when someone or something’s true nature is exposed,
many people will often still rush to defend it. Why? The person or entity in
question was so skilled at using perception to appear a certain way while
being another, that the false perception is deeply embedded in people’s
minds. People hate feeling like they have been duped, so will do almost
anything to cling to the false image they held. Think of the countless
celebrities who have been caught doing disgraceful acts but still command
legions of fans who claim the individuals in question were simply
“misunderstood.” Perception is powerful — use it to your advantage.
Keeping a true behavior or nature hidden is harder in the modern era than it
ever has been. Think of the countless examples of old photographs or
emails giving the game away. Even old data can be hacked and released into
the public to devastating effect. It is therefore absolutely vital that anything
you wish to remain hidden is kept in the utmost secrecy. Stay away from
email, text messages, social media—anything that could come back to
haunt you. Conduct your true plans in secrecy and away from any chance of
ever being exposed.

While doing one thing in secret, it’s important to leave a trail of doing
something different and acceptable in the eyes of the public. Let’s say, for
example, as a manager you need to get rid of one of your workers. You
know you must plot their downfall in secret. It’s not enough to plot and
scheme behind closed doors—you must appear to be very fair, even on the
doomed worker’s side, in public. If done skillfully enough, they will
eventually feel almost bad for you when you fire them, as you will seem
like a true friend who had their back. Really, their demise was inevitable the
entire time.

Deception and Perception—Sun Tzu and 
 
Machiavelli Combined
Like many powerful concepts, deception and perception are more potent
together than apart. If you take away one core idea from this chapter, it
should be that it is not enough to actively do one thing in secret—you need
to put out false information and seem to be doing something very different
in the eyes of the masses.
To really apply the ideas in this chapter, always keep two ideas in mind:
1. Which parts of my current course of action should I do in secret?
2. How can I appear to be doing something different to others?
It’s also important to always remain aware of the variables in any given
situation. A form of deception that worked once might not work again.

 

CHAPTER 5: DANGEROUS DARK
PERSONALITIES

T
The Dark Triad
he “dark triad” is a collection of character traits that are present in
every person. However, these traits are more prevalent in some than
in others. When they are predominant in an individual’s
personality, they can lead to inappropriate behavior, and in some cases, to
criminal activity. These traits are the hallmark of manipulators. While it is
not entirely known how they form, we do have a good understanding of
how they can be fostered.
When one of these traits is predominant in a person, you will find that they
are generally disruptive in many ways, but highly creative and energetic in
others. Moreover, people who exhibit dark triad traits in high order are
generally more skilled and intelligent individuals who have a keen sense of
the world around them. This is why they are able to make the most of their
desires and push their agenda along.
In some cases, you’ll see them as people who will stop at nothing to get
what they want. Other times, you will see them as people who don’t care

much about the feelings of others, especially if that gets in the way of their
achieving something.
So, if you are dealing with someone who exhibits any of these traits, or
heaven forbid, all three, then you really need to watch where you’re
stepping. Often, the best course of action is to get away from them. If you
try to do battle with people exhibiting dark triad characteristics, you need to
be several steps ahead of them. But, be warned that winning a war with
these folks may turn out to be winning a war of attrition more than one
based on skills and tactics.
Manipulators are all around us. There is no question about that. Some are
very easy to spot, while others may go unnoticed. Some manipulators act
out of impulse, while others are perfectly aware of what they are doing. In
such cases, manipulators may not spare any expense to get what they want.
Others may have a little more moral grounding, thereby enabling them to
set certain boundaries as to what they will and will not do.
 
 
 

Narcissism
Narcissism is broadly defined as love for oneself. This name comes from
the legend of Narcissus, who was in love with himself. From this legend,
narcissism is used to define a person who is extremely selfish. While it is
true that we are all selfish to a certain extent, the average narcissist is so
enamored with themselves that they will hatch whatever schemes they can
come up with to place themselves in the spotlight.
Narcissism is typically associated with feelings of entitlement and conceit.
These are individuals who seek to be the center of attention at all times
while trying to get others to do their bidding. The most rudimentary of
narcissists don’t really care how they get others to go along with them. All
they care about is that others do what they want. End of story.
More skilled narcissists are able to use many tactics at their disposal to get
others to go along. Often, these types of narcissists seem charming and very
pleasant.
Yet, it’s all a ploy. Their main objective is to get others to trust them and
admire them. As long as they are admired and shown constant displays of
affection, they are good with people. The problem occurs when they are not
given the feedback they seek. Often, it is a question of having their ego
stroked.
For example, a narcissist will become livid if they get no recognition for the
work they do. This is compounded if they feel that they have put their best
foot forward. The lack of recognition will drive them up the wall. On the
contrary, if they are showered with praise and accolades, then all is good.
They bask in the glory and seek to move on to the next display of affection
and appreciation.
The biggest issue with narcissists is that they are control freaks. Since they
feel that everyone must do their bidding, they need to control everything
and everyone around them. Consequently, if a narcissist feels that they have

lost control of their environment, they are liable to go to all means
necessary to ensure they regain full control. If this means destroying people
along the way, they may not stop to ponder the effects of their actions on
others.
A typical narcissist is formed in childhood, usually as the result of neglect
and oftentimes abuse. Generally speaking, kids who go through
abandonment and neglect in childhood tend to develop issues with control
and lack of affection. If untreated, these conditions can develop into a full-
blown narcissistic personality. In adulthood, a typical narcissist may have
serious trouble being part of social groups, leading them to isolation. While
extroverted narcissists may have a lot of friends early on, they may end up
becoming isolated as they struggle to form genuine relationships.
If you suspect that you are in the presence of a narcissist, be prepared for
someone who demands a great deal of attention and affection. In addition,
they will try to control every aspect of your life. In the end, you will have to
either move away or play their game as best you can.

Machiavellianism
Machiavellianism refers to the teachings of Machiavelli, a renaissance
political thinker and strategist. His most famous work, The Prince, is a
classic for all students of political science. In this book, he outlines what a
prince, or any leader for that matter, must do in order to achieve power and
control. Many famous phrases are quoted from this book such as “divide
and conquer” and “it is better to be feared than to be loved.”
From this, psychologists have coined Machiavellianism when referring to a
character trait in which an individual is cunning and calculating. Highly
intelligent individuals can be Machiavellian in the way they act. They can
be very methodical in their approach. In the worst of cases, they can be
ruthless and will stop at nothing until they get what they want.
This includes using people for their own purposes. Many times,
Machiavellians see people as “a means to an end.” As such, they want to
use people, and when they no longer serve a purpose to them, they will
discard them without any regard for their feelings. Highly skilled
manipulators 
may 
exhibit 
a 
considerable 
predominance 
of
Machiavellianism in their personality set. If you suspect that you are
dealing with such a person, then you are in for a war of attrition as they will
not back down easily.
The limits to how far Machiavellianism can go essentially depend on the
intelligence or support network of the person. There are cases, such as those
of master criminals, who may be unable to figure out schemes for
themselves but will employ those who can. This is a good example of how
scruples and morals may be quite loose on some folks.
If you are dealing with a Machiavellian person, you may have to choose if
you want to be in such a situation or move away from it. Generally
speaking, beating a Machiavellian involves total defeat, that is, destroying
them completely. For instance, if you’re dealing with someone who is
defrauding others, this may involve bringing them to justice. Even then, you

might be involved in a complex legal battle that you may not have the will
to see through.
 

Psychopathy
The third element of the dark triad is psychopathy. In general terms,
psychopathy is an absence of emotion. In particular, psychopaths are unable
to feel empathy. They are unable to gauge how others feel. This is why they
are incapable of understanding that their actions hurt others. When you look
at serial killers and other types of criminals, they genuinely believe they
have done nothing wrong as they are unable to comprehend the pain and
anguish they have put others through. Think about white-collar criminals
who embezzle pensioners out of their savings. They have no remorse over
their actions as they couldn’t really care less about those affected.
In some instances, psychopathy is associated with physiological issues in
the brain. When this occurs, neurochemical reactions may not take place.
As a result, these individuals may be unable to process their emotions
leading to flat reactions to emotion.
In other cases, it may be a purely psychological issue as psychopaths tend
to have a dissociative personality. Dissociative personality is usually the
result of prolonged exposure to abuse and trauma in childhood. Regardless
of the type of trauma, a child may develop a dissociation between their
feelings and the situations around them. This leads them to cut out their
feelings from the mental processes that they carry out. Consequently, a
perfectly normal person can develop into a psychopath purely through an
abusive and neglectful environment.
If you are in consort with a psychopath, you had better get a good idea of
what they are capable of. These individuals may be capable of just about
anything. They may not necessarily have any sinister motives, but whatever
they do is purely for their own pleasure and nothing else… even if it means
inflicting grievous harm on others.

The Dark Triad in Action
Having just one of the dark triad traits fully developed is enough to foster
an evil individual. When all three come into consort, even to a lesser
degree, the individual may have no morals, scruples, or ethics. While they
may not actually become serial killers, they may engage in activities that
harm people in the pursuit of their personal aims and pleasures. This may
lead to unspeakable acts of horror, crafty business schemes, or a relentless
pursuit of power in which people fall by the wayside.
There is no real way to deal with such individuals. It takes a lot of courage
and energy to stand up to them. That is why the most common course of
action is to get away from them. For example, people who grow up with
narcissistic parents often leave home at a young age as they are unable to
put up with the behavior of their parents.
In other cases, children of Machiavellian parents tend to have their parents
concoct clever ways to run their life well into adulthood. And if someone
happens to grow up with a psychopathic parent, they may be in for a
childhood filled with abuse.
At the end of the day, the dark triad is present in all of us. We all have some
type of manifestation of these traits, though most of us will never exhibit
them to a degree that is harmful to others. If you happen to recognize the
predominance of these traits in your own life, it is worth doing some
introspection so that you can determine if you need to get a better handle on
your feelings and thoughts. After all, letting any of these traits run wild may
end up consuming you to the point of emotional and psychological
exhaustion.

 

CHAPTER 6: THE PSYCHOLOGY 
 
OF DECEPTION, INFLUENCE 
 
AND DOMINATION

D
Understanding Deception
eception is any word or action that is capable of making someone
believe something that is not true. Fraudulently providing
evidence for something that is false, implying falsehood, omitting
the truth, and lying are all examples of deception.
Not all types of deception count as dark psychology. At some point in their
lives, everyone is going to deceive others to some extent or another. They
may do so because they feel inadequate, because they feel embarrassed, or
even as a kindness. For example, some studies have shown that many men
lie about their height. This doesn’t mean they practice dark psychology. In
addition, it is common for people to deceive themselves about a range of
issues such as their happiness, their ambition, and their health.
Deception becomes dark when it is carried out with an indifferent or
negative intention towards the victim. Dark deception is an understanding
that the truth is not going to serve the deceptive aims of the deceiver. The
deceiver is going to take the truth and either ignore, hide, or change it in
favor of a version of events that suits their purpose a little bit better. Those
who employ dark deception do it as a way to harm, rather than to help.
They want to foster their own interests, and they don’t care who gets hurt in
the process.

Deceptive Tactics
There are many different deceptive tactics that the manipulator is able to
use. Remember that this deception is the process of hiding information from
the victim in order to reach their overall goals. There are four categories of
tactics that fall under the umbrella of deception, and any given deception is
likely to involve a blend of each of them, which can make it even harder for
the victim to figure out what is going on.
The first deceptive tactic is lying. This is the first technique that the
manipulator is going to choose as soon as they know that the victim is
susceptible to lies and has trouble figuring out the truth. This is often
because the victim is someone who trusts others. Or the manipulator may
have worked on this victim for some time so that they lower their guard.
The manipulator is able to find ways to hide the lies and then explain the
discrepancies if the victim starts to notice.
Implication is another form of deception. Implication is when the
manipulator suggests something false is true, rather than outwardly stating
it. If the manipulator wants to deceive a victim about how much money
they have, then they could either lie or imply about it. A lie would be
something like, “Oh I’m a successful guy. I’ve made a lot of money,” even
though the manipulator knows this information is not true. But when they
imply they are rich, they may say something like, “It’s so stressful trying to
handle things with my accountant. Trying to get my tax bill down takes a
lot of my time.” The manipulator has acted and spoken in a way that makes
the other person think they are wealthy, but they never overtly state it.
Omission is another option for the deceiver. This is a failure to mention
something – usually a fact that is pretty important – that is true. Omission
doesn’t use falsehood in order to cover the truth like the other two options.
Instead, it ignores the truth or just leaves it out. Often this piece of
information is important for the victim to know about in order to make an

informed decision. The manipulator leaves this out to protect themselves
and ensure that the victim doesn’t have all the information.
The final form of deception is the most elaborate, and often criminal, form.
This is known as fraud. Instead of the deceiver simply lying about
something from the past, this kind of deceit involves false stories,
documents, and other “evidence” in order to back up their lie. The deceiver
will use these things in a subtle way. They would never say something like,
“I’m a doctor; take a look at my certificate!”
Instead, they will use some subtle displays to show off to the victim. They
will avoid being too pushy with their fraudulent claims because they know
that doing this will make the victim feel that something is wrong with the
situation.
Fraud is becoming more common than ever because of the Internet.
Deceivers often work with professional software in order to make
fraudulent documents that look realistic. This can make it really hard to tell
whether you are working with someone who is telling you the truth or if
they are deceiving you.
When this dark deception starts to enter the realm of fraudulence, it can be a
bad sign. It shows that the deceiver is dangerous and they are committed to
sticking with dark psychology. They are risking serious criminal charges to
do this kind of manipulation, and they are confident that they will be able to
do this without anyone really noticing it at all.

The Art of Subtle Influence and Domination
Did you know that you do not have to be overly dominant to succeed? If
you can subtly influence someone to do what you want, then you are still
dominant because you are getting this person to do something they
otherwise would not do. You are still exerting control. But the subject does
not realize this, and thus will not be as resistant.
Sometimes, a more discreet and subtle form of dominance is in order. You
may not want to flex your biceps and be the one in charge. You just want to
get your way with a person who intimidates you. Therefore, you can use
subtle influence and persuasion to your advantage. You can be dominant
without letting the other person know. This influence can work great with
people who are in charge of you, such as bossy family members, elders, and
superiors at work. It can help you get what you want without a big power
struggle and stressful resistance.
You are about to learn about all three of these methods of influence. So be
prepared to gain lots of power. The world is in your hands, even if you are
not the dominant alpha that this book is teaching you to be. No one will
know what you are doing and you can have dominance without even trying.

Rewards
Most people operate on a reward principle. You can use this to your
advantage by making someone feel that there is a reward in store for them
for doing what you want.
Benefits
Always point out the benefits to someone. Show him what he will gain by
doing something. The more appealing you make something seem, the more
likely he will take advantage of it
Reciprocity
Do someone a huge favor and then call on him or her later to return the
favor.
Liking
People will do things for those they like. So, gaining the favor and pleasure
of someone who is dominant over you can ensure that you get lots of
brownie points.
Make Someone Feel Good
There are a number of ways to make someone feel good. When you do so,
you essentially make sure that this person wants to serve you to gain more
pleasure.
Touch creates a dopamine rush in someone’s mind and creates a strong
bond between two people.
Eye contact can also accomplish this. Warm eye contact, rather than staring
someone down, and pretending to be submissive by smiling and looking
away can make your dominant counterpart feel really good.

The power of words cannot be underestimated. A simple compliment or
thank you can go a long way. People love feeling good about themselves, so
make sure they feel good because of what you say. Find out a person’s
insecurities and play on that by reassuring him that his insecurities are not
true. Flatter him by telling him what a great person he is and how great a
leader he is.
Also, giving someone a warm cup of coffee or some other hot beverage can
really make a difference in how they feel about you. It can subtly influence
them to change their thinking about you and to view you as a warm person.

Threats
Threatening someone’s needs or sense of safety by pointing out what he
stands to lose is an excellent motivator for most people. However, you do
not want to overtly threaten someone in order to avoid a power struggle.
Instead, you want to act as an advisor serving his best interests. Point out
ways that he may lose out if he does not take a certain action. Tell him that
you care about him and would hate to see him miss a great opportunity.
Scarcity
You can use this principle of influence to your advantage by making
someone feel that he must do something because the opportunity is passing
by quickly. Speak to your subject with a degree of urgency and point out
that the opportunity is only here for a short time.
Extreme Loss
Learn what your subject cares about. That way, you know what he has to
lose. Then find ways to work that into your persuasion. Most people care
about their loved ones, their jobs, and their social status, so you can safely
employ those as threats. Tell your subject how he stands to lose something
he loves if he does not act in a certain way.

Leading Questions
A leading question plants an idea in someone’s mind, getting him to say
something or make a conclusion on his own. Leading questions are
powerful ways to get your own way.
Yes Framing
In yes framing, you get your superior to grant you permission by framing
his mind to say yes. You start by asking a series of questions that make him
think “Yes.” Once he has said yes, a few times, ask for your favor and
notice how he says yes!
Idea Planting
The minute you bring up an idea or topic, you automatically put it in
someone’s brain. Continually mentioning it, especially in casual
conversation, can plant the idea in someone’s brain enough to make him
think about it a lot. Then, when he is forced to decide, the idea that he has
been mulling over all day will be on the forefront of his brain and he will
propose it as if it were his own idea. He will be open to your idea because
he thinks it is his own.
Leading (Literally)
Sometimes, physically leading a person in a certain direction exerts a strong
influence over him.
Hiding What You Want
Let’s say you work with a stubborn person who seems to have it in for you.
To get your way, you want to make it seem like you don’t want something
when you really do. Therefore, you get this person to think that you don’t
want something and that he or she should choose it.

 

CHAPTER 7: THE ART OF 
 
BLACKMAIL, MANIPULATION AND
BRAINWASHING

T
Blackmail
he next form of mental manipulation is the classic blackmail
strategy. Here a manipulator uses an object or piece of information
to control the subject. Control mechanisms for blackmail generally
stem from the fear of exposure to topics that would cause either social
embarrassment, actual loss, harm inflicted on the subject, or their loved
ones, or an induced state of helplessness.
While the subject being blackmailed may want to disclose the wrongdoing,
they most often won’t because the consequences of telling outweigh the
benefits. Experienced blackmailers know to work on a subject’s most
sensitive areas.
A classic blackmail line is this:
“If you tell anyone, I’ll tell them it was yours!”
 
 
 

In-Depth Techniques of Manipulation
Projection
Projection is easy to pinpoint because it often consists a manipulator being
unwilling or unable to see their own shortcomings and avoiding being held
responsible for anything they have done wrong in the past. In other words, a
person using projection will “project” their negative behavior or actions
onto another person by finding a very extended and unreasonable
connection between an action of the other person and the action of the
manipulator. This form of manipulation is also often used as a defense
mechanism and tends to be instinctual for most people.
Denial
Denial is a very versatile form of manipulation. There are many different
ways that a manipulator can deny their actions or deny the actions of
another subtly. They can do this using a method known as diversion. Using
diversion, a manipulator will refuse to give a straightforward answer to
questions and instead will move the conversation onto a different topic time
and time again to avoid the said question. This is a way of denying the
answer by not even giving it. A very similar tactic to this is known as
evasion; these two tactics are often confused. The difference between
diversion and evasion is that while diversion intentionally steers the
conversation onto a different but interesting topic, evasion is more an act of
giving vague and confusing responses that seem to have no meaning or are
irrelevant in the current situation.
Intimidation
There are many different forms of intimidation that can be used by a
manipulator to control their victim. The first one we will discuss is known
as covert intimidation. This is the subtle, indirect, or implied threats of a
manipulator that puts their victim into a defensive mindset. These threats

are often not threatening in a physical manner but rather in a business,
social, or economic sphere. These threats are very subtle, and may not be
picked up up on by the people around the victim.
Conditioning
Conditioning someone is a process of learning that happens through the use
of rewards and punishments in response to or desired or not desired
behavior. This can also be called operant conditioning. In this particular
form of conditioning, an association is made between a behavior and a
consequence of that behavior. This is not to be confused with classical
conditioning which is similar but not exactly the same. All of the steps
leading up to the end result of both forms of conditioning are the same; the
difference lies in the very last step. Operant conditioning is based on
voluntary behavior by the individual being trained, whereas classical
conditioning is based on the involuntary behavior of the person being
trained.
Now we can begin to see the connection between these two types of
conditioning with manipulation. If a manipulator knows even the basis of
these two types of conditioning it becomes very easy for them to
subconsciously train their victim to bend to their every whim.
 
Stalking and Gossip
Stalking and gossip are very interesting and very dangerous forms of
manipulation. When a manipulator stalks their victim, their intentions are
very different from normal manipulative intentions. This form of
manipulation is more a method of researching the victim. This is beneficial
to the manipulator because it allows them to know the victim's
vulnerabilities and insecurities. This form of manipulation is very different
from obvious stalking. There is of course a type of stalking in which the

stalker wants their victims to know that they are being stalked. This is more
a method to elicit fear into the victim.
While gossip is normally fairly insignificant and not the subject of
psychological studies, it can also be used as a form of manipulation. False
gossip more specifically is used as a form of manipulation.
Seduction
Seduction is a form of manipulation that is very well known throughout
history. It is often connected to attractive women seducing sexually
frustrated men, but this form of manipulation can go both ways. It can
include the use of conversation as well as sexual scripts. They may also use
certain methods of nonverbal communication.
 
 
 

Brainwashing
Brainwashing is, without a doubt, the biggest and most complex mental
manipulation tactic in a psychopath’s repertoire. If every other technique
was bad, this is Game of Thrones Red Wedding half-your-favorite-
characters-just-died kind of bad. The kind of bad you have a hard time even
imagining.
How Does It Work?
Well, simplistically speaking, brainwashing deals with the use of ideologies
or cults to slowly but steadily replace the beliefs that the victim holds on
particular topics, with the newfound beliefs that the manipulator wants them
to have. Those new beliefs are more in line with the manipulator’s plan.
Brainwashing is convincing a subject about a particular issue so deeply that
the subject no longer questions it, the same way in which we would view a
universal truth such as the sun rises in the east.
There are multiple ways in which brainwashing is carried out; however,
some of the most common and most effective techniques are listed below:
Isolation
Since it is much easier to control people individually than it is to control
them when they are in groups, a common tactic to start the whole process of
brainwashing is to isolate the subject. The subject is initially put in a
situation where they are distanced from their friends, family, and loved
ones. This not only makes it easier to control how they think and act, but
also creates a form of forced dependency, so the person who is being
worked on feels like the only person they can depend on or rely on is the
manipulator.
By positioning themselves as their only source of information as well as
their only source of support, the manipulator has created an artificial
ecosystem that the subject thinks they need to survive. This feeling makes

the subject not only see the manipulator as a hero, but also makes them less
likely to allow third-party influencers to influence or question what they
know to be right or true. Isolation is critical to the initial stages of
brainwashing as it makes the subject more malleable and also ensures that
they don’t rebel or act out against the restrictions or the new reality that the
manipulator is slowly enforcing on them. Worst of all, if you are dealing
with a skilled manipulator, the subject won’t even know they are being
isolated and will blame their friends or surroundings for the things that are
happening.
Mental Abuse
Another common ruse is the emotional battering technique. Here the
manipulator uses common forms of mental abuse such as bullying, public
shaming, humiliation, embarrassment, insulting, and badgering to weaken
or mentally destabilize the subject. Once the victim feels like they have no
choice but to give in, the manipulator starts to teach the victim how they
need to act or think to escape this hellish environment they have been put
into.
Physical Abuse
Mental abuse, however, is also often substituted with physical abuse. A lot
of these techniques are commonly used in wartime scenarios or even by
police to get the subject to act in the manner desired. Common physical
abuse tactics include light therapy, waterboarding, sleep deprivation, and
starvation. Subjects are also put in cold, completely silent, or extremely
loud situations where the sound balance damages them mentally. These
constant physical tribulations have a way of overwhelming the subject and
making them more susceptible to the manipulator and the suggestions,
making it a critical brainwashing tool, particularly for militaries.
Repetitive Music

Another fan favorite when it comes to brainwashing is the use of repetitive
music. Scientific studies have shown that when a person is in an
environment where they not only are listening to a specific repetitive beat
but a beat that is in rhythm with the beating of one’s heart (generally at
about 45 to about 72 beats per minute), the subject enters a state of
consciousness referred to as the Alpha state. (The normal state you are in is
the Beta state.) The Alpha state, however, makes you 25 times more
susceptible to suggestions and as such is used as a common brainwashing
tactic.
Selective Contact
Selective contact deals with the social control aspect of cult-like
brainwashing techniques. Here, instead of isolating the individual, the
manipulator only allows the subject to have access to similarly minded
individuals. This creates a sense of false enforcement. The person being
brainwashed is surrounded by people who are preaching or stating the same
things the manipulator is saying, and this starts to give weight to the
manipulator’s words. They must be right because they are all saying the
same thing. It’s a lot like social proof or mob mentality. The idea is that if
so many people are saying it, it must be right.
Us Versus Them Mentality
The “us versus them” mindset is a common form of brainwashing seen
mostly in teenagers, particularly in high school or in specific wings of
colleges such as frat houses. Here the subject seems to be given a choice:
Do you want to be with us or do you want to be with them? The choice is
meant to create a sense of loyalty or obedience. Now the manipulator can
ask the subject for just about anything, and because the subject thinks they
need to do it to stay in the group, they are much more likely to comply.
Incessant Push and Pull

Another familiar tactic is the push and pull scenario. Here, the manipulator
plays good cop, bad cop on a routine basis to upset the subject’s sense of
normalcy. On one hand, they are being loved and adored, while on the other
hand, they are being abused or demeaned. The manipulator uses positive
reinforcement when the subject is doing what they want them to do, and
then when the subject steps out of line, the manipulator comes down on
them with negative reactions to get the subject to associate those actions
with negative consequences.

 

H
CHAPTER 8: MANIPULATIVE 
 
POLITICAL PROPAGANDA AND 
 
MEDIA TACTICS
istory has given us some amazing examples of propaganda, and
two of the most striking forms originate from the Soviet Union
and Nazi Germany. The two nations used effective methods of
propaganda to influence their citizens into believing that they had the
correct side of the story. They bombarded the population with varying
forms of propaganda designed to persuade them to toe the party line.

Here Are Some of the Ways the Soviet Union 
 
Disseminated Propaganda
1)      Schools and youth organizations: They formed a program named
the Young Pioneers for children aged between ten and fifteen years
old, which taught their members to oppose the enemies of
socialism.
2)      Media: Poor people in Russia had no way of accessing any form of
entertainment, so the Russian propaganda machine used this fact to
“educate” them and keep them informed.
3)      Propaganda trains: They authorized the use of propaganda trains
filled with printing presses, projection equipment, radios, and
public speakers to preach to the masses.
4)      Posters: They regularly depicted the “new man,” who believed that
hard work and severe discipline were the best methods to overcome
the more basic instincts of mankind.
5)      The printed word: Russian people were only allowed to read
newspapers that were favorable to the Communist cause.
These methods were designed to encourage Russian people to band together
and oppose any form of rebellion. People listened and watched the
propaganda together and formed like-minded groups. Punishments for non-
conformists were swift and harsh. It was impossible to tune out the noise of
propaganda, as it was literally everywhere.

Propaganda in Nazi Germany
The emergence of Nazi Germany took political propaganda to a new level.
Hitler was a master of propaganda, and he appointed Joseph Goebbels as
the head of his campaign to ensure the Nazi Party was seen in a positive
light. He was also tasked with ensuring the German people had no access to
harmful information regarding the Nazi movement.
The production of powerful propaganda films furthered this display. The
films were made to highlight several issues and bring them to the nation's
attention:
The greatness of Hitler and his vision for the future
The Jewish people: The Nazis used beautiful and artistic posters to
promote the hatred and fear of Jewish people and other non-
conformist groups. They used beauty and art to mask the ugliness
and hatred of their message.
The way forward for the future: They promoted the idea of a
“master race” that began with “perfect children.” Any imperfection
was an insult to the Nazi vision of perfection.
The mistreatment of Germans in Europe: As WWII became
imminent, the Nazis recognized the need to demonize the rest of
Europe. They did this by highlighting how badly migrant Germans
were being treated in Eastern Europe.
While films like Triumph of the Will (1935) addressed serious subjects,
Goebbels recognized the power of entertainment propaganda.
He also recognized the power of saturation.
They used symbolism to its full extent. The use of the swastika, the salute,
and uniforms made sure that people in the street recognized the power the
Nazis held. While Hitler understood the importance of grandiose titles for
his henchmen, he was astute about his own title. He refused to be called

President, as he claimed the title was too “august” for him. This appealed to
the common person, and Hitler garnered popular approval with this move.
Nazi Germany was a prime example of mass brainwashing. The Nazis used
a barrage of information, images, and events to create an environment of
hatred and reverence.

Political Propaganda in the US
As one election passes, the preparations for the next one begins. We are
constantly being told to give our vote to one candidate or the other for
different reasons. While this is a fact that nobody can escape, are we
hardwired to believe the propaganda, or are we capable of making an
informed vote?
Recognizing the techniques used is the first step to becoming a savvier
voter. Let's examine some of the more popular ways that politicians have
used propaganda while angling for our vote:
Presidential Ads
We need to travel back to 1952 to witness one of the earliest ad campaigns
for a presidential candidate. “Ike for President” was a catch song used to
promote Dwight Eisenhower. In 1960 JFK also used a catchy song to head
his campaign.
The Bandwagon Technique
This is a technique that appeals to the masses and makes people feel part of
a movement. This type of ad plays on the insecurities of the masses and the
desire to belong.
The Testimonial Technique
Also referred to as the “endorsement” technique. These can include
endorsements from political hard hitters, media outlets, sportsmen and
women, and celebrities.
Symbolism Technique
When a candidate is trying to appeal to a base feeling of patriotism, they
will use all-American symbols to stir the emotions.

Glittering Generalities
These are statements that use vague words and phrases to influence the
public. They have no real meaning; they are mostly emotionally appealing
and are designed to have a positive effect on the general population.
The Plain Folk Technique
This is when politicians try to appeal to the man on the street. They may
have had Ivy League educations and never known what it is like to “miss
out,” but politicians know how to appeal to the common person.
Stacking the Cards
This type of propaganda may sound harmless, but it can be devastating. The
perpetrator will highlight their personal accomplishments and triumphs
without addressing any of their failures. They will then proceed to trash
their opponent and drag their name through the mud.

Media Manipulation and Subliminal Influencing
Media is all about influence. Everything you see in the media is designed to
influence you. However, have you ever wondered if the media is also
manipulating you? Some believe that the media is more a tool of
manipulation than influence. What if these people are “onto something,” as
they say on social media? According to Wikipedia, media manipulation is
“all about techniques in which partisans create an image or argument that
favors their particular interests.” Basically, the media can create a certain
perception of an issue, a person, a group, or anything to the public. The
public believe it because the media is supposed to be the ultimate source of
factual information. The media does this through the use of subliminal
messages.
Anybody that consumes media content is susceptible to media manipulation
and subliminal influencing. For years, subliminal messages have been
regarded as one of the dark arts used in persuasion and manipulation.
Advertisers, marketers, politicians, and the media are believed to use
subliminal messages to manipulate and modify people’s behavior. But how
effective are media manipulation and subliminal influencing? Do subliminal
messages actually work?
It is believed that the media subliminally influences consumers’ perceptions
by deliberately using communication techniques that are engineered to
generate specific responses. The aim is to get people to do things that they
ordinarily would not do. In short, both the perception and response to
subliminal influencing happen in the subconscious mind.
Visual subliminal messages in the media are either sub-visual or embedded.
Sub-visual cues are flashed very quickly in media content, so quickly that
you cannot perceive them. Embedded messages are static visuals in plain
sight, with an unchanging environment. They are often used in
advertisements. An example is the dollar bill in some KFC burger ads.
Auditory subliminal messages are either sub-audible or backmasking. Sub-

audible messages have low-volume sound inserted into high-volume audios,
such that you cannot hear them. Backmasking is a visual-audio message
recorded in reverse so that the actual message is hidden when it is played
forward.
Now, how exactly do these messages influence your behavior? One of the
proposed theories is that subliminal priming works to distribute activation
in the semantic network. Humans have semantically connected links of
concepts in the brain, and each concept exists in a bigger network of
interconnected concepts. Take Microsoft as an example: When prompted
about Microsoft, you will probably think of Bill Gates, computers,
Windows, etc. Microsoft is often associated with innovation. So, if you
were to briefly flash a Microsoft logo to someone and then ask them to
complete a task, they are likely to be more innovative in their approach
because their subconscious has picked up on what Microsoft is associated
with.
Because subliminal messages are targeted at your subconscious so that an
advertiser, politician, and other people can influence you to do things that
you ordinarily may not agree to do, they count as a form of manipulation.
This explains why people think the media is all-powerful. They understand
the power the media has and how they use that power. Media manipulation
and subliminal influencing should be considered unethical and treated as
such because they perfect the art of exploiting a person’s unawareness.

 

CHAPTER 9: WHAT IS 
 
PSYOP?

T
Definition of Psychological Operation
he term “psychological warfare” is often used interchangeably with
“psychological operations” or “political warfare.” The techniques
are similar, but the terms have distinctive meanings.
According to the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff, psychological
operations are synchronized and coordinated activities, planned by military
leaders, targeted against enemies, that are designed to instill in their target
audiences the desired reaction in support of a military operation or larger
strategy.
Psychological operations (PSYOP) is considered a sub-set of psychological
warfare and are designed to influence human psychology to the point of
view of change and/or action in support of an agenda. The objective of
military psychological operations is to induce or reinforce foreign beliefs
and attitudes favorable to the originator’s objectives.
The term is often used by the military to refer to the use of propaganda
techniques including leaflet drops, radio broadcasts, and loudspeaker
broadcasts.
 

Psychological Operation in Everyday Life
Here are simple examples of the techniques used in everyday, ordinary life.
Think about how a police officer will direct traffic. They will position
themselves on the street corner. They will direct you where to go.
Think about how a police officer will stand on the corner of the road. He
will be seen frequently enough to seem like he is doing something. He will
seem busy. He will also direct traffic off the road and into the parking lot.
He will direct traffic to a specific parking area for a specific person, like the
President of the United States or a celebrity.
These people are practicing a time-honored technique that has been used by
this group of special people; those who were trained in psychological
operations.
Think about how you may be directed to the parking lot in an airport or for
a big event. They will direct you and change your way of thinking. You will
be directed another way, to where they want you to go.

The Psyop Person
The psyop person may look the same as someone you know or any normal
person. The person may be someone from your workplace or your friend.
The person could be a co-worker. They could also be your leader. The
person may be working under an identity, a so-called personality, or even a
new appearance (such as a new hairstyle and new facial hair).
They could be a person of influence in your religious and your spiritual
activities. They could also be in your police station and your court system.
They could be placing themselves inside your armed forces and the
military.
They can be ministers, pastors, police officers, tax collectors, doctors or
nurses, lawyers, judges, teachers, social workers, and many others of
importance.
The psyop person is someone who is disguising themselves as a normal
citizen. They are not a real citizen and they are just playing at being a
citizen.
They could be someone you have known for a long time. They could be
your friend or acquaintance. You may trust them. They may have asked you
to trust them. They could be someone who has been building a relationship
with you for a long time. They could be your counselor, a working partner,
your confidante, or even a close friend.
They could be someone you work with who you know to be one of the good
guys, but who has actually been altered to believe something different.

Consequences of Having a Psyop Person Around You
When you have a person who you know and trust, who is planning to cause
you harm, you may not see it coming and you will not be able to avoid it.
The person who you know and trust will explain why they have to hurt you
in order to further their agenda. They will explain how they “have no
choice” and that you “would understand” if they explained the reasons.
When you believe that your loved ones have done something harmful to
you, what do you do? You want answers. You want to understand what
happened. You want your voice heard. You want to be informed of what
transpired. You want the truth and you want the truth to be known. You
don’t want to be deceived or lied to. You want to be acknowledged.
If you are close to a psyop person, they will want you to remain close to
them and they will want you to remain as you are.
 
 
 
 

Ways to Overcome a Psyop Person—Face the Psyop Person
and Speak the Truth
When a psyop person speaks with you, they will try to lie to you. When a
psyop person is lying to you, they will be nervous. When they know that
you know, they will become nervous and they will try to hide/mask their
nervousness. This will be a giveaway that they are hiding something.
If the psyop person wants to harm you, they will be more aggressive when
they hide/mask their nervousness. This will also betray them.
Another thing will be when the psyop person speaks words that are not
related to your conversation (words that are irrelevant). When you speak to
a psyop person and their response veers away from the “main”
conversation, this will betray them as well.

 

CHAPTER 10: WHY DO PEOPLE JOIN
CULTS? HOW DO CULTS WORK?

A
What is a Cult?
sk 10 people and you will receive 10 different answers.
For some, it's the mindless groupies of a rock or sports star who
hang off their every word.
For some, it's a religious sect that chooses to worship in a non-traditional
way or at non-traditional times.
For others, it's an umbrella term that encompasses a variety of supposedly
dangerous non-traditional beliefs or ideologies that are considered to be in
some way damaging to the followers of that belief system.
I prefer to think of a cult as one person who has found so-called “truth” and
then, spreads the word, not to seek criticism or further knowledge, but to
bring everyone else in line to have the same belief system.
Cults are a breeding ground for easy prey. They target people who are
desperate to escape from their lives, to be part of something bigger than
themselves.
They are led and fed, fed and led. They give their lives to their cult and, if
they were never to leave, they would never have to think for themselves
again.
People crave leadership, they crave instruction.

How Cults Work
Instead of demanding that people think for themselves, they change the
definition of leadership and teach people that to be happy and healthy, you
must become just like their cult leader.
The leader instructs people to be followers, but also to be the teachers of the
next generation; to tell the new generation that their leader is always right.
You cannot question or doubt a leader. No, I don't think it's even possible.
By the time the teaching has finally filtered down through the generations
of a cult, the last few generations have been lured to think like perfect little
minions and pledge their lives to a leader they barely know. And the cycle
continues.
This is the nature of cults; they slowly increase their membership with each
new generation that is taught the same way of thinking from the teachers.
And a leader will push their membership up further and further as they
grow.
A cult is, therefore, one person who has the power and the means to make
sure that everything they believe is disseminated on a wide scale so as to
become larger and larger and become as “true” to a society.
 
 
 

Why Do People Join Cults?
From the outside looking in, there are four main reasons:
1)      The hope of a better life
2)      Power
3)      Money
4)      Closeness to a higher power
As humans, we need optimistic belief systems to help us get through the
strains of our day-to-day lives and we are drawn to strong personalities that
lead to a sense of togetherness, security, community, and safety.
People love to be part of something special and they will pledge their life to
that special thing, be it a sports team, a religion, or a cult.

Correlation between Cults and Brands
There are many cults born from the corporate sector, i.e. a brand that is sexy
and cool at first glance, but once you get into the details, it may be highly
conducive to a certain type of group that the CEO secretly wants to grow.
The cult leader will have a vision and plots to implement that vision at all
costs.
If you are a small independent company, you can choose to watch your
competition and copy what they are doing in order to grow your own
customer base. This is fine.
But if you are a large corporation, you may be in a position where you do
not have that luxury.
As you grow, so too must your market. If you have a cult-like style of
management that you have chosen to propagate, you will be stuck with this
model of management forever and you will never be able to change.
Corporate cults are, therefore, highly dangerous. They lead to a defeatist
attitude for employees.
Brands are more of an ideological system; a religion more than they are a
product. If you think you cannot let go of any belief system that you've
embraced, you are probably trapped in your institution.

Brands and Self-Concept
In 2004, the “real beauty” campaign was launched by beauty brand Dove
with the purpose of redefining the beauty concept by taking into
consideration that in real life there are natural variations in beauty. The
brand image of Dove was given symbolic meaning by this campaign.
Specifically, by consuming the Dove brand, women had the opportunity to
communicate to their social environment that they shared Dove’s notion
that our current society’s beauty values need to be reconsidered and
reformulated. As this example shows, a brand is not only a schema or
category that directs attention and information processing, but it responds to
identity-based motives in that it communicates consumers’ characteristics,
values, and attitudes to their social environment.
For example, a consumer can use a brand to express the opinion that the
pursuit of a sustainable and healthy lifestyle is important. Consequently,
when a consumer observes another person using a brand that is associated
with identity-relevant attributes, such as a healthy lifestyle, he or she may
make similar inferences about the characteristics, values, and attitudes of
the brand user. Because brands provide consumers with a way to express
their identity and socially categorize themselves, it is reasonable for
consumers to prefer brands that are consistent with their self-concept.
The idea that individuals are motivated to perceive themselves as consistent
in their values, attitudes, and behavior is a central idea of early theories in
social psychology, such as consistency theory or dissonance theory. In
connection with these and more recent approaches, several studies have
demonstrated that individuals invest resources such as effort, time, and
money to appear consistent and thereby verify their self-concept (self-
verification).
To be able to classify and organize their experiences and to guide their
behavior, an individual is enabled to this by a consistent and stable self-
view. Also, consistent behavior that promotes a coherent environment for

social interactions increases predictability by others. For instance, a
consumer holding values of sustainability might actively avoid driving a car
brand that is linked to power (and gas consumption) and might instead
choose a brand that is known for its low gas consumption. By doing this,
the consumer provides a small window into his or her personality that
others can “peek into” to predict his or her future behavior, which in turn
influences their responses to the consumer and makes the environment
more predictable for the consumer as well.
To some degree, the self-concept that drives consumer behavior is flexible
wherein it will depend on which aspects of the self are accessible in a given
context. The accessibility of self-concept components is higher if the
components have been repeatedly activated in the past and if they have
been made salient more recently. Also, it is not necessarily the case that the
self-concept has to be conscious of it to influence consumer behavior.
A self-concept can represent a consumer’s viewpoint (how a consumer sees
him or herself) or the viewpoint of significant others (how the consumer
thinks others see him or her). As a consequence of this dichotomy,
consumers think of the discrepancies between their own self-views and the
way others perceive them. In connection with the consistency theories
mentioned above, consumers are usually motivated to reduce such
discrepancies. Using brands that are in line with their self-view helps to
resolve this conflict because such brands bring other individuals’
representations closer to an individual’s representation of his or herself by
allowing consumers to publicly display who they are. A consumer who
possesses the self-view that he or she is a creative person but thinks others
do not share this self-view may, for example (consciously or
unconsciously), use brands associated with creativity to signal his or her
creativity to others.
The best-known example of a brand application to influence others’ views
of one’s identity is the application of brands as status symbols. When you
think about it, it seems irrational that individuals would buy expensive
brands that fulfill the same functions as cheaper brands. However, this is

usually due to subconscious thinking of the fact that since a consumer can
afford to buy expensive brands, it symbolizes his or her possession of
resources such as money or power. Furthermore, in evolutionary
psychology, the use of status symbols is described as a costly form of
signaling that men might apply to appear attractive to females.
Indeed, some studies have found that men are more interested in purchasing
conspicuous luxury goods that signal wealth when mating goals are primed
compared with when such goals are not primed. However, some research
opposes this idea and has also shown that this is a short-term mating
strategy that is also perceived as such by women. An interesting finding is
that the social-signaling function of brands is not limited to luxury brands.
For example, green products such as hybrid cars can similarly be regarded
as status symbols, but only when it is transparent that these products are
more expensive than comparable non-green products.
Most importantly, not only might symbolic brand benefits communicate a
person’s actual self-view, but they also provide consumers with an
opportunity to express their personality as they would ideally like it to be
and to reduce a possible conflict between their actual and ideal self. This
idea can be derived from the self-discrepancy theory. It says that consumers
can use brands for symbolic self-completion and self-enhancement and that
brands can become part of the self. An interesting thought, a reduction in
self-discrepancies is related not only to a consumer’s ideal aspects of the
self but also to the personality aspects that a consumer thinks he or she
should possess.
For instance, a consumer might think that it is his or her duty to take care of
the environment, but he or she might sometimes also feel that he or she
does not fully live up to this responsibility (discrepancy with how he or she
perceives herself). Consumers are prompted to use brands to reduce this
discrepancy as well. For instance, they are inclined to purchase products
from a supermarket associated with sustainability such as Whole Foods.

Similarly, the feeling of uncertainty about one’s self-concept can motivate
brand use. The feeling of uncertainty about one’s self-concept is supposed
to yield the motivation to reaffirm the self. In one study, participants were
more likely to choose a product consistent with an activated self-view
(competence or excitement) when participants felt uncertain about their
self-view.

 

N
CHAPTER 11: PSYCHOLOGICAL WARFARE
AND STRATEGIC THINKING AT WORK 
 
AND WITH CO-WORKERS
ot all manipulation is a bad thing. There are times when you
might want someone to agree with you on something. You
probably don’t want to take it to the extreme and make your
victim do everything you want and take over their lives. But there are
certain moments when you may need someone to agree with you on
something, such as when a vote is going one way or another, if you need
help with a project, or something similar.
This chapter looks at some of the different ways you can manipulate the
people near you in order to get the things that you would like.

Similarities Are Key
The first thing you should concentrate on is finding similarities between
yourself and the person you are manipulating. Nobody is going to want to
be around you or do the things that you want them to if they have nothing in
common with you. You need to find the places where you mesh together
and can form a bond of some kind, if not a friendship.
There are a lot of different ways that you can work to find similarities
between you and the person you want to get on your side. First, consider
how you will be able to help them out with something they need.
Take the time and have a lunch break with this person, if you work with
them.
Work is not the only place where you can start to make a bond with
someone. You can bond after work without all of the stresses that come
with work.
Of course, you need to ensure that you are doing something that the other
person enjoys. You don’t want to seem like a bother or go around just
inviting them to things that you like.
Once you are able to build this bond, it will be easier for the two of you to
get along and you will be able to convince them to do the things that you
want later on.

Give Them a Reason Why
No one will have any desire to help you out unless there is something in it
for them. This means that you need to look through the situation and make
it work out well for the both of you.
There are two ways this can go. In most cases, when you are being
manipulated, both of you are going to get something out of the deal. One
person might get the better thing, but you are still going to be rewarded for
your hard work.
Then there is the more evil way of manipulating someone. A manipulator
may promise something that is going to entice you to help them out. The
issue with this, though, is that the manipulator doesn’t actually plan to give
you anything in return.
But in most cases, when you want to manipulate someone, you will want to
go with the first method so you can keep them as friends in the long run.
This means that you need to make sure they have a good reason to help you
out.

Language Patterns
The words you use in your speech and communication will determine
whether someone is going to listen to you or do what you would like. A
simple thing like switching around words to make them sound positive can
make a huge difference in the way that people associate with you.

Take Small Steps
This means you need to take things slowly. You need to go from step one
until the final step without skipping anything in between. But what are
some of the steps you may have to take in order to get to your end goal?
Here are some ideas to ensure that you are getting people on your side in
the right way:
1)      Get to know the person—the best cases of manipulation happen
once you know at least a little bit about the person.
2)      Determine if they will meet your goal—before you put in too much
effort, make sure that they are willing to go along with your goal.
3)      Start laying the groundwork—now that you have someone who is
going to be on your side, it is time to start laying a bit of
groundwork to help you out. Let them know a bit about the plan
and see if they are interested in helping you out.
4)      Show them what they can get out of this process. If they feel like
they are going to do the work and you are the only one who is
benefiting, they are going to run away and find something else to
do. Start out with all of the benefits that they are going to receive,
perhaps limiting the information about what you will receive, to
ensure that you are getting them on your side.
5)      Work towards the goal together—during this time, you both need
to be doing the work. While an evil manipulator will require their
victim to do all of the work on their own, this is not going to work
in most situations, and you should spend time working together
with the other person so that you reach the goal.
6)      Reap the rewards together—if this goes as plan, you and your
partner are going to see all of the rewards possible. This can make
your bond closer and will make it easier to influence your partner
later on.

When you take small steps together, it becomes much easier for you to get
to your goal without having to pull your hair out.
 

Go for the Emotions
One thing that you should always try when you are trying to get someone to
work with you is to go for the emotions. People are more likely to follow
and do something when they feel emotional about it.
There are a lot of different emotions that you will be able to play with. It is
important to realize that the emotions that people respond to the most are
anger, joy, and sadness. In most cases, you might find that it is easiest to
manipulate someone if you can get them angry about the same kind of topic
as you.

If Your Friends Jumped Off the Bridge…
With this option, you are going to try to convince the person that your goals
are in their best interests. This is the “everyone is doing it” method of
thinking. You want to portray this as something that everyone is doing, or at
least that if they do what you want, they are going to be envied by everyone
else.

Be the One in Control
No matter which method you are using, you need to make sure that you are
always in control. If you let someone else be in control, you are no longer
the manipulator; you are pretty much giving this power to the other person.
You want the other person to start relying on you, to start coming to you for
their questions, or even just for company. This can help to make you into
the most important person in their lives.
There are many techniques throughout this book that you can use to make
sure you are the one in charge. Establishing this early on will make things
so much easier in the long run.

 

M
CHAPTER 12: PSYCHOLOGICAL WARFARE
AND STRATEGIC THINKING IN
RELATIONSHIPS AND 
 
THE POWER OF WORDS
any master manipulators have psychopathic tendencies, but not
all are true psychopaths or sociopaths. Some persons do not
even understand that they are trying to exert their will onto
another against that person’s wishes, though there are those who have the
express intent of manipulating others. Psychopaths will actually go out and
prey on individuals to manipulate. But again, not every manipulative person
has a mental defect, nor does every manipulator acknowledge or understand
what they are doing.
Being able to determine when someone is attempting to sway you is a fine
art. By learning to master the arts of manipulation, influence, mind control,
and NLP, you are also mastering the art of spotting these tactics sooner and
saving yourself from undue influence.
The techniques in this book cover an array of relationships, from strangers
and new acquaintances, to persons that you may already be close to. The
most difficult aspect of these tactics to digest is when they are employed
against another person in an intimate relationship. The psychological
damage that these techniques may cause to a significant other or spouse
who has been victimized or targeted by a manipulative person can last for
years. Many persons manipulated in intimate relationships need to seek out
professional psychological help to move past this kind of emotional and
psychological abuse. And make no mistake, these techniques when
employed against a loved one without a doubt can be identified as abuse.

So, how do you keep from becoming involved with a master manipulator
before the relationship develops too far? Well, it depends if you are
engaging in a relationship with someone who just has manipulative
tendencies but means you no harm, or a master manipulator who explicitly
wants to control or manipulate you.
Most intentional manipulators have a few characteristics or traits in
common. Lack of empathy is normally an ear-mark for a manipulator. They
are narcissistic or self-absorbed, and they truly are indifferent to others who
suffer for any reason. Their indifference may extend to everyone, and that
may make anyone feel special. But special or not, you will eventually be
just another person they feel indifference towards. If you experience a little
setback that upsets you, a loss, or an illness, take note of your new partner’s
actions. Do they state that they care verbally, but refuse to engage with you
in person or excuse themselves from you to avoid you during your time of
duress? If you notice an indication that they might not care as much as they
say they do, pay attention to other signs.
While we are on the subject of their words and actions, another easy way to
separate the manipulators is not by what they say, but in what they do.
Master manipulators are known for being charismatic and saying all the
right words at precisely the right times but rarely do their words and actions
match each other. Look for unfulfilled promises, saying one thing and then
doing another, and opinions that flip-flop, depending on who else is around
to hear what they are saying. Manipulators may seem to be all-
encompassing to their partners, but in public, they may tend to stay in the
background for the purpose of observing others or completely change their
stances, opinions, or ideas to fit others, whom they are engaged with. Watch
out for inconsistencies.
Manipulators who intend to cause harm will tell you they adore you, but
find small ways to shoot digs at you that may hurt your feelings. If you are
currently in a relationship with someone who states that they want to spend
every minute of their free time with you, then calls you “needy” or
“codependent” when you want to spend time with them, it means that

individual is sending mixed signals that you may try to excuse away. There
could be different reasons why neither of you can spend every day together,
but there is never a good excuse to indicate that you are the one with issues,
particularly when they are the ones who initiated the response from you.
Another consideration is the right and wrong in a disagreement, and what
the manipulator will say and do during an argument. Manipulators will fight
dirty, insult you, try and use information you have given them against you,
and will never plead guilty. At times, master manipulators will deny words
or actions that they have said or done, hoping that this confusion will make
you question your view or beliefs on events that have occurred. They may
continue to speak about things that you have expressly stated, but no longer
want to discuss, creating unease in you regardless of your discomfort.
Master manipulators will disregard the emotions you express to them. They
may refuse to validate the way you feel or express to you that the way you
feel is not accurate or correct. Some manipulative people will start to
completely refuse to acknowledge the feelings of their significant others as
the relationship progresses.
Despite all of these negative aspects of the manipulator’s persona, many
individuals will find that even though they know the relationship is
unhealthy, they will continue to engage in that relationship or have an
extremely hard time cutting loose from the manipulator. The soaring
thoughts that excited you at the beginning of the relationship will make you
all the more likely to fear losing those strong emotions, and therefore fear
losing the manipulator themselves. You may find yourself increasingly
unsatisfied in the relationship, and the loved one may notice a change in
your mood too.
Despite your unhappiness, you may find yourself dreading life without
them. Your own mood will directly correlate to the mood of the
manipulator, and you may find yourself attempting to find favor with this
person, even though you have done nothing untoward or wrong. Because of
the conflicting and confusing aspects of the relationship, you may find

yourself overanalyzing. You may notice an increased state or level of
anxiety in yourself, as you are unsure of what is happening or where you
stand with the manipulative partner. Apologizing or compromising who you
are regularly, whether you understand why you feel the need, feel insecure
about yourself in general, or are experiencing feelings of guilt or
inadequacy are often strong indicators that you are in a manipulative
environment.
The best way to protect yourself from engaging in a manipulative
relationship is to be aware of your partner’s subtle manipulation tactics.

 

CHAPTER 13: PSYCHOLOGICAL WARFARE
AND STRATEGIC THINKING FOR
ENTREPRENEURS 
 
AND BUSINESS

T
Principle 1: Embrace the War Game of Chess
he metaphor for war strategy is chess, not checkers.
Checkers is a simple game with few possibilities and ramifications
for each move. There are few if any differences between the pieces.
And victory is often easily judged in retrospect as having been brought
about by a single logical error of the loser.
Chess, on the other hand, is far more complex. There is a much greater
variance in the power of the pieces. Pieces can move differently and can
work powerfully for or against you in combination. Your king-piece is
incredibly vulnerable. When you lose at chess, it's not always as easy to pin
it on a single erroneous move.
The war game, like chess, can be mentally and psychically draining, but
you must learn to play it if you wish to protect or advance your self-interest.
I urge you to at least understand the principles of war strategy waged
against you or you'll be completely exploited. Well, you'll probably be
completely exploited anyway, but by understanding the patterns behind the
strategies waged against you, you'll be better prepared to find true peace of
mind and have a much better chance of self-protection.
Do not be afraid of the chess-like war game. It's a lot less intimidating than
you may have been led to believe. You have all parts inside of you to be a
master at this game.

Principle 2: Embrace Master Plans and Strategies
Many people today have attention deficit disorder (ADD). Having access to
the Internet often means that you have ADD. If you own a smartphone, then
you have ADD. In today's age, we are all bombarded with enormous
distractions. Thus, no one thinks they have time to think several steps ahead
and it's a rare opponent who can competently think consequentially. Use
this to your advantage.
You may find it helpful to think through things in writing. It can be done
manually using a pen and paper or a word processing application on your
computer, tablet, or smartphone. Keep your brainstorming and plans in
hidden locations where your opponents cannot reach them. Thinking things
through while writing will allow your plans to reach a much higher level
than trying to think through everything in your head.
The strategy doesn't have to be complicated or intricate. It is simply a series
of sub-goals and items which come together to achieve a larger goal.
Embrace this strategic planning process and you will become brilliant at
war.
It's important to stay flexible and constantly revisit your plans as the
battlefield is constantly shifting, and you must stay adaptable to the moment
at hand. Nonetheless, master planning will allow you to stay ahead of the
game.

Principle 3: Engage in Small Scale Test Attacks to Assess the
Opponent's Skill and Game Plan
If you sense someone might be an opponent, then it may be worth it to test
them in order to get a sense of what they've got in them.
Let's say a new person enters your social circle. If you wanted to do a test
attack, then you could pay them a backhanded compliment or mild insult to
test how they respond. If they attack back ferociously, then your test attack
was successful and you uncovered their true villainous nature before they
could surprise you with it. If they respond with grace or apologetic
insecurity, then they are likely not a threat to you.
I know the above scenario may sound petty and even vile. But it is done in a
myriad of ways all the time. Watch for it. Oftentimes an opponent will test
attack you first to see how easily you can be exploited.
When someone comes at you with a test attack, it is usually worthwhile to
counterattack them in a similar way. Simply mirror them and this usually
does the trick, unless they have a more complex master plan in store for
you.
 
 

Principle 3: Feign Peace, but Anticipate Attack
Act like a peaceful person and you may be able to avoid large-scale attacks,
for opponents won't view you as much of a threat and will only come at you
with a small amount of their might. Thus, when you put on the pretense of
peace, you'll typically be attacked in only small and predictable ways. In
other words, the king is only mildly exploiting you, because he can.
You must, however, quietly prepare yourself for being attacked so that you
are not caught off guard. There is a fine line here. You must remain
psychologically strong, which means anticipating being attacked without
becoming paranoid. If you do become paranoid, tthe opponent has won a
major psychological battle against you. When you anticipate an attack from
an opponent without giving in to paranoia, it tends not to catch you off
guard, and therefore its psychological effect on you is next to nil.
When you are attacked after feigning peace, the best defense is usually,
again, to mirror the opponent. This typically gets them to back down. You
can also choose to gracefully ignore them if you don't feel the exploitation
is very severe.
Feigning peace is ironically a master tactic when it comes to psychological
warfare. Master the art of this tactic.

Principle 4: Boldly Attack First, but Pretend 
 
You Are the Victim
This is a classic technique of psychological warfare and can go a long way
toward psychologically wearing your opponent down.
Come up with a rationale that makes you look like the victim of your
opponent, then boldly attack them. It's best to attack them privately or
confidentially so that others will see you as the victim should the opponent
try and attack you back.
Often your opponent will be furious and threaten you with many things.
Here you can shout in your opponent’s ear that you are already a victim of
their wrath and that everything they threaten you with will only make you
appear more of a victim. This can have a powerful demoralizing
psychological effect on the opponent.
Playing the victim card while fiercely attacking the opponent is high art in
the world of psychological warfare.

Principle 5: Use Bald Morality to Shame 
 
Your Opponent
Most people in life who attack you have little or no shame. However,
shaming them to their face can sometimes have a strong effect. Try to guess
their insecurities and shame them for succumbing to them. If you are bold,
then threaten to go public with broader shaming of them, as you reveal their
hypocrisy and exploitation to others.
Be careful if you live in a glass house here, for many opponents will shame
you right back. It helps if you have done nothing close to what you're
accusing your opponent of. This is tricky stuff here, so be careful.
Shaming is usually best applied as a threat of embarrassment for the
opponent. For example, if a vendor threatens to not refund you or to not
fulfill their pledge, threaten to go public to their other customers with this
shame.

Principle 6: Stay Adaptable and Agile; 
 
Maintain an Escape Route
Victory often goes to the nimble and deft, not the powerful and strong.
Being adaptable to changes as they occur is paramount. And in a world that
is constantly shifting and transforming, being adaptable and agile is now
more important than ever.
This is another reason why creative brainstorming is so important. Your
rational and analytical mind is your most powerful weapon, and when you
are engaged in creative brainstorming, you are strengthening your plan and
your arms. Use creative brainstorming to rationally and imaginatively
conceive of as many tactics and contingencies as you can.
The strategic planning process is not as complicated as you've been led to
believe, so please do not be intimidated. If you were smart enough to seek
out and read a book like this, then you are smart enough to be strategic and
agile.
When you launch your attacks, it's often useful to have an escape route, so
that you can quickly backtrack and retreat if you are confronted with
enormous resistance. In general, you always want to leave yourself some
room to escape, if necessary.
 
 
 

Principle 7: Embrace Retreat
Retreat can be an effective tactic during an intense battle, as it can allow
you an opportunity to reflect and regroup, and can sometimes have a
psychological deflating effect on the opponent—at just the moment they
think that victory is imminent, you retreat and take away that opportunity
from them.
I can't tell you when the best time to retreat during battle is. It's something
that comes with experience. Just remember it is a tactic available to you in
the heat of battle. As such, it's best to give yourself an escape route so you
can easily retreat if necessary.
This is why the best lies stay as close to the truth as possible. When your lie
begins to get you in trouble, you can fall back on the parts that are true. In
general, though, I don't recommend lying, but it is a tactic available to you
when attempting to defeat an opponent.

Principle 8: Scare Your Opponent with the Unknown
Make vague references to your opponents about resources and allies you
have at your disposal. Put up appearances as though you are powerful,
strong, and a force to be reckoned with. Feign relationships with powerful
figures so your opponent will think you have powerful allies.
Most of all, keep your opponent in the dark. Make attacks that would
suggest you have more resources and allies than you do. What you want is
to evoke fear in the opponent. You want their mind to wander. You want
them to imagine and fear attacks upon them that you haven't even thought
of.

 

P
CHAPTER 14: DEFENSE 
 
STRATEGIES IN PSYCHOLOGICAL
WARFARE
sychological warfare is out there and it is real. You may just find
yourself a victim at some point in life. Or you have already been a
victim without even realizing it. After reading this book, you may
become aware of psychological warfare attempts that have been made on
you. You are not defenseless. Awareness is the first step to victory.
Who are your potential abusers? They may be neighbors, exes, or even
family. Anyone who has an agenda against you may be trying to run your
life and influence your actions unfavorably. If you feel like a victim, then
you probably are.

Prevent Psychological Warfare
Choose what you allow into your life. You do not need to give certain
people or situations the time of day. You are very busy and your time is
precious. You need to protect your energy, resources, and intellect by
associating only with the positive. Being selective about the people that you
associate with also helps you keep your reputation intact so that you can
preserve it in the event that your enemy attacks it.
You should also be selective about the media and information that you take
in. Psychological warfare is usually very covert. If you take in lots of
information, you raise your risk of exposure. Only choose a few reliable
sources of news, and avoid listening to people that do not seem trustworthy.
Do not believe everything that you read; question everything and perform
your own research on even your most reliable sources of information and
news.
Choose your relationships wisely. You really cannot trust anyone. Avoid
trusting people. You never know what information they may glean about
you to use against you. As you have learned from employing psychological
warfare, manipulative and emotionally abusive people are able to glean the
tiniest clues about you from your conersations. They then use this
information later to hurt you in some way.
Always be wary of people who try to bait you or distract you. Usually, their
actions are not innocent. Why do they want your attention? By distracting
you, they may be trying to give you a subliminal cue or they may be trying
to control you through the power of suggestion. Either way, they are trying
to dominate and monopolize your time. You can ignore or politely but
firmly tell them no when they demand your attention.
When people try to exert power over you, they may begin by stating you
have glaring flaws. They do this to lower your self-esteem and make you
sensitive. You do not need to fall for this. Just change the conversation or
suggest that they have the same flaw. If someone says you have a bad

temper, for instance, you can grin and say, “I know! But at least I don’t hold
everything in like you do. It is actually healthier to have a bad but
controlled temper like mine. How is your project coming along, by the
way?” This is called deflection and it works miracles.
Remove yourself from drama and conflict. Stonewalling people is better
than arguing with them. When you argue with people, you fuel their anger
and animosity. You add power to the fight. When you pull away and act like
a stone wall, you become unreachable. You win through silence. You also
avoid making the enemies that may eventually attempt to perform
psychological warfare on you by using stonewalling.
Do not let the opinions or actions of others change you. It is a natural
human instinct to mirror the behavior of others to earn social approval. But
social approval is highly overrated. You will be more at peace if you keep to
yourself and do your own thing. Act the way you want to act. Be who you
want to be. By not buying into the need for social approval, you lower your
risk of falling victim to mass fads. People can be controlled through things
like social proof and fads. If you are not one of the herd, you can avoid
falling into trends that are created for mass control by the government or
some other untrustworthy agent. You can be more discerning and determine
what is safe, rather than blindly following other people’s leads.
Avoid all contact with enemies. Again, this is important because your
enemies may be trying to get pertinent information from you. It is also
important because your enemies may be trying to poison you with their
negative vibes. They may even be performing psychological warfare on
you. Limit your exposure to avoid any harm. You don’t need to waste time
with people who do not care about you.
Establish a good reputation. This will make it difficult for your enemies to
discredit you. People are more likely to believe your claims and rally for
you if you have a good reputation. You can create a good reputation by
always being nice and kind to others. Always be honest so that you look

like a good person with unfailing integrity. You want to be someone that
other people like.

Protect Your Mind and Your Heart
Protect your mind and your heart; they are the main targets of psychological
warfare, more so than your physical body. By overturning the fear and hurt
that your psychological war-monger inflicts upon you, you essentially win
the war. Fear and pain are the primary weapons of psychological warfare.
They are aimed at the primary targets; your heart, and your mind. The only
way you can defeat psychological warfare is by blocking the fear and pain.
If you can reverse the fear and pain back on your attacker, you are even
more of a victor in a psychological war.
Avoid falling victim to the power of suggestion. If someone suggests that
you have a flaw or that you should do something, understand that they are
using the power of suggestion to make you believe a self-limiting belief.
Someone is trying to plant a bad thought about yourself in your head. By
believing what they say, you become a victim. But you can fight their
beliefs by believing in yourself. Undermine self-limiting beliefs that others
try to plant into your mind by suggesting an alternative truth.
Also, continue to hold positive beliefs about yourself. Know that you are a
good person and that you are loved. Believe that you are smart and capable.
Think positive thoughts that build you up, rather than tear you down. When
you do this, you give yourself the power and deny others the ability to take
control of your low self-esteem. You protect your mind from bad
suggestions and your heart from the pain that these suggestions can cause if
you believe them.
Search for your enemy’s weaknesses. Psychological warfare is very
successful and effective, but its use suggests that your enemy is too weak to
actually attack you. He or she can only employ covert methods.
Likely, your attacker uses the power of intimidation. This power is great
and it can make you cower in terror. But realize that intimidation is usually
just a front that a scared bully erects for his or her own protection. Has your
intimidator ever actually attacked you or anyone you know? Or is it all a

façade? Test intimidation and see how easily your intimidator’s façade
crumbles when you challenge it.
Try relaxing and reducing your stress level. Your attacker probably knows
just how to get to you mentally and emotionally. Because your attacker has
designed careful attacks on your heart and mind, you take these attacks very
seriously. They hurt you and trouble you. But come to think of it, you may
realize that these attacks are really nothing you need to worry about. Maybe
these attacks are based on lies, or maybe they do not matter in the overall
scheme of things. Take a day to yourself at some relaxing place, far away
from the person who is using psychological warfare on you, and think about
the attacks and whether or not you are blowing them up in your mind.
When you begin to relax and let go of stress, you take back power from
your attacker. Things stop bothering you so much and your heart will feel
better.
Your heart and your mind are usually the victims of psychological warfare,
not your body. If the psychological war-monger really wished you dead, he
or she would have killed you already. Considering the fact that you are still
alive today suggests that either your antagonist does not want to kill you, or
else they cannot get away with killing you. Perhaps he or she does not have
the means to get away with murder and is terrified of legal repercussions.
You are at least temporarily safe from bodily harm. Do not let your attacker
instill fear of death in you.
But time is of the essence. You cannot let your temporary safety give you a
false sense of permanent security. Things can quickly change as your
antagonist’s plan unfolds. You need to act to protect yourself immediately,
in preparation for future physical harm. If someone hates you enough to
perform psychological torture upon you, then that person is also capable of
murdering you.
Even if you are never physically harmed, mental destruction can be just as
disastrous for your life as physical destruction. You may develop a host of
mental illnesses in response to the trauma wreaked upon you. You will

never be the same. You will deal with self-delusions, hallucinations,
depression, and other issues for the rest of your life. Your mind will no
longer be your property, but rather the plaything of another person or
persons whom you do not know. As you have seen in this book,
psychological warfare can take hold of you and transform you into another
person. It is insidious and it is effective.
They are taking your life slowly but surely. They may as well kill you since
they are stealing your willpower, your freedom of will, and your will to
live. You need to put an end to it before they truly disable you and ruin your
life. Take back your power now before more of it is stolen from you.
 
 
 

Protecting Your Loved Ones
Protecting your loved ones starts by limiting the use of social media and
other forms of media. The less that they are exposed to certain media, the
less likely they are to be exposed to any propaganda that can affect them
adversely.
You can also teach your kids to think for themselves and to respect
themselves. Teach them what manipulation looks like and tell them that it is
never OK. Teach them to research everything that they hear, even in school,
and to always be suspicious of things.
Be frank and open about the reality of psychological warfare with your
loved ones. Provide plenty of real-life examples. This way, your family can
become aware of the danger. Awareness can enable them to take steps to
fight the problem.

 

CHAPTER 15: TRAIN YOUR 
 
MIND TO BE CALM IN EVERY 
 
SITUATION

O
Self-Hypnosis
ne of the keys to entering your own mind and making changes is
self-hypnosis. Self-hypnosis lulls your mind into a state where
you can access your subconscious effortlessly. Once in the
hypnotic state, you can make suggestions that your subconscious mind will
hear and process. Self-hypnosis works by reducing distracting conscious
thoughts, leaving your mind bare and free to receive more sensitive
messages directly in the subconscious. Hypnosis also lowers your natural
inhibitions so that your mind is more receptive to messages and does not
argue with itself or block thoughts or messages out.
Here are simple steps on how to perform self-hypnosis:
Lie in a comfortable position or sit down. Now, look at a specific
spot somewhere on the ceiling. It is important to strain your eyes a
little bit in order to induce concentration so pick a spot that is
behind you and hold your eyes on it.
Change your breath to be slow, firm, and deep. Breathe in through
your nose, out through your mouth. Feel yourself fill your chest and
concentrate on the sensation of your lungs expanding with air. Then,
let all your breath out and feel it rushing through your windpipes,
over your teeth, out through your lips.
Recite out loud or in your mind the word “sleep” as you inhale, and
then recite “deep sleep” as you exhale. Keep doing this until sleep
overtakes your body. Your entire body should feel leaden with
sleep.
Now is a good time to tell yourself to shut your eyes. Your eyes
should just close without any effort on your part.
At this point, you are in a hypnotic state. Welcome! Deepen this
state by counting. Tell yourself, “I am going to count to three and as
I do that, I shall slip deeper into this hypnotic state. By the time I
reach three, I will be more relaxed.” You can come up with your

own version of this mantra, but just be sure to say something like
that to yourself. Repeat your mantra a few times, either out loud or
in the privacy of your own mind.
Count to three, all the while repeating the command with each
count: “One… I am feeling more relaxed. Two…. I’m feeling even
more relaxed…Three… I am feeling completely relaxed and I am
truly in a hypnotic state now.”
Counting past three can help you enter a deeper hypnotic state. If
your mind still wanders and you can’t focus, you can try longer
counts. The more you practice self-hypnosis, however, the easier a
short count will work.
Once in the hypnotic state, start telling yourself things you want to
manifest in waking life. Some examples:
“On the count of ten, I will overcome this grudge.”
“On the count of ten, I will no longer hurt.”
“On the count of ten, I will start chewing gum when I crave nicotine
so that I can stop smoking for good.”
“On the count of ten, I will start to crave healthier foods to lose
weight.”
The more you use hypnosis, the faster you can slide into it. Also, the more
you practice it, the more you can get into your deep mind and make a
change. Finally, realize that you don’t have to regard the examples above.
You can use this technique to achieve weight loss, quit smoking, letting go
of grudges, or ending other bad habits.
Remember to always replace bad behavior with a good one. So instead of
saying “On the count of ten I will quit smoking,” suggest to your mind that
on the count of ten you will start chewing gum instead of smoking
cigarettes. Find an alternative to your old habits. If you are working on
changing your personality, you might want to suggest that on the count of
ten you will become more of whatever you want to become.
Avoid using negatives like “stop,” “don’t,” etc. Your mind does not respond
to negatives so well and will leave off the “Don’t” to adopt the following

behavior. So instead of saying negatives, state positives. Say “I will” and “I
am going to start.” Use lots of strong action verbs.

Mind Hacking
Whether you drink a little too much to deal with stress or you tear yourself
down with overly critical self-talk, your bad habits are preventing you from
shining at your very best. To end bad habits, you can start to hack your own
mind. It is surprisingly easy to do and it helps you break bad habits by
changing the patterns your subconscious mind follows on autopilot, as I
mentioned before. Mind hacking is an excellent form of subliminal
psychology to use upon yourself.
Mind hacking works by using loops. The concept behind loops is that you
reach into your thinking and adjust it. Each thought you think leads to more
thoughts of the same vein. So, to change your thinking, you want to create
loops of positive thoughts rather than negative ones. Instead of following
the loops you create with each negative thought, be innovative and chase
the negative thought with a positive one to redirect the consequential
thought loop.
So how can you use this to adjust your personality and change bad habits?
When you start to reach for a bad habit that you normally turn to in order to
comfort yourself, such as a drink, think a positive loop about how you
deserve better. Follow that with another positive thought that will encourage
yourself to do something else that you will thank yourself for later. For
example, instead of drinking to unwind after a stressful day of work, do
some yoga to relax or take a hot bath. You will not hate yourself when you
wake up thoroughly well-rested and without a hangover. Find what you
want to feel and then find healthy ways to encourage that feeling without
engaging in your bad habits. The more positive loops you make in your
own mind, the more positive emotions you feel. And then the happier you
are.

Subliminal Trick for Waking Up
Waking up earlier is one of the difficult and elusive secrets to success.
When you wake up early, you have more time to get things done. You are
more productive. Even if it seems like you will get the same number of
hours in a day no matter when you wake up, waking early is good for the
human mind and allows for better productivity.
But if you struggle to get out of bed, you can try the exhaustive old advice
of going to bed early and just forcing yourself awake at an earlier hour.
However, this seldom works well for people. That is when subliminal
psychology for self-improvement plays a fun little role. One excellent trick
for waking up at an earlier hour is to chant the time you want to wake up to
yourself as you fall asleep. So, as you begin to drift off into sleep, which is
basically the hypnotic state, you should tell yourself, “I want to wake up at
seven.” Say this three times.

Anchoring
You can start to train yourself using anchoring. Through this process, you
teach yourself to reach for positive behaviors when you receive a stimulus.
So, to create an anchor, first set a clear goal.
Next, pick a stimulus. Anything can work, but a stimulus that already has a
profound meaning for you will work best.
Once you choose the stimulus, you need to start playing it or expose
yourself to it, and then immediately pick up the task you want to learn to
perform by the anchor. Keep doing this until you have hammered it in.
Soon, you will notice that when you see or hear this stimulus, you want to
do a particular thing. That’s when you know it has set. Keep using it and the
anchor will only get stronger and more infallible. After some training, it
will start to work on its own to motivate you.

Continue Education and Further Experiences
Make it a goal to keep learning and experiencing life. This simple desire
can really transform your attitude about life and your zest for doing new
things. You will want to get out of bed if you dedicate your days to learning
and experiencing more.
I love the saying: Do something every day that scares you. I think this is the
best advice you could possibly apply to your life. Try new things, approach
new people, and take advantage of new opportunities. Even if you feel
scared, do it anyway and surprise yourself as your life improves. Do not be
complacent and let your life get stale and stagnant.

Adjust Your Self-Talk
All day long, a monologue runs in your mind. Take a moment to listen to
how you speak to yourself. How does your internal monologue sound? Is it
the way that you would talk to a friend? If not, you need to change your
self-talk to be kinder and more encouraging. Your self-talk is a direct
reflection of how you feel about yourself, so it is very important to your
overall mental outlook on life. To change your overall outlook, you need to
start speaking kindly to yourself. You can vanquish lack of motivation,
discouragement, fear, and depression by talking to yourself in a kinder
manner and giving yourself confidence boosts throughout the day.
 
 

It’s OK to Be Mean
Sometimes it is just necessary to be mean. No, I don’t mean become the
new bully in the office or an abuser to your family. But start to be a bit
harsh and firm when you stand up for yourself. Be selfish and demand what
you deserve without an apology. Give yourself permission to be mean when
you need to be. Being nice will only open you up to being taken advantage
of.
You must work to always stick up for yourself. Even if it requires being
mean to someone, you must put yourself first.
It is also acceptable to ignore the conventional rules of social politeness to
defend yourself. Take care of yourself and conserve your precious time and
money by not tolerating sitting there listening to someone’s rambling.
Similarly, stop letting people insult you. Maybe you have accepted it before
to be polite. You know that you are supposed to laugh and take it as a joke
even though it is not very funny to you. But why do this?
Say no when you want to. You may feel that it is polite to say yes, but doing
so can really tax your resources and make you overextend yourself.
Fearlessly confront people when you feel you have been ripped off. Never
tell people that you are sorry for what you say or feel guilty for sticking up
for yourself.
Being mean can help you gain both dominance and confidence. It shows
you that you are worth something, so your mind starts to believe it. Soon
you will not even have to try. You just stand up for yourself because you
know you don’t deserve any disrespect or poor treatment.

 

S
CHAPTER 16: PERSUASION VS
MANIPULATION
eeing how individuals structure assessments and contentions, and
display and incorporate realities into their psychological models is
key to your capacity to persuade anyone to become tied up with a
thought and afterward follow up on that thought. That is the embodiment of
influence.

The distinction between influence and manipulation lies in:
1)      The expectation behind your craving to convince that individual,
2)      The honesty and straightforwardness of the procedure, and
3)      The net advantage or effect on that individual
Manipulation suggests that you are disguising a craving to move someone
to see things from your perspective, such that it will profit you. What's
more, if this advantage were uncovered, that disclosure would make the
other individual far less open to your message since it would either:
Demonstrate a solid inclination towards their absence of advantage
in the trade,
Demonstrate an ulterior thought process, or
Some mix of both.
So, for instance, suppose I was selling someone a vehicle. That individual
strolled into my business with a group of six children, and it was evident
that they were searching for and truly required a family-sized, reasonable
vehicle.
In any case, I at that point utilized the entirety of my powerful capacities to
persuade the parent that he shouldn't purchase a little van, but rather a two-
seater convertible to relive his youth, knowing that I would make double the
commission on that vehicle and it was totally unsatisfactory for the
customer.

That Is Manipulation
Now imagine a scenario where that same parent came into my business
with six children and said to me, "Man, I simply need to blow some money.
I should purchase an eight-seater. I know it's silly, and I truly can't
legitimize this. However, I'm only here for the two-seater convertible."
Also, imagine a scenario in which I then utilize my convincing capacities to
gradually and deliberately drive this parent to comprehend the advantages
of acquiring the more moderate and appropriate family vehicle.

That Is Influence, Not Manipulation
I utilized similar skills to persuade someone to accomplish something that I
truly accepted was to their greatest advantage, rather than persuading them
to accomplish something that was not to their greatest advantage.
It's the hidden expectations, the net advantages, and the veracity with which
you breathe life into this toolkit that makes the distinction between
influence and manipulation.
This has been a subject of discussion for truly a huge number of years. In
Greece, during the fourth century BC, the father of influence, Aristotle, held
a gathering of educators known as the Sophists. Aristotle conflicted with
the Sophists over the way that they couldn't have cared less about truth yet
would advance any thought for an expense. He stated that the Sophists were
taking part in manipulation since they purposefully misdirected individuals
and caused hurt.
 
 
 

Why Persuasion Is Good
To accurately perceive the distinction between influence and manipulation,
it is fundamental to comprehend the morals that undergird influence. There
are some scholars who have proclaimed that influence is morally impartial.
In other words, that influence is neither acceptable nor terrible, however
simply a fair-minded procedure. I don't acknowledge this position. I would
argue that the Aristotelian perspective that influence isn't nonpartisan,
however honorable, is right.
Influence is intrinsically acceptable in light of the fact that it is one of the
essential methods through which truth gets known. Through the influential
strategy, a thought is advanced with proof, and an individual is permitted to
decide to either acknowledge or dismiss that powerful intrigue openly.
Influence does, without a doubt, include moving individuals to a position
they don't right now hold, however not by asking or persuading. Rather, it
includes cautious planning, the best possible encircling of contentions, the
introduction of distinctive supporting proof, and the push to locate the right
passionate match with your crowd.
The conviction that influence is a fair and powerful method for landing at
truth is seen in the way that it is the reason for present-day financial aspects,
directing practices, and the lawful framework. What's more, influence is
additionally the establishment of majority rule government. Majority rules
systems utilize attentive moral influence at whatever point they choose
pioneers, set up laws, or attempt to ensure their residents. Indeed, even the
individuals who become alarmed with the thought of influence can't get
away from it.
Influence is imbued inside human correspondence. When imparting their
will, individuals both deliberately and unexpectedly advance certain
convictions and practices. Thus, influence doesn't involve decisions; it is
innate in social connection. Indeed, it is so inescapable in human
correspondence that, on occasion, it turns out to be practically undetectable.

The supposed individuals' callings – legislative issues, law, social work,
advising, business the board, promoting, deals, advertising, and the service
– should be called influence callings.
At its center, influence is the quest for truth. It is through influence that
positive change happens. For instance, influential messages have been
logically demonstrated to incite students to abstain from smoking, and from
joining packs. Influence helps manufacture harmony between countries.
 
Influence persuades drivers to forgo driving when they've had a couple of
drinks and are too drunk to drive. Influence is utilized to persuade a
drunkard to look for proficient assistance. Influence is the manner by which
the mentor of a dark horse group moves the players to give it their
everything. Influence is an apparatus utilized by guardians to ask kids not to
acknowledge rides from outsiders or to permit anybody to contact them in a
way that feels awkward. So, influence is the foundation of various positive,
pro-social attempts. Barely any of the decency that we find on the planet
could be practiced without influence.
However, the integrity of influence and the way it is implanted inside
human instinct isn't what causes concern. What causes nervousness is the
debasement of influence. Undoubtedly, when influence is mutilated, it can
get manipulative, which is perilous. Through manipulation, scallywags,
religious pioneers, and tyrants have mishandled, oppressed, and even
slaughtered millions. In any case, as unfavorable as manipulation may be, it
ought to never be mistaken for influence.
Manipulation is the corruption of influence. It isn't worried about truth but
instead based in double-dealing. Aristotle remarked on this in his acclaimed
work, Rhetoric when he accentuated, "maltreatment of the explanatory
workforce can work extraordinary evil, a similar charge can be brought
against every beneficial thing spare righteousness itself, and particularly
against the most helpful things, for example, quality, wellbeing, riches, and

military aptitude. Properly utilized, they work the best gift; and wrongly
utilized, they work the best damage.”
Therefore, the appropriate inquiry is how you might recognize influence
and manipulation? Coming up next are the three clear, yet dependable ways
that you can break down if a message is manipulative.
1. Intention
The aim is an essential factor in deciding whether a solicitation is
manipulative. In the event that an individual endeavors to exhibit a thought
or conduct that isn't to the greatest advantage of another, they are
participating in manipulation. Unfortunately, this is very normal.
Individuals habitually fall into the snare of manhandling others in the quest
for what they want. One of the underlying drivers of this Machiavellian
point of view is not seeing others with equity. The famous scholar
Immanuel Kant expounded on this attitude when he recommended that the
central statute of ethical quality is regarding an individual as a person and
not as a thing.
2. Withholding Truth
Manipulation includes misshaping or retaining truth. Regularly, this is seen
through overstating the upsides of conduct, a thought, or item. It was this
type of manipulation that incited the expression Caveat Emptor, which is
Latin for "Purchaser Beware". The expression was especially far-reaching
during those chronicled periods when there was little responsibility for
venders. The maxim was an admonition to potential purchasers to be
suspicious of those selling merchandise, and to ensure that they confirmed,
before buying, that the nature of the item was indistinguishable from the
cases made by the dealer. Indeed, even today, a great many people have
encountered being told about the highlights or advantages of an item, and
afterward, in the wake of obtaining it understood that they had been
misdirected. This isn't right, as something outside genuine portrayal is
conspicuous manipulation.

3. Coercion
The pressure is the third and most clear segment of a manipulative intrigue.
It is the expulsion of free decision, the final proposal – do it, or something
bad might happen. Interestingly, influence includes impact, but never
power. A characterizing facet of influence is free decision. At some level,
the individual must be fit for tolerating or dismissing the position that has
been encouraged by the person in question.
Interestingly, a manipulative intrigue is one that, whenever embraced, will
adversely affect another. Manipulation is ethically off base and
counterproductive to all included. The deliberate utilization of misdirecting
impact strategies turns into a mentally and monetarily self-harming process.
In this manner, through a precise and powerful comprehension of both the
rightness of influence and the three essential components of manipulation,
you will be ready to convince others morally and shield yourself from
manipulative solicitations.

The Most Effective Method to Develop 
 
Your Influencing Skills
We frequently need to convince and impact those over whom we have no
genuine position. The question is how to do this in a viable and
unpretentious manner.

Persuasion requires empathy
Give the other party the feeling that you have met them midway or further.
An inconspicuous, compassionate methodology is suggested as opposed to
a more straightforward or powerful style.
 
 

W
CHAPTER 17: EARN RESPECT
hile life would be fantastic if it worked this way, you can’t
snap your fingers and just decide to be more charismatic and
confident. You can from a mental and psychological
standpoint, but acting more confidently takes time and practice, just like
anything else in life.
What I would recommend for is to read through this part of the book and let
the information settle, and then start practicing a bit at a time. Some aspects
will resonate more with you than others. Some things you might do already,
and some you may never have thought of, so take the bits you want and
work with them. If you’re feeling adventurous, then sure, try a bit you may
not have thought about trying.
My point is, try things out and find what works for you. This way, you’ll be
discovering yourself and your style of charisma along the way. Let’s go!

Method 1 – Becoming More Charismatic
To be charismatic means to have a charm and attractiveness about you, both
physically and intellectually, that makes other people want to be around you
and want to know more about you. You may draw people in with how you
talk and the way you are, you may have people hanging off your every
word, or you may inspire something in people that makes them want to be
better.
I’m sure you know some charismatic people in your life; the kinds of
people who make you feel like you want to be them, but not in an
egotistical way—more in a natural way that just gives you a certain sense of
peace around them. Fortunately, anyone can be this kind of person. It’s
something you learn and practice, although it does come more naturally to
some people. Here’s how:
Awareness of Your Values
This means you need to understand your values and what your abilities are.
What do you stand for, what do you believe in, and what potential do you
have to do amazing things in your life?
Own Your Integrity
Integrity is the ability to stick to your values and do the things you say
you’re going to do. This is essential when it comes to trusting others around
and believing in yourself.
Think for Yourself
The most charismatic people think for themselves, regardless of what the
status quo thinks, which makes them such inspiring people to be around.
 

Have a Flame Inside You
There is nothing more satisfying than having a flame or a spark inside you
that makes you go out and get what you want in the world.
Step Out of Your Comfort Zone
Charismatic people are comfortable with getting uncomfortable.
Be in Control of Your Emotions
Being emotional is not a great place to be. Now, I don’t say this because
emotions are bad. Emotions are useful because they’re a clear indication of
who we are as individuals and what we care about. However, if you allow
your emotions to consume you and take over, this is where things can get
problematic.

Method 2 – Everything You Need to 
 
Know about Confidence
The official definition of being confident is having the willingness to act
accordingly when meeting life’s challenges and having the drive to succeed.
This goes hand in hand with stepping outside of your comfort zone, settling
into uncomfortable situations, and even going on a journey to becoming
more charismatic while believing in yourself.
If you don’t have confidence, you’re not going to have what it takes to be
the best version of yourself. You need that passion and inner motivation to
step forward into your true self and be yourself. Your relationship with
yourself requires this, and it ripples out to every other relationship you’ll
have in your life.
Find Your Limiting Beliefs
There will be moments where you are naturally confident already, so a great
place to start when trying to expand this confidence “zone” is to take some
time to think about where you are not so confident.
Define Your Confidence Style
The best way to do this is to think about the times in your life when you felt
the most confidence.
Minimize Comparison with Others
Comparing yourself to someone else is only going to make you feel bad
about yourself and diminish your achievements. The only person you
should be comparing yourself with is yourself.
Keep on Learning

When you take time to learn something new, whether it’s a fact about the
world or a new skill, you’ll give yourself a little boost in confidence
because you’re proving to yourself that you’re enough and you’re fully
capable.
Be True to Yourself
Suppose you’re masking yourself and pretending to be someone you’re not
for the supposed benefit of others. In that case, you’re not going to be
confident in yourself because you’re spending all your energy focusing on
hiding this person.
When you can freely be yourself and truly embrace who you are, there’s no
reason to spend energy on hiding yourself.

Method 3 – Your Outside Reflects Your Inside
It’s all well and good being a good, genuine person, but if you don’t look
after yourself, you’re going to be pushing people away. More realistically, if
you’re not looking after yourself, you’re probably not going to be confident
in yourself, which will lead to you being even more socially anxious than
you already are, which will ultimately make relationships harder to form
and maintain.
It pays to look after yourself and to treat your body with respect, both for
the attraction of others and for boosting the confidence you have in
yourself. If you look and feel the part of the person you want to be,
everything else will fall into place naturally.
Find Your Style
Everybody has their own style, so it’s important for your confidence and
self-esteem to find yours.
Develop a Daily Routine
Proper hygiene is vital if you want to be confident in yourself, and if you
want others to be attracted to you.
This means  taking the time to look after yourself, thus helping you love
yourself more and making yourself incredibly attractive to the people
around you.
Exercise Regularly
Endless studies prove that exercise is important for maintaining a balanced
state of mental health, reducing stress levels, and building up your
confidence. You'll also improve your social relationships when you exercise
with a partner or friend, join a team, and improve your abilities to
successfully create powerful and beneficial habits.

Eat a Healthy Diet
Eating a healthy diet goes hand in hand with exercising properly and
making sure you’re keeping yourself healthy in the best possible way,
therefore allowing all the positive benefits to come into your life.

Method 4 – Trust is Everything
If you’ve ever been lied to or betrayed by someone, then you know how
much it hurts to have trust in a relationship broken. Having trust is
fundamental to any relationship. Even though you might see yourself as a
trustworthy person, it’s vital that you think about how you can be more
trustworthy and prove this to the people around you consistently and
naturally.
Think about how often you tell little white lies. The lies that don’t mean
anything, but you tell them anyway. In sales, I used to say all the time that
work on a project was done, and I’ll send it over Monday because my
internet was acting up. The work wasn’t done. I was just at home feeling
sorry for myself and was making up excuses to give myself more time.
Now, you might think these lies are harmless, but when people can see
through them, they create an impression of you, and they damage your
relationships.
From the other person’s perspective, they see that you’re going through a
rough time but don’t want to approach you. Obviously, you’re lying
because you don’t want to talk about it. However, that person will feel
negatively towards you because you lied to them, and while it may seem
little, they’re not going to trust you on much bigger, more important topics.
A 2016 global study on some of the top CEOs in the world found that 55%
of CEOs in the world’s biggest companies said that a “lack of trust” was
among the biggest threats to a company's stability and success. Just like in
my example above, if you don’t trust the people you’re working with, this
creates a huge shift in the team's dynamic because nobody knows who is
telling the truth. Problems are guaranteed to arise at some point.
The same applies to your relationships. If you break trust in a relationship,
both romantic relationships or friendships, the person involved may never
fully trust you again, and there’s no stability. It doesn’t matter what you say

to that other person; they can just say, “I don’t believe you,” and there’s
nothing you can do to make things better.
As a general rule of thumb, always be honest with people from the moment
you meet them. Never give them a reason to think you’re untrustworthy. If
people can trust you with their lives, your relationships will be stronger than
you can imagine. So, how do you do it?
How to Be More Trustworthy in Your Relationships
People all have different life experiences, and if you meet someone who’s
been lied to by the people in their lives for as long as they can remember,
they may not trust you, even if you’re a trustworthy person. You need to
have the integrity to prove that you are, and you can do this by following
the points below.
Start Off Slow and Build Up Trust
Start slowly when you’re getting to know someone and build up to the more
intimate and vulnerable details of your thinking as you go. Remember,
while you want the other person to trust you, you always want to be able to
trust them, so find the right balance between giving and taking.
Putting in the Time
If you want someone’s trust, you need to put in the time and have
experiences with this person. The more positive time you put into the
relationship, the more you’ll be trusted.
Avoid Emotionally Harming Someone
When someone tells you something that they’re trusting you with, you must
pay them respect and avoid damaging them and hurting them, even if you
do it unintentionally. This is one of the most assured way to break your trust
with someone.

Remember, your words have the ability to create magic, and it’s up to you
what spells you cast.
Be Honest with Your Feelings
The best and most fulfilling relationships are formed between people who
can be open and honest, even if it would be easier not to. This will create a
huge amount of respect for you among the people in your relationships, and
the trust will only help strengthen these connections.

 

T
CONCLUSION
he message of the book is awareness of the various languages of
psychology warfare including what they are, and who is fighting
with these languages. Basic psychology involves a person's inner
systems that can be used for a better and more positive result. Psychological
warfare on the other hand has been termed as mind and behavior
manipulation.
The art of psychological warfare is present due to the inherent dark side of
all people. The book mainly emphasizes the dark “I” and its impact on the
psyche of the person.
The book is about the manipulation of minds and how people live through
the minds and the transformations it brings.
The book's main focus lies on the common person who is unaware of the
powers that they have inside them.
There are different main arts in psychological warfare.
Deception is one of them. We must understand the various facets of
deception as the word itself has multiple shades. For instance, camouflage
is a part of deception. In camouflage, we learn to hide our inner self and
give out the appearance that we are different from what we actually are.
Another form of deception is to appear friendly on the outside and promote
some other hidden agenda on the inside. This is but one of the many forms
of deception used in psychological warfare.
Influence is another word used in psychological warfare. The art of
influence is used for various purposes, but it can also be used for inducing
some positive change in the person's behavior. Another form of influence
that is used for psychological warfare is influencing the person to believe
they are in control of the situation while they actually are not.

Domination is another art used in psychological warfare. This art helps
make the person feel disempowered. The art of domination is applied in
psychological warfare through the use of high-ranking titles. The army
generals are known by their ranks and so are the police officials. This,
therefore, gives a sense of power to the people around them while they have
lower ranks.
Blackmail is another art used in psychological warfare. It is one of the
forms of fear used in psychological warfare.
Manipulation is another art used in psychological warfare. This is used to
encourage a person to do stupid things that are in the interest of the
manipulator.
Brainwashing is also another art used in psychological warfare. The art of
mind control is used on those people who have witnessed trauma in their
lives. The art utilizes that trauma for advantage. Due to the person's inner
difficulties and fears, art like this is used to make them feel that they are
controlled, and free from any responsibilities.
Psychological warfare is based on how to control the mental processes of
individuals. This is done by the use of these arts. The goal is to direct the
individual towards some purpose that is accomplished by using
psychological warfare.
The techniques employed in psychological warfare can be applied at the
workplace. This includes distract the employees by giving them some false
promises. The employee ends up not focusing on the work because they
have been distracted.
It can also be applied in relationships. The attachment created through
psychological warfare is not a healthy form of attachment. In unhealthy
relationships, the other person can be constantly trying to persuade the
person to do some favors or sell their inner self.
Different principles of the art of psychological warfare can also be applied
to entrepreneurs and businesspeople. The psychological warfare that aims at

influencing the decisions of the people who invest in the business is an art
that can be utilized to boost the economy by offering investors more value
for their money.
The mission of the book is to raise awareness of the varieties of
psychological warfare in order to protect people from these tactics.
The psychological warfare that we face every day is not at all as easy as it
seems. These people try to manipulate our minds, and with that belief in
mind, the author decided to write this book.
The dangers of psychological warfare are real, and the author wanted to
raise the awareness of the readers to fight the art. It is about realizing your
power, working with the art of positive psychology, and ensuring there is a
balance between the inner and outer self.
We need to take note of the fact that we are on enemy grounds and we need
to have defense strategies in place.
We need to raise awareness about the different psychic attacks that people
are suffering. We need to create a balance between the outer and inner self
and this is done by raising awareness of the art of psychological warfare.
Thank you for reaching the end and hopefully, I was able to impart a lot of
knowledge to you.

