
The Mathematics of Infinity 
A Guide to Great Ideas 
Theodore G. Faticoni 
Fordham University 
Department of Mathematics 
Bronx, NY 
A JOHN WILEY & SONS, INC., PUBLICATION 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

The Mathematics of Infinity 

PURE AND APPLIED MATHEMATICS 
A Wiley-Interscience Series of Texts, Monographs, and Tracts 
Consulting Editor: David A. Cox 
Founded by RICHARD COURANT 
Editors Emeriti: MYRON B. ALLEN 111, DAVID A. COX, PETER HILTON, 
HARRY HOCHSTADT, PETER LAX, JOHN TOLAND 
A complete list of the titles in this series appears at the end of this volume. 

The Mathematics of Infinity 
A Guide to Great Ideas 
Theodore G. Faticoni 
Fordham University 
Department of Mathematics 
Bronx, NY 
A JOHN WILEY & SONS, INC., PUBLICATION 

Copyright 0 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, lnc. All rights reserved 
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey. 
Published simultaneously in Canada. 
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form 
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as 
permitted under Section 107 or 108 ofthe 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior 
written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to 
the Copyright Clearance Center, lnc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax 
(978) 750-4470, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should 
be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1 I 1 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 
07030, (201) 748-601 1, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permission. 
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in 
preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or 
completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of 
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales 
representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be 
suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the 
publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including 
but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages. 
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact our 
Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at 
(317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002. 
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may 
not be available in electronic format. For information about Wiley products, visit our web site at 
www.wiley.com. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available. 
Faticoni, Theodore G. 
The Mathematics of Infinity: A Guide to Great Ideas 
ISBN-1 3 978-0-47 1-79432-5 
ISBN-I0 0-471-79432-5 
Printed in the United States of America. 
I 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1  

To Professor Elliot Wolk who taught me Set Theory. 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Contents 
Preface 
ix 
1 Elementary Set Theory 
1 
1.1 Sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
2 
1.2 Cartesian Products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17 
1.3 Power Sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
20 
1.4 Something From Nothing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22 
1.5 Indexed Families of Sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27 
2 Functions 
37 
2.1 Functional Preliminaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  38 
2.2 Images and Preimages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  52 
2.3 One-to-one and Onto Functions . . . . . . . . . . . .  61 
2.4 Bijections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
65 
2.5 Inverse Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
68 
3 Counting Infinite Sets 
75 
3.1 Finite Sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
75 
3.2 Hilbert’s Infinite Hotel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  82 
3.3 Equivalent Sets and Cardinality . . . . . . . . . . . .  98 
4 Infinite Cardinals 
103 
4.1 Countable Sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
104 
4.2 Uncountable Sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
117 
4.3 Two Infinities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
126 
4.4 Power Sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
132 
4.5 The Arithmetic of Cardinals . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  145 
vii 

... 
CONTENTS 
Vlll 
5 Well Ordered Sets 
163 
5.1 Successors of Elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  163 
5.2 The Arithmetic of Ordinals . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  173 
Cardinals as Ordinals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  184 
5.4 Magnitude versus Cardinality . . . . . . . . . . . . .  197 
6.1 Mathematical Induction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  205 
6.2 Transfinite Induction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  222 
6.3 Mathematical Recursion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  231 
6.4 Number Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
237 
of Arithmetic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  240 
6.6 Perfect Numbers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  242 
5.3 
6 Inductions and Numbers 
205 
6.5 The Fundamental Theorem 
7 Prime Numbers 
247 
7.1 
7.3 
7.4 
Prime Number Generators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  247 
7.2 The Prime Number Theorem 
. . . . . . . . . . . . .  251 
Products of Geometric Series . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  254 
The Riernann Zeta Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  261 
7.5 Real Numbers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  265 
8 Logic and Meta-Mathematics 
271 
8.1 The Collection of All Sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  271 
8.2 Other Than True or False . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  274 
Bibliography 
283 
Index 
284 

Preface 
The most primitive of herdsman used a pouch of stones to keep 
track of the number of sheep he had in the field. As each sheep 
would enter the field the herdsman would place a stone in a pile. 
As the sheep would leave the field the herdsman would place the 
stones back into the pouch. If there were stones left on the ground 
then some sheep were missing. I there were no stones left and 
no sheep left then all was well with the herd. And if there were no 
more stones but there were more sheep then somehow the herdsman 
picked up a ewe or two. 
This correspondence between pouch stones and sheep is one of 
the most primitive forms of counting known. In today’s language 
this is known as a one-to-one correspondence, or a bijection between 
pouch stones and sheep. This kind of counting is continued today 
when we make an attendance sheet. Each name on the sheet cor- 
responds to exactly one child in the class, and we know some child 
is missing if he/she does not respond to his/her name. A more 
important correspondence is found in the grocery store. There we 
associate a certain number called a price with each item we put 
in our cart. The items in the cart correspond to a number called 
the total price of the cart. When we compare our receipt with the 
objects in the cart we are imitating the sheep herdsman’s pouch 
stones. 
ix 

X 
PREFACE 
Believe it or not, mathematicians count like the primitive herds- 
men. The number 1 is all sets that match up in an exact manner 
to the set ( 0 ) .  Thus we say that card({.}) 
= 1, and we say that 
card({*}) = 1. The number 1 becomes all that we associate with 
one element. 
We use the convenient symbol 1 to denote all possible sets that 
match up perfectly with ( 0 ) .  The symbol 1 is convenient because 
it is what we have been taught all these years. The number 2 is 
defined to be all of those sets that match up perfectly with ( 0 ,  *}. 
card((*, *}) = 2. 
This is 2 because we define it that way. It agrees with our training. 
It represents all possible sets that match up exactly with the set 
( 0 ,  *}. This is exactly what you have been taught. 
Next up is what we mean by matches up perfectly. This is the 
bijection we alluded to earlier. Sets A and B are called equivalent if - 
there is a bijection between them. That is, they match up perfectly. 
In other words, there is a way of matching up elements between A 
and B, 
called a function or bijection 
f : A - B  
such that 
1. different elements of A are mapped to different elements of B, 
and 
2. each element of B is associated with some element of A. 
For finite sets this bijection can be drawn as a picture. Let A = 
{ a l ,  u2, as} and let B = { b l ,  b2, b3}. Then a bijection between A 
and B is 
a1 - 
bl 
a2 - 
b2 
a3 H b3. 
Here is another such bijection. 

PREFACE 
xi 
You see, the bijection you choose does not have to respect the sub- 
scripts. These mappings are bijections because as you can see the 
elements ak are sent to different elements be. Also each element in 
B is associated with an element in A. That is exactly how mathe- 
maticians count elements in sets. 
An impressive extension of this idea is that we can count infinite 
sets in the same manner, but you must use different symbols to 
denote card(A). We let 
card(A) = the cardinality of A, 
which is simply all sets B such that A is equivalent to B. That 
is, card(A) is all those sets B for which there exists a bijection 
f : A - 
B. Hence B E card(A) or card(A) = card(B) exactly 
when there is a function f : A - 
B such that 
1. different elements of A are mapped to different elements of B, 
and 
2. each element of B is associated with some element of A. 
Notice that the definition of bijection has not changed. 
Since these sets are infinite we need a new symbol to denote 
card(A) of infinite sets. It is traditional to use the Hebrew letter 
aleph 
to denote infinite cardinals. Let 
N 
N = {0,1,2,3 ,... }, 
R = {z I z is a real number}. 
So N is the set of whole, nonnegative numbers, and R is the set of 
all real numbers. These would be decimal expansions like 1.414 and 
3.14159. Then we write 
card(N) = No 
and we say aleph naught. 
(universal) truth that there is a cardinal HI such that 
It is quite a surprising mathematical 

xii 
PREFACE 
Indeed there is an infinite chain of infinite cardinals 
N o < N , < N , < N g < - - - .  
We will have a chance to expand upon this idea in the later chapters 
of this book. 

The Mathematics of Infinity 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Chapter 1 
Elementary Set Theory 
The ideal writing style ascribed to by mathematicians is that in 
writing mathematics, less is more. If we can convey the exact idea of 
a concept with 5 words instead of 10 then we will use 5 words. Thus 
we will use the statement Cardinal numbers form a well ordered 
collection over the wordier statement The well ordered property is 
enjoyed by the collection of cardinal numbers. The second statement 
is mathematically correct but it is more than we need to convey the 
idea. 
I have tried to practice this ideal while writing the mathemat- 
ics in this book. The only exceptions to this ideal are made on 
the basis of decisions on the educational value of sentence struc- 
ture, the anecdotal comments, or discussions of this sort that occur 
between mathematical discourse. Sometimes it is good to sacrifice 
some mathematical austerity in the interest of getting an impor- 
tant point across to the reader. As the reader will clearly see, this 
economy of words in mathematical writings is not exercised in the 
text of a discussion. Discussions and intermediate anecdotes con- 
tain examples and illustrations which are the only tools we have to 
illustrate a concept. Since I have sacrificed a good bit of mathemat- 
ical rigor in favor of clarity, examples and illustrations are necessary 
if I am to get some subtle ideas across to the reader. This form of 
personalized writing style is unavoidable when discussing advanced 
ideas from mathematics in the popular press. 
We have a bit of a mountain to climb in this book, so be patient. 
Perhaps you can sit down in an overstuffed chair or at a table and 
1 

2 
CHAPTER 1. ELEMENTARY SET THEORY 
open the book. Maybe you have a pencil and paper handy. That’s 
a good idea. Some of these topics need to be diagrammed. And 
certainly you have a cup of beverage, coffee would be my choice. 
Now turn on that lamp overhead and blend in the final ingredient: 
a handful of inspiration. Good luck. 
1.1 Sets 
Some foundation has to be laid down before any discussion of math- 
ematics can begin. Our foundation is Set Theory and functions and 
we will discuss these notions in the first two chapters. There is one 
assumption that we will use implicitly and explicitly throughout this 
book. Our underlying assumption is that all mathematical objects 
considered in this book are from a Mathematical Universe in which 
these objects exist. Thus when we say that N is a cardinal it is to be 
understood that this cardinal lives in a Mathematical Universe and 
that we can examine it there. This Mathematical Universe is a clas- 
sical idea due to the Greek philosopher and mathematician Plato. 
Thus in making our universal assumption we are following in a good 
classic tradition. The intent here is clear. We will write given 2 if 
we wish to examine an object in the Mathematical Universe. Our 
definition of Set requires us to know when an object is given. Thus 
our universal assumption goes to work right away. Whatever else 
you might believe, let us agree that this Mathematical Universe is 
there and that we can study the elements in it. Said assumption 
will not change as we work our way through this book. 
Mathematical statements are explicitly or implicitly about ele- 
ments in sets. One of the highlights of twentieth century mathemat- 
ics was to show that all of mathematics can be derived from the ba- 
sic concepts in Set Theory. There is also strong empirical evidence 
that a firm grounding in Set Theory gives the reader the mathe- 
matical experience necessary to understand the advanced abstract 
ideas covered in later chapters. Thus we begin our introduction to 
modern mathematics with some work in Set Theory. However, the 
Elementary Set Theory that we will cover comes with a price. It 
can be terribly dry and uninspiring. We ask the reader to please 
be patient and work through the unions, intersections, and comple- 

1.1. SETS 
3 
ments contained in this chapter. Your work will pay large dividends 
in our later discussions. 
Definition 1.1.1 A set is a collection A of objects called elements 
that satisfy the property 
Given x then either x is an element in A 
or x is not an element in A. 
We will use the standard notation x E A when we want to say 
that x as an element of A. The notation x # A is used when we 
want to say that x is not an element of A. 
Observe that the defining condition of sets applies to objects that 
are given or that exist in the Mathematical Universe, and to nothing 
else. That must seem strange. But that little bit of philosophy must 
be addressed elsewhere. In this text we will assume that everything 
we consider exists in the Mathematical Universe. The use of the 
words Given x simply gives me a way of pointing out where that x 
is. This is perhaps the last time in this book that you will have the 
opportunity to think about this, so spend some time with it, and 
then read on. 
Some examples of sets are in order. Consider the simplest pos- 
sible set. The empty set is the collection that contains no elements. 
It is denoted by 
The empty set is a set since if x exists then x # 0. It arises in a 
surprising number of places in this book. For example, the set of 
all living people who will celebrate their -2nd birthday today is 
empty, as is the set of places in the universe whose temperature is 
measured at absolute zero. Chemists and physicists define absolute 
zero as that tempertaure at which all atomic motion stops, while 

4 
CHAPTER 1. ELEMENTARY SET THEORY 
Heisenberg’s Uncertainty Principle tells us that this cannot be mea- 
sured. The set of dogs with a PhD in mathematics is, at the time 
of this writing, also empty. 
For the most part, the sets in this book are listed according to 
their elements. Illustrations of how this is done include 
1. {o}, a set with the one element 0 
2. {+, =, :} the set whose elements are the symbols +, =, : 
3. {Lori, Christian, Marcus, Gwendolyn}. 
The set of natural numbers 
N = {0,1,2,3,. . 
is given as an implied list. You might have called the elements of N 
whole numbers in the past, but the common professional designation 
for x E N is that x is a natural number. The set of integers 
z 
= {. . . , -2, - l , O ,  1,2,. . .} 
is also an implied list. 
An implied list is an infinite list of elements. An ellipsis . . . is 
usually used to denote the fact that the elements in an implied list 
continue in the same manner or under the same pattern. It is hoped 
that each reader sees the same pattern when they get to . . -. Implied 
lists can be trouble like that. While we would agree that 
{2,4 ...} 
begins the set of even positive numbers (so that the next listed 
element is 6) we might also see that {2,4, . . .} begins the powers of 
2 so that the next element on the implied list would be 23 = 8. 
If we begin a set with numbers 

1.1. SETS 
5 
then what might the next element x be? Ponder this awhile before 
you read on. You might say that 5 = 2 + 3 so x = 3 + 5 = 8. Or 
you might say that 2 , 3 , 5  are the first three prime numbers so that 
x = 7, the fourth prime number. We will be explicit in the pattern 
used in an implied list, so there will be no confusion as to the next 
value in a list. 
Sometimes the best way to denote a set is to use a predicate 
to describe the elements. A predicate is a description in words 
and symbols. For example, blue and a temperature on Earth are 
predicates. Let P be any predicate. The symbols 
A = {x I x satisfies P }  
are read A is the set of elements x such that x satisfies P. The 
symbol I is read a s  such that or with the property that. For example, 
we would find it most difficult to give a complete list of the elements 
in the set {x 1 x is a person on the Earth}. It is better by far to use 
the predicate. Implied lists are often better written as predicates. 
N = {x 1 x is a natural number}, 
Z = {z Ix is an integer), 
lE = {x I z is an even natural number}, 
P = {x I x is a prime number}. 
We could not define the following sets of numbers without the use 
of the predicate form. Let 
R = {x I z is a real number}, 
R is called the set of real numbers and Q is called the set of rational 
numbers. While we would have great difficulty in trying to list the 
real numbers (in fact it is mathematically impossible) we can make 
an implied list of the rational numbers Q. To illustrate this point 
let us make an implied list of the set 

6 
CHAPTER 1. ELEMENTARY SET THEORY 
of positive rational numbers. We begin the implied list by listing 
those rational numbers with numerator 1. The next row will be 
those rationals with numerator 2, and then I hope the pattern is 
clear. We have thus constructed the following implied list. 
1
1
1
1
 
1
2
3
4
 
2
2
2
2
 
1
2
3
4
 
3
3
3
3
 
1
2
3
4
 
4
4
4
4
 
1
2
3
4
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
... 
- 
- 
- 
- 
... 
- 
- 
- 
- 
... 
- 
- 
- 
- 
... 
Observe that the rows of this infinite rectangular array list the pos- 
itive rationals by increasing the denominator of the fraction and 
holding the numerator fixed. There are repeated values on this 
implied list, aren’t there. We could clean that up by deleting the 
rational numbers that are not in reduced form. The result is the 
implied list below. 
1
1
1
1
 
1
2
3
4
 
2 
2 
1 
3 
3 
3
3
 
1
2
 
4 
4 
4 
1 
3 
- 
- 
- 
- 
... 
... 
- 
- 
- 
... 
- 
- 
... 
- 
- 
Note that among others, the fractions 
2 3 2 4  
have been deleted from our list. 

1.1. SETS 
7 
We will return to this list several times in this book. You might 
ask: Why is he doing that? Why would he present a list like that 
over and over again? The answer is that by referring to this list 
several times I hope to pique your curiosity. This list will be a 
friendlier mathematical object when next you see it. 
Given a general mathematical collection XI like a set, there are 
several ways that mathematicians will examine X. We will define 
operations between X and sets like it. We will consider subsets in 
X that have the same properties that X has. We will also compare 
sets like X by considering functions between them. In this section 
we will consider operations on sets and subsets of sets, and in the 
next chapter we will consider functions between sets. 
We operate on sets in the following ways. 
Definition 1.1.2 Let A and B be sets. 
1. A n B = { z I z 
E A and x E B}. 
2. A U B = {z I z E A or z E B}. Our use of the word or is the 
inclusive or. That is, z E A, z E B, or x is in both A and B. 
Because this book is being directed at people with at least a 
high school education, the assumption is that you are familiar with 
the operations n and U for sets. Thus we will make a minimal 
number of concrete examples of what these operations can do. Let 
A = {e, :} and B = {a, *}. Then An B = {e}, A U B = {e, :, *}. 
Recall that P = the set of prime numbers. These are the numbers 
whose proper natural divisors are precisely 1 and themselves. The 
first few primes are 2,3,5,7,11, while 1,4,9,12, and 15 are not 
prime. We say that 4, 9, 12, and 15 are composite numbers. Even 
numbers other than 2 are composite numbers. 
A positive natural number p is a prime number if given a set of 
p dots, 0 ,  then the only rectangle that we can form from those dots 
is a line of dots. For example, 2 and 3 are prime because the only 
rectangles we can form with those dots are 
ee 
and 
e e e  

8 
CHAPTER 1. ELEMENTARY SET THEORY 
while 4 and 6 are not primes since we can draw rectangles with 4 
and 6 dots. 
If we let lE denote the even numbers, then E n P = {a} since 2 
is the only even prime. lE U P = {x 1 z is even or x is prime}. Some 
but not all of the elements in E U P are 
2,3,4,5,6,7,8,10,11,12,13,101,102. 
Now that we have defined set we can define what we call a subset. 
The definition of subset represents a common technique in math- 
ematics. Once we have defined an object X that satisfies some 
properties then we can define a similar subset in X that satisfies 
the properties of X .  If we consider these subsets as slices of X then 
the subsets of X can be used to study X. 
Definition 1.1.3 Let A and B be sets. We say that A is a subset 
of B if 
given x E A then we can show that z 
E B. 
We write 
r 
1 
A c B  
if A is a subset of B. 
For example, (3) c { 1,2,3,4} because 3 is an element of { 1,2, 
3,4}, {2,3} C P because 2 and 3 are primes, and the set of children 
on Earth is a subset of the set of people on the Earth. If A C B 
then we also say that A is contained in B. The containments 
N c Z c Q c R  
X 
are clear since each x E Z can be written as x = -, and each 
1 
fraction is a real number. Other containments are the set of your 
family contained in the set of people on Earth. The land making 
up the country of Peru is contained in the land that makes up the 

1.1. SETS 
9 
South American continent. College professors form a set that is a 
subset of the set of educated people on Earth, and the ages of people 
on this Earth in years forms a subset of the natural numbers N. 
When you are writing proofs please do not take shortcuts. Use 
as much pencil lead, pen ink, and blank paper as possible when 
proving theorems. Fill in the details. Don’t be afraid to use some 
paper. The trees that were used to manufacture that paper have 
since departed. You are not saving trees by using less paper in 
your mathematical deliberations. Get a feel for the flow of your 
argument. Let the mathematics guide your argument. It is un- 
likely that we can find a logically consistent and convincing proof 
by writing down an argument with many gaps. Your hard work will 
be rewarded when you can follow some of the subtler arguments 
presented in later chapters. For now, to give you a running start in 
your reading, we present our arguments in all their baroque detail. 
The identities in the next theorem are not hard. By including the 
proofs we are improving the reader’s intuition of what constitutes a 
proof. This could be the first mathematics you have ever met that 
did not reduce to a formula or that did not require you to plug in 
some kind of numbers. I therefore recommend that you carefully 
read the following theorem as it consists of elementary examples. 
For instance, to show that A c B we start with an element z E A 
and then show that x E B. There is no formula and there is no 
shorter way to do this. 
Theorem 1.1.4 Let A, B, and C be sets. 
1. A c A .  
2. A n B c  A. 
3. I f A c B a n d i f B C C t h e n A C C .  
Proof 1. Proofs like this are mathematical double-talk. A c A 
because given x E A then z E A. 
2. As with every proof that attempts to prove X c Y we start 
with an element of X and show that it is Y .  So let x E A n B. By 
the definition of A n B ,  x E A and z E B. Specifically, x E A. Then 
A n B c A by the definition of subset. 

10 
CHAPTER 1. ELEMENTARY SET THEORY 
3. Suppose that A c B and that B c C. Let 3: E A. We must 
show that z 
E C. Using the definition of subset, z 
E A and A c B 
implies that z E B. And z E B and B c C implies that z E C. 
We have just proved that 
z E A implies that x E C 
so we can conclude that A c C. This completes the proof. 
Admittedly we have included a great deal of detail in these 
proofs. We do this to make a point. When you construct a proof 
you are trying to tell the reader what you are thinking. Thus in 
your argument every reason for the given steps must be explained. 
Since the reader does not know your mind, even the simplest of ar- 
guments can be confusing to them. Furthermore, the ideas flow one 
to the next and every statement in the proof is accompanied by a 
reason. This flow helps the reader follow the argument. A jumble of 
loosely connected statements will not form a convincing argument. 
The next type of argument, called a proof by contradiction, can 
be kicked around and explored. It is probably the first time you have 
met such an argument. Each proof by contradiction proceeds as 
follows. Suppose that we want to prove that P is a true Statement. 
The proof by contradiction begins with the assumption that P is a 
false statement. We then follow our logical noses until we arrive at 
a mathematical mistake called a contradiction. This contradiction 
shows us that we began our proof with a false statement. That is, 
it is false that P is false. Therefore P must be a true statement. 
The rest of this book contains many proofs by contradiction, so try 
to work your way through this one. 
Theorem 1.1.5 
0 c A. 
Proof Suppose for the sake of contradiction that 8 c A is a 
false statement. Then 0 $ A. Consider for a moment what it 
means when B $ A. It means that some element of B is not in 
A. Since 8 $ A there is some element x E 0 such that x 6 A. 
But z E 8 contradicts the fact that 0 has no elements. This is 
the desired contradiction, the mathematical mistake. We conclude 

1.1. SETS 
11 
that our initial assumption 0 @ A is false. Therefore 0 C A, which 
completes the proof. 
Have you ever wondered what it means for objects x and y to 
be equal, x = y? If x and y are numbers then we have an intuitive 
understanding of what it means for x = y. For example, would you 
have recognized the following equations on your own? 
= .5 
1 
2 - 
= .4999 
1
1
1
 
- 
- - + - + - +  
.... 
22 
23 
24 
Equality is not always such a simple concept. For our purposes we 
will accept that if objects x and y exist, there is an understanding 
of the identification x = y. 
The equality of sets is not intuitive at all. It is mathematically 
definite, mathematically rigorous. Thus for sets A and B there is a 
precise definition of equality. 
Definition 1.1.6 Let A and B be sets. We say that A equals B if 
A C B and B c A. The traditional notation is 
A = B. 
Thus to prove that A = B we must first prove that A C B and 
then that B c A. There are no shortcuts in this kind of proof. 
There are two things to show and we must be prepared to prove 
them. Some examples will show you what we mean. 
If we let 
IF = the set of finite or repeating decimal numbers 
then we can prove that 
as follows. To prove that Q c IF let x E Q. Then z is a fraction and 
your training in converting fractions into decimals makes z a finite 
or a repeating decimal. Thus Q C IF. Conversely, we show that 
Q = F  

12 
CHAPTER 1. ELEMENTARY SET THEORY 
IF c Q. Let 2 E IF. You may remember some training in arithmetic 
that shows you how to convert the finite or repeating decimal x into 
a fraction. We will not pursue that arithmetic here. Then z E Q 
and we conclude that IF = Q. 
Let 
A = {x I x is a solution to x2 - 1 = 0). 
We will show that 
A = {-I) I). 
The numbers -1 and 1 are solutions to x2 - 1 = 0 since 
(-1)2 - 1 = 0 and l2 - 1 = 0. 
Thus {-1,1} C A. Conversely, let us suppose that x E A. Then 
x is a real number such that x2 - 1 = 0. Our high school algebra 
gives us the following equations. 
2 
x -1 = 0, 
(x- l)(x+ 1) = 0, 
x - 1 = 0  
z + l = O ,  
x = 1  
x = -1. 
Thus A c { -1,l) from which we conclude that { - 1,l) = A. 
Other examples come from the operations U and n on sets A, 
B, and C. 
Theorem 1.1.7 Let A, B, and C be sets. 
1. A U B = B U A .  
2. A n ( B u C )  = ( A f i B ) u ( A n C ) .  
Proof 1. We begin by showing that A U B C B U A. The 
reader will note the interplay between the definitions of U and C. 
Because of its elementary nature the proof is going to sound like 
mat hemat ical doublespeak. 
Let x E A U B. By definition of U ,  x E A or x E B, 
so that 
z E B or x €'A. By the definition of U ,  x E B U A, and hence 
A u B c B u A .  

1.1. SETS 
13 
Conversely we must show that B U A c A U A. Let 2 E B U A. 
Then z E B or x E A so that 17: E A or 17: E B. Thus, by definition 
of U, z E A U B and hence B U A c A U B. 
Therefore A U B = B U A. 
The proof of part 2 is left as an exercise for the reader. 
Now that was deadly dull. You might complain that the whole 
idea of the proof was to say that “P or &” is the same as saying 
“Q or P,” and you’d be right. This is a tedious example of what 
it means to prove that two sets are equal. But the essence of the 
proof is the important thing. The introduction of all that detail is an 
attempt to get you to fill in more detail when you think and write. 
People tend to make intellectual leaps when they argue. I suppose 
that the person arguing feels that he can fill in the detail later 
or perhaps the arguer feels that the detail is unimportant. When 
original arguments avoid the details they are usually hard to follow 
and they are often incorrect. We cannot allow ourselves the luxury 
of gaps in our train of thought when we argue mathematically. 
Think of a mathematical argument as a maze in which you want 
to get from point A to point B. There are many paths we can 
choose. Because this is a maze, we cannot lift our pencils off the 
paper, thus ignoring the boundaries of the paths, and then drop the 
pencil point on B. That would be contrary to the spirit of playing 
with mazes. Many paths from A lead to a blind alley. We cannot 
find B down these paths. However, we can learn something from 
these blind alleys. They indicate the paths that we should avoid in 
trying to get to B. Perhaps there is some general principle that we 
can learn from these blind alleys. 
Let us apply the maze analogy to the construction of a proof. 
We know what we have to start with (the hypotheses) and we know 
where we want to finish (the conclusion). Try repeatedly to con- 
struct a logical path from the hypotheses to the desired conclusion. 
Don’t give up. Keep at it. Refine your argument but do not leave 
out essential details. Mathematical proofs do not come cheaply. 
They require a good deal of hard work. Eventually, we will find 
that path from the hypotheses to the conclusion. Then, if we apply 
what we have learned about the problem, we will rewrite the proof 
and perhaps find an elegant or beautiful path through the logical 
maze from the point of origin represented by the hypotheses to the 

14 
CHAPTER 1. ELEMENTARY SET THEORY 
ending point represented by the conclusion. 
We want to investigate what it means when an element 12: is not 
in. a set A, z 
@ A. This is also a good opportunity to stretch our 
logical experience with the word ((not.” 
Let me introduce a new notion here. Sometimes we will find 
that several sets A, B, and perhaps C are contained in one larger 
set U. 
This set U plays the role of the universe for A, B, C in that 
all operations on A, B, and C are relative to U. For this reason 
U is called a universal set. For example, the set of real numbers 
R is a universal set for the natural numbers N and the rational 
numbers Q. On the other hand, N is the universal set for 8, (1)) 
and {Z, 4,6, - + .}. 
Definition 1.1.8 Let A and B be sets in some universal set U. 
Then 
A \ B = {z I z E A and z 
@ B }  
and 
A‘ 
= { z I z ~ U a n d z @ A } .  
We say that A’ is the complement of A. 
Intuitively, to form A \ B we take the elements of A and we 
throw out the elements of B. To form A’ we take those elements in 
the universal set U that are not in A. 
Some examples will help us see what we are talking about. 
Let us begin with A = {a,b,c,d,e}, B = { c , d , e , f , g } ,  C = 
{a, b, c, d, e, f, 
g ,  h}. Then A \ B is the set of elements in A that are 
not in B. Thus 
A\B = { ~ , b }  
as the reader can easily verify. It is somewhat of a surprise to see 
that 
A \ C = O  

1.1. SETS 
15 
since each element of A is in C, A c C. Do this one element by 
element. We throw out a since a E A and a E C. We throw out 
b since b E A and b E C. We throw out c since c E A and c E C. 
Keep going until you run out of elements from A to test. So A \ C 
has no elements, A = 8. Let us find C\B. Write down the elements 
of C that are not in B. Delete the elements of C that are in B. 
C\B= {a,b,h} 
Let P be the set of people on Earth and let A be the set of male 
people. Then P \ A is the set of female people. This should be 
enough examples of a finite nature. 
Recall that lE = the set of even integers and let U = N. Then 
E’ is the set of integers that are not even. That is, IE’ is the set of 
odd numbers. If 7’ is the set of natural numbers that are divisible 
by 3 then T’ 
is the set of natural numbers not divisible by 3. That 
is, T’ is the set of natural numbers that have a nonzero remainder 
when divided by 3. 
Recall that P = the set of prime numbers and let U = N. Be- 
cause primes cannot be properly factored while composite numbers 
can be properly factored, P’ is the set whose elements are 0 and 1, 
and the composite numbers. A number > 1 not in P but in N is 
divisible by at least two numbers a, b # 1. Then such a number is 
a composite number, and hence the elements of P’ are 0, 1 and the 
composite numbers. 
Let Q- be the set of negative rational numbers, 
Let U = Q and let A = Q- U (0). Then A’ is the set Q+ of positive 
rational numbers. 
Another example is found by setting U = {z E R I z 2 0} = the 
set of nonnegative real numbers. Then Q+ c U and (a’)‘ is the set 
of positive irrational numbers. 
Here’s a challenge for the reader. Without peeking below, try 
to describe the symbols x E (A’)’ using words. This might help you 
see the power of this symbolism over the language in dealing with 

16 
CHAPTER 1. ELEMENTARY SET THEORY 
double negatives. As you work on this exercise note the interplay 
between the symbols x, A, and ()’ and the word not. 
The next theorem is another example of a proof by contradiction. 
Theorem 1.1.9 Assume that there is some universal set U that 
contains the set A. Then A f l  A’ = 8. 
Proof As with each proof by contradiction, we begin by assum- 
ing for the sake of contradiction that A n  A’ # 0. We now seek 
that mathematical mistake, that contradiction. Then A n A’ must 
contain an element, say, x E A n A’. By the definition of n ,  x E A 
and x E A’ or equivalently x E A and x # A. This conclusion 
contradicts the fact that A is a set. (Reread Definition 1.1.1 to see 
that if A is a set then x E A or x # A but not both.) Thus our 
initial assumption is false. That is, A n A’ = 8, which completes 
the proof. 
At this point I hope you have convinced yourself that 
(A’)’ = A 
for each set A. Here is how I hope you argued. Let x E A. By the 
definition of A’, x # A’, and hence x is in the complement of A’. 
The complement of A’ is (A’)’ so x E (A’)’ and so A C (A’)’. 
On the other hand, suppose that x E (A’)’. Then by definition 
of complement, x # A’. Either x E A or x # A. Assume to the 
contrary that x # A. Then x E A’, contrary to x $2 A’. Therefore 
x E A, which implies that (A’)’ c A. Consequently A = (A’)’, and 
this completes the proof. 
These two proofs were instructive exercises in mathematical dou- 
ble talk. The level of detail I used was strictly an educational de- 
vice. No professional includes the attention to minutiae that we 
have given here. However, in an introductory work like the present 
one, it is necessary for us to observe this obsessive level of detail 
in a proof. This level of detail allows you very little freedom of 
thought when you read it, and that is the key. By giving this level 
of detail you and I are certain to be thinking the same thing, thus 
giving me knowledge of how much further I can push the level of 
understanding. 

1.2. CARTESIAN PRODUCTS 
17 
To hone the reader’s writing skills we present a series of elementary ex- 
ercises. The reader is encouraged to try these exercises and to practice the 
completeness and clarity of a rational argument that characterizes a well con- 
structed proof. Let A, B, and C be sets contained in some larger universal set 
U. 
1. A n B c A U B .  
2. A n B = B n A .  
3. A u ( B n C )  = ( A u B ) n ( A u C ) .  
4. AUA‘=U. 
5. DeMorgan’s Law 
(a) ( A  n B)’ = A’ u B’. 
(b) ( A  U B)’ = A’ n B‘. 
6. ( A \ B ) n B = 0 .  
7. (A\B)n(B\A)=0. 
8. (A\B)U(B\A) = ( A u B ) \ ( A n B ) .  
1.2 Cartesian Products 
The next operation on sets allows us to make a larger dimensional 
set from a number of smaller dimensional sets. 
Definition 1.2.1 Let A and B be sets. The Cartesian product of 
A and B is the set of pairs 
A x B  = { ( z , y ) I z E A a n d y E B } .  
To form A x B we take the elements of A and B and pair them 
up. For example, if we let A = {a, b, c} and let B = {x, y} then 
It is natural to picture A x B as a two dimensional lattice of points. 

18 
CHAPTER 1. ELEMENTARY SET THEORY 
Y
-
 
x -  
I 
U 
The Cartesian plane 
I 
b 
0 
i 
C 
R 2 = R X R  
is the plane equipped with x and y axes with which you are familiar. 
4- 
3- 
2- 
1- 
c 
1 
2 
3 
4 
The Cartesian Plane R x R 

1.2. CARTESIAN PRODUCTS 
19 
This is the plane on which you graphed points, lines, and parabo- 
las in an early algebra course. The reason that the Cartesian plane 
R2 and the Cartesian product JFt x R are equal is that each point 
in the Cartesian plane can be represented by a unique pair of real 
numbers (x,y). So the point labelled by (2,4) is found by moving 
2 units in the x direction and then 4 units in the y direction. 
We then have a picture that we can use to diagram a number of 
Cartesian products. Such an example is the pairs of natural numbers 
N X N  
4- 
3- 
2- 
1- 
a 
a 
a 
I 
I 
I 
I 
- 
1 
2 
3 
4 
The Array of Natural Numbers N x R? 
R? x N = {(n,m) 
jn,m E N } .  

20 
CHAPTER 1. ELEMENTARY SET THEORY 
Here is how we picture N x N as a subset of the Cartesian plane. 
This array extends indefinitely upward and to the right. Thus N x 
N contains (1,l) and (101,102) but it does not contain (i, 
3) or 
(a, 
0). We will use an array similar to this one when we count the 
set 
Q+ = {x E Q I z > 0). 
The next result may strike you as a bit odd. It is another ex- 
ample of the care with which the empty set must be treated. The 
proof is one by contradiction. Briefly, A x 0 is empty because it 
does not contain any pairs.. 
Example 1.2.2 If A is a set then 
A x 0  = 0. 
Proof Assume for the sake of contradiction that there is an 
element p E A x 0. Then p = (x,y) for some x E A and y E 8. 
This contradicts the fact that 0 has no elements. Thus our initial 
assumption is false, and it must be true that A x 0 = 0. This 
concludes the proof. 
For instance, Nx0, Rx0, and, for sets A, 0 x A  are the empty set. 
You can match these mind stretchers by thinking of multiplication 
by 0. Given any number z, 
x . 0 = 0 and in much the same way 
X x 0 = 0 for sets X .  
This is not the last time we will make an analogy between op- 
erations on sets and operations on numbers. In the later portion of 
this book, we make the analogy precise. 
1.3 Power Sets 
Let A be a set. The reader is acquainted with the idea of a subset 
of A. We will take that idea to a new level by introducing the set 
of all subsets of A. This power set will be an important device in 
the later chapters of this book. 

1.3. POWER SETS 
21 
Definition 1.3.1 Let A be a set. The power set of A is the set of 
all subsets of A. We write 
P(A) = {sets X IX c A}. 
Some examples will be useful. Since power sets grow quickly our 
examples of necessity will be small. It may be hard to accept at first 
that the elements of P(A) are themselves sets. If A = {w, 
x, y, z }  
then ?(A) contains as elements the sets 0, {w, 
z}, {x, y, z}, and 11 
more sets. See if you can find them. If we let 
R+ = {x €I[$ x > O} 
denote the set of positive real numbers then the power set P(R+) 
of Rf contains as an element the set Q+. P(Rw+) 
also contains the 
element { 1,2,3} and the element { fi, a, 
&, a, 
. . .}. (What is 
the next element on the last implied list, reader?) Seeing a set as 
an element in a larger set can be done but it takes practice. 
Since 0 and A are always subsets of A, P(A) contains 0 and A. 
0, A E P(A) for any set A. 
For example, 
and 
p({*H = (0, 
P({% b}) = (0, {ah { b h  {a, 
b)}. 
The reader can find the eight elements in P(A) when A = {a, 
b, c}. 
Be sure that you include 0, {b}, {a, 
c}, and {a, 
b, c}. Because 0 is 
the only subset of 8 we have the equation 
P(0) = (8). 

22 
CHAPTER 1. ELEMENTARY SET THEORY 
The importance of the power set is that it allows us to construct 
a much larger set from a smaller one. In general, if A is a finite set 
with exactly n elements then 
I 
P(A) contains exactly 2" elements. 
I 
Thus P({u,b}) has 22 = 4 elements while P ( { a , b , c } )  has exactly 
23 = 8 elements. 
Try writing down the 8 sets that comprise 
In the case where A is an infinite set we can ask for a self- 
contained method for describing the elements of A. For example, 
P(N) contains as elements the set { l}, the set IE = {2,4,6,. . .} of 
even numbers, the set P of prime numbers, and N. But when we try 
to make a list of the elements of P(N) 
we are met with the following 
deep result of mathematics. 
m a ,  b,c}). 
We cannot make an implied list of the elements in P(N). 
I 
I 
Any list that we make of P(N) will miss some element of P(N) and 
any correction we attempt to make will still result in an incomplete 
list of the elements of P(N). We will have much more to say about. 
this mathematical mystery in later chapters. 
1.4 Something From Nothing 
Here is an application of sets that appears infrequently in the pop- 
ular press. Although humans have used the natural numbers since 
they could herd sheep, most of us are unaware of the mathemati- 
cally precise construction of, say, 1. We will use sets and subsets to 
construct the first few natural numbers. The process with which we 
start is easily extended to a construction of N from nothing. For this 
we must initiate a discussion of cardinality that will be improved 
upon throughout the chapters of this book. 
We give a superficial and mathematically imprecise definition of 
counting that can be understood without a significant mathematical 

1.4. SOMETHING FROM NOTHING 
23 
background. In the next chapter we will present the mathematical 
background needed to make a precise accounting of the counting 
process. Let A be a finite set. The cardinality of A is defined to be 
card(A) = all the sets X that can be matched 
element by element with A. 
When treating card(A) we must be careful because card(A) is not 
a set. It is proper to call it something else like a collection or a 
class. But card(A) is just too big to be a set. We will avoid the 
issue of what card(A) is by carefully avoiding set theoretic issues 
surrounding sets, collections, and classes. 
We will use card(A) as a precise way of counting the number of 
elements in A. That is why we need a precise understanding of how 
to “match element by element” the elements of X and A. On the 
one hand, we have a word cardinality that you should interpret as 
meaning the number of elements in a set. On the other hand, we 
have a notation card(A) that represents all sets that have the same 
number of elements as A. Some examples will help you visualize 
what we mean by this. 
For the set 
{*I 
the set card({.}) 
consists of all sets that can be matched element by 
element with ( 0 ) .  This is a simple thing to see, mostly because the 
set { 0 )  is so small. The sets { a}, { t } ,  { 1) are in card( { 0 ) )  because 
they can be matched element by element with ( 0 ) .  The matching 
between {a} and {o} is obvious enough. This matching is 
a cf 0. 
Similarly, card({a, b}) consists of the sets that can be matched ele- 
ment by element with {a, b}. The sets (2, 
y}, (0, l}, { H ,  W }  are in 
card({a, b}). One matching between {0,1} and {a, b} is 

24 
CHAPTER 1. ELEMENTARY SET THEORY 
There are others and you are invited to write them down, but we 
only need one. At this point I hope that the pattern is clear to you. 
The set {a, 
b, c} is in card( { 1,2,3}) because there is a matching 
( 2 - 3  
b - 2  
c - 
1. 
Notice we didn’t need to pick the one you were thinking of. Any 
matching of elements will do. We just chose a different one. 
Let’s continue the discussion by looking at the set without ele- 
ments, 0. We have 
card(@) = all sets that have no elements. 
Inasmuch as the notation card(0) is a bit cumbersome, we will use 
the symbol 0 to denote card(0). 
0 = card(0). 
This notation is perfect. The identification of card(0) with the tra- 
ditional symbol 0 makes perfect sense. We want to choose a symbol 
for card(0) that will not confuse your mathematical sensibilities. 
The cardinality of 0 is denoted by 0 because we say so and for no 
other reason. But the use of 0 is compelling. It makes you think 
about the right ideas, the right quantities, and the right magni- 
tudes. We could just as easily have decided that card(0) should be 
denoted by 2. But since the world has been using 0 for a similar 
purpose for centuries we will continue the tradition. We have thus 
constructed the natural number 0 from nothing. 
Next we construct the number 1. Take the power set P(0) of 
0. P(0) is the set of all subsets of 0. Thus A E P(0) exactly when 
A c 0. But since 0 has no elements, A C 0 implies that A = 0. 
Thus the only element of P(0) is 0, or equivalently 
P(0) = (0). 

1.4. SOMETHING FROM NOTHING 
25 
Observe that P(8) is not the empty set since it has an element, 
namely, 8. Initially, you may not like thinking of 8 as an element 
in a set, so keep trying. Since it has been used in a similar way for 
ages, we will use the symbol 1 to denote the cardinality of P(8). 
1 = card((8)). 
This is in perfect agreement with the ages old use for 1, isn’t it? 
Before you read this book, if I asked you to count the number of 
elements in the set (8) you would most certainly say “One.” So 
this notation agrees with your intuition, with your experiences, and 
with your senses. It is the idea of defining 1 in this way that may 
unsettle your inner moral mathematical compass. But since this 
use is not in conflict with the rest of society, then why not make the 
identification. Nothing spiritual will be harmed. What we identify 
and what we believe are the same thing. 
Okay, let’s define the natural number 2 in such a way that it 
does not conflict with our education of what 2 means. I will respect 
your difficulty in seeing 8 as an element in a set and we will for the 
moment look at ( 0 ) .  We will see together that 
Write down a subset A c ( 0 ) .  Since A is a set either 0 E A or 
0 6 A, there can be no other cases to consider. Because 0 is the 
only element of ( 0 )  either A = ( 0 )  or A is empty, A = 8. Thus, as 
we predicted, P((0)) = (8, ( 0 ) ) .  
Now force yourself to see 8 as the lone element of { 8). Convince 
yourself that (8) is the set whose only element is 8. Applying the 
above argument to (8) instead of ( 0 )  yields the power set of {a). 

26 
CHAPTER 1. ELEMENTARY SET THEORY 
We have constructed 2 once we have defined 
2 = card((0, (8))). 
This definition of 2 agrees with everything you learned as a child. 
There are just enough elements to make perfect sense of this use 
of the symbol 2. You can think of 2 as card((0)) or you can think 
of it as a number you learned long ago. It doesn’t matter. They 
represent the same idea, don’t they? That is the beauty of this 
discussion. We are constructing natural numbers in an entirely 
precise mathematical format without losing the traditional meaning 
of the symbols we are using. 
Next, construct 4. We will be careful not to upset our mathe- 
matical traditions concerning the number or symbol 4. Use bullets 
for 8 if you need to, but see the set (8, (8)) as a set with two el- 
ements. We will examine the subset structure of (z,y} and then 
restrict our attention to (0, (0)). This is the last time we will do 
this, so get comfy. 
Let A be a subset of (x)y). If A has no elements then A = 8; 
if A has exactly one element then A = {x} or A = (9). If A has 
other than one element then A = (x) 
y}. There are no other choices 
since all of the elements of {x) 
y} are exhausted at this point. Thus 
P({.IYH 
= (0: b>, 
{Y), bC1 3 ) ) .  
If we replace z by 8 and y by (8) then we have written the power 
set of (0, (0)). 
We define the number 4 to be the cardinality of P((8, (8))). Thus 
which agrees with our previous uses of the symbol 4. We have thus 
constructed the natural numbers 0,1,2,4. 

1.5. INDEXED FAMILIES OF SETS 
27 
Wait, there is another way to see this. We observe that 
From this chart we can see that 
0 = card(0) 
1 = card(P(0)) 
2 = card(P(P(0))) 
4 = card(P(P(P(0)))) 
This last list shows us that the numbers 0, 1, 2, 4 can be realized as 
an iterated application of the power set operation P(.) by starting 
with 8. So in a real sense we have constructed the numbers 0,1,2,4 
from nothing. I leave it to you to construct the natural number 3. 
Try to do so in the spirit of the above construction. However, 3 will 
not be P(A) for any set A. Try to think of 3 as 4 - 1. 
1.5 Indexed Families of Sets 
To this point we have only considered U, n, 
and ()’ for sets A and B. 
These were used to make us comfortable with the logical properties 
of the words and, or, and not. In this section we will work with 
U, n, and ()’ for families of sets. In order to make the discussion 
as accessible as possible we will work only with finite or countable 
families of sets { A1, Az, A3, . . .}. These countable families will prove 
to be enough of a mind expander for this book. 
The smallest countable families of sets are the finite families. 
Thus {N, Z, 
Q, R} is a finite family of sets as is (8, ( 0 ) ) .  You know 
what a finite family of sets is. When you list the students in the 
classrooms at the local elementary school, you are making finitely 

28 
CHAPTER 1. ELEMENTARY SET THEORY 
many finite sets. You make one finite set for each classroom. There 
may be 6 such classes. The lists of enrolled students in a classroom 
form a family of 6 sets as in the next list. 
Listl, Listg, Listg, Listq, Lists, List, 
Each list List, is the list of names of students in classroom k. The 
symbol k will be a natural number between 1 and 6. 
Our examples of countable families of sets begin with 
{1)1{2L (31,. . . 
{1),{~12)1{11213}l. 
. . . 
Oftentimes the implied list of sets will be listed vertically, as in the 
following family of sets. 
A1 = (0) 
'42 = {OJ} 
A3 = {0,1,2) 
A4 = (01 1,213) 
This list is infinite and it consists of sets. That is why we call such 
a list an infinite family of sets. 
Here is another. For each m E W let W, 
be the set of natural 
numbers divisible by m. Then the list 
W2 = {2,4,6,. . .} 
Nj3 = {3,6,9,. . .} 
N, = {m,2m,3m,.. .} 
is an infinite family of sets. 
For each natural number m let 
Q) be the positive rational numbers 
whose numerator (the top part) is m. 
I 
I 

1.5. INDEXED FAMILIES OF SETS 
29 
We can make an implied list of this set since the denominators of a 
positive fraction can be only 1’2’3’4,. . .. 
m m m m  
1 ’  2 ’ 3 ’ 4 ’  
m 
Notice the denominator increases while the numerator remains m. 
24 24 24 24 
- - - - ... 
a;, = { 1 ’ 2 ’ 3 ’ 4 ’  
We will not have a set a’& since 4 is not a natural number. 
Here is another example. Given an n E N let (n,n + 1) = 
{x E R 1 n < x < n + 1) be the set of real numbers strictly between 
n and n + 1. In picture form we would draw 
I 
I 
- R  
Then 
{(n, n + 1) 1 n E N) = ((0, 1)’ (1’2)’ (2’3)’ * 
1 .I 
is an infinite family of sets. 
At this point we will define n and U for countable families of sets. 
The point behind doing this is that the notation corresponds to some 
important language. In particular, we will have the opportunity to 
use phrases like f o ~  
some, or at least, or for all. The introduction of 
unions and intersections of infinite families of sets is meant to bring 
these phrases and their uses to your attention. 

30 
CHAPTER 1. ELEMENTARY SET THEORY 
Definition 1.5.1 Let {Ao, Al, A2, . . .} be an infinite family ofsets. 
1. n{A, 1 n E N} = nnEN 
A, = {x I z E A, for all n E N}. The 
phrase for all means that x is an element of every set in the 
family of sets. 
2. U{A, I n E N} = UnEN A, = {x I x E A, for some n E N}. 
The phrase for some means at least one and at most all. 
We certainly can use some examples here. Let 
be an infinite family of sets. Then 
Some examples will help you visualize what we are talking about. 
Example 1.5.2 Let 
Then 1 E A2, 2 E AS, 3 E A4, and continue. In general we see that 
n E Anfl for all n E N. 
The phrase for all means that each and every set A, in the list 
satisfies the predicate n E A,+l. Thus if we begin with a number Ic 
then 
Ic is an element of A, for some n E N. 

1.5. INDEXED FAMILIES OF SETS 
31 
We conclude that k E UnE~An. 
In fact since there was no extra 
condition on k we can say that each natural number k is in UnE~An. 
Suppose we look at nnENAn now. Since 0 E A, for each n E N 
we can see that 
O E  n A , .  
nEN 
If m E N is a natural number other than 0, then m $! 
A, so that 
m # A, for some natural number n. In fact m @ A, for many 
natural numbers n but we only need the one occurrence to conclude 
that 
m @ 
An. 
nEN 
Therefore nnEN 
A, = (0). 
Example 1.5.3 Let us make another infinite family of sets. Ex- 
amine the list 
Bo = (0, 1 5) 
B1 = {1.5,2.5} 
B2 = {2*5,3.5} 
B3 = {3.5,4*5} 
of sets of two natural numbers. Let 
IF = ( 5 n  1 n E N} 
denote the set of nonnegative multiples of 5. We will prove that 
U B, = IF. 
n E N  
Proof Let z E UnE~Bn. 
Then z E B, for some n E N. By the 
definition of B,, z E {5n,5(n + 1)) so that z is a multiple of 5. 
Hence z E IF. As sets this means that 
U Bn c IF. 
n E N  

32 
CHAPTER 1. ELEMENTARY SET THEORY 
On the other hand, the second inclusion begins with an element 
x E IF. By the definition of IF there is an n E N such that x = n5. 
Then z E {5n, 5(n + 1)) = B, for some n E N. We conclude that 
z E U,,,B, 
and so 
IFc u B,. 
rich' 
Therefore UnEN B, = IF and the proof is complete. 
Example 1.5.4 In this example we let p 2 2 be a prime and we let 
N, denote the set of positive natural numbers divisible by p .  Thus 
N2 is the set of positive even numbers = {2,4,6,. . .}, N3 is the set 
of positive numbers divisible by 3, and 
Ns = {5,10,15,20,. . .}. 
We let N1 = {0,1} by default. This is just a notation we are using. 
It has nothing to do with the prime notation. Then we have an 
infinite family of sets 
N1 = {0,1) 
N2 = {2,4,6, ...} 
N3 = {3,6,9,. . .} 
Nj5 = {5,10,15,. ..} 
We have an infinite family 
indexed by 1 and the set of prime numbers P. Thus N7 is a member 
of the family but Ng is not included in the family. Since each natural 
number n 2 2 is divisible by some prime number, I leave it to you 
to justify that 
UnEP N, = N2 u N3 u N5 u . . . 
= those natural numbers divisible by some prime 
= the set of natural numbers n 2 2. 
Remember 1 is not a prime number, no matter what you may believe 
right now. Thus 1 cannot be divisible by any prime. Moreover 1 is 
not in N, for any prime number n, so that 1 # UnEPN,. 

1.5. INDEXED FAMILIES OF SETS 
33 
Therefore 
N1 u UnEP N, = N1 u N2 u N3 u NJ5 u . . 
= {0,1,2,3 ,... } 
= N. 
Example 1.5.5 Using the notation in the previous example let us 
examine the set 
x = N ~ ~ N ~ ~ N ~ ~ . . . =  
n.,. 
PEQ 
Suppose, for the purposes of a proof by contradiction, that we as- 
sume that there is an element x E X. Then z E N, for each prime 
p E lP so that x is divisible by each prime p E P. What are the 
natural numbers divisible by all prime numbers? You are passingly 
familiar with the answer each time you factor a natural number. 
Natural numbers are divisible by only finitely many prime num- 
bers. This contradiction (that z is divisible by all primes and that 
z can be divisible by only finitely many primes) shows us that our 
assumption is incorrect. Hence X = 0. That is, 
N,nN3nN5n ... = 0  
even though the intersection of any two of these sets is nonempty. 
pq E N, n N, since pq is a multiple of p and a multiple of q 
so that N, n N, # 0. 
Example 1.5.6 Let Ao, Al, Az, . . . be an infinite family of sets. 
The following negation of the definitions of f'l and U is a good exer- 
cise in using mathematical language properly. 
z q' nnEN 
A, exactly when z 6 
A, for some n E N. 
Notice the change in phrasing. We went from for all to its logical 
negation at least. Thus the negation of for all is at least or for some. 
The statement all colors are impressive is negated by stating 
some colors are not impressive. Try negating x E S for all sets 

34 
CHAPTER 1. ELEMENTARY SET THEORY 
S before reading on. You would be correct if your negation reads 
x $ S for some set S. 
The statement n < n + 1 for all n E N is negated by writing 
n 2 n + 1 for some n E N. Said another way this negation reads 
there is some natural number n such that n >_ n + 1. 
This is obviously a false statement, which we should expect since 
we are negating the true statement n < n + 1 for all n E R. 
The phrase for some means at least one, at most all. Its meaning 
will be reinforced with several examples. 
The statement some children have blue eyes means that there 
is one child or perhaps several children who have blue eyes. A 
quick check of European children will verify that many children 
have blues eyes, so logically some children have blue eyes. The 
statement x E A, for some n E N means that there is one, and 
possibly more than that, natural number n such that x E A,. The 
statement 3x = 0 for some x E R means that there is one, and 
perhaps more, real number x such that 3x = 0. .Algebra shows us 
immediately that in this case there is exactly 1 number x such that 
32 = 0. But still it is proper to say that there are some real numbers 
x such that 3x = 0. 
If we have a predicate P and we write P as satisfied by at least 
one natural number, then we mean that there is a natural number 
n that satisfies P ,  and that there may be more natural numbers m 
that satisfy P. We do not rule out the possibility that every natural 
number n might satisfy X. 
For instance, let 
P = there are n musicians in a rock-and-roll band. 
Then P is satisfied by at least the natural number 4. In fact, P is 
satisfied by 3, 5 ,  and 7 as well. Rock-and-roll bands do not run into 
the thousands of musicians so there are some natural numbers that 
do not satisfy P. I leave it to you to name the bands that have that 
many people in them, keeping in mind that your author’s narrow 
musical taste runs to sixties and seventies rock-and-roll. 

1.5. INDEXED FAMILIES OF SETS 
35 
Example 1.5.7 Let 
be an infinite family of sets. Then 2 6 
A1, 3 6 
A2, and, in general, 
n g' L4,-1. 
Hence 
2,3,...,n # n A n  
n E N  
because n is not in some set A, in this infinite family of sets. Since 
0 E A, for all natural numbers n we see that 
We say that x E U n E ~ A n  
if II: E A, for some n E N. 
The negation of for some is never. 
Thus the negation' of the union looks like this. 
exactly when 
Thus 
x # A, for any n E N. 
{0,1,2, ...} = U A ,  
nEN 

36 
CHAPTER 1. ELEMENTARY SET THEORY 
The following versions of DeMorgan’s Laws are left as exercises for the 
reader. Let {A, In E N} be an infinite family of sets contained in some universal 
set U. 

Chapter 2 
F’unct ions 
Throughout this book we will want to compare sets. We do this by 
studying the functions that exist between them. A function from 
a set A into a set B is a rule that associates each element x E A 
with exactly one element y E B. If we name the rule f then we will 
write 
f(X) = Y 
to denote the fact that the element x is associated with y. We will 
also say that y is the image ofx under f. Some of you are familiar 
with functions from that third year of high school math. In that 
case a function was usually a mapping or a general rule that acted 
on real numbers. For example, 
would be the function from R into R that associates each number IC 
with its square x2. Others may have written this function as x2 = y. 
In either case we are using some algebra to denote the image of IC. 
Our functions will only occasionally operate on real numbers. 
The reason for this is that our deliberations are on general sets 
and not exclusively real numbers. For example, we might define 
the function f that takes each person on Earth to his/her age in 
years, or we might define a function that associates each woman 
with exactly one man. You might even associate the elements of 
37 

38 
CHAPTER 2. FUNCTIONS 
{a, b, c} with the elements from the set {x, y, z} by defining 
U
H
X
 
b - z  
c 
t----+ z. 
Notice that the function, which we will call f ,  misses y as an image 
and that two values b and c map to one value z. This type of 
abstract association is more closely related to the functions that we 
will encounter as our discussion evolves. 
2.1 Functional Preliminaries 
Suppose we are given sets {x, y ,  z} and {0,1,2}. Some of the more 
important questions we will pursue in this book are the folloowing. 
1. What do we really mean by an element by element matching 
between {x, y ,  z }  and {0,1,2}? 
2. Can we make the notion of the cardinality of {x, y, z} a math- 
ematically precise idea? 
3. It seems clear that {a, b} has fewer elements than {x, y ,  z}. 
Can we make this precise? 
We will approach these questions by considering a general compar- 
ison of sets called a function that requires us to investigate the idea 
of a function on abstract sets. 
The following takes our definition of function and gives it some 
mathematical style. It may read as a dry definition to you but it 
has the advantage of being mathematically precise. Perhaps you 
could try to define functions in such a way that it encompasses the 
examples we give in this section. There is something to be learned 
by trying to do that, so please do. 
Definition 2.1.1 Let A and B be sets. A function from A to B is 
a rule f with the following two properties. 
1. f associates each x E A with an element f(x) E B 

2.1. FUNCTIONAL PRELIMINARIES 
39 
2. There is exactly one value for f(x). 
A bit of very useful notation is the following. We will write 
f : A - - - + B  
if f is a function from A to B. We call A the domain off, and we 
call B the codomain off. We call f(x) the image of x under f just 
as we did in our algebra class in high school. 
Another description of a function that you may find a bit easier 
to absorb is the following. A function f from A to B assigns to each 
element 2 E A an image f(x) E B. There must be no ambiguity in 
the value of the image f(x). This definition gives you the mental 
picture of a function that you had in high school, but it contains so 
much more. You may have read that 
and that is not wrong. We often let y denote the image of z. It 
is common to do so especially when graphing the function f as we 
will do presently. You may also have read that 
f(x) = 22 + 1, 
which is an example of a function on real numbers. This is not the 
only type of function, which is why we had to define functions in 
such a broad abstract way. There is a function f : {0,1,2} - 
( 2 ,  y, z }  defined by the rule 
0 - 2  
1 - x  
2 
i-----1 
t. 
Under this function, y is not associated with any element in {0,1,2}. 
Our next example of a function f : R - 
R is defined by setting 
f(z) = 7x + 6 for each x E R. 

40 
CHAPTER 2. FUNCTIONS 
We should all be familiar with the fact that the graph of this func- 
tion is a line that is inclined upward when we read it from left to 
right. Notice that to each z E R there is exactly one real num- 
ber y = 72 + 6. Observe that the images of 0, 1, and -1 can be 
calculated using the formula f ( z )  = 7z + 6. 
f ( 0 )  = 7 - 0 + 6 = 6  
f(1) = 7 . 1 + 6 = 1 3  
f(-1) = 7 * (-1) + 6 = -1. 
A familiar function f : R --f R is defined by f ( x )  = x2. The 
value x2 is a real number that is unique to 5 so f is indeed a function. 
We can find the images of 0, 1, and -1 easily enough. 
f ( 0 )  = o2 = 0 
f(1) = l2 = 1 
f(-1) 
= (-1)2 = 1. 
If you had any trigonometry in your education then you may 
know that 
f ( 0 )  = tan(0) 
defines a function that associates with each angle 0 its tangent, 
tan(0). We can construct the value tan(0) as follows. Draw a trian- 
gle whose base length is 1 and whose base angles are 0 and a right 
angle, as in the diagram below. Then the side opposite 0 has length 
tan(0). If you possessed a ruler that was mathematically accurate 
to all decimal places, you could read tan(0) from picture (2.1). 
The 
take 
1 
functions f(2) = 72 + 6, f ( x )  = x2, and f(x) = tan(x) will 
real numbers 2 and associate them with or send them to a real 

2.1. FUNCTIONAL PRELIMINARIES 
41 
number f(z). Most of the functions that you have experienced in 
your lifetime are like this. Now let’s see something more abstract. 
Consider the graph (2.2). 
Y 
It has a naturally occurring feature that you may not have seen 
before. It has a gap and a hole in it. These are common features 
of graphs, even though they have been kept from you, and they 
occur more often than the smooth connected curves with which you 
are familiar. We will present some of these functions with broken 
graphs. 
Example 2.1.2 Define a function f : R - 
(1’ -1} by setting 
f(.) 
= { 
if 
5 O . 
-1 
if x > O  
We observe that given z E R then f(x) = 1 or f (x) = -1 but not 
both. Thus f satisfies our definition of function. Its graph is the 
one given in (2.2). 
Example 2.1.3 A function whose graph has many more steps is 
the postage rate function. 
f (x) = cost in pennies to send a letter that 
weighs z ounces by snail mail. 

42 
CHAPTER 2. FUNCTIONS 
3P 
21, 
P 
Its graph is the graph (2.3) below. 
-- 
8----. 
-- 
-0 
:: 
0 
0 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
t 
5p t 
4p i 
If a letter weighs up to and including 1 ounce, the cost of postage 
is p. (At the time of this writing p = 39 cents.) If it weighs more 
than 1 ounce but at most (and including) 2 ounces, then the cost 
to mail the letter is 2p. This continues on until you get tired of 
it. The graph of this function must reflect that jump in price at 1 
ounce and at 2 ounces and at 3 ounces, and so on. 
The fact that we have a hole o on a graph means that the price 
is not evaluated at that line. The line corresponding to p has a 
hole at the left end. This is the cost of mailing a letter weighing 
0 ounces. There is no letter to mail in this case so the cost is 0 
cents. The line corresponding to p has a solid dot at its right end, 
and the line corresponding to 2p has a whole at the left end. That 
means that the cost for a 1 ounce letter is to be evaluated from the 
lower line. Thus we pay p cents when mailing a 1 ounce letter. 
The graph tells us that it will cost 2p cents to mail a letter that 
weighs more than 1 ounce and up to 2 ounces. The black dot 0 on 
that line means that if the letter weighs more than 1 ounce then 
you must pay 2p to mail it. Similarly if the letter weighs more than 
2 ounces or up to 3 ounces then the letter costs 3p to mail. You can 
guess what happens when the letter weighs more than 3 ounces but 
up to 4 ounces. 

2.1. FUNCTIONAL PRELlMINA RIES 
43 
Example 2.1.4 Define a function f : R - 
(0,l) by setting 
1 if z E Q That is, z is a fraction 
0 if z @ Q  
This one cannot be graphed, but it is still a function. If we were to 
try to graph this function we would have to graph a horizontal line 
that is full of holes and full of dark spots. For instance, 
while 
Furthermore, between 
rational number q 
every two real numbers z and y there is a 
so between every two numbers z and y at which f(z) = f(y) = 0 
there is a number q such that f ( q )  = 1. 
Current technology does not permit us to graph such a line. How- 
ever, since a given real number z is either a rational number or 
an irrational number but not both, the rule f defines a function 
f : R - 
(0,l). 
Next let us consider functions that are not so algebraic. 
Example 2.1.5 Let P be the set of people on the Earth, and define 
a function a : P - 
N as the function that assigns to each person on 
Earth his/her age in years as of January 1, 2005. Thus a(Wendy) = 
15, a(new born) = 0, and a(author) > 25. You cannot at this time 
determine a(author), but there is a natural number that the author 
calls his age. However, at the time of this writing there is no person 
z such that a(.) 
= 200. 

44 
CHAPTER 2. FUNCTIONS 
Example 2.1.6 Let L be the set of locations on the Earth, and 
define a function t : L - 
N to be the function that assigns to each 
location on Earth the temperature in degrees Celsius at that loca- 
tion at exactly 12 noon on January l, 2005. So you might find that 
t(South Pole) = -8O"C, t(Guam) = 30"C, and t(outside) = 20°C. 
You cannot at this time determine t(300 miles under New York City), 
but there is a natural number that we would all agree is that tem- 
perature. There is no place x on Earth such that t(z) = absolute 
zero. 
A rule f must satisfy both of the conditions in our definition 
of function if it is to be a function. The following rules are not 
functions. 
(Failure of Condition 1.) Let .f be the association from R to R 
defined by f ( ~ )  
= &. 
Then f-is not a function since f(-1) = 
G # R .  
(Failure of Condition 2.) Let R+ be the set of positive real 
numbers, and let f be the association from R+ to R defined by 
f(x) = &&. 
Then f is not a function since f(1) = 1, -1 is more 
than one value. 
We think we know what an implied list is, but here is a math- 
ematically precise way to think of it. Let A be a set. Any set will 
do. We define an implied list of elements in A to be a function 
f : N - A .  
In this case we will write 
and in general 
f ( n )  = a, for each element n E N. 
For instance, we can define f : N - 
R as 
f(n) = n. 

2.1. FUNCTIONAL PRELIMINARIES 
45 
Then f is the implied list 
0 7 1 7 2 , 3 , .  
. . . 
Another function f : N - 
R defined by 
for all n E N 
1 
f b )  = n+l 
is the implied list 
The following is a pretty little rule that is not a function unless 
In this age of computers it should be no surprise that we can 
we are very careful. 
find for every real number 0 < x < 1 a binary series 
bi 
b2 
b3 
x =  - + -+ - +..., 
2 
22 
23 
where the digits bl, b2, b3.. . take values in the set (0,l). We would 
then write x as a binary expansion. 
x = .blb2b3.. . 
(2.4) 
For example, 
1
0
0
 
- -+-+-+.. 
1 - _  
2 
2 
22 
23 
and 
0
1
0
1
 
1 
1 
3 
2 
= -+-+-+-+..., 
1 
- 
3 
2 
22 
23 
24 
where the coefficients for - are 1 for the even exponents of - and 0 
elsewhere. Thus 
1 
- = .loo0 
2 
3 - = .llOOO 
4 
= .OlOlDi. 
1 
3 
- 

46 
CHAPTER 2. FUNCTIONS 
In the general spirit of mathematics we denote the set of all 
binary sequences by S. 
S = the set of all binary sequences blb2b3.. . . 
1 
I 
That is, S consists of all sequences of 0’s and 1’s. For instance, S 
contains elements like 100.. . and Olm.. ., but it does not contain 
,333. 
We define the unit interval (0,l) to be the real numbers that lie 
properly between 0 and 1 on the real number line. 
I 
I 
(0) 1) = {x E R 10 < x < l}. 
Let us define a rather obvious function 
f : (0,l) ---t s 
as follows. Given an x E (0,1), 
write x as a binary expansion as in 
(2.4)) 
= .blb2b3.. . , 
and then define 
f(x) = blb2b3.. . . 
Thus f(x) just drops the decimal point of the binary expansion for 
z. Evidently given z E (0, I), f(x) is a binary sequence, so that 
f(x) E S for each z E (0,l). 
However, the value f(x) has some ambiguity surrounding it. For 
1 
example, let’s show that A has two binary expansions. 
2 
1
0
0
 
- -+-+-+... 
1 - -  
2 
2 
2 2  
23 
2 
2 2  
2 3  
0
1
1
 
This will require some trickery and guile that we will use several 
times in the future. Given 
= -+-+-+.... 
0
1
1
 
-+-+-+..., 
2 
2 2  
2 3  

2.1. FUNCTIONAL PRELIMINARIES 
47 
1 
1 
2 
2 
let’s multiply by - = 1 - - to realize the following equations. Use 
the distributive law or your friend foil to do the multiplication. 
1 
) 
= (1-;) 
($+$+?+ 
... 
1
1
1
 
-+-+-+... 
22 
23 
24 
1
1
 
(3 ( 
+ 
+ 
1 - +  
1 - +  
23 
23 
1 
1 
- 
24 
24 - 
+ 
+ ... -1 
... 
\ 
- - - - - - -  
23 
24 
25 
Thus 
1 
1 
1- + 1- + 1- + .  .. ) = 1 1 >  
(9 ( 22 
23 
24 
so that multiplication by 2 yields the equation 
So, reader, which one is it? According to our definition of f, 
there are two choices for f (z). Which choice do you make? 
The point here is that there should be no choice. The value f(z) 
should be unique, unambiguous, singular to z. If two values present 
themselves, they should be equal. They might look different but 
they should be the same thing. This is not the case here. The value 

48 
CHAPTER 2. FUNCTIONS 
for f (i) has on the one hand only 1 entry of 1, while on the other 
hand it has infinitely many entries 1. As it is defined, the rule f 
does not satisfy Condition 2 of the definition of function, so it is not 
a function. 
The only way to correct this deficiency is to take advantage of 
the number of 1’s in these binary sequences. This, it turns out, is 
all we need to change the rule f into a function. Define a rule 
F : (0,l) - 
s 
related to f by requiring that 
F ( z )  = blb2b3.. . , where we choose the binary 
(2.5) 
expansion for x = .blb2b3.. . with the 
smallest number of 1’s. 
Under this new rule F ,  the sequence 017. . . is ruled out as the image 
of - since there is a “shorter” binary sequence available. Hence 
1 
2 
F - = 1000.. 
(9 
This definition for the new rule F avoids the ambiguity that the 
rule f possessed. 
Let us examine an operation on functions. Functions in abstract 
sets cannot be added or multiplied, so we will not be dealing with 
the addition or multiplication of functions as we might have done 
in algebra. There is, however, an important operation on functions 
called composition. 
Definition 2.1.7 Let f : A - 
B and g : B - 
C be functions. 
(Note that B serves as both the domain of g and the codomain of 
f.) There is a function 
g o f  : A-C 
whose rule is 
I 
g o f(12:) = g(f(x)) for each 12: E A. 
I 

2.1. FUNCTIONAL PRELIMINA RIES 
49 
For example, let f : R - 
R and g : R - 
R be defined by 
f(z) 
= z + 1 and g ( z 2 ) .  Then 
g o f ( z )  = 9 ( f ( z > )  = 9(z+ 1) = (z+ 
and 
fof(.) 
= f(f(z)) = f(z+ 1) = (z+ 1) + 1 = z+2. 
1 
Example 2.1.8 Let f(z) = -. Then 
z 
1 
1 
f 0 f(z) = f(f(z)) 
= f(-) = - 
= 2. 
2 
l/x 
That is, f o f(z) = z. 
Example 2.1.9 Let f(z) 
= JE and g ( z )  = x2. Then 
z i f z > O  
-x i f x < O  ' 
f 0 g(z) = f ( g ( z ) )  = f(z2) = @ = 
Experiment with this. 
f o g ( +  
= f ( g ( - 1 ) )  = f((-1)2) 
= f(1) = di= 1 = -(-1), 
while 
f 0 g ( l ) = f ( g ( l ) ) = f ( l 2 ) = f ( l ) = d i =  1. 
You can check this formula for z = -2,2 to see that f o g ( z )  # z. 
How do you reconcile this fact with what you know today? 
Example 2.1.10 Let F : (0,l) - 
S be the function defined in 
(2.5). Then F ( z )  is the binary sequence blb2b3.. . that defines z. 
Define a function 
G : S - 
(0,1} 
by requiring that 
G(blb2b3.. .) = bl = the first entry in the sequence blb2b3.. .. 
The composition G o F has the rule 
G 0 F ( x )  = G(F(2)) = G(blb2bj.. .) = bl E (0, I}. 

50 
CHAPTER 2. FUNCTIONS 
Thus G o F is a function that assigns to each IC E (0,l) either 
a 0 or a 1, and it makes the assignment without ambiguity. We 
challenge the reader to find the set of numbers x E (0,l) such that 
G o  F ( x )  = 1. Hint: Look at the definition of F .  The answer to 
this challenge is given at the end of this section. 
We will need a notation for the set of all functions from A into 
B. 
Definition 2.1.11 Let A and B be sets. We let 
BA = the set of all functions f : A - 
B 
Let A = {a, b} and let B = {0,1}. We will write down all of the 
functions in BA. 
f (a) = 0, 
f ( b )  = 0 
h(a) = 1, h(b) = 0 
g(a) = 0, g(b) = 1 
k(u) = 1, k(b) = 1. 
Since we have completely exhausted the possible images for a and 
b we have written a complete list of the elements of BA. Another 
way of writing these functions presents itself. 
Let us agree that each function f will be written as 
f = [x, 
y] provided that f(a) = x and f (b) = y 
For instance, 
f = [ l , O ]  means that f ( u )  = 1 and f ( b )  = 0. 
Thus we can write down all of the functions in (0, 
l}{"3b} 
by sys- 
tematically writing down the possible pairs [x, 
y]. They are 
i0101 
101 11 
[ l l O I  
[I? 11. 
We can then easily count the number of functions in (0, l}{"ih}. 
Recall that the cardinality o f X  is denoted by card(X). Then 
card((0, l}{a7b}) 
= 4 = 22 = card((0, l})card({"3b})l 

2.1. FUNCTIONAL PRELIMINARIES 
51 
which explains why we chose this notation. 
Other examples are found by letting A = {a, 
b,c} and B = 
(0,1}. To count the number of functions in (0, l}{"2b>c), 
let us agree 
to write the function 
in terms of its values at a, b, and c. Then f is denoted by 
f = [x, 
y, z], where f ( u )  = x, f ( b )  = y, and f(c) = z. 
I 
I 
For example, the function f such that f ( a )  = 1, f ( b )  = 1, f(c) = 0 
is denoted by 
The left entry in [l, 1,0] is 1 because f ( a )  = 1. The middle entry is 
1 because f ( b )  = 1, and the right hand entry is 0 because f(c) = 0. 
Every function f : {a, 
b, c} - 
{0,1} can be represented in this 
way. This provides us with a very simple way to count the elements 
in (0, l}{a,b%c). 
There are two possible values for each of the three 
entries off = [x, 
y, 21 so that there are 2-2.2 = 8 possible entries for 
f and therefore there are 8 possible functions in (0, l}{"~b~"). 
That 
is, 
f = [I, LO]. 
card(BA) = card((0, 1}{a3b1c)) = 8 = card( (0, l})ca'd({"~b~c))~ 
We leave it to the reader to write down the eight functions in BA. 
As a further exercise, the functions in (0,1, 2}{"7b} can be written 
as 
[x, 
y] where f ( a )  = x and f ( b )  = y, 
where x, y are numbers in {0,1,2}. Since there are three numbers 
that can fill the two entries [x, 
y], there are exactly 3.3 = 9 functions 
in (o,I, 2}{"1'}. 
card(AB) = card((O,l, 2}{a3b)) = 32 = c ard( { 0, 1, 2})ca'd({aib)). 
Four of these functions are 

52 
CHAPTER 2. FUNCTIONS 
The first function takes each of a and b to 0. [l, 21 is a function that 
takes a to 1 and that takes b to 2. The reader is invited to list all 9 
functions and their rules using the [z, y] notation that we described 
above. 
This is the answer to the G o F challenge. You can use 
the sum (2.4) to convince yourself that G o F ( z )  = 1 exactly when 
1 
-<z<1. 
2 -  
2.2 Images and Preimages 
Consider the function f : R - 
R defined by 
2 
f(.) 
= x . 
A moment’s thought reveals that 
f(1) = f(-1) = 1. 
Let’s write that in a more useful notation. 
Furthermore, if we recall that (-1,l) = {x E R 1 - 1 < x < 1) then 
The following picture may help you see this. The interval (-1,l) 
defined by the slashes “/” is mapped into the interval [0,1) defined 
by the dashes “-” . The open circles o mean that z = -1, z = 1, 

2.2. IMAGES AND PREIMAGES 
and y = 1 are not included. 
Y 
53 
I 
I 
We will say that [0, 1) is the image of (- 1,l) under the function 
f(x) = x2. Since (-1,l) is everything that f(z) 
sends into [ O , l )  we 
say that (-1,l) is the preimage of [O,l). Another example would 
be that (1) is the image of (-1) and since {-l,l} is all that f 
maps to { l}, { -1, l} is the preimage of { 1). In more general terms 
we have the following definition. 
Definition 2.2.1 Let f : A - 
B be a function and let X c A 
and Y c B be subsets. 
1. f ( X )  = {f(z) 
1 x E X}. f ( X )  is called the image of X. 
2. f-'(Y) 
= {x E X I j(x) E Y}. f-l(Y) 
is called the preimage 
of Y. 
If x E A and y E B then we will write f(z) 
for f({z}) and f-'(y) 
for f-l({y}). 
Thus f ( X )  is the set of things that X is mapped 
to and f-l(Y) is the set of things that map into Y. 
Picture (2.7) 
is there to help you visualize images and preimages. Suppose we 

54 
CHAPTER 2. FUNCTIONS 
think of A and B as boxes and suppose f is an arrow between them. 
Inside A is a box we call X and inside B is a box we call Y .  
The arrows in picture (2.7) indicate that the box X maps to the tri- 
angle f ( X )  and that the square Y comes from the rectangle f-'(Y). 
In fact, everything that maps into Y is in the rectangle f-'(Y). 
Here are more examples to illustrate these ideas. 
Example 2.2.2 Let a : People of Earth - 
N be defined as 
a(.) 
= age in years of the person 2 on January 1, 2005. 
Then a(your author) = 50, 
~ ~ ' ( 1 5 )  
= {people 2 I a(.) 
= 15) 
= set of 15 year olds. 

2.2. IMAGES AND PREIMAGES 
55 
Suppose that z is some individual on Earth whose age is 50. Then 
u(x) = 50 and hence 
u -1 (~(x)) = a-'(50) 
= the set of all people having age 50. 
Notice that z E a-'(a(z)) but that z is hardly everyone who is 50. 
We leave it to the reader to justify that ~ ~ ( 2 0 0 )  
= 8. 
Example 2.2.3 In this example, let t : places on Earth - 
R be 
the function that takes a place on Earth z and returns the temper- 
ature t(z) in degrees Celsius of that place at 12 noon on January 1, 
2005. Then t(outside) = 20" C, 
tP1(30"C) = {places z 1 t(x) = 30°C) 
= {places at which the temperature is 30°C) 
and 
t - l ( ~ ~ ~ o C )  
= {places z 1 t(z) = 100"c) 
= {places at which the temperature is the 
boiling point of water at sea level}. 
Notice that t-l ( 100°C) contains the places where people at sea level 
are boiling water. It also contains those places, like volcanoes and 
geysers, at which the temperature is that of boiling water. 
Example 2.2.4 An example from trigonometry is given by the 
function f : R - 
R defined by f(0) = tan(6), where tan is the 
tangent function. We have already defined the tangent function for 
angles 6. (See page 40.) Then f(0) = tan(0) = 0, while 
f -'(O) 
= the set of all angles whose tangent is 0 
= {. . . , -2T, -7r, O,n, 27r,. . .} 
= (n7rInEZ). 
Here are some results on images and preimages that we are using 
as educational tools to prepare the reader for the more advanced 
arguments presented in the next chapter. 

56 
CHAPTER 2. FUNCTIONS 
Theorem 2.2.5 Let f : A ---+ B be a function. If Y c Y' c B 
then f-'(Y) c f-'(Y'). 
Proof We must show that every element of f-'(Y) is in f-'(Y'). 
Let z E f-'(Y). By definition of preimage f(z) 
E Y ,  and since 
Y c Y', f(z) 
E Y'. Then z E f-'(Y') 
by definition of preimage. 
Hence f-'(Y) c f-'(Y'), 
which completes the proof. 
Look at what we did in the above proof. We started with an 
element z 
E f-'(Y) 
and we evaluated what that means to us. The 
definition of the preimage must be used. It tells us that z maps 
into Y .  That is, f(z) E Y .  The subset hypothesis is now used. 
f(z) E Y c Y' implies that f(z) 
E Y'. Since z maps into Y' then 
z is in the preimage, the set of all that maps into Y': x E f-'(Y'). 
Hence f-'(Y) c f-'(Y'). 
Notice the detail with which I am arguing. This detail is nec- 
essary for two reasons. First, we cannot know what the other is 
thinking so I must show all of the thoughts that I want you to 
think. Second, before we can skip steps without fear of error set- 
ting in, we must first pay our dues with this type of detail. I hope 
you are paying dues. The later material will more than make up for 
the present effort I am asking you to exert. 
Theorem 2.2.6 Let f : A --+ 
B be a function and let X C A. 
Then X c f-'(f(X)). 
Picture (2.8) is an illustration of what we will show in the proof 
of this theorem. 
Proof We must show that each element of X is an element of 
f-'(f(X)). Let x E X. By the definition of image f(z) 
E f ( X ) .  
For the sake of clarity let W = f ( X ) .  Then f(x) E W .  The 
definition of preimage and the definition of W show us that 
z E f-'(w) = f-'(f(X)). 
Thus X c f-'(f(X)), which completes the proof. 
Once again we will detail and motivate the given proof. To 
prove that X c f-'(f(X)) we must show that each given z E X 

2.2. IMAGES AND PREIMAGES 
57 
is in f - ' ( f ( X ) ) .  Let x E X. It must be clear to you by now that 
f(x) E f ( X ) .  Thus J: is a part of all that maps into f ( X ) .  Put 
symbolically, x E f - ' ( f ( X ) ) .  We conclude that X C f - ' ( f ( X ) ) .  
A 
I 
All that maps to f ( X )  
/ 
Example 2.2.7 Here are two examples of how f - ' ( f ( X ) )  can be 
much larger than X. 
1. Consider the function f : R -+ R defined by f(x) = x2, and 
let X = {a}. A small calculation reveals that f ( 2 )  = 4. Thus 
2 E f-'(4). The set f-l(4) is the set of all x such that x2 = 4. 
A moment's thought will show you that f ( 2 )  = f ( - 2 )  = 4 
and that {-2,2} = f-'(4). 
Thus X = ( 2 )  # {-2,2} = 
f -Yf (X)). 
2. Let a : People on Earth - 
N be the function that assigns 
to each person x on Earth his/her age as of January 1, 2005. 
Then a(your author) = 50 while a-'(50) is the set of all 50 
year olds on the planet. Hence a-'(a(your author)) = a-'(50) 
is quite a large set, not equal to just {your author}. 

58 
CHAPTER 2. FUNCTIONS 
This is why the boxes in diagram (2.8) properly contain each 
other. 
There is a relationship between subsets and the composition of 
functions. Notice the reversal of order in the functions f and g in 
the next result. This is also a test. The only question on this exam 
is: Have you learned enough of the basics to understand a more terse 
mathematical proof? Before you read on, remember that sets A and 
B are equal, A = B, exactly when A c B and B c A. Nothing 
less than these two conditions may be proved if we wish to conclude 
that A = B. You will start with an J: E A and prove that it is in 
B. Then you will start with an x E B and prove that it is in A. 
Notice that in the next several proofs this is exactly what we are 
practicing. 
Theorem 2.2.8 Let f : A - 
B and g : B - 
C be functions, 
and let Z C C. Then 
Proof To prove the equality we must show that 
and that 
f - l ( g - l ( m  c (9 0 f>-'(z>. 
We will prove the inclusion ( g o  f)-'(Z) C f-'(g-'(Z)). 
age, 
Since g ( f ( J : ) )  E 2, 
f(x) E g-'(Z), and then x E f-l(g-'(Z)>. 
Hence 
Let x E (g o f)-I(Z). By definitions of composition and preim- 
g ( f ( 4 )  = (9 0 f > ( 4  E 2. 
( g o f ) - ' ( Z )  c P ( g - ' ( m  
Conversely, we will prove that f-'(g-'(Z)) 
c ( g o f ) - ' ( Z ) .  Sup- 
pose that x E f-'(g-'(Z)). 
We must show that IC € (g o f ) - ' ( Z ) .  
Now x E f-'(g-'(Z)) 
implies that f(x) E g-'(Z) and hence that 
g(f(z)) E 2. By definition of o we have 

2.2. IMAGES AND PRElMAGES 
59 
so that 
x E (9 
O f)-'(G 
f-'(g-'(m c (9 0 f)-'W, 
Consequently, 
and therefore f-l(g-'(Z)) = (gof)-'(2). This completes the proof. 
Finally, as an exercise in the use of the quantifiers for all and 
there exists, we will prove the following theorems. 
Theorem 2.2.9 Let f : A - 
B be a function. If {Yn 
1 n E N} is 
a family of subsets of B then 
Proof In shorthand notation, we will first prove the inclusion 
Let 
By the definition of U, x E f-'(Y,) for some m E N, so that 
2 E f-l(Ym). By definition of preimage, f(x) E Y,, so that 
f(x) E U Yn 
n E N  
by definition of U. The definition of preimage shows us that 
f-' (
y
n
)
 
and hence that 

60 
CHAPTER 2. FUNCTIONS 
Conversely, we will prove the reverse inclusion 
Let 
The definition of preimage implies that 
and the definition of U implies that f(x) E Y k  for some k E N. 
Then x E f - l ( Y k )  for that k E N, 
and so 
Consequently, 
and therefore 
This completes the proof. 
Here are a few exercises that will build your mental mathematical muscles. 
The reader can sample the thrill of the creative and discovery processes by 
providing proofs of all these results. Rather than repeat the hypotheses over 
and over again, let us agree that, for each of these exercises, f : A 
B is a 
function, that X ,  X' c A, and that Y, Y' c B. 
1. If X c X' c A then f(X) c f(X'). 
2. f(f-'(Y)) 
c Y .  
3. If X , X '  c A then f(X n X ' )  c f(X) n f(X'). 

2.3. ONE-TO-ONE AND ONTO FUNCTIONS 
61 
4. If X, 
X’ c A then j(X U X‘) = f(X) 
U f(X’). 
5. If Y,Y’ 
c B then f-l(Y 
n Y’) 
= f-l(Y) 
n f-l(Y’). 
6. If Y, 
Y’ 
c B then f-’(Y 
U Y’) 
= f-l(Y) 
U f-’(Y’). 
7. If {X, I n E N} is a family of subsets of A then f(UnEN X,) = 
8. If {Y, 1 n E N} is a family of subsets of B then nnEM 
f-’(Y,) 
= 
U,EN f(Xd 
f-l (n,,, YJ. 
2.3 One-to-one and Onto Functions 
Functions come in a variety of different colors. For instance, f ( x )  = 
x2 defines a function on R such that f(-l) = f(1). That is, f 
takes two different numbers to the same number. The function 
f(x) = x + 2, on the other hand, takes different numbers x # x’ to 
different numbers x + 2 # x’ + 2. When you stand in a particularly 
long line to see a movie and you count the number of people in 
front of you, you are forming a function f that associates a natural 
number n with a person in that line. Then f( 1) is the first person 
in line, f(2) is the second person in line, and so on. In this function 
we see that if n # m then the people f(n) 
and f ( m )  are different. 
One person will not hold two different places in line. 
This type of counting function goes back to the first humans to 
herd animals. As the goats would enter the pasture land the ancient 
goatherd would drop a rock or stone in a pile. In this way he sets up 
a function from the goats to the pile of stones. As the goats leave 
the pasture he removes one stone for each goat that passes. If he 
has stones left he might conclude that the wolf has found one of his 
goats. If there are more goats than stones he might conclude that 
he has picked up another goat from somewhere. Different stones 
are associated with different goats. Thus when the goats and the 
stones match up element by element he concludes that he has just 
as many goats that evening as he had that morning. 
The next definition identifies this property of functions. 

62 
CHAPTER 2. FUNCTIONS 
Definition 2.3.1 Let f : A - 
B be a function. 
1. We say that f is a one-to-one function if 
f(x) = f ( d )  implies that x = x’ 
or equivalently if 
2 # d implies that f(x) # f(z’). 
Said in a colloquial manner, f is one-to-one if different ele- 
ments of A map to different elements of B. 
2. We say that f is an onto function if 
given y E B then we can find an x E A such that f(x) = y. 
In an informal way, f is onto if every element in B is the image 
of an element from A. 
Consider what this definition represents. We have uncovered a 
pair of properties about functions that the reader probably has not 
encountered before. This discovery is the tip of an iceberg, or a 
general principle, that is called abstraction,. Abstraction is one of 
the processes through which mathematics grows. For example, you 
can study lines on a sheet of paper and you will understand lines 
and linear processes. But once you abstract lines to linear approx- 
imation you have discovered the calculus. Now you can leave that 
sheet of paper and study nature and the universe around us. If you 
allow your definition of line to be abstracted you grow from points 
and lines on a plane to studying the geometry of points and lines 
on a sphere, or a globe. Lines here would be different because they 
must curve along the sphere. Quite a change, isn’t it? Abstraction 
usually has this effect on mathematics. 
Some examples will help you visualize one-to-one and onto func- 
tions. 
Example 2.3.2 Start with a function f : {a, b} -+ {x, y, z }  de- 
fined by 
f ( 4  = x f ( b )  = 9. 

2.3. ONE-TO-ONE A N D  ONTO FUNCTIONS 
63 
A glance at the definition shows us that f ( a )  # f ( b )  so that f is a 
one-to-one function. f is not an onto function since f ( a ) ,  f ( b )  # z. 
That is, z is not an image of an element from {a, b}. 
Define a function f : {a, b, c} - 
{z, 
y} by 
f ( a )  = 2 
f ( b )  = 2 
f ( c )  = y. 
Since f ( a )  = z and f ( c )  = y, each element of the codomain {x,y} 
is an image of an element from {a, b, c}. Thus f is an onto function. 
f is not a one-to-one function since the different elements a # b 
map to the same element f(a) = f ( b )  = z. 
You may recall that we examined sets that could be matched 
element by element. The matching is a limited way of describing 
a function that is both one-to-one and onto. These one-to-one and 
onto functions will thus replace the previous notion of an element 
by element matching of sets. 
Example 2.3.3 Let f : R - 
R be defined by f(x) = 72 + 6. We 
claim that f is both one-to-one and onto. 
1. f is one-to-one: Suppose that 2, x’ E R are such that f(z) 
= 
f(z’). Then 72 + 6 = 72’ + 6 implies that 72 = 72’. We can divide 
by 7 to show that x = 2’. As claimed f is one-to-one. 
2. f is onto: Suppose that y E R. We must find a number 2 E R 
such that f(z) 
= y. Let z = 
E R. A little algebra shows us 
- 
Thus f(z) 
= y, so that f is onto, as claimed. 
In the above example we made use of the arithmetic of 7 and 
6. We added and subtracted at will and we divided by 7 like there 
was no problem with it. (There isn’t.) But now let us abstract this 
problem. We will need to acknowledge the fact that we could divide 
by 7 because 7 # 0. We also need to see that 6 - 6 = 0. Let’s see 
how that is used in a more abstract setting. 
Example 2.3.4 Let f : IR - 
R be defined by f(z) 
= m x  + b for 
some m # 0. We claim that f is both one-to-one and onto. 

64 
CHAPTER 2. FUNCTIONS 
1. f is one-to-one: Suppose that x,x’ E R are such that f ( x )  = 
f(x’). Then 
m x + b  = md+b 
mx = mx‘ 
m x  
mx’ 
m 
m 
x
=
 X I .  
( m X + b ) - b  
(mx’+b)-b 
- -  
- -  
We could divide by m in the second to last step only because we 
chose m # 0. As claimed f is one-to-one. 
2. f is onto: Suppose that y E R. We must find a number x E lR 
such that f ( x )  = y. Let x = - 
- ‘ .  Since rn # 0, we can divide by 
m to form y, and so x E R. A little algebra shows that 
712 
f ( x )  = f ( y) 
Y - b  
= m (q!) 
+ b = 9. 
Thus f ( x )  = y ,  so that f is onto, as claimed. 
Our choice of z in the above example is typical of mathematical 
proof. Before setting down to write this little mathematical essay, 
several drafts of the essav were made. We found the value x = - 
X - b  
m 
before we set pen to paper to write out our proof. Our choice of x 
may at first seem magical, coming from nowhere, without motiva- 
tion as it did, but that is because you were not there while I worked 
out all of the details in the drafts of this proof. That is the sign of a 
well written well constructed argument. You have done all of your 
homework surrounding the proof so that when you attempt to type 
that final draft you can appeal to values a s  if they come naturally 
from the ether as opposed to the preparat,ion. I will use this style 
of mathematics as little as possible, but I .will use it. 
Example 2.3.5 Let f : R - 
R be defined by f(x) = x2. We will 
show that f is neither one-to-one nor onto’. 
1. f is not one-to-one: We need only produce two different 
numbers that map to the same number. .f(-2) = 4 = f(2) shows 

2.4. BIJECTIONS 
65 
that f is not one-to-one. (Where did -2 and 2 come from, reader? 
If you write out a draft of this proof yourself you might find their 
origins.) 
2. f is not onto: We need only produce one element in R that 
cannot be written as f(x). Since x2 2 0 for all x E R, f(x) = x2 # 
-1 for any 2 E R. (A little preparation gives us the value -1 as a 
good example of a number that is not an image under f(x) = x2.) 
A simple change of the domain or the codomain can signifi- 
cantly change the function. That is, by changing the domain and 
the codomain of a function that is neither one-to-one nor onto we 
change the function into one that is both one-to-one and onto. As 
we said above these one-to-one and onto functions are the element 
by element matchings that we encountered earlier as functions for 
counting sets. Such a special function deserves a name. We use the 
French term. A function is a bzjection if it is both one-to-one and 
onto. 
Definition 2.3.6 The function f : A - 
B is a bijection i f f  is a 
one-to-one and onto function. 
Bijections 
Some functions on finite sets will further develop your intuition 
about bijections, or one-to-one and onto functions. 
The function f : {a, b, c} - 
{x, y ,  z }  defined by 
f ( 4  
= 2 ,  f ( b )  = Y ,  f(c) = z 
or by a list of assignments 
is a bijection since a glance at the list shows us that different ele- 
ments in the domain {a, b, c} are mapped to different elements in 

66 
CHAPTER 2. FUNCTIONS 
{x, y, z } ,  and each element in the codomain {x, 
y, z }  is the image of 
an element from {a, 
b, c}. We might have said as in Chapter 1 that 
there is an element by element matching of {a, 
b, c} with {x, 
y, z}. 
Our use of a bijection makes this intuitive matching of elements 
mathematically concrete. 
Example 2.4.1 Example 2.3.3 shows that i f f  : R - 
R is defined 
by f(x) = 7x + 6 then f is one-to-one and onto. Thus f(x) = 7z + 6 
defines a bijection f : R + 
R. 
Example 2.4.2 Example 2.3.4 shows that if m # 0 is a real num- 
ber and if f : R - 
R is defined by f(x) = ‘inx + b then f is one-to- 
one and onto. Thus f(x) = M X  + b defines iz bijection f : R - 
R. 
Example 2.4.3 Let Iw+ be the set of positive real numbers, and 
let f : R+ ----f R+ be defined by f(x) = -. We will show that f is 
a bijection. 
1. To show that f is one-to-one suppose we have x, x’ E R’ such 
1
1
 
that f(x) = f(x’). The definition of f shows us that then - = -, 
x 
2’ 
and so a little algebra shows us that x = 2’. Thus f is one-to-one. 
2. To show that f is onto begin with a y E R+. We must choose 
an x E R+ such that f(x) = y. Since y ~i El+, y # 0, so we can 
1 
X 
-I 
1 
form the real number x = - E R’. 
Y 
Observe that 
f(x) = f (s) 
to conclude that f is onto. Therefore f is i t  bijection. 
Example 2.4.4 Recall that R+ is the set of positive real numbers. 
Let g : R+ - 
R+ be defined by g(x) = x2. We will show that g is 
a bijection. That is, it is both one-to-one and onto. 
1. g is one-to-one: Suppose that x,x’ 
:> 
0 are such that g(x) = 
g(x’). Then x2 = ( x ’ ) ~ .  
Since x, z’ > 0 we can take square roots to 
see that 
x = Q = f l = x ‘ .  
Thus g is one-to-one. 

2.4. BIJECTIONS 
67 
The above chain of equations holds only because z,x’ 
> 0. To 
see this notice that l2 = (-1)2 while 1 # -1. Only the positive 
numbers x satisfy @ = x. 
2. g is onto: Let y E R+. Since y > O we can let x = fi E R+. 
Then 
which shows us that g is onto. (Where did that value x come from? 
Obviously, it is from the preparations we made before writing down 
the final draft of this proof.) 
These examples concerning the rule x2 should be compared. 
Even though the functions f : IR - 
IR and g : R+ - 
R+ have 
the same rule, namely, f(x) = g(z) = x21 their domains and their 
codomains are different. This difference makes g both one-to-one 
and onto, while f is neither one-to-one nor onto. These must be 
different functions because they behave differently. They enjoy dif- 
ferent properties. Thus the sets used to define a function will have 
a significant effect on the properties possessed by the function. 
Example 2.4.5 Example 2.3.2 shows us that the function 
f : {a, b} - 
{x, y, z }  defined by 
9(4 = (lm2 = YI 
is one-to-one but not onto. Thus f is not a bijection. 
However, the function g : {a,b} - 
{xlg} defined by 
9(4 = 2 1  
9(b) = Y 
is a bijection. Notice that f and g have the same rule. The difference 
in their codomains makes them different functions. 
Example 2.4.6 By Example 2.3.2 the function f : {a,b,c} - 
{x, y} defined by 
f ( 4  = x, f(b) = 2, f(c) = Y 
is onto and not one-to-one. Thus f is not a bijection. 
However, the function g : {b, c }  - 
{x, y} defined by 
is a bijection. Again we see that a change in domain changes a 
function that is not one-to-one into a function that is one-to-one. 

68 
CHAPTER 2. FUNCTIONS 
2.5 Inverse Functions 
The operation of composition g o f looks very much like a multipli- 
cation of functions. It is natural to ask if we can divide functions 
as well. Unfortunately, the division of functions is not defined in 
general. Thus we must examine an analogous operation, namely 
the undoing of a function. We consider each function f as a rule 
that manipulates or that changes an input value x. The value f(x) 
is seen then as some kind of variation on x. Our inverse functions 
will be this manipulation in reverse. Iff squares then its inverse g 
takes square roots. If f adds 3 to x then g will subtract 3 from 2. 
Do you see it? The inverse of f is the function that performs the 
opposite manipulation that f performs. 
The best solution in our search for an inverse function is to find 
the largest class of functions that have inverse functions. Specifi- 
cally, we will discuss functions for which the composition division 
exists. Within this collection a specific function f will be associated 
with a function g such that 
7
9 0 f(4 = 9 ( f  (4) = x and 
f 0 9 ( 4  = f (9(x>> 
= 2. 
In this case we will say that g is the inverse of f. This inverse is 
not found by dividing by f but by undoing whatever it is that f 
does. It happens that this kind of functional inverse exists only for 
bijections. 
Definition 2.5.1 Let f : A + B and g : B - 
A be functions. 
Notice the change in the domain and codoniain off and g. Then g 
is called the inverse of f if 
1. g o f(x) = x for each x E A, and 
2. f o g ( y )  = y for each y E B 
In this case f is also the inverse of 9. I f f  has an inverse then we 
say that f is invertible. 
Observe that the compositions g o f and f o g are defined since 
their domains and codomains match up. 

2.5. INVERSE FUNCTIONS 
69 
Example 2.5.2 Let f : R - 
R be defined by 
f ( x )  = mx + b 
for some numbers m # 0 and b. Define a function g : R ---f R by 
x - b  
g ( 4  = 7 
Since m # 0, g : R - 
R is a function. We will show that g is the 
inverse of f .  
Let x E R. We must show that g o  f(x) = f o g(x) = x. A little 
algebra shows us that 
and that 
= m(-)-b 
x - b  
Thus g is the inverse of f 
Now where do you suppose the inverse g of f came from in 
the above example? In preparing for this 'example, I assumed that 
f(x) = ma: + b had an inverse g(s). Then I calculated as follows. 
Since f ( g ( x ) )  = x we have 

70 
Now solve for g(5). 
CHAPTER 2. FUNCTIONS 
m.g(z) + b  = x 
m.g(z) = X - 0  
X - h  
The only reason that g(x) can be found in this case is because 
m # 0. If m = 0 then f is not a bijection and its inverse g cannot 
be found. 
The above theorem connects bijections with inverses. Try think- 
ing of its proof as another examination of how far your mathematical 
thought processes have progressed over the last 10 pages or so. This 
approach is drier than the examples you hi3ve met in this chapter 
and the presentation will cause you to think about my line of rea- 
soning. The idea of choosing values x or y in some previous draft 
is used throughout this argument. However, all of the details are 
there and if you can read it without too much difficulty then you 
are ready for the next chapter, where we begin our investigation of 
infinite sets. 
Theorem 2.5.3 Let f : A - 
B be a function. 
1. I f f  is invertible then f is a bijection. 
2. I f f  is a bijection then f is invertible. 
Proof 1. Suppose that f is invertible. We must show that f is 
Suppose that f ( ~ )  
= f(d) 
for some X,X’ E A. Then 
one-to-one and onto. Since f is invertible it has an inverse g. 
and since g is the inverse of f we have 
2 = g( f (x)) = g(f(z’)) 
:= X I .  
Thus f is one-to-one. 
Let y E B, and let x = g(y). Since g is the inverse of f we have 

2.5. INVERSE FUNCTIONS 
71 
so that f is onto. 
Therefore f is a bijection. 
2. Suppose that f is a bijection. We must construct a function 
g that will serve as the inverse of f .  Define a rule g from B into A 
by 
I 
g(x) = y exactly when x = f(y). 
This is a reasonable definition for an inverse. We must show that g 
is a function. 
The definition of function (page 38) asks us to define g on all 
of B. So let x E B. Since f is onto there is a y E A such that 
IC = f(y). Then by definition of g, g(x) = y. 
Also the definition of function askes us to show that g(x) is 
exactly one value. To prove that there is exactly one of something 
you assume that you have two perhaps equal things, and then you 
prove that they are the same. So suppose there are two elements 
y,y’ E A such that 
g(z) = y and g(x) = y’. 
By the definition of g, 
x = f(y) and x = f(y’) 
and because f is one-to-one, y = y’. Thus g(x) is exactly one value. 
Therefore g : B - 
A is a function. 
To complete the proof we must show that g(f(x)) = x and that 
f(y(y)) = y for each x E A and y E B. 
Let IC E A and write 
f(x) = Y. 
Then, by the definition of 9, 

72 
CHAPTER 2. FUNCTIONS 
On the other hand, if y E B is given then write x for g(y). That 
1s, 
By the definition of g, y = f(x), so that 
9(Y) = x. 
Hence g is the inverse of f, which is what we had to prove. 
The above theorem can be used to anticipate the existence of 
inverses without telling us what that inverse might be. For instance, 
f(x) = rnx + b where rn # 0 
is known to be a bijection. Thus the above theorem tells us that 
f in invertible. It does not tell us what that inverse might be. We 
found (see Example 2.3.4) that 
x - b  
g ( 4  = 7 
is the inverse off. 
The function 
h(x) : It+ -- 
R+ such that h(x) = x2 
is known to be a bijection. (See Example 2.4.4.) Thus h has an 
inverse. Its inverse can be found by emulating the proof of the 
above theorem. Solve the equaticn 
2 
x = y  
for y. Of course, we just take a square root so that 
Hence 
s(x) = 6 
is the inverse of h. 
Now that we have plowed through the preliminaries, let me 
present a story. 

2.5. INVERSE FUNCTIONS 
73 
When we learn to play a game like checkers or chess we play with 
a person learned in the ways of the game. As we play we learn the 
rules over several initial games. It might take three or four games 
to learn the rules. There is a deeper understanding that comes with 
playing more games. The only way to learn the game well is to 
lose a lot of games to a better player. If we keep coming back to 
challenge this master of the game we eventually will learn enough 
to challenge him or her. However, maybe you don’t play games like 
checkers or chess. Maybe you like video games. 
How do we learn to play video games? We start with a two 
dimensional character who moves across the screen prodded by our 
control box. Initially we play for 15 seconds and then we die. Do we 
give up? Do we go onto something else? We do not. We hit reset 
and begin again. This time we get a little further. Eventually, after 
resetting the game for what feels like an infinite number of times, 
we reach the end of the game. We defeat the Monster who was 
holding your Sister with the Golden Hair hostage, and we rejoice. 
We won the game. But it took a while. It took a lot of time. 
I ask you to devote a fraction of that energy into the topics that 
we will cover in the next few chapters. The derived rewards will be 
far more than those enjoyed by checkers or video games, I assure 
you. 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Chapter 3 
Counting Infinite Sets 
3.1 Finite Sets 
The natural numbers are the numbers introduced by the Hindu and 
Arabic cultures. Today they are written as 
N = {0,1,2,3,. . .}. 
This is an implied list. The three dots, . . ., indicate that the pat- 
tern continues indefinitely, or without stopping. Although this set 
appears to be small it contains numbers that we do not encounter 
in our daily lives. Some examples of natural numbers that you have 
probably not met before are: 
1. The number of people on the Earth, about 6,000,000,000 or 
6 x 10'. 
2. The Gross National Product of the USA is about 100 trillion 
or 1014 dollars. This is a 1 followed by 14 zeros, 
100,000,000,000,000. 
3. The distance across the observable universe, about 4 x lo1' 
light years. This is a 4 followed by 10 zeros. It takes light 
4 x 10" years to travel this distance. This number doesn't 
have a name, only a scientific designation. 
4. The number of fish in the ocean on January 1, 2003. Even 
though we can't write down this number, it is still a number 
and we can refer to it by a symbol, say, cr. 
75 

76 
CHAPTER 3. COUNTING INFINITE SETS 
5 .  The number of grains of sand on the Earth. We will figure 
out how large this number is, but I think'we can all agree that 
even though the number exists, it is impossible to write the 
exact number down. 
Let us see how these numbers compare. To do this we will 
have to expand your imagination a bit. Once enlarged we will use 
the natural numbers {0,1,2,. . .} to write down some really large 
numbers. Suppose we write down the largest number that you can 
imagine, say, 
X. 
We can get a larger number by adding 1: 
x+1. 
How big was X? Was it the number of people on Earth, 6 billion? 
Was it the speed of light, 186,000 miles/second? Maybe it was a 
light year, the distance light travels in a year, or about 2.6 x lo9 
meters. In miles that would be 1.6 x lo9. Now those were large 
numbers. But this is hardly big enough. We can produce a larger 
number by adding 1: 
6,000,000,001. 
Not really much larger, though, is it? Maybe we can form an expo- 
nential number: 
(6 x 
= 36 x 10l8. 
This is larger than a light year since it has 18 zeros following the 
36. We can make a larger number: 
36 x 10l8 + 1. 
Ones are not what we need here. I want numbers that grow so large 
that we cannot print them with meaning. Let me explain that with 
examples. 
Now that you have seen how big these numbers can be, let us 
write down implied lists of these numbers called sequences. One 
such sequence starts with 100: 
100,101,102,103,104,. . . . 

3.1. FINITE SETS 
77 
These numbers do seem as large as they might have seemed to you, 
but they are getting larger. They just grow slowly. Adding 1 moves 
us only a little bit when compared to our first number. 
So let us take multiples of 100: 
100,200,300,400,. . . . 
The second number is twice as large as the first number) and the 
third number is three times as large as the first, etc. Once you've 
done this 100 times you have reached a number that is 100 times 
larger than 100. This is the number 
100 x 100 = 10,000. 
These numbers get larger more quickly than the numbers do in 
the sequence 100, 101, 102, 103, . . . , but they are still quite small 
compared to the numbers we can form. 
The sequence 
100, loo2, loo3, loo4,. . . 
( 3 4  
gets large relatively quickly. Each time we produce another entry 
in this sequence we add 2 zeros to the previous entry. The first 
number has 2 zeros, the second number has 4 zeros, the third has 
6, the fourth number 
100,000,000 
has 8 zeros, and so on. The number loo2 is already as large as the 
hundreth entry in the sequence 100,200,300,400, . . .. The hundreth 
entry in the sequence 100, loo2, loo3, loo4, . . . is 100'oo, which is a 
100 followed by a hundred zeros. These numbers are getting larger 
in magnitude with each entry in the sequence. So things are quickly 
getting large, but maybe the values are not large enough. 
For the next demonstration we will write 
100 = lo2 
The reasoning here is that the exponential form is more easily ma- 
nipulated. Consider the sequence 

78 
CHAPTER 3. COUNTING INFINITE SETS 
of exponents of 10. These numbers get large so fast that the second 
one, the number 
1O1O0 = 1 followed by a hundred zeros 
is too large to comfortably print in this space. It is just a 1 followed 
by 100 zeros, but the usual way of writing it down as 1,000,. . . is 
utter folly. Try to write down 1O1O0 as a 1 followed by 100 zeros just 
to get the feel for how useful this exponential notation is for this 
number. No one can read that many zeros with meaning. Did we 
read 99 zeros or did we read 100 zeros? This number lo1'' 
is larger 
than the number of grains of sand you would need to fill a bag as 
big as the Earth. (More on that sand number later.) It is hard to 
understand just how big the other numbers are in this sequence. 
And yet each of them is finite. 
Now let us compare the sizes of the numbers in the different 
sequences. We will all agree that 
1 o ' O  + 1 < 2 x 1 o 1 O  < 1 O 2 O  < 1O1O0. 
One way to see that a number 2 is large is to see how small its 
reciprocal - is. The number lo1'' 
is so large that if you used your 
calculator to find a decimal equivalent for the fraction 
1 
X 
your display would probably read 0. And yet this number is not 0, 
no matter what the display says. 
Now that we have some large numbers we can examine how large 
the relatively small numbers 1O1O0 and 
are. We will use the 
sand that makes up the Earth to give us all a mental picture of 
these numbers. 
To write down the number of grains of sand on the Earth we 
will have to use scientific notation. Scientific notation is the use of 
powers of 10 to abbreviate numbers that have a daunting length. 
Certainly we can write down 
10. 

3.1. FINITE SETS 
79 
This number is large if you happen to be 9 years old. We can also 
write 
lo2 = 100. 
One hundred is a large number if you earned a 75 on your last math- 
ematics examination, but it may not require the scientific notation 
lo2. Larger numbers look like this: 
1015 = i,ooo, ooo,ooo, ooo,ooo. 
You see that lo1’ is a more compact way of writing 1 followed by 
15 zeros. As we indicated before, 
10’O0 
is a more practical method for writing down that number. It is an 
example of a number that can only be written in a meaningful way 
as a power of 10. 
Now that is one large number. And that is where we draw the 
line. One hundred zeros is beyond the patience of most people. 
Scientific notation prevails. 
Small numbers can also be written in scientific notation. For 
instance, 
lo-’ 
= .1 
= .01 notice the 1 zero. 
lo-’’ 
= .0000000001 notice the 9 zeros. 
= a decimal point “.” followed by 99 zeros and then a 1. 
10-100 
The only useful way to write down 
is as a power of 10. In 
other words, there are some numbers that can only be realized in 
scientific notation. 
The reader may ask: “Why examine this? Surely 1O1O0 and 
10-100 are unique enough that they do not apply to anything in 
the real world.” This is not the case. For example, when banks 
transfer sums of money between themselves they need to encode 
their transaction. They need to hide this little bit of business from 
the rest of the world. The numbers used to encode have more than 
100 digits. That is, in order to transfer information between banks, 
a 100 digit number, a number larger than 1O1O0 is required. Just 

80 
CHAPTER 3. COUNTING INFINITE SETS 
how this encoding takes place is too far afield for our elementary 
intuitive discussion. 
Another large number is found in chemistry. There are about 
6 x 
atoms per mole of matter. All we need to know about 
a mole of matter is that it is a fundamental unit of measurement 
in chemistry. There are about 
atoms in your body and about 
lo8’ = 
protons, neutrons, and electrons exist in the space of 
the observable universe. This is the fourtieth entry in the implied 
list 100, loo2, loo3,. . . above, or a 1 followed by 80 zeros. The point 
is, we have discovered something new. Numbers with up to 100 
digits have a very practical purpose. 
The story goes that two mathematicians and a child were sitting 
around the kitchen table one afternoon when one adult asks the 
other just how many grains of sand there are on the Earth. To 
make this problem something we can see in our mind% eye, suppose 
we have a typical grain of sand. The typical grain of sand has the 
following dimensions. 
1. weight of one grain of sand = 
2. diameter of one grain of sand = 
grams. 
meters. 
We duplicate this grain many times over until we have a bag of sand 
that, in our minds eye, is the size of the Earth. By size I mean that 
the bag of sand and the Earth have the same size and shape and 
mass. The question we are asking now becomes: “HOW many grains 
of sand do we need to fill a bag that large?” 
The grain of sand is light, but not too light. It seems that 100 
copies of this grain of sand weigh 
100 x 
= lo2. 
= 1 gram. 
So 100 grains of sand would not make a large or heavy bag. Suppose 
we have 1 trillion or 1OI2 copies of this grain of sand. Then the mass 
of that bag of sand is 
or 10 billion grams. Now that is a large number of grains of sand 
and yet modern computer hard drives have many more than 10 
billion bytes (10 gigabytes) of available storage. So this number is 

3.1. FINITE SETS 
81 
still something you might have in front of you right now. Suppose 
that we have 10102 copies of that grain of sand. Then the mass of 
that bag of sand is 
which it turns out is pretty close to the mass of the Earth, so we 
can say that there are about 10'O2 grains of sand on the Earth. 
The mathematicians I mentioned above were so impressed by 
this number that they asked a nine month old child to name the 
number. The child said googol and that name stuck. 
The number 10'Oo is called a googol. 
Even though we have answered our question of just how many 
grains of sand make up the Earth, that is not the end of the story. 
As mathematicians will do, they asked for some kind of concrete 
realization of the number googolplex. 
The number 
is called a googolplex. 
Let us demonstrate just how large a googolplex is. 
For this demonstration we will need a common object from 
around the house, toilet paper. But this roll of toilet paper has 
a special printing on it. On the first square of paper is a 1 and on 
each following square there is a 0. The roll contains enough squares 
so that the number 1 followed by all of those zeros is a googolplex. 
Just how large is that roll? It is so large that you would never run 
out of this household necessity. This roll could not be kept in your 
house, it is too large. You might try keeping it somewhere on your 
block. No. The roll is much larger than that. Perhaps the mayor of 
your city would allow you to use the city as a storage for this roll. 
This also is too small. The roll expands beyond the boundaries of 
any city. How about the country you live in? The roll is larger 
than that. Perhaps you would keep it on the North American con- 
tinent. Nope. Too small for this roll. Let us jump and ask if the 

82 
CHAPTER 3. COUNTING INFINITE SETS 
Earth will hold it. No. The Earth is too small to contain such a 
roll. Be patient, we have a long journey to make here. Perhaps the 
roll would fit into the solar system as encompassed by the orbit of 
Pluto? This roll is too big to be kept in that space. Perhaps the 
Galaxy is large enough to encompass this roll. No. The roll will 
spill out into intergalactic space. How much larger should we go? 
Is this roll large enough to fit into the observable universe? Now 
that would be one huge roll of toilet paper. And yet this roll is 
too large to fit into the observable universe. We are faced with the 
following thought: This roll is larger than our physical universe can 
hold. That googolplex is one large number. It would seem that a 
googolplex is a number for which there is no physical significance. 
However, it is still a small value when compared with numbers like 
the exponential 
I can’t even begin to hint at how large that monster might be. These 
numbers are large but they are still finite. The numbers that we 
will encounter in the next section, called infinite cardinals, outstrip 
these natural numbers for size. 
1 Ogoogolplex 
The numbers googol and googolplex seem to have struck a nerve 
with modern American culture. The numbers turn up in cartoons, 
movies, and a number of novels published in the United States. This 
is the first example I know of an obscure mathematical idea that 
appears in a children’s cartoon as well as adult entertainment. 
3.2 Hilbert’s Infinite Hotel 
In Chapter 2 we started a process that would eventually define each 
natural number n from nothing. Thus we will assume that we have 
constructed the set 
N = {0,1,2,3,. . .} 

3.2. HILBERT’S INFINITE HOTEL 
a3 
of natural numbers. To decide what an infinite set is, we first decide 
what a finite set is. 
Definition 3.2.1 Let n E N. We say that the set A has cardinality 
n and we write 
card(A) = n 
if there is a bijection f : A - 
{ 1, . . . , n}. The set A is finite if 
card(A) = n for some n E N. 
Example 3.2.2 card({*}) = 1 since every function f : {*} - 
(1) is a bijection. 
The set ( 0 ,  :} has cardinality 2 since the map 
defined by 
f(*) = 2 and f(:) = 1 
is a bijection. 
Example 3.2.3 We claim that N is not a finite set. Even though 
this is an intuitively obvious fact, mathematicians require some kind 
of justification or proof. We will show that there are no bijections 
from f : N - 
{ 1,. . , , n}. To do this we will show that no onto 
function f : N - 
{ 1,. . . , n} is a one-to-one function. (In this way 
f cannot be both one-to-one and onto.) To prove that f is not 
one-to-one we will find two dzflerent numbers x and x’ that map to 
the same value. That is, we must produce 2 # x’ E N such that 
Given an integer n > 0, suppose we are given an onto function 
f : N - 
(1,. . . , n}. There are 2 1 , .  . . ,x, E N such that f(z1) = 
1,. . . , f(n) 
= n. Since {zl,. 
. . , x,} is a finite set of numbers it has a 
largest number. We will assume that this number is zl. Since x1 is 
the largest element and since 2 1  + 1 > 21, 21 + 1 $ (51, . . . , x,}. But 
because 21 + 1 E N, 
f(xl+ 1) E (1,. . . , n}. Hence f(x1+ 1) = k = 
f(xk) for some Ic E {I,. . . , n}. Since x1 + 1 is not in (51,. . . , x,}, 
f(4 = f(z’). 

a4 
CHAPTER 3. COUNTING INFINITE SETS 
x1 + 1 # xk, but we also have f(xl + 1) = f ( x k ) .  This is what we 
wanted to prove. Therefore f is not one-to-one. 
Subsequently, there can be no bijections f : N - 
{ 1,. . . , n). 
Since n was arbitrarily chosen (i.e., there is no special property 
about n), N is not a finite set. 
Let us look at that proof again. A specific n is called for. Sup- 
pose that f : N - 
{ 1,. . . ,101) is a bijection. Then there are 
natural numbers {xl,.. . ,z101} c N such that f(xk) = k. There is 
a largest number x E {XI,. . . , xlO1}. “What made you do that?” 
you ask. “Writing and rewriting this example enables me to do 
that,” I respond. It, x, need not be ~ 1 0 1 .  The number x is just 
the largest number in {XI,. . . ,x101). “Why look there, why look 
for x? What inspired you to do that?” you ask. “My preparation 
of this proof is what inspired that choice,” I say. That and a num- 
ber of years of experience. Because z < x + 1 we conclude that 
x + 1 # {XI,. . . ,x101) (x is the largest thing in that set). Hence 
x + 1 # xk for any of the xk E ( 2 1 , .  . . ,2101). Meanwhile, however, 
f(x + 1) E { 1,. . . ,101) = {f(.l), . . * , f(x101)) 
so that f(x + I) = f(xk) for some x k  E {xl,. 
. . ,x101). We have 
shown that there is an xk such that x + 1 # xk but such that 
f(x + 1) = f(xk). These x + 1 and xk are two different numbers 
in N that map under f to the same number, and hence f is not 
one- to-one. 
Congratulations! You have just learned how mathematicians 
count and what mathematicians count. We count elements in sets 
via bijections. If the object is not in a set then we cannot count it. 
Moreover, you have seen how a mathematician does his work. He 
counts on his experiences, he counts on his mathematical instincts, 
and he counts on his mathematical inspirations. Do not discount 
the wonderful consequences of mathematical inspiration. 
With this, we can define what mathematics means by infinity or 
by an infinite set. 
Definition 3.2.4 A set A is said to be infinite if A is not a finite 
set. 

3.2. HILBERT’S INFINITE HOTEL 
85 
Of course N is an infinite set. Since N c 0, and since N is 
infinite then Q is infinite. Since Q c R, R is infinite. 
We will attempt to expand your horizons in preparation for a 
more mathematical treatment of infinite sets. The thought experi- 
ment that we will use is called Halbert’s Infinite Hotel. Do not try 
to think of this Hotel as a hammer and nail construction. It exists 
only in the fertile minds of human beings. If you require your math- 
ematics to be practical, you are about to get your mind significantly 
stretched. 
Hilbert owns a unique hotel. It has just one floor but it has 
infinitely many rooms in it. 
The three dots 
0 
indicate that the room numbers continue in 
the same manner. Obviously Hilbert’s Hotel does not exist in our 
universe, but in some other universe of imagined mathematical ob- 
jects. 
Initially the Hotel is empty. A set {Pl,P2} of people (people 
travel in sets in this universe) visits the Hotel and they want differ- 
ent rooms. So Hilbert assigns them rooms as follows. 

86 
CHAPTER 3. COUNTING INFINITE SETS 
Hilbert observes that infinitely many rooms 3 , 4 , 5 , .  . . are vacant. 
Next, a set { N l ,  N2, N3,. . .} of Naturalists visits the Hotel. They 
are in town for a convention protesting the overuse of paradoxes 
involving infinity in modern mathematics. They all want private 
rooms. Hilbert hits upon the following scheme for assigning them 
rooms. Since rooms 1 and 2 are occupied Hilbert looks at picture 
(3.2) and assigns rooms as follows. 
room 1 
room 2 
room 3 
room 4 
room 5 
1 
PI 
~ 
P2 
1 
Nl 1 
Nz 1 
N3 
1 ": 
(3.3) 
Notice that in general the nth Naturalist N, is put up in room n + 2 
in picture (3.3). In this way everyone has a single room and every 
room is occupied. 
Next to arrive at Hilbert's Hotel is a lone stranger L who wants 
a private room. Hilbert studies picture (3.3) for a while and comes 
up with the following scheme. Every occupant will move down one 
room. 
room 1 c---t room 2 
room 2 
t--f room 3 
room 3 
t----f room 4 
The result is summarized by the picture (3.4). 
room 1 
room 2 
room 3 
room 4 
room 5 
~~0 
(3.4) 

3.2. HILBERT’S INFINITE HOTEL 
87 
In this way everyone has a private room. As he anticipated, Hilbert 
sees that room 1 in picture (3.4) is unoccupied. (There is no room 
0 to send to room 1.) Thus Hilbert assigns the lone stranger L to 
room 1 as in picture (3.5). 
Everyone has a single room and every room is occupied as in picture 
(3.5). There are no vacancies at Hilbert’s Infinite Hotel. 
A troop of 1023 Boy Scouts arrives at the Hotel. After extracting 
a promise from them that they will not practice the art of making 
fire from two sticks, Hilbert assigns them rooms in his filled Hotel 
as follows. First he moves his guests. 
room 1 H room 1023 + 1 = 1024 
room 2 
t---1 room 1023 + 2 = 1025 
room 3 I--+ 
room 1023 + 3  = 1026 
Draw this picture for yourself, reader. This empties rooms 1 through 
1023 so he assigns each of the 1023 Scouts a single room. The Hotel 
is filled to capacity once again. I leave it to the reader to draw the 
pictures that relate to this assignment of rooms. 
The next day everyone checks out. The Hotel is not empty for 
long, though, as an infinite set {S1, S2, S3,. . .} of college students 
arrive for spring break. Hilbert assigns student S, to room n. The 
Hotel is filled as in picture (3.6). 
room 1 
room 2 
room 3 
room 4 
room 5 
(3-6) 

88 
CHAPTER 3. COUNTING INFINITE SETS 
Just as Hilbert thinks that the worse of this continual stream 
of guests is over, an infinite set of Psychologists { X I ,  X2, X3,. . .} 
arrives at Hilbert’s Hotel. They are here for The Conference on 
the Theory of Group Therapy for Infinite Groups being held in the 
Hotel’s Infinite Conference Room. Hilbert tells his staff to set up 
infinitely many chairs and a podium for the lectures, so now he 
has to assign these new guests rooms. Of course, everyone wants 
a single room. But the Hotel is filled. How can he do this? He 
decides to make room by making every other room vacant. Try to 
figure this one out yourself before reading on. 
Here’s how he does it. The student S, in room n is sent to room 
2n as follows. 
S1 - 
room 2 
S2 c--f room 4 
S, 
t---1 room 6 
S, H room 2n 
The room assignments in the Hotel look like picture (3.7). 
room 1 
room 2 
room 3 
room 4 
room 5 
3
(3.7) 
Each of the odd numbered rooms is empty so Hilbert assigns the 
Psychologists rooms as follows. 
XI H the first odd numbered room 1 
Xz H the second odd numbered room 3 
X, H the third odd numbered room 5 
X, 
H the nth odd numbered room 2n - 1 

3.2. HILBERT’S INFINITE HOTEL 
89 
This gives each student a single room and each odd numbered room 
is occupied as in the following picture. 
room 1 
X1 
room 2 
S1 
room 3 
x2 
room 4 
s 2  
room 5 
x3 
In general, we are assigning rooms as follows. The rooms 2n - 1 
and 2n receive people X ,  and S, as follows. 
Notice that the even numbered room 2n is occupied by student 
S, who had occupied room n. The odd numbered room 2n - 1 
is occupied by Psychologist X,. 
Thus each room is occupied by 
exactly one person. The Hotel is filled once again. 
Here are a few exercises on Hilbert’s Infinite Hotel. 
1. Suppose that the Hotel is filled with infinitely many students S1,S2, 
S3,. . .. Two infinite groups {Yl, Y2, Y3,. . .} and {Zl, Z2,Z3,. . .} show 
up looking for rooms for the night. Show how to accommodate these 
new guests with single rooms. 
Assign them rooms so that the Hotel is filled. 
2. The Hotel is empty when a group { U I , U ~ , U ~ ,  
. . . ,Unz,. 
. .} shows up. 
There is an interesting thing going on in these room assignments. 
Hilbert assigns rooms so that when he is done his Hotel is filled to 
capacity. That is right. He fills the hotel so that each person has a 

90 
CHAPTER 3. COUNTING INFINITE SETS 
room and each room is filled. So far he has been able to do that for 
any group that arrives, but shortly we will see that there is a large 
collection of Realists that cannot be housed in Hilbert’s Hotel. I 
will not give details, only the punch line. Hilbert has filled his 
Hotel with everyone who has arrived so far, but he will be unable 
to accommodate all of the Realists. 
The next day all the guests at Hilbert’s Infinite Hotel check 
out. Suddenly, infinitely many groups of Rationalists show up and 
require single rooms. 
Notice that 
is Rationalist m in implied list L,. Thus A12 is Rationalist 2 in 
the implied list L1, A47 is Rationalist 7 in the implied list L7, and 
Al~lgoogo~ 
is Rationalist number googol in the implied list Llol. We 
will demonstrate how to accommodate these guests so that each 
room is occupied and each Rationalist has a single room. 
Write the names in each implied list L, as row n in the infinite 
rectangular array (3.9). 
A31 
A32 
A33 
A34 .. . 
A41 
A42 
A43 
A44 . . . 

3.2. HILBERT’S INFINITE HOTEL 
91 
Draw parallel arrows starting at the elements Akl and ending at 
the elements All, as in array (3.10). 
#1 
#2 
#3 
#4 
#5 
(3.10) 
These arrows can be used to define a bijection 
as follows. These arrows define a means of reading the array and 
assigning rooms to the Rationalists. Hold the page at an angle if you 
must, but start reading the array along the arrows as though there 
were words to be read. The first thing you read is All. The next 
two things you read are A21 and Al2. The next things you would 
read would be A 3 ,  A22, A13. The process continues indefinitely. In 
the more precise language of functions we write 
... 
Trace these values for f through the first five arrows in the above ar- 
ray. We will show you that this rule f is the promised bijection. Try 
to plow through this argument. However, if you feel overwhelmed 
then try to understand that in drawing these arrows we have inter- 
sected each of the entries of the array in such a way that each arrow 

92 
CHAPTER 3. COUNTING INFINITE SETS 
intersects finitely many entries in the array and each entry is met 
by some arrow. 
We take it as clear that f is one-to-one. Let A,, E L,. By the 
above scheme we see that the subscripts lying along the first arrow 
add up to 1 + 1 = 2, the subscripts lying along the second arrow add 
up to 3, the subscripts lying along arrow #3 add up to 4, and in 
general the subscripts lying along arrow #k add up to k + 1. Thus 
A,, 
lies along arrow #n + m - 1. Now consider the number that 
we will assign A,, with f .  
On arrow #1 there is 1 entry. On arrow #2 there are 2 entries, 
and in general on arrow #n there are n entries. Thus, when we have 
finished counting the entries from A11 to Al,, we will have counted 
a total of 
from arrow #1 
#2 
... 
#e 
e(e+ 1) 
2 
1
+
 2
+
 . . . +  e =  
entries. We will see why this sum is ‘(‘7 
in a little bit. For 
L 
now just accept it knowing that there is the promise of a proof. 
Meanwhile back at the argument, we see that A,, is on arrow 
#n + m - 1 so that 
(n + m - l)(n + m) 
2 
there is some k 5 
such that f(k) = A,,. 
This proves that f ( k )  = A,, for some number k ,  and this in turn 
proves that f is onto. Since we have already stated that f is one- 
to-one, f : N - 
A is a bijection. We would then send Rationalist 
A,, to room k. The assignment of rooms is complete. 
Let us take a break at this time and examine the sum 1 + 2 + 
. . . + !. 
A German school teacher was feeling a bit hungry so he 
prepared to go out for coffee and a danish. To keep his pupils busy 
he instructed them to add up the numbers from 1 to 100. We will 
do this problem for an arbitray positive integer e. A child, Carl F. 
Gauss, decided that there must be a faster way. In a flash of genius 
the 11 year old Gauss discovered the following identity. Let us call 
the sum S. 
s= 1 + 2 +  . . . +  e. 

3.2. HILBERT’S INFINITE HOTEL 
93 
Find the sum in two different ways. Start at 1 and end at e, and in 
the other start at e and end at 1. 
S = l +  
2 + ... + e - 1  + e 
s = e + e - 1  + ... + 
2
+
1
 
Notice that in each column we have a sum 
e +  1. 
Add these two sums together to find that 
s =  
I
+
 
2 + ... + 
e - 1  + 
e 
+s = 
e + 
e - 1  + ... + 
2
+
 
1 
2s = ( e + l )  + (e+1) + ... + ( t + 1 )  + (!+1) 
There are e terms e + 1 so we have 2s = -t(e + 1) or equivalently 
Quite a pretty little argument for a child, eh? Before the school 
teacher could button his coat, Gauss turned his slate over and folded 
his hands. The teacher, thinking something was amiss, examined 
the slate and saw the correct sum written there. History does not 
record whether or not the school teacher got his coffee that day or 
if he suffered for a lack of it. 
The purpose behind the above stories is to develop an intuition 
for the infinite. The story about Hilbert’s Infinite Hotel shows us 
that in an infinite set there is always plenty of room. It would seem 
that we can make room for any number of guests. Or can we? 
The conventions and conferences are over so that the Hotel is 
empty. Hilbert breathes a sigh of relief and counts his revenue. 
Accommodating all of those guests has taxed him. There is a knock 
at the door and Hilbert sees that an infinite collection of Realists 
{R, I z E R and 0 5 z 5 1) 
is in town for a conference on complex issues. Hilbert sets out 
to assign each of them a private room, but his first attempt at 

94 
CHAPTER 3. COUNTING INFINITE SETS 
assigning rooms leaves infinitely many Realists without a room. He 
tries again and still he cannot assign every Realist a single room. 
For some reason he does not yet fathom, no matter how he assigns 
rooms to the Realists, some Realists do not get a single room. The 
mathematics behind this conundrum is a jolt to our common sense 
and will have to wait until Theorem 4.3.1. The problem of assigning 
rooms to Realists shows us that our intuition about finite sets is 
useless when we consider matters about infinite sets. We will have 
to develop entirely new insights if we are to understand the infinite. 
Hilbert does not yet have the mathematical experience to address 
this problem. He sends most of these potential guests packing. 
Let us discover what Hilbert did not fathom. Let us see why 
there is no way to accommodate these realists with single rooms in 
the Infinite Hotel. 
Suppose, for the sake of contradiction, that we can make an 
implied list of these guests and their single rooms. That is, we 
assign Realists to single rooms and then we make an implied list of 
the rooms n and the associated occupants RXn. 
room 
occupant 
1 
R X ,  
2 
RX2 
3 
RX3 
4 
RX4 
decimal 
We have also given the decimal expansion of x,. In this implied 
list, each dii is a digit, a number in the set {0,1,. . . ,9}, and we 
choose the shortest decimal expansion for 2,. That is, if the decimal 
expansion for x, ends with 999 then we replace it with the number 
that ends in 0’s. For instance, the following numbers are equal. 
1.000 = .999 
.loo0 = .0999 
.1230 = .122999. 
In these cases we choose the shorter finite decimal expansion, except 
for 1. The number 1 is written as a decimal .999. 

3.2. HILBERT'S INFINITE HOTEL 
95 
Furthermore, dll represents the first digit in the decimal form of 
~
l
,
 
d23 represents digit number 3 in the decimal form of x2, and in 
general d,, 
represents digit number m in the decimal form of x,. 
We can now produce a Realist R, who does not get a room. 
Let us define a digit dl as follows. 
dll + 1 
if dll # 9 
0 
if dll = 9 ' 
dl = { 
Notice that we have defined dl so that dl # dll. For example, if 
dll = 5 then dl = 6 and if dll = 9 then dl = 0. 
We do the same thing for d22. Let 
d22 + 1 
if d22 # 9 
d 2 = (  
0 
if d22 = 9 
Notice that we have defined d2 so that d2 # d22. For example, if 
d22 = 0 then d2 = 1 and if d22 = 7 then d2 = 8. 
In general, let us define 
dnn + 1 
if dnn # 9 
0 
if d,, = 9 ' 
d n =  { 
Then d, # d,,. 
expansion 
The roomless Realist R, is given by writing down the decimal 
x = .did2dsd4.. . . 
If x ends in 999 then we replace it with the shorter decimal repre- 
sentation that ends in 000. Then x # x1 because by our choice of 
d l ,  x and x1 differ in the first decimal place, dl # dll. Also, x # x2 
because by our choice of d2, x and 2 2  differ in decimal place number 
2, d2 # d22. In general, x # x, because by our choice of d,, x and 
X ,  differ in decimal place number n, d, # dnn. Thus R, is not on 
the implied list of Realists who got a room. This is the person we 
have sought. This is why Hilbert could not give each Realist a single 
room. There are simply too many Realists! No matter what rooms 

96 
CHAPTER 3. COUNTING INFINITE SETS 
he assigned there would always be a Realist R, who does not get a 
room. There are more Realists than there are rooms. 
How can that be, reader? There are infinitely many rooms and 
infinitely many Realists. How can there be more Realists than 
rooms? Read on. 
Let’s examine the above choices for d, and the construction of 
x on a concrete example. Suppose that we are given specific real 
numbers zlr x2, 
x3, . . . that form the following implied list. 
.El 
.0 
.1 
.4 i 
4 
1 
3 
4 
4 
4 
1 
5 
m 
5 
0 
7 
4 - 
... 
... 
x5 = .o 
1 0 
1 
... 
Then 
z = .2 0 0 3 4 - - - .  
The first decimal of x is 2 because the first decimal of x1 is 1. 
The second decimal of z is 0 because the second decimal of 2 2  is 9. 
The second decimal of z is 0 because the third decimal of 23 is 9. 
The fourth decimal of z is 3 because the fourth decimal of x4 is 2. 
The fifth decimal of z is 4 because the fifth decimal of x5 is 3. 
The comparisons of x to the numbers on our implied list are 
obvious. 
x # x1 because they differ in decimal place 1, 
x # x2 because they differ in decimal place 2, 
x # x3 because they differ in decimal place 3. 
These comparisons continue indefinitely. In this way we show that 
x is not on the implied list XI, 
x2, 
x3,. . .. 
There is a person at the Hotel who haunts the Lobby. Each day 
he tries to walk a 2 meter long straight line across the Lobby floor. 
He starts at one end of the line and wants to get to the other end, 
but he has a peculiar way of walking. His next step is always half 
the length of his previous step. He starts with a step of one meter. 
One meter remains to be crossed. 

3.2. HILBERT'S INFINITE HOTEL 
97 
1 
2 
He follows this with a - meter step. Half a meter remains. 
midpoint 
2 
1 
1 
0 
0 
1 
1 
2 
_4_ 
1 
2" 
leaves - meters left to be covered. The scale is magnified. 
He continues on indefinitely. Upon completion there are 0 meters 
left to cover and so he has crossed 
meters. He has walked the entire 2 meter length. 
Each of the rooms at Hilbert's Infinite Hotel has to be cleaned 
and there is one and only one cleaning lady to do the job. Her 
name is Mary. (Hilbert's mother needed a job.) Her routine is to 

98 
CHAPTER 3. COUNTING INFINITE SETS 
clean the rooms in order. She begins in the morning with room 1, 
followed by room 2, and then room 3, and on inductively. She is an 
industrious woman who picks up momentum a s  her day progresses 
so she cleans the first room in 1 hour, the second room in - hour, 
1 
2 
1 
1 
22 
2” 
the next in - hour, and so on, cleaning room n in - hours. When 
she has cleaned each room she is done. Thus she works 
hours a day. She certainly has a good job. She only has a 2 hour 
work day. But something else is wrong here. Where is she at the 
end of her day? There is no last room for her to clean because the 
Hotel has infinitely many rooms. However, we can be assured that 
each of the rooms is spotless. We will learn the fate of the cleaning 
lady when we finish our discussion of ordinals on page 184. 
3.3 Equivalent Sets and Cardinality 
In this section we will define the equivalence of cardinalities. 
Definition 3.3.1 Sets A and B are said to be equivalent if there 
is a bijection f : A - 
B. 
Theorem 3.3.2 A and B are equivalent exactly when card(A) = 
card( B). 
If we look at the different steps in Hilbert’s Infinite Hotel we 
see that in making space for the lone stranger Hilbert used the fact 
that the function 
f : {1,2,3,. . .} - 
{2,3,4,. . .> 
defined by 
f ( n )  = n + 1 

3.3. EQUIVALENT SETS AND CARDINALITY 
99 
defines a bijection. Thus {1,2,3,. . .} is equivalent to the proper 
subset {2,3,4,. . .}. 
In moving the students (5’1, S2,S3,. . .} into new rooms to ac- 
commodate all of the Psychologists { X I ,  X2, X 3 , .  . .}, we are making 
use of the bijection 
f :  {1,2,3 ,... } - 
{2,4,6 ,... } 
given by 
f(n) = 2n. 
Thus {1,2,3,. . .} is equivalent to the proper subset {2,4,6,. . .}. 
One of the exercises asks you to show a result due to Galileo 
Galilei. Galileo observed that there are no more and no fewer perfect 
squares than there are natural numbers. In our language Galileo was 
observing that there is a bijection 
f :  
{1,2,3 ,... }---+{1,4,9 
,... } 
given by 
2 
f(n) = n . 
Thus { 1,2,3,. . .} is equivalent to its proper subset { 1,4,9,. . .} of 
perfect squares. This property turns out to be a characteristic of 
infinite sets that can be used to define infinite sets without referring 
to finite sets. 
Theorem 3.3.3 The set A is infinite exactly when A is equivalent 
to a proper subset of itself. 
For example, by the functions f that we discussed above, N is 
an infinite set. 
Example 3.3.4 Let us show that Z 
is equivalent to N. This may 
seem strange. N is unbounded to the right while Z 
is unbounded in 
both directions. A bijection between them exists nonetheless. 
Define a rule f : Z --+ 
N by writing 

100 
CHAPTER 3. COUNTING INFINITE SETS 
for all 2 E Z. (“Now where did that come from?” you ask. “From 
a great deal of preparation,” I respond.) Let us get a feel for the 
rule given here. For 2 2 0 we have 
f(0) = 0, f( 1) = 2, f(2) = 4, 
and in general for n E N the nth positive number n is sent to the 
nth even number: 
f(n) = 2n. 
The negative z are a different matter. 
f(-1) 
= -1-2(-1) 
= 1 
f(-2) 
= -1-2(-2) 
= 3  
f(-3) 
=z -1-2(-3)=5 
and in general for n E N the nth negative number -n is sent to the 
nth odd number: 
f(-n) = 2n - 1. 
We casually observe that f is onto since a natural number is either 
even or odd. Furthermore, f is one-to-one. This will require us to 
look at a few cases. Let z # 2’ E Z. 
1. If z # 2’ 2 0 then f(z) = 2z # 22’ = f(z’). 
2. If 2 # z’ < 0 then f(z) = -1 - 22 # -1 - 22’ = f(z’). 
3. In the last case, we can assume without loss of generality that 
Then f ( z )  is odd and f(z’) is even so that 
2 < 0 < z’. 
f(2) # f(2’). 
In any case, f(2) # f(z’) so that f is one-to-one. Hence f is a 
bijection and consequently Z 
is equivalent to N. Subsequently, since 
Z is equivalent to its proper subset N, Z 
is infinite. 
Example 3.3.5 We will show that R is equivalent to the proper 
subset R+ of positive real numbers, thus proving that R is infi- 
nite. This may seem obvious, but remember that every statement 
in mathematics must be accompanied by a justification or proof. 
Besides, the exercise prepares us for more complex arguments later. 

3.3. EQUIVALENT SETS AND CARDINALITY 
101 
The bijection f : R + R+ is given by 
f(z) = 2". 
The argument requires a little high school algebra involving the 
logarithm log,(z). All you have to know about Iog,(z) is that 
To see that f is one-to-one, suppose that f(x) = f(z'). 
Then 
Apply log, to each side of this equation to find that 
log,( 2") = log, (2"'), 
so that x = 2'. Thus f : R - 
Rf is one-to-one. 
such that 
To see that f is onto let y E It+. Then z = log,(y) is a number 
f(.) 
= 2" = 2bg2(4 = y. 
Thus f : R ----+ R+ is onto, hence f is a bijection, whence R is 
equivalent to R+. 
Example 3.3.6 We will show in Theorem 4.3.1 that the function 
is a bijection. Then R is equivalent to its proper subset (-5 ") 
hence Iw is infinite, and therefore (-i, i) is infinite. The alge- 
braically educated reader should try this as an exercise. 
2'5 ' 
We present two classic examples due to G. Cantor, which will 
demonstrate that our intuition about infinity is inaccurate. These 
examples will present ideas that are contrary to what we learned as 
children, if indeed we learned anything about infinity as children. 
We begin with an alternative approach to cardinality. 

102 
CHAPTER 3. COUNTING INFINITE SETS 
Let A be an infinite set. The cardinality of A can be defined as 
follows. 
card(A) = the sets B that are equivalent to A. 
In this case we call card(A) a cardinal number or a cardinal. Thus 
x is a cardinal exactly when there is a set A such that z = card(A). 
Although this appears to be different from the original definition of 
cardinal number, it defines the same thing. 
For example, card(0) is the collection of sets that have no ele- 
ments. Naturally 0 is the only such set, so we will use the symbol 0 
to denote card(0). 
0 = card(0). 
Since any bijection 
is onto, we can write 
f : ( 0 )  - 
x 
x = {f(*>} 
or equivalently 
X = {x} for some element x. 
Thus it is natural to use the symbol 1 to denote card{*}. 
1 = card{*}. 
A tradition started by Georg Cantor [l] is to use the first Hebrew 
letter N to denote small infinite cardinals. Thus we let 
No = card(N) 

Chapter 4 
Infinite Cardinals 
As we defined in the previous chapter the cardinality of a set A, 
card(A), is the class of all sets B that are equivalent to A. For 
a finite set A = (1,. . . , n}, card(A) is the collection of sets that 
contain exactly n elements. Thus card(A) is a good way to describe 
the size of A, even when A is infinite. We might naively say that 
if A and B are infinite sets then card(A) = card(B). However, we 
showed in Chapter 3 that Hilbert’s Infinite Hotel, whose rooms are 
numbered 1,2,3,. . . cannot fit the Realists whose group is indexed 
by real numbers (0,l) = {x E R 10 < x < 1). In another light, there 
is no bijection from the set (0,l) onto the set of natural numbers N. 
If such a bijection does not exist then we must conclude intuitively 
and accurately that 
card(N) and card(0,l) are different cardinalities. 
This should come as a shock to your common sense. Both cardinals 
are infinite so how can they be different values? The inequality 
card(N) # card( (0,l) ) is true enough, so we have learned that 
our common sense is wrong when we deal with infinity. This is an 
important point. We do not have any common sense when it comes 
to infinite sets. We have to develop a new sense for size by relying 
on the mathematical properties of infinite sets. Once this is done, 
we can find some new intuitive feelings about infinity. 
We will find in this chapter that there are two kinds of infinite 
sets: the countable ones and the uncountable ones. Any set equiv- 
103 

104 
CHAPTER 4. INFINITE CARDINALS 
alent to N is said to be countable (hence the name countable) so 
we say that card@) is a countable cardinal. If S is an infinite set 
and if card(N) # card(S) then S is said to be uncountable. We will 
show that card(N) # card( (0,l) ) so the set (0,l) is uncountable. 
Other uncountable sets include P(N) and card((0, l}N) so there are 
several uncountable sets. We end this chapter with the amazing 
fact that there is an infinite chain of infinite cardinals. We might 
colloquially rephrase this by saying that there are infinitely many 
infinites. 
4.1 Countable Sets 
A set A is said to be countable if A is finite or if card(A) = card@). 
Equivalently, A is countable if A is equivalent to some subset of W. 
Countable sets are appropriately named since these are the sets A 
that we can list as the possibly finite sets: 
Thus we can use subsets of N to list the elements of A. The sets 
8, {1,2,3}, and {2,4,6,. . .} are countable. There are plenty of 
countable sets and we will give several examples of them in this 
section. 
Let 
be the set of positive rational numbers. It is a fact (not proved here) 
that between any two positive real numbers 2 < y there is a positive 
rational number q. If you pick two different real numbers XI < y’, 
then there is another rational number y’ between them. Let’s draw 
that picture. 
X 
Y 
Y 
X’QI yl 
I 
I 
I 
I
1
 I 
c 

4.1. COUNTABLE SETS 
105 
1 
r? 
Thus between 0 and - there is a positive rational number. You 
1 
can check that one such number is -. 
Compare this to the fact 
42 
that the distance between two different natural numbers is at least 
1. We say that Q+ is a dense subset of R+ while N is a discrete 
subset of R+. Another way to think of this property of Q' 
is that 
each real number can be approximated by a rational number to any 
degree of accuracy. We are familiar with the notion of the density 
of the rationals since each calculator readout demonstrates that 
each real number P can be approximated by a number with a finite 
decimal expansion. Finite decimal numbers are rational numbers. 
For example, the readout on your calculator for fi is not completely 
accurate even though it may give 64 decimal places of A. The 
calculator value for fi is accurate only to those few decimal places. 
The reason for this is that the number fi is neither a finite decimal 
nor a repeating decimal. An infinite number of decimal places is 
necessary to write down &? 
with complete accuracy, but we can 
approximate 
with rational numbers. 
We might be led to believe that N and Q+ are not equivalent 
since N is more thinly distributed in R+ than is Q+. 
That is, we 
might suspect that card@) # card(Qf). However, the next the- 
orem, due to Georg Cantor, shows us that Q+ is a countable set. 
Thus the distribution or density of numbers on the real line does 
not necessarily reflect cardinality. 
Theorem 4.1.1 Q+ is a countable set. 
Proof We must produce a bijection f : N - 
Q+. 
Begin by 
enumerating Q+ as the infinite rectangular array (4.1). 
1
1
1
1
 
1
2
3
4
 
2
2
2
2
 
1
2
3
4
 
3
3
3
3
 
1
2
3
4
 
4
4
4
4
 
1
2
3
4
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
... 
... 
... 
... 

106 
CHAPTER 4. INFINITE CARDINALS 
Notice that the numbers in Row 1 have numerator 1, the numbers 
in Row 2 have numerator 2, and in general the numbers in Row 
n have numerator n. Similarly, the denominator of the fractions 
in Column 1 is 1, the denominator of the fractions in Column 2 is 
2, and in general the fractions in Column m have denominator m. 
Since each number in Q+ is a fraction -, the array (4.1) contains 
all of the numbers in Q+. (Which Row and Column contain that 
last fraction?) 
Delete from this array any fractions that are not in reduced form. 
For example, we will delete the fractions 
n 
m 
3 4 9 212 
- 
3’ 2’ 27’ 424 
as well as any other fraction that can be reduced. The remaining 
fractions cannot be reduced. Some of those fractions include 
1 1 19 101 
- 
1’ 2’ 27’ 53’ 
A portion of the resulting array is 
1
1
1
1
 
1
2
3
4
 
2 
2 
1 
3 
3 
3
3
 
1
2
 
4 
4 
4 
1 
3 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
... 
... 
... 
... 
At this point we introduce arrows into array (4.2). The arrow #1 
1 
2 
1 
passes through - only. The arrow #2 starts at - and extends to -. 
1 
1 
2 
In general, arrow #n starts at - on the left edge of the array and 
extends to - at the top edge of the array. The array (4.3) will help 
n 
1 
1 
n 

4.1. COUNTABLE SETS 
107 
you envision this process. 
#I 
#2 
#3 
#4 
#5 
... 
(4.3) 
These arrows give us a means of writing down a bijection f : N - 
Q+ as follows. We will define f by reading the fractions as they 
appear along the arrows. 
1 
1 
LIST : f(0) = -, 
Before reading on, try to use arrows #5 and #6 to fill in the next 
two rows of this rule. 
You can peek now. The next three arrows will produce the 
values 
f(9) = - 1  
5 
1 
1 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
f(W = g1 
f(l1) = -, f(12) = -, f(13) = -, f(14) = -, f(15) = --, f(16) = -, 
7 
5 
3 
1 
f(17) = -, f(l8) = -, f(19) = -, 
f(2O) = - 
1 
3 
5 
7 

108 
CHAPTER 4. INFINITE CARDINALS 
for the function f .  Now that we have some intuition about the rule 
f ,  our next task is to show that f is a bijection. 
To see that f is onto let - be on the array. Then - is in Row 
n and Column m and the number - begins the nth arrow in our 
array as in the picture (4.4). 
n 
n 
m 
m 
n 
1 
(4.4) 
#n 
# n + l  
#n+2 
# n + m - 1  
By shifting to the right one place, we shift to the next arrow. It 
is clear from the diagram that - is on arrow #n + m. How many 
numbers have we counted when we finish arrow #n + m? On arrow 
#1 we counted 1 number, on arrow #2 we counted 2 more, and in 
general on arrow #! we counted at most ! 
fractions. Thus when 
we have finished counting along arrow #n + m we have counted at 
most a total of 
n 
m 
(n + rn - l)(n + m) 
2 
1 + 2 + . . . + (n + m - 1 )  = 
fractions. You may remember this sum as the identity found by an 
eighteenth century elementary school student Carl F. Gauss. See 
page 92. Since sometime before we reach the end of arrow #n+m-1 
we will reach -, there will be some number 
n 
m 
(n + m - l)(n + rn) 
k l  
such that 
For example, before we reach the end of arrow #7, we will count at 
most 

4.1. COUNTABLE SETS 
109 
3 
fractions. Thus there is some number k 5 28 such that f ( k )  = -. 
5 
The reader will find k by reading Row 7 of the above LIST that 
defines f that k = 19. That is, f(19) = -. Thus f is onto. 
It is clear that different natural numbers k and k' are sent to 
different fractions f ( k )  and f ( k ' )  on the LIST, so f is one-to-one. 
Hence f is a bijection, and as required to complete our task, N is 
equivalent to Q+. 
3 
5 
The inclusions 
{2,4,6,. ..} C N C ()+ 
can be used to intuitively deduce that 
card({2,4,6,. . .}) 5 card@) 5 card(()+). 
But the compelling work that we have done to date allows us to 
deduce the stronger thought 
card({2,4,6,. . .}) = card(N) = card(Q+). 
I 
1 
Some might try to say that because N and Q' 
are infinite they 
must be equivalent. This represents old common sense so it has to 
be rejected as an argument. Cardinalities are equal only when we 
can produce a bijection between two of their elements. (Remember 
that card(A) is the set of all sets B that are equivalent to A.) Some 
of our subsequent work will show why that kind of reasoning is not 
a part of mathematics. 
The next result shows us that the countable union of countable 
sets is countable. That is, we will start with a family of sets 
such that each A k  is itself a countable set. Thus we can take set A1 
and list it as 
A1 = {all, a12,a13, * * *}, 

110 
CHAPTER 4. INFINITE CARDINALS 
where a12 represents element 2 in set Al, and where al,ll is the 11th 
element in set Al. We will also list A2 as 
Notice that the first subscript gives the set A2 that the element is 
in, and the second subscript gives the place that the element takes 
in the implied list A2. Thus ~
1
5
 
is element 15 in the set A2. In 
general, we will list A, as 
For instance, in the implied list A121, the 200th element on the 
implied list is ~121,200. The next result shows that if we have a 
countable implied list Al, 
A2, 
A3, . . . of countable sets, then when 
we put them together using the union operation we will have a 
countable set. 
Theorem 4.1.2 Let Al, 
A2, AS,. . . be an implied list of countable 
sets. Then UnEN A, is a countable set. 
Proof We have used this argument several times before. 
Since each set A, is a countable set we can make an implied list 
of their elements as we did in the discussion preceding this theorem. 
To make the notation easier, let A = UnEN A, and list the elements 

4.1. COUNTABLE SETS 
111 
of A as in array (4.5). 
(4.5) 
We are going to use arrows to count the elements in the array (4.5). 
Your instincts might say that we should count left to right, the 
way we read. But that approach leads us to exhaust the counting 
numbers N before we have left the first row. No, the best way is to 
use these diagonal arrows because each of them is finite and each 
aij lies on some arrow. Thus we are assured that each element will 
be counted. 
Draw parallel line segments starting at the elements a k l  and 
ending at the elements a l k  as in the array (4.6). 
#1 
#2 
#3 
#4 
#5 
... 
Use these arrows to define a bijection 
f:N-A 

112 
CHAPTER 4. INFINITE CARDINALS 
whose images f(n) 
satisfy the following rule: 
It is clear that f is one-to-one. Let am, E A. By the above scheme 
we see that the subscripts lying along arrow #1 add up to 1 + 1 = 2, 
the subscripts lying along arrow #2 add up to 3, the subscripts 
lying along arrow #3 add up to 4, and in general the subscripts 
lying along arrow #t add up to t + 1. Thus am, lies along arrow 
#m + n - 1, which proves that f(k) = am, for some number k. 
In fact, using the argument used to prove Theorem 4.1.1, we could 
show that 
(n + m - 1)(n + m) 
2 
Ic 5 1 + 2 +  ... + ( n + m -  1) = 
Try to do that, reader. This proves that f is onto and hence that 
f : N + A is a bijection. Consequently, A is equivalent to N and 
therefore A is a countable set. This completes the proof. 
The next result shows that if we increase N by finitely many 
elements then we have not increased the cardinalty of N. 
Theorem 4.1.3 Let n E N and suppose that {all.. . ,a,} is a set. 
Then card(N U {at,. . . ,a,}) is countable. 
Proof The sets N and { al, . . . , a,} are countable, so by Theorem 
4.1.2 their union N U { a l ,  . . . , a,} is also countable. This completes 
the proof. 
Theorem 4.1.2 can be used to give a quick proof that card@) = 
card(Q). 
Theorem 4.1.4 Q is countable. 
Proof Observe that Q = Q+ U { 0) U Q-, 
where Q- is the set of 
negative rational numbers. We will prove that Q- is countable. 

4.1. COUNTABLE SETS 
113 
Define a function f : Q+ - 
Q- as 
n 
n 
f(-) = --. 
m 
m 
That is, the function f(x) sends a rational number x to its additive 
inverse -x. Thus f(1) = -1 and f(9) = -9. The function itself 
is not complex but we will find it to be very useful. We will show 
that this f is a bijection. 
To see that f is one-to-one let x # x’ be different numbers in 
Q+. 
It is then clear that -x = --z’ so that f(x) # f(x‘). Hence 
different fractions x and x’ map to different fractions f(x) and f(x’), 
whence f is one-to-one. 
Prove that f is onto as follows. Let y E Q- be a negative 
fraction. Then x = -y is a positive fraction, now isn’t it? By 
forming -y you are 
r simply removing the negative sign from y. Try 
1 
3 
it with -- and --. Then x E Q+ and 
2 
3 
f(x) = --z = -(-g) = y. 
Hence f is an onto function. 
As we claimed at the onset, f : Q+ --$ Q- is a bijection. 
By Theorem 4.1.1, Q+ is countable, so Q- is countable. . Thus 
Q+, 
{0}, and Q- 
are countable sets, and hence Q is a union of three 
countable sets. Theorem 4.1.2 then implies that Q is countable. 
This completes the proof. 
Summarizing the above proof we showed that Q+ and Q- 
have 
the same cardinality because there is a bijection f : Q+ 
--+ Q-. 
The bijection f is defined by f(x) = -x for each x E Q+. That is 
there is a way to count off the elements of Q+ and Q- so that when 
we are done with the elements of Q+ we are also done with the 
elements of Q-. 
One element of Q+ 
corresponds to one element of 
Q- 
and one element of Q- corresponds to one and only one element 
of Q+. This is what makes a bijection. This is why card(Q+) = 
card(Q-). 
The next result shows us how to use Theorem 4.1.2 to show that 
a set is countable. Consider the set of pairs N x N = { (n, m) I n, m E 
N}. Since N c Iw we can graph N x N as points in the plane Iw2 as 
in figure (4.7). 

114 
CHAPTER 4. INFINITE CARDINALS 
The pairs (2,4) and (3,2) label a couple of randomly selected 
points. This pleasant geometric object of evenly spaced points in 
the plane is called a lattice. The lattice extends indefinitely in all 
directions. Given the theme of this chapter it is natural to ask for 
the cardinality of the lattice. 
I 
(4.7) 
(470) 
- 
- 
- 
T 
T 
T 
T 
L 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Theorem 4.1.5 N x N is a countable set. 
Proof Arrange N x N as an infinite rectangular array (4.8). 

4.1. COUNTABLE SETS 
115 
We will avoid the arrows used in Theorems 4.1.1 and 4.1.2. The 
rows of the array (4.8) are actually countable sets Ao, Al, A2,. . ., 
and there are countably many of them. 
In general, 
so that (n, m) is the mth element on the implied list A,. This holds 
for each n,m E N so that 
N x N = A ~ U A , U A ~ U  
.... 
Hence N x N is a countable union of countable sets, whence N x N 
is countable by Theorem 4.1.2. This completes the proof. 
The next result shows us that we can increase the dimension of 
a set and still preserve its countability. 
Theorem 4.1.6 Let A and B be countable sets. Then A x B is a 
countable set. 
Proof Since A and B are countable we can list them. Let 

116 
CHAPTER 4. INFINITE CARDINALS 
Then we can list the elements of A x B as an infinite array or implied 
list (4.10). 
(4.10) 
Name the rows of array (4.10) with symbols XI, X2, . . . as in 
array (4.11). 
Each X, is a countable set and there are countably many of 
them, so by Theorem 4.1.2, the union 
A X  B=X1UX2UX3U ... 
is a countable set. 
Since Q is countable we have proved the following theorem. 
Theorem 4.1.7 Q x Q is a countable set. 
Using the same kind of argument the reader should try to prove 
the next result. 
Theorem 4.1.8 N x N x N = { (n, m, C) I n, m, C E W} is countable. 

4.2. UNCOUNTABLE SETS 
117 
4.2 Uncountable Sets 
The next stage of our work requires us to compare the size of car- 
dinals. 
Definition 4.2.1 Let A and B be sets. We write 
card(A) 5 card(B) 
if there is a one-to-one function f : A - 
B. 
This is quite a reasonable definition of inequality for cardinals. 
For example, 3 < 4 because { 1,2,3} c { 1,2,3,4}, and in general 
m < n exactly when {l,. . . ,m} c { I , .  . . , n } .  
For larger sets we see that 
card@) 5 card@) < card(Q) < card(R) 
because N c Z c Q c R. One property that real numbers share 
with cardinals is the following property of natural numbers. 
If n 5 m and m 5 n then n = m. 
What this says is that we can deduce the equality of numbers if we 
can show that they are mutually related by <. It is a remarkable 
fact that this property also holds holds for infinite cardinals. Its 
proof is too far afield for us to write here. We will just accept its 
truth in this book. 
If card(A) 5 card(B) and card(B) 5 card(A) 
I 
I 
then card(A) = card(B). 
I 
I 
What we need now are some good examples. The set A is said 
to be uncountable if card(W) # card(A). The question is, are there 

118 
CHAPTER 4. INFINITE CARDINALS 
any uncountable sets at all, or is every set countable? We will show 
the remarkable fact that there are indeed uncountable sets. This 
must seem strange if you think about it for a second. Why should 
there be two types of infinite set? And yet that is where we are 
headed. 
Let (0,l) denote the set of real numbers properly between 0 and 
1: 
(0,l) = { z E R j O < x < 1 } .  
The next series of results provides us with a collection of uncount- 
able sets by showing that many of the geometric objects you are 
familiar with are themselves uncountable. For example, every line 
segment is uncountable. Thus the cardinality of a set is indepen- 
dent of its length. The first result shows us that all line segments 
of finite length have the same cardinality. 
\ 
\ 
Theorem 4.2.2 I f  XI and X2 are finite line segments then 
card(X1) = card(X2). 
equivalent. 
Equivalently, any two line segments are 
Proof Begin with two line segements as in picture (4.12). The 
segments XI 
and X2 in picture (4.12) are representative of all seg- 
ments. We will use only their most general properties in this dis- 
cussion. In picture (4.13) the end points of these segments are 
contained in lines L and L'. Lines L and L' intersect at a point P. 

4.2. UNCOUNTABLE SETS 
119 
We define a function f : XI - 
X2 as follows. Given any 
point x E X I  draw a line (the dotted one in picture (4.13)) from 
P through z such that it intersects the segment X2 at the point y. 
We define 
L’ 
To see that f is onto, refer to picture (4.13). Let y E X, be a 
point. Extend a dotted line from P to y. This line intersects X I  at 
some point z. Then by the definition o f f ,  f(z) = y, and hence f 
is onto. 
To see that f is one-to-one suppose that x # 2’. Then as in 
picture (4.14), x and x‘ determine different (dotted) lines through 
P. Let y and y’ be the points where the dotted lines intersect X2. 
The intersections of these dotted lines with Xz are different points y 
and 3’. (If otherwise, the intersection is one point y, then y and the 
point P yield exactly one dotted line, not two.) Then f(z) # f(x‘), 

120 
CHAPTER 4. INFINITE CARDINALS 
which implies that f is one-to-one. 
L’ 
Thus f is a bijection and therefore XI is equivalent to Xz. This 
ends the proof. 
A colloquial way of stating the above result is that any two line 
segments have the same number of elements. However, our later 
work will show that to say “the same number of elements” is a 
terribly inadequate way to describe the cardinality of a set. 
For instance, 
card(0,l) = card (0, 
googolplex) = card (-2, - 1) = card 
Consequent 1 y, 
card(0,l) = card(a, b) for any numbers a < b. 
That is, any two segements have the same cardinality, namely, that 
of (0,l). 

4.2. UNCOUNTABLE SETS 
121 
The next example shows that all segments have the cardinality 
of R. 
Theorem 4.2.3 card(0,l) = card(R). 
Proof By the comment preceding this theorem 
card(0,l) = card (-;, ;) 
so, without losing generality, we can prove that card 
card (R) . 
Consider the function 
Given a real number y draw a right triangle labelled as in the dia- 
gram below. 
Y 
1 
Elementary trigonometry shows that 
Y 
1 
tan(8) = - = y. 
Thus tan(8) is onto. 
such that 
To see that tan(8) is one-to-one, suppose that 8 and 8’ are given 
tan(8) = tan(8’). 

122 
Draw two triangles: 
CHAPTER 4. INFINITE CARDINALS 
1 
1 
Certainly the bases of these triangles are equal as are the indicated 
right angles. By hypothesis the right hand legs are equal in length. 
Then by a theorem you learned in high school geometry the two 
triangles are congruent. Thus the measures 6 and 8' of the corre- 
sponding base angles are equal: 
8 = 6', 
so that tanfB) is one-to-one. 
\
I
 
7 l - T  
Then tan(8) : (--, -) ---+ R is a bijection and therefore 
2 2  
This completes the proof of the theorem. 
That may come as a surprise to you. The cardinality of a finite 
segment and the cardinality of the unbounded real number line are 
the same. This implies that greater length does not produce more 
points in a line. In simple but inaccurate terms, the number of 
points on a finite segment is equal to the number of points in all of 
the real number line. 
Let 
1 = { z € R / O I z I l } .  

4.2. UNCOUNTABLE SETS 
123 
This is the set whose elements are 0 and 1 and all of the numbers 
between 0 and 1. Let S be the unit square and its interior, and let 
C be the unit cube and its interior. In pictures we have 
0 
1 
I 
I 
I 
Let us be clear about which figures we mean. I includes the end 
points and the interior of the interval (0, l), S is the interior and 
the boundary of the square whose sides have length 1, and C is the 
solid cube whose sides have length 1. The following example will 
show us that the cardinality of a set is independent of its geometry 
and dimension. If you draw a line segment on a piece of paper, 
that segment has the same number of points as the piece of paper, 
which has the same number of points as the room in which you are 
reading this. Thus even though these sets have different geometric 
dimension they have the same cardinality. 
Theorem 4.2.4 card(1) = card(S) = card(C) 
Proof It seems clear enough that 
I C S C C  
so that 
card(1) _< card(S) 5 card(C). 
(4.15) 
To complete the proof we will produce a one-to-one function f : 
C - 
I .  This will allow us to conclude that 
card( C) 5 card( I )  

124 
CHAPTER 4. INFINITE CARDINALS 
and hence that card(1) = card(C). Play with that one for a while. 
Suppose that a, b are numbers such that a 5 b and b 5 a. The only 
way for this to happen is for a = b. We are simply using the fact 
that this same property holds for cardinals. If you find the following 
argument difficult, just skip forward. There is plenty of time and 
no shame in coming back to these deliberations. 
From analytic geometry we recall that the unit cube C is a set 
of ordered triples, 
The one-to-one function f : C - 
I that we need is defined as fol- 
lows. Given an ordered triple (x, y, z )  E C, write IC, y, z as decimals 
x
=
 xo. 21 2 2  x3 .. 
Y = Yo. 
Yl 
Y2 y3 . 
f 
z = 2.0. z1 z2 
z3 . . 
where xo = 0 or 1, and where zl, z2, x3,. . . are digits in the set 
{0,1,. . . , 9). Similar statements apply to the decimal expansions of 
y and z. Furthermore, to avoid that nasty case where numbers end 
in 999, we assume that the shorter decimal expansion that ends in 
000 is used for x, y, and z. Then we define 
f(x, y, z )  = .xoyozo XlYlZl x25r2z2 X3Y3Z3 . . . 
I 
I 
Since the numbers x k r  yk, z k  are in the set {0,1,. . . , 9}, f (x, y, z )  is 
a decimal between 0 and 1. That is, f (x, y, z )  E I and hence 
f : C - I  
is a function. Since the numbers x, y, and z do not have an infinite 
string of 9’s in their decimal expansion, the number f (z, y, z )  does 
not end in 999. 
For example, to find 
f( 1.000,0.41415. . . ,0.122) 

4.2. UNCOUNTABLE SETS 
125 
we write the three numbers as 
x = 1. 0 0 0 ’”, 
y = 0. 4 1 4 * I f ,  
z = 0. 1 2 1 
* . * .  
Now shuffle them. 
f(l.00,0.41415.. . ,0.122) = .lo0 041 012 041 * .  * . 
We will show that f is one-to-one. Suppose that 
for some ordered triples (z, 9, z ) ,  (x’, y’, z’) E C. This is the unique 
short way of writing w since by design w does not end in 999. Then 
by the definition off (applied in reverse) we have 
XI 
x = xo. x1 
2 2  x3 ... - 
z
=
 20. 21 
22 
23 . . . - 
- 2’. 
- 
Y = Yo. 
Y1 
Y2 
Y3 
. *
*
 - 
- Yl 
Then (z, y, z )  = (z’, 
y’, z‘), which implies that f is a one-to-one 
function. By our definition of 5 for cardinals, 
card(C) 5 card(1). 
Combining this with the inequalities (4.15), we see that 
card(1) = card(S) = card(C) 
as required to complete the proof. 
The above example should strike you as contrary to the conser- 
vation of mass or some such concept from physics. How could a line 
and a cube have the same anything? The issue here is that we are 
counting the points in a mathematical object, and points do not 
have any mass and they do not have any other physical properties. 
Physics and physical properties of lines and cubes never enter the 
picture. 
The surprises continue in the next result where we state, but do 
not prove, that infinite space, a child’s toy block, and a 1 inch long 
segment have the same cardinality. 

126 
CHAPTER 4. INFINITE CARDINALS 
Theorem 4.2.5 Let R denote the one dimensional real line, let R2 
denote the two dimensional entire plane, and let R3 denote all of 
three dimensional real space. Then 
card(0,l) = card@) = card(R2) = card(R3). 
That is, cardinality is independent of spatial dimension. 
This example should also upset your common sense. If we iden- 
tify (0,l) with an inch long line segment, then you might believe 
that certainly an inch has fewer points than the entire real line, 
which has fewer points than the plane or all of three dimensional 
space. Once again we are shown that our intuition regarding infin- 
ity does not agree with the surrounding mathematical facts. The 
theorems in the next section will show you why we are being so 
careful in our discussion. 
4.3 Two Infinities 
Let us summarize what we have learned to this point. The cardinal- 
ity of a set X is a way of measuring in precise mathematical terms 
the number of elements in X .  We saw that 
card(N) = card{ 12, 22, 32,. . .} = card(@ 
These sets are called countable. We saw that 
card(0,l) = card(unit cube) = card@) = card(space). 
These sets are called uncountable and I will explain why shortly. 
We also saw that 
card@) 5 card@). 
We ask the natural question: How are card@) and card@) oth- 
erwise related? Are the uncountable sets and the countable sets 
two different types of sets? The uninitiated reader might argue 
that since both sets are infinite, N and R have the same cardinal- 
ity. The next result shows that this is not the case. A colloquial 
and accurate interpretation of this theorem is the philosophical and 
intuitive shocker that there is more than one infinity. 

4.3. T W O  INFINITIES 
127 
Theorem 4.3.1 card@) < card(R). 
Proof Evidently N c R, so by the definition of inequality of 
cardinals, 
card@) 5 card(R). 
What we have to prove now is that card@) # card@). To do this 
we borrow from the Realists who visited Hilbert’s Infinite Hotel on 
page 94. 
Suppose, for the sake of contradiction, that we have a one-to-one 
function 
f : N - 
[O, 11. 
Make a list of f and its values in [0, I]. 
In the above implied list we have given the shorter decimal expan- 
sion of f(n) 
= x, for each n E N, 
if the shorter decimal expansion 
exists. In this implied list, each dij is a digit, a number in the set 
{0,1,. . . ,9}, and f(n) does not end in 999. Furthermore, dll rep- 
resents the first digit in the decimal form of 5 1 ,  d23 represents digit 
number 3 in the decimal form of x2, and in general d,, 
represents 
digit number m in the decimal form of 2,. We can now produce a 
real number that is not on this implied list. 
Define the digit dl as 
dll + 1 
if dll # 9 
dl = { 
0 
if dll = 9 
Notice that we have defined dl so that dl # dll 
if d22 # 9 
0 
if d22 = 9 
Notice that we have defined d2 so that d2 # d22 
Let 
d22 + 1 
d 2 =  { 

128 
CHAPTER 4. INFINITE CARDINALS 
In general, define 
dnn + 1 
if dnn # 9 
d n = {  
0 
if d,, = 9 
Then d, # dnn. 
The extra number x is given by the following decimal expansion: 
x = .dldZd3d4.. . . 
If the number x ends in 993, replace it with the shorter decimal 
expansion that ends'in 000. 
Then x # x1 because by our choice of dl, z and x1 differ in the 
first decimal place, dl # d l l .  Also, x # x2 because by our choice of 
dz, x and x2 differ in decimal place number 2, d2 # dzz. In general, 
x # x, because by our choice of d,, x and x, differ in decimal place 
number n, d, # dnn. Thus x is not on the implied list X ~ , X Z ,  
z3,. 
. . 
of real numbers in [0,1]. This is what we wanted. Hence f is not a 
bijection. 
We have thus shown that there are no bijections f : N - 
[0,1], 
which proves that 
card(N) # card[O, 11. 
Since Theorem 4.2.3 states that cardlo, 11 = card@), we have shown 
that 
card@) # card@) 
card@) < card@). 
and therefore that 
This completes the proof. 
Subsequently, there cannot be a list of the real numbers R. Fur- 
thermore, we conclude that the terms countable and uncountable 
describe two different types of infinite sets. Those sets equivalent 
to N are not equivalent to R. Since Q is a dense subset of R the 
following result shows us that cardinalty does not depend on the 
density of the set in the real line. 
Theorem 4.3.2 card(Q) < card(R). 

4.3. TWO INFINITIES 
129 
Proof Theorem 4.1.4 shows us that card(N) = card(Q) and 
Theorem 4.3.1 shows us that card(N) < card@). Then card(Q) < 
card(R). This is what we wanted to prove. 
Summarizing some of our results to this point, we see that 
I 
card(N) = card(Q) < card@) = card(space) 
How does that make you feel? There it is in plain mathematical 
language. There are several infinities. We will see later that there 
are more than just two. That should jolt you. Infinity is infinity and 
that is that, you might have said. The answer to that argument is 
that yes, all infinite sets are not finite, but infinity is not a number. 
Infinity is not a cardinal. Infinity is not the last word on the size of 
a set. It is only the beginning, like saying that something is large. 
There will always be larger sets. Saying that a set is infinite is like 
saying that a car has color. Yes, it has color, but which one? Is it 
tan or silver? So when we encounter cardinals we will ask, “Is it 
finite or infinite?” And if it is infinite we will ask “IS it countable 
or uncountable?” This will describe somewhat which cardinal we 
have but it will not be the last word on how large that cardinal is. 
Keep an open mind as you read this section. 
Because card(Q) < card@) there must be real numbers that 
are not fractions, not repeating decimals. A number x is said to be 
irrational if it is not rational; that is, if x $!‘ 
Q. We let 
Q’ = the set of irrational numbers. 
I 
I 
Unlike 0, 
there can be no implied list of irrational numbers. The- 
orem 4.3.2 and a little intuition will convince us that Q’ and R are 
equivalent sets. 
Theorem 4.3.3 card(0’) = card@). 
It is interesting to observe that this simple counting card(Q’) = 
card@) shows us that most numbers are not rational. This is con- 
trary to your experience since every number you have ever seen has 

130 
CHAPTER 4. INFINITE CARDINALS 
been a rational number. That changes nothing. There are many 
more irrational numbers than there are rational ones. However pro- 
fessional mathematicians consider it to be very hard to prove that 
any given number is irrational. While it is true that 71 is irrational, 
the proof is quite hard. We will show shortly that fi is an irrational 
number, but we cannot show that rJZ is irrational. Currently, no 
one knows its rationality. If you have some facility with logarithms, 
you might find it challenging to try to prove that 
log,(3) is irrational. 
(Hint: Read the proof of Theorem 4.3.4 first.) A simple question 
that currently remains unanswered is this. If x and y are irrational 
numbers, under what conditions is x + y irrational? For example, it 
is known that 8 
+ fi is irrational. But what can be said of more 
mysterious numbers like 2Jz? 
Let’s settle back and catch our breath now. The earliest example 
of an irrational number occurs around 600 BC in ancient Greece, 
where the Pythagoreans showed that fi is an irrational number. 
They found this fact to be so disturbing that they threatened people 
with a removal of their hands if they betrayed the great secret that 
fi is not a fraction of integers. We laugh at this today or we 
gape in awe that rational people would react so extremely to a 
mathematical fact. Today this fact is considered to be one of the 
highlights of early mathematics. The proof is just as compelling 
today as it was 2600 years ago. The proof that fi is irrational is a 
pivotal moment in mathematics. Prior to this, people who thought 
about the universe thought that all of it could be described by 
fractions, rational numbers. Thus the following result is a moment 
of transformation in mathematics, physics, and science in general. 
Do your best to follow it. 
Theorem 4.3.4 fi is an irrational number. 
Proof: Before we begin we need to establish: 
If n2 is divisible by 2 then n is divible by 2. 
(4.16) 
Equivalently, we will prove: 
If n is not divisible by 2 then n2 is not divisible by 2. 

4.3. TWO INFINITIES 
131 
The proof is a calculation. Suppose that n is not divisible by 2. 
Then n = 2k + 1 for some k E N so that 
n2 = (2k + 1)2 = 4k2 + 4k + 1 = 2(2k2 + 2k) + 1. 
Thus n2 = 2 K  + 1 where K is the integer 2k2 + 2k, so that n2 is an 
odd number. This proves statement (4.16). Armed with this fact, 
we can attack the irrationality of fi. 
Assume for the sake of contradiction that fi is rational. Then 
J Z 2  
m 
for some integers n, m > 0. We assume without losing our generality 
that the fraction - is in reduced form. Specifically, 
n 
m 
at least one of the numbers n and m 
is not divisible by 2. 
(4.17) 
Squaring both sides yields 
n2 
2=--. m2 
Thus 2m2 = n2 and so n2 is divisible by 2. Statement (4.16) implies 
that n is divisible by 2 and hence we can write 
n = 2k 
for some integer k. Squaring both sides we find that 
2
2
 2 
2 m  = n  = 4 k ,  
so division by 2 yields 
m2 = 2k2. 
Then m2 is divisible by 2 and hence m is divisible by 2 by statement 
(4.16). Thus both n and m are divisible by 2, contrary to the 
statement (4.17). Hence our original assumption is in error, and we 
conclude that fi is irrational. This completes the proof. 
The reader can use the same argument to show that & is irra- 
tional and that in general fi is irrational for each prime p .  This 

132 
CHAPTER 4. INFINITE CARDINALS 
reinforces the above work that there are infinitely (actually uncount- 
ably) many irrational numbers. The present work has the advantage 
that we have implied the existence of a List of some irrational num- 
bers. 
&, h, 
fi, a,. 
. . are irrational numbers. 
Compare this to Theorem 4.3.3, which states that there are infinitely 
many irrational numbers but which does not list them. 
There are at least two types of cardinals, the countable and 
the uncountable. We will see in the next section that uncountable 
cardinals also come in many different sizes. 
4.4 
Power Sets 
Let A be a set. Recall from Definition 1.3.1 that the power set of 
A, P(A), is the set of all subsets of A. We will use the power set to 
show that there are many infinite cardinals. 
€+om Theorem 4.3.1 we know that card@) and card@) are 
different infinite cardinals. The next result shows us that R and 
P(N) have the same cardinality. 
Theorem 4.4.1 card(R) = card(P(N)). 
Proof We will produce a one-to-one function 
thus proving that card[O, I] 5 card(P(N)). Then by Theorem 4.2.3, 
we will have shown that card@) = card[O, 11 5 card(P(N)). If you 
find this proof is stretching you a bit too far, skip to the end. There 
is no examination at the end of this discussion. 
In this age of computers it should come as no surprise that each 
real number can be written as a binary decimal. That is, to each 
real number 2 E [0, 11 there is a string 
x = .blb2b3.. . 

4.4. POWER SETS 
133 
of bits bl, b2, b3,. . . E (0,l). Specifically, we can write down an 
equation x = .blb2b3.. . exactly when 
1 
1 
1 
z = b l - + b z - + b 3 - +  
.... 
2 
22 
23 
For example, 
1 
1
1
 1 
- = 1-+0--0-+ 
..., 
2 
2 
2 2  
23 
1 
2" 
where the coefficients of the remaining fractions - are 0. Thus we 
will write 
1 - = .loci. 
2 
Another example is 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
- = 1-+o--1--0--0-+ 
..., 
8 
2 
22 
2 3  
2 4  
25 
1 
2" 
where the coefficients of the remaining fractions - are 0. Then 
5 
- = .lOlOG. 
8 
Furthermore, we can write 
1 
1
1
 1 
1 
1 
- = 0-+1--0--1--0-+ 
.... 
3 
2 
2 2  
23 
23 
23 
where the pattern of coefficients 0, 1, 0,1,0,1,. . . continues indefi- 
nitely. Thus 
1 - = .OlOlR. 
3 
Now, write the elements of [O, I] in the usual way. Given an 
z E [0,1], 
write 2 as a binary number as above 

134 
CHAPTER 4. INFINITE CARDINALS 
and pair the decimal bits bl, b2, b3,. . . with N as follows. 
1 2 
3 4 
. . .  
bl bz 
b3 
b4 . . . 
Construct a subset f(x) = U, c N as follows. 
n E U, exactly when 
b, = 1 
c n # U, exactly when 
b, = 0 ’ 
That this defines a subset of N is clear since the bits b, can only 
1 
be 0 or 1. For example, let’s see what set U, corresponds to -. 
3 
Because - = .OlOl@, the pairing for - looks like this. 
1 
1 
3 
3 
1
2
 3 4 5 6 ... 
0 1 0  1 0  1 ... 
Then the elements of U, are those paired with a 1. That is, 
f (i) = {2,4,6 ,... }. 
The reader can show that the pairing for 
5 = .101001000100001000001.. . 
results in the set 
U, = {1,3,6,10,15,21,.. .}. 
Search for the pattern in the decimal expansion for x. 
There is a possible point of confusion that we should discuss. 
1 
There are two very different ways to write 
1 - They are 
2‘ 
as a sum of powers of 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
-
_
 
- 0- + 1- 
+ I- + 1- 
+ ..., 
2 
2 
22 
23 
24 

4.4. POWER SETS 
135 
or in other words 
= .ID = .oi. 
1 
2 - 
1 
2 
Which of these sums should we use in defining f(-)? Let us agree 
that, in case there are two or more ways to write a fraction x as a 
binary decimal expansion, we will take the one with fewer 1’s. Thus 
we take - = .ln and so 
1 
2 
Our goal now is to show that f is one-to-one. This is done by 
showing that 
x # y implies that f(x) # f(y). 
So suppose that x # y and write each as a binary decimal. 
x = .bl 
ba 
b3 b4 . . . 
y = .c1 c2 
c3 
c4 . . . 
Since x # y, they must differ in some position, say, the nth position. 
That is, 
bn # cn. 
We may assume without loss of generality that bn = 1 and that 
c, = 0. Then by the definition of f 
n E f(x) = U and 
n $ f(Y) = v, 
so that U and V do not contain the same elements. It follows that 
and so f is a one-to-one function. 
Thus f : [0,1] + 
P(N) is a one-to-one function, and therefore 
cardlo, 11 5 card(P(N)). 
(4.18) 

136 
CHAPTER 4. INFINITE CARDINALS 
Conversely, the following careful inspection of P(N) 
will reveal 
that 
card(P(N)) 5 card[O, 11. 
(4.19) 
Combining the inequality (4.19) with the inequality (4.18) will then 
yield the equation 
card@) = card[0,1] = card(P(N)). 
When we are done with the inspection, the proof will be complete. 
What we are going to do is to define a one-to-one function 
f : P(W) - 
to, 11. 
First, write each subset of W as a binary sequence. Given a set 
U c N, define a binary bit b, as 
1 
i f n E U  
bn = { 0 
i f n @ U  
and then 
U corresponds to bblb2.. . . 
This correspondence is so detailed that we can identify U with 
boblba.. .. They both contain the same information, namely, which 
numbers are in U and which are not. 
For instance to construct the binary sequence that corresponds 
to the set U = {0,2,4,. . .} of even numbers, we find each binary 
bit, beginning with 0. 
bo = 1 since 0 E U 
bl = 0 since 1 $! U 
b2 = 1 since 2 E U 
b3 = 0 since 0 $! U 
(Yes, 0 is an even number.) Thus the set of even numbers corre- 
sponds to 
1 om. 

4.4. POWER SETS 
137 
The set U = ( 5 )  corresponds to OOOOOla. If U corresponds to 
OlOlm, then U = {1,3,5,. . .} = the set of odd numbers. If U 
corresponds to 000011i, then U contains all the natural numbers 
except 0,1,2,3. The set U of prime numbers corresponds to the 
binary sequence that begins with 
00 1 10 10 1000 10 1000 10 1. 
You can find the next five terms in that sequence if you wish. Thus 
we will treat each U E P(N) as a binary sequence boblb2.. .. 
Consider the function 
f : P(N> - 
[O, 11 
defined as follows. Write each U E P(N) as a binary sequence 
U = boblbz.. . 
as we did above. Then define f ( U )  to be the real number 
f(x) = .bOblb2 
written as a decimal number. For example, 
1 
100 
1 
f(iii) = .iii= -, 
9 
f(0lD) = .01= -, 
f(l0TTi) = .lorn. 
Evidently, f ( U )  just places a decimal point in front of the binary 
sequence b0blb2. . . corresponding to U, 
making the sequence a real 
number .boblb2.. .. 
We will show that f is one-to-one. Suppose that 
U # V for some sets U, V E P(N). 
We must show that f ( U )  # f(V). As we did above, write the sets 
U = bOblb2.. . and V = 1 3 ~ 1 ~ 2 . .  
. 
as binary sequences. Since U # V there are binary bits, say, b,,c,, 
such that 
bn # cn. 

138 
CHAPTER 4. INFINITE CARDINALS 
But then the decimal numbers f ( U )  and f(V) differ in the nth 
decimal places. That is, these are different numbers. 
f ( U )  = .boblb2.. . # .cOC~C~. 
. . = f(V). 
Hence f is a one-to-one function. 
proved that card[O, 11 5 card(P(N)), we conclude that 
Consequently, card(P(N)) 5 card[O, 11. Since we have already 
card[O, 11 = card(P(N)), 
which concludes the proof. 
In Theorem 4.3.1 we showed that 
card(N) < card[O, 11 = card@), 
thus showing that there are at least two different infinite cardinals. 
This presents the problem of determining how many infinite cardi- 
nals there are. It seems unlikely that there are just two so we look 
for more. 
The following beautiful result shows us that no matter which 
set A we choose, P(A) is always a larger set than A. That is, the 
cardinality of P(A) is always more than the cardinality of A. This 
fact is certainly true of finite cardinals as we have proved that 
if card(A) = n is finite then card(P(A)) = 2" 
We see immediately that 
card(A) = n < 2" = card(P(A)) 
for any n E W, thus proving that P(A) has more elements than the 
finite set A. If A = { a l ,  . . . ,a,} has exactly n elements and if we 
let 
P2(A) = P(P(A)), 
P 4 ( 4  = P ( ~ ( P ( P ( A ) ) ) )  
= P(P3(A)), 
P3(A) = P(P(P(A))) 
= P(P2(A)), 

4.4. POWER SETS 
139 
(note the use of 4 P's in the third line), then we see that 
card(P(A)) = 2", 
card(P2(A)) = card(P(P(A))) 
= 2'" 
since card(P(A)) = 2", 
card(P3(A)) = card(P(P'(A))) 
= 222" 
since card(P2(A)) = 2", 
card(P4(A)) = card(P(P3(A))) = 222" 
since card(P3(A)) = 22", 
This leads us to the infinite sequence of finite cardinals 
Our next result shows that there is a similar sequence of infinite 
cardinals. We challenge the reader to find the similarities between 
the argument used below and the argument used to prove Theorem 
4.3.1. 
Theorem 4.4.2 If A is a set then card(A) < card(P(A)). 
Proof First we establish that card(A) 5 card(P(A)). The sym- 
bol X is the Greek letter called lambda. The one-to-one function we 
need is 
X : A __t P(A) 
defined by 
Certainly A(%) = X ( d )  implies that {x} = {d} 
or equivalently 
that x = x'. Thus X is a one-to-one function and hence card(A) 5 
card (P( A)). 
To prove that card(A) < card(P(A)) we need to show that no 
function 
X(x) = {x}. 
F : A - 
P(A) 
is onto, thus showing that there are no bijections between A and 
P(A). It will then follow that card(A) # card(P(A)) and hence 
that card(A) < card(P(A)). 
Given a function F : A - 
P(A) and an x E A, observe that 
F ( x )  E P(A) so that F ( x )  is a subset of A, F ( z )  c A. We can ask, 
Is x E F ( z )  or is 2 # F(x)? Define a special set X c A by 
X = {X E A I x # F ( x ) } .  

140 
CHAPTER 4. INFINITE CARDINALS 
The set X is a remarkable observation made by Bertrand Russell 
and has no motivation. Let's accept the genius that uncovered this 
idea, that it works well, and then see how it is used in our argument. 
We claim that there does not exist an x E A such that F ( x )  = X. 
Suppose to the contrary that there is an x E A such that F(x) = 
X. We seek a contradiction. Since X is a set we ought to be able 
to decide whether or not x E F(x) = X or x # F ( x )  = X. Suppose 
that x E F ( x )  = X. Then x satisfies the predicate defining X, 
which is x # F(x). This is not possible since F ( x )  = X is a set. So 
it must be that x $i 
F(x) = X .  In this case x satisfies the predicate 
for X, so that x E X. But this is also impossible (x $ X and 
x E X) since X is a set. Thus we cannot decide if x E F(x) = X 
or if z $ F(x) = X .  This contradiction to the definition of set 
shows us that our initial assumption that F ( x )  = X for some x is 
a falsehood. Thus there is no x E A such that F ( x )  = X. This 
proves our claim, thus F : A - 
P(A) is not onto, and therefore 
card(A) # card(P(A)). This completes the proof. 
Theorem 4.4.3 card(W) < card(P(N)). 
Theorem 4.4.2 allows us to prove the following counterintuitive 
result. In a language devoid of mathematics it implies that there 
are infinitely many infinities. 
Theorem 4.4.4 There is &n infinite sequence a0 < a1 < a2 < . . . 
of infinite cardinals. 
Proof If we let a0 = card(N) and let al = card(P(N)), then 
Theorem 4.4.2 shows us that 
Next, consider the sequence 
and let 
= card(P(N)), 0 2  = card(P2(N)), 0 3  = card(P3(N)), . . . . 

4.4. POWER SETS 
141 
In other words, if we let P(N) = A then P2(N) = P(A) is the power 
set of A = P(N). 
Theorem 4.4.2 shows us that 
a1 = card(P(N)) = card(A) < card(P(A)) = card(P2(N)) = 0 2 .  
That is, a, < a1 < a2. 
In general, let A = P"(N). Because 
Pn+'(N) = P(P"(N)) = ?(A), 
Theorem 4.4.2 shows us that 
card(P"(M)) = card(A) < card(P(A)) = card(P(P"(W))) = card(P"+'(M)). 
By setting 
l 
0, = card(P"(N)) 
for each n E N 
we have constructed an infinite chain of infinite cardinals 
a, < a1 < . . . < a, < 0,+1 
< . . . . 
Spec i fical 1 y, 
card(N) < card(P(N)) < card(P2(N)) < card(P3(N)) < . . . . 
This ends the proof. 
In pictures, the above chain can be realized as in the following 
line. This is not the real line. It is just a visual means of describing 
a chain of cardinals. 
0 1 2 
0 0 0  
card(N) card(P(N)) card(P2(N)) 
0 0 0  
Let us examine another method for constructing cardinals and 
infinities. Recall that if A is a set then (0, l}A 
is the set of functions 
f : A - 
(0,l). 

142 
CHAPTER 4. INFINITE CARDINALS 
Theorem 4.4.5 Let A be a set. Then 
card(F(A)) = card((0, l}A). 
Proof We will produce a bijection 
F 
: P(A) - 
( O , l } A  
from which we will conclude that 
card(F(A)) = card((0, l}A). 
A 
Given a subset U c A, define a function 
fu 
A -  
{ O A  
as in the above diagram. 
1 i f z E U  
0 i f x @ U  ’ 

4.4. POWER SETS 
143 
Thus fu(x) = 1 precisely when x E U .  Otherwise it is 0. Clearly 
fu E (0, qA. 
so that the rule 
defines a function F : P(A) - 
(0, l } A .  We will show that F is a 
bijection. 
F ( U )  = fu 
To see that F is one-to-one, let 
be subsets of A. That is, take distinct elements of P(A). By the 
definition of equal sets some element x is in one set and not the 
other. We assume without loss of generality that there is an element 
x E U that is not in V. Let fv be the function that takes V to 1 
and all else to 0. Then 
x E U and x GV, 
so that 
fu(x) = 1 while fv(x) = 0 
by the definitions of the functions fu and fv. Then fu and fv have 
different rules 
so that F : P(A) - 
(0, l } A  is a one-to-one function. 
(0, l } A .  Define a subset of A, 
F(U) = fu # fv = F(V), 
To see that F : P(A) - 
(0, l}A 
is an onto function, let f E 
U = ( x ~ A I f ( x )  
= I}. 
That is, U = f-'(l), or in other words, U is the set of all x E A 
that are sent by f to 1. (See the above diagram.) Then 
f(x) = 1 = fu(x) for all x E U and 
f(x) = 0 = fu(x) for all IC @ U .  
Since f and fu have the same rules, f = fu, and since F ( U )  = fu 
we have 
f = fu = F(U). 

144 
CHAPTER 4. INFINITE CARDINALS 
It follows that F : P(A) -+ (0, l}A is onto. 
Hence F is a bijection and therefore 
card(P(A)) = card((0, l}A). 
This completes the proof. 
Theorem 4.4.6 
1. card(N) < card((0,l)’). 
2. card@) < card((0, l}R). 
Proof 1. By Theorem 4.4.2, card@) < card(P(N)) and by The- 
orem 4.4.5, card(P(N)) = card((0,l)’). 
Thus card(N) is strictly 
smaller than card((0,l)’). 
Part 2 is handled in a similar fashion. 
This completes the proof. 
The notation we will use for the exponents is also an exponent. 
Given a set A let 
cad(A) = N 
(read as aleph) and then let 
card((0, l}A) = 2N. 
This does not imply that we are taking a power of 2 to some infinite 
cardinal. It is just a convenient method for writing some cardinali- 
ties. There is something more to see here though. 
Theorem 4.4.7 Let N be a cardinal. That is, N = card(A) for 
some set A. Then 

4.5. THE ARITHMETIC OF CARDINALS 
145 
Proof From Theorems 4.4.2 and 4.4.5 we see that 
N = card(A) < card(P(A)) = card((0, l}A) = 2c"rd(A) = 2N 
This completes the proof. 
It is a tradition going back over 100 years to let 
card(N) = No, 
where No is read as aleph nought. Then with Theorem 4.4.5 and our 
new notation we can write 
No = card(N), 
2N0 = card((0,l)"O) = card(P(N)), 
22No = card((0, l}~oi'~*o) 
= card(P(P(N))), 
which by Theorem 4.4.5 leads us to an infinite sequence of infinite 
cardinals 
The next question we will explore is, can we find some inequality 
between card((0,l)") and card@)? 
4.5 The Arithmetic of Cardinals 
We will use the Greek letters Q (alpha) and ,f3 (beta) and the Hebrew 
letter N (aleph) to denote general cardinals. We will also use the 
traditional notation of 
No = card@) 

146 
CHAPTER 4. INFINITE CARDINALS 
(pronounced aleph nought). It was Georg Cantor in his ground 
breaking paper on cardinal numbers [l] who first used the notation 
N for cardinals. 
What you are about to read should be interesting. We are about 
to define the addition and multiplication of natural numbers. This 
is the arithmetic that you learned in elementary school. We will 
define 1 + 1 and show that it is 2. We will define 2.3 and show that 
it is 6. We will eventually use this arithmetic to define operations 
like addition and multiplication on infinite cardinals. And surprise! 
No + No = No. Now isn’t that what you expected of infinity? What 
would you expect of the following sum? 
No + 2 N O  = ? 
Let us define the addition of natural numbers. Sets E and F are 
said to be disjoint if E n F = 8. 
Definition 4.5.1 Let n,m E N. Choose disjoint finite sets E and 
F such that card(E) = n and card(F) = m. Then we define 
n + m = card(E U F ) .  
As our first example of how to use this definition, we will prove 
an elementary arithmetic fact. Recall that 1 is the set of all sets 
that are equivalent to the set {o}, and similarly 2 denotes the set 
of all sets that are equivalent to ( 0 ~ 0 ) .  
Then 
card( { 0 ) )  = card( { O}) = 1 
so that 
1 + 1 = card({.} U {n}) 
= card({., 0 ) )  
=
2
 
We have just proved that 1+ 1 = 2. We did not state this numerical 
identity, we did not ask for measurements, and we did not accept 
the teacher’s word for it. We proved it with the same certainty 
that a proof about congruent triangles would possess in a geometry 

4.5. THE ARITHMETIC OF CARDINALS 
147 
course. Thus set theory is a point of view that allows us to examine 
all of the mathematical fundamentals. That is its power. 
This idea of considering the addition of natural numbers as the 
union of finite sets is what we will use to define the addition of 
infinite cardinals. 
Definition 4.5.2 Suppose that a and p are infinite cardinals. 
Choose any sets A and B such that card(A) = a and card(B) = p. 
Then we define 
r 
a + p  = card(AUB). 
The power here is that to add the infinite cardinals a and p we 
may choose any of the sets A and B for which card(A) = Q and 
card(B) = p. Unlike the addition of finite cardinals, the sets A and 
B do not have to be disjoint when adding card(A) and card(B). 
This statement is actually a theorem. Professionals use a weaker 
statement as a definition. But for our purposes, this definition is a 
good working definition. Thus Q + p is independent of our choice 
of sets A and B. The professional would say that the definition of 
the addition of infinite cardinals is well defined. 
The addition of infinite cardinals has some of the properties as- 
sociated with the addition of real numbers, and as we will see the 
addition of infinite cardinals can be quite unexpected. One similar- 
ity is the commutative property of addition. Given any cardinals a 
and p, then 
Q + p  = p+ a. 
To see the truth of this matter choose sets A and B such that 
Q = card(A) and p = card(B). Then 
a+/? = card(AUB) 
= card(BUA) 
= p+a, 

148 
CHAPTER 4. INFINITE CARDINALS 
which is what we wanted to prove. We have just proved that addi- 
tion is commutative. This is a fact that has been handed down to 
you through educational tradition but no one (I’m betting) in your 
past proved that this property was true of all cardinals or numbers. 
For example, if we use the traditional symbol 
c = card(R), 
then 
No+c = c f N o  and 
2N0 + c  = c f2NO. 
The symbol c stands for the continuum, an old term used to describe 
the real line. This shows us that the addition is commutative but 
it does not show us what the indicated sums are. 
As children we might have heard an adage that infinity plus 1 is 
infinity or that infinity plus infinity is infinity. This is mildly true 
since any number of elements added to an infinite set still yields an 
infinite set. However, as we saw in the previous sections, the term 
infinite is just too coarse a measurement for the size of a set. It is 
like saying, the house has color. Sure it has color, but which ones? 
Saying that something is infinite simply says that it is not finite. 
It does not tell us a thing about the cardinality of the set. Is the 
cardinality No, or c, or some other value? 
As an example of how to add infinite cardinals, consider the 
following result. One might read this as the old adage Infinity plus 
one is infinity. Our work to date brings mathematical truth to this 
adage. 
Theorem 4.5.3 Let N be any infinite cardinal. 
1. O + N = N .  
2. I f  n > 0 is a natural number then n + N = N. 

4.5. THE ARITHMETIC OF CARDINALS 
149 
Proof 1. By definition there is a set A such that N = card(A), 
and by definition 
0 = card(0). 
Then we have 
O+N = card(0UA) 
= card(A) 
= N. 
This proves part 1. 
A of n elements contained in A. Then 
2. Since A is infinite and n is finite, there is a set {al, . . . , a,} C 
n = card{al,. . . ,a,} 
and so 
n + N = card((a1,. . . ,a,} U A) 
= card(A) 
= N. 
This proves part 2, which completes the proof. 
For example, part 2 above shows us that 
No $- 1 = No 
and that 
lo'o'olo 
even though 10 
The next result might be read as infinity plus infinity is infinity. 
This is a true statement, but we can say with certainty which infinite 
cardinal the sum is. 
Theorem 4.5.4 Let N be any infinite cardinal. Then 
is a huge finite natural number. 

150 
CHAPTER 4. INFINITE CARDINALS 
Proof We know that N = card(A) for some set A. Hence 
N + N  = card(AUA) 
= card(A) 
= N. 
This ends the proof. 
Then, for example, 
No + No = No 
and 
c + c = c .  
and for any infinite cardinal N, 
You see? An infinite cardinal plus the same infinite cardinal is 
the same infinite cardinal. Or in other words, any infinite cardinal 
added to itself is itself. 
For that reason, we will not subtract cardinals because subtrac- 
tion makes no sense on infinite cardinals. To see the truth of this 
matter, consider the following example. 
Example 4.5.5 We will show the following. 
There is no way to define No - No as a cardinal. 
Assume to the contrary that we could define the subtraction NO -NO 
as the opposite of addition. The implied value of the subtraction 
No - No is 
No - No = 0. 

4.5. THE ARITHMETIC OF CARDINALS 
151 
Now, by part 2 of the above theorem, 
1 + N o  = No. 
Using the assumed subtraction, we would then subtract No from 
both sides of the equation, thus revealing that 
l + ( N o - N o )  
= N o - N o  
1 + 0  = 0 
1 = 0, 
which is ridiculous. This mathematical mistake shows us that our 
initial assumption is wrong, and thus No - No cannot be defined. 
This concludes the proof. 
In fact, given any cardinal N we cannot define N - N. If we 
cannot define N - N then a general subtraction of cardinals cannot 
be defined. 
So let us decide what the addition of two cardinals is. That is, 
what is a+P? The next result gives further mathematical certainty 
to the old chestnut infinity plus infinity is infinity. 
Theorem 4.5.6 Let LY < ,O be infinite cardinals. Then 
~~ 
LY + ,B = P = the larger of two cardinals. 
Proof To prove this result we will need sets A and B such that 
LY = card(A) and P = card(B). By the definition of inequality of 
cardinals (see page 117), there is a one-to-one function 
f : A - B .  
We will show that A and f(A) are equivalent sets. The function 
f : A - 
B restricts to one F : A - 
f(A). Thus f and F 
have the same rule but they map into different sets. The following 

152 
CHAPTER 4. INFINITE CARDINALS 
picture will help you see what we are doing with f ,  F ,  and f(A). 
B 
A 
f 
F 
Specifically, f may not be onto, but we will show that F is a 
bijection. The function F is one-to-one because that is how we 
chose f .  To see that F is onto, let y E f(A). By definition of f(A) 
there is an 17: E A such that 
F ( z )  = f(17:) = y. 
Then F is onto, hence F is a bijection, whence A and f(A) are 
equivalent. 
Since f ( A )  c B, f(A) U B = B, so that 
CY + ,B = card(A) + card(B) 
= card(f(A)) + card(B) 
= card(f(A) U B )  
= card(B) 
= p. 
This completes the proof. 

4.5. THE ARITHMETIC OF CARDINALS 
153 
For more familiar cardinals there are the following examples. 
N o + c = c  
because by Theorem 4.3.1 
card@) = No < c = card(R). 
Furthermore, 
I 
I 
because by Theorem 4.4.7 
No < 2"O. 
N < 2*, 
In general, for infinite cardinals N we will apply Theorem 4.4.7, 
to see that 
I 
N + 2" = 2". 
A curious consequence of this addition is that No behaves like 0 
on the infinite cardinals. You see 
for each infinite cardinal N, so by Theorem 4.5.6 
No + N = N for infinite cardinals N. 
Don't try to cancel that N from the equation. In general, the cance- 
lation of infinite cardinals does not work. Again, our finite intuition 
is worthless in the infinite setting. 

154 
CHAPTER 4. INFINITE CARDINALS 
Since we can add cardinals to themselves we can define multiples 
of cardinals. Let N be an infinite cardinal and let n E N. Then 
n.N= N +  
+ N  =N. - 
n summands 
Specifically, 
2. No = No and 
n. c = c for each n E N. 
It is important for us to see that 
this multiplication is not associated with a division of cardinals. 
Here’s why. Assume to the contrary that we can divide by No. One 
of the fundamental identities implied by the existence of a division 
is that 
1 
By applying the assumed division we would then have the following 
series of equations: 
2 . 1  = 1 
2 = 1, 
another clear contradiction. Therefore our initial assumption must 
be tossed out and we conclude that we cannot divide by No. This 
may be your first experience with a multiplication that is not asso- 
ciated with a division. It might seem strange at first but the laws 
of mathematics demand it. 
Moving on to the multiplication of infinite cardinals, observe 
that 
(112) x (1,273) 

4.5. THE ARITHMETIC OF CARDINALS 
155 
consists of the following 6 pairs. 
We have just proved the arithmetic fact 
2 ~ 3 = 6 .  
You should be sitting straight up in your chair when I tell you some- 
thing like this. Here is a fundamental concept of human intellect 
and I am showing you how to prove it from more basic facts. 
The reader can write down the 15 pairs that make up {1,2,3} x 
{ 1,2,3,4,5}. The point behind these examples is that zj E and F 
are finite sets, then we have 
card(E x F )  = card(E)card(F). 
To see the truth of the matter suppose that E = (1,. . . ,m} and 
that F = (1,. . . , n}. Arrange E x F as a rectangular array of pairs 
(XI Y). 
(L1) (La) ... (Ln> 
(2,2) ... (2,n) 
(7% 1) (m,2) 
0
.
.
 ( m , 4  
There are m = card(E) columns and n = card(F) rows in this array 
so there must be m . n = card(E)card(F) pairs in this rectangular 
array. This is what we wanted to prove. 
Thus motivated, it is reasonable to define the product of infinite 
cardinals as follows. 
Definition 4.5.7 Let a and ,Ll be infinite cardinals. Choose sets A 
and B such that card(A) = a and card(B) = p. We define 
a . 0  = card(A x B). 

156 
CHAPTER 4. I N m v I m  CARDINALS 
As before, we want to verify that the multiplication of cardinals 
is commutative. That is, 
I 
To see this, choose sets A and B such that a! = card(A) and p = 
card(B). Then the reader is invited to show that the function 
f : A x B - B x A  
defined by switching components 
is a bijection. Then card(A x B) = card(B x A) and hence 
a!.p = card(A x B )  
= card(B x A) 
= pea!. 
This is what we wanted to prove. 
Thus, like the multiplication of numbers, the multiplication of 
infinite cardinals is commutative. This may be the totality of the 
similarity between the multiplication of natural numbers, and the 
multiplication of infinite cardinals. 
Let us examine the product No . No under this multiplication. 
Since No = card@) we can write 
N o .  No = card(N x N) 
= card(N) 
by Theorem 4.1.5 
= No. 
That is, 

4.5. THE ARITHMETIC OF CARDINALS 
157 
This multiplication must strike you as strange. The only real num- 
bers x for which x . x = x are 0 and 1. And No is not special in this 
regard. In general, 
N . N = N for any infinite cardinal N. 
I 
J 
Furthermore, since N - N = N2 we are led to consider square roots of 
cardinals. Things are not what our old common sense might have 
said to us. 
fi = N for any infinite cardinal N. 
This is another difference between natural numbers and infinite car- 
dinals. The square root of most natural numbers is not a natural 
number. However, the square root of any infinite cardinal is an in- 
finite cardinal. Here is another peculiarity. Question: How many 
natural numbers do you know of that are their own square roots? 
Answer: Only two, 0 and 1. And yet every infinite cardinal is its 
own square root. The land of infinite cardinals is indeed strange. 
Here is a property of multiplication that may not agree with 
your calculus lectures. (Skip this discussion if you have never had 
calculus.) Limits of the form - require an application of L’Hopital’s 
Rule. That is, if f(x) and g(x) are functions such that f(u) = 
g(a) = 0, then the limit 
0 
0 
f (4 
L!! 
can be almost any real number. The value of the limit depends on 
the functions f (x) and g(x). For example, 
sin(x) 
lim - 
= 1 
and 
2x2 - 1 
lim 
= 2. 
P . t l 2 3  + 22 + 1 
Specifically, the limits of the form 0.00 can have any value. In set 
theory no such rule is necessary. 

158 
CHAPTER 4. INFINITE CARDINALS 
Theorem 4.5.8 Let N be an infinite cardinal. Then 
O - N = O .  
Proof This one is tricky. There is a set A such that card(A) = N. 
See Example 1.2.2 to see that 8 x A = 8 for any set A. Hence 
0 . N = card(8 x A) = 0. This completes the proof. 
The following theorem shows us that like addition, the multi- 
plication of cardinals is in some respects different from the multi- 
plication of real numbers. One major difference between the mul- 
tiplication of numbers and infinite cardinals is the following rule of 
evaluation. 
Theorem 4.5.9 Let cx 5 ,B be infinite cardinals. Then 
cx . ,B = ,B = the larger of the two cardinals. 
We will not prove this one, but we offer the following examples. 
No * No = No, 
c - c  = c, 
N 0 . c  = c, 
by Theorem 4.3.1, 
No - N = N for any infinite cardinal N, 
N . N 
1 N = N for any infinite cardinal N. 
The results in this section show us that the arithmetic of infinite 
cardinals will require some thought before we can apply it or ma- 
nipulate with it. Read the above arithmetic facts while reminding 
yourself that these equations do not hold for real numbers other 
than 0 and 1. 
Inasmuch as we have defined 
N2 = N . N, 

4.5. THE ARITHMETIC OF CARDINALS 
159 
it is important that we define powers of cardinals. Recall that given 
sets A and B 
BA is the set of all functions f : A - 
B. 
Let us write down the rules of all of the functions in (1, 2}11,2,3). A 
function f : { 1,2,3} - 
{ 1,2} is given by its images of 1, 2, and 3. 
Thus we can write down the rule for f by just listing how it behaves 
on 1, 2, and 3. A very effective method is to list 
where a, 
b, c E { 1,2} and where 
f(1) = a, f(2) = b, f(3) = c. 
For instance, suppose that we have a function 
whose rule is given by 
Then the very effective method for writing down f is 
The function 
9 {1,2,3} - 
(17 2) 
whose rule is given by 
is written down as 
9 = [2,1,21. 
Furthermore, given a triple 

160 
CHAPTER 4. INFINITE CARDINALS 
we have defined a function 
whose rule is given by 
h(1) = l,h(2) = 2,h(3) = 2. 
Let us count the number of functions in { 1, 2}{1,213). Since [a, 
b, c] 
is a random function and since there are 2 choices for a, 2 choices 
for b, and 2 choices for c we see that there’are 23 functions f in 
{ 1, 2}{11273). That is, 
card((1, 2}{19213)) = 23 = card((1, 2})card({132’3)). 
In general, if E = (1,. . . , m} and F = (1,. . . , m} are finite sets 
then each function in F E  can be written as a finite sequence 
[Yl,Y21.. 
f 7Yn1, 
where y1,. . . , yn E F and where 
For each k there are exactly m choices gk for the image f ( k )  under 
f. Since there are rn choices made for each of the n values 91,. . . , yn, 
there are exactly mn functions in FE. In other words, if E and F 
are finite sets then 
caxd(EF) = card(E)card(F). 
This motivates the following natural definition of exponential 
values of infinite cardinals. 
Definition 4.5.10 Let Q and p be cardinals. Choose any sets A 
and B such that o = card(A) and p = card(B). Then 
1 
pa = card(BA). 

4.5. THE ARITHMETIC OF CARDINALS 
In particular, 
161 
2N0 = card((0, l})card(”) 
= card((0,l)”). 
Theorems 4.4.2 and 4.4.5 show us that 
card@) < card(P(N)) = card((0, l}”) 
for the infinite set N so that by Theorem 4.3.1 
Consider this inequality in a more general context. Let N be an 
infinite cardinal and let A be a set such that N = card(A). Then 
2’ = card( (0, l}”) 
and hence Theorem 4.4.5 shows us that 
N < 2N. 
Moreover, since 2N is also a cardinal, we can form the cardinal 
which is properly larger than 2N. Iterating this process beginning 
with No produces an infinite chain of infinite cardinals 
NQ < 2N0 < 22No < 222N0 < . . 

162 
CHAPTER 4. INFINITE CARDINALS 
The diagram below illustrates these inequalities. This is not the 
real line. It is just a visual means of describing a chain of cardinals. 
I
I
 
I 
I 
I 
c 
We leave this section with a question and a list of small infinite 
cardinals that summarizes our research to date. 
No = card(N) = card(Q) = card(N x N) 
card(0,l) = card(R) = card(R3) = card(P(N)) = 2'0 
No < 2*0 < 22No < 222N0 < . . . 
Question: Is there a cardinal between card@) and card@)? Specif- 
ically, is there a cardinal N1 such that 
card(N) < N1 < card@)? 

Chapter 5 
Well Ordered Sets 
5.1 Successors of Elements 
The set of natural numbers N has an interesting property. 
The Well Ordered Property: Given any element n E N 
there is a unique next element or successur element n+. 
Thus there is exactly one successor element n+. You know n+ 
as n + 1, for example, O+ = 1, 12+ = 13, and 121+ = 122. There is 
no element x E N such that n+ = 0. Other common sets have this 
property and we tend to think that every collection has the Well 
Ordered Property. For example, suppose that P = {PI, P2, P3) is 
a set of three people. Our culture automatically endows P with 
several well orderings. We give P a well ordering by saying that 
the smallest element will be the shortest person, say, PI, the next 
element will be the next tallest person, say, P2, and then the tallest 
person, P3. We would write 
Good. This is a well ordering of P by saying that the symbol < 
points to the shorter person. Furthermore, 
There is no element 2 in P such that x+ = PI or P3f = 2 
163 

164 
CHAPTER 5. WELL ORDERED SETS 
Height is not the only way to well order P. Suppose that PI is 
older than P3 and that P3 is older than P2. Then we might well 
order P by age by writing 
In this case < points to the younger person. Thus 
P2’ = P3, P3+ = PI 
under the age well ordering. There is no element z in P such that 
IC+ = P2 or Pl+ = z. 
You might also well order P alphabetically on the last names of 
the people in P. Thus if PI is named Himmel, if P2 is named Frugal, 
and if P3 is named Briar, then under the alphabet ordering 
Thus P: 
= P2 , P; = PI, and there is no element z in P such that 
We have ordered P in different ways by considering different 
numbers associated with people. We are constantly well ordering 
people and their Iives when we say “I love you more” or “You’re so 
much better than him.” These sentences imply that given any two 
people we can assign an inequality to them: 
P;c = 2. 
Pl < P2 if Pl is “better than” PZ 
In this example < points to the better person. Most of us well order 
people on a continual basis even when an ordering is not called for. 
After all, can a parent declare which of their children they most 
love? I don’t think so. 
The power set P(A) of a set A is a naturally occurring example 
of a set that is not linearly ordered in the natural way. We define 
an order < on P(A) that is not a linear order as follows. 
I 
1 
1 
Given X,Y E P ( A )  then X < Y 
if X c Y. 
I 
1 
I 

5.1. SUCCESSORS OF ELEMENTS 
165 
Take, for example, P({ 1,2,3}). The elements {2}, { 1,2}, and {2,3} 
E P( { 1,2,3}) satisfy 
{2} c {1,2} and (2) c {2,3). 
We might consider the two elements to be successors of (2). Since 
(2) does not have a unique successor element, P((1,2,3)) is not a 
well ordered set. A similar argument shows that 8+ does not exist 
because it cannot be defined uniquely under the subset ordering <. 
0 c {l}, 0 c {2}, 0 c (3). 
However, we can define an abstract well ordering 5 on P({ 1,2,3}) 
by picking an ordering at random on the 8 elements of P( { 1,2,3}) 
as follows. 
Notice that this ordering does not have much to do with the subset 
inclusion C . It is simply an ordering that your author chose to make 
a point. Abstract well orderings are still well orderings, and they 
will be treated as legitimate well orderings on sets. 
The set R of real numbers is an example of a set that possesses 
a linear order < but that is not well ordered. For example, a is a 
real number but there is no next real number, fi'. That is, there 
is no real number that is next on the real number line after @. 
4 + 1 will not do since 
There should be nothing between a number and its successor. 
It is also apparent that Q is not well ordered. O+ does not exist 
as a rational number. We cannot use 1 as O+ in Q since 1 is not the 
next rational number larger than 0. This is clear once we write 
1 
o < - < l .  
2 
So well ordered sets are going to be thin sets. Given an element x, 
there is a next value or successor value x+. 

166 
CHAPTER 5. WELL ORDERED SETS 
There is another interesting example of a set that is not well 
ordered, but is still quite thin. Let 
W =  { O , l , -  ;,;,;,...} 
- - 
and let < be the usual ordering of real numbers. Then in the set 
- 
I+ 
1+ 
1 
2 
4
3
 
W ,  - 
= -, but O+ is not to be found in W .  Let’s argue 
about that. Suppose Q+ exists in W .  Then 
= 1, - 
1 
n 
O+ = - for some n E N. 
1 
n 
But then - should be the next value in the set that is larger than 
0. This is not the case since 
1 
< -. 
n t l  
n 
1 
O < -  
Hence, in W ,  O+ does not exist. Therefore W is not well ordered. 
I leave it to the reader as a challenge problem to justify to your- 
is well ordered. Just try to find x+ for each x € U. 
The well ordered set of natural numbers N satisfies some inter- 
esting properties that we will use later in a more general setting. N 
satisfies the following property. 
The Trichotomy Property: Given n, 
m E N then exactly one of 
the following relationships holds. 
n < m  or m < n  or n = m .  
For example, the solution to 2 = z + 1 satisfies exactly one of 
the comparisons x < 0, 0 < x, or x = 0. 

5.1. SUCCESSORS OF' ELEMENTS 
167 
Another example is the age no of the youngest mathematics 
professor in Canada. This number no satisfies exactly one of the 
following options. Either 
no < 22 and we say that the mathematics professor is younger than 22 , 
or no > 22 and we say that the mathematics professor is older than 22 , 
or no = 22 and we say that the mathematics professor is 22 years old. 
Even though we do not know the age no, we can still state that it 
satisfies the Trichotomy Property. 
A property closely aligned with the Trichotomy Property is the 
following. 
The Minimum Property: If A is a well ordered set then each 
subset of A has a unique minimum element. 
Each nonempty set in N contains a unique least element. That 
is, given X c N there is an element zo E X such that zo 5 z for 
each 17: E X. For example, { 7,8,9,10,11} c N has least element 7, 
while 
{n 1 n is the age in years of a Canadian mathematician} 
has a unique least age no that we cannot specifically identify. We 
would all agree, though, that this age no is somewhat more than 10 
and somewhat less than 100. 
A hard to verify minimum natural number is the minimum nat- 
urally occurring temperature in degrees Celsius on the surface of 
the Earth. For our purposes here this temperature will not have 
a decimal value, but only a whole number value. While we can 
safely say that this minimum temperature is smaller than 100°C 
and more than -1OO"C, we cannot say what that minimum tem- 
perature is without first measuring temperatures everywhere on the 
Earth's surface. However, the Minimum Property tells us that such 
a minimum temperature exists, whether or not we have made the 
measurements. 
If you are given a set of people measured only as closely as inches 
(i.e., their heights are in inches but not in fractions of inches), then 
these heights have a unique minimum height. It might be that the 
heights are smaller than 120 inches and that they are greater than 1 

168 
CHAPTER 5. WELL ORDERED SETS 
inch, but there is a unique minimum height h, and there is a person 
whose height is h,. 
The Well Ordered Property and the Minimum Property combine 
as follows. If n E N then 
n+ is the smallest of all the elements that are larger than n. 
In other words, 
if n < m E N then n+ 5 m. 
For example, 1 < 5 so that I+ = 2 5 5; 12 < 14 so that 12+ 5 14; 
and 121 < 122 so that 121+ 5 122. 
Another example is as follows. We will argue in this chapter that 
the set of cardinals is a well ordered set. A complete justification is 
well beyond the scope of this book. The framed inequality on page 
161 shows us that 
No < 2N0. 
No < N,+ 5 2%. 
So where is the successor N,f to NO? The best we can do at this time 
is to say that 
Furthermore, N: # No + 1 = No since, as must be apparent, N$ # 
Ho = Ho + 1. 
With these properties in mind let us abstract the notion of a 
well ordered set. 
Definition 5.1.1 Let A be any set. We say that A is a well ordered 
set if it satisfies the following two properties. 
2. A satisfies the Trichotomy Property. That is, given z, y E A 
then x and y satisfy exactly one of the following options. 
x < y, y < x, or x = y. 

5.1. SUCCESSORS OF ELEMENTS 
169 
2. A satisfies the Minimum Property. That is, each subset of A 
contains a unique least element. Equivalently, to each element 
x E A there is a unique element x+ E A such that 
if y E A and if x < y then x+ 5 y. 
We call x+ 
successor of x. 
Notice that the element x+ # x + 1 since we do not know if 1 is 
in A or if there is a way to add the elements of A. 
Under this definition N is a well ordered set. We have already 
discussed that N satisfies the Trichotomy Property, and that each 
element n E N possesses a successor element n+ = n + 1. 
We can also show that N satisfies the Minimum Property. Each 
subset of N has a least element found as follows. Let X C N and 
assume that X # 0. If 0 E X then we are done. 0 is the small- 
est element of W. Otherwise, test 1 E X. If it is then it is the 
smallest element of X .  Continue in this way, taking 2 and then 3, 
and on inductively. By choosing the natural numbers in this way 
0,1,2,3,. . . we will eventually find an element of X (since X is 
nonempty) and this will be the smallest element of X .  Anything 
smaller has been ruled out by the way we chose 0,1,2,. . .. Thus N 
satisfies the Minimum Property. 
Given a set A = {XO, 
XI,. 
. . , x,} we can write down a well or- 
dering on the elements of A by requiring that 
50 < 51 < . . . < 2,. 
Notice that every element x # x, E A has a successor x+ E A. For 
example, 
The successor x,' to x, does not exist since 
xof = 21, x; = x2. 
{x E A 1 x, < x} 
is empty. Moreover, it is improper to say that x,' = x,+1 in A since 
x,+~ is not an element of A. 
We can make {x1,x2,x3} a well ordered set if we define 

170 
CHAPTER 5. WELL ORDERED SETS 
Notice the peculiar order of the subscripts when compared with the 
ordering of the x’s. The order of the subscripts does not follow 
the ordering of the elements. It is the order of the elements that 
matters, not how we name them. Observe that x: does not exist. 
Partially order the pages of this book by the rule 
x 5 y if page y of the book follows page z. 
You should try to convince yourself that this ordering makes the 
pages in this book a well ordered set. If x is the last page in the 
book then x+ does not exist since there is no page following the last 
page of the book. 
Convince yourself that the subset ordering c makes the set 
a well ordered set. 
Order the set 
A = {{1,2), (2,311 
using the subset order C. The elements of A are incomparable. That 
is, {1,2} p {2,3} and {2,3} 
{1,2}. (Read $ as not a subset of.) 
Because the set A does not satisfy the Trichotomy Property, it is 
not well ordered. Write this one down for yourself. 
If we use the ordering < of the real numbers then 
is not a well ordered set since the set 
1 1  
u =  
does not contain a minimum element. The following diagram will 
help show us why. The line below is the line R+ of positive real 
numbers. It is not to scale. 
1 
2 - 
1 

5.1. SUCCESSORS OF ELEMENTS 
171 
1+ 
1+ 
1 
2 
' 3  
2 
This picture shows us that in A we have - = 1 - = -, and 
in general 
1
+
 1 
n + 1  
n 
If we try to choose an element - in X then we have a smaller one 
. Thus X cannot contain a minimum element, something in 
1 
n + l  
X that is smaller than any other element of X. Thus A does not 
have the Minimum Property. 
Moreover, 0 is without a successor O+ in A. To see this, suppose 
that Of exists in A. Then O+ must satisfy 
- _  
- -  
1 
n 
1 
so that 0' 5 - 
by the 
1 
for some n E N. In that case 0 < - 
definition of the successor element. But then 
n + l  
n + l  
1 
1 
< - = o + < -  
n + l  
n 
n +  1' 
1 
a clear contradiction. Thus O+ does not exist in A. 
We can construct new well ordered sets from old ones in the fol- 
lowing way. For reasons that will become clear later, let us assume 
that 
is a symbol not in N. Any element not in N will do. You might 
choose 0 ,  you might choose 0, 
or you might even choose the symbol 
N. We reserve the symbol cm for another purpose. It is traditional 
to choose wo. 
We then turn the set 

172 
CHAPTER 5. WELL ORDERED SETS 
into a well ordered set by requiring that 
n < wo for each n E W. 
We can list the elements in this well ordered set as follows. 
NU{wg} 
= 0 < 1 < 2 < 3 < ... <q. 
A picture of N U  {WO} will help. 
'This is not a picture of the real line. The three dots in the picture 
indicate that the values 0,1,2 continue on indefinitely in the same 
manner. The placement of wo indicates that wo is larger than 0,1, 
2, and every natural number n: for example, 
Even the very large natural numbers are smaller than wo. 
Reader Be Warned: We are dealing with an abstract math- 
ematical construction. We treat" as a featureless set. Recall how 
we constructed the natural numbers. 2 is the collection of all sets 
that are equivalent to {x,~}. 
2 is not a distance under this con- 
struction. 1 < 2 does not mean that 1 and 2 are a distance of 1 
unit apart. We have not introduced a means of defining distance 
on N. You should not see wo as being infinitely far away. wo is not 
a number. It is simply another element in a larger set. 
We have added wo in such a way that wo is the unique largest 
element in N U {wo}. Furthermore, 
I 
there is no element x E N U {WO} such that x+ = WO. 

5.2. THE ARITHMETIC OF ORDINALS 
173 
This is not hard to show. Let n E N be any element. Then by 
elementary arithmetic nf = n + 1 E N. Thus n f  # wg. 
For this reason, we say that 
I 
1 
wo is the first infinite ordinal 
or the first countably infinite ordinal. It is natural to think of wg as 
a countable infinity since it is larger than each n E N. We also refer 
to wg as a limit ordinal. 
Some of you may be having trouble thinking of this element wg. 
You are so accustomed to seeing N as a set whose elements are 1 unit 
of distance apart that the idea of N as a set without distance makes 
you uncomfortable. You think of < as a measure of the distance 
between elements. This is not the case. 
Think of N this way. Envisionla mathematical bag that contains 
each of the elements n E N. There is no distance and there is no unit 
of measurement. There is just a bag that contains all of the natural 
numbers n. You can do this, you know. It has been done on a 
smaller scale. Pick up a large dictionary and look at the back of the 
book. There is a page of measurements in various units of distance. 
Thus we have, on one page, included numbers like 12 inches in 1 
foot. Here we squeezed 12 numbers into one place. We also have 
1 mile is 5280 feet. We put several thousands of natural numbers 
into one page. You might also find 186,000 miles per second if you 
looked up the speed of light. These are large numbers that are not 
far away. They are within our grasp. Think of our bag of natural 
numbers in the same way. They exist as numbers in some kind of 
set. Nothing more. 
5.2 The Arithmetic of Ordinals 
We now have a set N U  { W O }  that contains a symbol wo that can be 
identified with an infinite value. All we had to do was to introduce 
a new symbol wo that we defined to be larger than each of the 
elements in N. No distance was implied since infinite distance is 
undefined. The symbol wo is just that, a symbol. Let us continue 

174 
CHAPTER 5. WELL ORDERED SETS 
using this idea of adding a symbol, and thus extend the well ordered 
set N U { W O }  to a larger well ordered set. 
We will choose a symbol to serve as wof in a well ordered set. 
We choose for convenience 
1 
wo + 1 
and we place wo + 1 as the maximal element in a new well ordered 
set as in the following diagram. 
0
1
2
3
 
wo 
wo + 1 
* * e  
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
t 
The symbol does not really mean the sum of wo and 1. We have 
simply chosen a symbol that we can recognize as the successor w$ 
of WO. However, we will abuse the notation and read wo + 1 as 
omega nought plus one. In this way we have begun an induction 
process with which we will construct a new set of ordinals. We have 
already introduced two different infinite ordinals, wo, wo + 1, and 
there is the promise of many more. Notice that this construction is 
in conflict with the adage that we were taught as children: infinity 
plus one is infinity. While this adage applies to cardinals, it does 
not anticipate the existence of ordinals. We might try bending the 
adage somewhat and say that infinity plus one is infinite. 
Extend the above construction of ordinals by choosing different 
symbols 
that we will call ordinals. 
defining a quite natural ordering 
wo + 2, wo + 3, . . . 
We make a new well ordered set by 
of the new set 

5.2. THE ARITHMETIC OF ORDINALS 
175 
A picture will help the reader visualize the ordering. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
. 
In effect we have constructed a sequence of ordinals or infinities. If 
we ignore the addition and multiplication of N then the set 
{Wo,wo 4- 1,wo 4- 2,Wo 4- 3,. . .} 
appears to be no different from N. Another picture will help. 
0 
1 
2 
3 
* * *  
I 
I 
I 
. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
For all intents and purposes, our new well ordered set is formed by 
attaching a copy of N to the right of N. 
There is another interesting omission here. Where do we find 
the symbol 1 + wo in this picture? The answer is hard to explain 
but easy to read. 
1 
1 +wo = wo # wo+ 1. 
This contradicts all of our intuition on addition of numbers. Why 
isn’t wo + 1 = 1 + wo? Common sense tells us that addition is 
commutative. The reality of it shows us that our common sense 
about numbers cannot be applied meaningfully to infinite ordinals. 
An explanation that might satisfy our curiosity and our common 
sense lies deep inside the study of well ordered sets. We will not go 

176 
CHAPTER 5. WELL ORDERED SETS 
that far. Suffice it to say that this startling unexpected equation is 
a property of ordinals and not of numbers. 
We need a new element that will act as an element that is larger 
than wo + n for each n E N. Since our new well ordered set is 
basically formed by putting one copy of N behind another copy of 
N, 
our next choice of a largest element might be chosen as wo + wo. 
This symbol is not in our set. Certainly 2w0 is another symbol not 
in our set so we will make the identification 
2w0 = wo + wo 
and then form the well ordered set 
N u {wo, wo + 1, wo + 2,. 1 .} u (2wo) 
by requiring that 
wo + n < 2wo for all n E N. 
In our new well ordered set the largest element is 2w0 as in the 
accompanying picture. 
We have constructed another well ordered set. This set is diflerent 
from the previous well ordered sets in that it has two limit ordinals 
while the previous well ordered sets have just had the one limit 
ordinal WO. 
Thus there is no element x such that x+ = wo or x+ = 2wo. Fur- 
thermore, , to each element x except the largest element there is an 

5.2. THE ARITHMETIC OF ORDINALS 
177 
element x+. Given the way that we have defined x+ E N U  {wg) as 
the symbol x + 1, it is natural and mathematicaiiy proper to write 
x- = predecessor of x 
J 
for ordinals x. That is, x- is the unique largest element that is 
smaller than x. Hence 
- 
x = the unique element y such that y + 1 = x. 
Under this convenient notation we have 
We must be aware of the fact that not every element x has a pre- 
decessor x-. For example, w; and 0- do not exist. There is no 
element y such that y + 1 = 0 or wo. Thus there is no way to define 
wo - 1 since wo - 1 would be the ordinal x such that x+ = w, and 
such an ordinal does not exist. In a similar way 2wo - 1 cannot be 
defined since there is no ordinal x such that x+ = LO. 
Therefore, in 
general, even though we can add some ordinals and subtract some 
ordinals, the subtraction of ordinals cannot be defined on all ordi- 
nals. Here is an abstract addition whose associated subtraction is 
not defined everywhere. 
We have defined the multipIication of at least two ordinals when 
we formed 2wO. We will show that division is not defined on all 
ordinals. To see this, assume to the contrary that there is some 
ordinal 
1 
-wo = x. 
2 
wo = 22 
Then 
so that wo > x. Consequently, x E N since the only ordinals less 
than wo are in N. This implies that 
2x E N, 

178 
CHAPTER 5. WELL ORDERED SETS 
while we chose wo such that 
22 = wo $2 N. 
1 
2 
This contradiction shows us that -wo cannot be defined. 
If we place a copy of the well ordered set 
N u {wo, wo + 1, wo + 2, . . .} 
at its end, we have constructed a new well ordered set that is dif- 
ferent from what we started with. That is, we can choose symbols 
2w0 + n for n E N and we define a new well ordered set. 
N U {WO,WO + 1, wo + 2,. . .} U ( 2 ~ 0 ~ 2 ~ 0  
+ 1 , 2 ~ 0  + 2,. . .}. (5.1) 
Pictorially we have the following set. 
* * *  
wo w o + l  wo+2 * * *  
2w0 2 w o + l  
2w0+2 a * *  
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
t 
Can you see it? Can you see how we will proceed next? We will 
insert a new element 3w0 that is larger than all elements in (5.1) 
thus creating a new well ordered set whose picture might look like 
this. 
* * *  
wo w o + 1  wo+2 **. 
2w0 2 w o + l  
* * e  
3wo 
The above picture suggests a chain of limit ordinals that are 
integer multiples of wo. 
wo < 2w0 < 3wo < . . . , 
Given an n E N we would define an ordinal 

5.2. THE ARITHMETIC OF ORDINALS 
179 
as follows. Provided that we know (n - l)wo, we can define the 
ordinals 
(n - I)W$ = (n - l)w0 + 1, (n - l)w0 + I+ = (n - 1)wO + 2, . . . 
as we did above with wo. A picture is given as follows. 
0 . .  
( n - l ) w o  
( n - l ) w o + l  
( n - l ) w o + 2  
0 . .  
1 
I 
Then we choose a symbol 
and define it to be the unique element that is larger than all of the 
elements (n - l)wo, (n - 1)wo + 1, (n - 1)wo +2,. . .. The well ordered 
set that we have just defined can be described by the following 
picture. 
0 . 0  
( n - l ) w o  
( n - l ) w o + l  
( n - 1 ) w o + 2  
0 . 0  
nuo 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Then we have indeed defined an unending chain of limit ordinals: 
wo < 2w0 < 3w0 < . . . < nwo < . . . 
Thus there is a limit ordinal 1 0 0 ~ 0  
and one 186,000~0. Why there 
but this is so far out there that we would have trouble imagining 
just how large that ordinal is. 
We might be tempted to say “and so on” when we read . . . but 
what does that mean now? Indefinitely? Infinitely? What do these 

180 
CHAPTER 5. WELL ORDERED SETS 
words mean. Do we mean that we should repeat the process once 
for each n E N, or once for each ordinal < 3W0, or perhaps once 
for each ordinal less than 10102wo? We need a more precise way of 
saying "and so on," and we will see it in the next section. 
As long as we have a chain of limit ordinals WO, 2w0, h o t  . . . we 
can define a symbol 
w; = wow0 
I 
I 
that is larger than each of the limit ordinals nu0 with n E N. Picto- 
rially we have defined the new well ordered set whose limit ordinals 
look like this. 
We have defined w i  by placing wo copies of N one right after the 
other. The ordinal w: is larger than all limit ordinals of the form 
nwo. Even the incredibly large limit ordinal 
is smaller than w i .  
Just for the fun of it let's try to define w;. Let us define 
w; = w; * wo. 
Beginning with w i  we will define the ordinals w i  + n and nwi for 
each n E N. The diagram shows us what we have done. It is not to 
scale. 

5.2. THE ARITHMETIC OF ORDINALS 
181 
By repeating the same process we will define ordinal powers of 
wo as the symbol 
w: = wg-' . wo for each n E N. 
If we start with wo = w i  then we can define w i  = WO-WO, w: = ~ 0 2 . ~ 0 ,  
and then w: = w: . wg. The process continues, defining all of the 
powers wg. We have then expanded our collection of limit ordinals 
by taking powers of wo and all of their combinations 
2
3
 
wo < wo < wo < ... 
and 
lowo < 12iW; < 10102w,33 + 101 < 2w,81 + wo < . . . 
Pictorially we have 
I
l
l
 
I
l
l
 
!
!
I
 
c 
If we continue this chain wo, w;, w i ,  . . . of limit ordinals we arrive 
at the much larger limit ordinal 
w p  = the smallest ordinal that is larger than all of the ordinals w:. 
This limit ordinal w,wO can be pictured as follows. 

182 
CHAPTER 5. WELL ORDERED SETS 
In fact, there is no end to the exponents we can form. We can 
even define an ordinal that has infinitely many exponents. Let us 
agree that 
is the smallest ordinal that is larger than each of the composite pow- 
ers 
GJo"o 
WOyO 
wo<w,wo <wo 
<w,w. 
< ... 
Thus N is part of a larger well ordered set, some of whose picture 
we give below. 
o . . .  wo. 
W,"O 
wo"" . . . wg 
e e e  
e e e  
e e e  
This picture is not complete since we can extend this well ordered 
set by defining 
It is difficult to explain which well ordered set these ordinals repre- 
sent. They are so large that they are larger than every ordinal that 
we have discussed so far. Let us just agree that these are large or- 
dinals whose existence we had not expected. Keep in mind, reader, 
that like any other graph, there are many unlabelled ordinals be- 
tween the labelled points in this picture. That is what . . . and 
should say to you. 
And yet, as large as this ordinal is, there is a larger ordinal. To 
find it we will have to construct an ordinal in a different way. 
Let X be the set of real numbers. It is best if we use a different 
symbol like X as it will enhance the discussion. In Theorem 4.3.1 
we showed that 
card(N) < card@) = card(X). 

5.2. THE ARITHMETIC OF ORDINALS 
183 
One of the accepted axioms of mathematics is that X can be turned 
into a well ordered set. The set X is so large that it contains a copy 
of every one of the ordinals we have discussed so far. For example, 
are all (essentially) in X .  But none of these ordinals is the largest 
element of X .  
Let fl1 be a symbol not in X and define a new well ordered set 
X+ = X U {fll} by requiring that 
x < 521 for each x E X. 
Then fll becomes the largest element in X+. 
We say that 
R1 = the first uncountable ordinal. 
And yet 
is not the largest ordinal. 
Indeed, if we seek the largest ordinal then our search is fruitless. 
There is no such object. Ordinals just go on without stopping. If 
we think that we have exhausted our chain of ordinals at some value 
a, we can always define a new ordinal a < a + 1 and kickstart our 
chain. If we have a set of ordinals 
a1 < a2 < ... 
and we think that this is the end of the ordinal process, we can 
always choose a new symbol z not on the chain, place it at the end 
of the set 
a1 < a2 < ... < z ,  

184 
CHAPTER 5. WELL ORDERED SETS 
and start the process of constructing ordinals again. 
Let us end this section by reintroducing an old friend of ours. Do 
you remember the cleaning lady, Mary, in Hilbert’s Infinite Hotel 
from page 98? She’s the one who cleaned all of the rooms immacu- 
lately and was not heard from again. Well, as it happens, she was 
found resting quietly in a room outside the Infinite Hotel numbered 
wg. Naturally, this is the room for Hotel Staff. 
5.3 Cardinals as Ordinals 
It is possible to order a set linearly but not well order the set. 
For example, the usual ordering of the real numbers R makes R 
a linearly ordered set, but not a well ordered one. Linear order 
implies that the Trichotomy Property is true of R; however, it does 
not imply that R is well ordered. For example, we cannot define 
1 
a successor for 
in R that respects the usual ordering of R. The 
r2 
reason would be that 
number x such that 
I+ 
if we have - 
2 
then there should be no real 
1 
1+ 
- < x < - .  
2 
2 
Thus there can be no next real number. 
Recall that card(A) 5 card(B) if there is a one-to-one function 
f : A - 
B. This ordering 5 of cardinals is linear because the 
given cardinals satisfy the Trichotomy Property. That is, 
given any two cardinals Q and P either 
a < p ,  P < Q ,  
or a=P. 
I 
I 
This allows us to make the following conclusion. 
Given two cardinals Q and P then 
Q 5 P and p 5 Q =+ 
CY = p. 

5.3. CARDINALS AS ORDINALS 
185 
It is natural to ask if this linear ordering of cardinals is a well 
ordering of cardinals. For example, if we want to know the com- 
parative sizes of card(P3(N)) and 2card(P(N)) then we can be assured 
that exactly one of the three conditions 
card(Ps(N)) < 2c"'d(p(N)), 
2"a'd(P(N)) < card(P3(N)), 
or card(P3(N)) = 2ca'd(p(N)) 
applies to the two cardinals. Now that we know that the cardi- 
nals are linearly ordered, we make the next leap of the mathemat- 
ical imagination. The reason that we have taken such care with 
the ordinals and their arithmetic is the following deep result from 
mathematics that links ordinals with cardinals. 
Theorem 5.3.1 Given a cardinal N there is a successor cardinal 
N+. That is, the set of cardinals is well ordered. 
The theorem is deep and its proof is far too complex for us to 
present in this book, so let us just accept the truth of it. 
Thus there is a cardinal N,f and one (2N0)+. Since 
No < 2N0 
and since the successor element Z+ is the smallest element that is 
larger than 2, we can say that 
but we do not know if this inequality is proper or an equation. 
A more familiar inequality comes from Theorem 4.3.1: 
No < card@). 
Since the successor element N,f is smaller than every element that 
is larger than No, we can write that 
N,f 5 card@). 
Questions about this inequality turn out to be some of the deep- 
est questions in mathematics. We will address this predicament 
presently. 

186 
CHAPTER 5. WELL ORDERED SETS 
The following notation will be used for the most often referred 
to cardinals: 
No = card(N) (read as aleph nought), 
N1 = N$ is the successor of NO (read as aleph one), 
I 
N2 = Nf is the successor of N1, 
and so on. 
Inasmuch as 
No = card@) < card@), 
we can write that 
N1 5 card@). 
The reasoning here is that the successor N1 = N,f is the smallest 
element that is larger than No. We have thus arrived at our first 
mysterious property of cardinals. Given that N1 5 card@) it is 
natural to ask if N1 = card(R). This question is so subtle a mat- 
ter that the mathematician who answered it, Paul J. Cohen, was 
honored with the highest award in mathematics: the Field’s Medal. 
Theorem 5.3.2 [Paul J. Cohen] We cannot prove and we cannot 
disprove that N1 = card@). 
We say that the condition N1 = card@) is independent of the 
ZFC Axioms of Set Theory. That is, it is unattainable as a theorem 
in regular mathematics. That statement needs some explanation. 
I suppose you have had experience in plane geometry, so we start 
there. The geometry we studied in high school was based on ten 
elementary truths, or axioms and propositions, given by a Greek 
mathematician Euclid (circa 300 BC). Euclid started with these 
ten statements and then proceeded to develop all of geometry from 
them. The truth of most of those statements is quite transparent. 
For example, Euclid starts by assuming that the whole is the sum 
of its parts. Obviously, this is true. He also assumes that all right 
angles have equal measure. Again, obviously true. There are eight 
others that we will not state because they do not impact on our 

5.3. CARDINALS AS ORDINALS 
187 
discussion. The point is, from ten clearly true statements Euclid 
could derive all of the mathematics in the geometry you studied in 
school. Thus, by starting with true statements about points, lines, 
and triangles and then extending his thoughts using Aristotelian 
Logic, (the logic of true and false statements), Euclid was able to 
develop a mathematics that was free of any mistakes or miscon- 
ceptions. Euclid’s method, now called the axiomatic method, was 
so compelling that mathematicians in every century over the last 
2300 years have made use of it. We all begin our work with a few 
basic statements and proceed from there to demonstrate universal 
truths. These truths are not personal opinion. They are statements 
that would be true no matter who was reading them. These are 
truths that can be shared with advanced civilizations anywhere on 
Earth and, should the need arise, with extraplanetary civilizations. 
Assuming that a group of people is sufficiently advanced, assum- 
ing they know enough mathematics, we would share with them the 
same theorems of plane geometry. That is the power and the na- 
ture of the axiomatic method. Try to make a similiar statement 
concerning the literature, art, or religion of two different civiliza- 
tions on Earth. That would not be possible. Mathematics took on 
the axiomatic method with vigor in the early part of the twentieth 
century. In this time every area of mathematics from algebra to cal- 
culus tried to find those few elementary truths that could be used as 
a springboard with Aristotelian Logic to produce universal truths 
about that area of mathematics. Sometime in the 1920s a math- 
ematician came up with a few statements that all mathematicians 
could agree on as obviously true, and that most agreed were simple 
statements. These axioms today are called the the ZFC Axioms, or 
Zermelo-Franklin-Choice Axioms. These are axioms about sets and 
they are the basis for most modern mathematics. For example, one 
of the statements is that there do not exist sets A and B that are 
elements of each other: that is, 
There do not exist sets A and B such that A E B and B E A 
A moment’s thought might convince you that this statement is true, 
and that its negation is: 
There are two sets A and B such that A E B and B E A. 

188 
CHAPTER 5. WELL ORDERED SETS 
The point behind this is that by starting with elementary statements 
about sets we are able to prove advanced ideas in such areas as linear 
algebra, calculus, and trigonometry. All of mathematics assumes set 
theory so all of mathematics depends upon axioms. 
What P. J. Cohen proved was that there is at least one state- 
ment about mathematics that cannot be proved or disproved with 
the ZFC Axioms. No amount of logic and mathematics will allow 
us to start with the axioms of set theory and then end up with 
HI = card@). Mathematics, as large as it might seem right now, 
is too small to include HI = card@) as a theorem. Now there is a 
statement. Why would you ever think that mathematics is small? 
And yet here we have an example of its limitations. 
This is probably the first time you have seen such a statement. 
Think of this as a Catch-22 in your algebra course. Your teacher 
asks you to show that x = y for some numbers x and y, and you 
tell your professor, “I cannot prove that x = y but I cannot prove 
that z # y.” Your professor would certainly give you a high mark 
if x = N1 and y = card@). 
Let’s examine what it means to be independent of the axioms 
of set theory. There are five axioms that define what set theory is. 
From these axioms almost all of modern mathematics can be proved 
as theorems. This occurs in exactly the same way you learned it in 
your high school geometry course. You begin with five axioms or 
postulates (these from Euclid) from which you can prove all of the 
theorems in elementary geometry. Mathematics is handled in the 
same way. Most of the mathematics we meet in elementary courses 
can be proved from the axioms of set theory. Thus the ZFC Ax- 
ioms of Set Theory become the foundation of modern mathematics. 
With such a beginning, mathematicians are sure that modern math- 
ematics is on the same firm foundation that Euclid’s plane geometry 
enjoys. 
Before Cohen’s Theorem 5.3.2, mathematicians did not know of 
a simply stated idea that was independent of the ZFC Axioms of 
Set Theory. Indeed, these Axioms were relatively new discoveries 
when Cohen proved his theorem. It struck the mathematicians of 
the day as quite strange. It is still thought to be curious that some 
statement about mathematics is beyond mathematical proof or dis- 
proof. Before Cohen’s Theorem, the powerful mathematician David 

5.3. CARDINALS A S  ORDINALS 
189 
Hilbert (remember him of Infinite Hotel fame) had suggested that 
mathematicians should start looking for a program or computer 
of sorts that would produce all of mathematics if it was allowed 
to run long enough. Cohen’s Theorem 5.3.2 proved that Hilbert’s 
suggestion could not be realized. There can be no program or com- 
puter that produces all of mathematics even if it was allowed to 
run in some thought experiment. Some statements of mathematics 
are simply beyond the reach of mathematical proof. They can be 
stated or assumed but not proved. 
The cold fact is that the axioms of set theory are simply not 
strong enough to prove every statement about mathematics. Fur- 
thermore, no collection of mathematical axioms will allow us to 
prove every statement about mathematics. The only way to use a 
statement like N1 = card(R) is to include it as an axiom. However, 
once that inclusion is made we create a larger and diflerent math- 
ematics that properly contains the one we grew up with. This new 
mathematics will contain all of the work you did in your high school 
mathematics class, including algebra and geometry, and it will con- 
tain a new and perhaps strange mathematical statement. Before 
the end of this discussion we will encounter a simple statement that 
is true in the mathematics that assumes that N1 = card@) but not 
in a smaller mathematics. 
Georg Cantor did not know of Cohen’s Theorem (since Can- 
tor lived 80 years before Cohen’s Theorem was published), so he 
accepted N1 = card@) as an axiom or hypothesis. 
The Continuum Hypothesis: Assume that N1 = card(!R). 
I 
1 
Because the Continuum Hypothesis is independent of our usual 
mathematics, it can be used as an axiom with which we can con- 
struct an entirely new mathematics. 
CH 
CH is the usual mathematics together with the Continuum Hypoth- 
esis used as an axiom. Many beautiful theorems are proved in CH, 

190 
CHAPTER 5. WELL ORDERED SETS 
or by assuming the Continuum Hypothesis. The mathematics you 
learned in high school is not strong enough to prove all of the the- 
orems in CH. 
On the other hand, because we cannot disprove the Continuum 
Hypothesis, we can include its logical negation, N1 < card@), as an 
axiom in mathematics, thus constructing a new mathematics: 
notCH. 
While many theorems are proved in notCH these theorems cannot 
be compared to the theorems in CH. Theorems in CH may seem 
to contradict some theorems in notCH, but this is an inaccurate 
comparison because 
CH and notCH exist as two different mathematical universes. 
We cannot compare the theorems from CH and notCH anymore 
than we could compare recipes for bread and cake and claim that 
one is right and one is wrong. Each has its own uses and each has 
its own role on the dinner table. In the same way the theorems of 
CH have their place in mathematics, the theorems in notCH have 
their place in mathematics, and the two places cannot be compared. 
This must seem odd. We were all led to believe that there was 
only one mathematics. This reaction is not unusual. The math- 
ematics we learned in high school is contained in both CH and 
notCH. No one except the experts ever has the opportunity to 
distinguish between the mathematics in CH and the mathematics 
in notCH. In picture (5.2), CH and notCH are the regions that 
contain the shaded region called Standard Mathematics. From this 
picture we can imply certain facts about Mathematics. Here is what 
this means to you. 

5.3. CARDINALS AS ORDINALS 
191 
All of Mathematics 
( 5 4  
................................. 
................................. 
................................. 
................................. 
..... 
..... 
..... 
..... 
..... 
::::: 
..... Standard 
i i i i i  
I ..... 
i i i I Mathematics f ii 
..... 
..... 
..... 
..... 
..... 
..... 
..... 
..... 
..... 
................................. 
Other Mathematics 
1. CH and notCH overlap in the Standard Mathematics. 
2. CH and notCH are different. 
3. Neither CH nor notCH equals the Standard Mathematics. 
4. Together CH and notCH do not encompass All of Mathe- 
matics. 
Moreover, the diagram suggests that there are other regions of math- 
ematics out there to be discovered. This is indeed the truth of the 
matter. 
In the following discussion I will attempt to show you a mathe- 
matical fact that changes when viewed as a theorem in CH and in 
notCH. 

192 
CHAPTER 5. WELL ORDERED SETS 
Recall that N1 = N,f is the successor to No, and that N2 denotes 
the successor of N1. 
L 
I 
The next question we will consider is: How do No, N1, card(R), and 
Nz compare? It turns out that these relationships depend on the 
mathematics we choose to work in, CH or notCH. We have shown 
that 
N1 5 card@). 
Using this with the already established Theorems 4.3.1 and 4.4.2, 
we find that there is a chain of cardinals 
No < NI 5 card(R). 
To fine tune these inequalities we would use the Continuum Hy- 
pothesis or its logical negation. The next two boxes show us how 
these inequalities change in CH and in notCH. Note the different 
placement of N1 and N2. 
In CH, 
No < L I I i  
N1 = card(E%) < N2, 
while in notCH, 
This is real evidence that CH and notCH are different mathe- 
matical systems. 

5.3. CARDINALS AS ORDINALS 
193 
Let us examine that thought. The cardinality of R, essen- 
tially the number of elements in R, has different values in CH 
and notCH. This infinite number card(&!) has two different val- 
ues, depending upon which mathematics you choose to work in. 
The difference between CH and notCH could not be more plain. 
card(&!) = N1 in CH, 
card(R) 2 N2 in notCH. 
How is that possible? Does the number of elements in R change as 
it passes between CH and notCH? Are there fewer real numbers 
in CH than there are in notCH? Of course, the set R does not 
change when we work in CH or notCH. If z is a real number in 
the mathematics CH then z is a real number in the mathematics 
notCH. The reason for this is that R exists in the mathematics 
you learned in high school. The real numbers will be the same no 
matter which mathematical structure you work in. So then how 
does card(&!) change values between CH and notCH? The answer 
is that in notCH we add a cardinal between No and card@). When 
we form CH we are not allowing for any other cardinals between 
No and card@). CH tolerates the inequalities 
No < N1 = card@) < N2. 
When we list the cardinals in notCH we allow for the existence 
of a cardinal N1 such that 
No < N1 < N2 5 card(&!). 
Since N2 = Nr there will not be cardinals strictly between N1 and 
N2. Thus in notCH we have the chain of inequalities 
No < N1 < N2 5 card@). 
It follows that the ways we count in CH and notCH are different. 
The cardinals (numbers) that we use change values when we pass 
from the mathematical system CH to notCH. 
Now consider the cardinal 2N0. Under the ZFC Axioms of Set 
Theory we can write down that 
No < N1 5 2N? 

194 
CHAPTER 5. WELL ORDERED SETS 
Thus in CH we have 
while in notCH we have 
Once again we see that the size of a cardinal depends upon the 
mathematical system in which we are working. 
Let me impart one final item. A more general version of the 
Continuum Hypothesis is 
The Generalized Continuum Hypothesis (GCH) : 
Assume that N+ = 2* for each cardinal N. 
1 
I 
That is, given a cardinal N assume that 2* is the next cardinal. 
The statement GCH assures us that all cardinals come in essentially 
one form, that of a power of 2. 
Picture (5.3) illustrates the containing relationship between the 
mathematical system GCH that results from the addition of the 
Generalized Continuum Hypothesis into the Standard Mathematics 
ZFC. Picture (5.3) suggests that ZFC, the Standard Mathematics, 
is properly contained in the mathematical system GCH formed by 
adding GCH to the ZFC Axioms of Set Theory, and that CH prop- 
erly contains GCH. Thus we have found a mathematics properly 
between CH and ZFC. There is every reason to expect that there is 
an infinite chain of mathematical systems containing ZFC. Indeed, 

5.3. CARDINALS AS ORDINALS 
195 
All of Mathematics 
(5.3) 
CH 
GCH 
ZFC 
Other 
Mathematics 
we leave it to the reader to find an infinite chain of mathematical 
systems 
between ZFC and CH. Think of the Continuum Hypothesis and 
remember that we do not know if N+ = 2N for cardinals N. Just 
find these new mathematical systems. There is no reason to show 
that these chains behave precisely like the picture or your intuition 
suggests. 
As we stated earlier, according to the Generalized Continuum 
Hypothesis each cardinal except No is a power of 2. In this way 
cardinals are not like numbers at all. After all, not every number is 
a power of 2. Thus under the Generalized Continuum Hypothesis 
each of the cardinals No) N1, Nz, . . . is a power of 2. 
ZFC c ... c MS2 c MS1 C CH 

196 
CHAPTER 5. WELL ORDERED SETS 
CH 
There is one easy question that I will leave the reader with in 
this chapter. We know that the Continuum Hypothesis cannot be 
proved using the ZFC Axioms of Set Theory. There are also math- 
ematical statements that cannot be proved within CH. 
The Gen- 
eralized Continuum Hypothesis is one such statement. Moreover, 
there is a true statement that cannot be proved within GCH. 
It 
exists but we cannot state it here. As we indicated in picture (5.4) 
there is a chain 
GCH c ... c MS2 C MS1 C CH 
of mathematicd systems. Each system MS, is associated with a 
statement S, that cannot be proved within MS,. The question is 
this. Can we find one statement, say S, that cannot be proved in 
any of these systems MS,? That is, can we find one statement, 
say S ,  that cannot be proved by MS1, that cannot be proved by 
MS2, that cannot be proved by MS3, and so on? I will not answer 
this because the question is more philosophical than mathematical. 
Test your answer when you find it. Feel free to get emotional about 
it. Do you really think that your statement is beyond the proof of 
all of these mathematical systems? 

5.4. MAGNITUDE VERSUS CARDINALITY 
197 
5.4 Magnitude versus Cardinality 
As with every discussion about the infinite, these ideas take place 
in a mathematical thought experiment or a Platonic Universe. So 
if these ideas do not agree with what you see around you, good! 
There is nothing infinite about this world around us. Let us expand 
on that for a little bit. 
When you were introduced to the infinite as a child (i.e., before 
you read this book), you thought that infinity was an infinite dis- 
tance from us. Somehow, infinity was a place that we could reach if 
we could move infinitely far. This is not possible within our phys- 
ical universe. In our universe we have only a finite distance that 
we can travel before we come upon our starting point again. There 
are two infinities in that idea that have to be addressed, namely, 
infinite distance and infinite time. 
The universe, as far as is known at the time of this printing, is a 
lumpy sphere having four dimensions. Its beginning can be pinned 
down to within such a small fraction 
of a second that for our 
purposes we can assume that scientists have glimpsed the origin of 
the universe. Of course, this is not really the universe's origin, and 
perhaps that origin is beyond the scope of scientific observation, 
but it gives us a beginning, a starting point to talk about age in 
years. The beginning of our universe seems to have occurred some 
20 billion years ago. It might be older or younger than that but 
we can assume with scientific certainty that the universe is no more 
than 30 billion years old. Moreover, outside this framework of time, 
it is relatively certain that time as we know it does not exist. Time 
seems to be peculiar to our universe. Thus there can be no infinite 
time prior to us. Time has not existed forever. 
The expansion of the universe probably occurred in fits and 
starts: that is, the expansion of the universe was not smooth and 
not of uniform speed. But it has a maximum value, the speed of 
light. Given the age of the universe and a finite rate of expansion, 
it is clear that the universe is a bounded place, say, smaller than 
3 x lo1' x c, c being the speed of light. This gives us a bounded 
universe, so that distances in the universe do not appear to be in- 
finite. Before anyone starts to suggest that we can reach the edge 
of the universe, let me bring you back to reality. There is no edge 

198 
CHAPTER 5. WELL ORDERED SETS 
to the universe. If you start out in a direction and hope to travel 
in a straight line you are thwarted by gravitational considerations 
since gravity warps space and time. Furthermore, you are on a four 
dimensional lumpy spheroid, not a three dimensional object. Thus 
your travels are necessarily distorted by the fourth dimension. For 
instance, suppose you are a point living on a sphere. You live in 
three dimensions but you only experience two. As you travel around 
the bounded spherical universe of yours, you are impressed with the 
fact that you can never reach the edge of the universe. And yet you 
know the universe is bounded. Try it on an orange and see if that 
helps you visualize the point moving about and seeking the edge of 
its universe. 
Thus we do not find our universal edge. It bends away from us 
in the fourth dimension. In fact, cosmologists, people who study 
the universe, suspect that our universe exists as an 11 dimensional 
object. It would then be impossible for us to know today where 
that bending or curvature in the universe might be. 
But just because the point’s universe has no edge does that mean 
that the distances in the universe extend to the infinite? Are there 
two points in our universe that are infinitely far apart? Of course 
not. The distances might be large, perhaps even larger than our 
imagined point ever imagined, but the distances on the sphere are 
quite finite. In the same way but in a higher number of dimen- 
sions our universe does not possess two points that have an infinite 
distance between them. Infinite distances it seems must somehow 
extend beyond the universe. What then do we mean by infinite 
distances? This is the difference between cardinals and the infinite 
distances you may have become familiar with. Infinite distances do 
not exist while our notion of a cardinal does exist. 
A cardinal is in a very loose sense a count of the number of 
elements in a set. As we saw there are many cardinals including 
the first infinite cardinal card(N) and the cardinality of the reals 
card@). (If this notation makes little or no sense to you, then 
please read the previous chapters in this book.) We can continually 
add elements to these sets to form sets with larger cardinality. For 
example, if we let P(X) 
denote the power set of X, or equivalently 
P ( X )  is the set of subsets of the set X ,  then 

5.4. MAGNITUDE VERSUS CARDINALITY 
199 
is a list of sets with different cardinalities. Since we can always 
take the power set of a set, this list is infinite. Thus if we count the 
number of elements in a set carefully, we find that there are infinitely 
many infinite cardinals. These cardinals do not measure distance. 
They do not measure how far it is across a set. These cardinalities 
simply measure how many elements are in the set using one-to-one 
and onto functions. 
The infinite ideas that you have seen in life are more closely 
related to distance because their size is determined relative to the 
natural numbers, N. Mathematics does not recognize distance as 
an infinite number. That symbol you may have seen, the lazy eight 
m, is not defined as a number. That’s right. No matter what you 
may have heard 00 is not a number. The division - is not infinity, 
either. It is undefined, meaning that it holds no meaning at all. The 
symbol - makes no mathematical sense at all. We do not even give 
it a special symbol or name. In fact, except for books like this one, 
you are not likely to see a professional mathematician write down 
1 
1 
- That’s enough of that. My fingers hurt when I type -. Ouch, I 
0’ 
0 
did it again. 
Now, to speak about infinite quantities mathematicians have 
found that the limit is the only notion that allows us to describe 
and manipulate infinite or unbounded quantities in a consistent and 
mathematically precise manner. Let f(x) be a function that takes 
real numbers x to real numbers f(x). This is where that high school 
education comes in handy. Suppose we want to know about the size 
of f(x) as z gets closer to some number, say, a. We write 
1 
0 
1 
0 
provided that f(z) 
gets closer to L as x gets closer to a. Don’t 
let the notation scare you. This is the smallest bit of notation we 
can use to get the idea across to the reader. It has been in use for 
150 years now and shows no sign of being replaced by something 
else. What do we mean by x gets closer to a? What we mean 
is that x is allowed to take on values that are physically closer to 
a. That is, the difference between them (i.e., the larger minus the 

200 
CHAPTER 5. WELL ORDERED SETS 
smaller), is allowed to become very small or close to 0. For example, 
a calculator will show you that 2x + 3 gets close to 5 as x gets close 
to 1. I won’t bore you with the table of numbers. In our notation 
lim 2x + 3 = 5. 
We are more interested in limits where L is not finite. We say that 
f(x) has an infinite limit at a if for each natural number N there 
is a small neighborhood of a, call it U ,  such that 
x+1 
f(x) > N for all II: E U, 
and we write 
lim f ( x )  = 00 
in this case. For example, if we consider the function f ( ~ )  
= - at 
0 then as we said above f(0) is undefined. (Notice how I managed 
to say that without writing -. Ouch!) But we can take the limit as 
J: gets close to 0 to see that 
x-+a 
1 
X 
1 
0 
1 
2 4 0  x 
lim - = CQ. 
The table shows us why. We take values of x that are closer and 
closer to 0, but do not equal 0. The sequence of resulting values 
f(x) gets larger. 
1 
x f(x) = - 
X 
If we are given a small value for 2, a number close to 0, then the 
number - seems to get very large. If we are given,a natural number 
N we can find a number & = x very close to 0 such that f(x) > 
1 
N. Thus it would seem that lim - = 00. Observe how the limit 
replaces the undefined term -. (Thought I’d say ouch, didn’t you?) 
1 
2 
x+o 
1 
0 

5.4. MAGNITUDE VERSUS CARDINALITY 
20 1 
This is an infinity associated with magnitude. This is an infinity 
that requires us to think of how tall or how long or how much of 
something there is. For this reason it would seem that 00 has little 
to do with the infinite cardinals No, N1, 2N0. 
The calculus also presents us with some other paradoxes asso- 
ciated with the infinite. Consider the fact that if we add three 
numbers together then we can push them around as follows. 
z + ( y + z )  
= ( z + y ) + z  
z + y  = y + z .  
Thus 
1 - 1 + 1 = (1 - 1) + 1 = 0 + 1 = 1 
l - l + l = l + l - l = ( l + l ) - l = 2 - 1 = 1 .  
and 
We arrive at 1 in two different ways. If the number of terms is 
infinite, problems arise. Consider the sum 
1 - 1 + 1 - 1 + 1 -  . . .  
Such infinite sums have to be treated with care. Just because we 
have written it down does not mean it equals a number! For ex- 
ample, if this sum exists then you might say that the sum should 
support any use of parentheses. However, , when we try the follow- 
ing two groupings of the sum we get diflerent values. By grouping 
using parentheses we see that 
1 - 1 + 1 - 1 + 1 - 1 + . . . = (1 - 1) + (1 - 1) + (1 - 1) + . . . 
= 0 + 0 + 0 +  ... 
= 0, 
and by changing the order of terms and then grouping we get 
1 - l + l - l + l - l +  ... = l + l - l + l - l + l - l +  ... 
= 1 + (1 - 1) + (1 - 1) + (1 - 1). . . 
= 1 + 0 + 0 +  ... 
= 1. 

202 
CHAPTER 5. WELL ORDERED SETS 
So which is the answer, 0 or l? One august mathematician in the 
eighteenth century suggested that since 0 and 1 were answers that 
1 
we could also include their average -. (Now that fraction didn’t 
2 
hurt a bit.) Today we say that the symbols 
1 - l + l - l + l - l + l -  
... 
do not converge to a number. The sum is just as undefined as the 
unmentionable fraction -. (I think I need an aspirin for this pain.) 
Another sum that has problems with the infinite is a geometric 
sum. The reader may have heard that 
1 
0 
(5.5) 
1 
for numbers x between -1 and 1. Thus, if we let x = 
in (5.5) 
as we will prove in Chapter 6. However, as soon as we try the 
boundary value x = -1 in (5.5), we arrive at a familiar set of 
symbols that do not mean anything. 
Maybe that august individual was not so far from the mark. 
The sum (5.5) gives an absurd value when we try to use values 
beyond the boundaries set by mathematics. With x = 2 in (5.5) we 
have our mathematically sensitive mind injured by 
That must have hurt you as much as me. 
So what is the message here? The message is that we cannot 
talk about infinite quantities except in the presense of limits. If we 
are using infinite sums then we must be very careful to work within 
what is called the radius of convergence. This is the neighborhood 

5.4. MAGNITUDE VERSUS CARDINALITY 
203 
in which the sum makes sense. If we take values z outside this 
neighborhood, the result will be mathematical nonsense. For that 
reason we say that 
1 + z + z2 + z3 + . . . 
is only defined for z’s between -1 and 1, and nowhere else. 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Chapter 6 
Inductions and Numbers 
Let us consider the well ordered set N from a new perspective. We 
used two properties of N to define well ordered sets. They were the 
Trichotomy Property and the Minimum Property. It is accepted by 
mathematicians that these properties together with the Principle 
of Mathematical Induction will give us all a common intellectual 
picture of the natural numbers. At this stage of intellectual de- 
velopment, the professionals agree that everyone who reads these 
statements will envision the same set of natural numbers that are 
right this minute dancing in your head. Furthermore, these prin- 
ciples can be extended to well ordered sets to give us a new and 
powerful tool or argument about well ordered sets. That new tool 
is called Transfinite Induction. Transfinite Induction is to well or- 
dered sets what Mathematical Induction is to the natural numbers. 
6.1 Mathematical Induction 
We begin with a discussion of the Principle of Mathematical Induc- 
tion or more briefly Mathematical Induction. Intuitively, Mathe- 
matical Induction allows us to make a statement for all of the natu- 
ral numbers by knowing only that the statement holds at 0 and then 
the statement holds at n + 1 if it holds at n. For instance, suppose 
you are playing a board game (a thought experiment) whose object 
is to move through all of the playing spaces numbered 0,1,2,3, , . .. 
You move from space to space by rolling a die whose every face has 
a single black spot 0 on it. You are on space 0. Next, to get from 
205 

206 
CHAPTER 6. INDUCTIONS A N D  NUMBERS 
space 100 to 101 you roll the die and move one space. In general, to 
get from the space numbered n to the space numbered n+ 1 you roll 
the die and move one space. This is how Mathematical Induction 
works. You have a starting place and you are told how to get from 
place to place or, more precisely, from natural number to natural 
number. A more mathematical discussion follows. 
The Principle of Mathematical Induction: Suppose we are 
given a subset X c N. Then X = N if X satisfies the property 
0 E X and given k E X then k + 1 E X 
You may have encountered this principle in your Algebra I11 
course in high school, although you may not have given it a name. 
The Principle of Mathematical Induction tells us that if we have a 
process P that can be done in the first place, (we say that P(0) is 
true), and if we can show how to proceed from some statement P( k )  
to the statement position P(k + l), then we can infer that P(n) is 
true for each n E N. That is one efficient way to prove something 
for infinitely many natural numbers. Please allow me to use ladders 
with steps instead of rungs. 
Here is an illustration of how Mathematical Induction works. 
Suppose that we have an infinite ladder whose first step is numbered 
with 0. 
We are on the first step of the ladder, and we have a set of instruc- 
tions that shows us how to get from one step on the ladder to the 
next in a general way. These directions will not be of the form 
Move from step 0 to step 1 and then to step 2. 

6.1. MATHEMATICAL INDUCTION 
207 
Such directions will work for a finite ladder, one having, say, 5 steps, 
but it fails to help us climb a ladder with an infinite number of steps. 
Rather, the directions should read like this. 
If you are on some step then here is how to get to the next step. 
This set of directions ensures us that we will be able to traverse 
every step of this infinite ladder. In elementary mathematics, these 
instructions are usually a set of equations. In computer program- 
ming, this process is the set of instructions in a loop without a stop 
command. The only way to find some kind of intuition surrounding 
Mathematical Induction is to read several examples. 
Example 6.1.1 The following algorithm writes all of the natural 
numbers n > 0. 
1. Let k = 1. 
2. Write k. 
3. Increase k to k + 1 
4. Go to step 2. 
We will prove that the claim of this algorithm is true using 
Mathematical Induction. 
The Initial Step is to check that 1 is written on the first pass. 
One pass through this algorithm, that is, one reading of lines 1 
through 4, confirms that step 2 will write 1 in step 2. Then k is 
increased from 1 to 2. 
The Induction Hypothesis: Assume that k is written on the k-th 
pass through the algorithm. 
The next step is the Induction Step. Assuming the Induction 
Hypothesis we must show that k+ 1 is written on the (k+ 1)st pass. 
So assume that the Induction Hypothesis is true. Assume that k 
is written on the kth pass. Step 3 of the algorithm increases k to 
k + 1 so that on the next pass (i.e., on pass number k + 1) step 2 of 
the algorithm writes k + 1. This is what we had to prove. 
Then by Mathematical Induction we conclude that for each nat- 
ural number n > 0, the algorithm writes n on its nth pass. 
Notice what we did. We predicted the behavior of the algorithm 
through all of its passes knowing only how it behaves at some point 

208 
CHAPTER 6. INDUCTIONS AND NUMBERS 
k. While physical restrictions limit a computer to print only finitely 
many integers using this algorithm, Mathematical Induction allows 
us to know the behavior of this algorithm through any number of 
passes. Thus no matter how fast or powerful computers get we will 
know precisely what this algorithm does on any pass. 
Here is an example of how Mathematical Induction can replace 
hand waving in a mathematical discussion. Recall that on page 96 
we watched a gentleman take a curious walk across the lobby in 
Hilbert's Infinite Hotel. He moved first one meter and then - a 
meter and in general on his nth step he moved -meters. 
We will 
use Mathematical Induction to show that when he has completed 
meters from the end of his walk. 
his nth step then he is 2n-' 
1 
2 
1 
1 
Example 6.1.2 Begin with the open interval (0,2) of numbers 
properly between 0 and 2. Mark the midpoint of the open interval. 
The segment yet to be crossed (i.e., the one bordering on 2) has 
length 1 as in the picture. 
0 
midpoint 
2 
. 
1 
t 
I 
I 
1 
Take the interval boardering on 2 and find its midpoint. Continue 
this process inductively. That is, if we have an open interval bor- 
dering on 2, then find its midpoint and find the half that borders on 
2. For example, in the second step we will find the midpoint of the 
chosen interval and choose the half bordering on 2 as in the picture. 

6.1. MATHEMATICAL INDUCTION 
209 
1 
The segment yet to be crossed has length -. 
2 
We will prove using Mathematical Induction that: 
1 
2" 
In step n + 1 the length of the chosen segment is -. 
Initial Step: We are starting with 1 = 0 + 1. On the 1st step 
the chosen segment has length 1 = 0 + 1 = -. 
Thus our formula 
for length works for n = 0. 
Induction Hypothesis: We will assume that in the (k + 1)st step 
1 
of our process the segment chosen has length -. 
2k 
1 
20 
Induction Step: By the Induction Hypothesis, in the (k + 1)st 
1 
step of the man's walk he chooses a segment of length -. 
In the 
2k 
next step, the (Ic + 2)nd step, we take half of the given segment. 
Thus the segment 
1 1  
1 
The result is a segment of length -- = - 
22k 
2@++')' 
This is what we had 
1 
in step k + 2 = (Ic + 1) + 1 has length 2("+'). 
to prove. 
We conclude by Mathematical Induction that the segment in 
step n + 1 has length - for each n E N. 
Example 6.1.3 Another identity using - is the subject of the next 
induction argument. We will show that 
1 
2" 
1 
2 
2 - - = 1 + - + . * * + -  
1 
1 
1 
2" 
2 
2" 
is true for each n E N. 
Proof Initial Step: In step 0 check that 
Induction Hypothesis: Assume that we have shown that 
for some k E N. (This is true since we have proved it true for at 
least the value k = 0.) 

210 
CHAPTER 6. INDUCTIONS A N D  NUMBERS 
Induction Step: We must show that 
We begin by grouping the first k terms in the sum. 
By the Induction Hypothesis and a small bit of algebra we can write 
after a little bit of arithmetic. This shows us that 
- I + - + . . . + -  
2 - - -  
2(k+') 
2 
2(k+l) ' 
1 
1 
1 
which completes the Inductive Step. 
We conclude by Mathematical Induction that 
2 - - = 1 + - + . * * + -  
1 
1 
1 
2" 
2 
2" 
for each n E N. This completes the proof. 
We can use the above example to prove that the curious man 
in the lobby of Hilbert's Infinite Hotel covers 2 meters when he has 
finished walking all of the steps possible. On the man's (n + 1)st 
step he has travelled 
1 
1 
1 + - +..-+- 
2 
2" 
meters. The distance between 2 and this intermediate position is 
2 -  l + - + . - * + -  . 
( :  
2" '1 

6.1. MATHEMATICAL INDUCTION 
211 
By the above example this can be simplified to 
2 -  
2 - -  
= -  
Thus his final position x and 2 must be separated by less than 
1 - for each n. That is, 
2" 
( 
in) 
i n *  
1 
2" 
2 -  - < x 5 2. 
Then 
However, 
so that 
1 
lim 2 - - = 2 - 0 = 2 
n+m 
2" 
1 
2 =  l i m 2 - - - x 5 2 .  
n-+m 
2" - 
Thus his final position x must be equal to 2. 
An application of Mathematical Induction will show that the 
cleaning lady who cleaned all of the rooms in Hilbert's Infinite Hotel 
does indeed clean each of the rooms in a total of 2 hours. 
Example 6.1.4 Recall that there is a cleaning Iady Mary who 
cleans room 1 in 1 hour, and cleans out each successive room in 
Hilbert's Infinite Hotel in half the time it takes to clean the previ- 
ous room. That is, if Mary takes x hours to clean room n then she 
1 
takes -x hours to clean room n+ 1. We will show that Mary cleans 
2 
all of the rooms in Hilbert's Infinite Hotel and that she cleans room 
1 
n in - hours. 
2" 
Initial Step: Mary cleans room 1. I know because I stayed there. 
The room was spotless. By design she takes only 1 hour to clean 
room 1. 
Induction Hypothesis: Assume that Mary has cleaned a room, 
say, room lc, in 
hours. 
1 

212 
CHAPTER 6. INDUCTIONS A N D  NUMBERS 
Induction Step: Mary has cleaned room k by the induction pro- 
cess. She moves to room k + 1 and proceeds to clean it. Thus room 
k + 1 is cleaned. She cleans room k + 1 in half the time it took to 
clean the previous room k. Then it takes -- 
= - hours. This 
is what we had to prove. 
We conclude by Mathematical Induction that Mary cleans all of 
the rooms at Hilbert's Infinite Hotel, and that she cleans room n in 
- 
hours. This ends the Mathematical Induction proof. 
1 1  
1 
22k-I 
2'" 
1 
2"- 1 
Let us find the total time it takes Mary to complete her work. 
If we reread Example 6.1.4 we see that Mary takes 2n-1 hours to 
completely clean room n. We conclude then that the time taken for 
Mary to clean each of the first n + 1 rooms is 
1 
1 +  -+-+...- 
1
1
 
1 
2 
22 
2" . 
According to the previous example 
It follows that as Mary cleans more rooms the difference between 2 
hours and Mary's working time is 
1 
2 -  
2 -- 
=-. 
( i n )  
2" 
Thus, in a mathematically precise way, we see that when Mary has 
completed her rounds (i.e. when she has cleaned room n + 1 for 
all natural numbers n E N) the difference between 2 hours and her 
working time is smaller than - for all n > 0. But 0 is the only 
nonnegative number smaller than the fractions - for all n > 0. We 
conclude that after Mary has completed her cleaning duties, she has 
worked exactly 2 hours. That is, Mary requires exactly 2 hours to 
clean all of these rooms. 
1 
2" 
1 
2" 
Here is another example that uses the number 2 in a clever way. 

6.1. MATHEMATICAL INDUCTION 
213 
Example 6.1.5 We will show that 
Initial Step: 1 = 2Oso that 
providing us with the Initial Step. 
Induction Hypothesis: We assume that we have proved that 
1 + 2 + 22 + . 
I - + 2k = 2"+' - 1 for some k E N. 
(Again, we did so for k = 0.) 
Inductive Step: We must show that 
where Ic is the integer chosen in the Induction Hypothesis. 
A little algebra and the Induction Hypothesis shows us that 
This is what we had to prove. 
Therefore, by Mathematical Induction, we have proved that 
1 + 2 + 22 + . - .  + 2" = 2"+1 - 1 for each n E N. 
Now here is another mathematically imprecise way to justify the 
identity given in the above example. Fix n E N and use your old 
friend foil to find the product 
(2 - 1)(1 + 2 + * 
* + 2"-' + 2"). 

214 
CHAPTER 6. INDUCTIONS AND NUMBERS 
Do not simplify this expression as that will make our calculations 
useless. Then 
1 + 2 +  f * * +2" = (2 - 1)(1 + 2 +  .
+
.
 + 2 7  
2(1 + 2 + 
... + 2") 
... + 2") 
= { -1(1 + 2 + 
= -1 + (2 - 2) + * .  . + (2" - 2") + 2"+l 
= -1+2"+'. 
Therefore 
1 + 2 +. . . + 2" = 2"+1 - 1, 
and we have proved the identity in the above example. The reader 
might question why this argument is mathematically imprecise. The 
answer lies in the way we stacked the powers of 2. In the above 
equations we lined up the powers of 2 as follows. 
2 + 22 + 
+ 2" + 2"+l 
2" 
-1 - 2 - 22 - ... - 
We then implicitly declared that since this stacking of powers of 2 
works for the first 2 powers of 2 it works for all powers of 2. This is 
the weakness in the argument. There is no mathematical law that 
says that a pattern that occurs twice will occur in all places. There 
is no way to imply from the first two places that the stacking will 
take place in all places. No way, that is, unless we use the Principle 
of Mathematical Induction. 
You might be suggesting right now that the pattern is obvious. 
We should be able to imply a mathematical truth from the obvious 
nature of the pattern. I offer the following numerical pattern and 
ask the reader to fill in the value x in the pattern. 
1,2,3,x. 
Most readers will choose 2 = 4 as the next obvious value. Some 
might choose x = 5 since the (obvious) pattern could be that the 
next number is the sum of the previous two. 

6.1. MATHEMATICAL INDUCTION 
215 
Another example is the sequence 
with which we ask for the next number x. Some would say that the 
pattern is 
21, 22, 23, 24 
so that x = 24 = 16. Others might claim that the pattern is more 
recursive and conclude that the next number is the product of the 
previous two. Hence 
2 , 4 , 2 * 4 , 4 * 8 = 3 2  
is the most obvious pattern, and so 2 = 32 is the next value. So 
which pattern is the most obvious? 
The answer is that neither is more obvious. In fact it has been 
proved that the three numbers 1,2,3 and 2,4,8 satisfy infinitely 
many patterns, and so no pattern is the obvious pattern. We only 
choose the most familiarpatterns. The most obvious pattern cannot 
be found because there is no way to judge obviousness for a pattern 
from the infinitely many patterns available. Thus we should not 
look at three numbers and then quickly point out some pattern as 
the only obvious correct one. 
Here is an open question for the reader. Suppose I give you three 
natural numbers 
2,395 
and ask you for the fourth one x. What pattern did I have in 
mind? Remember that there are many values for x because there 
are many patterns whose first three values are 2,3,5. I had x = 8 
in mind. Why is that? Another equally legitimate number would 
be x = 7. Why did I choose these numbers, reader? I leave the first 
to your imagination. The value x = 7 was chosen because it is the 
next prime number. 2,3,5,7,. . . could have been the implied list of 
prime numbers. 
Let us consider an old chestnut as an example of Mathematical 
Induction in mathematics. We previously examined this example 
on page 92. 

216 
CHAPTER 6. INDUCTIONS AND NUMBERS 
Example 6.1.6 Let n E N. Then 
n(n+ 1) 
2
.
 
0+1+ ...+ n =  
Proof As the Initial Step of this proof we observe that 
O(0 + 1) 
2
.
 
O =  
Thus the formula is true for 0. 
Induction Hypothesis: Assume that you have proved the result 
for some natural number k 2 0, and in fact you have. You have 
proved it for the natural number 0. In this example our Induction 
We can begin the Induction Step. We must give a general argu- 
ment that shows how the formula for k + 1 can be derived from the 
Induction Hypothesis. That is, we must prove that 
( k  + l)((k + 1) + 1) - ( k  + l)(k + 2) 
- 
2 
2 
0 + . . . + k + ( k  + 1) = 
The sum 0 + . . . + k + ( k  + 1) can be regrouped as 
(0 + . . . + k )  + ( k  + l), 
so by the Induction Hypothesis 
Next, a little algebra shows us that 
k(k + 1) + 2(k + 1) - 
- ( k  + 2)(k + 1) 
2 
2 
+ ( k  + 1) = 
k(k + 1) 
2 
, 
or equivalently that 
( k  + l)(k + 2) 
2 
0 + . . . + k + ( k  + 1) = 
This is what we had to show. 

6.1. MATHEMATICAL INDUCTION 
217 
The most important step in the proof is this last one. By Math- 
ematical Induction we conclude that 
n(n + 1) 
2 
O +  ...+ n =  
is true for each n E N. 
You might ask why we are interested in Mathematical Induction. 
After all, you might say, there is nothing wrong with the argument 
we gave on page 92. There is a subtlety that can give us trouble 
in more general settings. The idea is this. We have written the 
argument so that the numbers on page 92 match up perfectly as in 
the following expression. 
s = 1 +  2 + . . .  + e - 1  + e 
s = e + e - 1  + ... + 
2
+
l
 
We know that the sum of the first and last column entries in this 
expression is e + 1. We assumed that the sum on any column in 
this expression is ( k )  + (! - k + 1) = e + 1. But how do we know 
this? There must be some concrete mathematical reason why the 
columns in this expression match up as they do, and there is no hint 
of that reason in the argument we gave on page 92. The argument 
above using Mathematical Induction provides us with a bridge for 
the gap in our earlier argument. Mathematical Induction gives us a 
neat way of jumping from the fact that the first column adds up to 
!+ 1 to the truth that each column adds up to !+ 1. This is exactly 
the type of mathematical fact on which Mathematical Induction is 
designed to work. 
Here is another algebraic application of Mathematical Induction. 
Recall that a natural number n is an odd number if n = 2k - 1 for 
some k = 1,2,3,. . .. In general, 2k - 1 with k = 1,2,3,. . . is 
the kth odd number. Thus 2(1) - 1 = 1 is the first odd number, 
2(lO) - 1 = 19 is the 10th odd number, and 2(101) - 1 = 201 is 
the lOlst odd number. Galileo (circa 1580) noticed that the sum of 
the first n odd numbers is the nth perfect square. Specifically, he 
noticed that if he wrote down the first 2 odd prime numbers that 
they added up to 22, if he wrote down the first 3 odd prime numbers 

218 
CHAPTER 6. INDUCTIONS AND NUMBERS 
that they added up to 32, and if he wrote down the first 4 odd prime 
numbers that they added up to 42. 
22 = 1 +3, 
32 = 1 + 3 + 5 ,  
42 = 1 + 3 + 5 + 7 .  
He then concluded that 
n2 = 1 + 2 + 3 +. . . + (2n - 1) 
but without proof. We will use Mathematical Induction to show 
that this identity is the case for all natural numbers n > 0. 
Example 6.1.7 n2 is the sum of the first n odd numbers. 
Proof Initial Step: By replacing n with 1 we see that 
2 
1 = 1 = 2 * 1 - 1 .  
Thus the Initial Step has been established. 
some natural number k > 0. 
Induction Hypothesis: Assume that k2 = 1 + . . . + (2k - 1) for 
Induction Step: Show that ( k  + 1)2 = 1 + . . . + (2(k + 1) - 1). 
Begin by grouping the sum of k + 1 terms. 
1 + . . . + (2k - 1) + (2(k + 1) - 1) 
11 +... + ( 2 k -  l)] + (2k+ 1). 
= 
The Induction Hypothesis and a little algebra will show that 
[I + . . . + (2k - I)] + (2k + 1) = k2 + 2k + 1 
= ( k +  l)2. 
Thus 
( k  + 1)2 = [1+ 
1
.
.
 + (2k - l)] + (2(k + 1) - l), 
which is what we had to prove. 
Therefore, by Mathematical Induction, 
n 2 = I + 3 + 5 +  ...+ (2n-1) 
for all natural numbers n 2 1. This completes the proof. 

6.1. MATHEMATICAL INDUCTION 
219 
Here is another story in mathematics that shows us that patterns 
are not always as obvious as they first appear. The equation 
ax + b = 0 and a # 0 
can be solved by even the youngest of mathematical students. It 
is important to note that the exponent of x is 1 in this equation. 
Next, the high school student knows that the quadratic formula 
- b f  d
m
 
2a 
x =  
will solve the quadratic polynomial equation 
ax2 + bz + c = 0 and a # 0. 
The solution features a square root (a radical) fi and the coeffi- 
cients a, b, c of the polynomial equation. Notice that the highest 
power of z that occurs is 2. We say that the expression (6.1) is a 
solution by radicals of the polynomial equation of degree 2. 
In about 1535 AD the Italian mathematician Tartaglia showed 
that the equation 
ax3 + bz2 + cz + d = 0 and a # 0 
can be solved by radicals. His solution featured cube roots $ij, 
square roots, and the coefficients on the polynomial equation. Since 
this polynomial equation has degree 3, Tartaglia’s solution is said 
to be a solution by radicals of the polynomial equation of degree 3. 
Tartaglia’s solution was published in 1545 in Cardano’s book 
Ars Magna. The Ars Magna also contained the first publication of 
the solution to the polynomial equation 
ax4 + bz3 + dx2 + ex + f = 0 and a # 0. 
The solution to this polynomial equation of degree 4 also featured 
fourth roots ~, cube roots, square roots, and the coefficients of 
the polynomial equation. Thus we have solutions by radicals for 
polynomial equations of degrees 1, 2, 3, and 4. Is there a pattern 
here? 
The above history may seem to indicate a pattern. If polynomial 
equations of degree 1, 2, 3, 4 can be solved by radicals, we might 

220 
CHAPTER 6. INDUCTIONS A N D  NUMBERS 
then suggest that it is obvious that the fifth degree polynomial 
equation 
ax5 + bx4 + dx3 + ex2 + fx + g = 0 and a # 0 
has a solution by radicals. Unfortunately, the mathematical gods 
are playing games with us. The supposed pattern is misleading. In 
1821 a 21 year old Norwegian mathematician, Niels Abel, showed 
that there is no solution by radicals to the polynomial equation of 
degree 5. In fact, an 18 year old French mathematician, Evariste 
Galois, showed that except for these first four degrees, the general 
polynomial equation is not solvable by radicals like the first four are. 
So what happened to our obvious pattern? It must be that there was 
never a pattern to find. The pattern evaporated. It disappeared. 
It was never there. This is an important thought. Mathematicians 
must be careful in deciding when a pattern exists and when it does 
not exist. This is not as easy as it might seem since most people 
seem to see patterns everywhere. The best defense against seeing 
phantom patterns is to use a good solid argument that includes 
Mathematical Induction. 
The next story concerns a misuse of Mathematical Induction. 
This example elegantly demonstrates the importance of the Initial 
Step in a proof using Mathematical Induction. The story is called 
The Unexpected Termination. 
Example 6.1.8 A company Boss wants to fire a Supervising Bar- 
ber who works in the Hair Styling Branch of the company. The 
firing will take place at 9:00 AM sometime between Sunday and 
Saturday of next week. However, since the Boss does not want the 
Barber to anxiously await his last day, he decides not to tell the 
man which day will be his last. The Barber catches wind of this 
compassion and decides to use it to his advantage. 
The Barber decides that he will not be terminated. His argu- 
ment is as follows. He reasons that if he has not heard about his 
termination by 9 AM Friday then he most certainly will not be ter- 
minated the next day, Saturday. This is because the Boss must fire 
this Barber at 9 AM Saturday. He would then be upset all day 
Friday while he waited for the axe to fall on Saturday. The compas- 
sionate Boss does not want the Barber to suffer in that way, so the 

6.1. MATHEMATICAL INDUCTION 
22 1 
Barber concludes that he will not be terminated Saturday. He rea- 
sons that he can use this fact as the initial step in a Mathematical 
Induction. 
Suppose that the Barber has argued that he will not been ter- 
minated on day k - 1. (Think of Saturday as day 1, Friday as day 
2, and so on to Sunday which is Day 7.) He reasons about Day k 
as follows. If he has not heard about his termination by 9 AM of 
Day k + 1 then he most certainly will not be terminated the next 
day, Day k ,  because in that case the Barber would be upset all day 
long Day k + 1 contrary to the compassionate Boss’s wishes. Thus 
the Barber concludes that he will not be terminated on Day k. The 
Barber concludes by Mathematical Induction that he will not be 
terminated on any day n that week. Unfortunately, the Boss termi- 
nates the Barber at 9 AM on Wednesday. The Barber’s argument 
must have been flawed, but where is that flaw? 
Let us examine that argument in detail. The Barber will not be 
terminated Saturday for the reasons given in the Induction Step. So 
maybe Friday is the termination day. If so then Thursday morning 
at 10 AM he will know that he is not to be terminated Thursday, 
and so a Friday termination is the only thing possible. He would 
then fret, contrary to the compassionate Boss’ wishes. He concludes 
that Friday is not the day. Will Thursday be his termination day? 
No. The same argument applies. Try it yourself. We then use the 
familiar dots, . . ., to conclude that the Barber will not be terminated 
that week. 
So where is the error in that argument? I leave it to you to think 
about The Unexpected Termination for a while. Try not to peek at 
the answer before you work with the problem a little. 
As we said earlier the answer concerns the Initial Step. His 
initial assumption is that he has a job on Friday. This renders the 
rest of the argument mute because if he has a job Friday then he 
has not been terminated at all. Thus he has assumed that which he 
wants to prove, and there is his mistake. If you want to prove that 
you will not be terminated then you cannot make an assumption 
that assumes that you will not be terminated. 
We hope that these examples have helped you to understand the 
process called Mathematical Induction. Recapping, we begin with 
a process P that is defined at each n E N. Induction begins by 

222 
CHAPTER 6. INDUCTIONS A N D  NUMBERS 
showing that the process is true for some intial value, say, 0. In the 
Induction Hypothesis we assume that P(k) is true for some k E N, 
and in the Induction Step we show how P(k) leads us to P(k + 1). 
We then conclude by Mathematical Induction that P(n) is true for 
all n E N. 
Use Mathematical Induction to show the following. 
1 
6 
1 
4 
1. 1' + 2' + . . . + n2 = -n(n + 1)(2n + 1) for each n E M. 
2. l3 + 23 + . . . + n3 = -n'(n + 1)' for each n E N. 
3. (1 - z)(1 + z + z' + . . . + zn) = 1 - zn+' for each n E N. 
6.2 Transfinite Induction 
The power of Mathematical Induction comes from the fact that 
it works for any process defined for each n E N. The limits of 
Mathematical Induction come from the fact that it only works for 
processes defined for each n E N. There are some very important 
processes that are defined for every ordinal a. Thus if P is a process 
defined for ordinals, then Mathematical Induction will show that 
P ( n )  is true for each n E N but it will miss the truth of P(w0). For 
example, we used Mathematical Induction to show that the cleaning 
lady in Hilbert's Infinite Hotel on page 98 will eventually clean all of 
the rooms labelled with n E N. However, our discussion missed the 
room for Hotel Staff labelled with wo. We found her in that room 
on page 184. In this way Mathematical Induction can be applied 
to processes defined for each natural number n < wo but it fails for 
processes defined for the ordinals a 2 
wo. In this section we will 
present an induction that can be applied to infinite ordinals as well 
as N. 
Let P be a process that is defined for all ordinals a. In other 
words, P(a) is defined or makes mathematical sense for each ordinal 
a. A proof by Transfinite Induction will proceed as follows. 
1. Initial Step: Prove that P(0) is true. 
2. Induction Hypothesis: Assume that there is an ordinal a such 
that P(p) is true for each ordinal p < a. 

6.2. TRANSFINITE INDUCTION 
223 
3. Induction Step: Show that P(Q) is true. 
4. Conclude that P(7) is true for all ordinals 7 
We will use Transfinite Induction to replace the phrases continue 
indefinitely and continue in the same manner that accompanied 
some vague arguments that we encountered in some earlier proofs. 
Some examples of arguments using Transfinite Induction will help 
us see what all of this formality is about. 
Example 6.2.1 The first example is the simplest possible. We will 
construct a well ordered set. 
Initial Step: We choose a smallest element which we denote by 
P(0) = 50. 
Induction Hypothesis: We assume that for some ordinal a we 
have constructed a set 
with an ordering given by 
xo < x1 < . . . < xo < . . . for each ordinal P < a. 
Hopefully you see the pattern. 
The order on P(a) is not a well ordering since it is possible that 
z,-~ is in P(a) but by definition of P(a) no successor element for 
x,-~ exists in P(Q). For example, given Q = 5 our set is 
P(5) = {XO,~lrX2,X3,X4) 
= {xp I P < 5 )  
and the ordering is 
xo < x1 < 2 2  < x3 < 24. 
The element x4 does not have a successor element. 
For CY = wo our set is 
Unlike the previous set, this ordering is without end. 
20 < 21 < x2 < . . . . 

224 
CHAPTER 6. INDUCTIONS AND NUMBERS 
Before reading on, the reader should write down the set correspond- 
ing to x,,+1. 
It is 
P(W0 + 1) = (50, x1, x2,. . . , xuo} = {Xp I p < wo + 1). 
We make no special hypothesis about the nature of the symbols 
2,. 
We define the order in the set P(w0 + 1) as 
2 0  < 2 1  < 2 2  < . . . < z,,. 
Notice that x,, is the unique largest element in this set. It has no 
successor in P ( w ~  
+ I). 
Induction Step: The object here is to prove that there is a set 
P(Q + 1) = {zp 1 p < Q + l} 
whose ordering is given by 
xo < z1 < . . . < xp < . . . < x, for each ordinal /3 < a. 
Choose a symbol x, that is not in P(a) and form the set 
P(a + 1) = {xp jp < a+ 1) = {xp I p < a} u {z,} 
by simply requiring that 
for each ordinal ,G < a. 
dered set 
z p  < 2, 
We conclude, by Transfinite Induction, that there is a well or- 
P = {zY I y is an ordinal}. 
This set is well ordered because for each element x, there is a suc- 
cessor element z,+l. The element x,+1 exists by the Induction Step 
above. Actually, the limit P is not a set. It is a collection. It turns 
out that P is larger than any set so it cannot be a set. We will have 
more to say about this kind of anomaly later. 
Notice in the above example that we did not have to prove any- 
thing for + 1 as we did in Mathematical Induction. We use the 
Induction Hypothesis to prove something about the construction 
process as it exists prior to a. l l y  to keep this in mind as these 
examples continue. 

6.2. TRANSFINITE INDUCTION 
225 
Example 6.2.2 Here is another example of Transfinite Induction. 
Suppose that there is some universal set U given, and suppose that 
there is a transfinite chain of subsets of U 
uo c u1 c . . . c u, c 
f . . c u, 
where cy ranges over all of the ordinals. Further suppose that there 
is sorne special element u E U that is not in U, for any ordinal 0: 
u @ U, for each ordinal a. 
We will show, using Transfinite Induction, that 
I 
I 
Picture (6.2) will help you to visualize what we are doing. The 
set U2 includes Ul and the set U, includes U2. The set U is the 
union of all of the sets U,, cy an ordinal. Notice that the element u 
is not in any of the sets U,. 
= Uall ordinals a 

226 
CHAPTER 6. INDUCTIONS AND NUMBERS 
Initial Step: It is clear that u # UO so that 
u # u u p = u Q  
P< 1 
This begins the induction process. 
Induction Hypothesis: Let us assume that 
for some ordinal Q. 
Induction Step: In the Induction Step we must show that 
P<a+l 
From the Induction Hypothesis we know that 
u e  u 
4 3 ,  
P<a 
and by the hypothesis that starts this problem u # U,. Then by 
the definition of the set operation U we have 
This is what we had to prove. 
We conclude, by Transfinite Induction, that 
u #  u UP* 
all ordinals p 
What we have just shown is that if the V, do not contain a 
point u then the union of the U, fails to contain that point u. We 
accomplished this by showing that the union 
Uo U U1 u Uz u . . . u Up for p < Q 
does not contain the point u and then concluded by Transfinite 
Induction that the total union does not contain the point u. 

6.2. TRANSFINITE INDUCTION 
227 
Example 6.2.3 Given an ordinal a let 
W, = {ordinals y 1 a < y}. 
The set W, is the chain of ordinals that lie above a on the chain of 
ordinals. Thus W, can be thought of as a line of ordinals beginning 
at a + 1 and continuing on indefinitely. So 
a+l,a+2,a+3 ,... E W,. 
In terms of a picture we have 
0 
1 
2 
e e e  
a 
a + l  
.a. 
We might also envision the sets W, as follows. 
Wl 

228 
CHAPTER 6. INDUCTIONS AND NUMBERS 
Using Transfinite Induction we will show that 
Initial Step: 1 $! 
WI since W1 is the set {y 1 1 < y} of ordinals y 
that are strictly larger than 1. Since 
wacw1, 
w n we. 
n w,. 
all ordinals a 
we conclude that 
all ordinals a 
Induction Hypothesis: Assume that for some ordinal p we have 
all ordinals a 
Induction Step: Since Wp,, 
= {ordinals y 1 ,D+ 1 < y}, it follows 
that 
P + 1 e w,,,. 
Since 
n wa w ~ + ~ ,  
P + W  
n w,. 
all ordinals a 
we find that 
all ordinals a 
Therefore, by Transfinite Induction, 
all ordinals a 
for any ordinal y. Thus nail ordinals a Wa does not contain any ordi- 
nals, which implies that 
n we=@. 
all ordinals a 

6.2. TRANSFINITE INDUCTION 
229 
Example 6.2.4 (With an acknowledgment to Douglas R. Hofs- 
tader [5].) This is a story that illustrates how Transfinite Induction 
takes over where Mathematical Induction ends. 
It seems that the magic lamp was passed down from generation 
to generation of Aladdin’s family. The current heir to the lamp, Al, 
is a mathematician with a droll sense of humor. When he rubbed 
the lamp the genie appeared and said, “YOU have three wishes.” 
Using his droll humor he said, “I wish for more wishes.” “That 
is a wish about wishes and I cannot grant such a thing,” the genie 
responded. “It would be like the Mayor of New York City acting 
like the President of the United States. Before I can grant your 
wish I must ask for my Boss’ permission. His name is 
MI grants my wishes.” 
So the genie contacted MI and said, “I wish to grant a wish 
about wishes.” MI thought for a minute and said, “You have made 
a wish about a wish about wishes. Before I can grant your wish I 
must ask for my Boss’ permission. His name is A42. Mz grants my 
wishes.” 
Once M2 is contacted MI asks, “I wish to grant a wish about 
a wish about wishes.” Of course, M2 saw through that wish right 
away and said, “That is a wish about a wish about a wish about 
wishes, and I cannot grant it without the permission of my boss, 
M3. M3 grants my wishes.” 
The process of asking the boss M, continued once for each n E 
N, 
where 
Mn+l grants the wishes to Mn. 
(The observant reader might observe that we did not define Mo. 
We will assume that MO is Al. Thus MI grant’s Mo’s wishes.) 
The problem was that no one could give the permission that would 
eventually grant Al’s wish. No matter how far up the chain the 

230 
CHAPTER 6. INDUCTIONS A N D  NUMBERS 
request travelled no boss Mn+l could grant permission to the boss 
Mn. The chain of bosses { M ,  1 n E N} has no maximal element. 
The chain of bosses {Mn I n E N} is only a part of a well ordered 
chain of bosses. Let me introduce you to the boss of all of the chain 
{Mn 1 n E N}. His name is 
Because he is a good administrator, he realized the predicament his 
people were in so he thought he would just give all of the Mn per- 
mission to grant those wishes. But you see, being an administrator 
Mwo must ask permission from his boss Mw,+l before he can grant 
wishes about wishes for each Mn with n E N. 
The transfinite process here is now quite clear. Suppose that we 
are given an ordinal a such that 
boss Mp exists for each ordinal p < a 
and such that 
Mp+l grants Mp’s wishes for each ordinal p < a. 
Define boss Ma who is the boss of all Mp with /3 < a. Then we 
have extended our discussion to include all bosses Mp such that 
p 5 a < a + 1. By Transfinite Induction, for each ordinal k ,  each 
boss Mk+, grants wishes for boss Mk. 
The problem is that there is no boss M at the top of this chain 
to give everyone permission to grant wishes. The story has a happy 
ending though, as The Supreme One saw what was going on and 
said to each boss My, “Grant Al’s wishes and let’s get on with the 
work of the day.” And so it was done. 
Before continuing on to the next section let me present a process 
called Student Induction. It seems that a certain University cancels 

6.3. MATHEMATICAL RECURSION 
23 1 
classes the Wednesday prior to Thanksgiving Thursday. This gives 
the students an initial day off. They then rationalize that since 
there are no classes Wednesday they can leave for home Tuesday 
night. This is not too hard to understand. The anticipation of 
the holiday being what it is they decide to leave earlier that day, 
Tuesday afternoon. No, make it Tuesday morning because knowing 
that they are leaving for home at noon, they lose their concentration 
in the morning classes. But then, why not leave Monday. Well 
nobody is going to stay at college for one day of classes so they 
argue that they can leave Sunday night. Get real. No one will 
stay the weekend to leave Sunday night, so they leave late fiiday. 
No. Not late. No one has enthusiasm for F'riday classes so they 
decide to leave Thursday night. With this kind of Student Induction 
taking place the student is soon leaving on Halloween (October 31) 
in anticipation of the Thanksgiving holiday (the last Thursday in 
November). The same process is at work in the Spring Semester 
when the students prepare for Spring Break. They are soon leaving 
in January for a vacation that does not take place until March. We 
leave the details to be filled in by the reader. 
6.3 Mat hemat ical Recursion 
Another process that is designed to take the ellipsis . . . out of math- 
ematical definitions is call recursion. Recursion is a mathematical 
device that defines one object in terms of another smaller object. 
This smaller object is similar to the larger one but not at quite 
the same size. The first recursion usually seen by the student is n 
factorial. This n factorial is defined as 
O! 
= 1 and 
n! = n(n - l)! for integers n 2 1. 
Do you see that n! is defined in terms of the smaller number (n- l)!? 
For example, 

232 
CHAPTER 6. INDUCTIONS A N D  NUMBERS 
We do not define n! for negative numbers and we do not define n! 
for fractions. The number n! in this book is defined only for whole 
nonnegative numbers n. 
The definition of n! is recursive because it is defined in terms of 
a factorial at a smaller value. We can define other numbers in this 
way. We let 
To = 0 and 
T, = n + T,-1 for integers n 2 1. 
T, is called the nth triangular number and it is the number of dots 
needed to form a triangular array. For instance, since one dot forms 
a (trivial) triangular array, TI = 1 is a triangular number. 
a 
The formula for triangular numbers shows us that 
Tz = 2 + Ti = 2 + 1 = 3. 
Thus 3 is the number of dots needed to form the next larger trian- 
gular array, as in the illustration below. 
For larger triangular numbers proceed recursively. 
T3 = 3 + T2 = 3 + 3 = 6 
since we know that T2 = 3. The triangular array for T3 is formed 
by adding a row of three dots into the previous triangular array. 
Notice that T3 is found by counting the number of dots in a tri- 
angular array of dots whose base has 3 dots. The same is said for 
T , = 4 + T 3 = 4 + 6 =  10. 

6.3. MATHEMATICAL RECURSION 
233 
Actually, we were introduced to triangular numbers when we 
examined the sum 
1 + 2 + 3 +  ... +n. 
A little induction will show that 
T, = 1 + 2 + 3 + . . . + n for n > 0. 
Proof Evidently TI = 1 so the Initial Step is defined. 
Suppose that T' = 1 + 2 + . . . + k for some integer k > 0. This 
We must show that Tk+1 = 1 + 2 + . . . + (k + 1). By definition 
is the Induction Hypothesis. 
and the Induction Hypothesis, 
T'+1 = (k + 1) + T k  
Tk+l 
T'+l 
= 
= 
(k + 1) + (1 + 2 +. . . + k) 
(1 + 2  +. . . + k) + (k + 1). 
Therefore, by Mathematical Induction, 
T, = 1 + 2 +  ... + n  
for each integer n > 0. 
Subsequently, by using the formula found by little Gauss on page 
92, we see that 
n(n + 
for each integer n > 0. 
2 
T, = 
Our recursive formula for T, = n+Tn-l is then replaced by a closed 
formula for T, = 
~ 
. 
n(n + 1) 
L 
Closed formulas have their advantages. The most immediate 
advantage is that we can calculate TI0 without calculating T, for 
all 0 < n < 10. 
= 55. 
10( 10 + 1) 
2 
TlO = 
Larger triangular numbers can be calculated without the use of 
smaller triangular numbers or of triangular arrays. 
loo( 100 + 1) = 5050. 
2 
TlOO = 

234 
CHAPTER 6. INDUCTIONS AND NUMBERS 
This is the advantage of closed formulas. 
There is an interesting formula involving triangular numbers and 
perfect squares. We will show that 
T, + T,-l = n2 for each integer n > 0. 
In words, consecutive triangular numbers add up to a perfect square. 
That should sound satisfying to you. Two triangular numbers add 
up to a square number. How many times have you broken a square 
into two triangles using a pencil and a ruler? Now you have a 
numerical identity that does the same thing to numbers. A square 
number is the sum of two triangular numbers. 
Proof By (6.4) we have 
n(n + 1) 
(n - 1)n 
2 
+
2
 
Tn + Tn-1 = 
n 
= -((n 
r) 
+ 1) + (n - 1)) 
n 
= 5(2n) 
This is what we had to prove. Therefore Tn + T,-1 = n2 for each 
integer n 2 1. 
Another sum that adds up to a perfect square is due to Galileo 
(circa 1600 AD). Observe that 
1 + 3 = 4  
and that 
1 + 3 + 5 = 9. 
Thus the sum of the first two odd numbers is the second perfect 
square, and the sum of the first three odd numbers is the third 
perfect square. Care to guess about the sum 
1 + 3 +  ... +29 

6.3. MATHEMATICAL RECURSION 
235 
of the first 15 odd numbers? Of course the pattern is set. The sum 
is 152, the 15th perfect square. Care to prove this pattern holds for 
all integers n 2 1, reader? Let us do just that. 
I 
1 
I 
1 + 3 + . .  . + (2n - 1) = n2. 
! 
The sum of the first n odd numbers is the nth perfect square. 
Proof We use induction. Since 1 = l2 we have established the 
Assume that 1 + 3 + . . . + (2k - 1) = k2. This is the Induction 
intial step. 
Hypothesis. We must show that 
1 + 3 + . . . + (2(k + 1) - 1) = ( k  + q2. 
By the induction hypothesis 
1 + . . . + (2(k + 1) - 1) = (1 + . . . + (2k - 1)) + (2(k + 1) - 1) 
= k2 + (2k + 1) 
= (k+ q2. 
Therefore, by Mathematical Induction, the sum 1 + . . . + (an - 1) 
of the first n odd numbers is the nth perfect square n2. 
The first few sums of odd numbers can be seen in the following 
diagrams. Think of one square as being formed by adding dots to 
the edge and then count the odd number of dots that are added to 
the recursive square. 
. . 
0. :F 
0 . .  
. 
+ 
0 . .  'i" 
a . 
0. 
0. 
l2 
1 + 3 = 2 2  
(1+3)+5=32 
( 1 + 3 + 5 ) + 7 = 4 2  
Draw the next square in the pattern to see that 42 + 9 = (1 + 3 + 
5 + 7) + 9 = 52. 
Here is an example of recursion in an infinite setting. 

236 
CHAPTER 6. INDUCTIONS AND NUMBERS 
Example 6.3.1 Hilbert has expanded the Infinite Hotel to accom- 
modate any and all guests. To do this he adds on one room for each 
ordinal to his Infinite Hotel using recursion. 
The Intial Step is to construct room 1. 
The Induction Hypothesis is to assume that there is an ordinal 
a for which we have constructed rooms p for each ordinal p < a. 
Let Ha be this construction. We construct room CY onto Ha thus 
arriving at a hotel with rooms ,D for ordinals p < CY + 1. We have 
constructed Ha+, . 
Therefore, by Transfinite Induction, we have constructed the 
hotel H with rooms p for each ordinal ,D. The result is something 
more. The Infinite Hotel is now a TI-unsfinite Hotel. For instance, 
there is a room wo, a room 
and so on. 
step 0 I-I-I 
The Transfinite Hotel is not a set, though. It is bigger than any set 
can be. We will consider the matter more closely later. 
Mary cleans each room a and then cleans room a+ 1. Time is no 
longer an issue since Hilbert and the Hotel Staff signed a collective 
bargaining agreement that stops time. Thus, no matter how many 
rooms are cleaned, no time has passed. It also means that when she 
goes home there is no end to her leisure time since that time does 
not pass. In this way Mary can start with room 1, then clean all 
of the rooms in the Transfinite Hotel within her work day, and still 
have time for the grandchildren Paul and John. We will show that 
she does indeed clean all of the rooms. 
The initial room, room 1, is cleaned shortly after she arrives at 
work. 
Inductively, assume that there is some ordinal a such that Mary 
has cleaned room ,D for each ordinal ,f3 < a. 
Having cleaned rooms p for p < CY Mary finds herself in front of 
room a. Since she is industrious, she enters the room and cleans it. 

6.4. NUMBER THEORY 
237 
Thus room a is cleaned so that room ,B is cleaned for each ordinal 
We conclude by Transfinite Induction that Mary has cleaned 
room y for each ordinal y. At this time she joins a colleague and 
sits and talks in the Hotel Staff Lounge. 
p < a + 1 .  
6.4 Number Theory 
The numbers considered in this section are whole numbers and non- 
negative numbers. We will not be considering negative fractions, 
although we will need to consider 0,1,2, . . .. In this section we will 
use mathematical induction and recursion to give mathematical cer- 
tainty to some facts we have all heard about integers. 
The number p > 1 is said to be prime exactly when 
p = ab implies that a = p or a = 1. 
Another way of saying this is that p is not 1 and p is divisible only 
by itself and 1. A number a is a factor of n if there is a number 
b such that ab = n. The number a is a prime factor of PI. is a is 
a prime number and a is a factor of n. For example, 3 is a prime 
factor of 6 and 15 while 7 is a prime factor of 49. Prime factors, it 
seems, are everywhere. 
Lemma 6.4.1 Every number n > 1 has a prime factor 
Proof Let us assume to the contrary that there is a positive 
number n that has no prime factors. We take the smallest such 
number n. Then n is not prime (since otherwise it would be a 
prime factor of itself) so we can write 
n = ab 
for some numbers a, b not in {n, 1). Since a # n and b # 1 divide 
n, a is smaller than a. 
n 
a = - < < .  
b 
Since n is the smallest number without a prime factor, a has a prime 
factor p ,  say, 
a = pc. 

238 
CHAPTER 6. rNDucTroNs AND NUMBERS 
But then p is also a prime factor of n since 
n = ab = p(cb). 
This contradiction to our assumption shows us that every number 
n possesses a prime factor. 
The next result is one that goes back to the Greek geometer 
Euclid (circa 300 BC). He proves that there are infinitely many 
prime numbers. That may sound obvious at first. You have known 
it since birth or since early in your education. In fact, you were 
given a known mathematical fact and you were asked to memorize 
it. You accepted it as a truth. But mathematics can give certainty 
to the arithmetic facts you learned as a child. That is what we will 
do here. We will give mathematical certainty to some arithmetic 
facts that we learned at a young and impressional age. 
Theorem 6.4.2 [Euclid] There are infinitely many prime numbers. 
Proof We offer a proof by contradiction. Suppose to the con- 
trary that there is only a finite list of prime numbers. Write down 
that finite list. 
P l ,  P 2 , .  . . , Pt. 
Consider the number 
N = PlP2”’Pt + 1. 
Since every number has a prime factor, N has a prime factor p .  
However, p # pl since division of N by pl leaves a remainder of 1, 
p # p2 since division of N by p2 leaves a remainder of 1, and so 
on. p # pt since division of N by p, leaves a remainder of 1. Since 
p l ,  p2, . . . , pt is supposed to be a list of all of the primes and since 
p is a prime not on the list, we have found our contradiction. Thus 
the list of primes is infinite. 
Let us try to show what this result has done. Given any finite 
set of primes it shows us how to locate a new prime. For instance, 
the number 
N = 2 - 3 * 5 . 7  + 1 = 215,442 

6.4. NUMBER THEORY 
239 
is divisible by a prime number p such that p # 2,3,5,7. We can 
verify this by writing down the number N in a more familiar way. 
N = 2 - 3  5 * 7 +  1 = 121 = 112. 
Thus the new prime is 11. Eleven was not on our finite list of primes, 
but it is surely not the last prime that exists. 
In the same way the number 
N = 17.19.23.29 + 1 
has a prime divisor p. We do not know what p is but we can say 
with certainty that p is not on the finite list of primes 
17,19,23,29. 
This is what the proof of Theorem 6.4.2 has done. 
Just how many times is a number n divisible by a prime? In- 
finitely often? Finitely often? The next lemma resolves this ques- 
tion. 
Lemma 6.4.3 Let n be a number with prime divisor p. There is an 
exponent t and a number b such that n = ptb and b is not divisible 
by p. That is, p divides n exactly t times and no more. 
Proof We proceed by contradiction. Suppose there is a number 
n and a prime p such that p divides n infinitely often. That is, we 
can write 
n = pbl = p2bp = . . . 
for some integers bl, bp, . . .. Then 
n 
n 
n 
bl = - > bp = - > b3 = - > . . . 
P 
P2 
P3 
is an infinite list of smaller and smaller positive integers. This is 
impossible so our supposition was incorrect. Each prime divisor of 
n divides n at most finitely often and no more. This completes the 
proof. 

240 
CHAPTER 6. INDUCTIONS AND NUMBERS 
Theorem 6.4.4 Let n 2 2 be a positive integer. There are primes 
p l ,  . . . ,pt such that 
n = pl . . . p t .  
(6.5) 
Let us agree to call (6.5) a prime factorization o f n  
Proof We apply induction. The result is true for n = 2 since in 
this case n = pl = 2. 
Assume that we have arrived at an integer k 2 2 for which each 
number m 5 k has a prime factorization like (6.5). This is our 
Induction Hypothesis. 
We must find a prime factorization for k + 1. By Lemma 6.4.1, 
Ic + 1 has a prime factor p .  Then 
P 
has a prime factorization by the Induction Hypothesis. Hence we 
can write 
k + l  
P 
= Pl...Ps 
for some primes p 1 , .  . . ,p8. It follows that 
k + 1 = P(P1 . . .Ps), 
which is a prime factorization of Ic + 1. 
prime factorization. 
Therefore, by Mathematical Induction, each integer n 2 2 has a 
6.5 The Fhndamental Theorem 
of Arithmetic 
The above theorem shows us that each integer n > 1 has a factor- 
ization into primes. But we know more than that, don't we, reader? 
We know that there is one and only one way to factor an integer 

6.5. THE FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM OF ARITHMETIC 241 
n > 1. This uniqueness is where we are headed to now. Such a re- 
sult is important enough that mathematicians have given it a name. 
The Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic: Let n 2 2 be an 
integer. 
1. There is a finite list of primes pl, . . . , pt such that n = pl . . . pt. 
2. If n = 41 . . . qs for some other list of primes ql,. . . , qs, then s = 
t and after a permutation of the list entries, pi = qi for each 
i = 1, . . . , t. We say that n has unique prime factorization. 
Proof 1. This is Theorem 6.4.4. 
2. We apply proof by contradiction. Suppose there is a number 
n 2 2 that possesses two different prime factorizations, say 
n = p l . .  .Pt = 41 ... qs 
for some finite lists p l ,  . . . ,pt and 41,. . . , qs of primes. Choose the 
smallest integer n with this property. Then the lists p l ,  . . . , pt and 
41,. . . , qs are different. After permuting the subscripts we can as- 
sume that pl is not on the finite list 41,. . . , qs and 
2 F Pl < 41. 
Then 41 - pl < q1 so that 
(41 -P1)(42-%) 
< 91(42.'.4s) = n. 
Since n is the smallest integer with nonunique prime factorization, 
has a unique prime factorization. 
By hypothesis pl # qi for i = 1,. . . , s, and pl does not divide 
41 - pl. (Otherwise pl is a divisor of the prime (ql - p l )  + pl = ql, 
contrary to (6.6).) Since (6.7) is a unique prime factorization of rn, 
pl does not divide m. On the other hand, pl divides n so pl does 
not divide n - m. However, 
n - m = Ql42 * .  - 4s - (41 - Pl)Q2 * * * 4s 
(41 - (41 - Pl))(42 * - * S S )  
= 
= (Pl)(42 * * .  4 s ) .  

242 
CHAPTER 6. INDUCTIONS AND NUMBERS 
This obvious contradiction shows us that our supposition was in- 
correct. Thus the finite lists p l ,  . . . ,pt and 41,. . . , ys are the same. 
Subsequently the number of terms s and t on these lists are the 
same. 
s = t  
This is what we had to prove to complete the proof of part 2, and 
thus finish the proof of the Theorem. 
Let us illustrate the above theorem with a number. The number 
n = 215,441 
has a unique prime factorization. At present we do not know what 
it is but we do know that unique prime factorization exists for n. 
Some work with a calculator shows us that 
n = 17.19.23 1 29 
is a prime factorization of n. The Fundamental Theorem of Arith- 
metic shows us that this is the only prime factorization of n. If 
we have a prime factor p of n then the Fundamental Theorem of 
Arithmetic states that p is on the list 
17,19,23,29. 
No other primes are allowed to divide n. That is the power of the 
Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic. Without even knowing what 
p is we know that it is one of the four primes on the list. 
6.6 Perfect Numbers 
Euclid is also known for introducing us to perfect numbers. The 
number m > 0 is said to be perfect if rn is the sum of the numbers 
properly dividing rn. Thus 6 is a perfect number since 1,2,3 are 
the proper divisors of 6 and 
6 = 1 + 2 +  3. 
Six is the sum of its proper divisors. The next perfect number is 28 
because 1,2,4,7,14 are the proper divisors of 24 and 
2 8 = 1 + 2 + 4 + 7 + 1 4 .  

6.6. PERFECT NUMBERS 
243 
Other perfect numbers we know are 496, 521, 607, and 1279. These 
perfect numbers were found by some computer use in 1952. In those 
days, number problems like this were used to test a computer's 
accuracy. This calculation continues, though, as computers are still 
being used to factor numbers of the form 2" - 1. 
So far these perfect numbers have a curious property. They are 
all even numbers. Are all perfect numbers even? Currently, no one 
knows. This uncertainty enhances interest in perfect numbers. For 
the even perfect numbers, there is the following theorem also due 
to Euclid. 
Theorem 6.6.1 [Euclid] If 2" - 1 is a prime number then 
2"-'(2" - 1) is a perfect number. 
Euclid's proof of this theorem was geometric in nature since 
Greek algebra was under developed. The proof has evolved over 
the years into the following algebraic gem. Late in the eighteenth 
century the prodigious mathematician Leonard Euler (circa 1750 
AD) showed that if m is an even perfect number then there is an 
integer n such that 2" - 1 is a prime number and m = 2"-'(2" - 1). 
Think of the gap in time here. Euclid (300 BC) introduced perfect 
numbers but it took until Euler (1750 AD) to show that all even 
perfect numbers are encompassed by Euclid's Theorem. That makes 
2050 years between first sight and last sight. This must be one hard 
type of number to study if it takes over two millennia to make 
substantial progress on the classification problem. 
Thus Euclid's Theorem accounts for all of the even perfect num- 
bers. We are left to wonder about the open question. 
Open Question: Are there any odd perfect numbers? That is, is 
there an odd number m that is the sum of its proper divisors? 
For example, 5 is not a perfect number since 1 is the only proper 
divisor of 5 and 5 is not the sum of its proper divisor 1. The odd 
number 25 is not the sum of its proper divisors 1, 5 because 
25 # 1 + 5. 
You can use your computer to verify that there are no odd perfect 
numbers less than 100. 

244 
CHAPTER 6. INDUCTIONS AND NUMBERS 
Let us prove Euclid's Theorem. 
Proof Suppose we know that p = 2" - 1 is a prime for some 
integer n > 1. Then we have a unique prime factorization 
m = 2"-'p. 
The prime divisors of rn are 2 and p so any proper divisor d of m is 
a multiple of 2 and p ,  
d = 2kpe, 
where Ic can be any integer in {0,1, . . . , n - 1 )  and e is either 0 or 
1. That means that the proper divisors of m that are not divisible 
by p are 
1,2, 22,. . . ,2"-' 
and the proper divisors divisible by p are 
p ,  2p, 22p, . . . , 2n-2p. 
(We do not include 2"-'p = m since it is not a proper divisor of m.) 
No other numbers are possible. Recall the geometric identity 
1 - xn 
1 - 2  
1 + z + x 2 +  ...+ x*-l = 
~ 
with common ratio z. If x = 2 then we have 
l + 2 + 2 2 + . . . + 2 n - 1  = 2 " -  1. 
Hence adding up the proper divisors of rn yields geometric identities 
>
=
 
>
=
 
1 + 2 + 22 + . . . + 2"-'+ 
p + 2p + 22p + . . . -k 2n-2p 
1 + 2 +22 + .  . . + 2"-'+ 
(1 + 2 + 22 + . . . + 2"-2)p 
(2" - 1) + (2"-l - 1)p = 
p +  (2n-1 - l ) p  = 
2n-'p 
= m 
This shows that m is a perfect number and completes the proof of 
Euclid's Theorem. 

6.6. PERFECT NUMBERS 
245 
Therefore there will be an infinite number of perfect numbers 
if there are infinitely many numbers n such that 2" - 1 is a prime 
number. At the time of this writing, it is not known if there are 
infinitely many primes of the form 2" - 1, and so it is not known if 
there are infinitely many even perfect numbers. 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Chapter 7 
Prime Numbers 
7.1 Prime Number Generators 
Theorem 6.4.2 shows that there are infinitely many primes. The 
next step then would be to decide where these primes are. The 
pursuit of prime numbers goes back to the Greeks and is currently 
a source of mathematical investigation and inspiration. We will 
discuss the two ends of this time line. 
The Greeks had a clever way of finding the prime numbers less 
than some fixed number. They called it The Sieve. Basically, if you 
wanted to find all of the prime numbers less than a given number, 
let us say 60, you would first write down all of the numbers less 
than 60 starting with 2. (Leave 1 out because 1 is not a prime. 
Remember, a prime is a number p > 1 that is divisible only by 1 
and itself. We exclude 1.) 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 1 0  
11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 
21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 
31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 
41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 
51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 
and so on until you write down 60. All numbers divisible by 2 are 
excluded from our search for prime numbers so we start with 2, and 
move every other space, marking these numbers out as we go. We 
mark them out because they are divisible by 2. You stop when you 
247 

248 
CHAPTER 7. PRIME NUMBERS 
reach the end of your Sieve. Observe. 
2
3
 
5 
7 
9 
11 
13 
15 
17 
19 
21 
23 
25 
27 
29 
31 
33 
35 
37 
39 
41 
43 
45 
47 
49 
51 
53 
55 
57 
59 
Instead of striking the numbers out we have deleted them from 
The Sieve. You can just strike them out with the slash /. The 
numbers that remain are not divisible by 2. 
Next, we find multiples of 3. Start at 3 and count three spaces in 
The Sieve until The Sieve is ended. It is important that you count 
the spaces in The Sieve as well. The deleted numbers contribute to 
our search for primes. Do it this way. 
2
3
 
5 
7 
11 
13 
17 
19 
23 
25 
29 
31 
35 
37 
41 
43 
47 
49 
53 
55 
59 
The numbers left are not divisible by 2 or by 3. The next number 
left on The Sieve is 5. Delete all of the numbers and spaces in The 
Sieve that are five spaces from 5, 5 spaces from that number, and 
so on. Simply slash out numbers by counting every fifth number 
and space, as follows. 
2
3
 
5 
7 
11 
13 
17 
19 
23 
29 
31 
37 
41 
43 
47 
49 
51 
53 
59 
The remaining numbers are not divisible by 2, 3, or 5. Do the 
same for 7 (the next number on The Sieve) and arrive at 

7.1. PRIME NUMBER GENERATORS 
249 
2
3
 
5 
7 
11 
13 
17 
19 
23 
29 
31 
37 
41 
43 
47 
51 
53 
59 
Note the disappearance of the number 49 from The Sieve. You 
would have deleted 14, 21, 28, 35, and 42 but these numbers were 
already deleted from The Sieve. They are also divisible by 2, 3, and 
5. None of the remaining numbers in The Sieve is divisible by 2, 3, 
5, or 7. Take 11 and strike out every eleventh number as so. 
2
3
 
5 
7 
11 
13 
17 
19 
23 
29 
31 
37 
41 
43 
47 
51 
53 
59 
Nothing new is deleted. That is, because the first number en- 
countered must be of the form 112. The smaller numbers are of the 
form p 
1 11 for p = 2,3,5,7 and these numbers have been deleted 
from The Sieve. The number bigger than 11 that we would first 
delete is 121, which is not on our small Sieve. Thus The Sieve has 
filtered out all of the prime numbers less than 60. Those primes are 
the numbers left in The Sieve. They are 
2,3,5,7,11,13,17,19,23,29,31,37,41,43,47,51,53,59. 
The Sieve is used to find the primes less than a given number, 
but this approach is quite slow. Computers especially have a hard 
time finding primes less than n with The Sieve when n is large, say 
a million. It takes a more than a week of computer time to find all 
of the primes less than a million. 
Another method for generating primes is to use polynomials. It 
was observed by Euler (circa 1750 AD) that the quadratic polyno- 
mial 
P(X) = 41 + z + x2 

250 
CHAPTER 7. PRIME NUMBERS 
gives a list of prime values for small z. Some of those prime numbers 
are given. 
f(0) = 41, f( 1) = 43, f(2) = 47, 
53,61,71,83,97,113,151,173,197,223, 
251,281,313,347,383,421,461,503,547,593,641,691, 
743,797,853,911,971,1033,1097,1163,1231,1301, 
1373,1447,1523,1601. 
Use your desktop computer to see that each of these numbers is 
a prime number. Of course, the number p(41) will not be a prime 
since it is divisible by 41, and neither is p(40) a prime. Try it and 
see. Thus some of the values of p ( 5 )  are not prime numbers. 
But what a mathematical coincidence. We produce many primes 
from such a simple polynomial of such small degree. Why is that so? 
Since mathematics does not believe in mathematical coincidence, 
the question posed was to find a polynomial of small degree that 
was complex enough to yield all of the prime numbers as output. 
In 1977 a team of mathematicians found a polynomial that gen- 
erated all of the primes when natural numbers were input. The poly- 
nomial does not have one variable, it has 26 variables, and its degree 
is not 2. It has degree 25. One has to wonder how James Jones, 
Daihachiro Sato, Hideo Wada, and Douglas Wiens came upon this 
algebraic dragon. For those wondering, that polynomial P is 
P = (k+2){1-[wz+h+j-q]2 
- [an + p  + q + x - el2 
- [(gk + 29 -I- k -k l)(h + j )  + h - 
- [16(k + 1)3((rc + 2)(n + q 2  + 1 - f212 
[((a + u 
2
2
 
(u - a))’ - l)(n + 4dy)2 + I - (z + cu)’]]” 
[n + 1 + 2) - 912 - [(a2 - 1)12 + 1 - m2I2 
- [ a i + k + l - 1 - i ] 2  
[p+ I(. 
- n - 1) + b(2an + 2a - n2 - 2n - 2) - m] 
- [q + l(u - n - 1) + s(2ap + 2a - p2 - 2p - 2) - .I2 
[z + pl(a - p )  + t(2ap - p2 - 1) - pm)I2}. 
- [e3(e + 2)(u + 
+ 1 - 0212 
- [(a2 - l)y2 + 1 - z212 - [16r2y4(a2 - 1) + 1 - u212 
- 
- 
- 
- 

7.2. THE PRIME NUMBER THEOREM 
25 1 
Try programming your desktop computer with this polynomial and 
integer input values to see that this polynomial puts out negative 
numbers, (to be ignored), and prime numbers only. You can also 
see that this polynomial has output 2 quite a lot, and the primes 
are not put out in their numerical order. But still, here is a finite 
formula that puts out the infinite set of prime numbers. That is the 
accomplishment. 
7.2 The Prime Number Theorem 
Now let’s consider just counting the primes. For a given integer 
n > 0 let 
T(n) = the number of primes p < n. 
Here is ~ ( n )  
for some small n. Because 
273 
are the primes less than 5, 
T(5) = 2; 
2,3,5,7,11 
4 1 2 )  = 5; 
because 
are the primes less than 12, 
and because 
2,3,5,7,11,13,17,19,23,29 
are the primes less than 30, 
~ ( 3 0 )  
= 10. 
Using The Sieve we would conclude that 
~ ( 6 0 )  
= 18. 

252 
CHAPTER 7. PRIME NUMBERS 
There doesn’t seem to be much of a pattern here, does there? And 
yet mathematicians have looked for and found an important pat- 
tern. It is nothing less than a closed formula for finding out how 
many primes are less than a given number. To talk about this mile- 
stone in mathematics we need to know a little about logarithms. 
One of the fundamental constants of mathematics is the number 
e (in honor of Leonard Euler who first investigated this number). 
The decimal value of the number e is upprozimately 
e x 2.718281828459. 
This number does not repeat itself and there is no end to the seeming 
random pattern to the decimal values of e. One does not study the 
physical sciences easily without the number e. This number, it 
seems, is how nature put the universe together. For those familiar 
with chemistry, the decay of radioactive elements is based on e 
through the equation 
A(t) = Aae-xt 
where A, is the initial amount of material and X is a constant called 
the decay constant. For those who have studied calculus, this func- 
tion A(t) comes from the differential equation 
A’(t) = A(t), 
which does not seem to mention e at all. 
Now in possession of this mathematical constant we define the 
natural logarithm as follows. Let a and b be nonnegative real num- 
bers. Then the natural logarithm of a is denoted by 
ln(a). 
~~ 
~~~ 
By definition, this logarithm is the log in the base e. That is, 
ln(a) = b exactly when a = eb. 

7.2. THE PRIME NUMBER THEOREM 
Thus 
253 
In( 1) = 0 because 1 = eo, 
ln(e) = 1 because e = el, 
In( -) = -1 because - = e-' and , 
1 
1 
e 
e 
1 
2 
In(&) = - because & = ell2. 
In general, we have 
ln(ez) = z for any real number z. 
Thus we have a rudimentary knowledge of ln(z). With this knowl- 
edge we can state the Prime Number Theorem. 
The Prime Number Theorem: Given a large natural number 
n, 
n 
r(n) M - 
ln(n)' 
Indeed, the approximation gets better as n increases without 
bound. By this we mean that a comparison between n(n) and - 
will show that these numbers are almost the same as n gets large. 
That is, the limit 
n 
ln(n> 
A 
B 
Consider this for a moment. A fraction - = 1 precisely when 
A = B # 0. This limit implies that 
is very close to 1 for 
large n. Thus - 
is a very good approximation for n(n) for large 
T(n) 
nl w-4 
n 
ln(n) 
natural numbers'n: Being close to r(n) is the best we can ask for 
at this time. 

254 
CHAPTER 7. PRIME NUMBERS 
For example, with a little calculater use we can be sure that 
T (  1024) 
is close to 
= 160. 
1024 
- 
1024 
ln(1024) 
ln(21°) 
lOln(2) 
=-- 
1024 
Larger numbers are sure to lead to better approximations. Thus 
n(e2') 
is close to 
e20 
e20 
320 
ln(e20) 
20 - 20 
-- _ -  < - 
= 1.5 x 318 
since e < 3. We can get another crude approximation of the number 
of primes less than e20 by noting that e2 M 8. That is, 
e2' 
(e2)l0 
- = -  
ln(e20) 
20 
(8>'O 
z -  20 
= 4 x 8 8  
= 226 
= 64 x (210)2 
= 64 x 10242 
x 64 x lo6. 
There are approximately 64 million primes less than e2'. To see 
how big e20 is, note that 2.7 < e so that 
e20 > (2.7)20 = ((2.7)2)'0 = (7.29)" > (50)5 = 312,500,000 
or over 312 million. 
7.3 Products of Geometric Series 
We are going to discuss the most famous of mathematical problems 
called the Riemann Hypothesis. This problem is intimately con- 
nected with the Prime Number Theorem and involves the roots of 

7.3. PRODUCTS OF GEOMETRIC SERIES 
255 
an infinite sum called the Riemann Zeta Function. What we do is 
probably the way that Leonard Euler went about the problem. 
The sigma notation is shorthand for writing down sums. It is 
especially useful when writing down infinite sums. It takes the 
guesswork out of seeing which pattern is meant by . . .. C means 
“add these terms up.” For example, 
i=O 
and, more importantly, the geometric series 1 + x + x2 + . . . with 
infintely many terms can be written 
m 
.. 
~ x k = l + x + x 2 +  
.... 
U 
k=O 
We can even sum over two or more variables if we are careful. Thus, 
assuming that i , j  2 0, we have 
i+j=3 
= y3 + xy2 + x2y + 23 
= x3 + x2y + xy2 + y3 
Another example is 
C 
= x3 +y3 + z 3  
i+j+k=3 
+ 
+ xyz. 
x2y + x2z + y2x + y2z + z2x + z2y 
One more detail before we begin our multiplication. The degree 
of a term is the sum of the exponents (implied or stated) in that 
term. Thus 
x2y3z4 
has degree 
2 + 3 + 4  = 9, 

256 
CHAPTER 7. PRIME NUMBERS 
while degree 3 terms look like this. 
z31 
x2y1 
xyz. 
We discuss the product of polynomials by considering the terms of 
different degree in the polynomial. There is a pattern here that will 
help us to multiply geometric series together. 
Consider the identity 
(1 + x)(l + y) = 1 + (x + 9) + xy. 
The term x + y comes from the fact that we have multiplied all of 
the degree 1 terms by degree 0 terms (=constant terms). 
1 - x  
+ y -  1 = z f y .  
The term xy comes from the fact that we have multiplied together 
all those terms whose product has degree 2. There is only one such 
product in this example. 
x - y = xy. 
Let us do the same thing for the identity 
(1 + 2 ) ( 1 +  y)(l + z )  = 1 
+ (x+y+z) 
+ (zy+ yz+xz) 
+ (XY4 
The term x + y + z comes from multiplying together those terms 
whose degree is 1: 
1 * z  + 1 * y +  1 * z = x + y + z. 
The degree 2 term is found by multiplying together all those terms 
in this example whose product has degree 2. 
xy + yz + xz 
is the result. The degree 3 term is from the only product that yields 
a degree 3 term: 
xyz. 

7.3. PRODUCTS OF GEOMETRIC SERIES 
257 
Let us try this analysis one more time by considering the identity 
(1+z+z2)(1+y)(1+z) = 1 
+ ( z + y + z )  
+ 
+ 
(xy + yz + 22 + x2) 
(s2y + s2z + zyz) 
+ (x2yz). 
The identity was found by using foil over and over again. Here is 
another way to find this identity. 
The degree 0 term is found by multiplying together all the terms 
that add up to a degree 0 term. There is just one: 
1 - 1 * 1 = 1 .  
The degree 1 term is found by multiplying all of the terms to- 
gether that result in a degree 1 term: 
1 . z  + 1 * y + 1 
* z = x + y + z. 
The next would be the degree 2 term. Multiply all of the terms 
together that result in degree 2. They axe 
sy + yz + xz + x2. 
The degree 3 term is next. The products resulting in degree 3 
are degree 1 times degree 2 or three degree 1 terms together. They 
are 
x2y, x2z, xyz 
so the degree 3 term is their sum. 
x2y + x2z + xyz. 
The degree 4 term is the only product that results in degree 4, 
namely, degree 2, degree 1, and degree 1: 
x2yz. 
This completes the product. 

258 
CHAPTER 7. PRIME NUMBERS 
So when multiplying we ask which products result in a degree 0 
term, then a degree 1 term, then a degree 2 term, then a degree 3 
term, and so on until the terms in the product are all used. 
We call an infinite sum 
1 + 2 + x2 + x3 +. . . 
a geometric series. This geometric series is a number when -1 < 
x < 1 and only when x is in this domain, so it is important that we 
do not allow 2 to stray from this interval of convergence. We will 
multiply two geometric series together using the above pattern. 
G = (1 + S  + z2 +. . .)(I + y +  y2 +. . .). 
Operating as we did above, the degree 0 term is 
1 . 1 = 1  
and the degree 1 term is formed by multiplying degree 0 and degree 
1 terms together. The result is 
1 - y + z -  1 = x +y. 
The degree 2 term is next. Combine all terms together whose degree 
is 2: 
The degree 3 term is found by counting degrees. 
2 
1 * y2 + x . y + x 2 .  1 = x2 + zy + y . 
1 * y3 + x * y2 + x2 
a y + x3 . 1 = x3 + x2y + xy2 + y3. 
One more, the degree 4 term. 
1 . 9 4  + 2 * y3 + 2 2  - y2 + x3 * y + x4 * 1 
= x4 + 23y + x2y2 + xy3 + y4. 
We have thus found the first 4 terms of the product G. 
G
=
l
 
+ (x++) 
+ (x2+2y+y2) 
+ 
+ 
(x3 + x2y + zy2 + y3) 
(x4 + x3y + x2y2 + xy3 + y4) 

7.3. PRODUCTS OF GEOMETRIC SERIES 
259 
In general, we can say that the nth term in G is found by adding 
together all of the products whose sum is n. In terms of the sigma 
notation we have the following. 
I 
The nth term of G = c 
xiyj. 
i+j=n 
It is worth noting that if (1 + z + z2 + . . .) and (1 + y + y2 + . . .) 
converge (i.e., if -1 < z, 
y < 1) then the product G also converges. 
However, as we will show presently, in case there are infinitely many 
geometric series multiplied together, then the product of them need 
not converge to a number. 
This is how we extend our products from two to three or more 
geometric series. Use the sigma notation to write down a geometric 
series. The rest of the notation is due to Isaac Newton. Let 
m 
A = x u i  = 1 + a + a 2 +  ..., 
i=O 
m 
B = p = l + b + b 2 +  ..., 
c = C c k = 1 + c + c 2 +  ..., 
j =O 
m 
k=O 
be an infinite implied list of geometric sums. The product 
I ' = A * B . C *  ... 
is the infinite series whose nth term is 
nth term of r = 1 (ui&ck.. .). 
i+j+k+ ... =n 
For example, the degree 0 term is from sums i + j + Ic + . . . = 0, 
which happens only when i = j = k = . . . = 0. Thus the degree 0 
term is 
1. 

260 
CHAPTER 7. PRIME NUMBERS 
The degree 1 term of r is the sum of all terms whose exponents add 
to 1. That is, the degree 1 term is the infinite sum 
U' + b1 + C' + . . . = u + b + c + .  . . . 
The degree 2 term, which is all we are going to do, is formed by 
taking products of degree 1 terms like ab or bc, and products of 
square terms with the only degree 0 term that exists here, 1. The 
degree 2 term is the infinite sum 
r+s=2 
In this case z, y E {a, b, c, . . .}. Some of the terms in the degree 2 
term of the product I? are 
c 
xTyS = a2 + b2 +c2 +, 
r+s=2 
+ ab+bc+ac+ 
.... 
Somewhere in the product l? is a factor 
00 
D = Ede = 1 + d + d 2 +  .... 
e=o 
It also contributes to the infinite sum that is I?. Terms like d5, abd2 
and a2c3d7 occur when we write down r in all of its detail. The 
sigma notation helps to simplify our representation of I?. 
00 
r(a,b,c,. ..) = c E (uZVC 
k...) 
n=O 
i+j+k+ ... =n 
We now have enough algebra to understand a little about the 
Riemann Zeta Function. 

7.4. THE RIEMANN ZETA FUNCTION 
26 1 
7.4 The Riemann Zeta Function 
In this section, we investigate a special value of r called the Rie- 
mann Zeta Function. We will replace a, b, c, . . . with specific val- 
ues or numbers, and the resulting product will be untangled. Our 
stopping place will be what is considered to be the most important 
mathematics problem of the last 150 years. It is called the Riemann 
Hypothesis. 
Let s > 1 be a real number. As in the previous section let us 
substitute - for a in A, and call the result 
1 
2" 
1 
1
1
 1 
A ( - )  = 1 + - + - + - + . . . . 
2" 
2s 
22.9 
23s 
1 
3" 
Let b = - in B and write 
1 
1
1
1
 
3" 
3s 
32" 
33" 
B(-) = 1 + - + - + - + ... . 
1 
5" 
Let c = - in C and write 
1 
1
1
1
 
5" 
5s 
52" 
53" 
C(-) = 1 + - + - + - +  
.... 
Continue inductively, forming reciprocals of s-powers of prime num- 
bers 
1 - 
P" 
and substituting them into the associated geometric series: 
1 
1
1
1
 
D(-) = 1 + - + - + - 
+.... 
P" 
ps 
p2s 
p3s 
Each geometric series 1 + x + x2 + . . . can be written in closed 
form as 
2 
1 
l + z + x  +...=- 1 - x  
1 
P" 
when -1 < x < 1. For primes p, -1 < - < 1, so 
1 
1
1
 
1 
P" 
D(-) = 1 + - + - 
+ .. . = - 
P" 
P2" 
1 - -  1 '  

262 
CHAPTER 7. PRIME NUMBERS 
Making this substitution for A, B, C, . . . yields the equation 
1
1
1
 
1 
1 
1 
I?(-, 
-, -, . . .) = A(-)B(-)C(-) 
2" 3" 5" 
2" 
3" 
5" 
all primes p 1 - I 
P" 
where the symbol 
all primes p 
means to take the product over all primes p. The first little bit of 
this formula is 
1 
1 
1 
and continues on indefinitely, one factor for each prime. 
This infinite product is called the Riemann Zeta Function: 
This function ((s) is defined at all complex numbers except s = 1. 
There is a deep connection between the roots or zeros of ((s) and the 
number of primes r(n) less than n. The details of that connection 
are beyond the scope of this book, so we will just write down certain 
facts about ((s). 
We can just as easily use complex numbers as real numbers in 
((s) so we do just that. Let 
s = u + iv, 
where u and v are real numbers, and i = a, 
the imaginary unit. 
The next question that we come upon is simple enough. You have 
often been asked to find the zeros of a polynomial function, and 
that is what we ask here. What are the zeros of the Riemann Zeta 
Function (( s) 2 
The Riemann Hypothesis: The zeros of the Riemann Zeta Func- 
tion have real part -. That is, if ((s) = 0 and if s = u + iv then 
1 
2 
1 
u =  2' 

7.4. THE RIEMANN ZETA FUNCTION 
263 
As of March, 2006 an answer to this question has escaped the 
most careful of analysis. All of the zeros that have been found 
1 
satisfy u = - but that does not preclude the possibility that there 
2 
might be a very large number s = u + iv out there somewhere that 
1 
is a zero of <(s) but that has u # -. The best computer models 
2 
1 
show that if [(s) = 0 and if u < 
then u = -. But this does not 
2 
1 
prove that all zeros of [(s) have real part -. 
2 
There is a story that circulates among the graduate students 
during the coffee hour at mathematics departments in universities 
all over the world. It seems that the Devil came to Riemann and 
said that he would give him his heart’s desire for his soul. You know 
the contract. It has become immortal since we read The Devil and 
Daniel Webster. Riemann, being mathematically astute, said to the 
Devil that he would give up his soul provided that the Devil could 
give Riemann a correct proof of the Riemann Hypothesis in one 
year. The Devil agreed, and vanished in a puff of smoke. Riemann 
went about his work. One year later to the day, the Devil returned 
to Riemann’s office. He sadly announced that despite using all 
of the resources in his realm he was unable to solve the problem 
Riemann had given him. “But,’) says he, “if I could just prove this 
one lemma.” Moral of the story is that there are no world class 
mathematicians in hell. 
Let us try a more traditional form of ((s). 
We can realize [(s) 
as an infinite sum as long as we begin with a real number s > 1. 
Recall that [(s) is a product of geometric series 
1 
1 
1 
2“ 
3” 
5” 
[ ( s )  = A ( - )  * I?(--). C(-). . . 
1 
P” 
where there is one geometric series D( -) for each prime number p. 
The terms of the series <(s) are 1, the sum of the reciprocal primes 
1 
c p”’ 
primes p 

264 
CHAPTER 7. PRIME NUMBERS 
and the sum of the degree 2 terms 
1 
1 
cp+ c 0s’ 
primes p 
primes p # q 
The higher degree terms are just too complicated to write down 
here. 
We approach the sum from the opposite direction. 
Consider the sum 
- 1  
We could add up these numbers by taking n = 1,2,3,. . . or we 
could add them up by taking their prime factorizations. Add up 1 
and the numbers that have just one prime dividing them. 
c 
7‘ 
n= 1 
1 
l +  c 
p. 
primes p 
Next, take the numbers that are of the form p2 or that have exactly 
two primes dividing them. Such an n would look like 
for two primes p # q: 
1 
primes p Ps 
primes p 
primes p # 9 
These sums are the initial sums of <(s). We have therefore argued 
that 
That is, the infinite product c(s) is an infinite sum. 
A most unusual mathematical coincidence occurs here. Remem- 
ber that I have warned you about manipulating infinite sums that 
do not converge. Well here is a good example of that. The geometric 
series 
1 
1
1
1
 
D(-) = l + - + - ; Z + - +  
... 
P 
P 
P 
P3 

7.5. REAL NUMBERS 
265 
converges since 
1 
P 
-1 < - < 1 for primes p. 
Does the infinite product 
1 
1 
1 
2 
3 
5 
((1) = A ( - )  ‘ B(-) . C(-) . . 
of convergent geometric series converge? No. You see, if we use the 
infinite series representation (7.1) of c(s), we see that 
which is the divergent harmonic series. That should raise a few 
eyebrows. Certain infinite products of numbers do not converge. In 
this way, infinite products of numbers are similar to infinite sums 
of numbers. Some converge, some diverge. 
7.5 Real Numbers 
The previous section shows us how mathematicians handle infinite 
sets of integers in a finite manner. In this section, we will see how 
mathematicians handle the continuum of the real numbers in a finite 
manner. For example, there is an infinite set called a sequence. An 
example of a sequence is 
The sequence is infinite but it takes place in a finite interval [0,1]. 
Moreover, there is a number 0 such that each open neighborhood of 
0 contains infinitely many of the terms in this sequence. An open 
neighborhood of 0 is an open interval (-a, u) that contains 0. Other 
open neighborhoods of 0 are (-1, l), (-2,2), and (2’ i). 
Another sequence is formed by allowing 

266 
CHAPTER 7. PRIME NUMBERS 
for each integer n 2 0. The first few terms are 
1 -1 1 -1 
- -  
1' 2 '2,'. 
They oscillate between positive and negative numbers. The entire 
sequence is contained in the finite interval [-1,1]. Moreover, there 
is a number 0 not in the sequence with a special property. Given 
any open neighborhood of 0, say, (-a, 
a), there is a point beyond 
which all of the terms in the sequence are in this neighborhood. 
That is, there is an integer N > 0 such that 
(-'I" E (-a,a> 
for all integers n > N. 
2" 
An open neighborhood of 0 is like having an infinite queue of 
people and saying that each of them lives on the same block of the 
city. A smaller open neighborhood of 0 would be one home. We 
would be saying that almost all of these people live in the same 
home. An even smaller open neighborhood would be a room in the 
home. All but finitely many of these people live in the same room. 
I won't get into the social implications that must come up when the 
open neighborhood of 0 is a chair in the room. 
Let us be a bit more precise. A sequence in the closed interval 
[ - 1,1] is a function f : N - 
[ - 1,1] from the natural numbers into 
[-1,1]. The images of the function or sequence is usually denoted 
with a subscript as in 
f(n) = 5, for each n E N . 
For instance, f(1) = 21, f(2) = 2 2 ,  and so on. The sequence with 
terms - 
(-')" 
is given by the function f : N - 
[-l,l] with rule 
2" 
Let us write down an arbitrary sequence in [-1,1]. 

7.5. REAL NUMBERS 
267 
of different terms. This is an infinite subset of [-1, 11 so there 
should be something finite that we can say about the sequence. 
Cut the interval in half. Is it possible that both halves contain a 
finite number of sequence elements in them? No. That would mean 
that the sequence is finite, which it is not. Thus one half contains 
an infinite number of sequence elements. So let 11 be the half of 
the interval that contains infinitely many sequence elements. Now 
cut II in half. As we have argued above, one half must contain 
infinitely many elements of the sequence since otherwise 11 contains 
only finitely many sequence elements, a contradiction. Hence we let 
1 2  c 11 be the half that contains infinitely many of the sequence 
elements. Continue in this way, constructing a chain of sets 
1 1 3 1 2 3  ..., 
each term half as big as the previous term. The lengths of the 
intervals form a sequence 
1 1  1 
I - - -  
) 2’ 22’ 23 , . . . . 
Observe that these lengths converge or approach 0 as n is allowed 
to grow. 
Now, we can write 
I k  = (ak, b k )  for some real numbers ak < bk. 
In this case we have a sequence of real numbers 
a1 < a2 < a3 < . . . < b3 < b2 < bl. 
( 7 4  
Then the sequence {all a2, a3,. . .} is a sequence bounded above by 
bl. That is, there is only one direction for the sequence, namely, 
upward, and there is a number 1arger.than all of the sequence ele- 
ments. We say that {an 1 n E N} is a bounded monotonic sequence. 
One of the primary properties of the real line is that such a sequence 
{a, 1 n E N} has a limit. That is, there is a number L such that 
each open neighborhood (3 of L contains all but finitely many of 
the a,. Pictorially we have 
Almost all sequence elements are 
in this open neighborhood of L. 
L 
a0 
a2( a3 
an 
I 
an+l 
a4 
) 
a1 
I 

268 
CHAPTER 7. PRIME NUMBERS 
The picture shows us that almost all (i.e., all but a finite number) 
of the sequence elements a, are in the open neighborhood 0 
of L. 
The sequence {b, 1 n E N} has the same property around L. Thus 
given an open interval 0 about L there is a point where 
for almost all of the open intervals (u,, b,) = I,. Since I, is chosen 
so that I, contains infinitely many elements of {x, I n E N}, we see 
that 0 contains infinitely many elements in {x, 1 n E N}. We call 
such a point L a cluster point of {x, I n E N}. 
At this point we summarize. 
Theorem 7.5.1 [Bolzano-Weierstrauss] Let {IC, 
1 n E N} c 
[-I, 11 be a sequence. There is a cluster point L in [--I, 11 for the 
sequence. 
What did we know about the sequence {x, 1 n E N}? Only that 
it was a sequence in [--1,1]. That is precious little to know about 
a sequence before we determine that it has a cluster point, a point 
that is very close to infinitely many of the elements in the sequence. 
Very little hypothesis gave us a powerful result. That is one of the 
aims or goals of mathematical research. When less gives us more 
we know that we are onto something special. 
Let me share some stories surrounding Karl Weierstrauss (circa 
1880 AD). Unlike many mathematical giants Karl did not start out 
as a strong mathematics student. Karl was a late bloomer. He 
spent his college life in pursuit of personal joy. Most of his young 
life was misspent fencing and quaffing beers in bars. His pursuit of 
fun distracted him from his studies. He was a party animal. Because 
of his party attitude he barely graduated college. Upon graduation 
he was denied a job at the local institutions and accepted a job 
instead teaching at an elementary school. It was here that he hit 
upon the sense of rigor and creativity that we remember him for 
today. In a change of image he set new standards for mathematical 
rigor that are still in effect more than 100 years later. Just as curious 
is the fact that in contrast to his earlier work, Karl’s lectures and 
teaching are renowned for the care taken in their presentation and 
preparation. His gifts to his students are another unique quality for 

7.5. REAL NUMBERS 
269 
Karl. He would begin a mathematical gem and then allow a student 
or a colleague to finish it, thus giving them the credit. This is a 
very generous and quite uncommon behavior. Mathematics cannot 
understate Karl’s foundational contributions to teaching, analysis, 
and rigor in mathematics. 
Let us use this kind of recursive argument to hunt tigers on the 
Arabian Desert. Your job is to find a Tiger in the otherwise barren 
Arabian Desert. You have all of the material you need, so you first 
erect an impassible fence around the Desert. Call the contained 
area S1. You divide S1 into two equal regions using the impassible 
fencing. To find the Tiger, you send men out into each half with 
orders to engage the Tiger in a fight. The men on one side return 
saying they could not find the Tiger and the men on the other side 
do not come back. Call their side S2. It contains the Tiger. Divide 
S2 in half using impassible fencing and send the men out again. The 
side 5’3 is the one whose men do not return. The Tiger is there. We 
have started an induction, constructing regions 
S1 3 s2 3 s, 3 . .  . , 
whose areas are given by a sequence 
1
1
1
 
1 > - > - > - >  
... 
2 
22 
23 
that becomes vanishingly small. Eventually we will construct a 
1 
region S, that contains the Tiger and whose area is 2. 
This power 
2” 
1 
of 
will be so small that we can see the Tiger in the region S,. At 
2 
this point we can say that we have corralled the Tiger. 
Some might say that we have no way of knowing that S, is small 
enough to cage the Tiger. There is less than 10l2 square miles in 
the Arabian Desert, so on the 41st attempt to find the Tiger we 
have a region of area 
1 
1 
= -(1000)~ 
240 
240 
1 
< -(1024)4 
240 

270 
CHAPTER 7. PRIME NUMBERS 
Another few fences and we have corralled the Tiger. 

Chapter 8 
Logic and 
Met a-Mat hernat ics 
8.1 The Collection of All Sets 
Let 
I 
F 
denote the Collection of all Finite Sets. Since F contains { l}, (1, a}, 
{1,2,3}, . . ., the collection F is infinite. Put another way: 
I 
The collection F of all finite sets is not finite. 
While this is not a surprise, it prepares us for similar ideas concern- 
ing deeper implications about more abstract collections. 
Example 8.1.1 The following is a classic example due to Bertrand 
Russell. Let 
I 
I 
c 
be the Collection of All Sets. We will prove the following. 
271 

272 
CHAPTER 8. LOGIC AND META-MATHEMATICS 
Theorem 8.1.2 C is not a set. 
Proof Assume for the sake of contradiction that C is a set. 
Then C has the rather unsettling property 
c E c. 
That is, C is an element of itself. This is like saying that a bag 
of sand is itself a grain of sand (bag and all), that this book is 
contained on one page of this book, or that a crowd of people is a 
person. And yet, although unsettling, C E C is a consequence of 
the assumption that C is a set. This unsettling statement will lead 
us to a wonderful contradiction. Picture (6.5) will help with the 
argument that follows. 
The Collection of All Sets C 
(8.1 
.c 
W 
S E S for these sets S 
ov 
E#tY lap 
0
0
 
W /  
S @ S for these sets S 
To produce a contradiction we will do something that may strike 
you as familiar. Define a set W = { sets S 1 S E S}. That is, 
W = the set of all sets S that contain themselves as an element. 
The complement of W 
I 
1 
W' = { sets S 1 S # S}. 
By our assumption C is a set such that C E C so that C E W .  
Thus W is nonempty. The empty set 0 satisfies 8 # 0 so 0 E W'. 
In fact, most sets S satisfy S # S so W' is a nonempty set. 

8.1. THE COLLECTION OF ALL SETS 
273 
We observe that given a set S either S E S or S 6 S so either 
S E W or S E W’ but not both. Thus W and W’ are sets. Let us 
determine where W’ resides. 
Assume that W’ E W’. Then, because W is the set of all sets S 
such that S E S, we must have W’ E W. This is a contradiction to 
the fact that no set can be in both W and W’, so our assumption 
is in error. 
Alternatively, assume that W’ 6 W’. -Because W’ is the set of 
all sets S such that S 6 
S ,  we must have W’ E W’. This is another 
mathematical impossibility. 
Therefore W’ is not a set, which is clearly a contradiction to our 
choice of W and W’. This shows us that our assumption that C is 
a set is in error. We conclude that 
C is not a set. 
I 
I 
This is a good time to demonstrate that card({.}) 
is not a set 
since it contains a copy of C: it contains {X} for each set X .  
Now that we have established that C is not a set, here are several 
mind expanding shockers. 
Theorem 8.1.3 There are no functions f : C - 
B for any sets 
B. 
Proof Functions are defined on sets and sets only. Since C is 
not a set we cannot define a function on it. 
Theorem 8.1.4 C has no cardinality. 
Proof Suppose to the contrary that C has cardinality N. Then 
there is a set B and a bijection f : C - 
B such that card(B) = N. 
This is contrary to the previous theorem. This contradiction shows 
us that C has no cardinality. 
Even though C has no cardinality there is a more philosophical 
way of seeing that C is larger than any mathematical construction. 
Let A be a set. Form the subcollection 
A = {{x} Ix E A }  

274 
CHAPTER 8. LOGIC AND META-MATHEMATICS 
Then A is a set and 
card(A) = card(A). 
Furthermore, 
A is a subcollection of elements in C 
so that in an intuitive but compelling way 
each set A is smaller than C .  
If we did not know about Theorem 8.1.4 we might be tempted to 
say that the cardinality of C is larger than every cardinality. In 
pictures 
0 . . . No 
2 N O  
22*O . . . 
N ... 
size of C 
8.2 Other Than True or False 
Have you ever engaged in logical games in which you had to decide 
who was telling the truth given some information or statements 
made by the people involved. My favorite is the classic chestnut 
The Hidden Tiger Puzzle. It goes like this. You are on an island 
where the island ruler askes you to make a choice. Behind one door 
is a Golden Key that will make you the ruler of the island. Behind 
the other door is a yellow and black striped tiger who will eat you 
if the door is opened. The two doors are guarded by two men who 
know where the Golden Key is located. You may ask one question 
of the guards in order to find the Golden Key. Here is the twist. 
One of these guards tells the truth all of the time and the other one 
lies all of the time. What one question can you ask that will lead 

8.2. OTHER THAN TRUE OR FALSE 
275 
you to the Golden Key? The answer to this question is given on 
page 281. 
The answer to The Hidden Tiger Puzzle relies on the fact that 
most statements have exactly one of two logical states. Namely, they 
are true or false, but not both. No third alternative is considered. 
In this section we will give examples of statements that will lead us 
to conclude that certain statements in the English language have a 
third possible logical state. 
Example 8.2.1 [5] We will show that there is a word W in the 
English language such that the sentence 
“W is a W word.” 
is neither true nor false. We conclude that it must possess some 
alternative logical state. 
Proof Assume for the sake of contradiction that the statement 
“W is a W word” is either true or false, and not both. We will 
say that a word W is self-descriptive if the statement “W is a W 
word” is true. The word W is said to be non-self-descriptive if the 
statement “W is a W word” is false. By our assumption, a word W 
is either a self-descriptive word or it is a non-self-descriptive word 
but not both. 
For example, since the word pentasyllabic has five syllables the 
sentence 
“Pentasyllabic is a pentasyllabic word.” 
is true. Thus pentasyllabic is a self-descriptive word. This demon- 
strates that there are self-descriptive words. There are many non- 
self-descriptive words. For example, since monosyllabic means hav- 
ing one syllable, the sentence 
“Monosyllabic is a monosyllabic word.’’ 
is false, whence monosyllabic is a non-self-descriptive word. 
your guess and then read on. 
So what kind of word do you think non-self-descriptive is? Make 

276 
CHAPTER 8. LOGIC AND META-MATHEMATICS 
Non-self-descriptive is the contradiction we seek. We will show 
that the sentence 
NSD 
“Non-self-descriptive is a non-self-descriptive word.” 
is neither true nor false, thus contradicting our assumption that the 
statement “W is a W word” is either true or false but not both. 
Suppose that statement NSD is true. By the definition of non- 
self-descriptive sentence NSD must be false. This is not possible 
as our initial assumption says that this sentence can have only one 
logical state. 
So it must be that NSD is false. By the definition of non-self- 
descriptive the word non-self-descriptive is a non-self-descriptive 
word. That is, sentence NSD is true, contrary to our initial as- 
sumption. 
Since each logical state leads us to a contradiction we conclude 
that the logical state of sentence NSD is something other than true 
or false. We have found a simple statement that seems to suggest 
true and false. These statements are also quite simple, leading us to 
believe that this kind of counterintuitive logical behavior is actually 
quite common. 
Consider what the above example does for the set of words in 
the Engish dictionary. Let S denote the collection of self-descriptive 
words and let NS denote the collection of non-self-descriptive words. 
According to the above example S and NS do not account for all 
of the words in the English language. There is a third collection: 
I 
I 
0 = words W for which “W is a W word” has a logical state 
other than true or false, including the nonsense state. 
If we wish to say that a word W is not in S we will say that 
We cannot say that W is a self-descriptive word. 
I 

8.2. OTHER THAN TRUE OR FALSE 
277 
This kind of wording allows for the fact that W might be in NS 
(non-self-descriptive words) or it might be in 0 (other than self- 
descriptive or non-self-descriptive words). 
What went wrong here? Why should the simple statement NSD 
give us so much trouble regarding its logical state? The number of 
words for which statement NSD is true is not large. It is something 
you might program your desktop computer to find if it could deter- 
mine when a word was self-descriptive or non-self-descriptive. Just 
download the CD that contains the entire Oxford English Dictio- 
nary and perform a search. Since this CD is finite the number of 
words for which statement NSD is true is finite. However, there is a 
word N such that the statement “ N  is an N word” is neither true 
nor false. Its logical state is some unknown third alternative state. 
It is possible that the missing third state is that the statement NSD 
has no logical state whatever. We will not pursue the matter here. 
Picture (8.2) of the English dictionary might help envision what 
we are talking about. 
Dictionary of the English Language 
(8.2) 
S 
Self-descriptive words 
NS 
Non-self-descriptive words 

278 
CHAPTER 8. LOGIC AND META-MATHEMATICS 
The following classic story is another example of a statement 
whose logical state is neither true nor false. We will update the 
story. 
The Epimenides Paradox: A philosophy professor named Epi 
walks into a room of college professors and announces that 
“I cannot tell the truth. I am lying.” 
Let us try to determine the logical state of Epi’s simple sentence I 
am lying. 
Assume that I am lying is a true statement. This is contrary to 
the fact that Epi cannot tell the truth. This is a contradiction in 
logical states, so that I am lying is not a true statement. 
Alternatively, we assume that I am lying is a false statement. 
Then Epi is telling the truth, contrary to the fact that she cannot 
tell the truth. This contradiction shows us that I am lying is not a 
false statement. 
Since it is neither true nor false we conclude that the logical 
state of I am lying is some kind of alternative third logical state. 
Try Epi’s sentence on your friends. Establish yourself as some- 
one who cannot tell the truth and then announce I am lying. 
A diagram of English might help you understand how we have 
partitioned the statements in the language. See the next page. 
The point in the previous two examples is that there are sen- 
tences in the English language whose logical state cannot be de- 
cided. We suggest that their truth state is some logical state that 
is other than true of false. 
Here is another example of alternative logical states that will 
really mess with your mind. 
Example 8.2.2 Consider the following two sentences. 
#I. 
Sentence 2 is false. 
#a. 
Sentence 1 is true. 

8.2. OTHER THAN TRUE OR FALSE 
Let us investigate the logical state of Sentence #1. 
279 
Statements of the English Language 
(8-3) 
True Statements 
False Statements 
Begin by assuming that Sentence #1 is true. That is, Sentence 
2 is false is a true sentence. Then sentence #2 is false, or in other 
words Sentence I is true is false. It must be then that sentence #1 
is false. This is a contradiction in logical states for sentence #1 so 
that our assumption is incorrect. 
Alternatively we assume that sentence #1 is false. That is, 
Sentence 2 is false is a false sentence. I leave it to the reader to 
produce the contradiction in logical states for sentence #l. 
We conclude that the logical state of sentence #1 is some alter- 
native third logical state. 
Statements #1 and #2 are not terribly complicated and yet they 
quickly lead us to a difficult logical situation. We conclude that not 
all of our language can be analyzed with traditional binary logic. 
That is, we cannot investigate the language without recognizing the 
existence of simple statements whose logical states are something 
other than true or false. 
Investigate the logical state of statement #1 in the following 
exercises. 

280 
- 
#I. 
Sentence 2 is true. 
#2. 
Sentence 3 is true. 
#3- 
Sentence 1 is true. 
CHAPTER 8. LOGIC AND META-MATHEMATICS 
#l. 
Sentence 2 is false. 
#2. 
Sentence 1 is false. 
#I. 
Sentence 2 is false. 
#2. 
Sentence 3 is false. 
#3. 
Sentence 1 is false. 
#I. 
Sentence 2 is false. 
#a. 
Sentence 3 is false. 
#3- 
Sentence 1 is true. 
#I. 
Sentence 2 is false. 
#2. 
Sentence 3 is true. 
#3- 
Sentence 1 is true. 

8.2. OTHER THAN TRUE OR FALSE 
28 1 
#I- 
Sentence 4 is false. 
#a. 
Sentence 3 is true. 
#3. 
Sentence 2 is false. 
#4. 
Sentence 1 is true. 
#I. 
Sentence 4 is false. 
#2. 
Sentence 3 is true. 
#3. 
Sentence 2 is true. 
#4. 
Sentence 1 is true. 
1 i!m 
Sentence 4 is false. 
Sentence 3 is false. 
Sentence 2 is true. 
Sentence 1 is true. 
The solution to the Hidden Tiger Puzzle: 
To find the 
door that contains the Golden Key choose one of the guards. It 
doesn’t matter which one. Ask him, Which door would the other 
guard say that the Golden Key is behind?. That is one question. 
Then open the other door. That is where you will find the Golden 
Key. 
Now here is how it works. Label the guards 1 and 2. Suppose 
you ask the one question of guard 1. If he lies all of the time then 
guard 2 tells the truth all of the time. Guard 1 will change guard 
2’s answer from the truth to a falsehood. Guard 1 will answer with 
the wrong door, the door hiding the Tiger. Open the other door. 
On the other hand, suppose guard 1 tells the truth all the time. 
Then guard 2 lies all the time. Guard 2’s answer to the question 

282 
CHAPTER 8. LOGIC AND META-MATHEMATICS 
would be the door that does not have the Golden Key behind it. 
Guard 1, being the one who tells the truth, will answer with guard 
2’s answer, which is the door that hides the Tiger. Open the other 
door. 

Bibliography 
[l] Georg Cantor, Contributions to the Founding of the Theory of Trans- 
finite Numbers, Dover Press, New York, 1955. 
[a] K. Devlin, Mathematics: The New Golden Age, Pelican Books, New 
York, 1988. 
[3] H. Eves, An Introduction to the History of Mathematics, Saunders 
College Publishing, New York, 1990. 
[4] C. Faith, Algebra I: Algebra and Categories, Springer-Verlag, New 
York, 1974. 
[5] Douglas R. Hofstader, Godel-Escher-Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid, 
Vintage Press, New York, 1980. 
[S] Nathan Jacobson, Basic Algebra 1, W.H. Freeman and Company, New 
York. 1985. 
[7] Edward Kasner and James Newman, Mathematics and the Irnagina- 
tion, Simon-Schuster, New York, 1940. 
283 

Index 
(071) 46 
(O,l}A 142 
n 7  
0 10 
5 for cardinals 117 
1 5  
A 
N (aleph) 144 
NO (aleph naught) 102, 145 
Abel, Niels 218 
absolute zero 3 
abstraction 62 
Aladdin 227 
Aristotelian Logic 186 
Ars Magna 217 
at least 29, 33 
axiomatic method 186 
B 
0" 144, 145, 160 
BA 159 
bijection 65 
binary decimal 132 
binary expansion 45 
binary sequences 137 
binary series 45 
C 
C 266 
card(A) 23 
Cardano 217 
cardinality 22, 50 
Cartesian product 17 
CH 189 
cluster point 264 
codomain 39, 48 
Cohen, Paul J. 186 collection of 
all finite sets 266 
collection of all sets 266 
commutative property 147 
composite numbers 7 
composition 48 
continuum 148 
Continuum Hypothesis 189 
countable 104 
countable families 27 
countable union 109 
D 
decimal number 137 
degree 251 
dense subset 105 
discrete subset 105 
disjoint 146 
bounded monotonic sequence 263 domain 39, 48 
284 

INDEX 
285 
E 
lE5 
elements 3 
empty set 3 
Epimenides Paradox 276 
equal cardinals 98 
equal sets 11 
equivalent sets 98 
Euclid 186 
Evariste Galois 218 
F 
factor 235 
factorial 229 
families 27 
Field’s Medal 186 
finite cardinals 139 
for all 29, 33, 59 
for some 29, 33, 34 
function 38 
G 
L 
Hilbert, David 188 
Hilbert’s Infinite Hotel 85 
Hofstader, Douglas R. 227 
I 
image 38, 53 
implied list 4 
incomparable 170 
Induction Hypothesis 205 
Induction Step 205 
infinite family 28 
infinite set 84 
Initial Step 205 
integers 4 
intersection 7 
interval of convergence 253 
inverse functions 68 
invertible 68 
irrational 129 
is an element of 3 
is contained in 8 
is not an element of 3, 14 
Cantor, Georg 105, 189 
Gauss, Carl F. 92 
GCH 194 
Generalized Continuum 
Hypothesis 193 
geometric series 253 
googol 81 
googolplex 81 
H 
harmonic series 261 
Hidden Tiger Puzzle 272, 279 
light year 76 
limit 199 
line segments 118 
linear order 184 
M 
magnitude 77 
Mathematical Induction 203 
Minimum Property 168 
mole of matter 80 
multiples of cardinals 154 

286 
INDEX 
multiplication of cardinals 155 
N 
Q 
N 5, 75 
NSD 270 
natural logarithm 248 
natural number 4, 75 
nonnegative real numbers 15 
non-self-descriptive 270 
notCH 189 
0 
wo (omega naught) 172 
one-to-one 62 
onto 62 
open neighborhood 261 
Q 5, 112 
Q+ 5 
quadratic formula 217 
R 
R 5  
radius of convergence 202 
rational numbers 5 
real numbers 5 
recursion 229 
Riemann Hypothesis 256 
Riemann Zeta Function 250,256, 
258 
Russell, Bertrand 140 
P 
S 
r ( n )  247 
IP5 
P(A) 21, 132 
pairs of natural numbers 19 
perfect numbers 240 
positive irrational numbers 15 
positive rational numbers 6, 104 
postage rate function 41 
power set 21, 132 
predecessor element 176 
predicate 5 
preimage 53 
prime number function 247 
Prime Number Theorem 249 
prime numbers 32, 235 
proof by contradiction 16 
Pythagoreans 130 
scientific notation 78 
self-descriptive 270 
sequence 76, 261 
set 2, 3 
Set Theory 2 
sieve 245 
sigma notation 250 
Student Induction 228 
subset 8 
successor element 163 
such that 5 
T 
tan(0) 40, 55, 101, 121 
tangent function 40, 55 
Tartaglia 217 

INDEX 
28 7 
there exists 59 
Transfinite Induction 220 
triangle number 230 
Trichotomy Property 117, 166, 168, 
184 
U 
u 7  
U 14 
uncountable 117, 126 
Unexpected Termination, The 218 
union 7 
unique prime factorization 238 
unit cube 123 
unit interval 46 
unit square 123 
universal set 14 
w 
Well Ordered Property, The 163 
well ordered set 221 
whole numbers 4 
X 
x 19, 114, 115, 116, 155 
Z 
2 4  
ZFC Axioms 186 

PURE AND APPLIED MATHEMATICS 
A Wiley-Interscience Series of Texts, Monographs, and Tracts 
Consulting Editor: David A. Cox 
Founded by RICHARD COURANT 
Editors Emeriti: MYRON B. ALLEN 111, DAVID A. COX, PETER HILTON, HARRY 
HOCHSTADT, PETER LAX, JOHN TOLAND 
ADAMEK, HERRLICH, and STRECKER-Abstract 
and Concrete Catetories 
ADAMOWICZ and ZBIERSKI-Logic 
of Mathematics 
AINSWORTH and ODEN-A 
Posteriori Error Estimation in Finite Element Analysis 
AKIVIS and GOLDBERG-Conformal Differential Geometry and Its Generalizations 
ALLEN and ISAACSON-Numerical 
Analysis for Applied Science 
AUBM-Applied 
Functional Analysis, Second Edition 
AZIZOV and IOMVIDOV-Linear 
Operators in Spaces with an Indefinite Metric 
BERG-The 
Fourier-Analytic Proof of Quadratic Reciprocity 
BERMAN, NEUMANN, and STERN-Nonnegative 
Matrices in Dynamic Systems 
BERKOVITZ-Convexity 
and Optimization in R" 
BOYARINTSEV-Methods 
of Solving Singular Systems of Ordinary Differential 
Equations 
BURI-Lebesgue 
Measure and Integration: An Introduction 
CASTILLO, COBO, JUBETE, and PRUNEDA-Orthogonal 
Sets and Polar Methods in 
Linear Algebra: Applications to Matrix Calculations, Systems of Equations, 
Inequalities, and Linear Programming 
CASTILLO, CONEJO, PEDREGAL, GARCIA, and ALGUACIL-Building 
and Solving 
Mathematical Programming Models in Engineering and Science 
CHATELIN-Eigenvalues of Matrices 
CLARK-Mathematical 
Bioeconomics: The Optimal Management of Renewable 
COX-Galois Theory 
Multiplication 
*ARTIN-Geometric 
Algebra 
*CARTER-Finite Groups of Lie Type 
Resources, Second Edition 
tCOX-F'rimes 
of the Form x2 + ny2: Fermat, Class Field Theory, and Complex 
*CURTIS and REMER-Representation Theory of Finite Groups and Associative Algebras 
*CURTIS and REMER-Methods of Representation Theory: With Applications to Finite 
Groups and Orders, Volume I 
CURTIS and REMER-Methods of Representation Theory: With Applications to Finite 
Groups and Orders, Volume I1 
DMCULEANU-Vector Integration and Stochastic Integration in Banach Spaces 
*DUNFORD and SCHWARTZ-Linear 
Operators 
Part 1-General Theory 
Part 2-Spectral 
Theory, Self Adjoint Operators in 
Part 3-Spectral 
Operators 
Hilbert Space 
FARINA and RINALDI-Positive 
Linear Systems: Theory and Applications 
FATICONI-The 
Mathematics of Infinity: A Guide to Great Ideas 
FOLLAND-Real Analysis: Modem Techniques and Their Applications 
*Now available in a lower priced paperback edition in the Wiley Classics Library. 
tNow available in paperback. 

FROLICHER and KRIEGL-Linear 
Spaces and Differentiation Theory 
GARDINER-Teichmuller 
Theory and Quadratic Differentials 
GILBERT and NICHOLSON-Modem 
Algebra with Applications, Second Edition 
*GRIFFITHS and HARRIS-Principles of Algebraic Geometry 
GRILLET- Algebra 
GROVE-Groups 
and Characters 
GUSTAFSSON, KREISS and OLIGER-Time 
Dependent Problems and Difference 
HANNA and ROWLAND-Fourier 
Series, Transforms, and Boundary Value Problems, 
Methods 
Second Edition 
*HENRICI-Applied and Computational Complex Analysis 
Volume 1, Power Series-Integration-Conformal 
Mapping-Location 
Volume 2, Special Functions-Integral 
Transforms-Asymptotics- 
Volume 3, Discrete Fourier Analysis, Cauchy Integrals, Construction 
of Zeros 
Continued Fractions 
of Conformal Maps, Univalent Functions 
*HILTON and WU-A 
Course in Modem Algebra 
*HOCHSTADT-Integral Equations 
JOST-Two-Dimensional 
Geometric Variational Procedures 
KHAMSI and KIRK-An 
Introduction to Metric Spaces and Fixed Point Theory 
*KOBAYASHI and NOMIZU-Foundations of Differential Geometry, Volume I 
*KOBAYASHI and NOMIZU-Foundations 
of Differential Geometry, Volume I1 
KOSHY-Fibonacci 
and Lucas Numbers with Applications 
LAX-Functional 
Analysis 
LAX-Linear 
Algebra 
LOGAN-An 
Introduction to Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations 
MARKLEY-Principles of Differential Equations 
MORRISON-Functional 
Analysis: An Introduction to Banach Space Theory 
NAYFEH-Perturbation Methods 
NAYFEH and MOOK-Nonlinear 
Oscillations 
PANDEY-The 
Hilbert Transform of Schwartz Distributions and Applications 
PETKOV-Geometry of Reflecting Rays and Inverse Spectral Problems 
RAGMeasure Theory and Integration 
RASSIAS and SIMSA-Finite 
Sums Decompositions in Mathematical Analysis 
RENELT-Elliptic Systems and Quasiconformal Mappings 
RIVLIN-Chebyshev Polynomials: From Approximation Theory to Algebra and Number 
ROCKAFELLAR-Network 
Flows and Monotropic Optimization 
ROITMAN-Introduction 
to Modem Set Theory 
ROSSI-Theorems, 
Corollaries, Lemmas, and Methods of Proof 
SENDOV-The 
Averaged Moduli of Smoothness: Applications in Numerical Methods 
SENDOV and POPOV-The 
Averaged Moduli of Smoothness 
SEWELL-The 
Numerical Solution of Ordinary and Partial Differential Equations, 
SEWELL-Computational Methods of Linear Algebra, Second Edition 
*PRENTER-Splines and Variational Methods 
Theory, Second Edition 
*RUDM-Fourier 
Analysis on Groups 
and Approximations 
Second Edition 
*SIEGEL-Topics in Complex Function Theory 
Volume I-Elliptic 
Functions and Uniformization Theory 
Volume 2-Automorphic 
Functions and Abelian Integrals 
Volume 3-Abelian 
Functions and Modular Functions of Several Variables 
*Now available in a lower priced paperback edition in the Wiley Classics Library. 
?Now available in paperback. 

SMITH and ROMANOWSKA-Post-Modem 
Algebra 
SOLIN-Partial Differential Equations and the Finite Element Method 
STADE-Fourier 
Analysis 
STAKGOLD-Green’s Functions and Boundary Value Problems, Second Editon 
STAHL-Introduction 
to Topology and Geometry 
STANOYEVITCH-Introduction to Numerical Ordinary and Partial Differential 
Equations Using MATLAB@ 
*STOKER-Differential 
Geometry 
*STOKER-Nonlinear Vibrations in Mechanical and Electrical Systems 
*STOKER-Water 
Waves: The Mathematical Theory with Applications 
WATKMS-Fundamentals 
of Matrix Computations, Second Edition 
WESSELING-An 
Introduction to Multigrid Methods 
WHITHAM-Linear 
and Nonlinear Waves 
tZAUDERER-Partial 
Differential Equations of Applied Mathematics, Second Edition 
*Now available in a lower priced paperback edition in the Wiley Classics Library. 
?Now available in paperback. 

