
The Ultimate SAP® User Guide
REHAN ZAIDI
 
 
Published by JonERP.com
 
 
 
Paperback and Kindle versions available on Amazon.com

Copyright © 2015
All rights reserved
 
Published by eCruiting Alternatives, Inc. (JonERP.com)
Web site: JonERP.com
 
ISBN: 978-0-9725988-8-0
Available retail from Amazon.com
Available wholesale from Ingram
 
Copy Edit by Help Publish; Krista Wiebe
Style Review by Rachel Meyers
Cover Design & Interior Book Design by Magic Graphix
 
All of the product names in this book are trademarks of the companies that own them. SAP AG is the registered
trademark holder of SAP, SAP R/3, ABAP, NetWeaver, SAP ERP, and other proprietary terms.
JonERP.com is not affiliated with SAP AG in any way. The technical information in this book has been verified to the
greatest extent possible; however, any information found in this book is used at the reader’s own risk.
JonERP.com reserves the right to correct any errors or omissions in any portion of this book at any time without
obligation. While the author has done his best to present accurate and up to date technical information in this book,
neither JonERP.com nor the author himself can guarantee that this information in this book is completely applicable to
your company’s SAP project. This book is sold with the understanding that the publisher and author are not engaged in
rendering legal, accounting, or formal implementation services through this book. Should you want to confirm how this
book’s content applies to your company’s project specifically, a paid consultation with the author is recommended.

Author’s Acknowledgments
I would like to thank and dedicate this book to my mother – who is my main strength. I
am 
very 
grateful 
to 
our 
editor 
Krista 
Wiebe 
of 
Clear 
Cut 
Editing
(www.clearcutediting.com). She provided help with the overall editing, formation of the
chapters, and provided layout suggestions. I am also thankful to Mr. Rick Porter (founder
of Revelation Software, which is based in Australia) for his cooperation during this
project. I am also indebted to the reviewers for helping me strengthen the content of the
book. To all those who purchase this book - I am forever grateful to you. I would like to
extend my apologies to anyone I have missed here.
Last but not least, I would like to thank my publisher, Jon Reed, who felt that this was a
subject worth publishing and who agreed to go on this journey with me. The idea was to
create a guide with tips and tricks that would be valuable for an SAP user. When I
presented the idea to Jon, he agreed that the need for a user guide was an excellent reason
to pursue the publication of my book.
Publisher’s Acknowledgments
Jon Reed would like to thank Andy Klee of JDEtips for providing the basis for Jon and
Rehan to originally meet and collaborate. The Ultimate SAP series would not be possible
without the expert advice of Morris Rosenthal and Rachel Meyers. Thanks also to our
expert readers, whose bios appear in the back of this book. Finally, Jon would like to thank
Rehan Zaidi for his diligence and the outstanding end result.

Contents
Foreword
Introduction
Chapter 1: SAP Overview and Basics
1.1 Getting Started
1.2 Basic Concepts - Initial Screen, Standard and User Menus
1.3 SAP Window Components
1.3.1 Elements in Reports and Entry Screens
1.3.2 System Status
1.4 User Tasks
1.5 Transaction and Transaction Code
1.5.1 Accessing Entered Transaction Codes Quickly
1.5.2 Searching for Transaction Codes (or Menu Items)
1.6 Managing Sessions
Chapter 2: Organizing Your Work  Using Favorites
2.1 What are Favorites?
2.1.1 Adding to the Favorites Node
2.1.2 Creating Favorites from User Menu Items
2.1.3 Creating a Favorite While Being in a Transaction
2.2 Creating Folders
2.3 Deleting Favorites and Displacing Favorites
2.4 Downloading and Uploading Favorites
Chapter 3: Entering Data Into SAP
3.1 Data Entry Transactions and Screens
3.2 Entering Data on Screens
3.3 Value Help (Search Help) for Input Fields
3.4 Copying Multiple Values from Screen with “CTRL+Y”
3.5 Defining Default Values for an Input Field
3.6 Hold Data and Set Data Functionality
3.6.1 Using Hold/Set Data Functionality
3.7 Object Manager
References
Chapter 4: Personalizing – Changing SAP Look and Feel

4.1 Personalizing the Initial Screen
4.1.1 Setting the Start Transaction
4.1.2 Modifying the Status Field Display
4.1.3 Changing Favorites and Easy Access Menu Settings
4.2 Changing Standard GUI Settings
4.2.1 Changing GUI Theme and Fonts
4.2.2 Adjusting Dropdown List Display
4.2.3 Personalizing Message Displays
4.2.4 Changing Display of F1 and F4 Help
4.2.4.1 F4 Help: Dialog and Control Mode Radio Buttons
4.3 Changing SAP Behavior
4.3.1 Controlling Cursor Behavior
4.3.2 Switching History Input On and Off
4.3.3 Changing Your User Profile
4.2.4 Quick Cut and Paste Feature
Chapter 5: Executing Report Transactions and 
Downloading Output
5.1 Types of Report Outputs
5.1.1 ABAP List Output and ALV format
5.1.2 Form Output
5.2 Online Execution of Reports
5.3 Executing Reports in Background
5.4 Downloading List Output
5.5 Desktop Shortcuts for Programs/Reports
Chapter 6: Mastering Selection Screens
6.1 Selection Screen Components: An Overview
6.1.1 Checkbox
6.1.2 Radio Buttons
6.1.3 Single Value Input Fields
6.2 Selection Criteria (Options) or Ranges
6.2.1 Specifying a Single Value or Range
6.2.2 Multiple Selection Specifications and Other 
Available Options
6.2.2.1 Specifying Multiple Single Values and Ranges
6.2.2.2 Entering Mass Data on Program Screen
6.3 Selection Screen Variants
6.3.1 Retrieving Variants

6.3.2 Creating Variants
6.3.3 Changing and Deleting Variants
Chapter 7: ALV Displays
7.1 ALV Displays: An Overview
7.1.1 Selecting a Given Column or Columns
7.1.2 Moving Columns and Searching for Values
7.1.3 Freezing Columns
7.2 Toolbar Functions Available
7.2.1 Sorting (Ascending and Descending)
7.2.2 Navigating Left and Right
7.2.3 Filtering Data
7.2.4 Calculating Totals, Subtotals, and Averages
7.2.5 Changing Views
7.2.5.1 Excel Inplace View
7.2.5.2 Generating Charts View
7.2.5.3 ABC Analysis Function View
7.2.5.4 Print Preview/ List Output
7.2.6 Excel Downloading
7.2.7 Managing Layouts
Chapter 8: Printing Guide
8.1 Quick Hard Copy
8.2 Printing Window Contents
8.3 “Execute and Print” From Report Selection Screen
8.4 Form Printing
8.5 Changing the Print Dialog Look and Feel
8.6 Using RSTXPDFT4 Program to Convert Spool 
Requests to PDFs
8.7 Printing-Related Problems
Chapter 9: Creating Your Own Reports
9.1 SAP Query: An Overview
9.2 Generating Basic Lists
9.2.1 Adding Control Levels to your List
9.2.2 Adding a Header and Footer to the Basic List
Chapter 10: SAP Business Workplace 
Part 1- Managing Documents
10.1 Overview of Transaction SBWP
10.2 Creating a New Message

10.2.1 Recipient Portion In Detail
10.2.2 Attachments
10.3 Forwarding Documents
10.4 Creating Distribution Lists
10.5 Working with Folders and Subfolders
10.6 Searching for Folders and Documents
Chapter 11: SAP Business Workplace 
Part 2- Managing Workflow Work Items
11.1 Work Items: What They Are and How They Look
11.2 Work Items View Within Inbox
11.2.1 Outbox
11.2.2 Deadline Messages
11.3 Functions Applicable On Work Items
11.4 Out of office Settings
11.4.1 Creating Substitutes
11.4.2 Automatic Forwarding
11.5 Other Personalization Options of Business Workplace
11.5.1 Switching Off Preview
Chapter 12: Miscellaneous Topics
12.1 Transaction SU53 – Displaying Authorization Check
12.2 Object Services
12.3 The “My Objects” List
References
Index
Author Bio
About the Publisher
The Ultimate SAP User Guide – Expert Reader Bios

 
Foreword
When I first met Rehan Zaidi, the author of the Ultimate SAP User Guide, he was still
an aspiring writer. The year was 2003. As the Founding Editor of ERPtips, I was looking
for writing talent. But that was not an easy thing to find, especially in the ERP world. I
needed authors who had a deep SAP experience as well.
Rehan was already an expert SAP developer, user, and all-around HCM smart guy.
Writing about SAP was new to him, but from his first articles, Rehan showed the ability to
express complex and sometimes nerdy SAP concepts in ways readers could easily
understand — something you will see on every page of this book.
It was a pleasure to edit Rehan’s work. With each article, his ability to illustrate SAP
concepts improved. Rehan was especially good at making sure that readers had takeaways
from each article. You didn’t have to read ten of his pieces to get something worthwhile.
Each article had a stand-alone purpose.
The same is true of this User Guide. Each chapter has a clear objective for the reader.
Whether it’s Chapter 1 (SAP overview and basics), Chapter 4 (personalizing your SAP
system), or Chapter 9 (creating your own reports), each chapter will give you something
you can use immediately. The Ultimate SAP User Guide is a much more affordable
alternative to a costly SAP training manual. You can also use it (or adapt it) for an
instructor-led course, making it one of the more flexible SAP books out there.
I don’t issue SAP books very often from JonERP.com. I rarely find an author with talent
who can fill an important gap in the market. The last time around, JonERP published The
Ultimate SAP Pricing Guide by SAP pricing expert Matthias Liebich. It’s great to be
adding to the “JonERP Ultimate” series with another book that I can be proud to share
with the SAP community.
One thing about the JonERP Ultimate series: We don’t publish 500 page encyclopedias.
When we put out a book, we make sure it’s easy to consume without weighing down your
carry-on.
Over the years, I have heard from thousands of SAP professionals who are at some kind of
crossroads in their SAP career. Even with the changes in the marketplace brought on by
new technologies, many are eager to know if there are still chances in the SAP field.
What I tell them is that there are certainly opportunities, but despite what you might hear
about SAP skills shortages, there’s nothing easy about the SAP career path anymore. You
have to develop an area of mastery and outperform your colleagues. But in a career
paradox, you also need to be a team player. Shining at the expense of helping others out

and being an expert AND a teacher is how you move ahead in today’s SAP field.
Rehan has figured this out. The clues to his success can be found throughout this user
guide. SAP professionals who want to excel — at any skill level — need to adopt a
“continuous learning” mindset. To pull this off, you need to have the right reference tools
handy. I believe this book can do that for you — otherwise I would not have published it.
Publishing is far from easy, but it’s an honor to get this book out there. I trust that you will
get as much out of reading it as we did sharing it with you.
Jon Reed, JonERP.com

 
Introduction
This book is intended for all SAP users across every module, as well as beginners who
are just starting out in the SAP world. If you are a new user, or if you have spent some
time working on SAP, this book has a lot to offer. In addition, project team members and
novice consultants may also find it useful.
This book will show users how to get the most out of their SAP system, and it will enable
them to get their job done in as little time as possible. Even if you are an advanced user
who works on SAP for hours each day, you will still find this book to be a valuable
resource. There are many features (or newer options) of which even advanced users are
not aware. There are plenty of lesser known tips and tricks, as well, that will help to
broaden your knowledge of SAP. This book also provides more efficient ways of doing
tasks that you carry out every day. We have made sure to update this book with the newest
and less known GUI features, with which very few users are familiar. 
The SAP User Guide is designed to be a one-stop resource to help you carry out day-to-
day activities quickly and easily without the need to search for resources on the Internet or
elsewhere. The chapters have been created in a goal-directed fashion, i.e., each chapter
contains a number of sections, and each section is based on a task that may be performed
or may be required by a user in their daily work.
Much of the information offered in the SAP world requires the typical user to scour the
Internet for materials that pertain to his or her particular needs. That is not the case with
this book. It is designed to be the handbook for the everyday user. Today’s SAP user has a
full plate of tasks and typically lacks the budget or time for classroom training. The goal
of this book is to be an invaluable resource for a busy user who wants to stay on track —
and on deadline. 
You can use this book as a go-to-reference, or you can work your way through it like a
training manual. If you choose to work your way through each chapter, by the end you
should be very comfortable with the ideas, and it should enable you to work more
efficiently and quickly within SAP. You will be able to work very comfortably within your
functional area and carry out all facets of work, getting the most out of the SAP system,
and availing the investment of your company. You will be a master of all commonly used
SAP functions, whether they are related to data entry, reporting, or emailing options.
This book is comprised of twelve chapters. Here’s a brief review of each one:
Chapter 1 - SAP Overview and Basics
This chapter will focus on basic SAP concepts, including transactions, menu items, and

accessing Help screens.
Chapter 2 - Organizing Your Work Using Favorites
Favorites lets you save time by eliminating the need to search for frequently used
transactions. Topics such as how to create Favorites for transactions, how to create
folders, and how to download and upload Favorites will be covered.
Chapter 3 - Entering Data Into SAP
Entering Data into the SAP system is the most important job of any user. This chapter
will outline how to enter data efficiently and effectively.
Chapter 4 - Personalizing – Changing SAP Look and Feel
This chapter will detail how to personalize your SAP system according to your unique
preferences.
Chapter 5 - Executing Report Transactions and
Downloading Output
This chapter gets you up to speed on the crucial topic of reporting. Functions covered
in this chapter include how you can execute report transactions and download output.
Chapter 6 - Mastering Selection Screens
Selection Screens are an important element of the SAP system, and this chapter will
cover the various ways you can make them more efficient and useful.
Chapter 7 - ALV Displays
The two types of ALV displays along with ALV lists and grids will be covered in this
chapter.
Chapter 8 - Printing Guide
This chapter will introduce you to the printing options available within the various
screen sets. Topics such as how to print window contents and how to convert spool
requests to PDFs will be covered.
Chapter 9 - Creating Your Own Reports
SAP Query allows you to generate reports based on your own data and particular needs.
This will be the main focus of this chapter.
Chapter 10 - SAP Business Workplace 
Part 1 - Managing Documents

The primary emphasis of this chapter will be on how to manage documents within the
SAP Business Workplace. Topics such as Transaction SBWP, how to use attachments,
and how to forward documents will be covered.
Chapter 11 - SAP Business Workplace 
Part 2 - Managing Workplace Items
This chapter will focus on working with Workplace and items within the SAP Business
Workplace.
Chapter 12 - Miscellaneous Topics (and Helpful Tips)
Miscellaneous topics, such as displaying authorization check, object services, and
attachment lists will be covered in this chapter.
If you are completely new to SAP, we suggest that you read the chapters sequentially
(starting from chapter 1). Reading it straight through will offer the best experience for a
beginner and will provide you with all the information you need that pertains to typical
things that you may encounter within the SAP ERP landscape.
If you already have experience working in SAP, you may find it more helpful to skip to
chapters that are relevant to your needs. This book can also be used for training users, both
beginners and experienced, and for all modules of the SAP ERP system.
This compact volume is packed with valuable tips and tricks that outline the day-to-day
activities a typical user will come across. Because of the array of gathered information in
this one book, project teams should be able to save time and money by using it for training
purposes. No single SAP training course contains the information found within this book.
This book is comprised of solely original content that has not been published elsewhere. It
has been written with Windows users in mind. The screen shots are taken from ERP 6.0,
Enhancement 
Pack 6. The latest version of SAP GUI (7.30) has been used in the preparation of the book.
Most of the concepts are applicable for other SAP system releases. The information in this
book holds true irrespective of the database used in the backend.
We hope this user guide will help you to be more productive on your project, in your daily
work, and will advance your SAP career.

Chapter 1
SAP Overview and Basics
In order to use SAP effectively and efficiently, users and beginners need to understand
some basic concepts and terminologies. This chapter will introduce you to those concepts
and will provide an introductory overview of the topics that will be covered in detail later
in the book. It will also briefly cover the typical work an SAP user may be expected to do.
This chapter will cover the following important topics:
·       Getting started with the basic SAP concepts
·       User tasks and transaction concepts
·       Managing sessions
·       Transactions and menu items
·       Accessing Help screens and other screen fields
Some questions that will be answered in this chapter include:
·       How do I log in to the SAP system?
·       What tasks will I be expected to perform as an SAP user?
·       What are the typical components of the initial SAP screen?
·       What is a transaction code?
·       How do I search for a particular item or transaction in the SAP Easy Access Menu?
Throughout the chapter, there will be examples and screenshots to help you understand the
process of beginning your work in SAP. In this chapter, the terms Window and
Screen will be used interchangeably.
In this section, we will learn how to get started with SAP. The first step is to log in to the
intended SAP system. We will see in detail the steps that are required to log in to the
system and the various options available on the login screen.
To log in to any SAP system, you will need to access the SAP Logon Pad. There are a
number of ways to do this:
·        From the Start menu, choose the SAP Logon program to launch the SAP Logon Pad as
1.1 Getting Started

shown in Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: SAP Logon Pad Shortcut
·        Alternately, you may choose the shortcut placed on your desktop as shown in Figure
1.2.
Figure 1.2: SAP Logon Desktop Shortcut
NOTE: The SAP Logon Pad is a Windows program that lets you log on to an
SAP system by choosing from a displayed list of available systems. User may also
modify this list according to their requirements.
This action will launch the SAP Logon Pad showing the list of systems into which you
may log in (under Connections shown in Figure 1.3).
Figure 1.3: List of SAP Systems
Double-click the system that you wish to access. This will launch the screen as shown in
Figure 1.4.

Figure 1.4: SAP Login Screen
The screen has User and Password fields, as well as Client and Logon Language fields.
We also have at the top a menu and standard toolbar. (We will discuss these elements in
the next section.)
Enter your user name and password in the appropriate fields on the login screen. Note that
the system provides a default value for the client. In case you want a different client from
the default shown, enter the new client’s three-digit number in the field provided.
The language is an optional field. In our case, for example, the default system language is
E (English). If you wish to enter a language other than the default language, you may also
do that using the field provided.
Once the necessary data has been entered in the login screen, press “Enter” to log in to the
system. Alternately, you may also click the green tick mark 
provided on the top left
corner of the screen.
If you are logging in for the first time or if the security team has refreshed your password,
you will be asked to enter a new password. Enter the new password twice and press
“Enter” in the dialog box that appears.
To change a password while logging in, enter your existing User ID and Password but do
not press “Enter”. Rather, click the
 button. The system will ask for the new
password and a confirmation.
If the password is initially entered incorrectly but then you finally succeed in logging in to
the system, a dialog box (see Figure 1.5) appears showing the total Number of failed logon
attempts.
 
 

Figure 1.5: Number of Failed Attempts
If you have forgotten your password, you may ask the Security team members to refresh
the password for your User ID. After six consecutive failed login attempts, your User ID
will be locked and you may no longer be able to attempt logons into the system. In this
case, you must ask the Security team members to unlock your User ID.
A user may attempt to log in more than once to the same system. In case you to want to
log in to a system in which you are already logged in, a dialog box is shown (Figure 1.6)
after the User ID and Password have been validated.
Figure 1.6: Multiple Logon Attempt
The system tells you the terminal from which you are already logged in. In this case, you
have two options:
·        You may either continue with the new logon or terminate existing logins. In this case,
you will lose any unsaved data.
·        Or you may terminate the new logon.
In some cases, a third option (not shown in Figure 1.6) may also appear which may allow
you to proceed with the new logon as well as keeping the existing logons alive.
In this section, we will see how the SAP Initial screen looks, and we will also cover some
1.2 Basic Concepts - Initial Screen, Standard and User
Menus

basic SAP concepts necessary for users.
Once you have successfully logged in to the SAP system, the Initial SAP Easy
Access screen is displayed, as illustrated in Figure 1.7. (The window shown in the figure
is also sometimes referred to as a Session.)
Figure 1.7: Initial SAP Screen
On the initial screen, either the Standard Menu or the User Menu will be displayed in
the left side of the screen. In the previous figure, the left pane displays the SAP Easy
Access Menu. It is in the form of a tree, which is comprised of nodes and subnodes. These
allow you to access the programs within the relevant functional areas.
Clicking the black triangle  next to the folder icon in the menu tree expands that node.
(Alternately, you may double-click the given node icon.) This is illustrated in Figure 1.8
where the Human Resources node has been expanded. 
Figure 1.8: Navigating the Easy Access Menu
A node may contain additional nodes that can be expanded, such as Personnel
Management and Time Management in Figure 1.8. Or a node may contain an executable
application, such as Manager’s Desktop. Note that these are indicated by the
icon.
Double-click this item to execute the relevant application (transaction). In case a tree is
 
 

already open, you may collapse it using the  icon. You may navigate through the nodes
(and their subnodes) until you reach the desired transaction.
Apart from the SAP standard menu shown in Figure 1.8, a user-specific User Menu is
also defined in the system. The User Menu contains the reports and screens relevant to you
or the ones that you use in your day-to-day work. For accessing the User Menu, choose
the menu path Menu à User Menu as shown in Figure 1.9.
Figure 1.9: Accessing User and SAP Menu
NOTE: In this section we only saw the Menu options. There are other useful
options related to Edit, Favorites, and Extras menus. These will be discussed later in
the book.
The user-specific menu is then displayed in the left pane as shown in Figure 1.10.
Figure 1.10: User-Specific Menu
In this section, we will see the components of a typical SAP screen. The concepts
mentioned in this section pertain to all SAP screens in general, including the Initial
Screen (mentioned in previous section).
An SAP Window consists of a Menu Bar, a Standard Toolbar, a Title Bar, and an
Application Toolbar, all found at the top of the screen. The Standard Toolbar and Menu
1.3 SAP Window Components

Bar together are known as the Screen Banner. These four components (Menu Bar,
Application Bar, Standard Toolbar, and Title Bar) form the Screen Header.
Below the Screen Header is a larger portion called the Screen Body. Any screen that you
display or any report you may execute is displayed in the Screen Body.
At the lower part of the screen is the Status Bar — important messages for the user (such
as errors, information, and warnings) are displayed here. On the right side of the Status
Bar is the relevant System and User information. 
Consider, for example, the screen shown in Figure 1.11.
Figure 1.11: SAP Screen Components
Let us now have a closer look at the components of the screen shown in Figure 1.11:
·        Menu Bar: You access the menu options in SAP just like you access the menus of
typical Windows applications. If appropriately defined, the relevant menu options may
be executed via keyboard shortcuts as well. The Menu Bar is context-sensitive and
displays all options relevant to the screen being executed. For example, Figure 1.11 is
the Maintain Master Data transaction and it includes the following menu options: HR
Master Data, Edit, Goto, Extra, Utilities, Settings, System, and Help. Clicking on one
of these menus results in a dropdown list of relevant options. For example, Figure 1.12
illustrates the options for the HR Master Data menu.
Figure 1.12: HR Master Data Options
Clicking on the displayed options will carry out the relevant activity.

In case a menu option consists of submenus, the submenu will be displayed when you
place the cursor on the relevant menu item. For example, in the menu shown in Figure
1.13, when we place the cursor on the Database Object option, the additional options
(Display, Check, and Database Utility) appear.
Figure 1.13: Menu Additional Options
·        Application Toolbar: This is comprised of buttons and functions relevant to whatever
application or program that you run. These change with the application programs.
There may, for example, be additional detailed information buttons. The application
toolbar for the HR Master Data screen is shown below:
Figure 1.14: Application Toolbar for HR Master Data
·        Status Bar: At the lower portion of the screen is the Status bar, which gives useful
information to the user. The Status Bar consists of the Message area (on the left), which
presents error messages or affirmative system messages, and the Status fields on the
right. An example of a message is shown in Figure 1.15.
Figure 1.15: Message in Status Bar
·        Standard Toolbar: The Standard Toolbar is comprised of standard functions. These are
generally provided in all SAP screens and applications that you run. However, some of
the functions may be disabled, depending on the nature of the task being executed. The
various functions of the Standard Toolbar are shown in Figure 1.16.

Icon
Meaning
Key Shortcut
Enter
Enter key
Save
CTRL+S
Back
F3
Exit
Shift F3
Cancel
F12
Print
CTRL+P
Search
CTRL+F
Search Again 
(or Continue Search)
CTRL+G
First Page
CTRL Page UP
Page Up
Page Up
Page Down
Page Down
Last Page
CTRL+Page DOWN
Opens New Session 
—
Help
F1
Customize Local Layout
ALT+F12
Figure 1.16: Standard Toolbar Functions
On the top (left of the application toolbar) is the Command Field (Figure 1.17). This is
an important field, as it lets you quickly access programs and screens.
Figure 1.17: Command Field
Simply entering the desired Transaction Code in this field will take you to the relevant
program. This relieves the user from learning the menu path of the task that he or she
wants to perform. (Refer to section 1.6 on how to use the Command Field for managing
SAP sessions.)
1.3.1 Elements in Reports and Entry Screens
An SAP screen body may contain a number of screen elements. Typically, a screen
contains input fields, output-only fields, radio buttons, and checkboxes for the purpose of
entering data. This is applicable for all transactions — including data entry screens and
reports.
If a field is grey (not white), it means that input is not allowed. It is mandatory to fill in the
40

fields that appear with a question mark. This means that even if you try to move ahead of
such screens, the error message, Enter data in all required fields, is displayed. Moreover,
in data entry screens, to enter tabular data, multiple lines may be entered using a table.
A screen may also be comprised of tabstrips, consisting of a number of tabs. Each tab may
contain a number of input and output fields, tables, as well as radio buttons and
checkboxes. While processing of SAP screens, you may come across dialog boxes that
may, for example, ask you for confirmation of an action. (For more information, refer to
Chapters 3 and 6.)
For accessing the Help of a particular application, choose the menu path Help à
Application Help. This will open the Help for that particular screen in a browser. To access
the Help screen related to a particular field given on an SAP screen, simply place the
cursor on the field and press F1. The Help will appear as shown in Figure 1.18.
Figure 1.18: Field F1 Help
For viewing the technical information of the given field, click the Technical Information 
icon. The technical name of the field and other useful information will then be
displayed.
1.3.2 System Status
Some useful information related to the system and your user ID is available from all SAP
screens. To access this, click the System à Status button. This will display the status in a
screen as shown in Figure 1.19.
 

Figure 1.19: System Status Details
The Status box shows you information about the User ID, such as the Client, the User
name, as well as the previous logon time, the time which you logged in, the current system
time, and so on. On the same screen, there are details of the running Program and
Transaction, as well as the machine on which the SAP server is running.
In this section, I will discuss the tasks that you may be expected to perform as an SAP
user. In the SAP system, a task may comprise of one or more screens. Typically, you may
come across the following tasks:
NOTE: Tasks include completing process steps (such as creating an invoice or
approving requests) or administrative tasks (such as checking messages).
Furthermore, numerous reporting options are available to the user. 
·        Data Entry: This involves a set of screens that allow you to create, change, or delete
display data stored in the database. These screens may have input checks in order and
messages that allow you to enter data correctly into the system. (The Data Entry
screens will be discussed in detail in Chapter 3.) Typical examples may include screens
for changing Employee Address or for creating Customer Master.
·        Executing Reports: Reports are programs that display data. They have a selection
screen on which values are entered for which data is required. The display may be in
the form of a simple list, as shown in Figure 1.20. They may also be ALV reports, as
shown in Figure 1.21, allowing you to perform a number of functions on the displayed
data, such as sorting or filtering. In addition, report programs may also allow you to
1.4 User Tasks

generate simple form outputs. You may run your reports in the background or in dialog
mode. The output of reports may be printed or downloaded.
Figure 1.20: Simple List Output
Figure 1.21: ALV Output
·        Other Tasks: These may include completing process steps (such as execution of a
payroll run, creating an invoice, or approval of travel requests). Furthermore, you may
want to generate your own reports using SAP Query. Or you may come across useful
transactions — such as the SAP Business Workplace — that will allow you to manage
your work, check your SAP emails, or perform tasks such as approval of requests via
Workflow items. 
An important term that SAP users need to be familiar with is Transaction. Regardless of
whether a user is executing tasks or generating reports, he or she does so via transactions,
which is denoted by a code that is three or more characters long (comprising of letters and
digits). These transactions may either be standard SAP transactions or custom defined
ones.
Any task that you need to perform, either running a report or performing a particular
activity, may be accessible either via the SAP Easy Access Menu shown in Figure 1.8, or
via a shortcut known as a Transaction code (or sometimes called Tcode). For example,
you have the standard transaction SBWP for accessing the SAP Business Workplace, or
you may have an SAP report using Transaction code ZHRREP. You enter the Transaction
code in the Command Field (and press “Enter”) in order to quickly access a particular
report or application screen. For example, we write the Transaction code “SBWP” in the
1.5 Transaction and Transaction Code

Command Field for accessing the Business Workplace application as shown in Figure
1.22.
Figure 1.22: Transaction SBWP
NOTE: In order to access a particular report or screen transaction, the Security
Team must provide your user ID with necessary authorizations.
Let us now see a few other examples of SAP transactions in various modules of the SAP
system.
Within the Materials Management module, the user may maintain Materials via
Transaction codes shown in Figure 1.23.
Transaction Code
Purpose
MM01
Create Material
MM02
Change Material
MM03
Display Material
Figure 1.23: MM Transaction Codes
The Sales Order is accessed via the transactions shown in Figure 1.24.
Transaction Code
Purpose
VA01
Create Sales Order
VA02
Change Sales Order
VA03
Display Sales Order
Figure 1.24: Sales Order Transaction Codes
For Network Order, the transactions are shown in Figure 1.25.
Transaction Code
Purpose
CN21
Create Network Orders
CN22
Change Network Orders
CN23
Display Network Orders
Figure 1.25: Network Order Transactions
1.5.1 Accessing Entered Transaction Codes Quickly
One quick way of going to a previously visited transaction (the code of which was entered
in the Command Field) is by using the “Down” arrow key. The history of visited
transactions may be viewed via the list box display of the Command Field. Suppose your

field history looks like the one shown in Figure 1.26.
Figure 1.26: Command Field History
If you want to go directly to the BRF+ transaction, simply type “B” in the Command field
(without opening the list display) and press the “Down” arrow key. The BRF+ transaction
will appear in the Command Field. You may then simply press “Enter” to go to the BRF+
transaction.
Likewise, typing “P” or “PA” will display the PA30 and PA40 respectively. This will save
you from having to type the entire PA30 or PA40 in the Command Field shown.
1.5.2 Searching for Transaction Codes (or Menu Items)
In case you want to search for a particular item or transaction in the SAP Easy
Access Menu, you may do so using a standard SAP transaction. Follow the steps below:
·            In the Command Field, enter the transaction “SEARCH_SAP_MENU”. The dialog
box appears as shown in Figure 1.27.
Figure 1.27: Searching Transaction 
·        Enter the text of the menu item or the text for the transaction that you want to search
for and press the (Continue/Enter)  
 button. The output will display the list of all
menu items as well as their complete navigation path from the SAP access menu.
Moreover, the relevant transaction code is also displayed. For example, the output of
the Search program for the search text “Business Workplace” is shown in Figure 1.28.
Figure 1.28: Searching “SAP Business Workplace”

In this section, we will see how to manage SAP Sessions. This includes a variety of ways
to create new sessions, close existing sessions and log off from the SAP system.
You may create a new session or window from a running session by clicking the 
 icon
(from the standard toolbar) or using the keyboard shortcut “CTRL+N”. Multiple sessions
will allow the user to work on more than one task at one time. A maximum of six sessions
(windows) are allowed for one login. In case you try to create a session above this limit,
the system will issue a message stating Maximum Number of Sessions Reached. You may
switch between sessions using the “ALT+Tab” keys. There may be a number of sessions
for a number of servers such as QAS and Production running on your machine. (The
procedure for logging in to a particular system has been discussed in detail in the
beginning of the chapter.)
There are a number of ways to close a session. A quick and easy way is to use the
icon
at the top right corner of the window. This will close the session.
Another option is to use the SAP Logon
 icon in the system tray. Right-clicking the icon
will show the context menu as shown in Figure 1.29.
Figure 1.29: Options of SAP Logon Context Menu
This figure shows the various context menu options. On top, you will be shown the
various SAP systems that you are logged in to. For example, in Figure 1.30, I am logged
in to server M26, for client 800 by the user name STUDENT003, in the English language
(EN). The number in the parentheses indicates the session number.
Two useful options available in the context menu are Close Sessions and Shut Down
SAP Logon. Clicking the Close Sessions option displays a dialog box shown in Figure
1.30.
1.6 Managing Sessions
  
 

Figure 1.30: Close Sessions Screen
This shows all the currently running sessions along with the transaction you are executing.
Select the checkbox for the session(s) that you want to close and then click the Close
button. The selected session(s) will then be closed and any unsaved data will be lost.
In case you want to close all running sessions quickly, click the option Shut Down SAP
Logon (shown in Figure 1.29). A message warning you of the loss of data upon
termination of all sessions is displayed as shown in Figure 1.31. 
Figure 1.31: Closing All Sessions
Click the Yes button to terminate all the running sessions.
If a session is hanging and you would like to stop the transaction that was running in the
session, simply click the 
 icon at the top left corner of the session window. A menu will
appear as shown in Figure 1.32.

Figure 1.32: Menu to Stop Transaction 
Choose the Stop Transaction option from this menu.
For logging off from an SAP system, simply choose the menu path System à Log Off.
Alternately, choose the keyboard shortcut “Shift+F3” or click the 
 icon on the standard
toolbar. In all cases, you will be presented with a confirmation dialog. Choose option Yes
to proceed.
You may also control sessions using the Command field. The Command field, as already
discussed, allows you to enter the transaction codes. You can enter certain text
(commands) with or without the transaction code in order to open or close new sessions.
Figure 1.33 shows the various inputs that can be made in the Command Field and the
relevant system behavior.

Field Input
Purpose
/o
This opens a list of all running sessions and their
transactions. You may end a session using the End
Session button provided in the list dialog.
/n
This closes the current session.
/nex
Closes all sessions of currently connect system and logs you
off. Any changes not saved will be lost.
/otcode
The ‘/o’ followed by a transaction code will open a new
session having transaction in it. For example, /oSBWP will
open the transaction SBWP in a new session.
/n
Closes the current session and opens a new session.
/nend
This logs you off the system. In this case, however, a
conformation message is displayed before the termination of
sessions.
/ntcode
This input will take you to the transaction specified in the
same session. If you want to return to the start menu, type
‘/nsooo’ in the Command Field.
/1,/2
This lets you quickly close the session denoted by the
number followed by forward slash ‘/’. For example, if you
type /1 in the Command Field, the first session will be
closed.
Figure 1.33: Command Field Inputs
Chapter 1 contains a lot of information about the basic concepts and terminology of SAP
that users need to understand in order to use SAP effectively and efficiently.
Some of the topics that were covered in detail in this chapter include getting started with
the basic SAP concepts, user tasks and transaction concepts, managing sessions,
transactions and menu items, and accessing Help screens and other screen fields. These
basic concepts are essential knowledge for users.
I hope this chapter has been a helpful guide to get you started to work in SAP. In the next
chapter, we will use this knowledge to further study and understand SAP. 
Summary of Chapter 1

Chapter 2
Organizing Your Work 
Using Favorites
Chapter 1 covered how to get started with SAP, the logging in process, and the basics of
the screens and session. In this chapter, we will discuss another important part of a user’s
life — organizing your work using Favorites. Favorites let you save time by eliminating
the need to search for frequently used transactions.
This chapter will cover the following important topics:
·       What are Favorites?
·       Creating Favorites for transactions
·       Creating Favorites from user menu items
·       Creating a Favorite while being in a transaction
·       Creating Folders
·       Downloading and Uploading Favorites
This chapter will describe a number of ways to add Favorites and organize your work. It
will begin with a brief overview of what Favorites are and how to utilize them effectively.
After the overview, we will dive into the various ways in which you can create Favorites
and how to organize them with folders.
Because users mostly use transactions, I will also focus on how to add or delete
transactions from Favorites. Some questions answered in this chapter include:
·       How can I create a Favorite for my transaction?
·       How can I organize my list of Favorites?
·       Can I delete a Favorite once it has been created?
Throughout the chapter, there will be examples and screenshots to help the reader
understand the process of creating and organizing Favorites.
SAP allows users to save their frequently used program or transaction names as
Favorites in their personalized menu tree (see Figure 2.1). This transaction can be
2.1 What are Favorites?

executed by simply double-clicking on the relevant Favorite node. This will save you time
as well as relieve you from remembering lengthy transaction codes.
The menu pertaining to Favorites (as seen from the Initial screen) is shown in Figure 2.1.
The menu contains useful features, such as  creating Favorite nodes, creating folders for
Favorites, as well as downloading and uploading them to and from your local PC.
Figure 2.1: Menu Path for Favorites
Alternately, you may use the initial screen toolbar that has been made for this purpose, as
seen in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Related Toolbar Buttons
The Delete button will only be enabled if you have at least one item under your
Favorites node. Otherwise, the Delete 
 button will not be enabled. 
2.1.1 Adding to the Favorites Node
Right-click on the Favorites node from the SAP Easy Access Menu. The context menu
appears as shown in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Context Menu of the Favorites Node
Choose the Insert Transaction option. The pop-up box for entering the Transaction Code
appears as shown in Figure 2.4.

Figure 2.4: Entering the Transaction Code
Enter the Transaction Code in the field provided, e.g., “SBWP” for Business Workplace,
and press “Enter”. This creates a shortcut to the transaction, in our case, Business
Workplace under Favorites (see Figure 2.5).
Figure 2.5: Transaction Code Added as Favorite
A message is displayed as shown.
Figure 2.6: Favorites Message
2.1.2 Creating Favorites from User Menu Items
Another quick and easy way for creating Favorites of your transactions listed in the SAP
Easy Access Menu is to select the given node and click the 
 button.
Alternately, you may right-click, choose the context menu option, and then choose the
option Add to Favorites (see Figure 2.7).
Figure 2.7: Context menu for adding a Favorite

You may also use keys “CTRL+Shift+F6” instead of the menu path.
The selected transaction may be added to your Favorites via drag and drop. Simply select
a given transaction node from your User menu and then, while keeping the mouse button
pressed, drag the item to the relevant position under the Favorites node or its folder or
subfolder. Then release the mouse button.
In all cases, a successful message will appear saying Node Added to Favorite List.
For checking the functioning of your Favorite, simply double-click on the relevant node.
The relevant transaction will be displayed.
2.1.3 Creating a Favorite While Being in a Transaction
All of the above techniques work when you are on the Initial screen of SAP. Suppose you
are “on” a transaction that you would like to add as a Favorite. The simplest way (without
the need to type the Transaction Code in the Command Field and/or going back to the
Initial screen) is to select the menu path System à User Profile à Expand Favorites.
Figure 2.8: Menu Path for Creating a Favorite from a Transaction
TIP: If you are within a transaction and the SAP can be easily accessed, then you
use the menu option System à User Profile à Expand Favorites. This is useful, as you
don’t need to go back to the Initial SAP screen.
When you have a number of Favorite items added, the list might become very large and
confusing. To better organize the list, you may create folders and subfolders within your
Favorites and place new Favorites within them.
2.2 Creating Folders 

In this section, we will cover how to create folders and subfolders for our Favorites, thus
making our work more organized.
To create a folder, select the Favorites node and right-click in order to access the context
menu. Next, choose the menu option Insert Folder.
Figure 2.9: Creating a Folder
A dialog box appears as shown in Figure 2.10.
Figure 2.10: Folder Name
Enter a suitable name for the folder and then press “Enter”. A new folder will be created
by the name specified.
We may create folders within the new folder by using the same context menu option.
Transactions may be added to the folders using the steps listed in the previous section.
You may also delete Favorites or change their position from within the various folders. 
For deleting Favorite nodes, select the relevant node and click the 
 button. The Favorite
will be removed from the Favorites list.
NOTE: For deleting all Favorites within a folder, select the given folder and right-
click to access context menu. Then choose option “Delete All Favorites”.
To change the sequence of existing Favorites, follow these steps:
·        Select the node of the Favorite whose position is to be changed by pressing the left
mouse button.
·        While keeping the left mouse button pressed, move the cursor to the new (desired)
2.3 Deleting Favorites and Displacing Favorites

position.
·        Then release the left mouse button. This places the Favorite into the new position.
You may also move a Favorite from one folder to another.
You may also download and upload Favorites that have been added to your personalized
menu. This is particularly useful when you, for example, have all of your Favorites in one
system, such as QA system, and you want to transfer them to another system, for example,
Production. You may simply download from one and upload to another without wasting
your time creating the entire set of Favorite folders from scratch.
To download Favorites on the local PC, proceed as follows:
·        In the SAP Easy Access Menu, choose the menu path Favorites à Download to PC
(see Figure 2.11).
Figure 2.11: Menu Path “Download to PC”
·        The dialog box appears as shown in Figure 2.12.
Figure 2.12: Save As Dialog Box
2.4 Downloading and Uploading Favorites

Enter a suitable file name after navigating to an appropriate location, and click the Save
button. This will save the Favorites and their folders on your local PC at the given
location.
To upload the saved Favorites from the desktop, proceed as follows:
·        In the SAP Easy Access Menu, choose the menu path Favorites à Upload from PC. A
dialog box similar to that shown in Figure 2.12 appears. Choose a suitable file name
and click the Open button.
Node entries from the selected file are read, and the relevant Favorites are created in
the system.
This chapter outlines how to create and effectively use Favorites. With the information
provided, you should now be able to explain what they are and how to create them. You
should also be able to create folders and organize your Favorites list, as well as download
and upload your Favorites.
Summary of Chapter 2

Chapter 3
Entering Data Into SAP
The most important part in the day of any user is the entry of data into the SAP system.
In this chapter we will cover this process, including the typical entry screens, their various
components, and their behavior on screen. This chapter will cover the following important
topics:
·       Data Entry Transactions/Screens
·       Value Help (Search Help) for Input Fields
·       Copying Multiple Values From Screen With “CTRL+Y”
·       Defining Default Values for an Input Field
·       Hold Data and Set Data Functionality
·       Object Manager
By learning how to efficiently input data into the SAP system, you will save time in your
everyday work life and your work will become more organized and easier to access. Some
questions that will be answered in this chapter include:
·       What does a Data Entry Transaction look like?
·       How can I create a Variant for Object Manager?
·       How can I effectively use an F4 Help Hit List?
Throughout the chapter, there will be examples and screenshots to help the reader gain the
greatest possible understanding of how to effectively enter data into the SAP system.

Data is entered into the SAP system using data entry transactions. You may execute these
transactions from a transaction code or an SAP easy access/user access menu path. 
An Entry Transaction may consist of a number of screens. The user may enter data on
one screen and may be required to go to a number of other screens while completing the
data entry sequence. Each screen may contain validations and checks (required for
consistency of data) that may generate error or warning messages.
SAP views all entities (items) whose data is to be maintained as Objects. Typical
examples of objects are Sales Order, Notification, and Employee. As already mentioned in
Chapter 1, there may be different transactions that Create, Change, and Display these
objects.
NOTE: Separate transactions are provided for Creation, Change, and Display for
objects, each of which is denoted by a different transaction code. This was discussed
in Chapter 1.
Before you are taken to the actual data entry screen(s), each transaction, whether
pertaining to creation or change of objects, takes you to an Initial Screen. The Initial
screen for Create transactions is different from those of Change and Display transactions.
For example, on the Sales Order Creation Initial screen, there are fields such as Order
Type, Sales Organization, and Distribution Channel, as shown in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Create Sales Order Initial Screen
On the Sales Order Change: Initial Screen, for example, we have the Order Number (in
this case the “object” under consideration) and other Search Criteria, such as Billing
Document and Sold-to-party. After entering the object number on the initial screen, you
will be taken to the actual data entry screen. For example, the main SD Change Order
3.1 Data Entry Transactions and Screens 

screen is shown in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: SD Data Entry Screen
Similarly, a typical data entry screen for HR is shown in Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Personal Data Entry Screen 
The initial screen and the following screens have an application toolbar along with screen-
specific menus and a standard toolbar. For example, for the Sales Order maintenance
screen, the application toolbar is shown in Figure 3.4.
Figure 3.4: Data Entry Screen Toolbar
NOTE: The main entry screen may lead you to further screens via toolbar buttons
or the Goto menu.
The entry screen may consist of checkboxes, radio buttons, input fields, tables, and tab
strips, which are arranged in various groups. Let us discuss some of the important
elements one by one:

·        Input fields. These allow for the entry of data and appear editable (white-colored). The
input fields can be of various sizes and types. Typical examples include Date Input
field, Amount, or a Text or Code Input field. Additional text may be displayed when a
particular set of data is entered in a field and then “Enter” is pressed. For example, if
we enter “01” in the Personnel Subarea (PS Area) field, the text Philadelphia is
displayed next to it. 
Figure 3.5: Input field for PS Area
You may use the F4 search help in order to find out the possible set of values applicable
for entry in a given input field (this is discussed in the next section). An input field may
be either mandatory or optional. A mandatory field, if left empty, will not allow you to
go to the next screen or even to another tab. The mandatory field appears with a tick
mark as shown in Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: Mandatory Field On Screen
For input fields, the AutoCompletion option is also supported. This means that when
you enter a value in a field, input help in the form of Auto Completion is available from
the previous set of entered values as shown in Figure 3.7.
Figure 3.7: AutoCompletion
NOTE: When entering data into an input field, use “Backspace” to see the
previously entered set of values. These are AutoCompletion values, and are system
independent.
·        Dropdown List. The Dropdown list is used for displaying a number of options in a list
box and the user can choose one from the list, such as the one shown in Figure 4.8. By
default, only the description is displayed and is available for selection. Settings may be
applied in order to display the codes as well as the description of the field in question. 
Figure 3.8: Dropdown List

·        Checkboxes. These are indicators as shown in Figure 3.9.
Figure 3.9: Checkboxes on a Screen
Checkboxes allow you to switch an option (or condition) on or off. These are
independent of each other if there are multiple checkboxes on a screen. 
·        Radio buttons. These are elements that allow you to choose one option from a number
of options. They may be arranged horizontally or vertically. Within a group you may
choose one radio button only.
Figure 3.10: Radio buttons
·        Buttons. Buttons may take you to another screen or display further information. They
may be displayed either with or without icons as shown in Figure 3.11 and Figure 3.12
respectively.
Figure 3.11: Button without Icon
Figure 3.12: Button with Icon
In certain screens, there may also be expandable buttons that allow you to hide or show
a set of elements on the screen.
·        Tables. The table is an important element of the data entry screen. A typical table for
entering data is shown in Figure 3.13.
Figure 3.13: Data Entry Table
Each line lets you enter data. For example, a list of salary components may look like
the one shown. Depending on the setting, Single or Multiple lines may be selected.
Each line may have checkbox, input fields, or display fields.

NOTE: You may alter certain settings of the table (such as changing the sequence
of displayed fields) to meet your needs. This is known as Table Configuration. They
may be stored and accessed later.
To alter the table settings, first make any changes in the table look. For example, you
may change the sequence of the table fields. To do this, simply drag the fields by
selecting the column header and then place them in the position of your choice. For
storing the configuration, click on the  icon on the top right corner of the table. This
will display the Table Settings dialog shown in Figure 3.14.
Figure 3.14: Table Settings
The changes to the table settings may be stored in the form of Variants. Enter a suitable
name for your variant in the field provided and then click the Create button. This will
create the variant. Press the Save button. The next time that you access the table
settings, you may choose the variant that you have just created in order to display the
table in the changed format.
·        Tabstrips. These are used in order to accommodate multiple sub-screens within a given
area on the main screen. A typical tabstrip that may be displayed is shown in Figure
3.15.
Figure 3.15: A Tabstrip
Each sub-screen may be accessed by clicking the relevant tab that may contain its own

elements such as input fields, checkbox, tables, and so on. When a certain tab is
clicked, it becomes active and the various components on it are shown.
You may also use the 
 and 
 icons to move left and right respectively. This is helpful
in case there are many tabs that are not all visible on the screen. Alternatively, you may
click the 
 icon on the upper right of the tabstrip in order to display the various tab
names in the form of a menu as shown in Figure 3.16.
Figure 3.16: Choosing from a tab list
You may then choose the tab you need.
·        Context Menus. Apart from the screen elements listed above, there are also context
menus that can be used for a screen field or table field. Right-clicking a particular field
will display a context menu from which further tasks may be chosen as shown in
Figure 3.17.
Figure 3.17: Context Menu
·        Long Text Editors. In addition to the above, a few screens may also allow you to enter
long text using a long text editor as shown in Figure 3.18. This may either be accessible
from a menu path or a button shown on the main entry screen.

Figure 3.18: Long Text Editors
When you enter input on any of the screen fields and then press “Enter”, the entered texts
(such as names) are made left-justified, whereas the amount, number, and quantity fields
are automatically made right-justified by the system.
After entering data in a particular field, you may press the “Tab” key to go on to the next
field. There are tab sequences defined for each screen that specifies the sequence of input
fields in which the cursor is placed by the system each time the tab button is pressed. If
you do not want to use the Tab key, you may select a field using the mouse.
By default, the Insert mode is on for data entry. This means that when the cursor is on a
field, entering any data will insert value in the field and will not overwrite the existing
values. When a field is selected using the mouse, you may overwrite the old value in the
field by switching on the Overwrite mode. This may be done by pressing the INS key
once. Alternately, you may press the INS shown in the right part of the status bar as shown
in Figure 3.19.
Figure 3.19: Insert Mode On
The INS will change to OVR as shown in Figure 3.20.
Figure 3.20: Overwrite Mode On
NOTE: The newest GUI allows you to edit the sequence of the tabs for the various
input fields.
Simple Cut and Copy functions work for single input fields when entering data. For
multiple field data selection and copy, we use the “CTRL+Y” keys. This is discussed
ahead in section 3.4 of this chapter - Copying Multiple Values from Screen with
3.2 Entering Data on Screens 

“CTRL+Y”.
When an entry is made on the screen and the “Enter” button is pressed, any validation
checks are run. You may see errors, warnings, or simply information messages depending
on the scenario.
An error message with a red symbol within a status bar is shown in Figure 3.21.
Figure 3.21: Error Message in Status Bar
An error will not allow you to proceed further with your data entry until the correct data is
inputted. In the example shown, entering a valid date in the relevant field will not show
the error any further and the user is allowed to proceed ahead. No saving of data is
allowed if the error persists.
On the other hand, a warning appears as shown in Figure 3.22. 
The Warning symbol is yellow.
Figure 3.22: Warning
This only warns the user that proceeding further will delete a record from the database.
Pressing “Enter”, for example, in such cases, will make the message disappear. The user
may then be allowed to save data on the screen. 
Instead of the status bar, messages may be displayed in dialog boxes depending on your
personalized settings (we will see this in Chapter 4 - Changing SAP Look and Feel).
Also of importance are some of the standard toolbar buttons and icons used. These are
Save, Cancel, and Back. The icons of the Cancel, Exit, and Back buttons are shown in
Figure 3.23.
Button
Icon
Exit
Back
Cancel
Figure 3.23: Cancel, Exit, and Back Buttons
The three buttons look similar in functioning, however, their working differs. When you
want to come out of a transaction without saving, you may simply cancel the transaction
by pressing the Cancel button. This will give you a prompt that says, Do you want to
Cancel? If you want to stay on the transaction, press No. Otherwise, choose Yes. In this
case, no option to save the data is presented to the user.
 

Suppose the user is editing an object that is comprised of header data as well as some
other groups of data, each of which are entered on separate screens. If the user accesses
only some of the screens, and after finishing data entry for a particular group he or she
returns to the main entry screen, it is done via the Back button. If the Back button is
pressed without saving the data on a particular screen, a dialog box is shown to the user
warning him or her of possible loss of data. If the Yes option is chosen, the data is saved
and the user is taken to the upper level in the application hierarchy.
The Exit button is used when the user, who has been entering data in an application, wants
to leave (exit from) the application and move on to another task. When the Exit button is
pressed, the system reminds him or her to save the entered data (if this is not done
already).
For both Back and Exit, any data entry checks relevant to the screen are executed. For
Cancel, no checks are executed for the data entered on the screen.
In Chapter 1, we discussed the F1 - Field Help. You may refer back to that chapter for
information on field help or for any information you require for particular input fields. In
addition to the F1 help, an Input Help also known as F4 Help is available. In this section,
we will see how to access the Value Help for input fields.
For accessing the Hit List, simply place the cursor on the field and then press the “F4”
key. Alternately, after focusing on the field, press the small symbol 
 displayed on the
field’s right side. This will display the Hit List as shown in Figure 3.24.
Figure 3.24: F4 Value Help
This allows you to see all possible sets of values (shown in the form of a Hit List) that
may be entered in the field in question.
The value help provides various functions via the buttons in the available toolbar as shown
in Figure 3.25.
3.3 Value Help (Search Help) for Input Fields 

Figure 3.25: Toolbar
You can sort the list according to a particular field in either ascending or descending order.
This may be done by selecting a particular column or by choosing a column and then
right-clicking in order to access the context menu. After this is done, choose the option
Sort Ascending or Descending as shown in Figure 3.26.
3.26: Context Menu for Hit List
For an input field in which, for example, a code is to be entered, the input help will display
the permissible codes and also their descriptions.
The Hit List may contain a very large number of values. You may filter the values based
on the applicable criteria. For filtering the values, click the 
 bar at the
top of the list values. The fields for restricting the Hit List appear as shown in Figure 3.27.
Figure 3.27: Filtering Values
Enter the appropriate values in the field provided to define your restriction criteria and
then press “Enter”. 

For example, in the case of our country code and description, the default maximum
number of hits is 500. We can change this to 6 and select only country codes beginning
with ‘U’. Then the Hit List will appear changed as shown in Figure 3.28.
Figure 3.28: Restricted Hit List
The Help shown in Figure 3.24 and 3.28 is a simple search help. Other than that, you may
also come across input help that is comprised of multiple tabs as shown in Figure 3.29.
They are termed as Collective Search Helps.
 
Figure 3.29: Collective Search Help
In this case, the relevant tab may be selected and input values entered in the fields
provided as shown in Figure 3.29.
In addition to the standard displayed list of values, you may also create a Personal Value
List (a set of values for yourself). This personal list allows you to organize your favorites
or your frequently accessed values.
Instead of the standard F4 Help, pressing “F4” displays the Personal Value List. You may
then switch from Personal Value list to standard Hit List and vice versa.
To create a Personal Value List (or to add a record into a Personal Value List) select a row
from the standard Hit List and then click the 
 button on the toolbar. This will add the

value to the Personal Value List and will create the list if it does not exist already. To view
the Personal Value list, click the 
 button.
NOTE: You may also create Personal Value Lists along with the standard F4 Help.
A personal list, as the name denotes, is a list of values that you have personally
chosen. It will be shown rather than the default search help list.
Once values are entered in the Personal Value List, accessing the F4 Help next time for the
field in question will display the Personal Value List rather than the standard help list. You
may switch back to the standard list by clicking the Display All Values 
 button in the
toolbar.
A useful function provided by all SAP screens is the facility to copy multiple values from
a set of input fields or table lines at one time using the “CTRL+Y” keys. To do this, follow
the steps below:
·        First, press the “CTRL+Y” keys. Alternately, you may use the menu path shown in
Figure 3.30.
Figure 3.30: Menu Path for Copying Values
Once this is done, the cursor will change into a crosshair cursor.
·        Place the cursor at the starting point of the area to be copied. Press the left mouse
button to mark the top-left corner of the area to be selected. This will start the selection
of the area. Keep the left mouse button pressed as you drag the cursor over the area to
be copied.
NOTE: Make sure a crosshair appears for the cursor after the “CTRL+Y” keys are
pressed. This means the “CTRL+Y” has been successful.
·        Use the mouse to drag the cursor in order to highlight the area to be copied. Release
the left mouse button to complete the selection process. A grey shaded box will appear
3.4 Copying Multiple Values from Screen with “CTRL+Y”

showing the selected area.
·         You may then use the “CTRL+C” keys to copy all the values that are filled in the
various input fields or table lines. These may then be entered via the Paste function to
any other SAP screen.
NOTE: You may use the “CTRL+Y” keys to select the content of multiple
input/output fields. “CTRL+C” will then copy all the values. These may then be
copied to another SAP screen or Desktop application.
In this section, we will discuss the default values for an Input Field. For certain input
fields, there are Parameter IDs (a three-character ID, such as FWS or ABK) that are
defined by SAP. In such cases, the user is allowed to set default values.
The benefit of doing this is that the user does not need to type the same value over and
over again. These default values will save the user time. Whenever the user is on a screen
that has the field for which the Parameter ID has been set, the default value that has been
specified in the “User Data” for that input field (Parameter ID) is read and filled
automatically. Another advantage of this is that one user’s default value for a particular
field will not affect the values of another user. A typical example of this is a currency field
that may be set as a default value such as USD or GBP.
NOTE: For input fields, if applicable, values may be set as default using
Parameter IDs. Parameter IDs may also be used to set user-specific settings of screens.
The procedure for defining default values for an input field is as follows:
·        In order to find out whether a Parameter ID is applicable, select the input field and
press “F1” in order to display the field help. The dialog will be displayed as shown in
Figure 3.31.
3.5 Defining Default Values for an Input Field

Figure 3.31: Field Help
·        Then click the
button. This will display the Technical Information. If the Parameter
ID is applicable, a three-letter ID will be displayed as shown in Figure 3.32.
Figure 3.32: Input Help with Parameter ID
In case the Parameter ID is not defined for the field in question, the Parameter ID
information will not be present.
·        Once you have the Parameter ID for the field, go to the User data by following the
menu path System User Profile à Own Data. This will lead you to the Maintain User
Profile transaction. On the Parameters tab, enter the Parameter ID in the respective
column and the default value in the Parameter Value column as shown in Figure 3.33.
Figure 3.33: Defaults Tab
·        Save your data. When you rerun the transaction, the defined default value, when
applicable, is placed automatically in the relevant field as shown in Figure 3.34.
Figure 3.34: Value Appears in Field
 
 
3.6 Hold Data and Set Data Functionality

While entering data for a number of objects (for example, Employees, Sales Orders, or
Notifications), you may come across screens that involve repetitive entry of a given set of
information for different objects. Entering the same data on a number of screens may be a
laborious activity, particularly when many entries are to be made. SAP relieves its user
from the burden of retyping the same data by providing the Hold Data/Set
Data functionality.
The Hold Data functionality allows users to save the redundant data in the SAP memory.
The user types these field values for an SAP screen only once, i.e., for the first object
whose information is being entered. This data then gets stored in SAP memory and is
automatically made available in the respective data fields when the same screen is
accessed for subsequent objects. This functionality provides a number of advantages to
users:
·        It lets you enter a large volume of data in SAP quickly and easily.
·        For each user, SAP allocates a separate area in memory. This ensures that no clash of
saved values will occur between different users.
·        You may use the Hold Data/Set Data functionality for screens of all modules and sub
modules.
3.6.1 Using Hold/Set Data Functionality
In order to use the Hold Data and Set Data options, follow the steps shown below:
·        Call the SAP transaction on which you would like to make the redundant entries.
·        As already mentioned, you only need to enter the repetitive data once. Enter these
values for the first object in consideration. Do not enter a value in any field whose
values are not to be copied.
·        Then choose the menu option System à User Profile à Hold Data (see Figure 3.35).
Figure 3.35: “Hold Data” Menu Path
This stores the entered data in the SAP memory. The message “Data was held” is
displayed.
Figure 3.36 Data Was Held
The held values are displayed in red, as shown in boxes in Figure 3.37.

Figure 3.37: Held Values
You may also hold values for input fields one by one. In this case, each time you hold a
value, all the held values are displayed on the input screen in red.
·        When you open the same screen to enter data for subsequent objects, the saved data
values are present in the relevant fields. You may also amend these values if you like.
·        If you want to exclude the held value fields from data entry or navigation via the tab
key, choose the menu option System à User Profile à Set Data. This will grey-out the
field in question and will not allow editing of the field value for current and subsequent
objects. Such a field will also be ignored during tab key navigation.
·        When you have completed entering the data, you should delete the held values from
the SAP memory. You can do this by choosing the menu option System à User Profile à
Delete Data.
On the left side of the initial screen of data maintenance transactions, there may be a
navigation tool known as the Object Manager as shown in Figure 3.38. (In this section
we discuss the Object Manager as it is used in the HR transactions PA30 and PA20.)
3.7 Object Manager

Figure 3.38 Object Manager
The search options are found on the top of the screen, and the Hit List area (where the
values found as a result of the search are displayed) can be seen on the lower part of the
screen.
There is a Search Term option that allows you to search in the database. In our case, we
have taken the Person example, so it is the employee (or the name of the employee).
Clicking the Find by Person option will show the dialog in Figure 3.39.
Figure 3.39: Find Person Dialog
Enter a name in the field provided and press the Find button.
This will populate the Hit List area with the names of the employees that satisfy our
entered condition. In our case, we have searched for all employees that have “Alexander”
in their name.
Figure 3.40: Hit List
While you are on the Hit List, you are able to create a list of multiple names or criteria.
You can do this by entering a search term and then clicking the Enter Search Result in List
button. This will add the results to the existing Hit List, and then you may enter
other search criteria in the With Name field.
Also, you may create variants that allow you to save your search criteria. To do this, click
on the Create Search Variant
button on the toolbar. The dialog appears as shown in
Figure 3.41.
 
 
 

Figure 3.41: Search Variant
Enter a suitable name for your variants. Let’s say we wrote “people named alexander” and
then pressed the Enter button.
This will add a node for the newly created search variant as shown in Figure 3.42.
Figure 3.42: Node for Search Variant
The next time you come to the transactions, simply double-click on the relevant variants
and the Hit List will be populated based on the criteria on that date. This means that, for
example, when you run the saved variant “people named alexander,” all of the people
named Alexander will be searched for again and displayed. You may get different results
each time as more people named Alexander are added to the system.
This chapter discussed how to effectively enter data into the SAP system. With the
information provided, you should now be able to, among other things, enter data using
Data Entry Transactions, incorporate value help for Input Fields, copy multiple values
from the screen, and define default values for an Input Field.
References
http://help.sap.com/saphelp_oil46csp2/helpdata/EN/85/daf1d04bac11d1890e0000e8322f96
Summary of Chapter 3

Chapter 4
Personalizing – Changing SAP Look and
Feel
This chapter will cover the possible options that are available to personalize the SAP
system according to your preferences. All of the settings shown in this chapter apply to
one particular user; the settings of other users are not affected.
Chapter 2 described how to organize your work using Favorites. In this chapter, I will
cover the specific details involved in personalizing the look and feel of the SAP system.
The following topics will be covered:
·        Personalizing the initial screen, including setting the start transaction, modifying the
status fields, and changing favorites and easy access menu settings.
·        Changing SAP behavior, including controlling cursor behavior, switching history
input on or off, changing your user profile, and quick cut and paste features.
·        Changing GUI and Help settings, including themes and fonts, adjusting dropdown
list displays, personalizing message displays, and changing the display of F1 and F4
Help.
This chapter is meant to help the user create a more efficient and enjoyable SAP system.
Some questions that will be answered in this chapter include:
·       How can I set the start transaction?
·       How can I quickly cut and paste portions of text?
·       What are my options for changing the theme and fonts?
·       How can I personalize messages when they are displayed?
Along the way, there will be examples and screenshots to make the task of personalizing
your SAP system as easy and straightforward as possible.
This section will discuss three changes that may be made to the default settings of the
Initial SAP screen. Personalization can occur by setting the start transactions, modifying
the status bar fields, and changing the menu and favorites display. Let us now see each of
the three in detail.
4.1 Personalizing the Initial Screen

4.1.1 Setting the Start Transaction  
A Start Transaction is defined as the first transaction displayed (or that the user is taken
to) after a successful logon. One of the simplest features about personalization is to set a
particular transaction as the Start Transaction. You may set this to the most frequently
used transaction or the first transaction that you start within your daily work.
Since this is the first screen that you are taken to, it will save time because you don’t have
to search within the tree or type the transaction name into the Command Field.
In order to set start transaction, from the main SAP menu choose Extras à Set Start
Transaction as shown in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Set Start Transaction
The dialog box appears as shown in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Entering Start Transaction
Enter the transaction code in the field provided and press “Enter”. This will set the
transaction code. The next time you log in, instead of the initial SAP easy access screen,
you will be taken to the specified transaction code.
The value of the set transaction is not deleted until you change or reset it. Even if you
assign value to the transaction at the end of a working day, the set transaction will remain
there until your next log in (irrespective of when you log in).
4.1.2 Modifying the Status Field Display 
In Chapter 1, I discussed the Status fields displayed in the Status bar. In this section, we
will see how to modify the status fields display (the information given here is relevant for
all SAP screens including the initial screen).
The information displayed in status bar is shown in Figure 4.3.

Figure 4.3: Status Fields
You may click on the 
 icon to see the list of various fields that may be displayed (and
their values) as shown in Figure 4.3.
Some of the options you may choose from (relevant to users) may be the Program or
Transaction code that you are executing as well as your user name. In addition, you may
choose to display the Response Time.
NOTE: You may hide the Status fields by clicking on the  icon.
To change the field displayed in the status bar, click the 
icon. This opens a number of
options as shown in Figure 4.3.
Some of the important information that may be displayed in the status includes:
·        System and Client: This displays the name of the system and the relevant client to
which you are logged in.
·            User: The ID with which you are logged in, for example, JONR01 etc.
·        Program: The name of the program you are executing.
·        Transaction: The transaction you are running.
·        Response Time: This may simply be defined as the time it takes for the execution of a
certain task (for example, a report transaction). This time is measured in milliseconds.
You may execute a report to display the selection screen. Enter the data on the selection
screen and click the Execute button. When you execute the report, it will show the time
taken for the report to fetch data from the database and generate the report output.
4.1.3 Changing Favorites and Easy Access Menu Settings 
For the initial SAP screen, you may change the way the Easy Access Menu and the
Favorites are displayed. Let us see in detail how this is done.
To change the menu and Favorites settings, access the menu option Extras à Settings. This
will display the dialog box as shown in Figure 4.4.       
 

Figure 4.4: Settings for Favorites
This has four checkboxes (options), which are discussed below:
·        Display Favorites at end of list: Choosing this option will display the Favorites at the
bottom of the list in the left pane. This is shown in Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Favorites at End of List
·        Do not Display Menu, only display favorites: If you check this option, the entire Easy
Access menu is hidden, and only the Favorites are displayed.
·        Do not display picture: In this case, the picture displayed on the right pane of the
screen is not shown.
·        Display Technical names: Switching on this option will display the technical names of
the items listed in the menu tree. For example, the transaction code of the reports and
screens that you work with are displayed as shown in Figure 4.6. Both of the items in
the Favorites as well as the menu display the technical names.

Figure 4.6: Menu Items and Favorites With Technical Names
In the figure, the transaction code of the Manager’s Desktop is shown (i.e., PPMDT) by
switching on the technical names.
In this section, I will cover the features that allow you to change certain GUI and Help
settings. These include how to change Theme and Fonts, how to adjust dropdown list
displays, how to personalize message displays, and how to change the display of F1 and
F4 Help.
NOTE: The screenshots for this chapter have been taken from the latest GUI
version 730. However, many of the features are also applicable to the older 710 GUI.
The major difference is the way the Customizing layout options appear. In older GUI,
instead of the navigation tree and nodes, there are tabs that have customization
options. If you are using the older GUI, use the appropriate tab.
For most of the changes shown in this section, the Customizing Layout options are used.
Click the Customizing Local Layout button
 on the standard toolbar. From the menu that
appears, choose Options. This will display the SAP GUI options dialog box as shown in
Figure 4.7.
4.2 Changing Standard GUI Settings

Figure 4.7: SAP GUI Customizing Options
On the left of the dialog box there is a tree that shows the different categories (or areas)
that contain the various GUI customizing options. For example, we have Visual Design
and Interaction Design as shown in Figure 4.8.
Figure 4.8: Customizable GUI Option Areas
There is also a Search field that you can use to quickly look for the actual place where a
particular customization option is. For example, in order to directly go to the screen for
customizing error messages, you may simply type “error messages” in the Search field.
When this is done, the respective node will be shown in italics as shown in Figure 4.9.
Figure 4.9: Searching for “Error Messages”
The exact node and the path for accessing it will be shown in italics, whereas the other
irrelevant nodes will appear dim, making the desirable node prominent. You may double-
click on this node to go directly to the customization screen (Notifications node in our
error messages example).
NOTE: If at any time you decide to restore (revert) to the default GUI settings,
you may do so by using the Restore Defaults button (see Figure 4.9). This button will
restore your default GUI settings, such as the fonts, theme, and cursor settings, back to
their original form.

NOTE: To access the help feature at any node or for any function, simply click the
Help button. The necessary documentation for the screen that you are on will be
displayed.
4.2.1 Changing GUI Theme and Fonts
You also have control over changing the GUI theme and the displayed fonts. In this
section, we will take a closer look at how this is done.
At the top-left of the dialog box shown in Figure 4.9 is a Theme Selection list box. In the
newer GUI version, you have the SAP “Signature Theme” selected. If you want to change
the theme, choose a different theme from the dropdown list and click Apply.
The new theme will only be applicable when the SAP Logon pad is closed and restarted.
Within the Signature Theme you can change the default color of the SAP windows. To
change the color of the Signature Theme, choose the path Visual Design —> Color
Settings. This will be found in the left pane of the GUI Options dialog (use the
Customizing Local Layout shown earlier). On the right side of the screen, select a
different color (such as SAP Gold or Purple). After you have chosen a color, click the
Apply button.
The new color will be applicable when a new SAP session is opened.
NOTE: From SAP GUI 730, SAP provides a new Corbu Theme. This theme has a
reduced contrast as compared to Signature Design and also has a different style of
icons.
In addition to the theme, you have the option of changing the fonts as well as the font size
displayed on the SAP screen. To do this, choose the path Visual Design à Font settings.
The right side of the screen changes as shown in Figure 4.10 (these are the default
settings).
NOTE: Fixed Width Font Settings are applicable for data entered in the input
fields and displayed in lists, whereas Proportional fonts are used for Captions and
descriptions (for items) shown on the screen.

Figure 4.10: Fixed Width and Proportional Font Settings
For Fixed Width Fonts pertaining to input fields and lists, you can set the Font type as well
as the size by clicking the relevant 
 button under the Fixed Width Font Settings area.
This will display a Font selection dialog box, which can be used to specify your
preferences (see figure 4.11).
Figure 4.11: Font Selection
When you are done with your font selection, click OK.
If you would like to keep separate font settings for Proportional Fonts, make sure the
Select Proportional Font checkbox at the top (under Font dialog) is on. Once this is done,
click the 
button under Proportional Font Settings. A similar font selection screen is
displayed as shown in Figure 4.11. Here you may choose from a variety of font sizes and
types according to your liking.
4.2.2 Adjusting Dropdown List Display
In addition to other features of the screen, you may modify the appearance of Dropdown
lists. By default, only the description of the items is shown in the Dropdown as shown in
Figure 4.12.
 

Figure 4.12: Permanent Address Dropdown List 
You may also display the key values along with the description, if desired, in sorted order.
Let us see how this is done.
To access the Dropdown list customization, click the Customize Local Layout
button
and choose Options. The dialog box appears. From the left pane, double-click the node
Visualization 1 shown under Interaction Design (as shown in Figure 4.13).
Figure 4.13: Visualization 1 node
The screen on the right appears as the one shown in Figure 4.14.
Figure 4.14: Dropdown List Customization
For older GUI versions, select the Expert tab from the dialog box that appears (Figure
4.15).
 
 

Figure 4.15: Expert tab on Older GUIs
The checkboxes displayed under the Controls area allow you to customize the dropdown
list. By default, the two checkboxes Show Keys in all Dropdown Lists and Sort Items by
Key are switched off. If the first checkbox, i.e. the one for showing keys in the list, is
switched on, the keys (codes) as well as the descriptions of the items will be displayed. In
this case, the dropdown lists will appear as shown in Figure 4.16.
Figure 4.16: Address Field Options
Moreover, if you would like to sort the items by using the key, make sure that the Sort
Items By Key checkbox is on (this checkbox will only be enabled if the Show Keys option
is selected).
Switching on the key, along with the sorted key options, may significantly increase
performance while entering data. Since most users are more familiar with the keys (codes)
– rather than the description, it will be quicker to search for the code within the dropdown
list.
4.2.3 Personalizing Message Displays
As mentioned earlier in Chapter 1, a variety of messages, such as Information, Errors, and
Warnings, are displayed while executing a transaction. Apart from other features that can
be personalized, some level of personalization may be done for messages as well.
The default behavior is that messages appear in the status bar. You may change the form of
the displayed messages to more noticeable dialog boxes, which will make them appear

more prominent. You may also turn a sound alert on or off when a message is displayed.
One more benefit is that you can set a control for each message type, such as Information,
Error, or Warning. It is possible, for example, to switch on dialog boxes display, for
Warning and Errors, and let Information appear as status bar messages.
For personalizing messages, click the Customizing Local Layout button from the standard
toolbar. From the menu, choose Options. From the dialog box that appears, choose the
node Notifications under Interaction Design (see Figure 4.17).
Figure 4.17: Notifications under Interaction Design
On the right side of the dialog box, a Messages area will be displayed as shown in Figure
4.18.
Figure 4.18: Options for Personalizing Messages
There are four checkboxes related to personalizing your messages. The Beep at Message
checkbox allows you to have a beep sound alert occur when a message is displayed (the
more important checkboxes are below this beep-related checkbox).
For each of the message types, you have a switch (checkbox) for displaying a dialog box.
Check the corresponding indicator(s) for the type(s) of message that you want to see as a
dialog box. If you want to see all Warnings, Errors, and Success messages as dialog boxes,
check all three indicators. Figure 4.19 shows an error shown as a dialog box if the error
checkbox is switched on.
Figure 4.19: Error Message in Dialog Box

The same error previously shown in the status bar appeared as the one in Figure 4.20.
Figure 4.20: Error Message in Status Bar
4.2.4 Changing Display of F1 and F4 Help
Apart from other features that may be changed according to your desires, some level of
personalization is also possible for the F1 Input and F4 value Helps. For F1 Help, you can
change the display, whereas for F4 Help, you have control over the number of values of
the hit list as well as the hit list itself. Let us see in detail how this is done.
Choose the menu path Help à Settings as shown in Figure 4.21 (this is available in all SAP
screens).
Figure 4.21: “Settings” Menu Path
The dialog box appears as shown in Figure 4.22.
Figure 4.22: Personal Settings for your User
Two important tabs on this box are the F1 Help and F4 Help. Let us discuss them in detail.
·        F1 Help. The previous Figure shows the F1 Help tab, which has two possible options.
You may choose to display the help either in the default Performance Assistant display
or in the form of a modal dialog box. If you choose the Modal Dialog Box option, the
F1 help will look like the one shown in Figure 4.23.

Figure 4.23: Modal F1 Help
The normal Performance Assistant help (as discussed earlier) is shown in Figure 4.24.
Figure 4.24: Performance Assistant Help
·        F4 Help tab. There are some user-specific settings also related to the F4 Help. Click
on the tab F4 Help. The appropriate screen will appear as shown in Figure 4.25.

Figure 4.25: F4 Help User-specific Settings
The important checkboxes and fields of this tab are shown below:
·        Do not Display Pers. Value List Automatic. If this checkbox is on, the Personal Value
list is not displayed automatically. The main hit list is displayed. There is a Personal
List Value 
button that allows you to go to your personal list. (The button is only
displayed if there is at least one value in the personal list.) You may add entries into the
personal list (from this screen) using the 
button.
If the checkbox is off, the Personal Value list is displayed. You may then go back to the
main list of all possible values using the  
 button.
·        Only Return Value directly if only one hit. If this indicator is set, the input field is
automatically filled with the value satisfying the search criteria entered, if only one
value exists in the database that satisfies the given condition. In this case no hit list or
value screen is displayed. For example, if we have a field name and we enter “J*” in it
and press “F4”, the field will be automatically filled with “John” if John is the only
value starting from J stored in the system.
·        Maximum number of hits to be displayed. This value determines the maximum number
of entries displayed in the hit list. You may enter a suitable value according to your
requirements in this field, and this setting will be applicable for all input fields.
Suppose we enter “10” as the Maximum Number of Hits, then only the first 10 values
satisfying the criteria will be displayed. If there are more than 10 values, a message is
displayed that reads There are more than 10 possible inputs. This is shown in Figure
4.26. 
Figure 4.26: More Than 1o Inputs Message
·        Maximum Width of Hit List (in chars). As the text denotes, this is used to control the
number of columns displayed in the hit list. For example, the hit list contains three
columns of 10, 15, and 30 characters of length respectively. If we want to only display
the first two columns, then 25 must be entered in the Maximum Width field. Likewise,
entering 10 will display only the first column in the list.
4.2.4.1 F4 Help: Dialog and Control Mode Radio Buttons
The Dialog and Control Modes of the F4 Help display are important. You may choose
either one of them depending on your requirements. Let us take a closer look at both.
·        Dialog Mode. When the Dialog Mode is selected and you press “F4” on an input field
on any given SAP screen for accessing the possible list of values, the format in which
the F4 list of values is displayed is shown in Figure 4.27. The values are displayed in a
dialog box.
 
  
 

Figure 4.27: List of Values Generated for 
F4 help of Sales Document Field
This dialog box does not allow you to proceed with the screen on which you were
working. If the list is too wide, there is a scroll bar at the bottom of the dialog box.
Before viewing the possible set of input values, if you would like the No restrictions
checkbox to be displayed on the initial screen of your F4 help selection (i.e. on the
Restrict Value Range screen), you need to select Dialog Mode. On the initial selection
screen of your F4 help, the screen will appear as shown in Figure 4.28.
Figure 4.28: Restrict Value Range
Selecting this No restriction checkbox will turn off number restrictions of the list of values
to be displayed. This means that if there are 10,000 values that fulfill the given criteria, all
values will be displayed. 
NOTE: The No Restriction feature is only available for F4 help list values in the
Dialog Mode.

·        Control Mode. In this case, the format that the list is displayed is shown in Figure
4.29.
Figure 4.29: Search Help Control
This is the Search Help Control mode. It provides a variety of advantages. You may click
the bar marked with 
 at the top to access the screen to further filter the values
shown in the displayed list. There is also a minimize button, which will minimize the list
and allow you to continue working with the SAP screen you were working on. In the case
of a complex F4 search help, you may go to the other tabs while you are on the list of
values.
In this section, I will cover the features that allow you to change SAP behavior. These
include how to control cursor behavior, how to adjust list displays on SAP screens, and
how to adjust the user profile.
4.3.1 Controlling Cursor Behavior
In addition to the SAP GUI, fonts, and other visual elements, you may also change the
way the cursor behaves while you work with the system. To access the cursor settings,
choose the Interaction Design à Keyboard Settings node from the SAP GUI options dialog
box (using the Customizing Local Layout button shown earlier). The screen changes as
shown in Figure 4.30.
4.3 Changing SAP Behavior 

Figure 4.30: Cursor Checkboxes on Keyboard Settings
NOTE: If you are using the earlier GUI version, access the cursor settings on the
Cursor tab of Customizing Local Layout options.
Under Keyboard Settings, the following checkboxes are relevant to cursor settings. Let us
discuss each in detail.
·        Automatically move focus to next input field on reaching end of field. If this setting is
on, the cursor moves automatically to the next input field (in the tab sequence) of the
screen, when the first field is completely filled with data. The use of a mouse or the
“Tab” key is not required. This allows you to enter data quickly without shifting the
focus yourself. This is also known as Automatic Tabbing. By default, this checkbox is
off.
·        Remember cursor position within input fields. If this setting is on, the system
remembers the position the cursor was last at within an input field. This means that if
you typed partial data (some characters in an input field) and went on to enter text in
another input field, the next time you focus back on the first field, the cursor will be
placed after the last character (even blank spaces) that you had entered.
·        Position cursor at the end of the value when entering a field. This checkbox, if on,
brings the cursor to the end of the text entered within a field. If you enter a certain
value in a field followed by spaces and then go on entering in another field, when you
use the mouse to focus back on the first field, the cursor will be placed at the end of the
text entered. Any blank spaces you entered will be ignored. If this setting is switched
off, the cursor will be positioned to the point where the blank spaces ended.
·        Automatically select complete value when entering a field in INS mode. When this is
checked, you can overwrite the previously entered value in an input field with a single
keystroke in the insert INS mode. If the focus comes to a field either with a tab or an
automatic tab, the entire content of a field is selected (as shown in Figure 4.31). This
makes it easy in the Insert mode to quickly change an already existing value. If you
switch off this feature, the entire value will not be selected and you must delete the
characters yourself.
Figure 4.31: Selected Content in Field
4.3.2 Switching History Input On and Off
As mentioned earlier, SAP remembers the history of values entered in an input field. This
is particularly useful when you need to input the same (or similar) value again, because
you do not need to reenter the entire value.  The History will help users make entries
quickly and easily. Certain settings at your local layout allow you to switch the History on

and off or change the way the History is displayed.
To change the History settings, access the SAP GUI options box (using the Customize
Local Layout 
button as shown earlier). Then choose the node Local Data à History.
The right side of the dialog box will appear as shown in Figure 4.32.
Figure 4.32: History Node Displayed
You have three options related to the History Status of input fields (see Figure 4.33).
Figure 4.33: History Status Options
The three options are discussed as follows:
·        Off: If this option is selected, the History for all input fields will no longer be
available. Additionally, the set of previously entered values will be deleted and lost,
even if you switch on the History later. In some cases you will want the History for
input fields to be disabled, as it may lead to confusion when making entries. 
·        On: This will switch on the History feature. The History will be displayed when you
use the “Backspace” key while the cursor is on the field in question, or when you try to
enter some value in the field.
·        Immediately: In normal History On mode, the History is only displayed when the user
starts entering values in the input field (or uses the “Backspace” key). Checking the
Immediately indicator will display the History as soon as the cursor is placed on the
field in question (either with a mouse click or by using the “Tab” key).
In addition to switching the History on and off, an important option is to limit the number
of entries displayed in the History list. This may be done via the History Settings as shown
in Figure 4.34.
 

Figure 4.34: History Settings
The relevant field in this case is the Maximum Number of Entries. You may increase or
decrease the value from the default value of 20. For example, if you type “4” in the field,
the maximum entries displayed in a field’s History will be 4.
If you need to clear all of the History, simply click the Clear History button. This will
clear the History for the entire system and no history will be shown for any input field on
any screen.
4.3.3 Changing Your User Profile
The Own Data within your User Profile also offers options for personalization. In this
section, we will take a close look at the User Profile options available. To reach your user
profile, choose the menu path System à User Profile à Own Data (see Figure 4.35).
Figure 4.35: User Profile Menu Path
This will take you to the screen shown in Figure 4.36.
NOTE: In order to go directly to the Own Data of the User Profile, use transaction
SU3.

Figure 4.36: Maintain User Profile
This screen is comprised of three tabs: Address, Defaults, and Parameters. On the Address
tab you can set the personal information related to your user ID. The various fields that
may be set are Title, Last and First name, the Department, Room Number, Floor, and
Building information.
The more important tab is the Defaults tab. Let us discuss some of the important fields on
this tab that can help in personalization.
Figure 4.37: Defaults Tab
NOTE: Once you are done with User Profile changes, save your settings. Values
entered on the Default tab apply when you log in again. The system reads these values
at the time of logon and changes itself accordingly.
·        Start Menu. This is the area menu displayed directly after you log in to the system. It
is similar to the start transaction. Use “F4” to select a value from the list that appears. If
you leave this field blank, the SAP Easy Access menu will be displayed.
·        Logon Language. This is the language applicable after you log in. All elements
displayed on the user interface, such as the menu item texts, application toolbar button
text, screen field labels, as well as the documentation, are in the selected logon
language.

·        Decimal Notation. The decimal notation lets you control the way the decimal figures,
including amounts that are displayed on the SAP screens and lists, are formatted. The
three formats in which you may display decimals are shown in Figure 4.38.
Figure 4.38: Decimal Formats
Choose the appropriate format based on your liking. The first format includes a period
‘.’ for every thousand numbers and a comma will appear to denote decimals points. For
example, One Million will be displayed as “1.000.000,oo”. In the second format, a
comma will appear for every thousand and a period for the decimal. For example, in
this case, One Million will appear as “1,000,000.00”.
·        Date format. Similarly, the date and time format may be set in a couple of different
ways. Typical formats for the dates are MM/DD/YYYY and the DD.MM.YYYY. For
example, if you choose the latter, December 31, 2014 will be displayed in screens and
lists as “12/31/2014” and not “31.12.2014”.
·        Spool Control. Within the Spool Control area, you may set important values related to
printing. In the Output Device, you can set your printer as the default printer to which
all printing jobs will be sent.
If the Output Immediately checkbox is on, the print dialog box that appears while
printing will also have the Output Immediately checkbox on by default. Once you
select the Print option, the printing will be carried out immediately. You are not
required to manually delete your requests from the list of Spool requests (for more on
SAP printing refer to Chapter 8 - Printing Guide). 
Choosing the Delete After Output button will delete the Spool request once your
printing has been completed. If this option is not on, the requests remain in the spool
list and will only be deleted by the system after a set period of time.
The Parameters tab within the User profile (when filled with appropriate
Parameter IDs) offers some valuable personalization options. These options
serve two purposes:
·        If you are carrying out a task involving the repetitive entry of data in a particular field
on a screen for multiple objects, you may set a default value for the input field (each
time the same screen is encountered). By doing so, the default value will automatically
be placed in the input field and will not require you to enter the same data into the field
over and over again. This option can save a lot of time and effort when you need to
enter multiple sets of repetitive data in a given field.
·        Moreover, some SAP screens are programmed so that they appear or behave
differently depending on the value assigned to a given Parameter ID in the profile of
the user in question. For example, Parameter ID UGR (Country Grouping) may be set
to denote a specific country, such as the United States or the United Kingdom. This will
show the users, if applicable, the screens relevant to the country specified. (This means

only that the fields specific to the country, for example the United States or the United
Kingdom, will be shown.)
NOTE: A value may be defaulted by entering the field’s Parameter ID in the User
Profile, if the particular field has a defined ID. To check if this feature is supported for
a particular field, press “F1” to access the help for the field and then choose the
Technical Information button 
. From the box that appears, note down the Parameter
ID as shown in Figure 4.39.
Figure 4.39: Reading Parameter ID
To enter a Parameter ID and assign an appropriate value, click the Parameters tab. A
number of Parameter IDs may already be there as shown in Figure 4.40.

Figure 4.40: Parameter ID and Value
To enter a new Parameter ID and its value, place the cursor on a blank line. Enter the
Parameter ID in the first column saying “Parameter ID”. The default value must be
entered in the “Parameter Value” column. Once you press “Enter”, the description will
automatically be filled (see Figure 4.41). 
Figure 4.41: Parameter ID and Value
When you are done, save your entries. The changes will then take place when you open a
new session. You may change the value of the given Parameter later.
The value will only be defaulted in the given field for the user who enters the Parameter in
this profile. Other users are not affected.

4.2.4 Quick Cut and Paste Feature 
The Quick Cut and Paste is an important feature that you need to know in order to copy
and paste content quickly. This feature significantly reduces the work for the user and will
save plenty of time, particularly when a lot of copying and pasting of text is required.
Using this feature may change the normal SAP Copy/Cut and Paste behavior. By default
this function is switched off. In order to use this function, you first need to switch on
Quick Cut and Paste. Follow the steps shown below:
·        Click the Customize Local Layout button
on the standard toolbar. The menu will
appear as shown in Figure 4.42.
Figure 4.42 : Customize Local Layout Menu
·        Click the option Quick Cut and Paste. This option is included in all SAP screens. Once
selected, the menu option will then appear selected to indicate that the Quick Cut and
Paste function has been switched on (see Figure 4.43).
Figure 4.43: Quick Cut and Paste
 
 

·        This function enables you to copy text simply by selecting it. Within the SAP screens,
you may then copy texts from either the input or output fields by selecting it via the
mouse left-click. Once the text is copied, it may be pasted in other places within SAP
or in other desktop applications.
·        For pasting, simply right-click while placing the cursor on the field in which the
copied text is to be placed. This will automatically copy the text into the field.
NOTE: Switching on “Quick Cut and Paste” will allow you to copy text simply by
selecting it from any SAP screen. (No copying is required either with “CTRL+C”
keys or mouse right-click.) Likewise, you can Paste text simply with a mouse right-
click.
This chapter discussed changes that can be made to personalize the look and feel of your
SAP system. With these directions, you should now be able to personalize your initial
screen, change various SAP behaviors, and also change the GUI and Help settings.
Utilizing these techniques in your SAP system will make for a more efficient and pleasant
working experience.
Summary of Chapter 4

Chapter 5
Executing Report Transactions and
Downloading Output
In this chapter, we will discuss the various ways in which you may execute report
transactions and download their output.
This chapter will cover the following important topics:
·       Types of Report Outputs
·       Online Execution of Reports
·       Executing Reports in Background
·       Downloading List Output
·       Desktop Shortcuts for Programs/Reports
This chapter will begin with the procedures that are available for executing and generating
output. It will then move into discussing how to save the outputs on your local PC in
various formats. The chapter will end with a discussion on various desktop shortcuts that
you may use for both programs and reports.
Some questions to be answered in this chapter include:
·       How can I execute a report?
·       What are the different formats that can be used for displaying reports?
·       How do I execute reports in Background Mode?
·       How can I download a list onto my PC?
Throughout the chapter, there will be examples and screenshots to help the reader
understand the process of executing reports and saving outputs to their PC. In this chapter
the terms Report, Report Program, and Report Transaction will be used interchangeably.
In this section, we will see some of the various formats in which data is outputted by
Report programs. These are ABAP List Viewer (ALV), classic ABAP List, Smart forms,
and Adobe PDF Forms. Let us review them one by one.
5.1 Types of Report Outputs

5.1.1 ABAP List Output and ALV format
One format that may be used for displaying reports is the ABAP List format. You may get
the report output in a typical list format as shown in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Report Output in List Format
Lines separate the displayed columns, and the text may be represented by different colors.
In addition to the ABAP list, a popular format that users come across while running SAP
report programs is the ALV format (or more precisely, SAP List Viewer). The ALV output
has a number of functions on the toolbar that you may perform on the displayed data. A
typical ALV output is shown in Figure 5.2.
NOTE: For detailed information on ALV outputs and the functions supported,
please refer to the Chapter 7 - ALV Displays.
Figure 5.2: ALV Output
5.1.2 Form Output

Apart from the list and ALV output, you may also run programs and they may generate a
form-like output. There are typically two possible formats: Smart Form and Adobe
Forms in PDF format. A print preview is shown for the two types of forms in the screen.
The Smart form output is shown in Figure 5.3.
Figure 5.3: Smart Form Output
The PDF form output is shown in Figure 5.4.
Figure 5.4: PDF Form Output
You may print the forms or view a Print Preview. The form opens in a PDF Viewer within
the SAP window, and all PDF functions such as “Save a Copy,” “Zoom in”, and “Zoom
out” are available on the user screen. In addition to the read-only mode, forms may be
editable (Interactive) depending on the requirement.
As mentioned earlier, a report transaction may be executed from the SAP Easy
5.2 Online Execution of Reports

Access Menu by double-clicking the relevant node in the SAP Easy Access Menu.
Alternately, you may choose the transaction node from Favorites and then double-click (as
shown in Chapter 2) or choose menu option Edit à Execute.
For online execution of a report transaction, you may also type the transaction code in the
Command field and press “Enter”. All of the above options will take you to the selection
screen of the report program. A typical selection screen is shown in Figure 5.5.
Figure 5.5: Selection Screen
You may then enter the appropriate entries on the screen and press “F8” to generate the
output.
For more information on how to fill the selection screen, refer to Chapter 6 - Mastering
Selection Screens. 
Apart from the online execution, you may also run program reports in background. This is
useful for long-running reports. The output of the report is sent to the spool and may be
printed later by the user.
For long-running report programs, you may execute them in Background mode. For
running the report in background, first run the transaction so that the report selection
screen appears. Then, choose the option Execute in Background. Alternately, you may
press the “F9” key. The print dialog appears as shown in Figure 5.6.
Figure 5.6: Execute in Background
Then you will see the scheduler dialog box as shown in Figure 5.7.
5.3 Executing Reports in Background 

Figure 5.7: Dialog Box
Once done, the dialog box appears for specifying the Start Time.
Figure 5.8: Start Time Dialog Box
This is an important dialog box, as we need to specify the exact time at which you want
the Report to start and then stop. For example, we can specify either Immediate or any
specific Date and Time when the program execution should start.
Click the Date/Time button. This will show the fields required to specify the date and time
for the report in question.
Figure 5.9: Date/Time
Enter suitable values in the Scheduled Start date and time fields as shown in Figure 5.9.
The Periodic job indicator may be checked if you would like to run the job periodically as
shown in Figure 5.10.

Figure 5.10: Periodic Job
When the indicator is checked, it will display the dialog box as shown in Figure 5.11
Figure 5.11: Periodic Job Dialog Box
Check the relevant button for your requirement, such as hourly, daily, or weekly. Finally,
click the Check button in order to ensure the correctness of your entered data.
Once you have made all relevant settings, make sure to click the Save button on the Start
Time dialog box shown in Figure 5.8. The report will then be scheduled for background
execution instead of online (foreground) execution. The output is then sent to a spool
request. 
A typical ABAP list was shown earlier in Figure 5.1. Let’s suppose that we need to
download it on our PC. In this section, we will see in detail the process of saving report
outputs on your local PC in various formats.
You are able to download outputs in a number of formats, such as simple text format, rich
text format (RTF), Excel, or HTML formats. While you are on the list output, you may
save the list output on your local PC by following the menu path List à Save/Send à File.
Figure 5.12: Saving List Output
The dialog box appears as shown in Figure 5.13.
5.4 Downloading List Output

Figure 5.13: Save List in File
Choose the appropriate option in which you want the output to be downloaded. There are
a number of possible formats.
The unconverted format lets you store the output in a simple text file. Choosing this option
will display the dialog shown in Figure 5.14.
NOTE: For downloading ALV in Excel etc. refer to the chapter ALV Outputs.
Figure 5.14: Storing Output in Text File
You may then enter a suitable file name and choose a suitable directory, for example, the
Desktop. By default, the SAP work directory appears in the Directory field. Enter a
suitable file name in the File Name field, such as “text.txt”.
Figure 5.15: Entering TXT File Name
Next, click the Generate button. The message will appear showing the number of bytes
transferred to the local PC, i.e., the size of the file.
Figure 5.16: Number of Bytes Transferred
The text file is a simple unformatted file.

Moreover, your ABAP list with its various columns may also be downloaded in the Excel
format. In this case, choose the Spreadsheet option shown in Figure 5.13.
This will display a dialog box shown earlier. Enter a suitable name in the field as shown in
Figure 5.17.
Figure 5.17: Saving as Excel File
An Excel file is created on the Desktop and may be viewed later.
You can also download the ABAP list output in HTML format. Or you may choose the
Rich Text format (RTF) by choosing the relevant options shown.
If a file by that name already exists, then choose the Replace button in order to replace the
file with your new data.
For quick execution of frequently used programs, SAP also allows you to create shortcuts
on the desktop of your PC. This functionality provides many advantages to users:
·        Instead of searching for programs or remembering transaction codes, the users may
simply double-click the shortcut on the desktop. This saves users’ time by letting them
quickly execute their most used transactions or programs.
·        You may create as many shortcuts as you like.
·        The shortcut only allows authorized users to execute the program or transaction in
question. If no connection to SAP exists, the system first verifies the user name and
password before allowing access to the transaction.
To create shortcuts, follow the steps shown below:
·        Select an item from the SAP Easy Access Menu (or from the Favorites) and right-click
to access the context menu as shown in Figure 5.18.
5.5 Desktop Shortcuts for Programs/Reports

Figure 5.18: Context menu of a Menu Node
·        Choose the option Create shortcut on the desktop. A message Shortcut created on the
desktop is displayed.
Figure 5.19: Message of Shortcut Creation
A shortcut then appears on the desktop with an SAP icon as shown in Figure 5.20.
Figure 5.20: Desktop Shortcut
To execute the given program or transaction, simply double-click on the shortcut. The
relevant transaction screen will appear if you are already logged into the system. In case
you are not, you are asked to enter your user ID and password before going to the
transaction.
This chapter outlined how to execute reports and save outputs on your PC. With the
information provided, you should now be able to identify the different formats that can be
used to display reports, execute reports in Background Mode, save lists and other outputs
to your PC, and use desktop shortcuts for programs and reports.
Summary of Chapter 5

Chapter 6
Mastering Selection Screens
This chapter will focus on selection screens and the various ways that you can make
them more efficient and useful. I will discuss, in detail, the important concepts related to
typical report selection screens within the SAP arena. The following topics will be
covered:
·       Components of Selection Screens, including checkboxes, radio buttons, and single
value input fields.
·        Selection Criteria (Options) or Ranges, including how to specify multiple single
values and ranges and how to enter mass data on a program screen.
·        Selection Screen Variants, including how to retrieve, create, change, and delete
Variants.
This chapter will enable the reader to master the various elements of a typical selection
screen and will ensure a more user friendly and efficient working experience. It will
answer such questions as:
·       How can I define my selection criteria?
·       How can I copy values from the clipboard and paste them into the SAP selection
screen?
·       What are the advantages of Variants?
There will be examples and screen shots to guide you in the process of mastering the
various concepts within the selection screens.

In this section, I will cover the details of a typical report Selection Screen (and screen
elements) that you may encounter within the SAP arena. 
A typical selection screen for programs is shown in Figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: Selection Screen
There may be a number of blocks within a selection screen. Each block is comprised of
input fields that can allow either single value input fields or ranges known as Selection
Options. In addition, you may have radio buttons and checkboxes on the screen.
NOTE: On a selection screen, you may have input fields that are mandatory,
meaning the program will not execute until the field(s) is (are) filled with appropriate
data. The required field appears with a tick mark in it as shown in Figure 6.2.
Figure 6.2: Mandatory Input field
You enter the data on the screen and then choose the Execute button. Alternately, you may
press “F8” to execute the report based on your selection criteria. In case you need to enter
data in a required (mandatory) single input or range field, an error is issued as shown in
Figure 6.3.
Figure 6.3: Error
6.1.1 Checkbox
A typical checkbox is shown in Figure 6.4.
Figure 6.4: Checkbox
6.1 Selection Screen Components: An Overview 

For example, you may have an Output Log checkbox. This may, by default, be On or Off.
The program executes and displays results based on the checkbox condition specified. For
example, if you have an Output Log checkbox as shown in Figure 6.4, it will display the
Log only if the checkbox is selected. A screen can contain a number of checkboxes, and
these are all independent of each other. You may check all of the checkboxes or choose to
leave them all unchecked.
Within the screen, you may also have a Test run checkbox. These are typical of programs
that update the database. If you have Test run on, all the results will be generated (in
simulation mode) and calculated, but it will not be posted to the database.
6.1.2 Radio Buttons
There are a number of choices available in the case of a radio button. By default, upon the
execution of the report, one of the choices will be checked. You may then decide which of
the other choices to select. The radio buttons are in groups, and only one radio button
choice within a group may be selected. A screen may contain a number of radio button
groups.
6.1.3 Single Value Input Fields
Single Value or Parameters are single input fields that do not allow you to specify range
(as shown in Figure 6.5).
Figure 6.5: A Single Value Input Field
A single field may take numbers, texts, and dates as input. If a single input field is left
blank, only the data pertaining to the blank value of that field will be displayed.
Based on a radio button selection or a checkbox, it is possible that input fields may
become visible or invisible, or they may be enabled or disabled. For example, if you have
an input field linked to the radio button option Layout for Remun Statement, it may be
possible that the given field is only enabled when the relevant radio button option is
selected.
Figure 6.6: Radio Button Option
You may have an F4 search help associated with a single input field for possible values.
For example, in the case of a date, you may use “F4” to choose an appropriate date.
Note: At any time, you may access the F1 help/information for an input field.
6.2 Selection Criteria (Options) or Ranges 

One of the most important elements that may exist within a selection screen is the
Selection option or criteria — also termed as Ranges. This allows you to enter a range of
values that are to be read from the database. If used wisely, it can greatly reduce the work
of the user as well as the load on the system. It can also improve the system’s
performance.
NOTE: For selection criteria, F1 and F4 helps are also available.
A typical selection option is shown in Figure 6.7.
Figure 6.7: Selection Criteria
There are two input fields on the selection screen (a Low and High field) as well as an
Extension (arrow button) on the right.
There are many options available to you in order to define your criteria. These options
include entering single values, one range, or multiple ranges within the input fields. You
may also keep the field blank by not entering any data. If the field is left blank, all entries
will be fetched from the database. For example, if you enter a report on the personnel
number 000001, the report will only show the data of that employee. Keeping the
personnel number blank will display all employees.
In its simplest form, the selection criteria allow you to enter a range as well as single
values. For example, if you enter the date range 01.01.2011 and 31.12.2011, the system
will show all records falling between 1 January 2011 and 31 December 2011. On the other
hand, if we enter 01.01.2011 in the first input field and leave the second input field blank,
only records that are valid at 01.01.2011 will be shown. If the two input fields are left
blank, all data will be shown regardless of what dates they belong to.
6.2.1 Specifying a Single Value or Range
The ranges may accept input in the form of numbers or dates as well as character fields
such as names.
The selection criteria (or ranges) have a number of selection options attached for each
input field. To display the various selection options and signs applicable, keep the cursor
on the input field and double-click. The various selection options appear.
Depending on the type of input field as well as the value entered before the double-click,
ten selection options may appear. These selection options are listed in Figure 6.8 along
with their meanings.
Selection Option
Meaning 
Not Equal To
Less Than

Greater Than
Less Than or Equal To
Greater than or equal to
Equal To
Pattern
Exclude Pattern
Range
Outside Range
Figure 6.8: Selection Options
The above options are used with two available signs, namely Include and Exclude. On the
selection options dialog, you may use the
button to switch on the Include sign,
whereas the
button is used for specifying the Exclude sign. When the
Exclude sign is on, the various selection options will appear red in color.
Here are some examples that will help clarify the usage and explore the power of selection
criteria.
·        Specifying Number Ranges: Suppose you have a range for employee numbers that you
need to enter and you want to specify them on an interval of numbers between 1 and
100. To do this, simply enter “1” in the lower field and “100” in the upper field as
shown in Figure 6.9.
Figure 6.9: Selecting Numbers 1 to 100
On the other hand, there are a number of options available to deselect employees from
1 to 100. This means include all employee numbers except for those falling within the
range of 1 to 100. One option for this is to use the Outside Range selection option. To
do this, enter the values “1” and “100” in the lower and upper fields respectively, and
then double-click the lower range field. The screen appears as shown in Figure 6.10.
 
 
 
 

Figure 6.10: Selection Options
Choose the option Outside Range and press “Enter”. The field will then appear as
shown in Figure 6.11.
Figure 6.11: Selecting All Outside Range
This will exclude employees from 1 to 100 from the selection.
Alternately, from the pop-up shown in Figure 6.10, you may press the Exclude from
Selection option, choose the Range option, and press “Enter”. The field will then
appear as shown in Figure 6.12.
Figure 6.12: Exclude all numbers from 1 to 100
·        Specifying Patterns. In case you have a name range field and you want to select all
names starting from P, you can do so by specifying “P*” in the lower input field, as
shown in Figure 6.13.
Figure 6.13: “P*” entered in Input field
If you need to ignore all names starting from P, enter “P*” in the lower input field and
then double-click on the field to display the selection options as shown in Figure 6.14.

Figure 6.14: Selection Options
Select the Exclude Pattern option and press “Enter”. The input field will then look like
the one shown in Figure 6.15.
Figure 6.15: Input Field
Another way to eliminate all names starting with P is to click the Exclude from
Selection button and then choose the option Pattern. The input field should look like
the one shown in Figure 6.16.
Figure 6.16: Eliminating “P”
In the above-mentioned ways, you may exclude all names starting from P.
·        Ignoring Blank Spaces. To ignore all blank spaces, double-click on the lower input
field. The options appear as shown in Figure 6.17.

Figure 6.17: “Not Equal to” Option
Select the ≠ (Not Equal to) option, and click the Save button. The input field will then
look like the one shown in Figure 6.18.
Figure 6.18: Input Field
This ensures that blank values are not used in the selection criteria.
·        Specifying Date Selection. Suppose you have a date field range and you need to
specify all dates but ignore the date 01 December 2012. You must select the Not Equal
to option and specify the date 12/01/2012 in the lower input field, as shown in Figure
6.19.
Figure 6.19: “Not Equal To” Option
Likewise, if we need to specify that all dates greater than or equal to 01/01/2013 must
be fetched, select the ≥ (Greater than or Equal to) option as shown in Figure 6.20.
Figure 6.20: “Greater than” Option for Dates
6.2.2 Multiple Selection Specifications and Other Available Options
Selection options have a number of other advanced options. You may enter a simple range
(or a number of ranges), or you may enter a single value or a number of single values that
are to be selected. In addition, you may specify any range of values or single values that
are to be excluded from the selected or displayed data. Let us discuss them in detail.
Selection options allow you to:

·        Enter one or more single values that need to be in the selection criteria.
·        Enter one or more range values that are to be included in the selection.
·        Specify one or more single values that are to be excluded from the selection.
·        Specify a range of values that are to be excluded from the selection.
To enter multiple single values and/or ranges, click the
button next to the selection
criteria. The screen appears as shown in Figure 6.21.
Figure 6.21: Values/Ranges to be Included and Excluded
6.2.2.1 Specifying Multiple Single Values and Ranges
Within the dialog box (shown in Figure 6.21), you may enter a number of single values
and ranges that you would like to include or exclude in your selection. There are four tabs,
namely, Select Single Values, Select Ranges, Exclude Single Values, and Exclude Ranges.
Suppose you have a number field and you need to see the data for all numbers ranging
from 1 to 1000 and from 3000 to 4000, and also the two numbers 2005 and 2008.
However, you want the numbers ranging from 50 to 65 to be omitted from the selection. In
this case, three tabs in the Multiple Selection screen must be filled in as follows: The range
“1”- “1000” and “3000” – “4000” will be entered on the Ranges tab.
On the Single tab, you will enter the two numbers “2005” and “2008”. To omit the
numbers from 50 to 65, you should enter the range “50” – “65” on the Exclude tab.
6.2.2.2 Entering Mass Data on Program Screen
Apart from the entry functions, a number of other important functions are supported on the
Multiple Selection screen. Let us discuss them one by one.
Most SAP programs involve the entry of input data by the user. There may be situations
when the data to be entered into a certain screen field resides in files stored on your PC.
These files may be comprised of a large number of records, whose manual entry may lead
to considerable loss of time.
This section will explain some of the tips and tricks used to enter such data. There are two
approaches involved: copying data using the memory clipboard and accessing the data
directly from a text file. These are discussed below:
 
 

·        Copying Values from the clipboard. A quick and easy way to enter values is to first
copy them into the clipboard memory and then paste them into the SAP selection
screen.
From Microsoft Word or Excel, select the column of values that are to be entered using
the “CTRL+C” keys. You may also copy data from other SAP screens or lists using the
“CTRL+Y” and “CTRL+C” keys.
Click the
button next to the field in which the file values are to be entered. This will
display the Multiple Selection screen as shown in Figure 6.22.
Figure 6.22: Multiple Selection Screen for Field Personnel Number
On this screen, click the
button. The values stored in the clipboard are pasted into
the Single Values column of the screen field.
·        Copying Values directly from a Text File. You may also copy values directly from a
text file stored on the hard drive of your PC.
On the Multiple Selection screen, click the
button. A dialog box appears as shown in
Figure 6.23.
Figure 6.23: Entering from a Text File
Select the file and click the Open button. This populates the selection screen with the
values stored in the file. In case the data residing in the file is not in an appropriate
format, an information dialog is generated as shown in Figure 6.24.
 
 
 
 
  

Figure 6.24: Conversion Error Dialog
Variants are simply defined as the (stored) set of input values for a given field. In a case
where you need to run a report involving a large number of input fields that you do not
want to memorize, you may choose to read from the stored set of input values provided by
the Variant. This is beneficial in that it will relieve the user from the burden of entering the
values over again.
NOTE: Variants store all inputs specified on the selection screen, including radio
button options, checkboxes, and the single and range input fields.
Variants provide the following advantages: 
·        Saves time by storing the values that are to be entered for a given set of fields on the
user screen.
·        Instead of hard-coded values assigned to fields, you may also have the option of
setting dynamic values, such as the value of system date, etc.
·        You may also make fields mandatory or invisible depending on user settings.
·        Variants also store the signs and selection options of any range of input fields. 
The user may change the values retrieved from the selected Variant, and a number of
Variants may be defined for a particular report. You may name them according to the area
for which they are applicable or for the frequency with which they are run. For example,
you may name a Variant “Monthly” and “Yearly” to denote the yearly or monthly
execution of a report.
In the next sections we will take a close look at how Variants are defined and retrieved.
6.3.1 Retrieving Variants 
To access a given Variant, proceed as follows:
·        From the program selection screen, choose the menu option Variants à Get Variants.
Alternately, you may choose the keys “Shift+F5” shortcut or click on the 
 button on
the application toolbar (the button appears if at least one variant exists). The dialog
6.3 Selection Screen Variants

appears as shown in Figure 6.25.
Figure 6.25: Variant Directory
You may then choose from the list the Variant that you would like to retrieve. In case you
have a number of Variants defined by a number of users, a dialog box appears in which
you can enter your user ID in the Created By field and then choose the  button to display
the Variants defined by you (see Figure 6.26).
Figure 6.26: Find Variant
You may then choose the Variant you are interested in.
6.3.2 Creating Variants
Tor create Variants, go to the selection screen of the program, enter the values in the
appropriate fields that you wish to save in Variant form, and click the Save button. This
leads you to the Variant Attributes screen as shown in Figure 6.27.
For each input field on the selection screen, a row appears on the Variant attributes screen
(see the Objects for Selection Screen table in Figure 6.27). A number of checkboxes
appear for controlling the field behavior. You may set the appropriate values for the
checkboxes of the fields shown on the report selection screen in order to get the desired
result.

Figure 6.27: Variant Attributes
Enter a Variant name and meaning in the fields provided. If you do not want the Variant to
appear when the program is executed in Online/dialog mode, check the indicator Only for
Background Processing. If you do not want the Variant to be changed by any users, make
sure the Protect Variant checkbox is selected. Then you need to fill the Objects table, the
most important fields of which are shown below:
·        Field Name. This is the long text of the input field that appears on the selection screen.
·        Protect Field. If the Protect Field indicator is checked for a particular field, input is not
allowed for the given field. All input fields that have this checkbox selected appear as
grey fields when the relevant Variant is used.
·        Hide Field. This may be used to hide or make fields invisible that are not meant for
display. Your screen may consist of a number of unwanted fields, and you may hide
them as you wish.
·        Save Field Without Values. In case you want to ignore a particular field or fields during
Variant selection and retrieval, you can save Variants without any values for the fields
by clicking this indicator. For example, if you have a Date field on the screen and you
check the Save Field without Values indicator, upon retrieval of the Variant, the value
entered in the Date field on the screen is not affected.
·        Mandatory. This will ensure that when the current Variant is selected, the respective
field will appear as a required field.
NOTE: Dynamic Specifications of Values — An important functionality exists
within the Variant creation. Instead of hard-coded values, the system lets you define
values dynamically based on certain variables. For example, you may set the value of
a given input field as the system date or the first day of the next month. In this case,
the system will calculate the date according to the current month and year and display
it in the relevant field.
Let us see how we can specify in the Variant that a date field should always display the
first day of the next month in which the program is executed. This will require a few
additional steps. 
Keep the cursor on the column Selection Variable and press “F4”. From the values

displayed, choose “D” denoting “Date”. This will fill the Selection Variable column for
the relevant fields with “D”.
Next, select the F4 help of the Name of Variable field and choose the option “First Day of
Next Month”. Your Variant attributes screen will look like the one shown in Figure 6.28
for the given input field.
Figure 6.28: Name of Variable
NOTE: The three fields will appear grey but will accept input.
6.3.3 Changing and Deleting Variants
To delete Variants, you may choose the menu path Delete à Variants and click on the
appropriate row that needs to be deleted.
You may simply change a given Variant by choosing the Variant using the menu path
Variants à Get or using keys “Shift+F5”. This will populate the selection screen fields
with the values stored in the selected Variant. Make your changes, and then choose the
Save button. You will then be taken to the Variant Attributes screen. You may then save
changes made to the Variant. A dialog box will appear (see Figure 6.29) confirming the
overwriting of the Variant in question.
Figure 6.29: Overwrite Variant
This chapter discussed the various options available to enhance your work experience with
selection screens. By implementing the use of Variants, understanding how to specify
single values and ranges, and mastering such components as radio buttons and single
value input fields, the user should find working with selection screens to be easier and a
more efficient use of time.
Chapter 6 Summary

Chapter 7
ALV Displays
Since Release 4.6, SAP has empowered the reporting capability by providing users with
the ALV data displays. The ALV data displays provide a variety of important functions to
the user.
ALV will display data in either full-screen design or without it. I will begin with an
explanation of both types, and then I will move on to cover the details of the various
functions provided in ALV. The following topics will be covered:
·        ALV Displays, including selecting a given column, moving columns using the mouse,
and freezing columns.
·        Toolbar Functions Available, including sorting (ascending and descending),
navigating left and right, filtering data, calculating totals and subtotals, and changing
views.
·        Excel Downloading, in order to save displayed data on desktop.
·        Managing Layouts, including change of column sequence and hiding them, if
necessary.
This chapter is meant to help the user become comfortable while working within the
ALV format. It will answer such questions as:
·       What are my options for different views available in ALV?
·       How can I download my data into Excel?
·       What are the typical functions available to me in various modes of ALV?
Along the way, there will be examples and screen shots to make operating within ALV as
easy and straightforward as possible.
ALV or SAP/ABAP List Viewer is a format for displaying data in reports. This format
has a number of toolbar functions as well as menu options and context menu functions to
assist you when carrying out useful tasks. Mastering all of these functions will help you
achieve your goals in less time.
7.1 ALV Displays: An Overview 

There are two types of ALV displays, namely a Full-screen display and a Container
display that is not full screen (this mode is used for ALV displayed output for SAP
queries).
An ALV Full-screen display is shown in Figure 7.1. The ALV data is displayed on the
entire screen, and the set of ALV functions toolbar is displayed in place of the application
toolbar. The ALV display may also have a header area. In Figure 7.1, the header displays
the date, time, title, or company logo.
Figure 7.1: ALV Full Screen Display
In some cases, each displayed row may have a corresponding checkbox for selecting any
number of rows that you desire. You are also able to carry out certain actions by choosing
an appropriate toolbar button. In some cases, an ALV may also have editable columns for
taking input from user, but this is very rare.
An ALV may contain data columns comprised of numbers, amounts, text, and dates, as
well as icons or symbols, such as traffic signals denoting the status of a record as shown in
Figure 7.2. You may have ALV in single-line and multiple-line formats.
Figure 7.2: Signal Icons Displayed as Columns
There may also be a hotspot displayed within a list column. Clicking the hotspot may take
you to the details screen for the column in question.
A list may also have key figures displayed in blue as shown in Figure 7.3.
Figure 7.3: Key Fields Displayed in Blue
 Note: In the black and white print book, the blue appears as  dark gray .

Scrolling to the right will make the columns on the left appear invisible, but the key fields
in blue will always remain visible, as they are fixed columns. 
You have the data displayed in the form of a grid, along with a toolbar with a variety of
useful functions. ALV displays may also have additional functions (buttons) specific to the
application in question. The full-screen mode has a number of ALV toolbar functions as
shown in Figure 7.4. The functions listed in Figure 7.4 are only available in the full-screen
mode in a majority of the reports.
Details
Mail
Select All
Save Layout
Deselect All
Change Layout
Sort Ascending
Manage Layout
Sort Descending
ABC Analysis
Filter
Total
Export
Excel Spreadsheet
Figure 7.4: ALV Toolbar Functions in Full-Screen Mode
The ALV provides a number of advantages to the user, some of which are listed below:
·        Unlike typical lists, a variety of powerful functions are supported.  
·        You may download the reports in a number of different formats, such as Excel, Word,
etc.
·        You can reduce (filter) the displayed number of records by specifying filter criteria.
·        Many functions, such as total and subtotals, may be performed on the number and
amount fields.
·        You may change the layout of displayed fields. For example, you can hide columns or
change column positions and move them back and forth.
·        You may also save the changes within the layout in order to use them afterwards.
·        To view details of a particular column or row, you may click on a row or a hotspot
within a column to view details, if applicable.
·        Charts may also be generated on the basis of data displayed.
NOTE: Depending on the mode of the ALV display, the position of the toolbar
may vary. The full screen display has the toolbar at the application toolbar place. In
non-full-screen mode, the toolbar is within the screen details area as shown in Figure
7.5.

Figure 7.5: Non-Full-Screen Mode
7.1.1 Selecting a Given Column or Columns
Before moving forward, let us discuss an important feature of 
ALV that you need to know: selecting columns of your choice. 
To select an entire column in ALV, simply click the column header. This will select the
column and it will appear in a grid as shown in Figure 7.6.
Figure 7.6: Selected Columns “End Date” 
and “Changed By” (in orange)
To select multiple columns, press the “CTRL” key after selecting the first column. You
may then select further columns by clicking on the respective headers. (Make sure the
“CTRL” key is pressed while multiple columns are selected).
7.1.2 Moving Columns and Searching for Values
Within ALV Grids, you have the option of moving columns. The columns displayed in
Figure 7.7 are shown before their positions have been changed.
Figure 7.7: Columns Before Change
You may move the Changed by column to the second position (before Changed on

column) by simply selecting it. Then, while holding the left mouse button down, drag the
column to the left and place it in the second position. The new positions of the columns
are shown in Figure 7.8.
Figure 7.8: New Positions of Columns
Within the column you may search for an entire word, a partial set of characters or a
number value.
For the normal full-screen mode, select a given column and then use keys “CTRL+F” or
use the menu option Edit à Search. You may also use the context menu option Find.
NOTE: For non-full-screen mode, you may have an additional option toolbar
button. For the next occurrence, use the
button.
The dialog appears as shown in Figure 7.9.
Figure 7.9: Searching Terms within a Column
Enter the search term in the dialog box (in our case “testing”).
You may check the Find only entire word or value checkbox if that option is needed. Next,
press “Enter” and the various hits will be displayed in the given column. 
If the Display Number of Hits checkbox is unchecked, the hits are displayed one by one
without the total number of occurrences of the given text in the given column as in Figure
7.10.
 
 
 

Figure 7.10: Search Results Displayed 
Without Total Number of Occurrences
The next hit will be displayed after pressing “Enter”.
If you check the checkbox Display Number of Hits, the hits found will be shown as in
Figure 7.11.
Figure 7.11: Hits Displayed with the 
“Display Number of Hits” Checkbox Selected
With each hit that is displayed, you will be taken to the respective cell that has the match
in it.
7.1.3 Freezing Columns
In any given ALV output, there may be important areas of key fields that you may want to
be visible as you scroll to the right or left within the display. You may therefore freeze one
or more fields of the ALV display. For freezing fields, select the given field(s) and then
right-click to choose the option Freeze to Column (see Figure 7.12).
Figure 7.12: Freeze to Column
All the columns from the beginning (in our case Clt to Airfare) will be frozen. If you need
to unfreeze the columns, right-click anywhere on the ALV output and choose the context
menu option Unfreeze Columns.

NOTE: Copy and Pasting Values from the ALV is very easy. As with other places
within the SAP system, you may also use the “CTRL+Y” keys for Copy and Paste
values data displayed in one or more cells.
In this section, I will take a close look at the various function buttons available in the
ALV toolbar. The typical toolbar displayed in the full-screen mode is shown in Figure
7.13.
Figure 7.13: Full-Screen Mode Toolbar
On the other hand, the toolbar for the non-full-screen mode is shown in Figure 7.14.
Figure 7.14: Non-Full-Screen Mode Toolbar
Let us now discuss how to carry out some simple tasks within ALV. In this section, I will
also provide the corresponding menu options for the toolbar options listed.
7.2.1 Sorting (Ascending and Descending)
You may sort the records in the ALV display either in ascending or descending order. The
two buttons used for this purpose are 
and
respectively.
Select a column whose criteria you need sorted in either ascending or descending order. To
sort in ascending order, click the
button. The list will appear sorted. To sort in
descending order, click the
button.
If multiple columns are to be sorted, click any of the icons again. The dialog box appears
as shown in Figure 7.15.
7.2 Toolbar Functions Available
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 7.15: Dialog Box For Sorting Multiple Columns
Here you may use the 
 button to add any of the fields in the column set (on the right) to
the Sort criteria (or you may simply drag and drop fields to the left). You may then specify
whether Ascending or Descending Sort is applicable to the Sort Criteria columns.
To go directly to the Define Sort Order dialog shown in Figure 7.15, use the menu paths
Edit à Sort in Ascending Order or Sort in Descending Order.
7.2.2 Navigating Left and Right
If you are in the ALV list output mode (discussed in the section 7.2.5.4 “Print Preview/
List Output” ahead), and the columns within the ALV list are more than the visible width
of the screen, you may scroll left and right using the
and
navigation buttons
respectively. 
The key fields/frozen fields will not disappear despite the scrolling. To go to the end of the
list to the extreme right, use the
button. To go to the extreme left, use the
button.
7.2.3 Filtering Data
ALV reporting also gives you the power to filter data according to your own defined
criteria. You may define the criteria using one or more fields (and their values) displayed
in the ALV. For example, if the Salary column is there in your output, you may set the
filter in order to display salaries ranging from $10,000 to $ 20,000.
There are two steps involved when defining Filters:
·        You specify the fields that are to be used for defining the filtering.
·        Then you specify the values for the filter-specific fields.
Simply click the Filter button
on the ALV toolbar. The dialog box appears as shown in
Figure 7.16.
Figure 7.16: Defining Filter Criteria
On the right side, all of the columns appearing in the ALV will be listed. You may select a
field or multiple fields and use the
button to bring them to the left side, thus defining
the filter criteria. You may also drag and drop fields from the right side to the left instead
of using the mouse.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Next, you need to specify values for the filter criteria. For this, click on the
icon shown
at the bottom of the screen. The dialog appears as shown in Figure 7.17.
Figure 7.17: Determine Values for Filter Criteria
A range of selection criteria appears for each input field selected. Enter the values for the
criteria. For more information on the various input options available in filter fields, refer
to Chapter 6 - Mastering Selection Screens.
The data will be filtered according to the defined criteria.
NOTE: For quick definition of filters, simply select the relevant column that you
need to use in the Filter criteria using the column header, and then click the Filter
button on the ALV toolbar. This will take you directly to the screen shown in Figure
7.17.
NOTE: To apply filters in non-full-screen mode, click the 
button to access the
list menu options and choose the Set Filter option from the menu that appears (see
Figure 7.18).
Figure 7.18: Set Filter Option
7.2.4 Calculating Totals, Subtotals, and Averages
If at least a single number, amount field, or quantity appears in the display, the Total
button is visible and enabled on the toolbar. If you want to total a particular column, select
the column by clicking on the column header and then click on the Total
button. This
will total the column, and the totals will appear in yellow as shown in Figure 7.19.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 7.19: Total Displayed for Distance
For non-full-screen mode, the toolbar button is shown in Figure 7.20.
Figure 7.20: Total Button in Non-Full-Screen Mode
This button comes with four functions that are accessed via a list menu. The functions are
Total, Mean Value, Minimum, and Maximum.
To access a particular function, choose the relevant option, such as Minimum, Maximum,
etc. The relevant function will then be applied to the chosen column, and the result will be
shown in yellow as seen in Figure 7.21.
Figure 7.21: Average Value Computed for Distance
In the above figure, the average of the distance is calculated.
Suppose the totaling has been done for an ALV output; you may also compute subtotals.
For the subtotal, you need a column that will be used as the criteria for the subtotal. This
must be a non-numeric column. Select the column and then click on the 
button.
NOTE: Subtotals can only be calculated after totals have been computed and
based on groupings of a non-numeric column.
This will calculate the subtotals as well. In the following figure, the Airline column values
are used as the basis of the Subtotaling.
 

Figure 7.22: Calculating Subtotals
As shown in Figure 7.22, the subtotals of the Capacity column are calculated for the
Airlines. The Airline AA has a subtotal (total capacity) of 742, and AZ has a capacity of
44. Finally, the grand total is shown at the end of the line. The subtotals appear highlighted
in a light yellow color.
You may condense the subtotal details of a particular Airline by clicking the 
 icon.
You may have different views for Subtotals calculation. Choose the menu option Settings
à Define Drill Down Options. The dialog box in our case for Airline subtotals appears as
shown in Figure 7.23.
Figure 7.23: Airline Subtotals Dialog Box
Choose the 1 - Airline criterion and press “Enter”. Your entire display will appear in
condensed form showing only the Capacity totals for each Airline as shown in Figure
7.24.

Figure 7.24: Capacity Totals For Each Airline
To switch back to the expanded form showing all of the data (as shown in Figure 7.22),
choose the 0 - Non-total lines criterion.
7.2.5 Changing Views
One important feature of the ALV is to display your data into different views. In this
section we will discuss three views: Excel Inplace View, Charts View, and ABC
Analysis Function View. We will also discuss how you can display your data in Print
Preview or List Output.
7.2.5.1 Excel Inplace View 
One popular view is the Excel Inplace view. With this, the toolbar is visible but the grid
display is replaced with an Excel view embedded on your SAP screen as shown in Figure
7.25.
NOTE: A setting needs to be switched on for the Excel Inplace to run correctly.
From Excel applications, choose the menu option File à Options. From the dialog box
that appears, choose Trust Center from the left pane. Then, click the Trust Center
Settings button. Make sure Macro Settings are selected from the left pane (see Figure
7.25). On the screen, make sure the checkbox for Trust access to the VBA project
Object Model under the Developer Macro Settings is switched on.
Figure 7.25: Trust Center Macro Settings
For a full-screen mode, once the Excel Inplace view is chosen, the screen display will
change as shown in Figure 7.26.

Figure 7.26: Excel View Shown With ALV Output
7.2.5.2 Generating Charts View 
You may also generate charts and other useful graphics using your choice of the data
displayed in the ALV. By simply selecting different columns, you can generate a variety of
chart outputs for a particular ALV data.
NOTE: Charts may be generated based on the selected columns or after groupings
performed in Subtotal calculation.
To generate charts, simply select the columns that you need to show in graphic form and
then press the
button. (Alternately, you may choose the menu path Viewsà Graphic.) A
new ALV Graphic window will appear showing the chart. You may right-click the chart
and send a print.
Suppose we have calculated the Airline wise subtotal of the Capacity column as shown in
Figures 7.22 and 7.23, and then clicked the
button; the corresponding chart will be
generated as shown in Figure 7.27.
Figure 7.27: Capacity of Airline Subtotals Generated as a Chart
 
 
 
 

7.2.5.3 ABC Analysis Function View 
The ABC Analysis function lets you divide the data into three (or even two) portions.
There are four analysis types available; the most important of which is Key Figure
Percent. This allows you to divide data based on the specified percentages A, B, and C.
The percentage of the A, B, and C may be set. For example, A may be set as 70%, B as
20%, and C as 10%. Part A constitutes the most important part of the data. Part B is less
important. Part C is the least important.  
To carry out the ABC analysis, select the numeric column you are interested in (in our
case, Bookings Total) and click the 
button. This will take you to the screen shown in
Figure 7.28 showing the ABC Analysis results. By default, the Key Figure Percent type is
applicable and the values of A, B, and C are 70%, 20%, and 10% respectively. You may
change the values according to your needs and then press “Enter”.
Figure 7.28 ABC Analysis Results
The lower portion shows the results of the Analysis. The values for A, B, and C segments
we chose divide the list into three parts: 
·        the set of rows which form approximately 70 percent of the entire bookings totals (A
Segment, see Figure 7.28)
·        the set of rows which form 20 percent of the bookings total 
(B Segment)
·        the remaining 10 percent (C Segment)
By default, the list is sorted in descending order, which means that the rows that have the
highest value of Bookings form the Segment A and so on. In case you want to sort the list
in ascending order, click the
button or choose the menu option Edit à Sort.
7.2.5.4 Print Preview/ List Output
 
 
 

In addition to the ALV Grid format, you have the option of displaying the print preview of
the data in ALV list format. For this, click on the 
 button. Alternately, you may use the
menu option List à Print Preview. This will change the output as shown in Figure 7.29.
Figure 7.29: ALV List Format Output
You may send the print from here by choosing the menu option List à Print. For the non-
full-screen mode, you may click the
button to access the available options as shown
in Figure 7.30. Then choose the List Output option.
Figure 7.30: List Output Option
The
button may be used to send a direct print (see Figure 7.30).
7.2.6 Excel Downloading
ALV format lets you download displayed data into a number of formats. A popular
download for users is to save the work in Excel. The steps for Excel download are shown
below.
To download into Excel in the non-full-screen mode, click the
button and choose the
Spreadsheet option from the context menu that appears.
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 7.31: Context Menu in Non-Full-Screen Mode
Next, you will be presented with two options: Table and Pivot table. Choose the option
Table. It will take you to the dialog box as shown in Figure 7.32.
Figure 7.32: Choosing “Excel” Download
You may then be asked to confirm Microsoft Excel as your format. After this, press the
“Enter” button.
NOTE: Any calculated applied filters, totals, and subtotals are simply ignored in
the Excel download. If the list is too long, an error is displayed and no download is
performed.
An Excel window will open and show the data as shown in Figure 7.33.
Figure 7.33: Excel Worksheet
You may also convert data into a Pivot table format. For this, instead of Table option,

choose Pivot table.
7.2.7 Managing Layouts
Apart from other useful functions, you may also change the layout of the fields within the
display. In ALV you may change the sequence as well as hide fields (columns) and save
your layout for the next execution of the report. As already mentioned, you may set the
filters according to the given criteria, sort fields, as well as change the sequence of the
displayed data. The layout includes any added filter as well as gives you the facility of
saving the layout for future use.
To change the layout, click the
button on the toolbar. This will display the Change
Layout dialog box as shown in Figure 7.34.
Figure 7.34: Change Layout Dialog Box
You will be presented with a number of tabs that will allow you to hide certain columns of
your choice or specify the Sort Order and the Filter criteria.
The first tab is for the Displayed Columns (see Figure 7.35).
Figure 7.35: Displayed Columns
On the left side are the columns that are currently displayed. If you wish to hide any
 
 

columns, they must be selected and transferred to the right block labeled Column Set.
NOTE: For the non-full-screen mode, press the 
 button to access the menu.
Then choose the Change Layout option.
Figure 7.36: Change Layout Option
You may select one or more fields using the “CTRL” key and then click the
button to
hide the fields selected. In the Figure 7.35, the Company name and Language Key will be
removed from the display. You may also specify the Sort criteria and the Filter criteria
using the Sort Order and Filter tabs respectively. When you press “Enter”, the data will
appear changed according to the changed Layout specifications.
To save the layout for the future, click the
button on the Change Layout popup box.
Alternately, you may use the
button on the ALV toolbar for the non-full-screen mode.
Simply choose this button and click on the Save Layout option.
To load an existing layout, click on the
button. From the list of options, choose the
appropriate layout. If no layouts exists, the message
is displayed. For the
non-full-screen mode, you may use the menu option Select Layout as shown in Figure
7.36.
This chapter discussed the various functions found within the ALV format. With the
information in this chapter, you should now be able to select columns, move columns with
the mouse, and freeze various columns. You should also be comfortable with the toolbar
functions within both the full-screen and non-full-screen modes.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Summary of Chapter 7

Chapter 8
Printing Guide
No matter how paperless an environment becomes, printing remains an important part of
the working life of an SAP user. The purpose of this chapter is to introduce you to the
printing options available within SAP.
This chapter will cover the following important topics:
·       Printing window contents
·       Printing from report selection screens
·       Form Printing
·       Changing the look and feel of print dialog
·       PDF creations from spool requests
·       Print-related problems
Since printing is such an important activity for the SAP user, this chapter will detail how
you can directly print a report out and send the contents directly to the printer. Related to
this, we will have a look at the Print Immediately and Send to Spool request options for
everyday printing.
Some questions that will be answered in this chapter include:
·       How can I print an entire screenshot of my current SAP session?
·       How do I create Spool Requests?
·       What are the different Spool Request Attributes?
·       How can I convert Spool Requests to PDFs?
Throughout the chapter, there will be examples and screenshots to help the reader
understand the printing process. 
A simple way to print the entire screenshot of the current SAP session without
encountering any dialog box is to use the Hard Copy option. This sends the screen’s print
to the default printer of your PC. It will send it directly without asking for any
information. This action takes a snapshot of the entire SAP screen. To choose this
function, proceed as follows:
8.1 Quick Hard Copy  

·        Click the Customizing Layout 
 button on the standard toolbar. The menu will appear
as shown in Figure 8.1.
Figure 8.1: Customizing Layout Menu
Choose the Hard Copy option. This will send a print to the default printer immediately.
To send a print of the SAP screen content, such as a list, a form, or an ALV output, you
may choose the Print option by clicking the
button. Alternately, you may also use the
keys “CTRL+P”.
The dialog box then appears as shown in Figure 8.2.
Figure 8.2: Print Screen List
The important fields on this screen are shown below:
·        Output Device: This is the name of the printer as defined within the SAP system. You
may choose the F4 help to display a list of defined output devices. If you choose LOCL
or LOCAL, your print will be sent directly to the default printer connected to your PC.
8.2 Printing Window Contents
 
 

·        Windows/frontend Printer: This is a dropdown list that allows you to choose from the
printers connected to your PC. Choose a suitable printer from the dropdown list.
·        Number of Copies: By default, this field contains the value “1”. If you would like to
print multiple copies, enter the desired number in this field.
·        Number of Pages: You may also select the number of pages that you require. By
default, the Print all option for Number of Pages is selected. Selecting Print all will
print all the pages of the list or form (no matter if they are 100 or 1000). In case you
want to print only a certain page range of the list or form, select the radio button Print
from Page…to… The From and To page number fields will be enabled as shown in
Figure 6.3. You may then enter the range you desire to print. For example, we printed
pages 1 to 5.
Figure 8.3: Number of Pages to Print
Once all field values are specified, click the
Enter button. If the Print Immediately
setting is on (we will see how this is done in the next section), the job will be sent
immediately to the printer. The message will be displayed as shown in Figure 8.4.
Figure 8.4: Printer Message
However, if we have set the option Sent to Spool, a Spool request will be created and no
immediate output is sent (see message in Figure 8.5). We will see how the attributes may
be set in the next section.
Figure 8.5: No Immediate Output
If you choose the Without Immediate Output option, a Spool request is created and may be
viewed using the transaction “SP02”. Alternately, you may use menu path System à Own
Spool Requests. The screen appears as shown in Figure 8.6.
 
 

Figure 8.6: List of Spool Requests
This will list the entire Spool requests that you have created. Each print job sent without
immediate output is stored here under a unique Spool Number. The type (ABAP list or
forms) is also displayed along with the date, time, and the number of pages included in the
print job. Listed in Figure 8.7 are the various types of Spool requests and their symbols.
Symbol
Type
ABAP List (Report Output)
Smartforms Form Output
Adobe Forms
Figure 8.7: Types of Spool Requests
At the end of the list, you will have lines showing the total number of Spool requests
displayed, as well as the total number of requests for which outputs have NOT been
generated.
You may select a given Spool (or multiple Spool requests using checkboxes) and click the
Print Directly 
 button on the toolbar. This will send the job to the printer and the number
of pages will be printed. However, if you would like to print with some changes in the
spool parameters, you may do so by clicking the Print with Changed Parameters 
button. This allows you to change certain parameters as shown in Figure 8.8.
Figure 8.8: Print Parameters

You may, for example, change the Output device and the number of copies. Moreover, you
may specify the Start Date and Time for printing. When you have entered the appropriate
values, you may click the Print button on the screen (for single values) or Print All button
if multiple Spool requests were selected.
To delete Spool requests manually, you may select the request and then click the Delete
button.
To display the contents of a particular Spool request, select the request and then click the
Display Contents
button. Alternately, you may press “F6” or select the Type symbol of
the given Spool request. The content will then be displayed. You may also download the
content of a Spool request in the form of a text file or a number of other formats (rich text
format [RTF], Excel, or HTML formats), if required. Once the contents are displayed, you
may choose the menu path System à List à Save à File. You may then specify the format
and save the spool content on your local PC.
NOTE: When using the transaction SP02, you may also display output of Adobe
Forms in PDF formats.
On report selection screens, it is also possible to execute and print the output together in
one direct step. For this, choose the menu option Execute and Print as shown in Figure
8.9.
Figure 8.9: Menu Option “Execute and Print”
A Print Dialog will appear and it will look the same as the one shown in Figure 8.2. You
may then specify the settings as usual in order to generate the Spool request.
In addition to reports, the SAP system also allows you to print forms output (both
Smartforms and Adobe forms output). If you try to print forms, you will see the dialog
box shown in Figure 8.10.
 
 
8.3 “Execute and Print” From Report Selection Screen
8.4 Form Printing

Figure 8.10: Form Printing Dialog Box
In addition to the parameters discussed previously, there exist other parameters on the
dialog that are also important. Let us now go through them:
·        Page Selection. The form output may have a number of pages. You may not need the
entire set of pages to be printed. If this is the case, you may specify certain pages or
range of pages from the given output to be sent to the spool system. For example, you
may specify the pages “1, 2, 4-6”.
·        Print Immediately. To send the output to the printer immediately, select the Print
Immediately checkbox. To send Spool requests to the Spooler, uncheck this indicator.
·        New Spool Request. Checking this creates a new Spool request for your form print job.
·        Delete After Output. If this checkbox is on, the created Spool request will be retained
only until the Spool request contents have been printed.
·        Close Spool Request. If this is on, the Spool request created will be closed and no
further print jobs may use it. If this checkbox is not checked, subsequent print jobs may
be added in the spool request and may be printed later all together.
There is a Print Preview button for previewing the output and a direct Print button for
specifying Spool request creation or to print immediately.
NOTE: Spool requests are temporary documents that contain the user’s items that
are to be printed. Each Spool request has a unique number.
In this section, we will see in detail how the default fields displayed on the Print dialog
may be changed. You may add up to 10 additional values to the Initial Screen of the Print
Dialog (shown in Figure 8.2). Let us take a closer look at how this may be done.
On the Print Dialog, click the Properties button. This will lead you to the screen shown in
8.5 Changing the Print Dialog Look and Feel

Figure 8.11.
Figure 8.11: Spool Request Attributes
This screen provides you with a list of Spool request properties (attributes). As already
mentioned, you can transfer up to 10 attributes to the Print Dialog. Let us now discuss
some of the important ones:
·        Time of Printing. As mentioned in the previous section, if the Time of printing is set to
“Immediately” then the document is printed immediately. However, there are also two
other options that may be chosen. These are shown below:
1.      Send to SAP Spooler for now. This setting allows you to prevent sending the
document to the printer immediately. When this setting is chosen, a Spool request is
created that may be viewed later and printed using transaction SP01.
2.     Print Later. This option allows you to print the document at a later date and is time
specific. When you select Print Later a date and time field appears. You may then
fill in appropriate values. This option will not work for documents sent to printers
connected with your PC (frontend printing).
·        Format. This attribute resembles the format in which the ABAP list is to be printed.
You may specify the columns (width) and rows (height) to be printed on a given page.
You may choose an appropriate format using the F4 help of the format field. For
example, 65 rows and 80 columns are used for the format “X_65_80”.

Figure 8.12: Format Attribute
Along with the above-listed attributes, a few more important ones are listed under Output
Options. Let us have a closer look.
·        Delete Immediately after Printing. As the name suggests, this attribute allows you to
delete the created Spool request from the system once the request has been printed.
·        Retention Period. This attribute allows you to specify a period until which the Spool
request is to be retained. After this time, the Spool request will be deleted from the
system and will no longer be accessible via SP01 transaction.
For each of the attributes mentioned, the value may be changed by double-clicking the
attribute in question (see Figure 8.13).
Figure 8.13: Selecting an Attribute
The lower part of the screen will then display the editable attribute along with a possible
set of values. For example, if you select Time of Printing, the editable list box appears as
shown in Figure 8.14
Figure 8.14: Editable Attribute
For the Time of Print attribute, you may choose from the options, “Send to SAP Spooler
Only for Now”, “Print Immediately”, or “Print Later”.
·        New Spool Request. If this indicator is checked, a new Spool request will be created
for the document in question. However, if you would like an existing Spool request
previously created by you to be used, you should uncheck this option.
·        Do not Append Print Jobs. If this value is set to “Yes”, then no further print jobs are
added to the Spool request in question. However, if this value is set to “No”, then the
subsequent print jobs/documents will be added to the current Spool request. This
attribute may be used in conjunction with the New Spool Request attribute. If the
former and the latter are set to “No” then all print jobs may be accumulated in one
Spool request. So from SP01, you may choose one Spool request to print the entire run,
thus saving you time.
Also important is a checkbox that is visible at the end of the screen with the label Show
Selected Print Parameters on Initial Screen (see Figure 8.14). For example, if we select

this indicator for the New Spool Request attribute, the initial dialog will display the given
attribute as shown in the Print Dialog in Figure 8.15.
Figure 8.15: Attribute “New Spool Request” Added
This section will discuss how a PDF file may be generated using a Spool request number
and a standard SAP program RSTXPDFT4. For this, we assume that the Spool request for
the print job has already been created and exists in transaction SP01. You should note
down the number for the given Spool request.
Go to transaction “SA38”. Enter the name of the program RSTXPDFT4 in the Program
field and click the Execute button. The selection screen of the program appears as shown
in Figure 8.16.
Figure 8.16: Selection Screen for Program RSTXPDFT4
Enter the Spool request number in the field shown. Make sure the Download PDF file
checkbox is selected. You may give a suitable path for where the file is to be stored on
your PC.
8.6 Using RSTXPDFT4 Program to Convert Spool Requests
to PDFs

Next, click the Execute button. A Save As dialog box will appear showing the path for
storing the generated file. You may change these values at this stage as well. Finally, click
the Save button.
A log will be displayed regarding the generating of the PDF file from the Spool request.
In this section, we will discuss the typical problems you may face when printing. (There
may be some issues that may be related to the printer settings.) Let us discuss them one by
one.
NOTE: Sometimes, when you try to open transaction Sp01 using the Own Spool
Requests menu option, a dialog box appears stating Maximum number of sessions
reached. If this is the case, close one session and try the transaction Sp01 again.
·        Print Not Sent. A common problem may be that when you try to print, the print is not
sent to the printer. Make sure that the Print Immediately option is set. You may also go
to the transaction SP01 and then check to see whether a corresponding spool request
exists for the corresponding print job. If Print Immediately is set and the print is still
not sent to the printer, you may ask the relevant basis team members for help.
·        Graphics Printed Upside Down for Smartforms. This is a problem with the driver of
your printer. Let your administrator know and ask him or her to install the correct
driver for your printer.
·        Short Dump appears saying Spool Buffer Full. If this problem occurs, the most
probable reason is that the spool buffer is full and no more spool requests could be
allocated to your request. This problem can be fixed by the basis team members.
This chapter outlined the Printing Guide for SAP users. With the information provided,
you should now, among other things, be able to print window contents, print from report
selection screens, change the look and feel of print dialog, convert spool requests to PDFs,
and troubleshoot any printing problems that may arise.
8.7 Printing-Related Problems
Summary of Chapter 8

Chapter 9
Creating Your Own Reports
This chapter will focus on SAP Query and the ways in which it will let the user generate
reports based on their own data and particular needs. It places the power in the hands of
the user to generate reports that are tailored to specific needs and purposes. I will discuss,
in detail, the need for creating SAP Queries and how this tool can help you generate your
own reports based on your unique data. The following topics will be covered:
·        Generating Basic Lists, the three types of reports that can be generated, and a step
by step account of how to generate a Basic list
·        Adding Control Levels to your list
·        Adding a Header to your list
·        How to add a footer to a Basic List
Queries are a very diverse and large topic, but in this chapter, I will only cover the topics
that are of interest and of use to a user. This chapter is meant to be a guide for the basic
setup and use of SAP Queries. Some questions that will be answered in this chapter
include:
·       How do I create a Query?
·       What are the three types of reports that can be generated by using SAP Query?
·       How can I add control levels to a Basic List?
Throughout the chapter, there will be examples and screenshots to help the reader gain the
greatest possible understanding of how to generate their own Queries.
The SAP Query is a tool that allows you to generate your own reports based upon data
stored into the SAP system. You do not need to rely on the services of an ABAP developer
for it. You may generate your report output in a number of formats, such as ALV, simple
list, graphics, etc. SAP query also allows you to define your own list of headers and
footers as well as define column headings.
Before creating a Query, there are certain prerequisites that must be created. These
prerequisites include an Infoset and User Group. An Infoset is the data source from
which the data is to be read and displayed in your Query. A user group is the group of
9.1 SAP Query: An Overview

users that can create and change queries of a particular functional area. Both of these must
exist before you can commence your Query.
You may generate three types of reports through the use of SAP Query. The three reports
are Basic List, Statistics, and Ranked Lists. Let us discuss them one by one.
·        Basic List: A Basic List lets you generate simple lists consisting of single or multiple
lines. You may also define list headers. A Basic List with control levels may also be
created for displaying the subtotals based on a certain criteria. With control levels, you
may specify the field(s) based on which list is to be sorted or which totals are to be
calculated.
·        Statistics: In the case of Statistics, you can define statistical values — computed from
a particular set of data. These statistical values include calculated values, such as totals,
percentages, averages, etc. In other words, Statistics is a summarized form of a larger
set of data. For example, you may generate a Statistics report based on Airline Codes or
Department Names. 
·        Ranked List: Ranked List is a list that is sorted according to the value of a computed
Statistical value. For example, Statistical value such as a Ranked List with top 20
average values.
In this section, I will discuss the detailed steps required to create a Basic List through the
SAP Query tool.
NOTE: We will print a list of airline data that will be comprised of the columns
Airline code, Flight Number, Plane Type, and the Total Booking Amount of a Flight
with relevant currency. We will assume that the Infoset and the User group are also
created.
In order to generate a Basic List using SAP Query, proceed as follows:
·        Call transaction “SQ01”. The screen appears as shown in Figure 9.1.
9.2 Generating Basic Lists

Figure 9.1: Generating a Basic List
Make sure that the correct user group is chosen. To go into the correct user group,
choose the menu path Edit à Other User Group. A dialog box appears showing the
various User Groups. Select the appropriate group and click the
button. This
will bring you back to the screen shown in Figure 9.1 but with the title including your
chosen User Group. 
·        Enter a suitable name for your Query in the field provided and choose Create. A
dialog box appears as shown in Figure 9.2.
Figure 9.2: Infoset Selection
·        Select a suitable Infoset as shown (in our case, /SAPQUERY/DEMO_FLIGHTS), and
press “Enter”. The screen appears as shown in Figure 9.3.
 
 

Figure 9.3: Entering Title and Description
·        On the screen that appears, enter a suitable Title in the field provided. You can also
define a suitable output format at this time. You may choose the default output format,
such as SAP List Viewer, the simple ABAP list, Graphics, etc. You may also specify
the Lines and Columns of the output in case the ABAP list is selected.
Then, click the Next Screen
button (or press “F6”). This takes you to the screen
shown in Figure 9.4.
Figure 9.4: Selecting Field Groups
·        On this screen, you will be selecting the Field Groups that you need to use. Start by
choosing the Field Groups that you are interested in. In the example shown, we have
chosen the Flight Data and Plane groups. After you have chosen the Field Groups,
click the Next Screen button to go through to the screen in Figure 9.5.
 
 

Figure 9.5: Choosing Fields
Choose the fields of your choice out of your chosen groups (you may use the Page Up
and Page Down buttons to view the various fields available). In this step, you will
choose all fields that you are interested in, either as a selection parameter or an output
field. Once you are done, click the Next button. This leads you to the screen shown in
Figure 9.6.
Figure 9.6: Selection Screen Fields
·        The next step allows you to specify the fields that are included in the selection screen.
On this screen, you will see all of the fields selected in the previous step. Use the
checkbox to select the desired fields. In the example, we have chosen Airline Code. If
you would like to change the label of the selection field on the screen, you may select
the respective field using the checkbox indicator and press “Enter”. The Selection text
for the respective field will then be editable and you may change the text as needed. As
shown in Figure 9.6, I have changed the text of the Airline Code to Airline ID. Once
you are done with this step, click the
button. This will take you to the screen
shown in Figure 9.7.
 
 

Figure 9.7: Basic List Definition Screen Without Graphical Painter
·        Now you need to define the appearance of the Basic List. For single line Basic List,
enter “01” in the Line number for all fields. For fields that you would like to define in
the second line, enter “02” for the corresponding column. Moreover, you need to define
the column sequence according to your requirements. I have defined the sequence
shown in Figure 9.7. If you would like particular field values to be sorted, you may fill
in the Sort field. Also, for the Total of current bookings field, a Total checkbox is
visible. If you would like the total of this column to be displayed at the end of the
output, switch on the checkbox and then choose the Next Screen.
You may switch off the Graphical Painter by choosing the menu path Settings à
Settings. The dialog box appears as shown in Figure 9.8.
Figure 9.8: Switching the Graphical Painter On or Off
You may switch off the graphical painter by unchecking the Graphical Query Painter
checkbox.
If you choose a graphical screen option, the Basic List definition screen appears as
follows:
Figure 9.9 Basic List Definition Screen

Figure 9.10: Left Side of Pane in Graphical View
Select the Field’s checkbox to include them in the output. The preview appears on the
right side of the pane as shown in Figure 9.11.
Figure 9.11: Report Preview
Finally, save and run your Query using the Test button. The screen appears as shown in
Figure 9.11.
Figure 9.12: Report Selection Screen
The Query output on the chosen ALV format looks like the one shown in Figure 9.12.

Figure 9.13: ALV Report Output With Grand Total
The ABAP list form of report for this is shown in Figure 9.14.
Figure 9.14: ABAP List Output
Also, if you have chosen a graphic output (pie chart output), it will look like the one
shown in Figure 9.15.
Figure 9.15: Pie Chart Output
9.2.1 Adding Control Levels to your List
Once you have generated your Basic List, you can add Control levels (based on Sorted
columns) to your list. You may then specify if the amount totals or total number of rows is
to be calculated, or whether descending sorting applicable is based for the sorted column

values. 
NOTE: We will modify our list that was defined in the previous section to print
subtotals of the bookings total of each Airline Code along with the Overall total. This
will create separate totals for each airline (AA, DL, etc.).
I copied the Z_FLIGHT query that was created and named it Z_FLIGHT_CONT. An
important step in defining control levels is to define the relevant field as a Sorted field in
the Basic List definition. On the Basic List screen, we will specify “1” in the Sort field for
the Airline Code as shown in Figure 9.16.
Figure 9.16: Define Basic List
Press the Next button, or follow the menu path Goto à Basic List à Control Levels (see
Figure 9.17).  
Figure 9.17: Menu Path
This will take you to the Control Levels screen, part of which is shown in Figure 9.18.
Figure 9.18: Control Levels Screen
Since our requirement is to calculate the total (or actually the subtotal) based on the
Airline code, we will check the Total indicator as shown. 
When you run the report, the output will then be shown in Figure 9.19. Each airline total is
displayed. 

Figure 9.19: Airline Totals
9.2.2 Adding a Header and Footer to the Basic List 
A useful function provided by SAP query is the ability to add headers and footers to your
list. In order to add a header and footer, proceed as follows:
·        On the Basic List definition screen, choose the menu path Goto à Basic List à
Headers. The screen will then look like the one shown in Figure 9.20.
Figure 9.20: Adding a Header and Footer
·        On top, you will find an area where we can specify the Page header (I specified it as
“Our Report Header”). At the lower part of the window is an area where we can specify
the Page Footer. I have specified it as “Our Page Footer”.
The final output with the header and footer defined in ABAP list format is shown in
Figure 9.21.
Figure 9.21: Final Output with Header and Footer
To change the column header of a particular field, double-click the respective column
header under the defined header of the report on the screen shown in Figure 9.20. This
will open the dialog box as shown in Figure 9.22.

Figure 9.22: Changing the Column Header of a Particular Field
For example, I selected the Booking total column as shown in Figure 9.20 and changed the
column header to “Income Total” as shown in Figure 9.22.
The report will then look like the one shown in Figure 9.23.
Figure 9.23: Output Report With New Column Header
This chapter outlined the essentials of SAP Query for SAP users. With the information
provided, you should now be able to create reports based on SAP data without the
involvement of ABAP developers. You will also be able to add headers and footers as well
as change the report column labels quickly and easily. Moreover, for data output that
consists of amounts, quantities, or numbers, subtotals and totals may also be generated.
Summary of Chapter 9

Chapter 10
SAP Business Workplace Part 1-
Managing Documents
This chapter will focus on the SAP Business Workplace with a primary emphasis on
managing documents. It will show you the range of possibilities available through the use
of SAP Business Workplace and will outline the basic steps involved in accessing and
using the Business Workplace efficiently. This chapter will cover the following important
topics:
·       Transaction SBWP
·       Creating a new message
·       Using attachments
·       Forwarding documents
·       Creating distribution lists
·       Working with folders and subfolders
·       Searching within folders and subfolders
It should be noted that within this chapter the terms document, mail and message are used
interchangeably to mean any content that is sent to another user through the SAP Business
Workplace. Some questions that will be answered in this chapter include:
·       How do I access the Business Workplace?
·       How do I send mail through the Business Workplace?
·       What is a distribution list and how is it created?
Throughout this chapter, there will be examples and screenshots to help the reader gain the
greatest possible understanding of how to utilize the SAP Business Workplace.
The Business Workplace (transaction SBWP) lets you write mails (create documents),
check workflows, and process work items. It is an efficient system that helps the user
manage their ingoing and outgoing documents through the use of folders, subfolders, and
distribution lists.
10.1 Overview of Transaction SBWP 

From the initial SAP screen, you may use the menu path Menu à Business Workplace (see
Figure 10.1). Alternately, you may choose the keyboard shortcut “CTRL+F12”. The direct
transaction for the Workplace is SBWP.
Figure 10.1: Accessing the Business Workplace
The main screen of the Business Workplace transaction is shown in Figure 10.2.
Figure 10.2: Business Workplace
The left pane shows the various folders and areas that exist, namely, Inbox, Outbox,
Resubmission, and so on. Within the right pane there are two portions. The upper portion
displays a list of items pertaining to the folder (folder node) from the left side that is
selected. The list is in ALV format, and it provides an ALV toolbar that has a number of
functions that may be applied to the items displayed. For more information on ALV
functions, refer to chapter 6 - ALV Display Format. 
The details (preview) of the selected item (for example a document) are shown in the
lower part of the right pane.
NOTE: There are Private and Shared Folders within the SAP Business Workplace.
The Shared Folder allows you to have a central storage place where you and many
other users may share or access documents and emails. On the other hand, the private
folders are private to you, and no other user may access it.
Three important folders are as follows:
·        Inbox. As the name implies, the Inbox lists the various documents (both read and

unread mail) as well as workflow work items.   
·        Outbox. The Outbox lists any mail that you have sent and Workflow items executed by
the user or forwarded to another user. 
·        Resubmissions. You may also resubmit workflow work items as well as documents for
a future date. They will appear in the Inbox when the set date comes. The resubmitted
items are shown under the Resubmissions folder.
NOTE: Within the Inbox and Outbox, you may have the Unread Documents,
Workflow, and Documents.
NOTE: The Inbox and Outbox are Private Folders in your Inbox. You may create
additional Private Folders under the Private Folder node.
If you need to see all of the contents of a folder, simply click that particular node. When
you select Inbox in the left pane, you will see the contents of all the subfolders of the
Inbox. If you need to view only Unread Documents or Documents, select that particular
node. For example, the unread documents when selected are displayed in the right pane as
shown in Figure 10.3.
Figure 10.3: Unread Documents
From the Message symbol, you may see whether a message is Read or Unread. You will
also see the Author (sender), the Date received, the title of the message, as well as the
number of recipients to whom the message was sent. The Attachments
symbol in the
attachment column indicates whether an attachment is there or not. If you place the cursor
on this symbol for a particular message, the number of attachments will be displayed.
Selecting a particular Inbox Unread or Read message will display the contents in the lower
part of the right pane as shown in Figure 10.4.
Figure 10.4: Preview of A Message
 
 

You may switch the preview on or off using the Settings à Switch Preview On/Off option
under the menu path. You may double-click a particular message to view the message or
work item in a new window. A typical full-screen document display is shown in Figure
10.5.
Figure 10.5: Full-Screen Document Display
As already mentioned, at the bottom of your received mail, you may have attachments in a
variety of formats. For example, you may have attached files saved as Excel, Word, or text
formats.
If you would like to save an attachment, first right-click the attachment, then choose the
Save As option from the context menu that appears. Then follow the relevant steps.
Let us now see how a simple message may be created. Similar to an email message, your
SAP document also has a subject, a recipient list, and a body of the email with optional
attachments.
To create a new message, click the
button on the application toolbar. The screen
appears as shown in Figure 10.6.
10.2 Creating a New Message
 
 

Figure 10.6: “Create Document and Send” Screen
Enter a suitable Title in the field provided. A full-fledged text editor with a number of
functions, such as Cut, Copy, and Paste, etc. is provided in order to fill in the text of the
email.
Fill in the message text. You may also attach files to your message (we will see how this is
done in the next subsection).
Once you are done, click the Send 
 button. The message that you sent will appear in the
Outbox (under Documents) of the SAP Business Workplace as shown in Figure 10.7.
Figure 10.7: Message in SAP Business Workplace
In the next subsections, we will see in detail how the recipient’s table may be filled in as
well as the way attachments may be linked to messages.
10.2.1 Recipient Portion In Detail
As already mentioned, the recipient portion has a number of important fields. Let us see in
detail the function of each field.
·        Recipient Type. This type determines whether the document is to be sent to an SAP
logon User, an Internet address, an organization, or a distribution list.
·        Recipient. The name of the recipient. If you select the type as SAP logon Name, then

you may enter an SAP user, such as LEARN1 or JONR. If you have an external
address, you may enter an email address, such as abc@gmail.com. You may also
specify a distribution list name. The possible values of the recipient are shown in
Figure 10.8.
Figure 10.8: Recipient Possible Values
·        Express Checkbox. Selecting this option displays an express message dialog box to the
user telling him or her that there is an email in his inbox.
·        Copy Email Checkbox. Checking this indicator sends a copy of the email to the desired
recipient.
·        Blind Copy mail Checkbox. Checking this indicator for a recipient will send the email
as a blind carbon copy to the recipient in question.
10.2.2 Attachments
As with any email message, you may attach any document to the outgoing message. To
attach a file to the email message, simply click the
button on the toolbar of the Create
Document screen.
This will show the dialog shown in Figure 10.9.
Figure 10.9: Attaching a File to an Outgoing Email
You may then browse your desktop and attach the file, such as Word, Excel, or any other
 
 

format, to the message. Repeat this step for each file that you need to attach.
You may also forward documents (you have received) to other users, provided the
forwarding function is enabled on the document in question. To do this, simply select the
document and right-click to access the context menu as shown in Figure 10.10.
Figure 10.10 Forwarding a Document
Then choose the Forward option. This will display the dialog box as shown in Figure
10.11.
Figure 10.11: Dialog Box for Forwarding a Document
Here, you may enter the list of the recipients and the various settings as discussed earlier
in section 10.2.2. When you are done, click the Send button.
10.3 Forwarding Documents

A Distribution List is a collection of email addresses that allows you to email multiple
people at once. Instead of typing each recipient’s contact information again and again, you
may create a distribution list and then simply enter the name of the Distribution List as the
recipient shown in Figure 10.6. A Distribution List may consist of a number of SAP
addresses and users as well as external email addresses. 
To create Distribution lists, click the
button on the toolbar. This will lead
you to the screen shown in Figure 10.12.
Figure 10.12: Distribution Lists Screen
This screen lets you search, display, and create lists that are both shared and private.
NOTE: In addition to mass mail sending, you may also use a Distribution List in
order to share a folder among various SAP users.
To create a new list, choose an appropriate list type (field with label Ty.). For example,
choose Private. Then click the Create button. The screen appears as shown in Figure
10.13.
Figure 10.13: Creating A New List
On the Attributes tab, enter the name of the new list as a title description in the fields
10.4 Creating Distribution Lists
 
 

provided.
To define the content of the lists and listing the various recipients, simply click on the
Distribution List Content tab. This will change the screen as shown in Figure 10.14.
Figure 10.14: Creating a Distribution List
Enter the Recipients in the spaces provided along with the Recipient type and the various
options. Then click on the Save button.
You may create a subfolder in the Private Folders or the Shared Folder areas. Simply
select a folder. Then right-click and choose the Create Subfolder option.
Figure 10.15: Creating a Subfolder
This action will display a screen as shown in Figure 10.16. Now you may move any
document or work item into the created folder. To move a document into a folder, simply
right-click the document and choose the Move option from the context menu.
10.5 Working with Folders and Subfolders

Figure 10.16: Moving a Document
This action will display the dialog box shown in Figure 10.17.
Figure 10.17: Selecting a Folder to Move
Enter the name of the folder to which you would like to move your document. The
document will then shift to the specified folder.
Within the SAP Business Workplace, you may search for folders or documents quickly
and easily. Let us take a closer look.
When searching for a particular folder, click the
button on the toolbar. This will
display the dialog box shown in Figure 10.18. 
Figure 10.18: Folder Selection
You may enter either a folder name or a folder title. You also have the option of searching
within the Private or Shared Folder areas. For example, if you want to search all folders
that have the word “scripts” in the title, you should enter *script* in the title field as
shown in Figure 10.18. The system will then show you the first folder that matches the
10.6 Searching for Folders and Documents
 
 

entered search criteria as shown in Figure 10.19.
Figure 10.19: Folder Matching Search Criteria
In addition to folders, you may also search for documents using certain search criteria. To
search for documents, click the 
button. This will take you to the dialog box
shown in Figure 10.20.
Figure 10.20: Search Range for Documents
Here, you can specify whether you want to search within the Private or Shared Folders.
For the Private folders, you may specify whether you would like to search within the
Inbox or Outbox, etc.
Next, enter the suitable search criteria in the Attributes section provided. You may, for
example, specify the search string within the Document title or search by entering the
creator of the document’s name. You may also search for a document changed within a
given date range. For example, Figure 10.20 shows the criteria entered for searching
documents changed between the dates July 11, 2011 and October 9, 2011 containing the
word “completion” in the document title. Once you press “Enter”, the relevant documents
are displayed in the top area of the right pane.
This chapter discussed the SAP Business Workflow with an emphasis on creating,
 
Summary of Chapter 10

sending, and filing documents. With the information provided, you should now be able to
access the Business Workflow, create a new message, attach documents to outgoing
messages, use folders and subfolders to organize your inbox, and create distribution lists.
In the next chapter, we will discuss how to manage Workflow and Work Items within the
SAP Business Workplace.

Chapter 11
SAP Business Workplace Part 2-
Managing Workflow Work Items
As already mentioned earlier in the book, Workflow is an important SAP functionality.
Work Items are active objects that are generated during workflow execution. They are an
important component of the Business Workplace, as they are executable objects that allow
you to carry out different actions.
In this chapter, we will discuss what users may be required to perform with Workflow
Work Items. We will discuss the various states of a Work Item and the various forms (and
purposes) in which they may appear in your inbox.
This chapter will cover the following important topics:
·       How to view Work Items within your inbox and outbox
·       How to handle a Work Item that has a deadline
·       The various out of office settings
·       Personalization options within the Business Workplace
Some questions that will be answered in this chapter include:
·       How can I create and view Work Items in my inbox?
·       What are the different statuses of Work Items?
·       What are the applicable functions on Work Items?
Throughout the chapter, there will be examples and screenshots to help the reader gain the
greatest possible understanding of how to utilize the SAP Business Workplace.
A Work Item is an executable object that allows you to carry out actions on business
objects, such as Purchase Order, Employee absence, or Notification. In more simple terms,
Work Items are generated as a result of workflow execution. They are active objects that
allow you to complete an activity in the SAP system, such as an Approval work item.
Work Items appear in the Inbox of the Business Workplace mainly under the Workflow
node (and a few other nodes). Your Inbox reflects all work items for which you are a
recipient (or one of the recipients). A typical Decision Work Item is shown in Figure
11.1 Work Items: What They Are and How They Look

11.1.
Figure 11.1: Decision Work Item
Here, you are presented with a number of choices (each of which is represented by a
button) from which you can choose the option you want. You may choose the option Yes I
approve, or No I don’t. If you choose the Cancel option, the Work Item remains in your
inbox for later processing. If the Yes or No options are chosen, the work item disappears
from the inbox.
Other than decisions, Work Items may serve other purposes, such as:
·        Work Items may be used to provide you with notification about an activity that has
taken place.
·        Work Items may require you to perform an action on an object in SAP transaction. In
this case, you may be taken from the Work Item to the necessary transaction. Such
Work Items may be required to explicitly confirm end of processing (or completion) in
order for the workflow to continue further as shown in Figure 11.2. 
Figure 11.2: Confirm End of Processing
·        Deadline Work Items/Messages for indicating that another Work Item has been
overdue.

Depending on the scenario, multiple users may be involved as recipients. In this case, the
Work Item may be present in the Inbox of a number of users. If one user then processes
the given Work Item, the Work Item will disappear from the inbox of the other users. A
Work Item may also contain attachments that may be used in the subsequent steps within
the workflow in question.
Within the Inbox of your Business Workplace, there are four folders that are related to
Workflow work items, namely Workflow, Overdue Entries, Deadline Messages, and
Incorrect Entries.
Figure 11.3: Four Workflow-related Folders
Double-click on the folder whose details you want to view. This will display the details in
the right pane. The view regarding the Work Items is different from that of the documents
as mentioned earlier. When you double-click the Workflow node, the right pane appears as
shown in Figure 11.4.
Figure 11.4: Workflow Work Items in Right Pane
The upper part shows the list of work items (also referred to as the Work List). At the top
is a toolbar that provides a variety of useful functions that may be performed on items.
The items shown in yellow indicate Overdue Items, i.e., the items that are past their date
for completion. The lower part contains the preview of the Work Item in question. This
contains the description of the item and any attachments along with relevant tips and
11.2 Work Items View Within Inbox  

tricks. You may place the cursor on the Tips and Tricks part to fully display the Tip
provided for the selected Work Item. 
Within the Object and Attachments shown within a work item, you may click on the
Object link to view the details of the object in consideration, such as the Purchase Order,
Notification, etc.
The various columns (information) about the Work List items are shown in Figure 11.5.
Figure 11.5: Information about the Work List Items
Let us take a detailed look:
·        Executable. The symbol 
 under the Executable column for a given Work Item
indicates that the Work Item may be executed. Typically, this symbol appears beside
the ones for which your interaction is required.
·        Title. This is the title (heading or subject) of the Work Item, for example, Please
Confirm End of Processing.
·        Status. The status shows the current state (denoted by a symbol) the Work Item is in.
Some of the most important statuses (visible in the SBWP inbox) are shown in Figure
11.6.
Symbol
Status
Meaning
Ready
When a Work Item initially appears in the
Business Workplace, its initial state is Ready.
This means that it can be executed (or
processed). Also, when a Work Item is In Process
status and then the Replace function is applied, it
returns back to the Ready state.
Executed
This is a special status for Work Items that must
be explicitly confirmed. These items have been
executed but not confirmed explicitly.
Reserved
This indicates that you reserve that Work Item. A
reserved Work Item will disappear from the
inbox of other users. Once reserved, a Work Item
may then be replaced by the same user or
assigned by the Workflow administrator to
someone else.
In Process
When you execute or open a Work Item or
execution, it gets the In Process status. Also,
when you open decision Work Items but cancel
them, it will show that they are in process.

Completed
This indicates completion of the work item.
Figure 11.6: Statuses of Work Items
·        Attachment. If an attachment for a Work Item exists, the 
icon under the Attachment
column will appear. 
NOTE: You may also sort all the items according to the column values. For
example, you may sort according to the Title by clicking on Title. The items will be
sorted according to the Title as shown in Figure 11.5.
·        Priority. Each Work Item has a priority that indicates its urgency. This may have a
range value of 1 – 9, with 1 indicating the highest priority and 9 indicating the lowest
priority.
·        Confirmed Explicitly. A flag indicator in this column for a Work Item indicates that the
confirmation (completion) of the Work Item must be done explicitly, meaning the
complete Work Item button will be pressed and then the workflow will proceed further.
NOTE: Apart from the toolbar, you may also right-click on a particular Work Item
in order to access the context menu showing the various supported functions for the
select Work Item.
·        Work Item Overdue. A Work Item may also have a latest end deadline. This is the time
by which the work item will be considered late or overdue if not completed. The
symbol  
 in this column indicates that the work item is overdue.
Over the passage of time, your Work List may become too long, and searching for a
particular Work Item, a type of Work Item, or all Work Items of a particular object ID may
be a challenging task. For this purpose, the Inbox view provides views of three Work Item
Groupings, which are shown in Figure 11.7 (the nodes are also shown in Figure 11.2). If
the user does not want to see all Work Items, he or she can view them according to the
groups shown that are used to restrict the search. Selecting a particular classification with
the various nodes groupings will display the items falling within the grouping in the right
pane.
 

Work Item
Groupings
Meaning 
Grouped
according 
to task
Under this node, further nodes may exist. This
classification is according to the Task text, i.e., the
Workflow task from which the Work Item has been
generated. For example, you may have a group within the
Grouped According to Task by the name of Change
Notification Task or Leave Approval Task.
Grouped
according 
to content
Group according to the object (with ID) in question. For
example, there will be separate nodes under it, 
such as Change 
Notification 
0041 and 
Change
Notification 0042. Selecting the appropriate notification
will display the Work Item in the right pane.
Grouped
according 
to content type
This grouping is based on the content type rather than the
actual content. For example, there may be a node Change
Notification which when double-clicked will display both
the Change Notification 0041 and Change Notification
0042 in the right pane. There will be no separate nodes for
the notifications 0041 and 0042 as in the Grouped by
Content classification.
Figure 11.7: Work Item Groupings
11.2.1 Outbox
In the Outbox, all the workflow related items are under the Started Workflow, Work Items
Executed by me, and Forward Work Items. These list any workflows started by you, the
complete list of work items executed by you, and any items forwarded by you to another
user, respectively.
Figure 11.8: Outbox
The Work Items Executed by me node gives the relevant work items list. The toolbar of the
Outbox also has a variety of useful functions, such as displaying of item detail, sorting,
and filtering.
Figure 11.9: Work Items Executed by You

By default, the last month’s items are shown. However, you may see the status of a day or
week as well. For example, you may choose the
button and access the Today Only or
the Last 7 Days option, whichever is required.
Figure 11.10: Items from Various Time Periods
11.2.2 Deadline Messages
For many Work Items, there may be a deadline set for the latest completion of the work
item. Once this time has elapsed, special Deadline Messages for Work Items are issued. If
you are defined as a recipient of such a message, you will receive a deadline message.
These deadline messages must be set as completed explicitly via the option Set to Done.
When you execute the Work Item, the Set to Done option appears as a toolbar button
(discussed in section 11.3). Also, you will find a Monitored Work Item button that will
allow you to get information from the overdue Work Item.
NOTE: Once you complete a Work Item that was sent to you and other users, it
will disappear from your inbox and from the inboxes of the other users. Until they are
completed, they may be in the “In Process”, the “Executed”, or the “Reserve” status.
In all of these statuses, no other user may execute the Work Item until the “Replace”
operation has been carried out.
In this section, I will discuss the various functions that may be performed on Work Items. 
·        Setting a Work Item to “Done”. As already mentioned, for certain Work Items,
including Deadline Work Items, you must explicitly confirm completion. This may be
done by first selecting the relevant work item and then clicking the Other Functions 
 button from the toolbar and choosing the option Set to done.
Figure 11.11: Set Work Item to “Done”
 
 
11.3 Functions Applicable On Work Items

NOTE: Since there is no auto-refresh in the workplace, after carrying out any
function on work items, use the Refresh 
 button in the toolbar to get the newest
state of the Work List.
·        Creating a Link. You may create a link to an item within a folder or a subfolder within
a folder. These folders may be private or shared. To do so, select the Work Item and
then choose the Environment 
 button. From the options that appear, choose Create
Link.
Figure 11.12: Create Link
The Folder Selection dialog box appears as shown in Figure 11.13.
Figure 11.13: Folder Selection
You may then specify the name of the shared or private folder where the link of the
Work Item is to be created.
Suppose we store it in the Private folder. After specifying the folder name as shown,
the link will be created in the private folder.
·        Changing priority of a Work Item. You may also change the priority of a Work Item
(as is the case with a document). To do so, click the Other Functions button 
 after
selecting the item. From the options, choose Change Priority option. The dialog box
appears as shown in Figure 11.14.
Figure 11.14: Change Priority Dialog Box

Choose the new priority of the Work Item and then press “Enter”.
·        Resubmission of Work Items (and documents). An important functionality supported in
the Business Workplace is to resubmit Work Items and documents for a future date.
This means that the Work Item will be moved from the inbox and will then be shown
under the Resubmissions folder. The Work Item will be automatically moved into the
Inbox by the system on the specified resubmission date.
Select the relevant item and click the Resubmit 
 button. (Alternately, you may right-
click and choose the Resubmit option from the context menu.) This will display the
dialog box as shown in Figure 11.15.
Figure 11.15: Resubmit Work Item
Then enter a suitable date when you would like the item to reappear in the Inbox. Next,
press “Enter”. The item will then appear in the Resubmissions folder until the date
specified.
NOTE: If you would like to display the Workflow log, you may select the Work
Item and click the 
 button from the toolbar. 
·        Reserving a Work Item. As already mentioned, it is possible for you to reserve a Work
Item that has appeared in your inbox. Once you reserve a Work Item, it will no longer
be visible to other users. Either you or the Workflow administrator can replace the
Work Item manually. To reserve a Work Item, first select it and then click the Reserve 
 button. Alternately, you may right-click and then choose the Reserve option from
the context menu.
This will reserve the Work Item for you, and the status of the item will be changed to
Reserved denoted by the  symbol.
·        Replacing a Work Item. The Replace function sets the Work Item to Ready and makes
it visible to other recipients as well for execution. This function may be applied on
items that have a Reserved, In Process, or Executed status. 
To replace a Work Item, select it and then click the Replace
button. Alternately, you
may right-click and then choose the Replace option from the context menu. This will
replace the Work Item and the status of it will be changed to Ready 
.
·        Adding Attachments to a Work Item. You may also add attachments to a Work Item.
You have the options of creating a new document and attaching it to the Work Item or
importing an existing document stored on your PC.
To add attachments, select the item and right-click in order to access the context menu
shown in Figure 11.16.
 
 

Figure 11.16: Create an Attachment
Choose the option Create Attachment. Alternately, you may click the 
 button and
choose option Create Attachment. The dialog appears as shown in Figure 11.17.
Figure 11.17: Create Document Header
NOTE: To import and attach files from your PC, click the Import 
 button and
follow the steps shown.
By default, SCR appears in the Type field. The SCR denotes the text format that you
may enter using the SAP editor. Suppose we choose TXT as the Type and enter a title
in the provided field. When we press “Enter”, a notepad document appears along with a
dialog box shown in Figure 11.18.
Figure 11.18: Notepad Document
You may enter the text in the text document and then save the text and close the
notepad document. Next, you will need to press the Continue button on the dialog box
shown. Once this is done, the TXT file is attached with a message saying Attachment
added to Work Item.

NOTE: You may delete attachments that you have added, but you may not
delete/remove those added by others.
The relevant Work Item’s Attachment column will now appear with a
 symbol,
denoting the presence of the attachment.
Figure 11.19: Attachment Column
·        Forwarding Work Items. As with documents, a Work Item may also be forwarded to
any other user. This may be done by selecting the Work Item and then clicking the
Forward 
 button. Alternately, you may right-click and then choose the Forward
option from the context menu that appears. The dialog box appears as shown in Figure
11.20.
Figure 11.20: Forwarding Work Item
Enter the User in the field provided and then press “Enter”. This will forward the Work
Item to the user specified. In the other user’s inbox, your user name will be shown in
the column Forwarded By for the work item in question. The forwarded Work Item will
be removed from all the other users’ inboxes who initially had the work item visible.
The item forwarded will appear in the Outbox under the node Work Items forwarded by
me.
In this section, we will cover the steps required to set up out of office settings for when
you are unable to send or receive messages. This includes creating a personal substitute
and setting the forwarding option in your email. 
11.4.1 Creating Substitutes  
In case you are going out of office, you may allow another user (known as your Personal
Substitute) to view your inbox and work list and approve the work items, if required. To
create substitutes, choose the menu path Settings à Workflow Settings à Maintain
Substitute. The dialog appears as shown in Figure 11.21.
 
11.4 Out of office Settings 

Figure 11.21: Personal Substitutes Creation
Position the cursor on your user ID (in our case, it is STUDENT009), then click the
icon. A dialog box appears that will let you enter a search term for the user.  In the search
term field, you may either enter the name of the user or a search term. If you want to
choose from all available users, you must enter the wildcard character (*). Press “Enter” to
view the users selected according to the search term entered. Then choose from the list
that appears.
Suppose we choose the name of the substitute to be Jane Allen. The screen appears as
shown.
Figure 11.22: Detail Screen Substitution
Enter the validity date (duration) of the substitution as shown (it is also possible to create
substitutes for a week or a month by specifying appropriate validity dates). You can
activate the substitute by checking the Substitution Active checkbox, and then click the
Save button.
 

The user Jane Allen will be one of your substitutes starting from March 31, 2012, and
your work items will appear in her Inbox right away. She will remain a substitute as long
as you don’t delete her entry.
If the Substitution Active checkbox is not on, your substitute will have to manually adopt
the substitution in order to make your work items visible in his or her Inbox. The menu
option for doing so is Settings à Workflow Settings à Adopt Substitution.
11.4.2 Automatic Forwarding
You may also forward your documents to another SAP user or even send an email in your
absence. To do this, follow the menu option Setting à Office Settings. This will open the
Private Office Settings dialog box. Select the Automatic Forwarding tab and press the
Create button. The Automatic Forwarding dialog appears as shown in Figure 11.23.
Figure 11.23: Automatic Forwarding
To forward your documents to another email address (Internet address), enter the email
address in the field provided. On the right, choose the option Internet address from the
drop box. Enter a validity period and press “Enter”.
Now all documents on which forwarding is permissible will be forwarded to the specified
address.
In this section, we will see some of the personalizing settings related to work items. To
access this setting, choose the menu path Settings à Workflow à Personal Settings.
11.5 Other Personalization Options of Business Workplace

Figure 11.24: Personal Workflow Settings
A few useful settings are shown below:
·        Enable Forwarding of Work Items to Several Users. As the name indicates, this setting
allows you to forward the work item to several users. By default, this setting is
switched to off.
·        No Tips and Tricks of Work Items in Workplaces. You may switch off the Tips and
Tricks displayed within a Work item by selecting this checkbox. By default this setting
is on. After doing so, no tips and tricks are shown.
·        Object Details Shown in Same Window. By default, clicking on the Object name
pertaining to a particular work item opens a new window showing the details of the
object. You may want to switch this off and display the object detail in the same
window. You can do this by selecting the checkbox Double-clicking object shows
object in Same Window. 
NOTE: If you would like to switch back the default settings of the Workplace
press the 
 button.
11.5.1 Switching Off Preview
You may also switch off the work item preview shown in the lower part of the right pane.
You can do this by selecting the menu option, Settings à Switch Off Preview.

Figure 11.25: Switching Preview Off
This chapter discussed the SAP Business Workflow with an emphasis on Work Items.
With the information provided, you should now be able to locate Work Items within your
inbox and outbox, identify deadlines on Work Items, and complete them appropriately.
You should now also be comfortable with the various settings found within transaction
SBWP, particularly relating to out of office settings and personalization of your Business
Workplace.
Summary of Chapter 11

Chapter 12
Miscellaneous Topics
This chapter will focus on a variety of additional topics that may be useful to the user. I
will discuss in detail how to display an authorization check using Transaction SU53 and
will then delve into the various functions/services pertaining to the Objects that you work
with on a day-to-day basis. These miscellaneous topics are meant to help you round out
your knowledge base.
The following topics will be covered:
·       Displaying Authorization Check
·       Transaction SU53 Output
·       Object Services
·       Attachment Lists
·       My Objects Lists
Some questions that will be answered in this chapter include:
·       I cannot gain access to a transaction. What do I do?
·       How do I display an Authorization Check?
·       How do I alert the security team that I need access?
·       What are the most important Object services?
·       How do I create a note for a given Object?
Throughout the chapter, there will be examples and screenshots to help you gain the
greatest possible understanding of how to display Authorization Checks and how to
manage Objects within their everyday tasks.
As already mentioned earlier in the book, the necessary authorization must be given to
your User (ID) in order for you to execute a report, to make entries on a screen, or to
display data through a transaction. However, there will be many situations when you
should be allowed to go to a transaction or carry out a certain activity within the system
12.1 Transaction SU53 – Displaying Authorization Check

but are not allowed to do so. This may also happen when you try to access a transaction
via the user menu or the SAP Easy Access Menu but cannot due to lack of authorization.
An authorization error displayed, in such cases, is shown in Figure 12.1.
Figure 12.1: Authorization Error
In such cases, you should ask the security team member to provide you with necessary
authorization. In order to do so, you need to point out which Authorization Object check
has failed. The information on the authorization object and the check that failed can be
determined using transaction SU53.
Simply call transaction “SU53” or use menu path System à Utilities à Display
Authorization Check.
Figure 12.2: Display Authorization Check
This will take you to the Authorization Display screen. The Authorization Data shown for
a check that has failed will be similar to the one shown in Figure 12.3.
Figure 12.3: Authorization Data
It will be clearly written that the Authority Check Failed and the required Authorization
value for the user in order to proceed with the activity will be shown in red.

You may then send this screenshot to the Security team and ask for the necessary
authorization. Make sure that this SU53 screenshot is taken right after the authorization
error occurs. Once the authorization is granted, you may then use the desired transaction.
NOTE: It is important that you call the SU53 transaction immediately after the
failing transaction.
If the last carried out check was successful, the screen appears as shown in Figure 12.4.
Figure 12.4: Successful Authority Check
The transaction SU53 output shows the last authorization check that was carried out by the
system while the user was carrying out his or her activity (even if it was successful or not).
For example, if you ran the check several hours ago, the authorization check history will
still be there. However, when you log off and then again log on to the system, you will
have your Authorization check history in transaction SU53 refreshed. Until the user does
not log off, the outcome of the last authorization check will remain in the system. 
NOTE: A successful message does not require the user to do anything. The details
about the generation of a failure message are what a user should send to the Security
team.
For the objects that you work with (such as a Document, a Material, or an Employee),
there may be some general functions known as Object Services available. These may
allow you to, for example, enter a note or attach a file to the object in question. This will
only be relevant to the particular document number or to the particular employee to which
it is attached.
To access the Object Services, click on the 
 icon on the top left corner of the SAP
window in order to open the submenu shown in Figure 12.5.
12.2 Object Services 

Figure 12.5: Object Services Submenu
The menu provides a number of options. All of these may not be applicable to your object.
Let us now look at the most important functions one by one. 
·        Creating and Managing Attachments. To create an attachment for the object in
question, you may use this function. Simply choose the menu option Create à
Attachment. The pop-up appears for specifying the file to be attached. You may then
attach any file (in a number of formats, such as Word, Excel, or any other format).
After at least one attachment (or an added note has been attached) exists for the object
in question, you may display the attachments to the object by choosing the Attachment
list option as shown in Figure 12.6.
Figure 12.6: “Attachment list” Option
The Attachment list will appear as shown in Figure 12.7. All files as well as Notes
attached to the object will be shown.
Figure 12.7: Attachment List

NOTE: Private Notes do not appear in the Attachment list of the Object.
·        Create Notes (and private notes). You may also attach notes to the given object. These
may be accessible by other users (normal notes) or may be just accessible by you
(private notes).
To create a note for all users, choose the option Create à Note. The Note editor will
appear as shown in Figure 12.8.
Figure 12.8: Note Editor
Enter the title of the note along with the text of the note and press “Enter”.
On the other hand, to create a private Note, you should choose the option Create à
Private Note.
Figure 12.9: Create Private Note
This will open the Personal Note editor shown in Figure 12.10.

Figure 12.10: Private Note Editor
You may then enter the private note and title and press the “Enter” button.
·        Send Object with Note (in an Email). It is also possible for you to go directly from the
submenu to the Business Workplace and create an email with the link to the object
attached to the email. For example, if we are processing employee 1280 and we choose
the option Send à Object With Note, the screen will appear as shown in Figure 12.11.
Figure 12.11: Send Object with Note in Email
We can then specify the Title, the Body of the email, and the Recipients, and then click
the Send button. On the Attachments tab, we will see that the Employee link is
attached.
Figure 12.12: Attachments Tab

·        Starting and Displaying Workflows for an Object. You may also have workflow
functions attached that are accessible from the General Object Services. In order to start
a workflow related to the object in question, simply select the menu option Workflow à
Start Workflow.
To view a list of the workflow pertaining to the object, choose the option Workflow à
Workflow Overview. This will display a list of the workflows for the object along with
the necessary information.
·        Adding Object to your Favorites. You may also add certain objects along with their
IDs to your favorite Objects list. This may be done by choosing the menu option My
Objects à Add to My Objects.
Figure 12.13: Add Objects to Favorites
This will add the object to the favorite list. (In the next section, we will see how the My
Objects list may be viewed.)
As already mentioned, there is a My Objects list to which you may add your favorite
objects. This is particularly useful when you have certain objects that you want to note for
future usage. The objects that are added to the list are not removed until you explicitly do
so.
You may display, change the list, or create folders in the Objects list. To do this you may
use the menu path System à My Objects à Edit Objects shown in Figure 12.14. (This menu
path is available in all SAP screens.)
12.3 The “My Objects” List 

Figure 12.14: Edit Objects
The My Objects list will be displayed as shown in the Figure 12.15.
Figure 12.15: My Objects
Suppose we added the employee number 1280. A node will appear for it in the list. You
may then double-click on the 1280 node and it will take you directly to the transaction for
processing the given object. 
You may also create folders in your favorite object list. To create a folder, click the 
button. The dialog appears as shown in Figure 12.16.
Figure 12.16: Create a Folder in the Object List
Enter a suitable folder name and then press “Enter”. The new folder will be added to your
list.

Figure 12.17: My Objects with Folder
You may create as many folders as you like, and then drag and drop any objects into the
folder. To delete an object from the list or to delete the folder, select the given item and
click the 
 icon. Press the Save button to save your setting.
The list of objects remains and may be accessed even after you have logged off. 

This chapter discussed how to generate and display Authorization Checks when you are
unable to access certain transactions. It also discussed different services that are available
to you for Objects that are used every day. With the information provided in this chapter,
you should now be able to apply the mentioned features effectively to your daily work. I
hope that this information is useful to you and has helped round out your knowledge base.
References
http://help.sap.com/saphelp_erp60_sp/helpdata/en/c8/96c998142f11d389940000e8216438/
Summary of Chapter 12

 
Index

ABAP List, 106, 169, 189
ABC Analysis, 142, 154, 157, 158
ABC Analysis Function View, 154, 157
Adobe Forms, 107, 169, 170
ALV, 3, 20, 21, 106, 107, 114, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150, 152,
154, 156, 159, 160, 162, 164, 166, 180, 188, 189, 197
Application Toolbar, 14, 16
AutoCompletion, 45
Automatic Tabbing, 92
Background mode, 110
Banner, 14
Basic List, 179, 180, 181, 185, 186, 187, 190, 191, 192
Business Workplace, 3, 4, 21, 24, 33, 195, 196, 197, 201, 208, 211, 213, 214, 216, 218,
224, 232, 233, 242
Charts View, 154, 156
Collective Search Helps, 57
Command Field, 17, 21, 23, 24, 28, 35, 70
Control levels, 190
Corbu, 78
Decision Work Item, 214
Dialog Mode, 88, 89, 90
Excel Inplace View, 154, 155
Favorites, 2, 13, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 69, 72, 73, 74, 116, 244
Hard Copy, 166
Hold Data/Set Data, 62, 63
Inbox, 197, 198, 199, 210, 214, 215, 216, 219, 224, 225, 230
Infoset, 179, 180, 181, 182
Initial Screen, 172, 176
Input Help, 54, 61
Insert, 33, 37, 51, 52, 93

Meaning, 17, 124, 218, 220
Menu Bar, 14, 15
My Objects, 244, 245
Object Manager, 41, 65
Object Services, 235, 238, 239, 243
Objects, 42, 134, 135, 235, 244, 245, 246, 247
Outbox, 197, 198, 201, 210, 220, 221, 228
Overwrite, 51, 52, 137
Personal Substitute, 228
Personal Value List, 58
Personalization, 70, 213, 232
Private notes, 240
Quick Cut and Paste, 102, 103
Ranked Lists, 180
Resubmission, 197, 224
Resubmit Work Items, 224
SAP Easy Access, 5, 10, 11, 21, 24, 33, 34, 38, 40, 97, 109, 116, 236
SAP List Viewer, 107, 183
SAP Logon Pad, 6, 7
SAP Query, 3, 21, 179, 180, 181, 194
SAP/ABAP List Viewer, 140
Screen, 5, 8, 10, 11, 14, 26, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 52, 58, 70, 109, 119, 120, 130, 131,
132, 140, 142, 143, 147, 151, 160, 167, 171, 177, 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188, 191,
199, 200, 205, 230
Screen Body, 14
Screen Header, 14
Search Help Control, 91
Selection Option, 124
Selection Options, 120, 124, 125, 126
Selection Screen, 120, 134
Session, 10, 17, 28
Smart Form, 107, 108

Standard Menu, 11
Standard Toolbar, 14, 16, 17
Statistics, 180
Status Bar, 14, 16, 52, 84
Table Configuration, 48
Title Bar, 14
Transaction, 3, 17, 19, 21, 22, 23, 24, 27, 33, 34, 35, 36, 41, 42, 70, 71, 72, 105, 195, 196,
235, 236
Transaction code, 21, 72
Transaction SU53, 236, 238
User Group, 180, 181
User Menu, 11, 12, 34
Variants, 48, 119, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136, 137
Window, 5, 13, 14, 166, 233
Work Item Groupings, 219, 220
Work List, 217, 219, 222


 
Author Bio
Rehan Zaidi has more than 15 years of SAP experience and has been writing about SAP
topics since 2001. He is the author of the SAP Advanced ABAP Cookbook published from
the United Kingdom, and has written a number of SAP books and articles about ABAP,
Workflow, HR functional and technical consultants, and SAP user experiences. He has
been published in prestigious American publications such as SAP Professional Journal
and HR Expert. Rehan has provided coaching for Mobility and ABAP. He has also
completed support and implementation projects for various areas of ABAP and
Workflow. He holds Bachelor’s and Master’s degrees in computer science. Rehan can be
reached at erpdomain@gmail.com.

 
About the Publisher
Jon Reed is an independent analyst, SAP Mentor and Enterprise Irregular who blogs and
videocasts on enterprise trends. The Ultimate SAP User Guide is the fifth book Jon has
published, and the third SAP title.
Jon’s prior SAP titles are the SAP Consultant Handbook (1998), one of the most
successful books in the SAP arena, and The Ultimate SAP Pricing Guide, by Matthias
Liebich. The home base for Jon’s SAP publishing ventures is JonERP.com, Career
Answers for SAP Professionals.
Most recently, Jon is a co-founder of diginomica.com. Launched in the spring of 2013 by
Jon and four other long-time enterprise bloggers, diginomica is focused on providing
original commentary and reporting focused solely on the enterprise market.
Jon is also the driving force behind JonERP.com, an interactive web site for SAP
professionals that features Jon’s long-running podcast and video series. In his client work,
Jon advises companies on enterprise go-to-market and the use of multi-media to reach new
audiences. Content tactics for reaching today’s informed enterprise buyer is a major focus
on Jon’s advisory.

 
The Ultimate SAP User Guide – Expert
Reader Bios
The Ultimate SAP User Guide is indebted to its expert reader panel for invaluable
feedback to the final version you are reading now. Here are their bios.
Simha R. Magal, Ph.D. is Professor of Management (MIS) and Director of the ERP
program in the Seidman College of Business, Grand Valley State University.  Dr. Magal
has taught graduate and undergraduate courses in business processes and enterprise
systems using SAP for over a decade, and has coauthored three best-selling SAP books:
Essentials of Business Processes and Information Systems (Wiley, 2009), Integrated
Business Processes with ERP (Wiley 2012), Business Process Integration with SAP ERP
(Epistemy Press 2013).  In 2013, he co-founded Epistemy Press, a digital publisher that
delivers cutting-edge SAP knowledge to both academia and industry.
In 2012,  Dr. Magal was also selected by the SAP professional community to be an SAP
Mentor, a rare honor for an academic.  He can be reached on Twitter at: @ERPProf.
Bill Wood has deep IT experience since the mid 1980s, including over 25 SAP
engagements since 1994. Wood’s diverse SAP experience includes: SAP Solution
Architecture, IT & business strategy integration, software & vendor selection, ITAM /
SAM audits, SAP CoE development, project management, SAP project audits,
methodology development, SAP upgrades, rollouts, and data conversions. Wood is ASAP
certified, a former Knowledge Manager for the Grant Thornton SAP practice, and a Mensa
member.
Wood runs the SAP customer centered site at R3now.com. Wood can be reached on
Twitter at: @r3now.
Paul Hawking is an Associate Professor in Information Systems at Victoria University.
He is considered as one of the leading commentators on ERP systems and Business
Intelligence and specifically SAP solutions. His knowledge is well respected in both
industry and academia and accordingly is often required to assist companies with their
SAP strategies and understanding SAP solutions.
Hawking was a past Chairperson and committee member of the SAP Australian User
Group (SAUG) for 10 years and was responsible for knowledge transfer. He now advises
the SAUG on the content for their events. In 2009, 2011, and 2012, Hawking was voted by
the SAP community as one of the Top Ten Most Influential People in SAP for Australia
and New Zealand. Hawking was awarded “Outstanding Academic 2010” by SAP. He was
the first academic in the world to become a SAP Mentor. Hawking can be reached on

Twitter at: @paulhawking.
Leonardo De Araujo is Vice President and member of the Executive Committee at
Beyond Technologies. De Araujo specializes in the implementation, optimization, support
and upgrade of SAP solutions. He has over 17 years of experience as an information
technology specialist. During his career, De Araujo carried out several mandates calling
on his SAP solutions expertise. With his considerable technical experience and his vast
business knowledge, he advises clients on the technology solutions adapted to their needs
in order to maximize their profitability.
In 2009, De Araujo was named an SAP Mentor - one of the most prestigious honors in the
SAP community. He regularly delivers speeches for the ASUG (America’s SAP Users’
Group) and the SAP TechEd conference (SAP’s annual technology event now known as
SAP d-code). De Araujo is based in Montréal, Québec. He can be reached on Twitter at:
@Leonardo_Araujo.
Additional expert readers: Zaidi and Reed would also like to thank expert readers
Nadine Baghdadi (expert SAP trainer), Rachel Meyers (expert training guide creator), and
Morris Rosenthal (publishing industry expert).

