

'" The Mathematics of
the Heavens and the Earth


'" The Mathematics of
the Heavens and the Earth
The Early History of Trigonometry
g l e n  v a n  b r u m m e l e n
P R I N C E TON  U N I V E R S I T Y  P R E S S Princeton and Oxford

Copyright © 2009 by Princeton University Press
Published by Princeton University Press, 41 William Street, Princeton, New Jersey 08540
In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press, 6 Oxford Steet, Woodstock, Oxfordshire
OX20 1TW
All Rights Reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Van Brummelen, Glen.
The mathematics of the heavens and the earth : the early history of trigonometry / Glen Van
Brummelen.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-691-12973-0 (hardcover : alk. paper)
1. Trigonometry—History.
I. Title.
QA24.V36
2009
516.2409—dc22
British Library Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available
This book has been composed in Times Roman
Printed on acid-free paper. ∞
press.princeton.edu
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
2008032521

To 
Len Berggren, my mentor,
and
Heide, my partner


Contents '"
Preface
xi
The Ancient Heavens
1
1 Precursors
9
What Is Trigonometry?
9
The Seqed in Ancient Egypt
10
Text 1.1 Finding the Slope of a Pyramid
11
Babylonian Astronomy, Arc Measurement, and the 360° Circle
12
The Geometric Heavens: Spherics in Ancient Greece
18
A Trigonometry of Small Angles? Aristarchus and Archimedes on
Astronomical Dimensions
20
Text 1.2 Aristarchus, the Ratio of the Distances of the Sun and 
Moon
24
2 Alexandrian Greece
33
Convergence
33
Hipparchus
34
A Model for the Motion of the Sun
37
Text 2.1 Deriving the Eccentricity of the Sun’s Orbit
39
Hipparchus’s Chord Table
41
The Emergence of Spherical Trigonometry
46
Theodosius of Bithynia
49
Menelaus of Alexandria
53
The Foundations of Spherical Trigonometry: Book III of Menelaus’s
Spherics
56
Text 2.2 Menelaus, Demonstrating Menelaus’s Theorem
57
Spherical Trigonometry before Menelaus?
63
Claudius Ptolemy
68
Ptolemy’s Chord Table
70
Ptolemy’s Theorem and the Chord Subtraction/Addition Formulas
74
The Chord of 1°
76
The Interpolation Table
77

Chords in Geography: Gnomon Shadow Length Tables
77
Text 2.3 Ptolemy, Finding Gnomon Shadow Lengths
78
Spherical Astronomy in the Almagest
80
Ptolemy on the Motion of the Sun
82
Text 2.4 Ptolemy, Determining the Solar Equation
84
The Motions of the Planets
86
Tabulating Astronomical Functions and the Science of
Logistics
88
Trigonometry in Ptolemy’s Other Works
90
Text 2.5 Ptolemy, Constructing Latitude Arcs on a Map
91
After Ptolemy
93
3 India
94
Transmission from Babylon and Greece
94
The First Sine Tables
95
Aryabhata’s Difference Method of Calculating Sines
99
Text 3.1 Aryabhata, Computing Sines
100
Bhaskara I’s Rational Approximation to the Sine
102
Improving Sine Tables
105
Other Trigonometric Identities
107
Text 3.2 Varahamihira, a Half-angle Formula
108
Text 3.3 Brahmagupta, the Law of Sines in Planetary Theory?
109
Brahmagupta’s Second-order Interpolation Scheme for Approximating
Sines
111
Text 3.4 Brahmagupta, Interpolating Sines
111
Taylor Series for Trigonometric Functions in Madhava’s Kerala 
School
113
Applying Sines and Cosines to Planetary Equations
121
Spherical Astronomy
124
Text 3.5 Varahamihira, Finding the Right Ascension of a Point on the
Ecliptic
125
Using Iterative Schemes to Solve Astronomical Problems
129
Text 3.6 Paramesvara, Using Fixed-point Iteration to Compute
Sines
131
Conclusion
133
Contents
viii

4 Islam
135
Foreign Junkets: The Arrival of Astronomy from India
135
Basic Plane Trigonometry
137
Building a Better Sine Table
140
Text 4.1 Al-Samaw’al ibn Yahya al-Maghribi, Why the Circle Should
Have 480 Degrees
146
Introducing the Tangent and Other Trigonometric Functions
149
Text 4.2 Abu’l-Rayhan al-Biruni, Finding the Cardinal Points of the
Compass
152
Streamlining Astronomical Calculation
156
Text 4.3 Kushyar ibn Labban, Finding the Solar Equation
156
Numerical Techniques: Approximation, Iteration, Interpolation
158
Text 4.4 Ibn Yunus, Interpolating Sine Values
164
Early Spherical Astronomy: Graphical Methods and Analemmas
166
Text 4.5 Al-Khwarizmi, Determining the Ortive Amplitude
Geometrically
168
Menelaus in Islam
173
Text 4.6 Al-Kuhi, Finding Rising Times Using the Transversal
Theorem
175
Menelaus’s Replacements
179
Systematizing Spherical Trigonometry: Ibn Mucadh’s
Determination of the Magnitudes and Nasir al-Din al-Tusi’s
Transversal Figure
186
Applications to Religious Practice: The Qibla and Other Ritual Needs
192
Text 4.7 Al-Battani, a Simple Approximation to the Qibla
195
Astronomical Timekeeping: Approximating the Time of Day Using the
Height of the Sun
201
New Functions from Old: Auxiliary Tables
205
Text 4.8 Al-Khalili, Using Auxiliary Tables to Find the
Hour-angle
207
Trigonometric and Astronomical Instruments
209
Text 4.9 Al-Sijzi (?), On an Application of the Sine 
Quadrant
213
Trigonometry in Geography
215
Trigonometry in al-Andalus
217
Contents
ix

5 The West to 1550
223
Transmission from the Arab World
223
An Example of Transmission: Practical Geometry
224
Text 5.1 Hugh of St. Victor, Using an Astrolabe to Find the Height of
an Object
225
Text 5.2 Finding the Time of Day from the Altitude of the Sun
227
Consolidation and the Beginnings of Innovation: The Trigonometry
of Levi ben Gerson, Richard of Wallingford, and John of Murs
230
Text 5.3 Levi ben Gerson, The Best Step Size for a Sine Table
233
Text 5.4 Richard of Wallingford, Finding Sin(1°) with Arbitrary
Accuracy
237
Interlude: The Marteloio in Navigation
242
Text 5.5 Michael of Rhodes, a Navigational Problem from
His Manual
244
From Ptolemy to Triangles: John of Gmunden, Peurbach, 
Regiomontanus
247
Text 5.6 Regiomontanus, Finding the Side of a Rectangle from Its Area
and Another Side
254
Text 5.7 Regiomontanus, the Angle-angle-angle Case of Solving Right
Triangles
255
Successors to Regiomontanus: Werner and Copernicus
264
Text 5.8 Copernicus, the Angle-angle-angle Case of Solving
Triangles
267
Text 5.9 Copernicus, Determining the Solar Eccentricity
270
Breaking the Circle: Rheticus, Otho, Pitiscus and the Opus Palatinum
273
Concluding Remarks
284
Bibliography
287
Index
323
Contents
x

Preface '"
Imagine a subject that is so pervasive that almost all of us see some of it dur-
ing our high school education, one whose story goes back well into ancient
times. This subject crosses most major cultures and places; indeed, it is not
easy to identify societies that contributed signiﬁcantly to science without
using it in some way. It might even be argued that this discipline was the link
that brought geometric models of the cosmos together with numerical com-
putation in a synthesis that allowed theory to be converted into prediction:
the birth of the exact sciences. All this makes it hard to believe that
trigonometry has never been given a proper book-length historical treatment
in English.
Trigonometry is particularly interesting because it is rare among
mathematical subjects: it was originally motivated almost entirely by out-
side concerns, in this case, astronomy and geography. Many theorems that
we now call trigonometric had been known before in other mathematical
contexts; others came to our awareness only through the need to solve
particular scientiﬁc problems. Thus trigonometry often retooled existing
mathematics for new purposes, but partly through its interface with the
sciences it blossomed into an independent discipline, providing structures
and ways of thinking that eventually returned to inspire mathematics
itself.
The most recent effort to write the history of trigonometry in a Western
language was over a century ago, with Anton von Braunmühl’s two-volume
classic Vorlesungen über Geschichte der Mathematik.1 The Vorlesungen was
an outstanding example of the best work of its time: rigorous and thorough,
yet concise and clear. However, most of the professional discipline of the
history of mathematics has happened since it was written, and after one hun-
dred years it is well past time to revisit the topic. In no area is this more true
than in the non-Western cultures most relevant to us, India and Islam. The
great nineteenth-century historians of mathematics, I am sure, would be as-
tounded and impressed to see what manuscripts and discoveries have come
to light in these ﬁelds.
I am proud to say that this book owes much to the efforts of the histori-
ans of von Braunmühl’s generation. It is fashionable to criticize them these
days, and not without cause. Current historiographic trends emphasize
xi
1 [von Braunmühl 1900/1903]. If one considers Russian to be a Western language, then there is
also the notable [Matvievskaya 1990].

cultural contextualization of mathematical history,2 and looking back, it is
clear that our predecessors too often brought their nineteenth-century con-
texts into their interpretations. It is part of the job of the historian to attempt
to disengage from the modern context, and to try to live the past the way the
past lived it. Surely this task is quixotic, but there is much to be gained in the
perpetual struggle to shed our own skins. Nevertheless, our success in this is
elusive, and really can only be evaluated after much time has passed. I won-
der whether twenty-second-century historians will judge us as harshly as we
judge the historians of one hundred years ago.
What I ﬁnd admirable about the great historians who did so much to es-
tablish the foundation of our ﬁeld is their unremitting attention to rigor and
reliability, and their commitment to both the history and the mathematics.
We may sometimes question their historicity, but we can trust their honest
attempts to face up to the material. They did their best to place their ﬁndings
in an appropriate context, but they did not shy away from the mathematics it-
self. One cannot genuinely practice the history of a scientiﬁc subject without
also living and breathing the science itself. Von Braunmühl knew the mathe-
matics of which he wrote, and I have done my best to live up to that heritage.
This is not to say that I will stick slavishly to the style of the past mas-
ters. The value of placing results in their original context is well taken; one
of my efforts in this direction is to include a number of extracts from (trans-
lations of) the original texts in the narrative. This should give the reader
the chance to experience directly what the texts say, and to judge how they
should be read. Explanations are provided to help decode passages that
would otherwise be obscure. These should also help to illustrate that the
modern mathematical notation used throughout this book is a transformation
of the original texts; hopefully the inclusion of excerpts will allow the reader
to decide how great this transformation is.3 I hope that some of the excerpts
will prove useful in the classroom: most of them stand on their own, and
Preface
xii
2 The paper that is sometimes said to have sparked the current trend of searching for and destroy-
ing modern mathematical conceptions in Greek mathematics is Sabetei Unguru’s “On the need to
rewrite the history of Greek mathematics” [Unguru 1975/76]; see also [Saito 1998] for an
update. The issue of appropriate contextualization is felt particularly strongly in the study of the
most ancient mathematical cultures; see [Imhausen 2003b] on Egypt, and [Robson 1999] and
[Robson 2001] on Mesopotamia.
3 The degree to which the arguments in historical mathematical texts should be translated to mod-
ern notation is a matter of current debate. For instance, many ancient and medieval texts will re-
fer to “the rectangle between AB and CD.” The arguments often require merely the product of
the lengths of the line segments, but writing it as such changes the mental process by removing
the geometric content, possibly changing our perception of what the author thought in some sig-
niﬁcant way. In this book—a scholarly survey, but not a research paper—I have tried to respect
the original sources as much as possible while making the arguments accessible to the modern
reader.

some might help to enliven trigonometric or astronomical concepts by pro-
viding historical context.
So, the reader will ﬁnd here some of the ﬂavor of an “episodes” book; it
is not necessary to read it from cover to cover. Nevertheless there is enough
of a ﬂow of ideas that the completist reader should also be satisﬁed.
The question arises who I intend to read this book. I would be delighted
if the interested lay public ﬁnds it to be useful, and I hope that they are given
the chance. However, my ﬁrst loyalty is scholarly: I aim to provide a solid,
reference-supported account of the best understanding of the history of
trigonometry that the academic community can provide. Hence the hundreds
of footnotes: for those readers who wish to delve into the issues in more
depth, the notes contain appropriate links to the literature, much of the back
story, and details on the mathematics. However, I have been careful to keep
scholarly debates out of the main text. My goal is to give the historical char-
acters the stage. Nevertheless, this is a mathematical rather than a social his-
tory. There are plenty of other places to go to ﬁnd out about the lives and
contexts of the scientists. Instead, I have chosen to emphasize the mathemat-
ical arguments. Many of them are beautiful; most are practical. They are the
heart of trigonometry, and I will not apologize for asking the reader to expe-
rience their pleasures.
The practical nature of trigonometry is a distinctive feature compared to
most other mathematical disciplines and is worth highlighting, especially
in this ﬁrst of two volumes. Through the sixteenth century, trigonometry
existed mostly (often exclusively) to serve the needs of mathematical as-
tronomers. Without astronomy, there wouldn’t have been much point. Thus
the reader should expect to encounter at least the basics of spherical and
planetary astronomy within these pages. I have done my best to avoid re-
quiring any outside astronomical reading, pleasurable though that might be.
The brief opening chapter on the ancient heavens should convey almost all
the spherical astronomy that is needed to make sense of the book.
The dependence of trigonometry on outside sources of inspiration in-
forms other distinctive choices I have made that might surprise some. Fol-
lowing the theme of contextualization, I focus on topics that the historical
practitioners—not necessarily the modern scholars—found interesting and
useful. Since these practitioners were astronomers, they were often less in-
terested in harmonious theory than in practical results. So, in addition to the
trigonometric identities and theorems, I have gone into some depth for in-
stance on the methods that were developed to compute trigonometric tables.
And in addition to some beautiful direct solutions to astronomical problems,
I also discuss the numerical methods that were applied when geometry was
not up to the task. Some modern readers ﬁnd a pleasing aesthetic quality in
Preface
xiii

the geometry and consider table-making a thing of the past, but this is after
all a work of history. The past is my business.
I do ﬁnd occasion to apologize in one respect. When considering what to
include in a survey of this scope, the author must eventually draw a line in the
sand. This leads inevitably to regret that some valuable topics missed the cut.
In my case this includes trigonometric traces that may be found outside of my
major cultural groupings—in particular, Jewish, Byzantine, and Chinese. In
the case of China the story is episodic early and much happens well after the
end date of this volume, so it will be treated in the sequel. There are also cer-
tain topics that I wish had received a proper scholarly treatment before the
writing of this book (the role of the analemma in Islam comes to mind). How-
ever, this will always be the case, and eventually one has to put pen to paper.
How to Read This Book
I will be grateful to the enterprising reader who starts on page one and works
faithfully to the end; there is reward in following a tale to its conclusion. But
I do not expect everyone to have the same zeal that I do for my subject. Many
people will use this book as a reference, concentrating on one or two of the
major chapters at a time, or even dipping into individual applications that
look intriguing. I have done my best to accommodate this, but there is a prob-
lem: a certain depth of astronomical understanding is required for a number
of the episodes in this book. I cannot repeat the same astronomical introduc-
tion again and again. So, the text itself contains only brief explanations of the
astronomy involved in each particular problem. If you ﬁnd the text too terse, I
have included a preliminary chapter which orients newcomers to the ancient
heavens. That chapter should give all the context that is needed.
Some formatting details to keep in mind while reading: throughout the
time periods covered in this volume trigonometric functions were deﬁned
not in the unit circle, but in circles of different radii. These are notated by
capitalizing the ﬁrst letter of the function (“Sin” rather than “sin”); the value
of the radius R should be indicated somewhere nearby. Secondly, many of
the calculations reported here were performed in the sexagesimal (base 60)
system. Numbers are represented as follows: for example,
Sometimes the whole parts of numbers are given in decimal format; for
instance, the number above can be written as 428;12,34,56. Finally, errors in
trigonometric values are given in units of the last place. For instance, if the
7 8 12 34 56
7 60
8
12
60
34
60
56
60
2
3
, ;
,
,
.
=
⋅
+
+
+
+
Preface
xiv

value given in the historical text is 12;34,56 while the correct value is
12;34,59, the error is displayed as [-3].
I originally intended to cover the entire history of trigonometry in one
book, but soon realized that task to be overwhelming. This volume is book-
ended, more or less, by the developments of the Earth-centered and the
Sun-centered universe. Trigonometry proper began with the origins of the
Ptolemaic geocentric system, and a nice breaking point is found with the be-
ginning of Copernicus’s heliocentric model. From this point trigonometry
began to move with the rest of mathematics toward symbolic algebra and
(eventually) analysis, losing some of its geometric character and picking up
a more familiar modern ﬂavor. As the medieval Islamic scientists often wrote
in their conclusions: there is much more to say, and I hope some day with the
will of God to write the necessary sequel. It took von Braunmühl three years
to publish his second volume; I hope that readers will be more patient with
me. It might take a little longer.
Reference Sources
This project would not have been possible without access to a number of
literature databases, both modern and old-fashioned. The opportunity to
acknowledge these sources does not present itself in the main text, so
I would like to give them a nod here. I turned most frequently to the
following:
MathSciNet (the online version of Mathematical Reviews);
Zentralblatt für Mathematik;
Kenneth O. May’s Bibliography and Research Manual of the
History of Mathematics [May 1973];
The Dictionary of Scientiﬁc Biography reference sections;
Dauben and Lewis’s The History of Mathematics from Antiquity to
the Present: A Selective Annotated Bibliography, revised edition on
CD-ROM [Dauben 2000];
The Research Libraries Group’s History of Science, Technology
and Medicine Database;
Rosenfeld and Ihsanoglu’s Mathematicians, Astronomers & Other
Scholars of Islamic Civilisation and Their Works (7th–19th c.)
[Rosenfeld/Ihsanoglu 2003];
A private literature database on Islamic astronomy maintained by
Benno van Dalen.
Preface
xv

Although I have found ways of coping with most languages relevant to
this study, Russian was a problem and I wish I could have handled this liter-
ature more effectively. A good Russian reference source is the extensive bib-
liography in [Matvievskaya 1990].
Acknowledgments
I have often been astonished at the long list of names in many books’ ac-
knowledgments sections and wondered if I would ever have the good fortune
to know so many people willing to give their efforts to another cause. I am
truly fortunate to be able to answer that in the afﬁrmative. Among them are a
number of people who provided input, commentary and support outside of
the formal refereeing process: Len Berggren, John H. Conway, David Fried-
man, Alexander Jones, David King, Duncan Melville, Kim Plofker, Nathan
Sidoli, Benno van Dalen, and Venessa Wallsten. Those who participated in
the formal reviewing process, a task often without sufﬁcient public recogni-
tion, deserve special thanks: Helmer Aslaksen, Len Berggren (again), Den-
nis Duke, Victor Katz, Kim Plofker (again), and Benno van Dalen (again),
and two anonymous reviewers. Vickie Kearn, the editor at Princeton Univer-
sity Press, and her assistants Sarah Pachner and Anna Pierrehumbert were
amazingly supportive. Technical support at Princeton provided by Terri
O’Prey, Lor Gehret, and Dimitri Karetnikov was meticulous and exemplary.
Bezaleel Tekka was a great help in preparing the line drawings for publica-
tion. Reid Ginoza, a student at Bennington College, spent ﬁve valuable
weeks reading the manuscript for mathematical accuracy. Heide Klix-Van
Brummelen provided much translation assistance and support. I would like
to identify two people who may not expect to see their names here: Radha
Charan Gupta, whose extensive writings on the history of Indian trigonom-
etry were so useful that I sometimes felt uncomfortably that I was summa-
rizing his research career—I only wish he had gotten around to publishing
his dissertation on the subject; and Marie-Thérèse Debarnot, whose sum-
mary of Islamic trigonometry in [Debarnot 1996] set a standard that I have
struggled here to reach. I have also had the marvelous fortune to teach at two
of the most exciting institutions of higher learning I have ever encountered:
Bennington College and Quest University. The former granted me a sabbati-
cal leave to work on this project and was in my corner throughout; the latter
has embraced my work with equal generosity. As always, the author assumes
all responsibility for weaknesses in the ﬁnal product.
Preface
xvi

The ﬁnal word goes to the two institutes that provided the crucial hospi-
tality, funds and administrative support for this project: the Dibner Institute
for History of Science and Technology at Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
nology (directors George Smith and Bonnie Edwards, and staff), and the In-
stitut für Geschichte der Naturwissenschaften at the University of Frankfurt
(director David King, and colleagues). Neither of these treasured institutions
deserved the fates that befell them shortly after my stays; I would gladly give
up this book to see either one of them re-open its doors. The ﬁeld will never
be the same. I have already dedicated this book, but an extra tip of the hat is
called for here, and a raised glass to their memory.
Preface
xvii


'" The Mathematics of
the Heavens and the Earth


1
The Ancient Heavens '"
This short chapter is not part of the main ﬂow of the book. It is intended only
as a reference for those readers who wish to become acquainted with the
basic concepts of spherical astronomy that will arise later. Those readers
may choose to read it now, or to wait until the need arises. All others should
skip forward to chapter 1.
A night spent watching the heavens with a clear sky reveals some basic facts
about the nature of the universe. Firstly, it is clear that the sky is the top half
of a sphere, the bottom half being below the ground and therefore not visible
to us. As the night progresses, we begin to notice that the stars are not ﬁxed
in place, but revolve slowly around us. It does not take long to realize that the
stars are in fact attached to the celestial sphere, and that the entire sphere is
spinning slowly, at a rate of one rotation per day (ﬁgure I.1).1 The Sun is one
of the stars attached to the sphere, and it is the rotation of the celestial sphere
that carries the Sun through the heavens, producing day and night. When the
Sun is above the horizon the sky is too bright to see the other stars, but they
are there nonetheless and they make their appearance when the Sun is car-
ried below the horizon.2
Before long the existence of the half of the celestial sphere below the
ground becomes clear: stars rise from below to above the horizon in the east,
and they set in the west. Over the course of a year, as the observer becomes
familiar with the constellations, a map of most of the celestial sphere and the
locations of the stars on it is gradually constructed.3
The point directly above the observer is called the zenith, and the great
circle from the north point of the horizon, straight up to the zenith, and down
to the south point of the horizon is called the observer’s meridian. As can be
seen from ﬁgure I.1, the Sun reaches its highest altitude in the sky when it
crosses the meridian; this is local noon.
The rotation of the celestial sphere leaves one point ﬁxed around which
the other stars move; this point is the celestial North Pole, which is currently
very close to Polaris, the North Star. Locating this star allows us to quickly
determine the direction of North, as well as our terrestrial latitude—it is
1 Of course, the modern reality is that the Earth is rotating rather than the heavens.
2 In the rare occasion of a solar eclipse, the stars may be seen above the horizon during the day.
3 Some stars, only visible in the Earth’s southern hemisphere, will always stay below the horizon
for our northern observer.

equal to the altitude of the North Star above the horizon.4 The equator of the
rotating celestial sphere, the celestial equator (see ﬁgure I.2), is one of the
most important great circles in the sky. Stars that happen to lie on the equa-
tor will rise directly east, and will set directly west.
The celestial equator spins at the constant rate of one rotation per day, or
15° per hour. Positions on the celestial equator are measured with respect to
one particular point on it, the vernal equinox ~,5 which we shall describe in
more detail shortly. The positions can be measured in degrees, but due to the
special nature of the equator, they are usually measured in hours. Thus the
right ascension  of a point on the celestial equator will be anywhere from
0hr to 24hr starting from ~. This suggests a coordinate system for the celes-
tial sphere: a star that does not have the good fortune to lie on the equator can
be imagined to drop perpendicularly onto it (see ﬁgure I.2). The angular dis-
tance that it falls is the star’s declination ;6 the right ascension of the point
where the star drops onto the equator is the star’s right ascension . The pair
(, ) form the star’s equatorial coordinates.
At this point it is still conceivable for the observer to be standing on a ﬂat,
or a spherical, Earth. It is in fact quite easy to see that the Earth is a sphere.
For instance, during a lunar eclipse the Earth’s shadow cast on the Moon is al-
ways circular. Or, when a ship disappears over the horizon, the hull of the
ship disappears before the mast does. There was never any question of the
sphericity of the Earth for the astronomers in this book, and we shall take it
for granted as well. Also, for them the center of the universe is obviously the
center of the Earth. There are a few occasions (for example, in Archimedes’
The Ancient Heavens
2
4 The North Pole gradually moves over the centuries; Polaris has not always been so conveniently
located.
5 At ﬁrst it may seem peculiar to refer to the equinox as a point rather than a date. Here, we mean
the Sun’s place on the celestial sphere at the moment in time that is called the equinox.
6  is positive if the star is north of the celestial equator, and negative if it is below. In ancient times,
of course,  was described simply as north or south of the equator.
Figure I.1
The celestial sphere. The
Sun and stars are on the
surface of the sphere, and
are carried in the sphere’s
daily rotation around the
observer.

Sand Reckoner) where there is an important distinction between the center of
the Earth and the observer’s location on its surface. But most of the time the
Earth is an inﬁnitesimal speck at the center of the celestial sphere.
If the Sun kept its place with respect to the rest of the stars in ﬁgure I.1, we
would see the same star show every night: the same stars would rise as the Sun
set, and at any given time of night the stars would be in the same place regard-
less of the time of year. However, the Sun does not keep its place. It wanders
through the constellations, changing its place every day by about 1° of arc,
making a complete circuit around the celestial sphere over the course of a year.
Six other celestial bodies (the Moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Sat-
urn) also move through the background of the “ﬁxed” stars, and collectively
these seven objects are named planets after the Greek word for “wanderer.”
But the Sun’s motion is by far the most regular of the planets. Its path is
a perfect great circle through the celestial sphere, known as the ecliptic (see
ﬁgure I.3). The Sun does slow down and speed up slightly over the course of
the year, but it does not stray at all from the ecliptic. The other six planets
travel close to the ecliptic, but can be above or below the ecliptic by at most
about 5° (depending on the object). This band around the ecliptic is called
the zodiac. The ecliptic is inclined to the celestial equator at an angle of
≈23.7°;7 this angle is called the obliquity of the ecliptic.
The Ancient Heavens
3
7 For the time period of this book,  may be considered to be a constant. In fact it has been de-
creasing slightly over the millennia, and is now equal to about 23.4°.
Figure I.2
Equatorial coordinates. For
this star, 
and
 30°.
 ≈2
1
2 hrs

It is the obliquity that gives us our seasons. As the Sun changes its posi-
tion over the course of the year, it spends varying amounts of time per day
above the horizon. When it lies on one of the intersection points with the
equator (the vernal equinox ~ or the autumnal equinox on the other side)
the Sun, like every other point on the equator, rises in the east, sets in the
west, and spends 12 hours above the horizon in the interim. When the Sun
reaches the point on the ecliptic furthest North from the equator (the summer
solstice), it rises and sets somewhat north of the east and west cardinal points
and spends more than 12 hours per day above the horizon. This allows us to
deﬁne the solsticial colure, the great circle through the poles and the sol-
stices (see ﬁgure I.3).
The existence of a new fundamental great circle on the celestial sphere,
the ecliptic, suggests a new coordinate system based on it. An object’s longi-
tude  is measured along the ecliptic from ~, and its latitude  is the ob-
ject’s distance from the ecliptic along the sphere’s surface (see ﬁgure I.3;
these coordinates are unrelated to terrestrial longitudes and latitudes). This
system is particularly useful when studying the planets: since they stay
reasonably close to the ecliptic, their motions can be broken into their
primary position  and the smaller effect . Most ancient planetary as-
tronomers emphasized , but there was some concern for  as well.
Now, the 360° of the ecliptic/zodiac are divided into 30° segments,
starting at ~. These segments, the zodiacal signs, are named after the con-
stellations that (roughly) occupied these spaces in ancient times: Aries,
The Ancient Heavens
4
Figure I.3
The celestial sphere,
highlighting the ecliptic and
the zodiac. The ecliptic
coordinates of the star
shown in the diagram are
60° and 30°.

Taurus, Gemini, and so forth to Pisces. However, over the past two thou-
sand years the constellations have drifted about 30°, or one zodiacal sign,
away from their namesake segments of the zodiac. The effect of this grad-
ual drift of the background stars from their positions on the ecliptic (or
vice versa) is known as the precession of the equinoxes, and measures
about 1° every 72 years. This requires a decision to be made in terms of co-
ordinates: is the ﬁxed reference point from which the coordinates are mea-
sured going to be ~ (which drifts slowly westward with respect to the
background stars), or a ﬁxed position within the map of ﬁxed stars (which,
conversely, drifts slowly eastward with respect to ~)? In the former case
we call them tropical coordinates; in the latter, they are called sidereal
coordinates.
As the Sun travels along the ecliptic throughout the year, its declination
varies from 23.7° (at the summer solstice) to 23.7° (at the winter sol-
stice). On a given day we may assume that the Sun is effectively motionless
along the ecliptic. It is thus carried in a circle by the rotation of the celestial
sphere; this is called the Sun’s day-circle (ﬁgure I.4). The hour-angle
formed at the North Pole using the meridian and the arc that heads to the Sun
determines the number of hours until local noon, since it corresponds to the
equatorial arc between where the Sun is now and where the Sun will be at
noon. The diurnal arc is the part of the day-circle above the horizon; in the
summer this comprises more than half of it. So, in the summer there are
more than 12 hours of daylight. However, some cultures measure hours as
twelfths of the daylight period; i.e., for them hours are longer in the summer
than in the winter. These variable hours are called seasonal day hours; they
occur often in astronomical timekeeping.
There is a hint of a third coordinate system in ﬁgure I.4, based on the
horizon circle. The ﬁrst coordinate, the azimuth, is the position of the object
along the horizon; the second coordinate, the altitude h, is the angular height
of the object above the horizon. The altitude shall get some attention here,
but we shall not refer much to the azimuth. Nevertheless a related quantity
arises from time to time: the ortive amplitude 	, the place on the horizon
where the Sun rises (relative to the East point).
A problem that arises time and again in historical spherical trigonome-
try is the determination of rising times of arcs of the ecliptic. It is related to
timekeeping by the Sun, and we shall see it in several chapters of this book.
We have seen already that the celestial equator rotates into itself over the
course of a day and thus does not change its position; this is however not true
of the ecliptic, which changes its position from hour to hour. Figure I.5 shows
the celestial sphere at sunrise; the Sun’s position on the ecliptic (its longitude
) is assumed to be known by the time of year. We shall see that the Sun’s
The Ancient Heavens
5

6
Figure I.4
Solar
timekeeping
Figure I.5
The oblique
ascension 

7
Figure I.6 The rising time 
of a given arc of the ecliptic (drawn in bold)
a) ﬁrst contact
b) last contact
EF =
−


2
1

equatorial coordinates—its right ascension  and declination —may be
found from . The ortive amplitude is also prominent in the diagram as 
; it often enters into rising time computations.
Given the direction of the equator’s rotation, it is clear from the situa-
tion in ﬁgure I.5 that the vernal equinox ~ rose somewhat recently. Exactly
how recently may be determined by ﬁnding the Sun’s oblique ascension
since  is an arc on the equator, it can be converted to time by the
relation 360°  24 hours. Incidentally, if the observer is on the Earth’s equa-
tor, the celestial equator will rise at right angles to the horizon and the right
ascension and oblique ascension will coincide. But when the observer is
elsewhere on the Earth’s surface, the equator is oblique to the horizon, and 
right and oblique ascension differ by the amount 
This quantity is
called the ascensional difference, or (in the Arab world) the equation of
daylight.
Given a particular arc of the ecliptic (usually one of the zodiacal signs),
the rising time of that arc is the length of time it takes for it to rise above the
horizon. In ﬁgure I.6(a) the top of the arc has just reached the horizon, and 
the oblique ascension is
A couple of hours later, as shown in ﬁgure
I.6(b), the arc has crossed the horizon completely and has become entirely 
visible; the oblique ascension is now 
The rising time is thus 
the difference between the two oblique ascensions.
There is a great deal more to ancient mathematical astronomy; in partic-
ular, we have skipped over the theory of the motions of the planets along the
ecliptic. However, this brief introduction should give the reader enough
background to make sense of the astronomy in this book.


2
1
−
= EF,
2 =
F.
1 =
E.
n
EM
=
.
 =
E:
 = E√
The Ancient Heavens
8

1 '" Precursors
What Is Trigonometry?
This deceptively difﬁcult question will shape the opening chapter. The
notion that sines, cosines, and other modern functions deﬁne what we mean
by “trigonometry” may be laid to rest instantly; these functions did not reach
their modern forms, as ratios of sides in right-angled triangles, until rela-
tively recently. Even in their historical forms they did not appear until
medieval India; the Greeks used the length of the chord of an arc of a circle
as their only trigonometric function.1 The word itself, meaning “triangle
measurement,” provides little help: it is a sixteenth-century term, and much
ancient and medieval trigonometry used circles and their arcs rather than
triangles as their reference ﬁgures.
If one were to deﬁne trigonometry as a science, two necessary condi-
tions would arise immediately:
a standard quantitative measure of the inclination of one line to
another;2 and
the capacity for, and interest in, calculating the lengths of line
segments.
We shall encounter sciences existing in the absence of one or the other of
these; for instance, pyramid slope measurements from the Egyptian Rhind
papyrus fail the ﬁrst condition, while trigonometric propositions demon-
strated in Euclid’s Elements (the Pythagorean Theorem, the Law of Cosines)
fail the second.
What made trigonometry a discipline in its own right was the systematic
ability to convert back and forth between measures of angles3 and of lengths.
Occasional computations of such conversions might be signs of something
better to come, but what really made trigonometry a new entity was the abil-
ity to take a given value of an angle and determine a corresponding length.
Hipparchus’s work with chords in a circle is the ﬁrst genuine instance of this,
and we shall begin with him in chapter 2. However, episodes that come
9
1 The chord is the length of a segment cut off across a circle, usually considered as a function of the
angle it subtends at the center.
2 Today this is done with angles, although in certain contexts such as spherical trigonometry, cir-
cular arcs (treating the given lines as radii of the circle) are more convenient.
3 For lack of a more convenient term, we shall use “angular measurement” to refer to any direct
measure of inclination, whether angles or arcs are measured.

close—a prehistory—do exist in various forms before Hipparchus, and we
shall mention some of them in this preliminary chapter.
There is a case to be made that deﬁnitions are unwise in a historical
account, especially one covering several cultures and a vast time span. Any
idea that produces fruit for as long a time as trigonometry is likely to be
altered to the point of unrecognizability after a while—consider, for in-
stance, the tortured history of the mathematical meaning of “analysis”—and
trigonometry is no exception. It is hard to reconcile the use of sines and
cosines in the analytical work of men like Euler, Fourier and Cantor with the
geometric spirit of trigonometry’s Greek progenitors. So, a deﬁnition that
ﬁts one part of the history may well be cumbersome elsewhere. Fortunately,
our deﬁnition coincides (mostly) with the realization and growth of a power-
ful single idea, but in cases where they diverge, we will stay with the ﬂow
rather than the deﬁnition.
The Seqed in Ancient Egypt
The pyramids are among the most recognized structures in the world; the
Great Pyramid at Giza is the oldest of the seven ancient wonders of the
world, and the only one still standing. They have become the center of spec-
ulative theories of all sorts, purportedly revealing advanced age, advanced
religious signiﬁcance, advanced astronomy, advanced mathematics, and
advanced engineering. Many of these theories have been shown to be little
more than advanced silliness; nevertheless, the pyramids are undoubtedly
some of the most remarkable buildings ever constructed. The precision in
both their North-South alignments and their slopes on such a staggering
scale are an achievement regardless of the level of sophistication required to
produce them.
Part of the reason for the vast literature on the construction of the pyra-
mids is, no doubt, the paucity of real evidence. In fact, much of what we
know about Egyptian mathematics in general comes from only a few papyri
that somehow survived the millennia. The most famous of these texts is the
Rhind Mathematical Papyrus (RMP),4 named after the nineteenth-century
Scotsman A. Henry Rhind, who obtained it in Luxor in 1858. This docu-
ment, over 5 m wide and about 32 cm high, consists mostly of the famous
Chapter 1
10
4 Much modern scholarship on the RMP is based on the edition [Peet 1923] and the two-volume
edition, translation, and commentary by A. B. Chace [Chace 1927/1929]. A new translation has
recently appeared within volume 3 of Marshall Clagett’s Ancient Egyptian Science: A Source
Book [Clagett 1999]. [Gillings 1972] contains substantial commentaries on the RMP. See also
[Robins and Shute 1987] for photographic plates of the entire papyrus and an explanation of its
mathematics.

2/n table used to convert fractional quantities into sums of unit fractions, a
table of division of integers by 10, and a set of 84 mathematical problems.
The problems are mostly arithmetical or involve the distribution of food, but
some deal with the geometry of circles, rectangles, triangles, and pyramids.
Problems 56–60 in particular contain calculations regarding the slope of a
pyramid given its horizontal and vertical dimensions, and some have posited
these problems as a kind of proto-trigonometry.5
The cause of these claims is the notion of the seqed, a term referring to
the slope of an inclined side in Egyptian architecture. Used in the RMP
only with respect to pyramids, there is evidence to suggest that the seqed
was also used for the inclinations of temple gateways.6 As a measure of
“slope” it inverts our use of the word: the seqed is the amount of horizon-
tal displacement, measured in palms, for every seven palms of vertical dis-
placement (thus s  7/m, where m is the modern deﬁnition of slope). Seven
palms corresponded to one architectural royal cubit. Curiously, analysis of
inclinations in Egyptian art suggests that something similar to the seqed
may have been at work in that ﬁeld as well, but using the small cubit of six
palms instead. In the case of the temple of Ramesses II at Luxor, the use of
a different cubit leads to a seqed of 1 (per 7) for the gateway itself, but an
inclination of 1 (per 6) in a relief of the same gateway on a wall inside the
temple!
Text 1.1
Finding the Slope of a Pyramid
(Rhind Mathematical Papyrus, Problem 58)
In a pyramid whose altitude is 931⁄3, make known the seqed of it when its
base-side is 140 [cubits].
Take 1⁄2 of 140, which is 70. Multiply 931⁄3 so as to get 70. 1⁄2 of 931⁄3 is
462⁄3. 1⁄4 of it is 231⁄3. Take 1⁄2 1⁄4 of a cubit. Operate on 7: 1⁄2 of it is 31⁄2; 1⁄4 of
it is 11⁄2 1⁄4; the total is 5 palms 1 ﬁnger. This is the seqed.
Precursors
11
5 From [Robins and Shute 1985]: “We know from the pyramid exercises in the Rhind mathemati-
cal papyrus . . . that the ancient Egyptians used a simple trigonometry for determining architec-
tural inclinations . . .” See also [Vetter 1925] and [Vogel 1959, 72–73]. The image on the cover of
the recent Trigonometric Delights by Eli Maor ([Maor 1998]) contains both the Sphinx and the
Great Pyramid.
6 See [Robins and Shute 1985, 113]. For the use of the notion of slope in water clocks, see [Clagett
1995, 76]. For a description of how the seqed would have been implemented in pyramid con-
struction, see [Rossi 2004, 192–196]. The extent to which the seqed was actually used is contro-
versial; see the chapter on seqed theory in [Herz-Fischler 2000, 30–45] for a careful analysis, in-
cluding a summary of various nineteenth-century opinions. Finally, [Imhausen 2003a, 162–168]
contains an algorithmic analysis of the RMP seqed calculations.

Working out:
1
931⁄3
\1⁄2
462⁄3
\1⁄4
231⁄3
Total 1⁄2 1⁄4
Produce 1⁄2 1⁄4 of a cubit, the cubit being 7 palms.
1
7
1⁄2
31⁄2
1⁄4
1[1⁄2]1⁄4
Total: 5 palms 1 ﬁnger, which is the seqed.7
Explanation: In ﬁgure 1.1, the base is bisected to give BC70 cubits. The
calculations that follow establish that BC / AB70 / (931⁄3) 3⁄4. To convert
this ratio to a seqed measurement, multiply this result by 7, which gives a value
of 51⁄4 (commonly used in pyramids of the late Old Kingdom).
The trigonometric connection resides in the fact that the seqed is simply the
ratio BC / AB (scaled by the unit conversion from palms to cubits), and is
thus equal to the cotangent of the angle at C. Is this legitimate trigonometry?
The text does not refer explicitly to C, but as we shall see, Hellenistic as-
tronomers often used arcs rather than angles for computations that are
clearly trigonometric. Here, however, there is no notion of the measurement
of C in any form. The purpose of the seqed is architectural, and to read it
as a cotangent is anachronistic. For this reason, and also since the seqed did
not transmit to the Greeks, we shall say no more about it here.8
Babylonian Astronomy, Arc Measurement, 
and the 360° Circle
Both angles and lengths are continuous quantities; to be able to move easily
between them requires a good system of numeration for fractional quanti-
ties. The ancient Egyptians used unit fractions exclusively, and forbade re-
peated use of the same unit fraction when representing a number. Clearly
this would have made converting arbitrary angles to lengths cumbersome.
The ﬁrst powerful number system incorporating fractions arose in the third
Chapter 1
12
7 This translation is taken from [Clagett 1999, 167].
8 Similar concepts of slope are found in other ancient cultures; for instance, see [Robson 1999,
222] for examples from Old Babylon. We shall ignore them here for the same reason that we pass
over the seqed.

millennium BC in Sumer, out of a system of metrological units, particularly
measurements of weight.9 A quantity of ten of one unit became the next unit
up, then six of that unit became the next, and so on. Eventually pairs of values
in the alternating bases of 6 and 10 came to be thought of as single values in a
number system with a base of 60. Since 60 has many divisors, sexagesimal
calculation (as it is now called) is not as difﬁcult as it may sound.10 An ad-
ministrative reform in the twenty-ﬁrst century BC, requiring the keeping of
meticulous records, may have instigated its birth.11 Whatever the cause, it was
to become the standard system of numeration in astronomy and trigonometry,
at least for the fractional parts of numbers, for millennia.12
We shall represent sexagesimal numbers in the standard modern tran-
scription; that is,
Since sexagesimals had arisen from metrology there was nothing particu-
larly special about any given unit; the measurement could always be subdi-
vided into something smaller. Hence the sexagesimal point, here indicated
by a semicolon, was not as signiﬁcant as the decimal point is to us, and was
not written. The lack of a symbol for zero would also have caused some con-
fusion until placeholder symbols for the absence of a quantity in a sexagesi-
mal digit were invented.
23 51 20
23
51
60
20
602
;
,
.
=
+
+
Precursors
13
9 See [Thureau-Dangin 1921], [Neugebauer 1927], [Thureau-Dangin 1928a], and the nice survey
article [Thureau-Dangin 1939].
10It is often said erroneously in textbooks that the base of 60 was chosen speciﬁcally because of its
many divisors.
11[Høyrup 1992, 604]. The case for this dating is made in [Powell 1976].
12 Indeed, [Nissen/Damerow/Englund 1993, 151] asserts that sexagesimal arithmetic was used
initially only in arithmetic texts, and if not for the birth of astronomy, it may have “fallen into
oblivion.”
Figure 1.1
RMP Problem 58, illustrating the seqed

The sexagesimal system is still seen today, for instance, in the division
of the hour into minutes and the minute into seconds, and of angular degrees
into minutes and seconds. Place value numeration was helpful then, as now,
for complicated arithmetic computations; the Babylonians were adept at
addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division (although certain compli-
cations arise for division13). Tables of square and cube roots reveal that the
Babylonians also had methods for these operations.14
By far the most famous computational tablet of the early Babylonian pe-
riod is Plimpton 322, composed around 1700 BC. Excavated during the
1920s, it contains a collection of Pythagorean triples—that is, sets of three
integers that satisfy the Pythagorean theorem a2b2 c2, thereby forming a
right triangle. The smallest examples of such triples are 3-4-5 (a version of
which appears on the tablet) and 5-12-13. One way to interpret this tablet is
by trigonometry: after all, the triples appear to compare lengths of sides in a
triangle, and they are arranged within the table in order of decreasing ratio of
the two sides touching the right angle. However, there are a host of compet-
ing explanations, including an interpretation in terms of reciprocal pairs.15
With no explicit system of angle measurement in this tablet or indeed in any
early Babylonian mathematics,16 nor any tradition of similar tablets of triples
to follow it, Plimpton 322 ﬁts neither our deﬁnition of trigonometry nor our
narrative; hence we move on.17
However, angular measurement did begin with the Babylonians; but it
was over a millennium later and in the context of astronomy. Observations of
celestial phenomena date back almost as far as human history, but the earli-
est documents that record these events systematically and develop a quanti-
tative science to accompany them began around the eighth century BC.18
Chapter 1
14
13The Babylonian procedure for division is simply to ﬁnd the reciprocal of the divisor and multi-
ply by the numerator. Tables of reciprocals existed to aid the process, but usually gave only re-
ciprocals whose sexagesimal representation terminated after a ﬁnite number of places. See
[Aaboe 1964, 10–16 and 20–22], among many other sources, for more details.
14This is well known; indeed, [Neugebauer/Sachs 1945, 33–35] lists some tables, and p. 42 ana-
lyzes a procedure text for cube roots. A consideration of an algorithm that may have been used
for evaluating square roots may be found in [Fowler/Robson 1998].
15The literature on Plimpton 322 is extensive, perhaps well beyond its signiﬁcance for Babylonian
mathematics. See [Neugebauer/Sachs 1945, 38–41] for its original publication. Most recently,
see [Robson 2001] and [Robson 2002] for a revival of the reciprocal pairs theory; the former
contains descriptions of competing theories and an extensive bibliography.
16[Robson 2001, 179–183] describes the Old Babylonian approach to circles as conceptualized
“from the outside in”; even the radius was a subsidiary idea. See also [Gandz 1929, 458–459]
for a refutation of the notion of angle in either Babylonian or Egyptian mathematics.
17The use of Pythagorean triples is also controversial in Egyptian architecture and mathematics.
See [Rossi 2004, 60–65 and 216–221] for a good summary of the evidence.
18See [Neugebauer 1975, part I, pp. 351–353] for a short summary of our sources for Babylonian
astronomy.

The driving forces behind these endeavors would have been partly calen-
dric (for civil and agricultural purposes), but astrological needs were domi-
nant. Perhaps as an outgrowth of this horoscopic heritage Babylonian
astronomy was computational and predictive, rather than geometrical and
explanatory. Rather than predict locations of celestial bodies at given times,
astronomers predicted the times and places of given celestial events. There
was no underlying geometric theory of how the heavens should work, only
computational schemes to say when and where a periodic event would next
occur.
Nevertheless, being able to answer the “where” question requires a
means of pointing to a particular place in the sky, and to grasp the Babylon-
ian solution we shall need some basic astronomy—although we should be
clear that the Babylonians did not necessarily share our need for the geo-
metric pictures to follow.19 The dome of the sky is called the celestial
sphere (see ﬁgure 1.2). Over the course of a day the celestial sphere per-
forms a single rotation around us from east to west, carrying the stars and
the Sun with it, thereby causing day and night. The stars remain in the same
place with respect to each other, hence the name ﬁxed stars. To any ob-
server the celestial equator remains in the same place in the sky, turning
into itself with its daily rotation. Seven bodies (the Sun, Moon, and the ﬁve
visible planets) also participate in this motion, but they also move slowly
with respect to the ﬁxed stars. For instance, the Sun travels on its own great
circle in the celestial sphere, known as the ecliptic, completing one revolu-
tion per year in the direction opposite to that of the celestial sphere’s daily
motion, or roughly 1° per day. The ecliptic does not remain ﬁxed in place; it
is carried by the daily rotation of the celestial sphere. Twice per year the
Sun crosses the celestial equator, and at these times day and night are of the
same length; these points are called the vernal and autumnal equinoxes.
(A fuller description of these astronomical concepts may be found in the
chapter on the ancient heavens.)
For the simple reason that the shape of the solar system is close to a disc,
most interesting celestial events—those involving the seven moving bodies—
take place within a few degrees of the ecliptic. This band, known as the zodiac
(see ﬁgure 1.2), was therefore the astronomer’s arena. The MUL.APIN, a
well-known text from the seventh century BC, contains an early version of
the zodiac before the appearance of the twelve constellations that became
the zodiacal signs, mentioning these twelve and another six constellations
Precursors
15
19There is a debate over the extent to which the Babylonians visualized their astronomy; even the
celestial sphere may not have been necessary. See [Brack-Bernsen 2003, esp. 23–24].

“who stand in the path of the Moon.”20 The Sun’s motion was described as
follows:
From XII 1 to II 30 the Sun is in the path of Anu:
Wind and storm.
From III 1 to V 30 the Sun is in the path of Enlil:
Harvest and heat.
From VI 1 to VIII 30 the Sun is in the path of Anu:
Wind and storm.
From IX 1 to XI 30 the Sun is in the path of Ea:
Cold.21
Hence the Sun moves on an inclined circle divided into four regions, spend-
ing three months in each.22 From here it would be an easy step to split each
region into three parts, one corresponding to each month; this division hap-
pened by the early ﬁfth century BC. Each of the twelve regions was identiﬁed
Chapter 1
16
20[Van der Waerden 1974, 79–80]. Science Awakening II: The Birth of Astronomy gives a fairly
thorough account of the emergence of the zodiac in scattered places, and is partly the basis of the
following discussion. See also [Evans 1998, 5–8] for a description of MUL.APIN, and [van der
Waerden 1953] and [Brack-Bernsen 2003] on the development of the zodiac and ecliptic in
Babylon and Greece.
21 Quoted from [van der Waerden 1974, 80].
22 “Month” refers to the time it takes for the moon to orbit the Earth.
Figure 1.2
The celestial sphere, the
equator, the ecliptic, and
the zodiac

with a constellation on or near the zodiac, giving rise to the zodiacal signs
Aries, Taurus, and so forth.23
The signs, eventually made equal in size, were each further subdivided
into 30 us (meaning length). This division is convenient for a couple of rea-
sons: the Sun travels roughly one us per day, and 30 is a handy number in
sexagesimal calculations. In fact the us was used only for computation; for
recording observations, another measurement called the kùs (equal to about
2.4 us) was standard.24 Nevertheless the zodiac was now divided into 360
units, later to be called degrees, and a uniﬁed system of arc measurement
was in place,25 at least for the zodiac.
Now, Babylonian astronomy was not designed with underlying geomet-
ric models in mind, and while it might seem natural to us to consider a
planet’s path as a geometric object in the heavens and work toward astro-
nomical predictions from that, this was not necessarily so for the Babyloni-
ans. Consider, for instance, their approach to the motion of the Sun. It travels
about 1° per day in its annual trip around the ecliptic, but its speed is not
constant; in ancient times it was slower in the spring, and faster in the fall.26
The Babylonians used two methods to represent the Sun’s changing speed:
System A, which alternates the speed between two ﬁxed values; and System
B, which varies the speed linearly between a maximum and a minimum (see
ﬁgure 1.3).27 It may be tempting, but is anachronistic, to consider these
methods as approximations to trigonometric curves;28 functions and graphs
are modern inventions. In any case, these systems were numeric constructs,
Precursors
17
23This zodiac differed from the Greek one, in that the vernal equinox happened to fall either 8° or
10° into Aries, and was ﬁxed with respect to the background stars. (For research on this topic,
see for instance [van der Waerden 1953] and [Huber 1958].) This becomes important with the
later Greek discovery of the precession of the equinoxes, a very slow movement of the vernal
equinox with respect to the background stars (1° every 72 years). The Greeks ﬁxed the begin-
ning of Aries to the vernal equinox rather than the stars. Thus, today the zodiacal signs have
moved about 30° away from the constellations for which they were named.
24 See [Swerdlow 1998, 34–37].
25For more detail, including the relation to time measurement, see [Thureau-Dangin 1928b],
[Sidersky 1929], [Thureau-Dangin 1930], [Thureau-Dangin 1931], [Neugebauer 1938], and
[Neugebauer 1983, 8]. A candidate for the earliest text with a 360° zodiac is one published in
[Sachs 1952, 54–57], probably dated 410 BC. Alongside ecliptic coordinates, another system
was used for certain types of texts (“Diaries,” “Goal-Year texts,” and “Normal-Star Almanacs,”)
whereby locations were identiﬁed with respect to 31 “normal stars” scattered irregularly around
the zodiac. See [Neugebauer 1975, 545–547].
26 In modern times the summer is the longest season in the northern hemisphere.
27Fuller descriptions of Babylonian models of the motions of the planets may be found in any
number of places; for instance, a survey in [Neugebauer 1957/1969, 97–144] and thorough cov-
erage in [Neugebauer 1975, 347–540] and [Brown 2000], and conjectures on the theory’s con-
struction in [Aaboe 1965], [Aaboe 1980], and [Swerdlow 1998].
28 It has been tried, for example, in [Dittrich 1934].

allowing the direct prediction of solar positions without the intervening pres-
ence of a geometric model.
The Geometric Heavens: Spherics in Ancient Greece
Meanwhile, Greek astronomy took a very different turn. The earliest astro-
nomical interests in Greece were likely similar to other cultures: ﬁrstly
calendrical, concerning the coordination of dates and weather events with
the risings and settings of certain stars and constellations. The belief that the
heavens and the Earth are concentric spheres is very old; the bringing
together of this cosmological statement with these astronomical problems
may have come with Eudoxus of Cnidus in the mid-fourth century BC.29 The
next decades produced several texts on the mathematics of spheres with an
eye to their use in the heavens. Noteworthy among these were Autolycus of
Pitane’s On a Moving Sphere and On Risings and Settings,30 and Euclid’s
Phaenomena.31 These works were among the treatises called the “Little
Astronomy,” used by later writers as an approach to the study of Ptolemy’s
Almagest.32
Chapter 1
18
29 [Goldstein/Bowen 1983] argues that Eudoxus’s two-sphere model marks the beginning of a
new phase of Greek astronomy, linking calendar problems with cosmology and allowing
mathematical reasoning to operate on both. One scholar believes that Eudoxus performed
trigonometric calculations to determine terrestrial latitudes from the lengths of shadows cast
by the gnomon (a simple astronomical instrument to be discussed in the next chapter); see
[Szabó 1985a].
30The Greek text and an English translation of these works may be found in [Autolycus
(Bruin/Vondjidis) 1971]; Greek text and French translation are in [Autolycus (Mogenet) 1950];
and German translations of Autolycus and Theodosius are in [Czwalina 1931].
31See [Berggren/Thomas 1996] for a translation and study of Euclid’s Phaenomena.
32 [Neugebauer 1975, 768–769] doubts that the “Little Astronomy” actually existed.
Figure 1.3
Two Babylonian models for the
Sun’s velocity throughout the
year

The problems dealt with in these treatises had much to do with the ear-
lier astronomical and geographical concerns;33 for instance, the varying
lengths of daylight throughout the year for a given location, the division of
the Earth’s surface into climate zones, or the angles between important great
circles in the celestial sphere. Euclid’s Phaenomena is geared particularly to
the times required for various arcs of the ecliptic to rise above the horizon.
Since the Sun is a point on the ecliptic, rising times were crucial for the reck-
oning of the passage of time throughout the day, and we shall return to this
topic several times. One typical theorem reads as follows:
[Proposition 9b]. Semicircles of the ecliptic that do not begin on
the same parallel rise entirely in unequal times, [with] that follow-
ing Cancer in the greatest, those following, each in turn, in lesser
[times], and that following Capricorn in the least. And those [semi-
circles] beginning on the same parallel rise in equal times.34
To see what this is saying consider ﬁgure 1.4, which positions the ce-
lestial sphere so that the equinoxes (the places where the equator and eclip-
tic intersect) are due north and south. The semicircle “following Cancer” is
drawn in bold;35 dashes or dots are on the back surface of the sphere from
our perspective. The equator rotates at a constant speed, carrying the eclip-
tic along with it. The point on the equator that is now at E on the horizon
will take twelve hours to rise above the horizon, travel through the sky, and
reach the horizon again at W. On the other hand the bolded part of the
ecliptic has already begun to rise above the horizon, and twelve hours from
now it will have as far to go before setting as it has risen in the ﬁgure.
So the bolded semicircle takes more than twelve hours to rise. Conversely,
the part of the ecliptic not drawn in bold will take less than twelve hours
to rise.
Euclid’s proof of this proposition is entirely geometric. Even so, it has
been suggested that he may have been aware of Babylonian arithmetic
schemes dealing with length of daylight (similar to the solar schemes of
ﬁgure 1.3), and he may have been trying to put the symmetries used in these
schemes on ﬁrm geometrical ground.36
Precursors
19
33See [Aujac 1976] for a discussion of the interaction between astronomy and geography, and the
latter’s use of both spherics and “spheropoeia” (which included the use of instruments).
34[Berggren/Thomas 1996, 71].
35By now the signs of the ecliptic were positioned so that Aries began at the vernal equinox, as op-
posed to the Babylonian practice of ﬁgure 1.2.
36[Berggren/Thomas 1996, 2] and [Berggren 1991b, especially 237–238].

A Trigonometry of Small Angles? Aristarchus 
and Archimedes on Astronomical Dimensions
Although early spherics was able to say a great deal about the qualitative be-
havior of the celestial sphere, it was not the basis for a predictive science.37
For instance, one could not use it to infer precisely where a particular body
would be at a given time. In this case the geometers would have been of lit-
tle help. Our notion of geometry, using coordinates, leads us to think easily
of lengths as quantities, measured by numbers; and locations as pairs (or
triples) of numbers referred to coordinate axes. Indeed, we often think of a
curve as an algebraic equation: for instance, a parabola is an equation of the
form yax2 bxc. By contrast, Greek geometry operated on its own and
had no need for such a numeric foundation.38
Indeed, if we were to impose a numerical understanding of magnitudes
on Greek geometry, then we might say that many trigonometric results were
Chapter 1
20
37See [Knorr 1989] for a discussion of four Greek scientiﬁc disciplines that do not employ nu-
meric techniques, including early spherics. Knorr argues that their purpose was to explain, not
predict, phenomena.
38The case is made in detail in [Fowler 1987] that Greek mathematics and astronomy, up to and in-
cluding Archimedes, were not “arithmetized”; see also [Fowler 1992].
Figure 1.4
Simpliﬁed ﬁgure for
Proposition 9b of Euclid’s
Phaenomena

known well before the birth of trigonometry. The most obvious is the
Pythagorean Theorem, which (for a unit circle) is equivalent to the identity
sin2cos21. More dramatically, Proposition II.13 of Euclid’s Elements
reads:
In acute-angled triangles the square on the side subtending the
acute angle is less than the squares on the sides containing the acute
angle by twice the rectangle contained by one of the sides about
the acute angle, namely that on which the perpendicular falls, and
the straight line cut off within by the perpendicular towards the
acute angle.39
In ﬁgure 1.5, if aBC, bAC, and cAB, then BDc cosB, and we
have the Law of Cosines:
b2 a2 c2 2ac cosB.
But these sorts of statements are not much closer to trigonometry than was
the Egyptian seqed. We have a working deﬁnition of angle, but no quantita-
tive measurement or systematic conversion to lengths.40
The ﬁrst real glimmer of a proper trigonometry came with the earliest
stages of a quantitative astronomy in the third century BC. As so often in the
history of science, it is very difﬁcult to assert a precise beginning; a blurry
gradual awakening does not lend itself to the identiﬁcation of a single blessed
moment. The inevitable result is that the birth of mathematical astronomy has
been attributed to several different people.41 One of the earliest ﬁgures in this
Precursors
21
39[Euclid 1925, 406].
40See Chapter 4, on John of Muris, for an example of II.13 being used more legitimately as the
Law of Cosines to solve a triangle.
41[Neugebauer 1959], for instance, argues that “all the evidence points to Apollonius as the founder
of Greek mathematical astronomy” based on his work on planetary motion. [Goldstein/Bowen
1983], on the other hand, claim that Eudoxus was “[t]he person largely responsible for turning
astronomy into a mathematical science.”
Figure 1.5
Diagram for Elements II.13

story is Aristarchus of Samos (ca. 310 BC–230 BC),42 who is most famous
for being the ﬁrst to propose a Sun-centered solar system, about 1,700 years
before Copernicus. The little we know of “the mathematician,” as he was
called, includes that he was a student of the philosopher Strato of Lamp-
sacus; Vitruvius credits him with the invention of the scaphe, a type of sun-
dial.43 Unfortunately most of his works are lost, including what he wrote on
his heliocentric system, and a book on optics. Our knowledge of Aristarchus’s
solar system therefore must be rebuilt from references in writings of later
authors, especially Archimedes’ Sand Reckoner, of which we shall speak
shortly.44
Aristarchus’s only surviving work, On the Sizes and Distances of the
Sun and Moon (see ﬁgure 1.6), has nothing to do with his heliocentric the-
ory; it sets out to measure the relative and absolute sizes of the Earth, Moon,
and Sun.45 It was one of the treatises in the “Little Astronomy,” and it is
probably due to its inclusion in this collection that we have it today.46 It reads
in the classical Greek style, reminiscent of Euclid, and its theorems are wor-
thy of one known as “the mathematician.”
The key datum for Aristarchus’s determination of the relative distances of
the Moon and the Sun comes from the moment when precisely half of the
Moon’s face is visible from the Earth. In ﬁgure 1.7, when the observer sees the
half Moon, the Sun–Moon–Earth angle is a right angle; the Moon–Earth–Sun
angle is asserted to be “less than a quadrant by one-thirtieth of a quadrant”
3° i.e., 87°.47 (The correct value is close to 89°50.) This hopelessly poor
value, in addition to some other incorrect observations and assumptions, lead
one to question whether Aristarchus’s purpose was less quantitative than proof
of concept, “a purely mathematical exercise”48—albeit an ingenious one.
To convert his angular data to ratios of distances, Aristarchus is forced
into approximations of trigonometric quantities. As a sample of his technique
we shall follow the ﬁrst half of Proposition 7, in which he demonstrates that
Chapter 1
22
42The source on which most twentieth-century work on Aristarchus is based is [Heath 1913],
which contains a translation of On the Sizes and Distances of the Sun and Moon. See also the
recent detailed textual and mathematical discussion of On the Sizes in [Berggren/Sidoli 2007].
For a biographical essay, see [Stahl 1970].
43[Vitruvius 1914, 273] or [Vitruvius 1934, vol. 2, 255].
44Aristarchus’s heliocentric hypothesis has attracted a fair bit of scholarly attention, especially the
extent to which Copernicus may have been indebted to him. Among others, see [von Erhardt/von
Erhardt-Siebold 1942 and 1943], [Neugebauer 1942], [Africa 1961], [Derenzini 1974], [Wall
1975], [Rosen 1978], [Gingerich 1985], [Zhitomirskii 1986], and [Christianides et al. 2002].
[Wall 1975] contains a summary of all extant information on Aristarchus.
45[Tannery 1883, 243–244] argues that Eudoxus may have originated the method that follows.
46[Heath 1913, 317–318].
47[Heath 1913, 353].
48Neugebauer makes this case in [Neugebauer 1975, 634–643], especially p. 643.

23
Figure 1.6
Title page of
Commandino’s 1572
edition of Aristarchus of
Samos’s On the Sizes
(courtesy of the Burndy
Library)
Figure 1.7
Earth, Sun, and Moon at
half moon, from
Aristarchus’s On the
Sizes

Let C be the center of the Moon when halved; let a plane be carried
through AB and C, and let the section made by it in the sphere on which the
center of the Sun moves be the great circle ADE.
Let AC, CB be joined, and let BC be produced to D.
Then, because the point C is the center of the Moon when halved, the an-
gle ACB will be right.
Let BE be drawn from B at right angles to BA; then the circumference ED
will be one-thirtieth of the circumference EDA; for, by hypothesis, when the
Moon appears to us halved, its distance from the sun is less than a quadrant by
one-thirtieth of a quadrant.
Thus the angle EBC is also one-thirtieth of a right angle.
Let the parallelogram AE be completed, and let BF be joined.
Then the angle FBE will be half a right angle.
Let the angle FBE be bisected by the straight line BG; therefore the angle
GBE is one fourth part of a right angle.
Chapter 1
24
Figure 1.8
Diagram for Proposition 
7 of On the Sizes
the ratio of the Sun’s distance to the Moon’s distance, is greater than 18 but
less than 20.
Text 1.2
Aristarchus, the Ratio of the Distances of the Sun and Moon 
(Proposition 7a from On the Sizes)
[See ﬁgure 1.8.] The distance of the Sun from the Earth is greater than eighteen
times, but less than twenty times, the distance of the Moon from the Earth.
For let A be the center of the Sun, B that of the Earth.
Let AB be joined and produced.

But the angle DBE is also one thirtieth part of a right angle; therefore the
ratio of the angle GBE to the angle DBE is that which 15 has to 2: for, if a
right angle be regarded as divided into 60 equal parts, the angle GBE contains
15 of such parts, and the angle DBE contains 2.
Now, since GE has to EH a ratio greater than that which the angle GBE has to
theangleDBE,thereforeGE has to EH a ratio greater than that which 15 has to 2.
Next, since BE is equal to EF, and the angle at E is right, therefore the
square on FB is double of the square on BE.
But, as the square on FB is to the square on BE, so is the square on FG to
the square on GE; therefore the square on FG is double of the square on GE.
Now 49 is less than double of 25, so that the square on FG has to the
square on GE a ratio greater than that which 49 has to 25; therefore FG also
has to GE a ratio greater than that which 7 has to 5.
Therefore, componendo, FE has to EG a ratio greater than that which 12
has to 5, that is, that which 36 has to 15.
But it was also proved that GE has to EH a ratio greater than that which 15 has
to 2; therefore, ex aequali, FE has to EH a ratio greater than that which 36 has to
2, that is, than that which 18 has to 1; therefore FE is greater than 18 times EH.49
Explanation: By hypothesis ABC 87° therefore DBE3°. Since an-
gles are measured by fractions of right angles, we shall write 
and 
where R90°.
By construction, 
and 
therefore 
Since 
we know that 
This key step, which 
applies the inequality without comment or proof (see below), allows
Aristarchus to convert from an equality of angles to an inequality of lengths.
Now FBE is a right isosceles triangle, so FB2 BE2; but (by Elements
VI.3) 
so FG2 2GE2.
Next, since 
we have 
so 
.
Finally, 
The lemma applied by Aristarchus in the argument above is stated by
Archimedes as follows:
FE
EH
FE
GE
GE
EH
=
⋅
>
⋅
=
12
5
15
2
18.
FE
GE
>
+
=
1
7
5
12
5
FG
GE
> 7
5
,
2
7 5
>
/ ,
FB
BE
FG
GE
2
2
2
2
=
,
GE
EH
> 15
2
.
GE
EH
GBE
DBE
> 

,


GBE
DBE
= 15
2
.
GBE
R
= 1
4
;
FBE
R
= 1
2
DBE
R
= 1
30
,
ABC
R
= 29
30
Precursors
25
49Excerpted from [Heath 1913, 376–381].

If of two right-angled triangles, (one each of) the sides about the
right angle are equal (to each other), while the other sides are un-
equal, the greater angle of those toward [next to] the unequal sides
has to the lesser (angle) a greater ratio than the greater line of those
subtending the right angle to the lesser, but a lesser (ratio) than the
greater line of those about the right angle to the lesser.50
Thus in ﬁgure 1.9 where AC DF and ,
(1.1)
Aristarchus applies the second inequality to BEH and BEG in ﬁgure 1.8;
elsewhere in On the Sizes he uses both inequalities. We may understand this
result in modern terms as follows: since AC/BCsin , DF/EFsin ,
AC/ABtan , and DF/DEtan ,
51
(1.2)
These facts, seen easily from the graphs of the sine and tangent functions,
may also be proved geometrically.52
We ﬁnd similar uses of trigonometry in one of the works of deservedly
the most famous of ancient scientists, Archimedes (287–212 BC). One of the
most creative mathematicians of all time, Archimedes is renowned for his
ability to approach difﬁcult geometric problems, including his determina-
tions of areas of curved ﬁgures. His “method of exhaustion” works by grad-
ually inscribing, and simultaneously circumscribing, the required ﬁgure
with polygons that successively approximate the curves more closely.
Archimedes also wrote a number of works in topics that would now be clas-
siﬁed under physics, including mechanics, optics, and hydrostatics. His
feared war machines and other instruments spread his fame far beyond the
conﬁnes of science.53
sin
sin
tan
tan
.






<
<
EF
BC
DE
AB
<
<


.
Chapter 1
26
50From the Sand Reckoner, translated by Wilbur Knorr in [Knorr 1985]. The origin of this lemma
is lost, but it has been speculated that it was part of a pre-Euclidean collection of lemmas for use
in the study of spherics [Hultsch 1883].
51See, for instance, [Heath 1921, vol. 2, 5], and similar statements in [Zeller 1944], 3–4.
52One such proof is given in [Heath 1913, 366].
53See [Clagett 1970] for an extensive biographical essay on Archimedes. The two leading modern
sources for Archimedes are the translations by Thomas Little Heath in [Archimedes 1897] (in-
cluding most of the Sand Reckoner) and the accounts of [Dijksterhuis 1956], especially the
Princeton 1987 reprint which contains an essay by Wilbur Knorr bringing the state of
Archimedes scholarship up to date.

The Sand Reckoner (see ﬁgure 1.10), one of several of Archimedes’s
works intended for a wider audience, was written to show the difference
between a large ﬁnite quantity and the inﬁnite. He illustrates this amply by cal-
culating the number of grains of sand that would be required to ﬁll the uni-
verse. His result, an upper bound on the order of 1063, was astronomically large
Precursors
27
Figure 1.9
An ancient
trigonometric lemma
Figure 1.10
Title page of Maurolico’s
1685 edition of
Archimedes’ collected
works, including the
Sand Reckoner (courtesy
of the Burndy Library)

(and required the invention of an ingenious number system to express), but not
inﬁnite.54 To make sure that he had truly capped the number with an upper
bound Archimedes needed to use the largest available estimate for the size of
the universe, hence his use of Aristarchus’s heliocentric system. If the Earth
travels around the Sun, then the vantage point from which we see the stars is
moving, so they should appear to move over the course of the year. In fact they
do, but by such a tiny amount that the effect is nowhere near visible. Thus
Aristarchus had to move the ﬁxed stars far enough away that this stellar paral-
lax was negligible, resulting in the largest universe known to Archimedes.
The Sand Reckoner begins with a measurement of the angular magni-
tude of the diameter of the Sun, ds, which Archimedes reports to be
(1.3)
(where R90°). (It had been thought that Archimedes obtained these
bounds by drawing lines of sight on his observational instrument and mea-
suring their angles physically. Recently, a procedure has been reconstructed
that uses mathematical methods similar to what follows, including an appli-
cation of (1.1).55) Using (1.3), Archimedes needs to ﬁnd a lower bound on
the length of the Sun’s diameter. Since he already has Aristarchus’s estimate
of the size of the circle in which the Sun orbits, Archimedes needs only to
ﬁnd a bound relative to that circle.
In ﬁgure 1.11 (see also ﬁgure 1.12), E is the observer at a moment after
the Sun has risen, PEQ is the Sun’s angular diameter seen from E, and
FCG its angular diameter seen from the center of the Earth C. A and B are
the extensions of the lines of sight from C. From (1.3) we know that
Since E is closer to the Sun than C, the angular diameter seen 
from C is smaller, so 
Thus, the arc 
in the corresponding 
circle is less than 
of a circle, and AB is less than one side of a 
656-gon. Hence 
.56 But AB is the Sun’s diameter,57
and since the Earth is assumed to be smaller than the Sun, the sum of
the
Earth’s 
and 
Sun’s 
radii 
is 
less 
than 
Therefore
.58
100
99 >
>
CO
HK
CF
EQ
/
/
1
100 CO.
AB
CO
/
<
⋅
<
1
656
1
100
2
1
164 4
1
656
×
=
AOB
FCG
R
<
1
164
.
PEQ
R
<
1
164
.
1
200
1
164
R
d
R
s
<
<
Chapter 1
28
54For an extended but accessible discussion of Archimedes’ purpose in this work, see [Netz 2003].
55See [Delambre 1817, vol. 1, 104–105], [Hultsch 1899, 197], and [Lejeune 1947, 38–41] for the
original theories, and [Shapiro 1975] for his rebuttal and reconstruction of Archimedes’ method.
56Here Archimedes applies his lower bound for , 22/7, from Measurement of a Circle.
57Since CACO, AM is perpendicular to CO, and OF is perpendicular to AC, by symmetry we
have AMOF, and the latter is the Sun’s radius.
58The ﬁrst of these inequalities is true because HK is what is left over when the two radii are taken
away from CO. The second inequality is true because COCF and HKEQ.

29
Figure 1.11
Determination of the Sun’s
diameter, from the Sand Reckoner
Figure 1.12
The equivalent to ﬁgure
1.11 in Commandino’s
edition of Archimedes’
Sand Reckoner (courtesy of
the Burndy Library)

Now Archimedes applies (1.1) to OEQ and OCF (since OFOQ but
EQCF, since E is closer to the Sun than C), which gives
.
This result allows him to convert from his inequality of lengths to one of
angles. Doubling both angles and recalling that we already know that
it is relatively easy sailing (using the second inequality 
above) to arrive at 
so that 
is greater than 
of a circle, and ﬁnally that AB is greater than one side of an 
812-gon. Archimedes rounds downward to the side of a chiliagon (1000-
gon), and has a convenient lower bound for the Sun’s diameter.
That both Aristarchus and Archimedes use (1.1) with no comment or
proof suggests that the lemma would have been familiar to their readers. In
fact there are nine proofs of one or the other inequality in this lemma in an-
tiquity, but the earliest proof of the ﬁrst inequality does not appear until
Ptolemy’s construction of his chord table in the Almagest four centuries
later.59 How the lemma might have arisen may only be speculated. Perhaps it
was recorded in a mathematical work alongside and adjunct to the study of
spherics,60 or perhaps it was more closely bound with the emergence of
practical astronomical problems.61 The lemma is useful, for instance, in the
determination of rising times of arcs of the ecliptic, or in the measurement of
time with sundials.62
Whether or not the lemma allows us to say that a more extensive
trigonometry existed as early as the third century BC is a matter of de-
bate.63 Clearly its existence alone does not qualify as sufﬁcient evidence.
Nor does it provide us with a useful general trigonometric tool; although
it is perfectly plausible to measure angles as fractions of a right angle,
the lemma gives reasonable and useful bounds only for very small arcs.
1
203 4
1
812
×
=
AB
ACB
R
R
>
>
99
20000
1
203
,
PEQ
R
>
1
200
,
CO
EO
OEQ
OCF
CF
EQ
<
<


Chapter 1
30
59[Knorr 1985] gives a detailed comparison of these nine sources, noting their remarkable simi-
larities. An equivalent to the tangent half of the lemma appears in Euclid’s Optics, in a different
context and format. Opinions on which is the earliest text to contain this proof have varied; see
[Knorr 1991, 195], [Knorr 1994], and [Jones 1994].
60As suggested in [Hultsch 1883], especially pp. 415–420.
61This view is favored by [Björnbo 1902].
62[Knorr 1985, 383–384].
63Views on this matter go back at least to the nineteenth century; see for instance [Tannery 1893,
60–68]. More recently, Toomer suggests that lemma (1.1) may have been “of fundamental im-
portance in evaluating triangles before the development of trigonometry” [Diocles 1976, 162], a
view that Knorr is inclined to support in [Knorr 1985, 385].

Given an arbitrary arc of sufﬁcient magnitude, the lemma cannot produce
bounds of any use to an astronomer in a reasonable time. On its own,
then, (1.1) is unable to provide a systematic conversion between arcs and
lengths.
We are not yet ﬁnished with Archimedes. In his treatise Book on the De-
rivation of Chords in a Circle, the early eleventh-century Muslim scientist al-
Biruni attributed the following result to Archimedes, sometimes called the 
“Theorem of the Broken Chord”: in ﬁgure 1.13, given unequal arcs 
in a circle, let D be the midpoint of 
and drop perpendicular DE onto AB.
Then AEEBBC.64 From here it is possible to derive results equivalent to
the sine or chord angle sum and difference identities, among others. This fact
led one scholar to claim that Archimedes had a more sophisticated trigonom-
etry than what we have witnessed thus far, one that would have given him the
capacity to construct a table of chords as powerful as Ptolemy’s.65 However, the
trigonometric identities do not drop entirely without effort from this theorem,66
AC
AB
BC
>
Precursors
31
Figure 1.13
Archimedes’ Theorem of the
Broken Chord
64[Al-Biruni 1948, 7–8], a German translation along with commentary and the appearance of the
same theorem in works of other medieval Arabic authors is available in [Suter 1910–11]. Al-
Biruni also mentions this theorem in his Mascudic Canon [Al-Biruni 1954, 273–274]; the rele-
vant section is translated into German in [Schoy 1927, 2–7, esp. 3–4]. See also the exposition of
al-Biruni’s text in [Dold-Samplonius 1973, 34–39].
65[Tropfke 1928]; announced in [Miller 1928] and repeated elsewhere; see for instance [Karpinski
1945, 269].
66Toomer derives the chord difference formula, for instance, as follows: let O be the center of the
circle, F the point diametrically opposite from D, AOD, and DOB. Now,
DEB~DFA (since DBEAFD subtend the same chord DA—thanks to Alina Kononov
and Eric Gorlin for this) and AED~FBD (BAD BFD since they subtend the same
chord BD). So BE(BDAF) / DF and AE(ADBF) / DF. Then, from Archimedes’theorem, 

and, just as seriously, we have no idea how Archimedes (as opposed to his
Muslim successors) might have intended to use it.67 It can only be said
that, had Archimedes the idea and numerical system needed to build a sys-
tematic chord table, he would have had the mathematics at his disposal to
pull it off.68
Chapter 1
32
BC Crd()AEBE(ADBFBDAF) / DF. Since ADCrd , BDCrd , DF
is the diameter, and BF and AF may be found by applying the Pythagorean Theorem with known
quantities, the chord difference law results.
67This argument is made convincingly in [Toomer 1973a, 20–23].
68See [Schneider 1979, 149–151] for an argument to this effect. Other cases have been made for
more extensive calculations with chords in the third century BC than are found in the extant lit-
erature; see for instance [Tannery 1893, 60–68], [van der Waerden 1970, 7], and especially [van
der Waerden 1986, esp. 400–401] for their views on Apollonius, and [Szabó 1985a] on Eudoxus.
Since these arguments must remain speculative (barring further discoveries), we simply refer
the interested reader to these articles. With respect to Archimedes, we have also his Measure-
ment of a Circle. In his computation of bounds for the value of  he uses the equivalent of a
chord half-angle formula, which we shall see is a vital tool for the construction of a chord table.
Once again, we have no evidence that Archimedes used it outside of the context of computing .

2 '" Alexandrian Greece
Convergence
The arrival of Babylonian astronomy in Greece in the second or third century
BC transformed that science utterly.1 Although the details of this transmis-
sion may never be known, eventually the geometry of earlier Greek science
was wedded to Babylonian arithmetic practice. The introduction of the sexa-
gesimal (base 60) number system simpliﬁed calculations with arbitrary
lengths; the use of a 360° circle made it natural to apply sexagesimal arith-
metic to arcs. Finally, Babylonian observational records and predictive
schemes for positions of celestial events gave Greek scientists the tools they
needed to build geometric astronomical models that were also quantitatively
accurate.2
The sexagesimal system ﬁrst appeared in mid-third century BC Greece,
in the geographical work of Eratosthenes. His division of the Earth into ﬁve
climate zones (one tropical, two temperate, two frigid) was deﬁned by
breaking the meridian circle of the Earth into sixty parts, and allocating cer-
tain numbers of sixtieths to each zone.3 The practice of dividing the circle
into sixty parts did not stop with Eratosthenes; it may be found in scattered
later writers as late as the seventh century AD.4
The 360° circle is ﬁrst mentioned on a second-century BC astronomical in-
scription found in 1893 in Keskintos, on Rhodes. Within a list of astronomi-
cal parameters we ﬁnd the following phrase:
A circle comprises 360 degrees or 9720 stigmai [points]; a degree
comprises [27] points.5
The unit “points” appears nowhere else; until very recently it was thought
that the tablet read 720 points rather than 9720, implying that a point is 
,6
but new research suggests that 9720 is in fact correct. This curious unit
1
2 °
33
1 This is the establishment view; several scholars are (to put it mildly) skeptical of the role of
Babylonian arithmetical astronomy in Greece. See especially many articles published in the jour-
nal DIO.
2 The earliest precise astronomical observations made in Greece were in the third century BC, but
probably not in degree units. See [Goldstein/Bowen 1991, esp. 103–105].
3 Strabo reports this in his Geography, [Strabo 1917, vol. 1, 436–439].
4 The list includes Geminus, Plutarch, Galen, and Severus Sebokht. See [Neugebauer 1975, 590,
n.2] for references.
5 [Jones 2006, 13].
6 See [Tannery 1895, 51–52] and [Neugebauer 1975, 698–699]. As we shall see, the demi-degree
did have some currency in later astronomy.

might have arisen by dividing the diameters of the Sun and Moon into 15
equal parts.7
Also in the second century BC we ﬁnd the following passage in On the
Rising of the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac by Hypsicles of Alexandria (best
known as the author of Book XIV of Euclid’s Elements):
The circumference of the zodiac circle having been divided into 360
equal arcs, let each of the arcs be called a degree in space, and sim-
ilarly, if the time in which the zodiac circle returns to any position it
has left be divided into 360 equal times, let each of the times be
called a degree in time.8
Hypsicles’s purpose was to solve the following problem: given the ratio
of the longest to the shortest day at a given location, determine the times that
it takes for the various signs of the zodiac to rise above the horizon.9 We
have seen rising times treated geometrically in spherics (for instance by Eu-
clid); Hypsicles’s approach was completely different. He assumes that the
values of the rising times for successive zodiacal signs form an arithmetical
progression, and he arrives at a numerical sequence strikingly similar to the
Babylonian arithmetical schemes for astronomical phenomena.10 Without
trigonometry, this method was perhaps the best option. However, at least in
Greece, the end of this approach was in sight. The convergence of structured
numeration and mensuration with the geometrical style of astronomy was
about to pay rich dividends.
Hipparchus
A ﬁgure as foundational as Hipparchus of Rhodes deserves better preserva-
tion than history has granted him; his works are almost completely lost. All
that survives is a relatively minor treatise, Commentary on the Phaenomena
of Aratus and Eudoxus (ﬁgure 2.1), and probably it is with us only because
of the fame of Aratus’s astronomical poem. Born in Nicaea early in the sec-
ond century BC, Hipparchus probably spent most of his career in Rhodes.
Chapter 2
34
7 [Jones 2006, 14–16].
8 [Thomas 1941, vol. 2, 394–397].
9 Each sign of the zodiac is a particular segment of the ecliptic 30° in length. As the celestial
sphere rotates over the course of a day, a given segment will at some point broach the horizon;
after a while it will completely clear the horizon. This time interval is the zodiacal sign’s rising
time.
10Hypsicles’s work has been edited and translated into German in [Hypsicles (DeFalco/Krause)
1966]. A commentary by Otto Neugebauer in the same volume (pp. 5–22) explains Hypsicles’s
arithmetical approach to rising times; see also [Neugebauer 1975, 715–718] for a summary.
[Tannery 1912, vol. 2, 261–262] suggests that this method came directly from Babylon.

We know from many references to him by later authors that he wrote on a va-
riety of scientiﬁc topics, especially astronomy, but also optics, combinatorial
mathematics, astrology, and geography (an attack on Eratosthenes).
Most of what we know of Hipparchus’s astronomy comes from reports
in Ptolemy’s Almagest, written almost three centuries later.11 Our under-
standing of the authorship of the Almagest’s innovations has changed dra-
matically. Many were once thought to be mere records of Hipparchus’s
Alexandrian Greece
35
11The best places to start with Hipparchus’s astronomy are [Neugebauer 1975, 274–343] and the
somewhat shorter [Toomer 1978], which relies partly on Neugebauer but also includes some
of Toomer’s reconstructions of Hipparchus’s methods. [Linton 2004, 51–60] is a good capsule
review.
Figure 2.1
Title page from a 1567 edition
of Hipparchus of Rhodes’
Commentary on Aratus and
Eudoxus (courtesy of the
Burndy Library)

achievements.12 But today, the Almagest is taken by most (although not all)
scholars to be close to its word when attributing discoveries to Hipparchus
or claiming them for Ptolemy himself. There is no doubt that Hipparchus
constructed models of the motions of the Sun and Moon, since Ptolemy tells
us as much. However, it is usually accepted today that Hipparchus did not
derive a theory of the motions of the planets, and that he restricted himself
only to observing that theories current at his time were deﬁcient (especially
the simple epicyclic theory ascribed to Apollonius in the Almagest).13
Among Hipparchus’s astronomical achievements, few rank as high as
his work with the precession of the equinoxes. As we described in chapter 1,
the equinoxes, the intersections of the ecliptic with the celestial equator (see
ﬁgure 1.2), were within Aries and the sign directly opposite, Libra. Hip-
parchus discovered that the equinoxes do not stay ﬁxed with respect to the
background stars, but move very slowly, at a rate of at least 1° per century.14
This fact implies that one must choose whether to ﬁx one’s ecliptic coordinate
system to the ﬁxed stars, or to the slowly moving equinoxes. The Babylonians,
unaware of the difference, chose the ﬁxed stars as their reference, hence the
term sidereal coordinates. For reasons relating to the theory of the Sun, the
Greeks’ reference points were the equinoxes (tropical coordinates), and they
laid out the zodiacal signs so that Aries always begins at the vernal equinox.
Since we have so little of Hipparchus’s writings, we must rely on scraps
of evidence from various sources to reconstruct what he contributed and
what methods he used. Like his predecessors, Hipparchus may have used
arithmetic methods to solve putatively trigonometric problems. It has been
suggested that On the Rising of the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac was one such
example; if so, it must have evoked memories of Hypsicles’s earlier treatise
on the same topic15—but it has been argued recently that Hipparchus may
have had access to spherical trigonometry for this problem.16 Certain frag-
ments of mathematical methods in Hipparchus’s geography also suggest the
use of arithmetic schemes,17 but again there are hints of more sophisticated
methods elsewhere.18 We shall return to these debates shortly.
Chapter 2
36
12The classic and inﬂuential Histoire de l’Astronomie Ancienne [Delambre 1817] was perhaps the
most prominent work to take this view.
13This is based primarily on Ptolemy’s report in Almagest IX.2, [Ptolemy (Toomer) 1984,
421–422].
14The correct ﬁgure is about 1° every 72 years.
15See [Neugebauer 1975, 301].
16[Sidoli 2006].
17For instance, [Strabo 1917, 283] seems to attribute to Hipparchus an arithmetic relation between
the length of longest daylight and the Sun’s maximum altitude.
18The other problem is the determination of one’s local latitude from the length of the longest day.
See the upcoming section on spherical trigonometry before Menelaus.

Other of Hipparchus’s lost works are more certain to have incorporated
trigonometry. For instance, recent reconstructions of Hipparchus’s method
to ﬁnd the distances of the Sun and Moon require the knowledge of chords of
certain arcs arising within the problem, for which Aristarchus’s methods
would have been insufﬁcient.19 It is tempting but probably facile to assign to
Hipparchus both a pre-trigonometry and a post-trigonometry phase; scien-
tiﬁc research does not usually proceed so linearly.
A Model for the Motion of the Sun
The Sun’s annual journey through the celestial sphere would have been one
of the most obvious signals that objects in the heavens cannot move strictly
according to the Aristotelean principle of uniform motion about a circle with
the Earth at its center. Certainly the Sun travels around the ecliptic, a great
circle centered at the Earth (see ﬁgure 1.4). But, according to Hipparchus, it
takes 
days to traverse the 90° arc from the vernal equinox to the summer 
solstice (its most northerly point above the equator), and only 
days to
proceed from there to the autumnal equinox. Thus spring is actually longer
than summer.20 The lengths of fall and winter can be inferred from these
measurements to be a mere 
and 
days respectively.21
Geometric models to account for anomalies in the motions of the plan-
ets had been advanced before Hipparchus. While the Sun and Moon accel-
erate and decelerate, the other planets move more dramatically, generally
traveling close to the ecliptic but occasionally reversing their path before
continuing on their way. (Figure 2.2 illustrates one of Mars’s retrograde
motions from 2003. Although the Greeks also considered motion above and
below the ecliptic, we shall focus on motion along the ecliptic.) Eudoxus
(fourth century BC) had proposed that the planets move according to a sys-
tem of linked, nested spheres. His ingenious design moved the planets in
curves known as hippopedes, reproducing qualitatively, but unfortunately
not quantitatively, the planets’ retrograde motions. Apollonius, in the late
third century BC, is the ﬁrst author we know to discuss the simple theory of
epicycles.22 In ﬁgure 2.3, which represents the plane containing the ecliptic,
90 1
8
88 1
8
92 1
2
94 1
2
Alexandrian Greece
37
19See [Toomer 1974], building on [Swerdlow 1969]. The chords that arise are considerably larger
than in Aristarchus, and lower/upper bound methods would have been ineffective.
20This assumes the convention that seasons begin at the equinoxes and solstices.
21These numbers, relying on a year length of 3651⁄4 days, are found in Almagest III.4 [Ptolemy
(Toomer) 1984, 155].
22Apollonius may be the originator of the epicyclic model. The only evidence we have comes
from Almagest XII.1 [Ptolemy (Toomer) 1984, 555–562], where a couple of Apollonius’s math-
ematical results are presented.

the center of a small circle (the epicycle) travels at a uniform rate around the
edge of a large circle (the deferent). At the same time the planet travels uni-
formly around the epicycle. Varying the sizes of the circles and the ratios of
the two velocities appropriately can produce accelerations, decelerations, or
retrograde motions, as desired.
Chapter 2
38
12/14
12/14
12/14
12/14
11/14
11/14
11/14
11/14
9/5
9/5
8/26
8/26
8/16
8/16
8/6
8/6
7/7
7/7
6/27
6/27
6/17
6/17
6/7
6/7
7/17
7/17
10/25
10/25
9/15
9/15
11/14
11/14
Ecliptic Meridian
Ecliptic Meridian
Ecliptic 
Ecliptic 
Celestial Equator
Celestial Equator
345º
345º
330º
330º
10º
10º
5º
5º
–5º
–5º
–10º
–10º
–15º
–15º
5/28
5/28
(MM/DD)
(MM/DD)
12/14
12/14
11/14
11/14
9/5
8/26
8/16
8/6
7/7
6/27
6/17
6/7
7/17
10/25
9/15
11/14
Ecliptic Meridian
Ecliptic 
Celestial Equator
345º
330º
10º
5º
–5º
–10º
–15º
5/28
(MM/DD)
Figure 2.2 The path of Mars through the 
ﬁxed stars from May to December 2003
Figure 2.3
The simple epicyclic model of
planetary motion

As far as we know Apollonius’s epicycles remained geometric; he did not
attempt to ﬁt the model to observations by quantifying the parameters—which
would have furnished astronomy with its ﬁrst precise theory. Hipparchus
seems to have realized that this simple model is unable to reproduce the plan-
ets’ actual retrograde arcs: each of the loops is the same size, disagreeing with
what we see. He thus stayed away from the planets.23 However, he showed no
such reluctance with the Sun and Moon, and his work on these models may
have led him to bring together Babylonian arithmetic and Greek geometry.24
The epicyclic model turns out to be identical to the eccentric model,
where the Sun revolves uniformly on a circle not centered at the Earth.
Knowing precisely where to place the Earth within this circle to match the
perceived changes in the Sun’s velocity is one of Hipparchus’s major goals,
and the problem can be solved from the data he provides: the lengths of the
spring and summer (
and 
days) and the year’s length (3651⁄4 days). 
Hipparchus’s solution is lost, but we have a solution in Ptolemy’s Almagest
III.4.25
Text 2.1
Deriving the Eccentricity of the Sun’s Orbit 
(from Ptolemy’s Almagest III.4)
[See ﬁgure 2.4.] Now since the Sun traverses circle KLM with uniform 
motion, it will traverse 
in 
days, and 
in 
days. In 
days its 
mean motion is approximately 93;9°, and in 
days 91;11°. Therefore
and, by subtraction of the semi-circle NPO [from arc KL],
So 
also,


NY
N
=
=
°
2
4 20
;
N
LO
 +
=
° −
° =
°
[
;
]
;
.
184 20
180
4 20
KL =
°
184 20
;
92 1
2
94 1
2
92 1
2
KL
94 1
2
K
92 1
2
94 1
2
Alexandrian Greece
39
23Almagest IX.2, [Ptolemy (Toomer) 1984, 421–422].
24The possibility has been raised that Hipparchus used Babylonian predictive schema while build-
ing his models for the Sun and Moon. This was ﬁrst noticed in [Kugler 1900]; among many
other sources see also [Aaboe 1955] and [Jones 1991b]. [Toomer 1998] is a summary of the evi-
dence in favor of Babylonian methods in Hipparchus’s astronomical work.
25One cannot always assume that what is attributed to Hipparchus in the Almagest is an accurate
reﬂection of Hipparchus’s work. In fact, [Jones 1991a] argues that much of Ptolemy’s account of
the Sun does not reﬂect Hipparchus’s approach, particularly the tables of solar motion, the epoch
position, and the equation of time.

where the diameter of the eccentre120p.
Now since 
, and 
and quadrant NP90°, by
subtraction, 
and 
where the diameter of the eccentre120 p.
And we have shown that EX2;16p in the same units.
Now since 
where the radius of the 
eccentre 60 p.
Therefore the radius of the eccentre is approximately 24 times the distance
between the centers of the eccentre and the ecliptic.26
Explanation: Since this is Ptolemy’s and not Hipparchus’s work, the con-
ventions used here do not necessarily apply to Hipparchus. Ptolemy sets the
radius of the eccentre, the circle of the Sun’s orbit, to 60 units (an arbitrary
but convenient choice, since he uses sexagesimal numeration). The notation p
stands for parts in this unit of distance. Ptolemy’s chord function, here de-
noted “Crd,” assumes a radius R60 p (see ﬁgure 2.5).
EZ
ZX
EX
EZ
2
2
2
1
2
2 29
=
+
≈
,
;
p



=
=
=
=
KFQ
KPQ
ZX
KF
KFQ
Crd
and
p
p
2 4
1 2
1
2
;
,
;
KPQ
PK
=
=
°
2
1 58
;
.
PK =
°
0 59
;
,
N =
°
2 10
;
NPK =
°
93 9
;
 
;
;
∴
=
≈
=
=
=







Y
NY
EX
T
Y
Crd
and
p
p
4 32
2 16
1
2
Chapter 2
40
26Excerpted from [Ptolemy (Toomer) 1984, 155].
Figure 2.4
Ptolemy’s determination
of the eccentricity 
of the Sun’s orbit

In ﬁgure 2.4 FZ, KM and Y are parallel, and are perpendicular to NO,
L, and QK. The Sun travels from the vernal equinox  to the summer sol-
stice K in 
days. Since Ptolemy supposes that it does so at constant 
speed, this arc (seen from the Earth to be 90°) is 
days
. Likewise, since the summer is
days, 
From here it is easy to determine 
Using his table of chords
Ptolemy ﬁnds 
similarly 
Cut the lengths in half and transfer them to EX and ZX; then by the 
Pythagorean Theorem we get the eccentricity of the Sun’s orbit 
Rounded to 2;30 p, this is 
of the radius of the eccentric circle.
Hipparchus’s Chord Table
If (as seems likely) Hipparchus proceeded in the above manner, he would 
have been faced with the task of ﬁnding the chords of 
and 
. Al-
though they correspond to somewhat small arcs, these chords do not have
“nice” lengths like the sides of the regular polygons of Aristarchus; their
values derive from observational data and are not likely to be convenient
numbers. Methods involving bounds would not have given the accuracy that
Hipparchus seems to have achieved, so he must have had a means of produc-
ing chords for arbitrary arcs.
KPQ
NY
1
24 th
ZE = 2 29 1
2
;
.
p
KFQ
KPQ
=
=
Crd
p
2 4
;
.


TY
NY
=
=
Crd
p
4 32
;
;
NY =
°
4 20
;
.
KL ≈
°
91 11
;
.
92 1
2
360
365
93 9
1
4
°
≈
°
days
;
K = 94 1
2
94 1
2
Alexandrian Greece
41
Figure 2.5
The relation between the chord 
function and the modern sine

Indeed, we have a report from Theon of Alexandria that Hipparchus
wrote a treatise on chords in 12 books.27 It is difﬁcult to take Theon at his
word here: even taking into account the intricacies of building a chord table
(see Ptolemy’s Chord Table later in this chapter), it is hard to imagine why
the topic would have required 12 books. Although the length of the treatise is
disputed, its existence is not—especially since we also have a report by the
later Greek astrologer Vettius Valens that he used a table constructed by Hip-
parchus to determine the Sun’s position (although not the Moon’s).28 Such a
table would surely have been built with the help of a chord table.
However, it is quite possible that Hipparchus’s chord table looked very
different from tables that came later. For instance, for our modern trigono-
metric functions we use the unit circle (R1). Ptolemy chose R60 p,
which scales his chord function up by that factor (although since his number
base was 60, this was hardly an inconvenience). Figure 2.5 illustrates the
simple relation between the modern sine function and a chord in a circle of
radius R,
Crd 22Rsin.
(2.1)
One might decide instead that the circumference of the circle should be
divided into a ﬁxed number of parts, say, 360 °  60 21,600. In this case R
would have length 21600/2	 ≈3438 parts. We shall see later that this system
was actually used in ancient Indian astronomy, which probably was trans-
mitted from pre-Ptolemaic Greece. One advantage to this system is that a
small arc (measured in minutes) and its chord are almost equal, since they
are measured in the same units of length.29
There may be countless ways in which Hipparchus’s table differed
from others, including the spacing of the arcs for which the chords are
tabulated, the numeration system, the level of rounding, and so on. One
might despair of ever getting a clear idea of what this ﬁrst trigonometric
table may have looked like, except for a clue buried in Ptolemy’s exposi-
tion of the lunar theory in the Almagest. Following Hipparchus, Ptolemy
takes observational records of three lunar eclipses, separated by just under
180 days each, and applies them to the simple epicyclic model of ﬁgure
2.3. A somewhat involved trigonometric calculation eventually produces
the ratio of r, the radius of the epicycle, to 
the radius of the deferent.
ℜ,
Chapter 2
42
27See [Rome 1931/1936/1943, vol. 2, 451].
28[Vettius Valens (Pingree) 1986, 339]. [Jones 1991b, 445–447] argues that Hipparchus’s solar ta-
bles, if they existed, came late in his career. The solar and lunar positions on which his models de-
pend thus would have been calculated using Babylonian arithmetic schemes (see [Jones 1991a])!
29The reasoning here is similar to the modern use of radian measure, which has the desirable prop-
erty that sin x≈x for small values of x.

Ptolemy gets 
but he also reports Hipparchus’s result, 
When this matter is considered using a simple eccen-
tric circle for the Moon’s motion instead of an epicycle and a different set of
data, Hipparchus gets 
(where e is the circle’s eccentricity).
The numbers in these ratios are peculiar indeed. Attempts to explain
them by reconstructing Hipparchus’s calculations have led several re-
searchers to the conclusion that they arose from the use of a chord table with
R3438: if one follows the computation through as closely to Hipparchus
as one could hope for, the numerators and denominators are close to his
numbers (although the match is not perfect).30 If this theory is correct, the
ﬁrst trigonometric table would have looked something like ﬁgure 2.6.
Might Hipparchus, then, have been the source for later Indian sine ta-
bles, which also use R3438? The Indian tables list sines for every 
which corresponds to chords for every 
this structure matches with a 
tradition in Greek geography, which divides the circle into 48 parts of 
each.31 To complete the circle, one of those scientists who used the 48-part
division was Eratosthenes, whose geographical work we know to have been
criticized by Hipparchus.
All of this evidence is convincing, yet circumstantial, and cannot be
proved deﬁnitively unless new documents come to light. In the next chapter we
shall visit alternate theories concerning the construction of the Indian tables.
7 1
2 °
7 1
2 °;
3 3
4 °,
e /
/
ℜ= 327
3144
2
3
r /
/
.
ℜ= 247
3122
1
2
1
2
r /
;
/
,
ℜ= 5 14 60
Alexandrian Greece
43
30Early researchers had assumed that Hipparchus’s chord table looked much like Ptolemy’s. [Biot
1859, 408–410], for instance, had already raised the possibility that Hipparchus’s chord table
was similar enough to Ptolemy’s that it might be the source of the Indian sine tables; and [Tan-
nery 1893, 63–68] speculated that Indian tables derived from a Greek table even earlier than
Hipparchus. (See [Szabó 1985b] for a claim that Hipparchus must have had the Almagest chord
table itself, based on results of certain gnomon shadow length calculations.) The reconstruction
of a chord table with R3438 from the lunar parameters was ﬁrst explored in [Toomer 1973a]
and asserted too strongly as “conclusively established.” However, an incorrect dating for one of
the eclipse observations ﬂawed the analysis, and it was abandoned when the correct date failed
to conﬁrm that R3438 ([Swerdlow 1979b], Toomer in [Ptolemy (Toomer) 1984, 215 n. 75]).
Further, an analysis of Toomer’s success in matching the Almagest parameters [Klintberg 2005]
recently concluded that Toomer’s evidence for R3438 as opposed to, say, R3600 is not as
strong as it seems. However, [Duke 2005a] revisited the issue. A new path through the computa-
tions results in an extremely good match with Hipparchus. Finally, [van der Waerden 1986]
speculates that Indian chord tables are based not on Hipparchus (who was “not a great geome-
ter”), but on a table that van der Waerden believed to have been composed by Apollonius. He re-
constructed this hypothetical table based on the Almagest declination table in [van der Waerden
1988], but this analysis was undermined in [Van Brummelen 1993, 90–101].
31[Neugebauer 1972, 250–251]; this article’s suggestion of a link between Hipparchus and Indian
sine tables instigated the trail of research by Toomer and Duke that led to the reconstructions of
a chord table with R3438.

If we go further to ask how Hipparchus’s chord table was calculated with
only the barest traces of evidence even of its existence, we risk taking specula-
tion to an extreme. However, it is worth noting that it would take very little
geometry to do it. The chord of 60° is just R (the radius of the base circle), and 
the chord of 90° is 
(see ﬁgure 2.7 (a) and (b)). The Pythagorean Theorem
provides an easy calculation of the chord of the supplement of a given arc:
R 2
Chapter 2
44

Crd 
0
0
450
15°
897
1341
30°
1780
2210
45°
2631
3041
60°
3438
3820
75°
4186
4533
90°
4862
5169
105°
5455
5717
120°
5954
6166
135°
6352
6511
150°
6641
6743
165°
6817
6861
180°
6875
172
1
2 °
157
1
2 °
142
1
2 °
127
1
2 °
112
1
2 °
97
1
2 °
82
1
2 °
67
1
2 °
52
1
2 °
37
1
2 °
22
1
2 °
7 1
2 °
Figure 2.6
A reconstruction 
of Hipparchus’s table
of chords

(2.2)
(ﬁgure 2.7(c)32). Just one more theorem is needed to complete the table, and
it had been known already to Archimedes a century earlier.
In Measurement of the Circle, Archimedes had found that 
by approximating the circle with inscribed and circumscribed hexagons,
then successively bisecting the sides and calculating their lengths. As one
proceeds to dodecagons, 24-gons, 48-gons, and ﬁnally to 96-gons, the poly-
gons approximate the circle more and more closely.33 Archimedes’s side
bisection process also provides a ready means to determine Crd /2 given
Crd , for any . In ﬁgure 2.8, let CBCrd  and DBCrd /2; given CB,
the goal is to ﬁnd DB. The angles at A are half the angles at O,34 so AD bi-
sects CAB. Now ADB~ACE (since the angles at C and D are right, and
the angles at A are equal). So
3
3
10
71
1
7
<
<
	
Crd
Crd
(
)
(
)
(
)
180
2
2
2
° −
=
−


R
Alexandrian Greece
45
Figure 2.7
Elementary chord relations
32It was well known that any triangle inscribed in a circle, with one side equal to the diameter, is
right-angled.
33The medieval astronomer Jamshid al-Kashi (c. AD 1400) extended Archimedes’s method to a
polygon of 805,306,368 sides, obtaining a value of  accurate to the equivalent of about sixteen
decimal places. See a German translation of the text in [Luckey 1953], or [Van Brummelen
1998] for a popular account.
34By Elements III.20.

(2.3)
The quantities on the right-hand side of this equality are all known 
(since AC can be found using (2.2) above). Since 
we
may solve for the only remaining unknown DB, which is the sought Crd
/2.35 This process turns out to be mathematically equivalent to the well-
known half-angle formula for sines,
(2.4)
From (2.2), (2.4), and the starting points of Crd 60° and Crd 90°, it is a
simple (if tedious) exercise to build the chord table of ﬁgure 2.6.36 If one
needs to ﬁnd chords of arcs between entries in the table, linear interpolation
is an option. This method is what Ptolemy uses in the Almagest, and the er-
rors that result are not large enough to affect any of the above arguments.
Thus for the ﬁrst time the Greeks had the ability to answer the question:
given an arbitrary arc, how long is its chord?
The Emergence of Spherical Trigonometry
Whatever it might have looked like, Hipparchus’s table of chords likely
served his treatments of the motions of the Sun and Moon well. However,
sin
(
cos ).


2
1
1
2
=
−
AD
AB
DB
=
−
2
2 ,
AD
DB
AC
CE
AB
BE
AB
AC
BE
CE
AB
AC
BC
Elts
=
=
=
+
+
=
+
(
.
VI.3)
Chapter 2
46
35The proof in the Almagest is slightly different from this [Ptolemy 1984, 52–53], but also goes
back to Archimedes, in a work on the heptagon known only from Arabic sources [Schoy 1927,
81–82].
36[Hughes 2000] suggests that Hipparchus also might have had a value for Crd 72° (as was later
used by Ptolemy) to build a chord table with many more entries and a more complicated con-
struction, perhaps explaining Theon’s assertion that Hipparchus’s work on chords consisted of
twelve sections. This would force one to conclude that the early Indian sine tables derived from
an earlier, more primitive Greek chord table, or were computed independently of the Greeks.
Figure 2.8
Archimedes’s half-chord
calculation

many astronomical problems arise on the surface of a sphere, not on a ﬂat
plane, and this requires mathematics beyond what we have seen so far. For
instance, knowing where the Sun will be on the ecliptic does not tell us
where it will be in the sky. Over the course of the day the position of the
ecliptic changes as the celestial sphere performs its daily rotation. Knowing
the Sun’s location instead with respect to the celestial equator (see ﬁgure
1.4) would be much more convenient, since the equator stays in place, rotat-
ing into itself at a constant rate of 15° per hour.
Positions on both the ecliptic and the equator are measured eastward
with respect to the vernal equinox ~ (ﬁgure 2.9). The Sun’s place on the
ecliptic is its longitude . If we are interested in some other object such as a
star or a planet, its arc distance above or below the ecliptic is its latitude .
Similarly, measuring along the equator gives the right ascension , while
the arc distance above or below the equator is the declination . Hipparchus
may have used an equatorial coordinate system for the ﬁxed stars,37 but the
Sun, of course, moves in the ecliptic. Converting from ecliptic to equatorial
coordinates thus would have been crucial for time-keeping, and this require-
ment is clearly a problem on the surface of a sphere, not a plane.
But in order to ﬁnd out, say, the length of daylight on a given day at a
given place, converting the Sun’s position to equatorial coordinates is only
Alexandrian Greece
47
37The case for this has been revived recently in [Duke 2002], countering the view of [Neugebauer
1975, 277–280] that the Almagest contains the ﬁrst appearance of an orthogonal coordinate sys-
tem on the celestial sphere.
Figure 2.9
Celestial coordinate
systems

38If the observer is on the Earth’s equator, the celestial equator is perpendicular to the horizon, and
the oblique and right ascensions are equal—hence the names. This special case, known as
sphaera recta, is a commonly discussed situation in ancient astronomy, to be distinguished from
sphaera obliqua.
part of the solution. Arcs on the equator act as a sort of clock; if two objects
on the equator are separated by 15°, then they will rise above the horizon one
hour apart. In fact, the right ascension  is still measured today in units of
24h of time rather than 360°. However, most objects (including the Sun) are
not on the equator (ﬁgure 2.10). Now, as the Sun rises, so does some point E
on the equator; the distance along the equator from the vernal equinox to E is
the oblique ascension .38 So to ﬁnd the length of daylight, we need to know the
oblique ascension of the Sun’s place on the ecliptic (at sunrise), and the oblique
ascension of the point opposite the Sun (at sunset). The difference between these
two is known as the rising time of the arc of the ecliptic drawn in bold. From the
rising time, the 15°/hour conversion factor gives the length of daylight.
Finding the oblique ascension was thus a fundamental problem for the
ancient astronomer. Simple twists of this problem, such as ﬁnding one’s ter-
restrial latitude from the length of the longest day, had geographical signiﬁ-
cance as well. Clearly a uniﬁcation of trigonometry with the science of
spherics had the potential to produce a big payoff.
When and how this merger happened is entirely unclear. We have texts
from two authors that illustrate the “before” and “after” stages, but as we
shall see, even they cannot be trusted to reﬂect their own times.
Chapter 2
48
Figure 2.10
The oblique ascension 
and rising times of arcs
of the ecliptic

Theodosius of Bithynia
The ﬁrst text in spherics after Hipparchus came quite quickly, before the
end of the second century BC. Theodosius of Bithynia’s39 Spherics40 was
one of three of his works which have been preserved as part of the “Little
Astronomy”; the others, On Habitations and On Days and Nights, also
deal with topics of spherical geography and astronomy.41 Their survival
has more to do with their inclusion in the “Little Astronomy” than with
their own merits; Theodosius is seen as more a compiler of existing work
than an original scholar.42 Even so, he has done us a favor by showing the
extent of Greek knowledge of spherics just before it was transformed by
trigonometry.
Theodosius’s Spherics (see ﬁgure 2.11) is similar in style to its prede-
cessors; in fact, so many of its propositions are pre-Euclidean that this book
is sometimes described as more representative of the late fourth century BC
than of its own time.43 The Spherics is divided into three books. Book I and
the ﬁrst half of Book II do for the geometry of the sphere roughly what Eu-
clid’s Elements does for the circle. We reproduce a couple of the theorems
here to give a taste:
Proposition I.9: Given a circle in a sphere, if from one of the poles
of this circle a line is drawn perpendicular to the circle, it will fall
on the center of the circle, and if extended, it will fall on the other
pole of the circle.44
Proposition II.3: If in a sphere two circles intersect the circumfer-
ence of a great circle at the same point, and they both have their
poles on this great circle, then they will be tangent to each other.45
Alexandrian Greece
49
39There is some confusion over his dates, and whether he hailed from Bithynia or Tripolis; see
[Tannery 1893, 36–37].
40The Spherics is available in a Greek edition in [Theodosius (Heiberg) 1927b], in German trans-
lation in [Theodosius (Nizze) 1826], and in French translation in [Theodosius (ver Eecke)
1927c]. Our account of some of the theorems in the Spherics is based on ver Eecke’s translation.
See also [Malpangotto 2003], which deals especially with Pappus’s generalizations of some of
Theodosius’s theorems.
41On Habitations and On Days and Nights is available in a Greek edition and Latin translation in
[Theodosius 1927a].
42Information on Theodosius is scarce. See [Heath 1921, vol. 2, 245–252], [Theodosius (Fecht)
1927a, 1–12], and [Neugebauer 1975, 748–767], especially on the Spherics.
43[Bulmer-Thomas 1976, n. 6]. [Berggren 1991b], however, argues that certain aspects of Theso-
dosius’s methods go beyond Autolycus and Euclid.
44Translated from [Theodosius (ver Eecke) 1927c, 14].
45Translated from [Theodosius (ver Eecke) 1927c, 35].

About halfway through Book II, the theorems become astronomical—
although at no time is any astronomy mentioned explicitly. Most of these
theorems give various inequalities, which are of course of little practical use.
For instance:
Proposition III.6: [See ﬁgure 2.12.] If the pole of parallels [A] is on
the circumference of a great circle [ADBEC]; if two great circles, of
which one is one of the parallels [BC] and the other is oblique to the
parallels [DE] intersect this great circle at right angles; if we cut 
equal consecutive arcs 
on the oblique circle on the
same side of the largest of these parallels; and if we describe great
circles [joining] the points thus determined with the pole [AHL,
AQM, and AFN]: they will cut, in their intervals, unequal arcs on the
[
]
HQ
QF
and
Chapter 2
50
Figure 2.11
Theodosius’s Spherics,
Francesco Maurolico’s
edition, 1558 (courtesy
of the Burndy Library)

largest of the parallels; and the arc closest to the original great circle
will always be larger than that which is further.46
This obscure theorem states the following: draw two great circles BC
(with pole A) and DE on the sphere. Cut equal contiguous arcs 
and 
on DE, both above BC, and draw great circle arcs from A through H, Q, and 
F to L, M, and N. Then 
This apparently useless result becomes
interesting only when one interprets BC as the celestial equator and DE as
the ecliptic. Then we conclude that equal arcs of the ecliptic rise in unequal
times, and that ecliptic arcs further from the equator (closer to ADB, the sol-
sticial colure) take longer to rise than arcs nearer to the equator.47 In modern
terms, the right ascension  of an ecliptic arc  increases more and more rap-
idly as  increases from 0° to 90°; i.e., the second derivative of  with re-
spect to  is positive.
Another important result, reproduced here, contains an interesting proof.
Proposition III.11: [See ﬁgure 2.13.] If the pole of parallels [A] is 
on the circumference of a great circle 
which intersects two 
great circles at right angles, of which one is a parallel 
and the 
[
]
BQC
[
]
ADB
LM
MN
>
.
QF
HQ
Alexandrian Greece
51
46Translated from [Theodosius (ver Eecke) 1927c, 96–97].
47This statement is similar in intent and meaning to Euclid’s Phaenomena Proposition 9b, quoted
in the previous chapter. The solsticial colure is the great circle through the pole and crossing the
celestial equator 90 degrees away from the equinoxes; it thus has right ascension 6hr and 18hr.
Figure 2.12
Diagram for Theodosius’s
Spherics III.6 (simpliﬁed).
The “parallels” are the
circles of constant
latitude.

other is oblique to the parallels 
and if another great circle 
passing through the poles of the parallels 
cuts the oblique
circle between the largest of parallels and that which touches the 
oblique circle [i.e., between parallel circles 
and 
, the ratio
of the diameter of the sphere to the diameter of the circle that
touches the oblique circle [DM] is greater than that of the arc on the 
largest of parallels 
situated between the original great circle 
and the great circle passing through the poles 
to the arc of the 
oblique circle situated between these last circles 
48
Understood astronomically, 
is the equator and 
is the ecliptic. 
The theorem states that the ratio of the ecliptic arc 
to its corresponding 
rising time arc 
is greater than the ratio of the diameter of the tropic cir-
cle DM to the diameter of the sphere.
The full proof begins by establishing many facts about the ﬁgure which
are obvious at a glance. We will trust the reader to ﬁll these in, and para-
phrase the rest:
BQ
DH
DZ
BC
[
].
DH
[
],
AQ
[
]
BQ
DM]
BC
[
]
AHQ
[
];
DHZ
Chapter 2
52
48Translated from [Theodosius (ver Eecke) 1927c, 111–112].
Figure 2.13
Diagram for
Theodosius’s Spherics
III.11 (simpliﬁed
slightly)

Proof: Connect various lines as shown in ﬁgure 2.13. Drop a perpendicular
from H to DZ, deﬁning P. Transfer length PR to PT, deﬁning T. Then
PTHPRH, since both angles at P are right, PRPT, and PH is a side
in both triangles.
Now, from the second inequality in lemma (1.1) applied to conﬁguration 
HPTO,  we have 
Since PTPR and PTHPRH
BOQ, we have 
But 
49
and 
Therefore the ratio of the diameters DZ/DM is greater than the ratio of the
chords 
The use of lemma (1.1) in this spherical context leaves Theodosius in
the same situation as Aristarchus and Archimedes had been in plane geo-
metry: without trigonometry, he is unable to turn his result into a useful
equality.
Menelaus of Alexandria
Our next Spherics is over two centuries later, and by then the subject had
been completely transformed. The author, Menelaus of Alexandria, lived
near the end of the ﬁrst century AD. As is true of many Greek scientists, we
know virtually nothing of his life. Aside from the Spherics, he authored sev-
eral other works. Among them was a treatise on chords, which Theon tells
us was in six books;50 one would expect, then, that Menelaus built his own
chord table, but no one knows for certain. Two passages in Heron’s Metrica
(ﬁrst century AD) quote unspeciﬁed “works in chords of the circle” stating
that the ratio of the chord of a side of a regular nonagon to the diameter of
its circumscribed circle is about 1/3, and that the ratio for an 11-gon is
BQ
DH
/
.
BQ
DH
BOQ
POH
= 

.
DZ
DM
OP
PR
=
,
OP
PR
BOQ
POH
> 

.
OP
PT
PTH
POH
> 

.
Alexandrian Greece
53
49This equality has been taken more than once to be equivalent to the relation tan a sin b tan A
in a spherical triangle with a right angle at vertex C ([Heath 1921, vol. 2, 251] and [Bulmer-
Thomas 1976, 320]). In Figure 2.13 consider spherical triangle AHD with a right angle at D;
then DZ/DM1/sin h (where hROP is the side of the triangle opposite H). Now A
PRH PTH, so tan APH/PT; also 
so tan a PH/PO. The result
follows by substituting into DZ/DMOP/PR. It seems to me that the context is too narrow to
assert from this equality of ratios that Theodosius had access to a spherical trigonometric theo-
rem in his astronomical work.
50[Rome 1931/1936/1943, vol. 2, 451]. This is the same quote from which we learn that Hip-
parchus wrote a treatise on chords in twelve books.


a
DH
HOP
=
=
,

about 7/25.51 Possibly these were found in the lost treatises of either
Menelaus or Hipparchus.52
Menelaus’s other treatises include the geometrical On the Triangle and
Elements of Geometry,53 both of which exist only in fragments in Arabic. He
composed at least part of a star catalogue and a work on the settings of zodi-
acal signs, but these books are lost.
The Spherics does not exist in the original Greek either, but is available
in a number of Arabic translations and commentaries,54 many of which sup-
plement the text with its astronomical applications. For, just as Theodosius
before him, Menelaus treated his subject as a work solely of geometry. How-
ever, as we shall see, as with Theodosius, the astronomical meaning is al-
ways just below the surface.
Menelaus’s Spherics is divided into three books. The ﬁrst is genuinely
geometric in content, and deals systematically with the spherical triangle (a
ﬁgure on the sphere enclosed by arcs of three great circles) for the ﬁrst time.
Menelaus mimics the theorems in Book I of Euclid’s Elements on plane trian-
gles, extending them or altering them as appropriate. A couple of examples:
Proposition I.2: The two angles on the base of any [spherical] tri-
angle with two equal sides are themselves equal.55
Proposition I.5: In each [spherical] triangle two of its sides,
whichever they may be, are always larger than the remaining side.56
Some statements about plane triangles are not true of spherical trian-
gles, and vice versa. For instance,
Proposition I.11: The exterior angle in any [spherical] triangle is
smaller than [the sum of] both its opposite interior angles.57
Chapter 2
54
51[Heron (Schöne) 1903, 58–59, 62–63]. These values are equivalent to sin 20°≈0.333 (as op-
posed to 0.342) and sin 16.36°≈0.28 (as opposed to 0.282).
52This supposition is questioned in [Rome 1932], and especially [Rome 1933a]. A debate arose
earlier whether or not Heron’s lengths of sides of polygons may be considered to be trigonomet-
ric, [Cantor 1907, vol. 1, 399] in favor, and [Tannery 1882, 184–191] (implicitly) and [von
Braunmühl 1900/1903, vol. 1, 9] against. [Schmidt 1900] argued that the derivations are purely
geometric. Since they do not particularly involve arc or angle measurement, we are inclined to
agree.
53[Hogendijk 1999/2000] restores some of the contents of Elements of Geometry from two Arabic
treatises; a fragment of On the Triangle is referenced in [Steinschneider 1896, 199].
54Menelaus’s Spherics is available in an Arabic edition and German translation in [Krause 1936].
See also [Björnbo 1902] for an extended study of the work.
55Translated from [Krause 1936, 122].
56Translated from [Krause 1936, 124].
57Translated from [Krause 1936, 129].

From this result we conclude immediately that the sum of the interior angles
of a spherical triangle is greater than two right angles, as Menelaus points
out.58
Book II resembles the astronomical theorems of Theodosius’s Spherics;
indeed, many of its results are extensions or generalizations of Theodosian
analogues. For instance Proposition II.21 corresponds to Theodosius’s III.6,
except that Menelaus does not require the two given ecliptic arcs (HQ and
QF in ﬁgure 2.12) to be contiguous. Later, in the middle of Book III, we ﬁnd
similar inequalities, this time relating ratios of arcs rather than the arcs them-
selves. Our example takes over a page and a half to state, let alone prove, so
we paraphrase in modern notation:
Proposition III.14: [See ﬁgure 2.14.] In spherical triangle ABG
where 
, cut two arcs GD and ZT from BG and draw arcs 
DE, ZH and TK so that they form the same angle with 
as 
does. Then:
As medieval commentator Nasir al-Din al-Tusi points out,59 this is a cum-
bersome way of stating that
(2.5)
In the case where the marked angles in the ﬁgure are right angles, AB is the
equator, and BG is the ecliptic, this is equivalent to
(2.6)
where 1 and 1 are the differences in longitude and declination
respectively for 
, and 2 and 2 are the differences for 
. This is
ZT
GD








1
2
1
2
>
,
GD
ZT
AG
DE
ZH
TK
>
−
−
.
GD
GA
DE
ZT
ZH
TK
GD
ZT
+
−
=
+
−
⇒
<
(
)
(
)
.
GA
DE
ZH
TK
GD
ZT
−
=
−
⇒
>
;
GD
ZT
GA
DE
ZH
TK
=
⇒
−
<
−
;
AG
AB
BG <
°
90
Alexandrian Greece
55
58Let the exterior angle be 180°A, and the two interior angles be B and C. The theorem states
that 180°ABC, so 180°ABC. See [Krause 1936, 130].
59[Nadal/Taha/Pinel 2004, 420]. This paper illustrates many of the astronomical applications of
propositions in Menelaus’s Spherics, and the following discussion is indebted to it.

equivalent to the modern statement that the second derivative of  with re-
spect to 
 is negative for 0
90°.
Supposing that Menelaus or other astronomers of his time were comput-
ing tables of functions like (
),60 relations of this sort would have been
plainly visible in the gradually slowing increase in the values of  as  in-
creased. Perhaps Menelaus included propositions such as this one to conﬁrm
the relationship, verifying the numeric patterns in the tables.61
The Foundations of Spherical Trigonometry: 
Book III of Menelaus’s Spherics
The ﬁrst several theorems of Book III establish the basis from which all of
spherical trigonometry follows. In fact, as we shall see, the amazingly versa-
tile Proposition III.1 (see ﬁgure 2.15) is the only theorem used by Ptolemy in
the Almagest to solve all important problems of spherical astronomy. It is
now called Menelaus’s Theorem; it was named the Transversal Figure in me-
dieval Islam after the shape of the diagram, where it remained the foundation
of spherical trigonometry until around AD 1000.
Precisely how Menelaus’s Theorem appeared in the Spherics is unclear,
since it takes on different forms in the different Arabic editions. The follow-
ing passage is translated from a manuscript that has been argued to be clos-
est to the original.62
Chapter 2
56
60This is not much of a stretch. Ptolemy’s Almagest later in the century contains a very good table
of declinations that was not computed directly from the Almagest chord table.
61This is suggested in [Nadal/Taha/Pinel 2004, 435]. One wonders about similar results in Theo-
dosius, or even Euclid and Autolycus. The tables witnessed especially by these last two would
have been Babylonian rather than Greek.
62[Lorch 2001, 327–335].
Figure 2.14
Figure for Menelaus’s Spherics III.14

Text 2.2
Menelaus, Demonstrating Menelaus’s Theorem 
(from the Spherics III.1)
[See ﬁgure 2.16.] Then, if arc BED intersects arc GEZ between the two arcs
BZA, GDA, and each of the four arcs is less than a semicircle, I say that the ra-
tio of the chord of twice AZ to the chord of twice BZ is compounded of the
ratio of the chord of twice AG to the chord of twice GD and the ratio of
the chord of twice DE to the chord of twice EB.
The proof of it is that we make point H the center of the sphere and we join
HZ, HE, HG and we join BD, BA, AD. And let AD, HG meet in one of two di-
rections at T. BD will intersect HE at L; AB will intersect ZH at K. Then points
K, L, T are in the planes of both circle ZEG and triangle ABD; hence, line KLT
Alexandrian Greece
57
Figure 2.15
The ﬁrst page of Book III 
of Menelaus’s Spherics
(Halley’s edition, 1758)
showing Menelaus’s
Theorem (courtesy of the
Burndy Library)

is straight. Then, according to what is in the diagram, the ratio AK to KB is
compounded of the ratio AT to TD and the ratio DL to LB; and these are the ra-
tios of the chords of twice the arcs attached to them. Hence, the ratio of the
chord of twice AZ to the chord of twice BZ is compounded of the ratio of the
chord of twice AG to the chord of twice GD and the ratio of the chord of twice
ED to the chord of twice EB.63
[Menelaus goes on to consider the case that AD is parallel to HG.]
Explanation: The presentation is abbreviated and will require some unpack-
ing; a couple of intermediate theorems are assumed without proof, which we
shall ﬁll in.
In modern notation, Menelaus asserts that
(2.7)
the equivalent statement in sines is simply
(2.8)
The ﬁrst few sentences of the proof establish the geometry of the ﬁgure.
The argument splits into cases when HG and AD are drawn, since they might
sin
sin
sin
sin
sin
sin
.
AZ
BZ
AG
GD
DE
EB
=
⋅
Crd
Crd
Crd
Crd
Crd
Crd
2
2
2
2
2
2
AZ
BZ
AG
GD
DE
EB
=
⋅
;
Chapter 2
58
Figure 2.16
Menelaus’s
Theorem, III.1
of the Spherics
63Reprinted from [Sidoli 2006, 53].

meet AD on the side extended beyond D, or they might meet on the side
extended beyond A, or they might be parallel. Our proof deals with the ﬁrst
and third cases, of which we shall examine only the ﬁrst.
The key to the argument is the appeal to “a certain argument in the dia-
gram,” where Menelaus calls upon the planar equivalent of his theorem. In
the shape in dotted lines in ﬁgure 2.16, he asserts (without proof) that
64
(2.9)
The phrase “and these are the ratios of the chords of twice the arcs attached
to them” brings the proof home (subject to substitutions at the end). It relies
implicitly on two related lemmas again taken for granted by Menelaus, but
proved by Ptolemy a few decades later in the Almagest as follows:
Lemma A: [See ﬁgure 2.17(a).] In circle AZB, 
Proof: AKY~BKX, so AK /KBAY/XB. But 
and
Lemma B: [See ﬁgure 2.17(b).] In circle ADG, 
Proof: DTY~ATX, so AT / TDAX / DY. But 
and
Menelaus applies Lemma A twice and Lemma B once, to the three ratios in
(2.9). Our case of Menelaus’s Theorem (2.7) has now been established.65
Menelaus goes on to prove a related result: in ﬁgure 2.16,
(2.10)
The two statements (2.7) and (2.10) together would eventually become
known as Menelaus’s Theorem.
Crd
Crd
Crd
Crd
Crd
Crd
2
2
2
2
2
2
AB
AZ
BD
DE
GE
GZ
=
⋅
.
DY
DG
= 1
2
2
Crd
.
AX
AG
= 1
2
2
Crd
AT
TD
AG
GD
/
/
.
= Crd
Crd
2
2
XB
BZ
= 1
2
2
Crd
.
AY
AZ
= 1
2
2
Crd
,
AK /KB
AZ
BZ.
= Crd
Crd
2
2
/
AK
KB
AT
TD
DL
LB
=
⋅
.
Alexandrian Greece
59
64Draw DX parallel to TK, meeting AB at X. Then AK / KB(AK / XK)(XK / KB). But
XAD~KAT, so AK/XKAT/TD; and BKL~BXD, so XK/KBDL/LB. The result follows
by substitution.
65It is possible, as argued in [Rome 1933b], that the proof in Menelaus’s Spherics known to
Ptolemy and Theon was missing the case that HD is parallel to AD in ﬁgure 2.16.

Although the uses of this theorem may seem somewhat limited given the
nature of the quadrilateral on which it operates, it is astonishingly versatile
and solved many problems in spherical astronomy for 900 years. We shall
glance at one application here, and again when we cover the Almagest and
trigonometry in medieval Islam.
The problem of converting the Sun’s longitude  on the ecliptic to equa-
torial coordinates, i.e., determining  and , is handled by adding the appro-
priate arcs to the diagram (ﬁgure 2.18). Draw the solsticial colure NCB and a
Menelaus conﬁguration arises, namely, ~AB√N. Since B and C are both 
90° removed from ~ we have 
, the ﬁxed angle between the equator
and the ecliptic called the obliquity of the ecliptic. (Today 23.44º; in the
second century BC it was about 23.72°; the value given in the Almagest is
about 23.86°.) Applying (2.10) to our ﬁgure gives
simpliﬁed (letting R60 be the radius of the celestial sphere), we get
(2.11)
equivalent to the modern formula sin  sin sin 
. So we have the decli-
nation, one of the two sought quantities. We leave to the interested reader the
Crd
Crd
Crd
2
2
2
2



=
⋅
R
,
Crd
Crd
Crd
Crd
Crd
Crd
180
2
180
2
2
180
° =
° ⋅
°



 ;
BC = 
Chapter 2
60
Figure 2.17
Lemmas for Menelaus’s
Spherics, III.1

task of applying (2.7) to the same ﬁgure to arrive at the equivalent of sin
tan cot , which gives the right ascension and completes the task of coor-
dinate conversion.
The next few results in the Spherics derive from III.1, and are interesting
because they eventually became foundations of medieval Islamic spherical
astronomy (although not directly from Menelaus).
Proposition III.2: [See ﬁgure 2.19.] If two spherical triangles share
one angle (A and D), and another angle (G) is equal or supplemen-
tary to the corresponding angle (Z), then
66
(2.12)
The case where GZ90° would become known as the “Rule of Four
Quantities.” Its advantages are made clear by the derivation of the declina-
tion in ﬁgure 2.18: apply it to ~√A and ~CB and the result follows im-
mediately, without having to draw arcs up to the pole.
Proposition III.3: [See ﬁgure 2.19.] If the angles at A and D are
right and GZ, then
sin
sin
sin
sin
.
AB
BG
DE
EZ
=
Alexandrian Greece
61
66Of course Menelaus expressed his theorems using chords, not sines.
Figure 2.18
Using Menelaus’s
Theorem to calculate the
declination of the Sun

67
(2.13)
the “Law of Tangents.” A glance at ﬁgure 2.18 reveals that this leads
to the formula for the right ascension sin tan  cot , to which
we referred above.
The Spherics concludes with several theorems directly applicable to as-
tronomy. One of these, III.22, corresponds to Theodosius’s III.11 which we
discussed earlier. It has two advantages over Theodosius: it is more general,
and more importantly its use of spherical trigonometry allows Menelaus to 
achieve what Theodosius could not: an equality. In ﬁgure 2.20 
is an arbi-
trary arc on great circle ADEB, and the horizontal circles through A, D, and 
E are parallel to 
. Then
(2.14)
where the d’s are diameters of the parallel circles through the indicated points.
sin
sin
,
GH
DE
d
d
d
d
A
B
D
E
=
⋅
⋅
GHB
DE
sin
sin
tan
tan
,
AG
DZ
AB
DE
=
Chapter 2
62
67The tangents arise because two of the quantities in the Menelaus expression are (equivalents of)
sines of arcs complementary to AB and DE. They are thus cosines of AB and DE and form ratios
with the sines, producing tangents.
Figure 2.19
The Rule of Four Quantities

This theorem may be put to several astronomical uses.68 For instance, let 
be the equator, and ADEB be the ecliptic. If we let D coincide with A (so
that DBGB90°) and consider, the coordinates , , and  of point E, then
This gives the position of the Sun on the ecliptic directly from its equatorial
coordinates.
Spherical Trigonometry before Menelaus?
Wilbur Knorr once made the following analogy concerning Greek mathe-
matics:
Imagine what it would be to piece together an account of contempo-
rary mathematics on the basis of the books held in the undergraduate
library of just one major university. Suppose further that these books
had been scattered about into dozens of small holdings, and that be-
fore you could reassemble them, many had suffered damage, . . .
Now project yourself far into the future, so that your entire enter-
prise would mean dealing with these twentieth century materials
through an alien language and culture, and in an entirely different
sin
sin
cos
cos
cos
cos
cos
.
GH
DE
HB
EB
d
d
d
d
A
B
A
E
=
=
=
⋅
⋅
=



1
GHB
Alexandrian Greece
63
68[Nadal/Taha/Pinel 2004, 412–414] lists some applications, including the one reported here.
Figure 2.20
Menelaus’s Spherics,
Proposition III.22

mathematical idiom. . . . However desperate this scenario might
seem, the situation with the historian of ancient mathematics is even
worse. Directly or indirectly, every inquiry we make in this ﬁeld is
haunted by the fact of loss.69
We have done our best to reproduce the idiom of ancient mathematics
but we cannot avoid the loss of part of the historical record, so we arrive at a
gap here. Several clues suggest that spherical trigonometry was not born
with Menelaus. His famous theorem (2.7)/(2.10) appears at the beginning of
a book, where we seldom ﬁnd new results—only the foundation from which
others will be built.70 Also curiously, in neither of the enunciations of
Menelaus’s Theorem does he refer to spherical triangles, so carefully studied
in Book I and applied elsewhere—suggesting that the theorem was lifted
from another context. Finally, the proof of Proposition III.5 of Menelaus’s
Spherics takes for granted the so-called anharmonic property of four great
circles on a sphere, which states the (chord equivalent of the) following: in
ﬁgure 2.21, with all arcs parts of great circles,
(2.15)
Omitting its proof, Menelaus must have thought that his readers were aware
of this important result.71
Evidence for the loss of a predecessor comes from the Almagest as well.
Menelaus wrote his Spherics only a generation or two before the Almagest,
yet Ptolemy never refers to him directly in connection with spherical
trigonometry, only as an observer.72 Finally, although Ptolemy relies heavily
on (2.7) and (2.10), he never uses any of the more advanced results in
Menelaus’s Spherics.
All of this suggests that Menelaus borrowed his theorem from some previ-
ous book, and that Ptolemy also relied on some earlier work—perhaps the same
one. The identity of this lost predecessor may be forever hidden, but the argu-
ment has been made more than once that the missing author was none other
than Hipparchus. This identiﬁcation has been speculated for many decades,73
but recently some scraps of evidence have been brought to bear on the question.
sin
sin
sin
sin
sin
sin
sin
sin
.
AD
DC
BC
AB
WZ
YZ
XY
WX
⋅
=
⋅
Chapter 2
64
69[Knorr 1990, 207].
70This case is made in [Sidoli 2004, 72].
71This case is made in [Heath 1921, vol. 2, 269–270].
72[Ptolemy (Toomer) 1984, n. 84].
73[Heath 1921, vol. 2, 270], for instance, speculated that both Menelaus’s Theorem and the anhar-
monic property were known to Hipparchus, mostly on the basis of Ptolemy’s reliance on 

Strabo’s Geography contains excerpts of Hipparchus’s geographical
writings, including some data on the calculation of an observer’s terrestrial
latitude, , from the length of the longest day of the year, M.74 According to
Strabo, Hipparchus divided zones of latitude on the Earth into klimata, de-
ﬁned by evenly-spaced values of M from 13 to 19 hours. He calculated the
latitude for each klima; for instance, at Pontus (
hours), he gave
31,700 stades (where a stade is 1/700th of a degree, so ≈45.3°).
The question arises how Hipparchus was able to come up with his lati-
tudes, which are generally quite accurate. A Babylonian-style arithmetic
scheme has been ﬁtted to his table of values of  (M), but there is no expla-
nation for how that scheme might have been generated.75 Indeed, Hip-
parchus’s numbers are so good that one suspects that they were found using
the trigonometric formula
(2.16)
where  is the obliquity of the ecliptic and M is measured by the standard
15°1 hour. As one might expect, this correct formula matches Hip-
parchus’s data better than does an arithmetic scheme.76
The question is, if Hipparchus used the trigonometric solution, how did
he get his hands on it? The obvious answer is through spherical trigonometry,
tan
cos(
/ )
tan
,
 = −
M
2

M = 15 1
2
Alexandrian Greece
65
Hipparchus in the Almagest. [Von Braunmühl 1897a, 5] even suggests the possibility of a Baby-
lonian origin for the solution of spherical triangles.
74[Strabo (Jones) 1917, vol. 1, 507–521].
75[Neugebauer 1975, 304–306].
76First proposed in [Diller 1934], the hypothesis was revived and enhanced in [Rawlins 1982,
368]. A table in [Rawlins 1994, 56] compares the ﬁt to Hipparchus of the arithmetic scheme
with the trigonometric one. The comparison uses the value 23;40°, better than Ptolemy’s
23;51,20°. Although the latitudes support Hipparchus’s use of 23;40° (and see also
[Nadal/Brunet 1984/1989] for further evidence that Hipparchus used this value), [Jones 2002]
argues that a shadow ratio datum given in Strabo favors 23;51,20°. The debate continues (see
also DIO 4.2 (1994), p. 54 note C added 2002/03).
Figure 2.21
The anharmonic property

which is how Ptolemy does it, using Menelaus’s Theorem.77 If no other plau-
sible historically-attested method were available, we would be forced to con-
clude from the numbers in Strabo’s table that Hipparchus was capable of
spherical trigonometry. However, there are other possibilities.
The analemma is an ancient geometrical device used to solve astro-
nomical or geographical problems on a sphere. It consists essentially of tak-
ing a reference plane through the center of the sphere and rotating relevant
arcs onto that plane, thereby reducing the original spherical problem to a
planar one. The existence of analemma constructions in the theory of sundi-
als suggests that they are very old.78 There are only a handful of examples
of Greek analemmas, but one of them—Heron of Alexandria’s determina-
tion of the great circle distance between two cities based on simultaneous
observations of a lunar eclipse—hints at prior, more extensive Greek work
on the subject.79 A passage in Hipparchus’s Commentary on Aratus (which
we shall visit in a moment) suggests that Hipparchus used them himself. A
reconstructed analemma solution to the latitude problem would negate the
necessity of the conclusion that spherical trigonometry goes back to Hip-
parchus.
Such a derivation exists;80 we present it here to show how an analemma
works. In ﬁgure 2.22 let HOS be the horizon, OQ the equator, and OE the
ecliptic;  is the obliquity of the ecliptic and  is the local latitude. On the
longest day of the year the Sun traces out a circle parallel to the equator
through E that comes perpendicularly out of the page, so that the setting Sun
√is directly between S and the reader’s eye. That circle D√E, indicated by
dotted lines, is rotated onto the plane of the diagram. Then, since E is the 
highest point on the ecliptic,
corresponds to half the day; so where M is
the length of daylight expressed in degrees, M/2 90°. Now
Therefore
SC
CE
=
⋅1
2
2
Crd(
),

CE
CO
=
° −
=
1
2
81
1
2
180
2
2
Crd
and
Crd
(
)
(
).


√E
Chapter 2
66
77[Ptolemy (Toomer) 1984, 76–78]. A complication arises if (2.16) is applied directly: since (as
we shall see) the use of a chord table allows the computation of most trigonometric functions
but not the arc tangent,  may not be obtained directly from tan . [Neugebauer 1975, 37–38]
describes how Ptolemy gets around this roadblock in this case.
78[Neugebauer 1975, 301].
79For a summary see [Neugebauer 1975, 845–848]; for the argument that Heron’s work reﬂects an
analemmatic tradition, see [Sidoli 2005].
80[Wilson 1997]; the following description is based on this paper.
81To see this join OD, and note that EOD180°2.

and so SC/CO, which is also equal to Crd (2)/ Crd (180°2), is equal to
Since 
 and  are given, we may solve for .82
Another way that spherical astronomical results might have been ob-
tained is through the use of stereographic projection of the sphere onto a
plane. Best known today in the context of complex analysis, it was originally
invented to transform the celestial sphere; the astrolabe, an ancient astro-
nomical instrument which we shall see later, is a physical manifestation. In
ﬁgure 2.23, the sphere is mapped to a ﬂat surface by drawing lines through
the south pole which intersect the horizontal plane through the equator. For
instance, A on the sphere is sent to A on the plane, while B is sent to B. This
process has the nice properties that circles on the sphere map to circles on
the plane, and that angles are preserved (although, strangely, this latter fact
was not known in any generality in antiquity83). Once the circles relevant to
the problem have been transferred, plane trigonometry sufﬁces to solve it.84
Ptolemy, for example, solves the rising times problem in this way in his
minor work the Planisphaerium (although it has been questioned whether
CE Crd
Crd
(
)
(
)
.
2
2


Alexandrian Greece
67
82 The equivalent argument using modern functions is as follows: if HQE is a unit circle, then
CEcos  and COsin . Hence SCCE sin cos  sin , so that tan SC/COcos  sin
 / sin . The substitution sin cos (90°)cos (M/2) leads to the result.
83See the historical discussion of circle and angle preservation in stereographic projection in
[Sidoli/Berggren 2008].
84[Donnay 1945], an intriguing little text on spherical trigonometry, bases its fundamental results
on stereographic projection.
Figure 2.22
An analemma
construction for
computing local
latitude from length
of longest day

such computations were really Ptolemy’s goal85). This technique goes back
at least a couple of centuries before Ptolemy, and may originate with Hip-
parchus.86
Another bit of evidence for the origins of spherical trigonometry, a pas-
sage from Hipparchus’s only surviving work Commentary on Aratus, records
the point on the ecliptic that culminates when a certain star sets, given that
star’s equatorial coordinates. Recently, arguments have been raised that this
calculation could not have been made using an analemma construction.87
Since Hipparchus says that he used geometrical methods, spherical trigonom-
etry is a strong candidate as an alternate solution.
The evidence remains circumstantial, but on the whole it seems likely
that spherical trigonometry existed before Menelaus. A scholarly verdict on
whether it goes back as far as Hipparchus may never arrive.
Claudius Ptolemy
Our fragmentary knowledge of the applied mathematical sciences before
Claudius Ptolemy could hardly contrast more starkly than with the wealth of
writings that we possess authored by Ptolemy himself. A number of his com-
plete scientiﬁc works, some very extensive, have come down to us in a vari-
ety of textual traditions. They reveal a tremendous range of interests and an
analytical depth perhaps never witnessed elsewhere before modern times.
One wishes that his predecessors’ works were better preserved, so that we
Chapter 2
68
85[Berggren 1991a] argues that the word “projection” is not a faithful description of what is going
on in the Planisphaerium; rather than mapping points on the sphere to the plane, Ptolemy is try-
ing to represent circles on the plane. The calculation of rising times is not the point of the
Planisphaerium, but is there simply to reassure readers of the faithfulness of the representation.
86An account of the solution to rising times may be found in [Neugebauer 1975, 860–865]; the
possibility of Hipparchus’s knowledge of stereographic projection is discussed in pp. 868–869.
87[Sidoli 2004].
Figure 2.23 Stereographic
projection of the sphere
onto a plane through its
equator

could more clearly assess Ptolemy’s achievements. What we have from
Ptolemy must serve therefore as a report both of the giants upon whose
shoulders Ptolemy stood, and of his own original contributions. As we have
already seen, in many situations original authorship is difﬁcult to decide.
We know from his reported astronomical observations that Ptolemy
ﬂourished around the middle of the second century AD, working in Alexan-
dria, Egypt.88 He is most widely known for his astronomy; his name will be
forever associated with his geocentric model of the solar system, later op-
posed by Copernicus’s heliocentric model. These attributions are not very
apt, since a number of Ptolemy’s predecessors had posed or developed geo-
centric models (including Eudoxus, Apollonius, and Hipparchus), and one
astronomer had even suggested a heliocentric system (Aristarchus). But
Ptolemy’s astronomical system is by far the most sophisticated, successful,
and truly scientiﬁc of all the extant ancient hypotheses. It is the only Greek
scheme we have that gives a decent quantitative ﬁt to the motions of the
planets, predicts eclipses accurately, and handles a variety of other astro-
nomical phenomena. Whether or not Ptolemy is responsible for its discov-
ery, its blend of geometry and quantitative precision deserves a place at the
apex of the ancient exact sciences.
Several of Ptolemy’s other contributions were no less successful. His
Geography established a standard for cartographic work through the me-
dieval period and, eventually, in the West. Much the same can be said for his
Optics (although its inﬂuence was indirect in the West). Most of Ptolemy’s
work on music theory, the Harmonica, also survives to today. However, his
ﬁrst commitment to astronomy is established by the existence of eight trea-
tises, all of which survive at least in part.
Chief among these works is the Almagest.89 Although not his ﬁrst astro-
nomical work,90 the Almagest was the foundation for his most important
later books. The Handy Tables extracted the mathematical tables and im-
proved upon them; the Planetary Hypotheses relied on some Almagest re-
sults to compute the dimensions of the solar system; the Tetrabiblos turned
its astronomical theory into astrological practice. Minor astronomical works
Alexandrian Greece
69
88See [Toomer 1975] for a technical overview of Ptolemy’s scientiﬁc work.
89In the past century the Almagest has been translated twice into English, [Ptolemy (Taliaferro)
1952] and [Ptolemy (Toomer) 1984]; the latter is considered the standard today. Two excellent
accounts of the contents of the Almagest are [O. Pedersen 1974b], whose notation we shall gen-
erally follow, and [Neugebauer 1975, vol. 1, 21–343].
90This honor appears to belong to the Canobic Inscription, a list of astronomical parameters origi-
nally engraved in stone at Canopus. Once thought to be spurious, the Canobic Inscription was re-
cently found to represent an early stage in Ptolemy’s astronomical work [Hamilton/
Swerdlow/Toomer 1987].

included the Analemma91 and the Planisphaerium, both topics of which we
have already encountered.
Ptolemy named his masterwork The Mathematical Collection; it was
later called “The Great Collection,” in Arabic Kitab al-majisti, from which
the Latin title Almagest followed.92 Its goal is almost startlingly modern: be-
ginning with observations, generate a mathematical model for the motions of
all celestial objects (the ﬁxed stars, the planets, the Sun and the Moon), so
that their positions and phenomena may be predicted. Indeed, the scientiﬁc
appearance of the Almagest has often led to its being judged by modern stan-
dards. The slim observational data set from which Ptolemy develops his
theory functions almost as an axiomatic base for the work, and the data gen-
erally provide far too perfect a match with the astronomical parameters
Ptolemy is hoping to arrive at than one would reasonably expect. Thus every
so often Ptolemy has been accused of scientiﬁc fraud, and defended on the
basis that he likely selected nice observations from a larger set to ﬁt his di-
dactic purposes.93 Our interest, thankfully, is not in the controversy but
rather in the mathematics, so we shall move on.
Ptolemy’s Chord Table
Ptolemy clearly needed a substantial trigonometric tool set to accomplish his
goal, and he provides it in the ﬁrst of the thirteen books in the Almagest. At its
base is a table of the lengths of chords in a circle and a detailed set of instruc-
tions on how to construct one; since the instructions contain some of the ear-
liest extant derivations of common trigonometric results, they have become
favorite topics of popular books on ancient mathematics.94 The Almagest uses
the base circle radius R60 and gives chords to three sexagesimal places for
arcs in 
increments from 0 to 180° (see ﬁgure 2.24, and extracts in ﬁgure
2.25). In terms of documentary evidence we are far ahead of where we were
with Hipparchus—we have here the earliest extant trigonometric table—but
we must be careful not to jump to conclusions. From Ptolemy’s introduction:
1
2 °
Chapter 2
70
91See [Luckey 1927].
92See [O. Pedersen 1974b, 15] or [Toomer 1975, 187].
93The latest episode began with the publication of The Crime of Claudius Ptolemy, [R. R. Newton
1977]. Various replies and arguments have appeared more or less continuously ever since; see
“Ptolemy on Trial” [Swerdlow 1979a] for an early rebuttal. The journal DIO has continued the
offensive, referring to Ptolemy’s book as the Almajest (!). A recent attempt to encourage colle-
gial debate on the issue was the back-to-back appearance of articles from both sides in the jour-
nal Isis [Thurston 2002] and [Gingerich 2002].
94The best general account of Ptolemy’s methods for computing chords is [Aaboe 1964,
101–126]; see also [O. Pedersen 1974b, 56–65]. [Hultsch 1901/1902] argues that Ptolemy put
two sources together in constructing his chord table.

But ﬁrst we shall show how one can undertake the calculation of
[the chords’] amounts by a simple and rapid method, using as few
theorems as possible, the same set for all. We do this so that we may
not merely have the amounts of the chords tabulated unchecked, but
may also readily undertake to verify them by computing them by a
strict geometrical method.95
It seems to have escaped notice that Ptolemy does not claim either to have
constructed the table in the manner outlined, or even to have authored the
Alexandrian Greece
71
95[Ptolemy (Toomer) 1984, 48].
Figure 2.24 The ﬁrst page of the chord table in Ptolemy’s Almagest, George of
Trebizond’s edition (1528) (courtesy of the Burndy Library)

table himself. As we shall see, there is cause to question at least the
former.
Several chords are easily obtained using simple geometry (ﬁgure 2.26(a)–
(c)); for instance 
and 
A couple, Crd 36° and
Crd120
2
3
103 55 23
2
2
2
2
° =
−( )
=
≈
R
R
R
;
,
.
Crd
Crd
60
60
90
84 51 10
2
2
° =
=
° =
+
≈
R
R
R
,
;
,
,
Chapter 2
72
Arcs
Chords
Sixtieths
1⁄2°
0;31,25
;1,2,50
1°
1;2,50
;1,2,50
11⁄2°
1;34,15
;1,2,50
2°
2;5,40
;1,2,50
21⁄2°
2;3,7,4
;1,2,48
3°
3;8,28
;1,2,48



12°
12;32,36
;1,2,28



24°
24;56,58
;1,1,26



36°
37;4,55
;0,59,43



48°
48;48,30
;0,57,21



60°
60;0,0
0;54,21



72°
70;32,3
;0,50,45



90°
84;51,10
;0,44,20



120°
103;55,23
;0,31,18



1781⁄2°
119;59,24
;0,0,41
179°
119;59,44
;0,0,25
1791⁄2°
119;59,56
;0,0,9
180°
120;0,0
;0,0,0
Figure 2.25
Extracts from
Ptolemy’s table 
of chords

Crd 72°, are harder but accessible, and rely on two of the most beautiful con-
secutive theorems in Euclid’s Elements96:
XIII.9: The sides of a regular hexagon and a regular decagon
inscribed in a circle are in “mean and extreme ratio” to each other
(i.e., the ratio of the smaller to the larger is equal to the ratio of the
larger to their sum—which turns out to be what is now called the
“golden ratio”  ≈1.618:1).
XIII.10: The square of the side of a regular pentagon inscribed in a
circle is equal to the sum of the squares of the sides of the hexagon
and decagon—i.e., they form a right triangle.
In ﬁgure 2.26(d) let D be the center of the circle, let E bisect the radius
DG, connect EB, and choose Z so that EZEB. Then EZ2 ED2 GZZD
(by Elements II.697); but EZ2 EB2 ED2 DB2, so DB2 DG2 GZZD.
Since this latter equality implies that DZ/DGDG/ZG, we know that DG
and DZ form a mean and extreme ratio—but DG is the radius of the circle,
hence the side of the hexagon. So, by XIII.9, DZ is the side of the decagon,
Alexandrian Greece
73
96These theorems may be found in [Euclid (Heath) 1925, vol. 3, 455–461].
97In modern terms: let aDEEG and bZD; then this equation says simply that
(ab)2 a2(2ab)b.
Figure 2.26
Calculations of simple
chords

and its length is Crd(360°/10) Crd 36°. But then since DB is also a radius,
DBZ satisﬁes XIII.10, so BZ must be the side of the pentagon with length
Crd 72°.
From here the desired results follow easily:
and
Ptolemy’s Theorem and the Chord 
Subtraction/Addition Formulas
Next Ptolemy develops tools that allow him to generate more chords from
existing values. The chord supplement formula (2.2) allows the quick deter-
mination of Crd(180°), but on its own this does not get him much further.
Much more powerful are the chord sum and difference formulas. To derive
them, Ptolemy could have used Archimedes’ Theorem of the Broken Chord
(from the previous chapter), but instead he applies another theorem:
Ptolemy’s Theorem: [See ﬁgure 2.27.] In a quadrilateral inscribed
in a circle, the product of the diagonals (AC BD) is equal to the
sum of the products of the opposite sides (ABCDADBC).
The proof is elementary,98 leading some to suspect that it is not original to
Ptolemy.99
The chord difference formula is easily obtained from this by letting AD
be the diameter of the circle. Let 
and 
. An application of
Ptolemy’s Theorem and a bit of manipulation gives
(2.17)
equivalent to the modern sine subtraction law
Crd
Crd
Crd
Crd
Crd
(
)
(
)
(
) ,






−
=
⋅
° −
−
⋅
° −
180
180
2R
 = AB
AC
Crd
Crd
72
36
70 32 3
2
2
2
2
° =
=
+
=
°
+
≈
BZ
DZ
DB
R
(
)
;
, .
Crd36
37 4 55
2
2
2
2
° =
=
−
=
−
=
+( )
−
≈
DZ
EZ
DE
EB
DE
R
R
R
; ,
,
Chapter 2
74
98 Draw BE so that ABEDBC. Then ABD~EBC (ABDEBC by addition of EBD,
and BDABCE since they both subtend chord AB—Elements III.20), so BDCEBCAD.
Also ABE~BCD (ABEDBC, and BAEBDC since they both subtend chord BC),
so BDAEBADC. Therefore ACBD(AECE)BDBADCBCAD.
99See for instance [O. Pedersen 1974b, 57–58].

sin(xy)sinxcos ysinycos x.
(2.18)
Using Ptolemy’s Theorem to ﬁnd the sum of two chords is not quite as 
straightforward. In ﬁgure 2.28 BZ is extended to E so that 
,
and 
. Application of Ptolemy’s Theorem to BCDE gives
(2.19)
from which Crd () may be found using the supplement formula (2.2).
This is equivalent not to the sine addition law, but rather to the cosine law
cos(xy)cos xcosysinxsiny.100
(2.20)
The signiﬁcance of this is that the supplement formula is not numerically
stable when working from large arcs to small; in fact, it has been shown that
the chord table is too accurate for (2.19) and (2.2) to have been used as pre-
scribed in the Almagest.101
Finally, Ptolemy gives a procedure on how to ﬁnd the chord of half a
given arc, equivalent to the sine half-angle formula (2.4). Curiously, al-
though he could have used Ptolemy’s Theorem to derive it, he chooses in-
stead to use a procedure similar to that which we saw in Archimedes.
Crd
Crd
Crd
Crd
(
(
))
(
)
(
)
,
180
180
180
2
° −
+
=
° −
⋅
° −
−
⋅






Crd
R
 = BC
 =
=
AB
DE
Alexandrian Greece
75
100 [Ptolemy (Toomer) 1984, 53]; [Aaboe 1964, 119–120].
101 For arcs close to 180°, the chords are very close to each other and to 120p, so small errors in
rounding of these chords can result in large errors in the chords of the corresponding small arcs.
See [Van Brummelen 1993, 67–68].
Figure 2.27
Ptolemy’s Theorem

Perhaps it is a remnant of the tools available to build chord tables before
Ptolemy.102
The Chord of 1°
The tools at hand allow us to compute Crd 12° (from Crd 72° and Crd 60°); 
from this the half-angle formula takes us down to Crd 6°, Crd 3°, 
and 
. But it is not possible to generate any chords of whole-numbered 
arcs other than multiples of 3°; to do so would be equivalent to trisecting the
angle, as Ptolemy suggests. To get an estimate of Crd 1° Ptolemy proves a
theorem similar to lemma (1.1), which Aristarchus and Archimedes had used
to capture trigonometric quantities between bounds: if 90°, then
(2.21)
This is intuitively obvious; as the arc increases so does the chord, but as the
arc increases the chord gets larger at a slower and slower rate.103
Substituting 
in (2.21), and then 
, Ptolemy 
arrives at
(2.22)
2
3
3
2
4
3
3
4
1
Crd
Crd
Crd
° <
° <
°;


=
°
= °
3
2
1
,


= °
=
°
1
3
4
,
Crd
Crd




<
.
Crd 3
4 °
Crd1 1
2 °
Chapter 2
76
102 This is suggested in [Toomer 1973a, 18–19].
103 Hence (2.21) is equivalent to stating that the second derivative of the chord function is less than
zero for 90°.
Figure 2.28
Derivation of the chord
addition law

both bounds turn out to be equal to 1;2,50.104 Armed with this value, the
chords of the multiples of 3°, and the sum, difference and half-angle identi-
ties, Ptolemy had the tools he needed to compute the remaining chords. Al-
though the values in the table are too accurate to be certain precisely how it
was done, it has been suggested that he began with a grid of entries for every
12°, then ﬁlled in the entries below each of these nodes using the chord sub-
traction law.105
The Interpolation Table
To be able to convert all arcs to chords, Ptolemy needed to use the table to
ﬁnd the chords of arcs that are not multiples of 
. The purpose of the col-
umn labeled “Sixtieths” in ﬁgure 2.25 is to tabulate the function
(2.23)
the average amount by which the chord’s value increases for every one-
minute increment of arc. To ﬁnd the chord of n°x, where n is a multiple of
and x is measured in minutes, simply calculate
Crd(n°x)Crdn°x· s().
(2.24)
In other words, apply linear interpolation. Curiously, the entries in the table
of s() are actually more accurate than what can be obtained from the chords
themselves. This observation suggests that more precision was used than
Ptolemy shows us, at least in some stages of the calculations.106
Chords in Geography: Gnomon Shadow Length Tables
One of the earliest uses of chords in the Almagest is geographical: given the
local terrestrial latitude , determine the length of the shadow cast by a
gnomon at noon at the equinoxes and solstices. The gnomon, nothing more
1
2 °
s( )
[
(
)
],



=
+
° −
1
30
1
2
Crd
Crd
1
2 °
Alexandrian Greece
77
104 The upper bound should be 1;2,50,40, prompting an accusation of fudging ([Newton 1977,
27–28] and [Newton 1982, 197–203]). But it has been pointed out that if Ptolemy used a little
more accuracy than he shows in the Almagest, the value he reports is correct to all three places
[Glowatski/Göttsche 1976, 70–71].
105 [Van Brummelen 1993, 46–73].
106 Bafﬂingly, [Newton 1985, 16–18] asserts that since the chords and sixtieths do not match per-
fectly, the table s() must represent “some other quantity,” which Ptolemy attached mistakenly
to the chord table. [Glowatski/Göttsche 1976] recompute the chord table according to the
method spelled out in the Almagest, and demonstrate that more accuracy must have been used
than is displayed, although the analysis in [Van Brummelen 1993, 46–73] suggests that the
Almagest prescription may not have been carried out to the letter.

than a vertical stick in the ground, casts shadows of different lengths at dif-
ferent times of the day and year depending upon the Sun’s altitude. Hence
one should be able to determine  using the length of a gnomon’s shadow,
as well as ﬁnd the time of day—which is, after all, what a sundial does. In
fact the gnomon is the most enduring of astronomical instruments; it pre-
dates the Greeks,107 and can be found in several prominent European cathe-
drals.108
At noon on the day of the equinox, the arc from the Sun to the zenith is
equal to  (see ﬁgure 2.29).109 On the summer solstice it is  (where  is
the obliquity of the ecliptic); at the winter solstice it is . Our goal is to
ﬁnd the lengths of the gnomon’s shadow at the equinox (GZ) and at the sol-
stices (GN and GK).
Text 2.3
Ptolemy, Finding Gnomon Shadow Lengths 
(from the Almagest II.5)
Then, since 
, which is equal to the elevation of the north pole from 
the horizon, is 36° (where meridian ABG is 360°) at the latitude in question, 
and both 
and 
are 23;51,20°, by subtraction 
, and 
by addition 
.
Therefore the corresponding angles
and
.



KEG
ZEG
NEG
=
°°
=
°°
=
°°
=
°°





24 17 20
72
119 42 40
2
360
;
,
;
,
 where
right angles



KEG
ZEG
NEG
=
°
=
°
=
°
=
°





12 8 40
36
59 51 20
4
360
; ,
;
,
 where
right angles
GM =
°
59 51 20
;
,
G =
°
12 8 40
; ,
DM
D
GD
Chapter 2
78
107 [Kennedy 1969b, 335–337] gives examples of shadow length tables from four cultures, the old-
est (Egyptian) dating back at least to 1300 BC. We shall not consider early examples of these ta-
bles to be trigonometric since they lack a measurable notion of angle or arc; nor do they exist
beyond this particular astronomical situation.
108 For an account of European cathedrals used as large gnomons, see [Heilbron 1999].
109 The altitude of the North Pole, measured upward from the horizon toward the zenith, is always
. At the equinox the Sun is on the equator, and at noon it reaches its maximum altitude.
Therefore the Sun is 90° removed from the North Pole, which is  above the horizon; hence
.
A√= 

Therefore in the circles about right-angled triangles KEG, ZEG, NEG,
and 
(supplement),
and 
similarly [as supplement],
and
(again as supplement).
Therefore where 
and where
and where
Therefore, where the gnomon GE has 60 p, in the same units
the summer [solsticial] shadow, GK ≈12;55p,
the equinoctial shadow, GZ≈43;36 p,
and the winter [solsticial] shadow, GN ≈103;20 p.110
Explanation: Ptolemy uses “demi-degrees” (indicated here by °°) alongside
ordinary degrees throughout the Almagest, which allows him to use a clever
46 16
60 15 42
,
,
;
,
.
p
p
GE
Crd
=
Crd GN = 103;
Crd
Crd
GZ
GE
p
p
=
=
70 32 4
97 4 56
;
,
,
; ,
,
Crd
Crd
GK
GE
p
p
=
=
25 14 43
117 18 51
;
,
,
;
,
,
GE =
°
60 17 20
;
,
GN =
°
119 42 40
;
,
GE =
°
108 ,
GZ =
°
72
GE =
°
155 42 40
;
,
GK =
°
24 17 20
;
,
Alexandrian Greece
79
110 Reprinted from [Ptolemy (Toomer) 1984, 80–81].
Figure 2.29
Gnomon shadow lengths

device to ﬁnd ratios of sides in a triangle. To ﬁnd the length of the equinoc-
tial shadow we must ﬁrst calculate GZ/GE. Imagine a circle circumscribed
around GZE and assign it a radius of 60 units. Then GZ is a chord in that
circle corresponding to GEZ at the far side of the circle. By Elements
III.20 we know that this chord corresponds to an angle at the center of the
circle exactly twice as large as GEZ—in other words, GEZ measured in
demi-degrees! Once the two sides GZ and GE are found using the chord
table Ptolemy ﬁnds the ratio between them, thereby eliminating the units lo-
cal to the circumscribed circle. The calculation is completed by converting
the units to a gnomon of length 60.
Ptolemy goes on to list shadow lengths for 39 climate zones, deﬁned (as in
Hipparchus) by a regular progression of lengths of longest daylight. For in-
stance, for the sample results above he writes:
The eleventh [climate zone] is the parallel with a longest day of 141⁄2
equinoctial hours. This is 36° from the equator, and goes through
Rhodes. In this region, for a gnomon of 60p, the summer [solsticial] 
shadow [at noon] is 
, the equinoctial shadow 
, and the 
winter [solsticial] shadow 
111
The equinoctial shadow length is just 60 tan  so there is a sense in
which these shadow lengths can be thought of as a sort of tangent table. In
fact, when the tangent was eventually deﬁned explicitly in medieval Islam it
was called the “shadow.” However, here the shadow lengths are simply an-
other geographical table, and are never used with mathematical intent. In-
deed, the representation of the numbers in common fractions would have
made them difﬁcult to use systematically in other contexts.
Spherical Astronomy in the Almagest
Spherical astronomy in the Almagest is conﬁned mostly to Books I, II and VIII.
Other books manage the motions of the Sun, Moon and planets by considering
their ecliptic coordinates  and  separately. As far as the rest of the Almagest is
concerned, then, calculations on the sphere are needed primarily for conversion
between coordinates—especially ecliptical (in which the planetary models
function), equatorial (where the daily rotation occurs), and with respect to the
local horizon (altitude and azimuth). Other uses of spherical astronomy included
103 1
3
p .
43 3
5
p
12 11
12
p
Chapter 2
80
111 [Ptolemy (Toomer) 1984, 86].

rising times, whose astrological signiﬁcance made them a favorite topic of
study; they are given full treatment in Book II. Finally, simultaneous risings,
culminations, and settings of ﬁxed stars are handled in Book VIII.
All of these tasks are accomplished using only Menelaus’s Theorem,
(2.7) and (2.10) in ﬁgure 2.16. Ptolemy proves it in essentially the same way
as Menelaus, but as we have noted, he does not attribute it to anyone. The
theorem may be applied in a surprising number of variations; in fact, it is not
hard to show that all the fundamental relations on which spherical trigonom-
etry is now based fall quite easily from one or the other of the two Menelaus
statements—even the spherical Law of Sines.112
We have already seen how Menelaus’s Theorem may be used to convert
coordinates from ecliptic to equatorial. Ptolemy’s solution of the problem of
rising times exempliﬁes nicely its ﬂexibility when used appropriately. In ﬁgure
2.30, the local latitude 
and position on the ecliptic 
are 
given; our goal is to ﬁnd the oblique ascension 
the arc on the equa-
tor that rises as the ecliptic arc from ~ to √rises.
Both  and  
may be found using the change of coordinates pro-
cedures described earlier, but it is not immediately clear how to proceed
from there until the meridian NDG is considered. Then several Menelaus
conﬁgurations appear, among them GME√ND. Applying Menelaus I (2.7),
we obtain
or
(equivalent to 
), which gives the ascensional 
difference
. Then the oblique ascension is simply 
. (To ﬁnd
the rising time of an arc that does not start at ~ but starts and ends at arbi-
trary points A and B on the ecliptic, simply ﬁnd  for the arcs ~B and ~A
and subtract.)


=
−ME

sin
tan
tan
ME =


Crd
Crd
Crd
Crd
Crd
Crd
2
180
2
180
2
2
2
180




(
)
(
)
° −
=
° −
⋅
°
ME
Crd
Crd
Crd
Crd
Crd
Crd
2
2
2
2
2
2
ND
DG
N
M
ME
EG
=
√
√
,
⋅
M
√
 =
E,

 =
√
 = ND
Alexandrian Greece
81
112 We do not deal with the speciﬁcs of this here, due to the danger of anachronism. The interested
reader may ﬁnd these derivations in [O. Pedersen 1974b, 75–78] and [Neugebauer 1975,
29–30].

The addition of the meridian circle (or some other appropriately chosen
great circle) to the diagram gives the Menelaus theorems almost as much
power as we have in modern spherical trigonometry. They are used in this
way throughout the Almagest; Menelaus proved his more advanced results
this way in the Spherics; and as we shall see, the Menelaus theorems con-
tinued to be fundamental to Muslim astronomers until the early eleventh
century.
Ptolemy on the Motion of the Sun
What we have seen so far of the Almagest is what Ptolemy calls “those as-
pects of heaven and earth which required, in outline, a preliminary mathe-
matical discussion.”113 The bulk of the work from here is the production and
use of mathematical models of the motions of the stars and planets. Once the
geometric models have been postulated, two tasks must be performed: the
determination of values for the numeric parameters (lengths of certain line
segments and various angular velocities), and the construction of a scheme
that allows one to predict a body’s position for an arbitrary time t. For
Ptolemy these are the primary functions of trigonometry.
Chapter 2
82
113 [Ptolemy (Toomer) 1984, 131].
Figure 2.30
Ptolemy’s solution to the
problem of rising times

The Sun must come ﬁrst, since studies of the other planets depend on it
in various ways (for instance, the crucial observations of the Moon are made
at eclipses). We have seen already how Ptolemy found the eccentricity of the 
Sun’s orbit given the lengths of the seasons; in ﬁgure 2.4 
, 
which he rounded to 2;30. Equally important is the orientation of the eccentric
circle, which is found by determining the location of the Sun’s apogee (its fur-
thest point from the Earth). To do this calculation Ptolemy employs a familiar
technique. In ﬁgure 2.4 the ecliptic, if drawn, would be a large circle centered
at E, enclosing the entire diagram. Imagine a circle circumscribed around
EZX with hypotenuse 120 p. Since we found earlier that ZX1;2, in the new 
units we have 
. Using the chord table 
backwards, we get 
. So the arc on the ecliptic upwards from the
summer solstice to the Sun’s apogee is half that, or 24;30°. Hence the Sun’s
apogee measured from the vernal equinox N is 
A 65;30°.
Of more mathematical interest are the tools that Ptolemy introduces to
provide an answer to the question of prediction: given arbitrary t, where is
the Sun? Clearly it is on the ecliptic, so its latitude   0; we must only
ﬁnd its longitude 
(t). If need be, we may then apply our coordinate
conversion techniques to locate the Sun with respect to the equator or the
horizon.
Our ﬁrst step is to separate the Sun’s longitude into a mean position and
a correction factor which Ptolemy calls the “prosthaphairesis,” or as it be-
came known in the medieval period, the “equation.” In ﬁgure 2.31 EZH is the
Sun’s orbit circle centered at C; and circle AG, centered at the Earth D, is con-
centric with the ecliptic. The apogee E has longitude 
A65;30°, as we cal-
culated previously. The Sun travels at constant speed on EZH, so the mean 
anomaly am increases linearly. Thus 
is a linear function of time:
(2.25)
where t0 is the epoch (a ﬁxed instant for which the Sun’s mean anomaly
am(t0) is already known),114 t is the time difference from the epoch to t, and
v is the Sun’s mean velocity.
However, the Sun’s position seen from the Earth is its true anomaly
aADZ. We can get from am to a by ﬁnding the solar equation
EZ
a
t
a
t
v
t
m
m
=
=
+
⋅
( )
(
)
,
0

EZ
ZX ≈
°
49
ZX
p
=
⋅
=
120 1 2 2 29
49 46
1
2
( ;
/ ;
)
;
e
EZ
=
= 2 29 1
2
;
Alexandrian Greece
83
114 For Ptolemy this was the ﬁrst day of the Egyptian calendar of the ﬁrst year in the reign of
Nabonassar in 747 BC. He chooses such an early date because he says he has records that go
back that far.

q(am)CZD. Once we have q then a(t)am(t)q,115 and the Sun’s position
on the ecliptic may be found simply by adding the longitude of the apogee E:

(t)
A a(t)
A am(t)q.
(2.26)
Text 2.4
Ptolemy, Determining the Solar Equation
(from the Almagest III.5)
[See ﬁgure 2.31.] First, let 
be given, e.g. as 30°. Produce ZC and drop the
perpendicular to it from D, DK.
Then, since 
is, by hypothesis, 30°,
Therefore, in the circle about right-angled triangle DCK, 
and
(supplement).
KC =
°
120
DK =
°
60


ECZ
DCK
=
=
°
=
°
°°
=
°°



30
4
360
60
2
360
where
right angles
where
right angles
.
EZ
EZ
Chapter 2
84
115 This is true because both am and aq are supplementary to ZCH.
Figure 2.31
The solar equation q

Therefore the corresponding chords 
where hypotenuse 
DC 120 p.
Therefore, where DC 2;30 p and radius ZC 60 p, DK1;15p and
CK2;10 p.
Therefore, by addition [of CK to radius ZC], KCZ62;10 p.
Now since DK2 KCZ2 ZD2, the hypotenuse ZD≈62;11p. Therefore,
where ZD120 p, DK 2;25p, and, in the circle about right-angled triangle 
ZDK, 
.
That will be the amount of the equation of anomaly at this position. And 
ECZ was taken as 30°. Therefore, by subtraction, ADB (which equals 
of the ecliptic) equals 28;51°.116
Explanation: Some of the procedures in this passage (such as the circum-
scribed circle and demi-degrees) were explained in Text 2.3.
DCe, so DK e sin am and CK e cos am. Then KCZRe cos am
(where R60 is the radius of the orbit circle), so by Pythagoras, 
Hence
(2.27)
and ﬁnally, aam q 28;51°.
Ptolemy could have used instead DK and ZK to get the much simpler
formula
(2.28)
(as was done in later Islamic astronomy), but since the chord table did not
permit him to evaluate arc tangents, he had to use (2.27).
To complete the project of ﬁnding the Sun’s longitude  for any time t,
Ptolemy supplies a table of values for the solar equation q as a function of am
tan
sin
cos
q
e
a
R
e
a
m
m
=
+
sin
sin
( sin
)
(
cos
)
,
q
e
a
e
a
R
e
a
m
m
m
=
+
+
2
2
ZD
e
a
R
e
a
m
m
=
+
+
( sin
)
(
cos
) .
2
2
AB
∴
=
°°
=
°°
°
=
°



DZK
2 18
2
360
1 9
4
360
;
;
.
where
right angles
where
right angles
DK =
°
2 18
;
DK
KC
p
p
=
=



60
103 55
and
;
Alexandrian Greece
85
116 From [Ptolemy (Toomer) 1984, 158–159].

(ﬁgure 2.32). Linear interpolation allows the reader to calculate q for what-
ever value of am comes along.
It is not certain whether this method of computing (t) was new with
Ptolemy, although there are no other obvious candidates; only a few tables
for solar motion are known before him, and they are structured differently.
We have an uncertain reference to a table of solar longitudes composed by
Hipparchus, and this table probably had a different conﬁguration.117 A re-
cently published papyrus fragment from the ancient garbage piles at
Oxyrhynchus, Egypt contains a pre-Ptolemaic table for ﬁnding solar longi-
tudes, again designed differently, but computed trigonometrically.118
The Motions of the Planets
A full treatment of the motions of the Moon and the planets in the Almagest
is beyond our scope, but a glance at the generic planetary model—the math-
ematical heart of the Almagest—will be worthwhile. The simple epicyclic
Chapter 2
86
117 See the discussions in [Jones 1991a] and [Jones 1991b, 449].
118 See [Jones 1997, 217–224] for an analysis of the fragment. It is edited in [Jones 1999, vol. 2,
94–99] and commented upon in [Jones 1999, vol. 1, 150–151].
Common Numbers
(am)
Equation(q)
6
354
0;14
12
348
0;28
18
342
0;42
24
336
0;56
30
330
1;9



60
300
2;1



84
276
2;21
90
270
2;21
93
267
2;23
96
264
2;23
99
261
2;22



177
183
0;8
180
180
0;0
Figure 2.32
Extracts from the
solar equation table

model of ﬁgure 2.3 reproduces the planets’ retrograde motions (ﬁgure 2.2)
qualitatively. However, while it can be made to ﬁt either the retrograde mo-
tions’ positions or their magnitudes, it cannot ﬁt both at the same time.119 So
Ptolemy modiﬁes the model, by moving the Earth away from the center of
the deferent C to E (ﬁgure 2.33), and by adding a new point, the equant Q,
the same distance in the other direction from C.
The equant serves as the location for the clockwork of the mechanism;
the angle at Q, the mean centrum cm, increases at a constant rate. The planet
is set in motion on the epicycle itself by having am increase linearly.120 To cal-
culate the planet’s position Ptolemy must ﬁnd two equations rather than one:
the equation of center q (analogous to the solar equation), which
when subtracted from cm gives the true centrum c, the position of
the center of the epicycle G; and
the equation of anomaly p, which accounts for the position of the
planet on the epicycle.
Alexandrian Greece
87
Figure 2.33
The planetary equations
119 For discussions of the motivation for the introduction of the equant point, see [Evans 1984],
[Swerdlow 2004], [Jones 2004], and [Duke 2005c].
120 For reasons beyond our scope here, he actually measures the planet’s position on the epicycle
using avamq. See [O. Pedersen 1974b, 283–285], [Neugebauer 1975, 183–184], and
[Evans 1998, 376–377].

Once these are found, the planet’s longitude is

(t)
A c(t)p 
A cm(t)q p.
(2.29)
What follows is a modern account of Ptolemy’s determination of the two
equations. We ﬁrst ﬁnd  EG, the distance from the Earth to the epicycle’s
center. Drop perpendiculars from E and C to GQ, extended if necessary.
Then CXe sin cm and QXe cos cm, and by Pythagoras
Then
and ﬁnally by Pythagoras applied to GEY we have
(2.30)
From here the equation of center is easy:
(2.31)
As for the equation of anomaly p, we drop a perpendicular from P onto
EG; then PLr sin av and GLr cos av, where r is the radius of the epicy-
cle. We could determine p using our knowledge of PL, EL  EG  GL
   r cos av, and an arc tangent, but again the table of chords forces us
around the long way. First we ﬁnd EP using Pythagoras; then
(2.32)
Tabulating Astronomical Functions 
and the Science of Logistics
The completion of Ptolemy’s planetary project requires that he provide his
readers an easy means to evaluate p, and this task is harder than it was for q.
By (2.32), p is obviously a function of the planet’s position av on the epicy-
cle. But it is also a function of the epicycle’s position cm on the deferent,
p
PL
EP
r
a
r
a
r
a
v
v
v
=
=
+
+
−
−
sin
sin
sin
(
cos
)
( sin
)
.
1
1
2
2

q
YGE
EY
EG
e
cm
=
=
=
−
−

sin
sin
sin
.
1
1 2

 =
=
+
=
−
+




+
EG
GY
EY
R
e
c
e
c
e
c
m
m
m
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
            
( sin
)
cos
(
sin
) .
GY
GX
XY
GX
QX
R
e
c
e
c
m
m
=
+
=
+
=
−
+
2
2
( sin
)
cos
,
GX
GC
CX
R
e
cm
=
−
=
−
2
2
2
2
( sin
) .
Chapter 2
88

since  varies with respect to cm. It is one thing to tabulate a column of val-
ues of a single-argument function, but quite another to tabulate a two-
dimensional array.
Ptolemy solves this problem by exploiting the fact that av has a much
stronger effect on p than does the other argument cm. In the plot of p(av,cm) in
ﬁgure 2.34, the goal is to determine the height of a randomly chosen point X.
Ptolemy tabulates only the four single-argument functions drawn in bold,
each of which is easily done since the corresponding values of cm are chosen
strategically to simplify the calculation. He then assumes that the increase in
the function from A to B to C proceeds in the same way (although with dif-
ferent magnitudes) as the increase in the tabulated values from D to E to F.
Thus, where pairs of letters stand for differences in heights in the diagram,
AX/AB DY/DE. Since all points but X in this equation have been tabu-
lated, we can solve for the height of X. This technique, now called Ptolemaic
interpolation,121 was to be used throughout the medieval period and was ap-
plied to several astronomical functions.
One might wonder what all this talk of interpolation has to do with
trigonometry, and indeed whether our use of functional notation unduly im-
poses a modern notion onto an ancient procedure. The former question is
answered easily enough: what made ancient trigonometry distinct from its
precursors was its ability to transform arcs to lengths (and vice versa) sys-
tematically. Without appropriate interpolation procedures one could not
claim to do this with a table alone. So, interpolation completed the ancient
trigonometric project.
Interpolation and the accompanying notion of function belonged to the
somewhat murky discipline known as logistics, one of the applied branches
of arithmetic. Deﬁned vaguely as the art of practical calculation, logistics
included Ptolemaic interpolation among its more advanced topics.122 Al-
though no treatises on logistics survive, it is referenced by several late
Greek authors as one of four mathematical topics beyond the traditional
quadrivium (arithmetic, geometry, music, astronomy), along with geodesy,
optics, and mechanics. Our tables and interpolation methods assume famil-
iarity with the idea of a continuous function, although perhaps “continu-
ous” is not the right word here. Ptolemy’s functions represent geometric
Alexandrian Greece
89
121 More thorough expositions of Ptolemaic interpolation may be found in [O. Pedersen 1974a,
41–46] and [Van Brummelen 1994].
122 For a modern account of logistics and the notion of function in Greek mathematics see
[O. Pedersen 1974a]; a detailed exposition of logistical calculation may be found in [Vogel 1936],
and a study of its development in Greece and relation to early Western algebra in [Klein 1934a and
1934b].

relationships, whether they happen to be continuous or not (although, of
course, they generally are). It is an irony that the need to cover every
geometric situation that might arise in astronomy forced ancient authors
to introduce interpolation, hence the computational science of logistics—
a mathematical subject removed as far as possible from the geometry that
motivated it.
Trigonometry in Ptolemy’s Other Works
One might get the impression from what has gone before in this chapter that
ancient trigonometry is essentially what is found in the Almagest; and if one
keeps in mind that the Almagest is a culmination of a period of develop-
ment, this assertion is not far from the truth. There are, however, scraps of
trigonometry in Ptolemy’s other works. Oddly enough Ptolemy did not dis-
cover the sine law of refraction in his Optics; instead he postulated a
scheme of second differences, reminiscent of Babylonian astronomical cal-
culation, to model the phenomenon.123 The Geography, in which Ptolemy
sets himself the challenge of mapping a substantial portion of the Earth’s
sphere onto a ﬂat surface, does appeal to trigonometry. He solves this prob-
lem in two different ways; the second requires an argument which will
sound familiar.
The projection, illustrated in ﬁgure 2.35, works as follows. We are as-
sumed to be watching the Earth from a point far away, directly above the par-
allel of the town of Soene in Lower Egypt on the Tropic of Cancer; thus its 
Chapter 2
90
123 See [Smith 1982] for an analysis of the reasons for Ptolemy’s failure, as well as a summary of
the substantial literature on this topic.
Figure 2.34
Ptolemaic interpolation

latitude is 
. Where the radius BE90 units, the point nearest to us 
on the equator will appear to be 
units below E (ﬁgure 2.36). In 
order to draw a circular arc representing the equator (which must pass
through B, Z and D), Ptolemy must ﬁnd the center H of this circle. Once it is
found, the other latitude circles will also be centered at H.
Text 2.5
Ptolemy, Constructing Latitude Arcs on a Map
(Geography I.24)
Now let AEZG and BED be imagined as straight lines representing arcs, such 
that BE has a ratio to EZ of 
. And let GA be produced, and let the center 
about which the circular segment BZD is to be described be at H, and let it be
required to ﬁnd the ratio of HZ to EB.
Let straight line ZB be drawn, and bisected at , and let H (which is of 
course perpendicular to BZ) be drawn. Then since EZ was assumed to be 23 5
6
90 23 5
6
:
EZ = 23 5
6
 ≈
°
23 5
6
Alexandrian Greece
91
Figure 2.35 Ptolemy’s second projection of the Earth’s surface, from Johannes
Ruremundanus’s 1540 edition of Book VIII of the Geography (courtesy of the Burndy
Library)
of such [units] as straight line BE is 90, the hypotenuse BZ will be 
of 
93 1
10
the same [units]. And angle BZE will be 
of such [units; i.e., half-degrees] 
as two right angles are 360, and the remaining angle HZ will be 
of the
same [half-degrees]. Consequently the ratio of HZ to Z is 
. But
of such [units] as Z is 
, straight line BE is 90; so that also of such [units] 
46 11
20
181
46
5
6
11
20
:
29 2
3
150 1
3

as straight line BE is 90 (and ZE is 
of the same), we will have straight line 
HZ too as 
. And [we will thus obtain] point H, about which all the parallels 
in the plane map are to be described.124
Explanation: To understand Ptolemy’s use of half-degrees, see Text 2.3.
First Ptolemy wants BZE, which we can ﬁnd immediately since
EBZ  tan1 (EZ/EB). However, once again the chord table does not
allow the equivalent of an arc tangent, so Ptolemy ﬁrst computes 
, and then applies an arc 
sine: 
(equal 
to 
). 
Then 
125 (equal to 
).
The rest of the argument proceeds without trigonometry. Since
HZ,~BZE,
29 2
3 °°


HZ
EBZ
=
≈
°
14 5
6
150 1
3 °°
BZE
BE
BZ
=
≈
°
−
sin
(
/
)
1
1
6
75
BZ
BE
EZ
=
+
=
+
≈
2
2
2
5
6
2
1
10
90
23
93
(
)
181 5
6
23 5
6
Chapter 2
92
124 Reprinted from [Ptolemy (Berggren/Jones) 2000, 90–91].
125 This is true because BZE~HZ—both triangles are right, and they share another angle.
Figure 2.36
Generating Ptolemy’s
projection
trigonometrically. The
goal is to determine the
equator circle; the
latitude circle through
Soene is also drawn in
this image.

But 
, so 
. So H is found, and the latitude 
arcs may be drawn.
After Ptolemy
There is very little to say about Greek trigonometry, or indeed astronomy,
after Ptolemy. One late fourth-century author, Theon of Alexandria, com-
posed commentaries on both the Almagest and the Handy Tables, although
for the most part they are disappointing to the historian—long-winded, and
with little information beyond the original texts themselves. One theorem in
his commentary to the Almagest is worth a note: the successive differences
of the chords of any increasing arithmetic sequence of arcs (180°) always
decrease.126 This result is equivalent to the fact that the second derivative of
the chord function is negative—as is the lemma in (1.1), which Ptolemy had
already used to get his estimate Crd (1°)≈1;2,50. As we shall see in the chap-
ter on Islam, the use of chord differences in Theon’s inequality rather than
Ptolemy’s chord magnitudes has the potential to improve the bounds around
Crd (1°) considerably, but Theon simply uses his result to verify Ptolemy’s
estimate.127
As far as is known, the trigonometrically-based astronomical methods
found in the Almagest were (perhaps not surprisingly) not an immediate suc-
cess with the astrologers, who continued to use arithmetical schemes as late
as the fourth century AD.128 Perhaps the more sophisticated astronomy was
just too difﬁcult to approach, or the extra precision did the astrologers little
practical good. In any case, it is clear that the ﬁrst real successors to Greek
trigonometry were Indian, and those to pick up the torch of the Almagest
were Islamic.
HZ = 181 5
6
Z
BZ
 =
=
1
2
11
20
46
HZ
Z
BZ
ZE

=
=
93
23
1
10
5
6
.
Alexandrian Greece
93
126 See the account of this theorem in [von Braunmühl 1900, 27–28].
127 [Rome 1931/1936/1943, vol. 2, 495].
128 [Jones 1996, 144].

94
3 '" India
Transmission from Babylon and Greece
The roots of Indian astronomy go far back into recorded history. They are
also extremely controversial, inciting both national pride and strong skepti-
cism. Evidence of origins in many subjects is already unclear, and our infor-
mation concerning transmission to India of mathematical and astronomical
knowledge from other cultures is particularly spotty.1 Ancient Vedic instruc-
tions giving the times to perform various rituals have led to a tremendous va-
riety of interpretations concerning the extent of the astronomical knowledge
encoded within them, as well as a wide range of datings. About all that we
can say with some certainty is that interest in astronomy was present at least
by the ﬁrst millennium BC and possibly earlier, dealing especially with cal-
endar periods. It became considerably more sophisticated and precise with
the arrival of data on astronomical period relations from Babylon, probably
in the ﬁfth century BC. The arithmetic character of Babylonian astronomy
(calculations of parameters, and representing continuously changing quanti-
ties with zigzag functions; see ﬁgure 1.3) was received well; as we shall see,
Indian mathematicians were as skilled at computation as their Greek coun-
terparts had been at geometric proof.
Nevertheless, Greek astronomy began to make its presence felt in India
as early as the third and fourth centuries AD, partly through various trade
routes. Works such as the Romakasiddhanta and the Paulisasiddhanta2 (lost
today but known partially to us through later works such as Varahamihira’s
sixth-century AD Pañcasiddhantika3) combined Babylonian arithmetical
schemes with Greek procedures that had been based on geometry. For in-
stance, the determination of solar eclipses in the Romakasiddhanta contains
computations of solar and lunar positions using tables of equations of center,
presumably based on Greek sources.
A remarkable fact of this transmission is that the astronomical theory
received in India was not Ptolemy’s, but something cruder. Most obvious is
1 [Pingree 1978] is a starting point for an account of Indian mathematical astronomy that argues in
favor of transmissions from Babylon and Greece. [Kak 2000] is a survey from the other side of
the argument, taking the view that Indian astronomy is old, and more home-grown. See also
[Ohashi 2000] in the same volume. We tend to side with transmission theories, but some of the
evidence is subject to different interpretations, and often the transmission is impossible to prove.
2 The word siddhanta means a treatise.
3 The Pañcasiddhantika is available in an edition, translation and commentary in [Varahamihira
(Neugebauer/Pingree) 1970/1971]; see also the analyses in [Shukla 1973] and [Shukla 1977].
[Pingree 1963, esp. 236–238] summarizes the works of this period.

India
95
the fact that the equant point in planetary models, prominent in the Almagest,
does not arise explicitly (although see below). Hardly any documentation
exists for the earliest arrival of Greek astronomical models in India, or for
that matter what those Greek models would have looked like. So, it is very
difﬁcult to ascertain the extent to which what has come down to us repre-
sents transmitted knowledge, and what is original with Indian scientists. If
it is all the former, we have a unique window on an otherwise-lost pre-
Ptolemaic astronomy; if it is all the latter, we have the birth of a new science.
The truth is probably a tangled mixture of both.4
The First Sine Tables
From the earliest extant works, especially Aryabhata’s Aryabhatiya5 (ca. AD
500) and the Pañcasiddhantika, Indian astronomers set out to do almost
everything that the Greeks had done—but with different emphases. The top-
ics are familiar: determining solar, lunar and planetary positions; predicting
eclipses; converting celestial coordinates; ﬁnding gnomon shadow lengths;
and so on. From combinations of traditional chronologies and Babylonian
goal-year texts, they derived planetary positions for intervals of up to bil-
lions of years since the epoch.6 The calculations that led to these numbers
may have spurred Indian interest in the mathematics of indeterminate equa-
tions. However, the main distinction between Greece and India is not in what
they chose to study, but in what they chose to write. In the case of India, this
is not much—many texts are simply prescriptions for calculations, given in
verse for the purpose of memorization. The reasonings behind the laws often
need to be inferred, and since the verses often can be interpreted in different
ways, controversies inevitably result.
These calculations required a trigonometric base, and almost every Indian
astronomical work had at least the rhetorical equivalent of a trigonometric
table. The ﬁrst surprise is that the chord function was no longer tabulated,
replaced by the sine in even the most ancient of extant texts. Although no ex-
plicit comment on the substitution survives, it is not hard to see how it might
have happened from some of our examples in the previous chapter. For in-
stance, in the Almagest solar theory (Text 2.1), in order to ﬁnd length XE
4 On the Greek origins of the planetary models, see [Pingree 1971b] and [Pingree 1976]. On
Aryabhata in particular, [Chatterjee 1949] emphasizes his originality; [Pingree 1993] acknowl-
edges the “Indianness” of his success in simplifying the mathematical computations while syn-
thesizing existing theories.
5 See [Aryabhata (Shukla/Sarma) 1976].
6 The epoch is a ﬁxed starting point in time from which planetary positions at other times are cal-
culated.

Chapter 3
96
Ptolemy must ﬁrst ﬁnd 
, take the chord, and divide by two. Some early
Indian astronomer, repeatedly doubling arcs and halving the resulting
chords, must have realized that he could save time simply by tabulating this,
and the jya-ardha (or ardha-jya, Sanskrit for “half-chord”), eventually short-
ened to jya, was born.7
Like the chord, the jya was deﬁned as the length of a certain line segment
in a circle. In ﬁgure 3.1, 
is the argument  and BD is the jya. Thus the re-
lation between the jya and the modern sine is
(3.1)
where R is the radius of the base circle. Since this function will appear re-
peatedly from now on we shall represent it with the now-standard Sin  (the
capital letter signifying that the function is R times the modern one).
As early as the ﬁfth century AD, other functions were deﬁned and used.
The kotijya, or cosine, is length AB in ﬁgure 3.1. The utkrama-jya (“reversed
sine”—also called the sara, or “arrow”), or versed sine, is length BC. This
function, out of favor these days, is
vers 1cos .
(3.2)
As before, all functions are R times as large as their modern counterparts.
Different astronomers chose different values for the radius R (the trijya8
or sinus totus), although some values were more common than others.9 One
of the earliest choices may be found in the Pañcasiddhantika (“Five Sid-
dhantas”), a sixth-century work by Varahamihira which summarizes several
earlier siddhantas, some of which are thought to be of Greek origin (for the
trigonometry, especially the Paulisasiddhanta). Although R is never deﬁned
explicitly there is no doubt from the mathematics in the text that it uses
R120.10
Varahamihira sets out in the standard Sanskrit verse a set of values for
his Sine, tabulated in ﬁgure 3.2. The oddity of using R120 is explained by
comparing Varahamihira’s table (ﬁgure 3.2) to Ptolemy’s table of chords: if
we divide the arguments by two and double the radius, we can transfer the
chords directly to sines. Indeed, comparing with Ptolemy’s values rounded
to one sexagesimal place has led to the suggestion that Varahamihira’s values
jy
R
a( )


=
sin ,
CD
NY
7 [Datta/Singh 1983, 40].
8 Trijya means “sine of three signs,” i.e., three zodiacal signs of 30° each.
9 [Gupta 1978] contains a staggering list of 25 different values of R and a discussion of how some
of them transmitted to other cultures.
10[Varahamihira (Neugebauer/Pingree) 1970/1971, part 1 pp. 52–57, part 2 pp. 36–37].

India
97
in fact may have been taken from Ptolemy.11 However, since the Almagest’s
values are correct to the level of rounding of the Pañcasiddhantika, one can-
not rule out the possibilities that the latter had an earlier source (Greek or In-
dian), or even that it is an original work.
Perhaps an even more peculiar feature of Varahamihira’s sine table, at
least at ﬁrst glance, is the step size of 3°45. This structure is standard in
early Indian tables (for instance, see Aryabhata’s table also in ﬁgure 3.2),
and we have seen it before. The reconstruction of Hipparchus’s chord table
in ﬁgure 2.6 uses a step size of 
which we have seen is easy to complete
with a minimum of trigonometric tools. Converted to sines where the arcs
are half as large, the Hipparchian process leads to a table with steps of 
Many Indian sine tables also use R3438, which as we saw in the previ-
ous chapter results from measuring the circumference of the circle in
3606021,600 minutes. This value is found, for example, in the sine table
in Aryabhata’s Aryabhatiya (ca. AD 499)12 and in many important works that
followed. As can be seen in ﬁgure 3.2 it holds the signiﬁcant advantage that
sines of small arcs are almost equal to the arcs themselves (since
3;45°225),13 which is also a motive for the modern use of radian measure.
Whether or not the similarity between the early Indian sine tables and
Hipparchus’s reconstructed chord table proves transmission from Greece to
3 3
4 °.
7 1
2 °,
11[Yano 1977, 84–85]; see also [Bag 1990] for a similar comparison. Seventeen of the twenty-four
entries in Varahamihira’s table match rounded chord values from the Almagest if we round up
when the last place is 30. Also, seventeen entries in Varahamihira’s table are correct to both sex-
agesimal places.
12Two of the most widely available translations of the Aryabhatiya are in [Shukla 1976] and
[Clark 1930], both of which contain extended commentaries. See also [Rodet 1879, 399,
410–413], which contains a translation into French of parts of the relevant passage and one of
the many interpretations of Aryabhata’s difference methods for computing sines.
13[Woepcke 1854b] asserted that the step size of 225 was chosen deliberately as the largest con-
venient arc for which Sin xx when rounding to minutes of arc, but the possible link to Hip-
parchus and the natural division of the right angle into 24 segments are better explanations.
Figure 3.1
Indian trigonometric functions

Chapter 3
98
India is a thorny question. The case for transmission suggested initially by
the structure of the Indian tables recently has been bolstered long after its
initial discrediting.14 Given other evidences of astronomical transmission,
the circumstantial evidence is now compelling. However, since the values in
any reconstructed Hipparchan table do not come directly from any historical
document, the entries in the tables themselves cannot be compared. Also,
given that the circle divided into 360°, it seems plausible (perhaps almost
14See Chapter 2, note 30.
Sin 
Sin 
 (degrees)
(Varahamihira)
(Aryabhata)
3;45
7;51
225
7;30
15;40
449
11;15
23;25
671
15
31;4
890
18;45
38;34
1105
22;30
45;56
1315
26;15
53;5
1520
30
1,0;0
1719
33;45
1,6;40
1910
37;30
1,13;3
2093
41;15
1,19;7
2267
45
1,24;51
2431
48;45
1,30;13
2585
52;30
1,35;12
2728
56;15
1,39;46
2859
60
1,43;55
2978
63;45
1,47;37
3084
67;30
1,50;52
3177
71;15
1,53;37
3256
75
1,55;55
3321
78;45
1,57;42
3372
82;30
1,58;59
3409
86;15
1,59;44
3431
90
2,0;0
3438
Figure 3.2
Varahamihira and
Aryabhata’s sine
tables

India
99
inevitable) that some Indian mathematician might have arrived independently
at the same 24-part division of the 90° quadrant. So it is likely that some ele-
ments of Greek chord tables found their way to India (the 360° circle, the
step size, and R3438), where they were converted to sines. As for the 
tables themselves, there is simply no way to decide whether the sine values
were merely borrowed or computed independently in India.
Aryabhata’s Difference Method of Calculating Sines
In fact, a uniquely Indian approach to tabulating sines is found in some of the
earliest works. Beginning with the assumption that the ﬁrst entry in the table
is sin(225)225, various authors give schemes (in verse) prescribing the
successive computation of the remaining 23 sine values, one at a time, using
only those that have already been found. Rules of this type may be found in
several texts, such as the Paitamahasiddhanta15 (“Siddhanta of Pitamaha,”
ca. sixth century AD) and in the later Suryasiddhanta (“Siddhanta of the
Sun”).16
A similar prescription in the Aryabhatiya has attracted considerably
more attention, partly due to differing understandings of the method and its
origin. We follow the most recent published interpretation, which comes
with its own translation of the crucial passage. It is based on an explanation
by the much later ﬁfteenth-century Indian scientist Nilakantha, who also
does us the rare favor of accompanying the computation with a geometric
derivation.17
3 3
4 °
15A short account of the sine difference method of the Paitamahasiddhanta is in [Pingree 1978,
559], and a translation of a corrupt version of the text is in [Pingree 1967/68].
16 The Suryasiddhanta has an extremely complicated history of revisions and transmissions; the
earliest version is at least as old as the ﬁfth century AD. The introduction to [Shukla 1957] (a
version based on Paramesvara’s ﬁfteenth-century commentary) goes into some detail on its his-
tory. Descriptions of the differences method for computing sines in the Suryasiddhanta are in
[Burgess 1860, 52–57] and [Chakravarty 2001, 3–6]. Apart from the Suryasiddhanta, the
method is described in a number of places; one accessible source is [Kennedy 1969b,
346–347].
17 The interpretation we follow is by [Hayashi 1997], who also summarizes thirteen different
published understandings of Aryabhata’s rather vague prescriptions. The mathematics that fol-
lows is based on Hayashi’s paper. For some other takes see [Rodet 1879, 412–413], [Ayyangar
1923], [Naraharayya 1924, 107–108], [Gupta 1972a], and [Shukla/Sarma 1976, 51–54]. The
latter also applies Nilakantha, whose writing on the subject was published in [Aryabhata (Sas-
tri) 1931]. [Gupta 1971] describes a ninth-century improvement of Aryabhata’s tabular differ-
ences done by extending the numeric values to fractional parts, leading to R3437;44,19 instead
of 3438.

Chapter 3
100
Text 3.1
Aryabhata, Computing Sines
(from the Aryabhatiya)
When the second half-[chord] partitioned is less than the ﬁrst half-chord,
which is [approximately equated to] the [corresponding] arc, by a certain
amount, the remaining [sine-differences] are less [than the previous ones]
each by that amount of that divided by the ﬁrst half-chord.18
Explanation: Especially considering that the words in square brackets are
modern insertions, it is no wonder that there are so many ways to read this
passage!
In this discussion we divide into 24th parts of a right angle (hence
Sin(1)Rsin 3;45°), and we write the ﬁrst differences of sines as
(i)Sin(i)Sin(i1). In ﬁgure 3.3 the 24 quadrant division points are
the Ai’s, while the midpoints are the Bi’s. The sines that Aryabhata seeks are
the lengths PiAi; the distances Ai Ai  1 Bi Bi  1 are all equal to Crd(1).
Since the chord Ai Ai  1 is perpendicular to OBi  1,  Ai CAi  1 ~
 OTi  1 Bi  1; therefore
This gives us an equation for the ﬁrst difference,
(3.3)
If we apply (3.3) twice (with i and i1 as arguments), we arrive at an equa-
tion for the second difference:
(3.4)
But what is TiTi1? The similarity of  BiDBi1 and AiPiO gives us the 
answer:
(3.5)
Substituting (3.5) into (3.4) gives
B D
B B
A P
AO
T T
B D
R
i
i
i
i i
i
i i
i
+
+
=
=
=
1
1
1
,
( ) ⋅Sin(i).
so
Crd


( )
(
)
( ) ⋅(
)
( )
i
i
R
OT
OT
R
T T
i
i
i i
−
+
=
1
Crd
Crd
(
)
( )
i
R
OTi
+
=
+
1
1
1
Crd
A
C
A A
OT
B
O
i
OT
R
i
i
i
i
i
i
+
+
+
+
+
=
+
=
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
,
(
)
( )
.
or
Crd

18From [Hayashi 1997, 399].

India
101
(3.6)
thus the left side is independent of i.19 Whether or not Aryabhata knew this
surprising equation is a matter for debate. Nilakantha did; he noticed that ap-
plying it twice (for i1 and for arbitrary i) gives
(3.7)
From (3.7) all sines may be generated in sequence, since (i1) is the
only quantity not known immediately from Sin(1), . . . , Sin(i); and
Sin(i1)  Sin(i)  (i  1).
This is rather abstract; a numerical example will help to intuit the
method in practice. Suppose we have found the ﬁrst four sines in ﬁgure 3.2,
and need to ﬁnd the ﬁfth. Then, according to (3.7), the quantity that we need
to increase from 890 to the new sine differs from the previous sine-difference
(890 671219) by








( )
(
)
( )
( )
( )
( )
,
( )
(
)
[ ( )
( )]
.
i
i
i
i
i
i
−
+
=
−
−
+
=
−
⋅
1
1
2
1
1
1
2
Sin
Sin
or
Sin( )
Sin(1)


( )
(
)
( )
( )
;
i
i
i
R
−
+
= 





1
1
2
Sin
Crd
19Since the numerator of the left side of (3.6) is a second difference of sines, this difference equa-
tion is analogous to the fact that the second derivative of the sine function is the negative sine.
Figure 3.3
Diagram for the proof of
Aryabhata’s procedure for
sine differences

Chapter 3
102
The new sine-
difference is thus 2194 215, and so the ﬁfth sine is 890 215 1105.
With some generosity in our interpretation, we can see that this pattern of
calculation corresponds to the prescription in Aryabhata’s verse.
The ingenuity of this method is underlined by the fact that once the con-
stants Sin(1) and (1)(2) are given, the results it generates are, at least in
theory, not approximate but exact. As the sample calculation illustrates, it is
also surprisingly efﬁcient—although due to the way one value is calculated
from another, sine values found from this method tend to decrease in accu-
racy as the computation continues.
It is quite possible that Aryabhata and others discovered their difference for-
mulas empirically, simply by observing patterns in the differences found in
geometrically-generated sine values.20 In fact, we must also admit the possi-
bility that Aryabhata simply borrowed the method from an even earlier
source, Indian or Greek. We leave it to the reader to decide whether or not it
is plausible that the above argument could have been found on its own at
Aryabhata’s time. Difference schemes like this depend only on basic geo-
metrical theorems and so would have been accessible to any culture familiar
with Euclid.21 But as far as we know they were not rediscovered until
François Viète’s work in the late sixteenth century—whereupon they trans-
formed the construction of trigonometric tables.
Bhaskara I’s Rational Approximation to the Sine
Even more audacious was Bhaskara I’s method for computing the sine using
no geometry whatever. Little is known about him, although the fact that he
wrote a commentary on Aryabhata’s work22 indicates that he worked in the
same astronomical tradition. One of his best known works is the Maha-
bhaskariya (“Great [Work of] Bhaskara,” around AD 600), which describes a
[ ( )
( )]
( )
( )
[
]
( )
( )


≈ 4.
1
2
1
225
224
4
1
890
225
−
⋅
=
−
⋅
=
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
i
20The idea that early Indian astronomers began working with previously existing sine tables and
found difference patterns by experiment has been around for a long time; see for instance [Davis
1799, 245–249].
21[Playfair 1798, 97–100] discusses the relation between the scheme in the Suryasiddhanta and
Proposition 93 of Euclid’s Data.
22On these commentaries see the series of four articles [Shukla 1971–1972], as well as [Keller
2006]. For a survey of Bhaskara I’s works see [Pingree 1970–1994, vol. A4, 297–299].
Bhaskara’s available treatises have been edited and translated in a series of three books pub-
lished by Lucknow University, including the Mahabhaskariya [Bhaskara I (Shukla) 1960].

India
103
number of innovations, not least of them a remarkable approximation to the
sine—a ratio of two quadratic functions.
As usual Bhaskara states his rule for computing sines without any ex-
planation; in modern notation, he asserts that
(3.8)
This function is extremely close to the Sine over the range of values
0180° (and better than the obvious parabolic approximation (R / 8100) ·
(180 ))23; the graphs are almost indistinguishable (see ﬁgure 3.4). The
sine values are of course approximate, but they never err by more than six
from the correct values (in units where R3438; compare with ﬁgure 3.2).
Bhaskara’s approximation was picked up and occasionally modiﬁed by
many subsequent Indian astronomers, as late as the sixteenth century;24 how-
ever, they do not answer the question that presses the modern reader: how did
Bhaskara arrive at it? A number of explanations have been proposed, including
for instance assuming that the sine function is a ratio of two quadratics, and
solving for these quadratics’ coefﬁcients by substituting known sine values.25
Sin




=
⋅
−
−
−
R
4 180
40 500
180
(
)
,
(
)
.
23This formula has roots at 0 and 180°; the R/8100 term scales it to reach a maximum value of R.
24[Gupta 1967] and [Gupta 1972b] provide quotations of versions of Bhaskara’s formula from
several works.
25 [Gupta 1967] contains ﬁve explanations; [Gupta 1986] improves some of the arguments. See
[Naimpally 1987] for a similar derivation. [Ayyangar 1950] argues that Bhaskara’s formula is
the best ratio of two quadratic expressions to represent the sine by forcing an arbitrary such
ratio to satisfy certain properties of the sine function, including certain commonly known sine
values.
Figure 3.4
The Sine function
(thin curve) and
Bhaskara’s rational
approximation
(thick curve)

Chapter 3
104
However, the most likely explanation (and the only one based on geometry) is
as follows.26
In ﬁgure 3.5 the diameter AC is equal to 2R. The area of ABC is equal 
to both 
and
so AB · BCAC · BD. But BDSin , so
(3.9)
The replacement of sines with their corresponding arcs would have been fa-
miliar, since sines and arcs were measured in the same units. We convert the
resulting inequality to an equality by considering the reciprocal of (3.9) and
inserting two unknowns x and y:
(3.10)
Substituting the two most obvious sines, Sin 30°R/2 and Sin 90°R, into
(3.10) results in a pair of linear equations for x and y. Their solution, and
substitution back into (3.10), leads precisely to (3.8). We leave the details to
the interested reader.
If this train of reasoning is indeed how Bhaskara came up with his ap-
proximation, it remains, in part, a puzzle. If he had used Sin  in (3.10) rather
1
2
180
Sin


=
° −



+
x
R
y
(
)
.
Sin


=
=
⋅
<
⋅
=
⋅
=
° −
BD
AB BC
AC
AB BC
AC
AB BC
R
R
2
180
2
(
) .
1
2 AC BD
⋅
,
1
2 AB BC
⋅
Figure 3.5
Reconstruction of a derivation of
Bhaskara I’s rational
approximation to the sine
26This explanation was originally posed in [Inamdar 1950] and enhanced by Shukla in [Bhaskara
I (Shukla) 1960, 208]; it is the ﬁrst of [Gupta 1967]’s ﬁve approaches. See also [Hayashi 1990]
for a speculation that Bhaskara’s formula is ultimately related to Aryabhata’s trigonometry.

India
105
than its reciprocal, his approximation would have been only a quadratic
function rather than a ratio of quadratics, and the result would have been
inferior. The insertion of the parameters x and y does reﬂect Indian mathe-
matical practice elsewhere. In any case, the early Indian reticence to provide
motive leaves us, as often, with only this plausible reconstruction.
Improving Sine Tables
As clever as Aryabhata’s and Bhaskara’s methods were, a sine table with en-
tries only for every 3;45° of arc rounded only to the nearest integer (with
R3438) leaves ample room for improvement. Ptolemy’s method for con-
structing a chord table has signiﬁcant advantages. One of these is the use of
equivalents of sin 18° and sin 36°; this leads to the sines of all multiples of 3°,
a grid of 30 entries over a span of 90° rather than the Indians’ more cumber-
some 24 entries. Furthermore, Ptolemy’s approximation of an equivalent to
sin 1° allowed him to ﬁnd the sine of every degree.
The sine of 18° entered Indian mathematics in the twelfth century, in the
Jyotpatti of Bhaskara II. One of the best and most popular scientists of me-
dieval India,27 Bhaskara II wrote a number of important works. If the number
of editions and commentaries is any guide, his most widely read were the
astronomical Siddhantasiromani (“Crest-Jewel of siddhantas”) and the math-
ematical Lilavati (on arithmetic, algebra and geometry), traditionally con-
sidered to be part of the Siddhantasiromani. The Jyotpatti (“Rationale of
Sines”) is a trigonometric appendix to the Siddhantasiromani;28 if one thinks
of it as a separate work, then it is the ﬁrst composition devoted solely to
trigonometry in India. There is some reason to think this way: uncharacteris-
tically for the Siddhantasiromani it contains a number of results but no justi-
ﬁcations. This has led to some speculation that the material contained within
it is foreign,29 perhaps transmitted from Islam.
In modern notation the Jyotpatti prescribes 
equivalent to 
and 
30 both val-
ues are correct. Bhaskara II gives no clue how he arrived at them, and this
omission led to a number of derivations and explanations (not all correct) in
subsequent commentaries. Some of these inferences are geometric; others
sin
(
) / ;
36
5
5
8
° =
−
sin
(
) / ,
18
5
1
4
° =
−
Sin18
5
4
2
° =
−




R
R
,
27The list of manuscripts of Bhaskara II’s works in Pingree’s Census [Pingree 1970–1994, vol.
A4, 299–326] extends to twenty-seven pages!
28The Siddhantasiromani, including the Jyotpatti, is available in English translation in [Wilkinson
1861]. See [Pingree 1970–1994, vol. A4, 318–319] for its extensive publication history.
29M. M. Sudhakara Dvivedi, quoted in [Gupta 1980, 45].
30[Yano 1997, 990].

Chapter 3
106
are algebraic; two are similar to derivations in Euclid and Ptolemy.31 Perhaps
one or more of these methods reﬂect Bhaskara II’s thoughts; once again, we
simply do not know.
FromhereBhaskara II needsonly twosteps tobuildasinetable comparable
in quality to Ptolemy’s chord table. The ﬁrst step, an approximation to Sin 1°, is
a much easier chore than Ptolemy’s: if Sin 225≈225, then even more accu-
rately Sin 60≈60. (Indeed, this approximation is actually a little better than
Ptolemy’s Crd 1°≈1;2,50.) The second, a method of ﬁnding the sines of sums
and differences of angles, allows Bhaskara II to complete a sine table for every
degree from 1° to 90°. His rule, given in the Jyotpatti in verse, is as follows:
The Sines of the two given arcs are crossly multiplied by (their)
Cosines and (the products are) divided by the radius. Their (that is,
of the quotients obtained) sum is the Sine of the sum of the arcs;
their difference is the Sine of the difference of the arcs.32
This is
(3.11)
which is in turn equivalent to the modern formula. This ﬁrst Indian appear-
ance of the sine sum and difference laws is yet again unaccompanied by jus-
tiﬁcation. The analogous cosine laws are not in the Jyotpatti; according to
the seventeenth-century Marici commentary by Munisvara, the reason for
this exclusion is that once Sin () are known, Cos () are more eas-
ily found simply using the Pythagorean Theorem.33
The later commentaries include a variety of derivations of the sine and
cosine addition laws, some of which are geometrical; one is based on
Ptolemy’s Theorem. However, we prefer to show a striking illustration of the
number-theoretic aspect of Indian mathematics (in the Marici commentary
on Jyotpatti). It relies on a lemma from indeterminate analysis, a subject of
great fascination in India.34
Lemma: If x1, y1 is a solution to the equation Nx2 a y2, and x2, y2 is a so-
lution of Nx2 b y2, then x1y2 x2y1, y1y2 Nx1x2 is a solution of
Nx2 aby2.
Sin
Sin
Cos
Cos
Sin
(
)
,


±
=
⋅
±
⋅




R
R
31See [Gupta 1976b] for a translation of the relevant section of the Jyotpatti, as well as summaries
of the various derivations of sin 18° in the commentaries.
32Translated in [Gupta 1974a, 165] from [Bhaskara II (Sastri) 1929, 283].
33[Gupta 1974a, 165]; the Marici commentary is summarized in [Gupta 1980].
34The following derivation is based on [Gupta 1974a, 167–169]. See also [Datta/Singh 1935/1938,
vol. 2, 141–181] for the lemma, related results, and their appearances in the works of other writers.

India
107
The relevance of this lemma to our situation becomes clear if one sets
N1 and abR2, which turns the indeterminate equations into the
Pythagorean Theorem. In this case both x1Sin , y1Cos  and x2Sin ,
y2Cos  satisfy the conditions of the lemma. Substitution gives us solutions
xSin· Cos Cos·Sin 
(3.12)
and
yCos· Cos Sin ·Sin 
(3.13)
to the equation x2 y2 R4. Dividing the latter through by R2 results in the
Pythagorean Theorem once again—(x/R)2  (y/R)2  R2. The leap to the
conclusion that x/R and y/R represent Sin() and Cos() respec-
tively seems to have been taken with conﬁdence.
Other Trigonometric Identities
The sum and difference formulas are vital to building trigonometric tables
ﬁner than the traditional 24 entries per 90°. But once one has the formulas,
they also can be used to generate many other identities. In particular, formu-
las for Sin 2, Cos 2, Sin 3, Cos 3, and higher multiples may be gener-
ated simply by writing n   … and applying the sum formulas
repeatedly. This was done by the later astronomer Kamalakara in his
Siddhanta-Tattva-Viveka (1658) up to the sine and cosine of 5; he quotes
Bhaskara II (who clearly knew that this could be done) for the addition and
subtraction laws.35 Kamalakara’s sine triple-angle formula, for instance, was
(3.14)
equivalent to the modern formula
sin 3 3sin 4sin3;
(3.15)
while his cosine quintuple angle formula was
(3.16)
equivalent to
Cos
Sin
Cos
Sin
Cos
Cos
Cos
5
5
10
4
2
3
4
4







=
−
+
(
)
(
) (
)
(
) (
) ,
R
Sin3
Sin
(Sin
(Sin30 )2


)
=
−
°




3
2
,
35A full account of Kamalakara’s work on multiple angle formulas may be found in [Gupta
1974c].

Chapter 3
108
cos 5 5sin4cos 10sin2cos3 cos5.
(3.17)
The identity (3.14)/(3.15) has special signiﬁcance, since it may be used to
get an accurate estimate of sin 1° from sin 3°—provided that one is able to solve
cubic equations. As we shall see, this method was ﬁrst applied by the Persian
astronomer Jamshid al-Kashi in the early ﬁfteenth century to generate an ex-
tremely accurate value of sin 1° (using an iterative scheme to solve the cubic),
leading eventually to the impressive sine table in Ulugh Beg’s Sultani Zij. Ka-
malakara, also interested in trisecting arcs, chose another path. Rather than
solving the cubic, Kamalakara took (3.15) and replaced sin3  with [(sin3 )/3]3.
Solving for sin 
 and setting 
/3, this substitution leads to an approximate
formula, but an extremely serviceable one for small angles:
36
(3.18)
Now that Kamalakara had an improved formula for sin /3, he could apply it
to (3.15) rather than the cruder [(sin 3)/3]3, ending up with an even better
formula for sin /3. Repeating iteratively, he could derive formulas as accu-
rate as he wished.37
Of course some of the “submultiple” angle formulas were known from
the beginning; as we have seen, an equivalent to the sine half-angle formula
goes back to ancient Greece. India’s introduction of new trigonometric func-
tions had already produced alternate formulations of basic identities like
this, easier to express and use. Already in the sixth-century Pañcasiddhantika
of Varahamihira, we ﬁnd a half-angle formula in the directions for building a
sine table, immediately after he gives values for Sin 30° and Sin 60°:
Text 3.2
Varahamihira, a Half-angle Formula
(from the Pañcasiddhantika)
When the remaining [Sines] are desired, the radius is diminished by the Sine
of the remainder of the subtraction of twice the arc from a quadrant; the
square of half of that [remainder] is to be added to the square of half [the Sine]
of double [the arc].
The square root of that is the desired Sine.38
sin
sin
sin
.



3
1
3
4
81
3

−
36[Datta/Singh 1983, 63–64]; Kamalakara applied a similar technique to arrive at an approximate
one-ﬁfth angle formula. Other late Indian mathematicians such as Munisvara (1627) (see [Ma-
jumdar 1978]) and Ghulam Husain Jaunpuri (1790) (see [Rizvi 1984]) also recognized the util-
ity of the triple angle formula for computing sines.
37For text, translation, and analysis of Kamalakara’s scheme, see [Gupta 1974d].
38From [Varahamihira (Neugebauer/Pingree) 1970/1971, part 1, 53].

India
109
Explanation: The goal of this passage is to determine the ﬁrst sine in the
table—of 3;45°—which requires three successive halving operations from
30°. The clause up to the semicolon tells us to compute RSin(90°),
i.e., the versed sine of . The rest of the sentence squares Sin()/2 and ap-
plies the Pythagorean Theorem. So Varahamihira’s formula is
(3.19)
This is easy to verify. In ﬁgure 3.6 BDSin  and BCVers , so the two
terms inside the squares on the right side of (3.19) are equal to EC and EF re-
spectively. Thus the Pythagorean Theorem is being applied to CEF. Since F
is the midpoint of CD, joining AF makes it obvious that CFSin (/2).39
(3.19) is equivalent to the well-known modern trigonometric identity
2sin2(/2)1cos .
(3.20)
The critical role played by half-angle formulas in the computation of sine
tables should be clear by now, so it is no surprise that variants are found
in many Indian astronomical texts.40
We have seen before that it is often possible to “ﬁnd” trigonometric identi-
ties seemingly applied within geometric procedures where they are not ex-
pected.41 One Indian example is in Brahmagupta’s Khandakhadyaka (“Eating
Candy,” AD 665), in which we ﬁnd an apparent use of the Law of Sines
within its planetary theory.
Text 3.3
Brahmagupta, the Law of Sines in Planetary Theory?
(from the Khandakhadyaka)
Multiply the ‘sine’ of the [Sighra] anomaly by the ‘sine’ of the maximum
Sighra equation and divide by the ‘sine’ of the corresponding Sighra equation;
the result is the ‘Sighra hypotenuse’. When the [Sighra] anomaly is half a circle
Sin
Vers
Sin
2
2
2
2
2
2





=



+



.
39Although my explanation is mathematically equivalent to [Varahamihira (Neugebauer/Pingree)
1970/1971, part 2, 36–37] and [Datta/Singh 1983, 50–51], it may represent the original author’s
thought process more accurately. Neugebauer/Pingree and Datta/Singh derive (3.19) but do not
explain the way the formula is presented, and they appeal unnecessarily to the chord function.
40[Datta/Singh 1983, 50–56] describes a number of them.
41 For instance the appearance of the Law of Cosines in Elements II.13 and the formula tan a
sinb tanA within the proof of a theorem in Theodosius’s Spherics.

Chapter 3
110
this Sighra hypotenuse is equal to the radius diminished by the ‘sine’ of the
maximum equations; when the anomaly is equal to the whole circle, the same
is equal to the radius increased by the same ‘sine’ of the maximum equation.42
Explanation: (See ﬁgure 3.7.) We shall deal with Indian planetary theory
later in this chapter. For now we need to know only that the sighra is one of
two epicycles in the standard model, a PMK is its anomaly (the angle
that locates the planet on the epicycle), and PEM is the planet’s dis-
placement caused by the sighra epicycle.
When the sighra equation is at its maximum max, EPM is a right
angle. If EM is set to be equal to the radius R, then PM, the radius of the
epicycle, is the Sine of max. So, our text prescribes
(3.21)
the distance from the Earth to the planet. Since Sin a Sin(180° - a), this is
equivalent to applying the Law of Sines to EPM.
Whether or not this apparent use of the Law of Sines allows us to claim
independent knowledge of it for Brahmagupta is a delicate matter, which we
shall discuss further in the section in Chapter 5 on the Venetian marteloio
system of navigation.
Sin
Sin
a PM
EP
⋅
=

,
Figure 3.6
A derivation of
Varahamihira’s Sine 
half-angle formula
42[Brahmagupta (Sengupta) 1934, 115]. A couple of punctuation marks have been corrected.

India
111
Brahmagupta’s Second-order Interpolation Scheme 
for Approximating Sines
Brahmagupta’s accomplishments did not end with the Law of Sines. One of
his more remarkable mathematical achievements was a method that began
with a sine table with a mere six entries, and computed the sine of any given
arc in a single calculation, with surprising accuracy.43 His approach boils
down to a second-order ﬁnite difference interpolation scheme, mathemati-
cally equivalent to the modern second-order Newton-Stirling formula; it may
be the earliest use of ﬁnite difference interpolation. Second order schemes
are often explained as a ﬁtting of parabolic arcs between the given data
points. We shall resist that temptation, and instead follow Bhaskara II’s ex-
planation of Brahmagupta’s thinking. This couplet describing the procedure
comes from Brahmagupta’s Dhyanagraha, an early work; it would be re-
peated in his later and more well-known Khandakhadyaka.
Text 3.4
Brahmagupta, Interpolating Sines
(from the Dhyanagraha)
Multiply half the difference of the tabular differences crossed over and to be
crossed over by the residual arc and divide by 900. By the result [so obtained]
increase or decrease half the sum of the same (two) differences, according as
this [semi-sum] is less or greater than the difference to be crossed over. We get
the true functional difference to be crossed over.44
43Brahmagupta’s interpolation method is examined in [Sengupta 1931a] and [Gupta 1969]. See
also [Gupta 1979b] for a seventeenth-century modiﬁcation by Munisvara that applied iteration
and often led to improved results.
44From [Gupta 1969, 88].
Figure 3.7
The Law of 
Sines in 
Brahmagupta’s planetary astronomy?

Chapter 3
112
Figure 3.8
Brahmagupta’s sine
table

Sin 
0°
0
15°
39
30°
75
45°
106
60°
130
75°
145
90°
150
Explanation: In the Khandakhadyaka Brahmagupta works with the very
small sine table of ﬁgure 3.8, which uses the somewhat common R150.45
Suppose we wish to ﬁnd Sin 39°. Bhaskara II argues that we need a difference
between sine values separated by 15°(900) that corresponds to 39°; the
difference of 31 between Sin 30°75 and Sin 45°106 is a quantity more
appropriate to the sine’s rate of change in the middle of the interval
What is required is a rate of change appropriate to 39°.
As Bhaskara II justiﬁes it, we consider the average of the difference be-
tween the given sines in the interval containing 39° (from 30° to 45°) and the
one before it (from 15° to 30°) as the sine difference appropriate to 30°,
i.e., (36 31)/2. We then take the difference in the interval from 30° to 45°
(i.e., 31) as the difference appropriate to 45°.46 To ﬁnd the difference ap-
propriate to 39° we use linear interpolation. This calculation is repre-
sented in our text as follows:
(3.22)
(where 540, the “residual arc,” is the excess of 39° over 30° expressed in
minutes). The appropriate difference for 39° is thus 32, and so the de-
sired sine of 39° is
(3.23)
Sin
Sin
39
30
540
900
32
94 2
° =
° +
=
(
)
. .
−
−




+
+



=
540 36
31
2
900
36
31
2
32
/
(
).
 =
°
37 1
2
45Oddly, in Brahmagupta’s other well-known astronomical work, the Brahmasphutasiddhanta,
written quite early in life, he computes a sine table for the common increment of 3;45°, but us-
ing the peculiar and as yet unexplained value R3270.
46The ﬁrst difference calculation (for 30°) is reasonable, but the second difference calculation
(for 45°) is not, and it is puzzling why he did not use the same approach for both differences.
The seventeenth-century commentator Kamalakara took Bhaskara II to task for this error [Gupta
1969, 89], although Bhaskara II himself seems to have been aware of room for improvement
[Datta/Singh 1983, 98].

India
113
In terms of the modern sine, this is 39°0.628 as opposed to the correct
value of 0.6293 (linear interpolation gives 0.624), good enough for astro-
nomical purposes. Given that Brahmagupta begins with sine values for arcs
all of 15° apart, this accuracy is impressive.
The phrasing of Brahmagupta’s couplet suggests that he meant it to apply
beyond the sine, and to decreasing functions as well as increasing. In fact, in
the Dhyanagraha he uses his method with both the sine and the versed sine,
and he and later commentators use it with both the sighra and manda correc-
tions of planetary theory (on which we will see more later). In the case of the
sighra Brahmagupta takes his work even further, applying the interpolation
to a table with entries separated by unequal argument intervals.
Taylor Series for Trigonometric Functions 
in Madhava’s Kerala School
Perhaps the most dramatic episode in Indian trigonometry happened late in the
medieval period, and produced the most accurate trigonometric table in me-
dieval India. The story begins in the late fourteenth century with the mathe-
matician Madhava, from the region of Kerala on the southwest tip of India.
Very little is known about Madhava and not one of his works on the topics we
shall discuss survives.47 Madhava would have taught in an illam, a family
compound. Although he wrote some of his mathematics, the small group of
students who gathered around him memorized many of his ﬁndings in verse.48
Followers (second, third, and even fourth generation) wrote the verses down
and provided commentaries; since none of the original verses provided any
hint of derivations, some of these later authors ﬁlled in explanations.
These verses contain some of the most sophisticated and unique mathe-
matics of the medieval period. Paramesvara, who wrote a number of treatises
in the early ﬁfteenth century, is one of the best known writers.49 Other major
figures include Nilakantha, who has come up before in this chapter—his
Tantrasan˙graha50 (“Epitome of Astronomical Treatises”) deals with some
of the Madhavan mathematics we shall see shortly; he also wrote the
47On Madhava and his works see [Pingree 1970–1994, vol. A4, 414–415].
48A nice description of life and work in a typical illam may be found in [Pingree 1985, 28–29].
49See [Pingree 1970–1994, vol. A4, 187–192] for information on Paramesvara’s works. [Gupta
1974b] gives a translation and explanation of his description of a third-order series approxima-
tion to the sine which differs from the Taylor series.
50The Tantrasan˙graha is available in a Sanskrit edition in [Nilakantha (Sarma) 1977] and has been
translated into English in a series of supplements to the Indian Journal of History of Science; see
[Nilakantha (Sarma/Narasimhan) 1998].

Chapter 3
114
Aryabhatiyabhasa, a commentary on the works of Aryabhata—and
Jyesthadeva, whose sixteenth-century Yuktibhasa51 (“Vernacular [Exposition]
of Rationales”) is related to the Tantrasan˙graha. Finally, San˙kara, a temple-
sweeper who became the last of the gurus we know to have descended from
Madhava, wrote two works containing extensive commentary on Madhava’s
series, the Yuktidipika (“Lamp of Rationales,” a Sanskrit redaction of the Yuk-
tibhasa),52 and the Kriyakramakari (“Performing the Steps for Calculation,” a
commentary on Bhaskara II’s Lilavati).53 Like most modern commentators,54
we shall concentrate on the mathematics of the sine and cosine power series.55
Nevertheless it is important to remember the ultimate purpose of these deliber-
ations: to provide a sound trigonometric basis for mathematical astronomy.
We follow Jyesthadeva’s Yuktibhasa, the earliest work that contains a
demonstration of the sine and cosine series.56 Modern trigonometric functions
51For a summary of the Yuktibhasa see [Sarma/Hariharan 1991].
52See [Nilakantha (Sarma) 1977] for an edition of the Yuktidipika.
53The text of the Kriyakramakari related to the  series has recently been made available, with
further explanation, in [Plofker 2007, 481–493].
54Madhava’s power series were mostly ignored until the 1940s, but have been the focus of over-
whelming interest since then. The Gregory and  series were ﬁrst brought to the attention of the
West early in the nineteenth century by C. M. Whish [Whish 1835], but modern studies began in
earnest with a series of papers by C. T. Rajagopal and his colleagues. An initial paper on the
Gregory series [Marar/Rajagopal 1944] was followed by a sequence of three papers in Scripta
Mathematica expressing the argument for the Gregory series in modern terms ([Rajagopal 1949],
[Rajagopal/Aiyar 1951], and [Rajagopal/Aiyar 1952]). This and a similar article dealing with the
sine and cosine series [Rajagopal/Venkataraman 1949], based on the Yuktibhasa, are useful but
tend to introduce unnecessary notions of limits and the integral calculus. Two later papers, [Ra-
jagopal/Rangachari 1978] and [Rajagopal/Rangachari 1986], deal with the enunciations of the
trigonometric series in the Tantrasan˙graha, and [Gupta 1976a] describes the relevant passage in
Nilakantha’s commentary to the Aryabhatiya. Since this series of papers a number of authors
have dealt with various aspects of the series, particularly the question of how much calculus is
contained within them; we shall address this brieﬂy later. A couple of anonymous Kerala texts
on the subject have also received modern treatment: the Mahajyanayanaprakara, edited and
translated in [Gold/Pingree 1991], and the Karanapaddhati (see the description of the power se-
ries passage in [Bag 1966]). For those who can read Japanese, consult especially Chapters 3 and
4 of [Hayashi/Kusuba/Yano 1997]. What little biographical information that is known for certain
about the Kerala scientists may be found in [Pingree 1970–1994] or in [Raja 1995].
55In fact, there are two distinct power series for the sine in the Kerala school; the other one begins
to vary from the Taylor series in the third term, described in [Gupta 1974b]. See [Plofker 2001]
for a possible geometric explanation for the difference, and [Plofker 2005] for a detailed com-
parison of the two series.
56The Yuktibhasa, written in Malayalam, is not available in English. This exposition is based
partly on [Rajagopal/Venkataraman 1949] and especially on [Bag 1979, 276–282], which holds
the advantage of avoiding the notation of the integral calculus. Bag had already described the
enunciations of the series in the Tantrasan˙graha and hinted at the Yuktibhasa derivation in [Bag
1976]. We have tried to follow the text as closely as we could; streamlined modern accounts are
available in [Katz 1995] and [Bressoud 2002]. The Yuktidipika is an elaboration of the Yukti-
bhasa and contains a related argument, translated and analyzed in [Plofker 2005].

India
115
and radian measure are used, since the plethora of extra constants and tech-
nical annoyances that arise when using the original Indian functions—
although they lead us to appreciate Madhava’s accomplishment all the more—
tend to obscure the main ideas. Finally, we use the symbol ≈only when an
approximation is actually being made at that step; this convention mirrors
how the material appears in the texts.
We have already seen Indian work on ﬁrst and second differences of sines;
the fact that ﬁrst differences of sines are proportional to cosines, and that sec-
ond differences of sines are proportional to the sines themselves, would have
been known at least by observation. Our demonstration of the Taylor series for
sine and cosine begins with a derivation of this fact, using the unit circle in ﬁg-
ure 3.9. We assume that arc  is sufﬁciently small that Crd  ≈ . In XYZ,
YZ is the difference  sin between and AOZ and sin AOX; likewise,
XY cos cos AOXcos AOZ. Now OAB~XYZ, since all corre-
sponding sides are perpendicular to each other. Hence
which gives us the following expressions for the ﬁrst differences:57
(3.24)
Statements like these had been around at least since Bhaskara II. They
can be used to obtain an expression for the second difference of the sine:
(3.25)
The real work starts in the unit circle of ﬁgure 3.10, where the arc  to
be analyzed is divided into a large number n of equal small arcs  (thus,
 n). Vertical lines represent the sines of successive multiples of ;










2
2
sin
sin
sin(
)
cos
cos(
)
cos
sin (
) .













=
−
+
=
⋅
−
+
=
⋅
=




sin
cos
,
cos
sin
.






=
⋅
=
⋅








1
≈
=
sin
cos
cos
sin
,
57The statement as shown here leaves ambiguity concerning precisely where the cosine and sine
are to be evaluated. When used later in this argument it is chosen correctly for the geometry of
the situation, in the middle of the interval , but this is not always done. In any case, since 
is small and quasi-inﬁnitesimal arguments are already at work, it does not matter that  be cho-
sen precisely, as may be seen by the approximation applied in (3.31). See [Gupta 1979a] for a
clever use of this result, from the Madhava school, to interpolate backwards in a Sine table from
a Sine value to its corresponding arc.

Chapter 3
116
to save space we shall write sinj  sin( j). Writing the ﬁrst backward dif-
ferences of these sines as sinj  sinj  sinj  1, notice that sin1  sin1.
Also the sought sine is sinn  sin , and ﬁnally, since n is large,  n  ≈
n  sin1.
We are ready to take the ﬁrst step in the iteration that will lead to our se-
ries: using the ﬁrst-order sine approximation sin ≈ to generate a second-
order cosine approximation. Notice that the versed sine of , AB in ﬁgure
3.10, is equal to the sum of the cosine differences  cosj. So, by, (3.24),
(3.26)
Taking sin ≈ for all sines in this expression, we get
vers





=
−
=
⋅
+
⋅
+
+
⋅
=
+
+
1
1
2
1
2
cos
sin
sin
sin
                          
[sin
sin
sin ]
.




L
L
n
n
Figure 3.9
First differences of sines
and cosines
Figure 3.10
Derivation of Madhava’s
Taylor series for sine and
cosine

India
117
(3.27)
The approximation of the sum of positive integers from 1 to n in the last
step was well known, as was the correct value n(n 1)/2. Indeed, correct
formulas for the sums of m-th powers of the ﬁrst n positive integers had been
described, for instance, by Narayana Pandita in the mid-fourteenth century.58
In our argument all that will be needed are the approximations
(3.28)
Equation (3.27) is actually most of the way to a second-order approxima-
tion of the cosine; since n, a little rearrangement produces the familiar
(3.29)
Our next step is to convert the second-order cosine into a third-order 
sine. Let 
and 
be the cosine and versed sine of half of ,
and 
the cosine and versed sine of 
and so on. Then by (3.24)59









sin
cos
–
,
sin
cos
–
,
sin
cos
–
,
–
–
1
2
1
1
2
1
2
11
2
1
2
1
2
1
1
1
=
⋅
=






=
⋅
=






=
⋅
=












vers
vers
vers
M
M
M
n
n
n
1
2
1 1
2 ⋅,
vers11
2
cos11
2
vers 1
2
cos 1
2
cos
.


=
−
1
2
2
1
2
1
1
m
m
m
m
n
n
m
+
+
+
+
+
L

(
)
.
vers









=
−
=
+
+
+
[
]
=
+
+
+
[
]
=
+
+
+
[
](
)
≈
(
)
1
1
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
cos
                           
                           
.
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
L
L
L




58See [Saraswathi 1963] for a discussion of the development of the study of these arithmetic series
in India, as well as others (including Madhava’s Taylor series).
59Here (3.24) is applied correctly, with the arguments of the cosines chosen in the middle of each
interval. In any case, in the following step (3.31) an approximation is made that renders the
choice of argument moot.
(3.30)

Chapter 3
118
Subtracting each of these equations from the ﬁrst, we obtain
















sin –
sin
(
)
(
) ,
sin1–
sinn–1
( – ) (
) ,
          
                      
sin –
sin
 
( ) (
)
–
1
1
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
n
n
n
n
n
=
−
≈
⋅
=
⋅
≈
⋅
=
⋅
≈
⋅
=
⋅










vers
vers
vers
versn–1
vers
M
M
2,
M
since 
and 
and applying (3.27) to the 
equalities at the end of each line. Adding the left sides of the equations in
(3.31) results in
(3.32)
So, if we add both sides of (3.31), we get
(3.33)
We have now arrived at the third-order sine approximation: since 
 n 
,
(3.33) becomes
At this point in the iteration the process can be automated somewhat. We
derived our previous cosine approximation by applying sin ≈ to (3.26) to
obtain (3.27); instead, we now apply our improved estimate sin ≈3/3!.
This adjustment gives us
1− cos  =
3
2
2
3
2
3
2
3
3
3
3
3






+






+








=
+
+






+
+



















n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
– (
)
!
– (
)
!
– (
)
!
(
)
!
L
L
L



sin  =  – 
!
.
3
3





–
(
)
(
)
             
(
)
!
(
) .
sin =
+
−
+
[
]
≈



⋅
=
n
n
n
n
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
1
2
2
3
2
3
L



(n–1)sin1
.
     (
sin
sin
sin )
  
– sin .
n
n
2
3





(sin2 + sin3 + ⋅⋅⋅
sinn)
=
+
+ ⋅⋅⋅+
+
=
sin
sin
1
1


+
–
–
vers
vers
n–1
2
n
≈
,
vers1
2
≈0
(3.31)
(3.34)

India
119
Substituting (as usual)  n   , we arrive at
Similarly for the ﬁfth-order sine: we derived our previous sine approxi-
mation by applying our previous cosine approximation term (3.27) to (3.31),
resulting in (3.33). If we use our updated cosine term (3.34) instead, we get
cos 


=
+
1
2
4
2
4
–
!
!
.
 
 
[
]
– [
] ( /
)
!
  
–
!
=
+
+
⋅
+
+
+
⋅
≈



(
)



(
)
⋅
1
2
1
2
3
2
4
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
4
4
L
L






n
n
n
n
n




60See for instance [Sengupta 1932]; Bag’s Mathematics in Ancient and Medieval India [Bag 1979]
goes so far as to entitle one chapter “Inﬁnitesimal Calculus.” Bag suggests that calculus-based
methods were transmitted to the West from Kerala [Bag 1979, 285]). [Katz 1995] discusses several
examples of calculus-like methods in Islam and India (including the sine and cosine series), com-
ing to much the same conclusion that we do. [Bressoud 2002] (“Was calculus invented in India?”)
describes the mathematical arguments leading to the Taylor series, and eventually concludes that
since they apparently did not transmit to the West, the answer to the question in his title is “no.”
Since n ,
From this point, applying improved sine/cosine approximations to the
cosine/sine derivation adds an extra term each time. Of course, the pattern in
the coefﬁcients is already clear at this stage.
It will come as no surprise that these arguments are the basis of several
claims that the calculus was known in medieval India.60 The ﬂavor of some of
sin  = 


–
!
!
.
3
5
3
5
+
 – sin  =






!
(
) –
!
(
)
    
(
)
!
(
)
– (
)
!
(
)
( – )
(
)
!
–
( –










+
−
−






+




=
+
+
+
[
]
+
−
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
2
2
4
4
2
2
4
4
2
2
3
4
2
4
1
2
1
4
1
1
2






L
L
1
1
4
3
2
5
4
3
5
4
5
3
3
5
5
3
3
5
5
)
(
)
!
(
)
!
–
(
)
!
!
(
)
!
(
) .
+
+
[
]
≈
⋅
⋅
=
⋅
−
⋅
L










n
n
n
n
(3.35)

Chapter 3
120
the algebra is similar to those of Riemann sums arguments in integral calcu-
lus, and the connection between (3.24) and the differentiation rules for the
sine and cosine is obvious. However, these claims cannot really be taken seri-
ously; what made the calculus signiﬁcant to Western science was its ability to
handle derivatives and integrals of many functions systematically. Madhava’s
and others’ derivations work only on particular trigonometric functions, and
cannot be associated with calculus any more than some of Archimedes’ uses
of the method of exhaustion to “integrate” circles and parabolic segments.
This observation does not diminish Madhava’s accomplishment in any way
(or Archimedes’s for that matter), which ranks prominently among the most
ingenious and powerful mathematics of the medieval period.
With his series Madhava would have been able to compute sines rela-
tively easily, and more importantly, to arbitrary accuracy. His sine table (see
ﬁgure 3.1161) was by far the most accurate of its time in India; although the
step size of the arguments in the table is still only 3;45° each entry is accu-
rate to the equivalent of about seven decimal places, making it comparable to
the best tables available in the Arabic world at the time.62
To achieve a table of this level of accuracy would require a better
value for  than is implied by the traditional Indian base circle radius
R  21,600 / 2	≈3438, and we can see by the last row of ﬁgure 3.11 that
Madhava seems to have realized this fact. Indeed one of his other inﬁnite se-
ries, which gives the circumference C of a circle in terms of its diameter d, is
63
(3.36)
This series would have allowed him to calculate  to arbitrary accuracy, at
least in theory. Anyone who has worked with (3.36) is aware of its painfully
slow convergence; however, Madhava improved it by inventing several in-
genious correction terms that greatly sped up the process.64
C
d
d
d
= 4
4
4
1
3
5
–
–
.
+
L
61Reprinted from [Yano 1997, 989] with corrections.
62The sine tables in Jamshid al-Kashi’s Khaqani Zij (ca. AD 1410) were about as accurate; those
in Ulugh Beg’s Sultani Zij (AD 1440), on which al-Kashi probably worked, gained about two
decimal places. These tables, however, contained many more entries than Madhava’s.
63This is a special case of the Gregory series arctan xx(x3/3)(x5/5)- . . . , also known to
Madhava. See several references to papers on this topic in preceding footnotes; for a modern ac-
count of the origin of the series, see [Roy 1990]. Of course tangents did not exist in Indian
trigonometry; the series was expressed with appropriate uses of sines and cosines.
64These correction terms were certain rational functions of n, where n is the number of series
terms used. Several theories have been proposed regarding the origins of the corrections; see
[Juschkewitsch 1964, 171–172] and especially [Hayashi/Kusuba/Yano 1990].

India
121
Applying Sines and Cosines to Planetary Equations
The Indian ability to make creative and innovative uses of received knowl-
edge from other cultures is nowhere better exempliﬁed than in their ap-
proach to the motions of the planets.65 We ﬁnd several different models, all
involving combinations of eccentric circles and epicycles. Other than the
65Indian models for the motions of the planets are discussed in many sources, including [Chatter-
jee 1949, 59–70], the appendix (pp. 174–188) to [Neugebauer 1956], [Prakash 1968, 147–152],
[Sen 1971, 111–116], [Sen 1974], [Pingree 1978, 557–59], and [Sen 1987]. Aryabhata’s contri-
butions are in [Aryabhata (Shukla/Sarma) 1976, xxxi–xxxiii and 104–112].
Figure 3.11
Madhava’s sine table

 (degrees)
Sin 
3;45
224;50,22
7;30
448;42,58
11;15
670;40,16
15
889;45,15 [1]
18;45
1105;1,39
22;30
1315;34,7
26;15
1520;28,35
30
1718;52,24
33;45
1909;54,35
37;30
2092;46,3
41;15
2266;39,50
45
2430;51,15 [1]
48;45
2584;38,6 [1]
52;30
2727;20,52
56;15
2858;22,55
60
2977;10,34 [1]
63;45
3083;13,17
67;30
3176;3,50
71;15
3255;18,22 [1]
75
3320;36,30
78;45
3371;41,29
82;30
3408;20,11
86;15
3430;23,11 [1]
90
3437;44,48

Chapter 3
122
equant point, these Indian constructions contain elements familiar to Greek
astronomy, and it is no stretch to see in them the traces of predecessors of
Ptolemy. The earliest texts work as follows (see ﬁgure 3.12): AG is the def-
erent circle, centered at the Earth E. Centered at G are not one, but two
epicycles. The manda or “slow” epicycle, with radius e, has a radius GM
that always points parallel to EA, the apogee. M, the mandocca, determines
the manda correction  MEG. The sighra or “fast” epicycle, with radius
r, has a radius GS that (for the superior planets) always points in the direc-
tion of the Sun.66 S, the sighrocca, determines the sighra correction
  GES.
Clearly the manda correction plays the same role as the Greek equation
of center, effectively moving the Earth away from the center of the deferent;
and the sighra correction does what the Greek epicycle does. But the loca-
tion of the planet itself is obscure. The texts give a pattern of calculation that
involves taking into account half the sighra correction, then half the manda
correction, then the sighra again, and ﬁnally the manda again, recomputing
the mean positions that are the arguments for the corrections at each stage.
The reader may well be puzzled by this iterated calculation, which seems at
66For the inferior planets EG points in the direction of the mean Sun, and GS forms with EG an an-
gle equal to the argument of anomaly a.
Figure 3.12
An Indian model of
planetary motion

India
123
ﬁrst to bear little relation to ﬁgure 3.12. The factors of
in the ﬁrst two steps
suggest a procedure that Ptolemy had performed when he introduced the
equant point (a bisection of the eccentricity), and this correlation may be no
coincidence.67
Variations of the Indian model even included pulsating epicycles (i.e.,
with varying radii), also possibly related to the equant. So it is clear that the
Aristotelean requirement of uniform circular motion was not operating in
any real sense; the theoretical basis so important to the Hellenistic as-
tronomers (and to us) was to the Indians less signiﬁcant than computational
results. What might appear to us a jumbled mix of incompatible approaches
nevertheless served its purpose, to give accurate numerical solutions to as-
tronomical problems.
Calculation of the sighra correction from its argument a proceeded as
follows.68 Form the bhuja Sin a (“angle/argument/side of right triangle”),
and the koti Cos a (“upright/complement/other side of right triangle”); these
correspond to the bhujaphala SX and the kotiphala GX respectively
(phala “result”), although not in the correct units. The standard unit is
1/360th of the deferent; the circumference of the sighra epicycle for Saturn,
for instance, is given in the Pañcasiddhantika as c40 of these units. So
(3.37)
Then the sighra hypotenuse (of ESX) is
(3.38)
and from here the sighra correction may be found simply:
ES
EX
SX
EG
GX
SX
R
ko iphala
bhujaphala
=
+
+
+
(
) +
=
+
(
) +
2
2
2
2
2
2
t
,
bhujaphala
SX
c
a
GX
c
os a
=
=
⋅
=
=
⋅
360
360
Sin 
and
C
 
 
 
.
kotiphala
1
2
67That these calculations reﬂect a buried use of the equant point was ﬁrst proposed in [van der
Waerden 1961] (and his case analyzed in [Thurston 1992]); it was taken considerably further
and more convincingly in [Duke 2005b]. If one accepts that Indian planetary astronomy came
from Greece, then this is a strong case for the existence of the equant in Greece before Ptolemy.
68The following is based on [Varahamihira (Neugebauer/Pingree) 1970/1971, part II, 102–104].
The manda correction may be found in a similar manner, but some texts, including the Pañ-
casiddhantika but not those emerging from Aryabhata’s school [Sen 1987, 120], used instead a
rather crude approximation.

Chapter 3
124
69
(3.39)
Spherical Astronomy
Planetary positions were hardly the only use for trigonometry in India,
although astronomy remained the central focus. A healthy tradition of gno-
monics continued, presumably because of its immediate uses in timekeep-
ing.70 The mathematics required is usually relatively simple, involving plane
trigonometry, similar triangles, and the Pythagorean Theorem. Much more
depth is called for when the ﬁeld of play transforms from a plane to a sphere.
We have seen that trigonometry’s astronomical roots led its practitioners
to work with arcs and distances on the surface of a sphere (usually, the celes-
tial one). In the Greek science of spherics, some treatises separated the math-
ematical theory from its astronomical context—so transparently that the
connection was as obvious as it was unstated. Nevertheless this may have led
Menelaus or his predecessors to study spherical triangles independently, a
step that would never be taken in India. Since the applications were strictly
astronomical in any case, Indian astronomers might have considered the dis-
tinction to be moot as long as their methods were as effective as those devel-
oped by their Greek counterparts.
Unfortunately, as we have seen throughout this chapter, Indian scientists
wrote much more on their results than on their methods. Several efforts have
been made to reconstruct the mathematics of Indian spherical astronomy, but
the reader can imagine that such rehabilitations often say more about the au-
thor’s point of view than about the original sources.71 We can say that there
is no evidence of Indian knowledge of Menelaus’s theorem or any other the-
orems that operate solely on the surface of the sphere. But such theorems are
not necessary to solve the astronomical problems that faced Indian as-
tronomers. Our ﬁrst example illustrates how results may be obtained just as
well from working with similar triangles within the sphere.
sin 
=

SX
ES
bhujaphala
ghra hypotenuse
=
si
 
.
69As we have seen in Greek planetary theory, the lack of a tangent function caused extra compli-
cations. Here, with a tangent, the sighra hypotenuse might have been bypassed altogether.
70The interested reader will ﬁnd a thorough description of gnomons and their applications in
Bhaskara I’s commentary to the Aryabhatiya, in [Keller 2006].
71The two major papers on Indian spherical astronomy, [Kaye 1919] and [Sengupta 1931b], take
sharply opposing points of view—Kaye in favor of Greek origins, Sengupta in favor of Indian
independence. [Zeuthen 1900, 27]’s assertion on the side of Greek origins was particularly
stark: “La seule chose que nous rencontrions chez les Hindous sans l’avoir rencontrée dans les
ouvrages grecs qui nous sont parvenus, c’est l’usage de tables de sinus au lieu des tables de
cordes.”

India
125
Text 3.5
Varahamihira, Finding the Right Ascension of a Point on the Ecliptic
(from the Pañcasiddhantika)
Multiply the diameter by the square-root of the difference between the
squares of the Sines of the declinations [of the Sun] and [of the Sines of the
ends of the several] signs and divide [the products] by the [respective] diame-
ters of the day [-circles]. The arc from this . . . [equals the] . . . rising of [each]
of the signs.72
Explanation: (See ﬁgure 3.13.) We wish to determine the right ascension 
of a point P on the ecliptic, given its longitude 
 and declination . Vara-
hamihira’s instructions, translated into modern notation, are:
(3.40)
where R is the radius of the sphere, and d is the diameter of the “day-circle”
(the circle through P parallel to the equator; thus d / 2 OB). There are sev-
eral ways to get to this formula, and once again the text is of no help in dis-
tinguishing between the possibilities. The most natural method is the follow-
ing.73
Drop perpendicular PB onto OD, and drop perpendiculars BA 
and CD onto O~. Then PASin 
 and PBSin ;74 hence 
Now CDSin .75 So, since OAB~OCD,
and hence
(3.41)
from which (3.40) follows.
Sin 
Sin
Sin
2
2

R
d
=


–
,
2
CD
OD
AB
OB
=
,
Sin
Sin
2 
2 


–
.
AB =
Sin 
2
Sin
Sin
2
2


=
R
d

 –
 ,
72From [Varahamihira (Neugebauer/Pingree) 1970/1971, part 1, 61].
73Our explanation differs from [Varahamihira (Neugebauer/Pingree) 1970/1971, part 1, 41–42];
but it is more direct, does not rely on other spherical trigonometric relations, and coincides with
the appearance of the formula in the text.
74For PA, consider right triangle OPA where POA; for PB, consider right triangle POB
where POB.
75Since, in right triangle OCD, COD.

Chapter 3
126
The tools required to effect this solution are very simple; indeed, they echo
this passage by Nilakantha:
The whole of the planetary-mathematics is pervaded by two theo-
rems, namely the so-called Pythagorean Theorem and the Rule of
Three (the proportionality of sides in similar triangles).76
In fact, the commonly-stated opinion that Indian spherical astronomy
uses the Greek method of the analemma (discussed in the previous chapter)
has no direct basis in evidence. Many derivations even in modern spherical
trigonometry are based on elementary geometry within the sphere, and are
no less powerful for it. This leaves us with two possibilities: either Indian
methods were in fact discovered independently, or they are witnesses to an
earlier Greek theory without the analemma.77 The truth of the matter may lie
somewhere in between.
As we have seen, Indian solutions to astronomical problems often in-
volve approximations of various sorts, and spherical problems are no excep-
tion. Most obvious is an assumption that the spherical triangle is actually
plane—although it is often difﬁcult to be sure about this, given the
76Quotation taken from [Gupta 1974e, 98].
77In this point, [Sengupta 1931] may well be correct in his case against [Kaye 1919] on the
absence of the analemma in India—and the study [Shukla 1968] agrees. The general claim that
Indian methods are independent of Greek methods simply cannot be evaluated fully without
further evidence.
Figure 3.13 A derivation of Varahamihira’s formula for the right ascension

India
127
ambiguities of the Sanskrit texts and the intervention of commentators.
Consider this example from the Aryabhatiya: in ﬁgure 3.14, the nonagesi-
mal N is the highest point on the ecliptic, 90° removed from the rising point
R.78 Given arcs n and y (which is equal to MZN, the hour angle of N—so
named because it measures the number of hours79 until noon, when the Sun
reaches the meridian) ﬁnd m, the zenith distance of N. Aryabhata’s ﬁrst step
is to ﬁnd z:
(3.42)
(a ﬁfth-century use of the Rule of Four Quantities!). To ﬁnd m, Aryabhata
computes
(3.43)
This statement seems to assume that the Sines of the sides of MNZ form a
plane right-angled triangle, which turns out to be no better than assuming
that MNZ itself is a plane right-angled triangle.
This is how Aryabhata’s method was interpreted by Brahmagupta (who
criticized him harshly for the approximation), Bhaskara II, and recent com-
mentators.80 Evidence recently published from the Kerala astronomer Ni-
lakantha’s commentary on the Aryabhatiya, however, suggests another way
to understand it. Nilakantha takes the right side of (3.43) to be equal not to
the drkksepjya (Sin m), but only an intermediate stage, the svadrkksepa. It
turns out to be a relatively simple matter—an application of similar triangles
in the diagram—to go from there to the correct formula:
(3.44)
Whether or not Nilakantha was simply being kind to Aryabhata will never be
known for certain, but the latter’s correct solutions to similar problems (in-
deed, similar to Varahamihira’s right ascension problem above) gives some
reason for us to be charitable also.81
At the same time several hundred miles to the west, Muslim as-
tronomers were developing spherical trigonometry to a high level of sophis-
tication, basing their approach more closely on their inheritance from
Sin 
Cos 
m
svad kk epa
R
z
=
⋅
r
s
.
Sin 
Sin
Sin
2
2
m
n
z
≈
−
.
Sin 
Sin 
Sin 
z
n
y
R
=
⋅
78The nonagesimal point appears as early as Ptolemy’s Almagest, and is used extensively in Indian
astronomy. It is still important in astrology today.
79Converting from degrees to hours by the factor 24h / 360°.
80See for instance [Sengupta 1931, 17–19] and [Shukla/Sarma 1976, 142].
81This interpretation was brought to light in [Gupta 1987].

Chapter 3
128
Greece (especially Ptolemy). Starting in the late fourteenth century, some of
these methods found their way into India. However, they do not appear to
have been well understood initially, and various errors and misconceptions
crept into the Indian works. Without a ﬁrm theoretical basis, mistakes could
not be removed easily.82 Nevertheless there do seem to have been continuing
efforts to “Sanskritize” Islamic spherical trigonometry, especially coordi-
nate conversions, from this time onwards. Even so, the subject was not
treated independently of astronomy, and the approximative techniques typi-
cal of Indian astronomy remained in use.83
Finally, a remarkable synthesis of Indian spherical astronomical
knowledge occurs in a passage of Nilakantha’s Tantrasan˙graha (AD
1500).84 In ﬁgure 3.15 the triangle between points Z (the zenith), N (the ce-
lestial north pole), and √(the Sun) is called the astronomical triangle, a
concept that survives to today. Its signiﬁcance arises from the fact that each
of its sides and two of its angles are important astronomical quantities. The
sides are 90°   where  is the observer’s terrestrial latitude; 90°  
where  is the Sun’s declination; and 90°  a where a is the Sun’s altitude
above the horizon. As for angles, Z is the Sun’s azimuth and N is the
Sun’s hour angle.
So ﬁve quantities in the astronomical triangle are signiﬁcant; and, like
plane triangles, spherical triangles usually require knowledge of three ele-
ments to be determined completely. Hence there are ten situations, dealing
with each of the ten possible ways to specify three of the ﬁve elements as
82For an analysis of the ﬁrst of these works (including explanations of some of the mistakes), the
Yantraraja by Mahendra Suri, see [Plofker 2000].
83[Plofker 2002a]; see also [Ohashi 1997].
84For the Sanskrit see [Nilakantha (Sarma) 1977, lxxiv–lxxv, 219–237]; an English translation and
analysis appear in [Nilakantha (Sarma/Narasimhan) 1998, S73–S82]; and the ﬁrst modern study
is [Gupta 1974e].
Figure 3.14
The nonagesimal point N

India
129
given. Nilakantha deals with each of these cases in turn, providing a rule to
solve the remaining two elements. For instance, given , , and Z, ﬁnd a:
we ﬁrst ﬁnd the “divisor”
(3.45)
and then solve for a in
(3.46)
(This formula can be derived today using the spherical Law of Cosines and
solving the quadratic equation in sin a that results when cos a is replaced
with 1sin2a.)85
Neither the methods used (we are once again in the dark, and some of
these methods seem to go back to much earlier times), nor the fact that Ni-
lakantha’s solutions are correct, are particularly striking. Rather, what is re-
markable is the handling of all ten cases of the astronomical triangle in one
place; this is as close as one can get to a complete solution of the general
spherical triangle. There is no particular reason why Nilakantha’s methods
cannot be applied to any other triangle. So, although there is no attempt to
generalize beyond the astronomical context, the spherical triangle is handled
as systematically here as it is in modern textbooks.
Using Iterative Schemes to Solve Astronomical Problems
Science often thrives on inverse problems, that is, situations where the path
to a solution is the reverse direction from the original development of the
Sin 
Sin  ⋅ Sin  
Sin
Sin
2
2
a
R
d
d
d
=
±
⋅




2
2
2
 
–
–
.


d
Z
R
=
+
⋅
Sin
Cos 
Cos 
2 

(
/
) ,
2
85[Gupta 1974e, 88–89].
Figure 3.15
The astronomical triangle

Chapter 3
130
subject. For instance, in Greek and Indian astronomy a planet’s longitude 
is usually found ﬁrst by determining the mean longitude 
m, a linear function
of time t, and then altering it by one (or more) equations or correction fac-
tors, say, q(
m). Then


m q(
m).
(3.47)
But if one wishes to determine when a given body will be in a certain loca-
tion (for the Sun and Moon, this is useful for eclipse calculations), (3.47)
must be inverted: 
m must be found from 
. Then we can backtrack to t eas-
ily enough, using its linear relation with 
m.
So, the problem lies in solving (3.47) for 
m.86 One seventh-century ex-
ample of this is in the Brahmasphutasiddhanta: Brahmagupta wishes to ﬁnd
the Sun’s mean longitude 
m given its true longitude 
. The problem he faces
is: in
86Readers familiar with Kepler’s equation will recognize a kindred spirit here. Kepler’s equation,
which arises often in astronomy, is yxa sin x; the goal is to solve for x given y.
87[Plofker 2002b, 171].
(3.48)





=
⋅
⋅




+
+
⋅




















m
m
m
m
r
M
r
R
M
R
r
R
M
– arcSin
Sin(
–
)
Sin(
–
)
Cos(
–
)
2
2
(where r, M, and R are known constants), solve for 
m.87
Difﬁculties of this sort do arise occasionally in Ptolemaic astronomy,
but in Greece there is a distinct preference for problems with direct solu-
tions. In India there is hardly any distinction between precise and approxi-
mate solutions, so it is not surprising that approximations became popular.
We might divide Indian approaches into two classes, ﬁxed-point and two-
point iterations, both of which go back to the earliest texts of Indian mathe-
matical astronomy from the ﬁfth century AD.
One example of ﬁxed-point iteration may be found within a method of
calculating Sines by Parame´svara, in his fourteenth-century Siddhan-
tadipika (a supercommentary on a commentary on Bhaskara I’s Maha-
bhaskariya).

India
131
Text 3.6
Paramesvara, Using Fixed-point Iteration to Compute Sines
(from the Siddhantadipika)
The Sine is to be derived from the arc by a method called “avisesa.”
One should halve the given arc, and the half of that, and so on in this way.
[Successive] halving from the half of that [arc] is required until the half is less
than 1/300 of the quadrant [18]. Then the Chord of the halved arc is equal
to that [arc].
Because of the smallness of the Versine, the Sine too is nearly equal to that
[arc]. The Cosine is [calculated] by means of the Sine, and the Versine from
the Cosine. Repeatedly, the square root of the square of the Chord diminished
by the square of the Versine is the corrected Sine, and from that, the Cosine [is
calculated], and thus from the Cosine, the Versine.
The square root of the difference of the squares of the Chord and the Ver-
sine is the corrected Sine, and having done this repeatedly, one may make that
indistinguishable [from the previous value, by iterative correction].88
Explanation: The term avisesa means “without difference,” implying that
the iteration is to be carried out until successive iterates no longer differ.
Paramesvara intends his process to be applied only to small arcs. For larger
arcs he instructs the reader to halve the arc successively until it is less than
18. After our passage he speciﬁes a successive doubling process, returning
to the original arc.
Once 18, we apply the usual useful fact that for small ,  ≈Sin 
≈Crd . This gives us our initial estimates Sin0 for Sin  and Crd0 for Crd  .
To derive an improved estimate Sin1 we step through some familiar identi-
ties, beginning and ending with the Sine:
(3.49)
Vers0 RCos0,
(3.50)
and
(3.51)
If the original Sin0 were equal to Sin , then Sin1 would simply be equal
to Sin0; but Sin0 is only an approximation, so we hope that Sin1 is a closer
Sin
Crd
Vers
1
0
0
=
2
2
–
.
Cos
Sin
0
0
=
−
R2
2 ,
88Quoted from [Plofker 1996, 248].

Chapter 3
132
one. We take it through formulas (3.49)–(3.51) again, updating all the sub-
scripts (except for Crd0, which remains constant), obtaining Sin2. Repeat as
necessary until eventually Sinn Sinn  1 to the level of accuracy that we are
shooting for.
The modern (or even ancient Greek) reader might be puzzled at the assump-
tion that Sin1 is closer to Sin  than is Sin0, and might wish for a demonstra-
tion. If we combine (3.49)–(3.51) into a single formula, we get
(3.52)
Since we are hoping that Sinn  1 Sinn, (3.52) may be thought of as an
equation of the form
xf(x),
(3.53)
where we intend to solve for x. Considering both sides of this equation as
functions of x (see ﬁgure 3.16), we are searching for the intersection of the
line yx with the curve yf(x). Substituting our initial guess x0 into f(x)
gives x1; on the graph the height f(x0) may be transferred to a length x1 by re-
ﬂecting it about the line yx. Repeated substitution in the example of ﬁgure
3.16 causes the iterates to spiral around the intersection point.
A moment’s reﬂection (and perhaps a couple of sketches) should con-
vince the reader that this method will converge if the slope of f(x) near the in-
tersection point is between 1 and 1. In practice convergence was probably
veriﬁed simply by trial and error. There are some later texts (starting with
Bhaskara II) that show evidence of concern over questions of convergence:
usually alterations made to existing methods that improve their chances of
success.89 But the authors do not discuss convergence or divergence directly,
and they never leave the astronomical context for more general mathematical
discourse.
Fixed-point iteration is surprisingly ﬂexible; with a little manipulation it
can be made to solve many equations. In the case of Brahmagupta’s solar
motion (3.48) for instance, recalling that 
 is given and 
m is to be found, a
little rearrangement gives
Sin
Crd
Sin
+1
0
n
n
R
R
=
−




2
2
2
2
–
–
.
89[Plofker 2004, 565–569].

India
133
This is now in the form  m f(m), and ﬁxed-point iteration may be ap-
plied.90
The two-point techniques used in India, especially regula falsi91 but also
(much later) the secant method, begin with a pair of initial estimates (or
“seeds”) rather than a single one. The next iterate is generated by applying
linear interpolation between the two seeds. The choice of the next pair of es-
timates depends on the method. Again, although regula falsi was applied in
different astronomical contexts, it was never discussed as an independent
topic.
Conclusion
It is clear by now that the debate point behind many conversations about In-
dian astronomy is the degree to which it depends on its Greek antecedent,
and astronomical mathematics is no exception to this. There seems little





m
m
m
m
r
M
r
R
M
R
r
R
os
M
=
+
⋅
⋅
+
+
⋅




















arcSin
Sin(
–
)
Sin(
–
)
C
(
–
)
2
2
.
90[Plofker 2002b, 172].
91Not to be confused with the “rule of false position” used in early mathematical history to solve
linear equations, although it is related.
Figure 3.16
Fixed-point iteration

doubt that the spark for trigonometry in India came through the importing
of some pre-Ptolemaic version of Greek mathematical astronomy. The ear-
liest trigonometric tables share some features with their Greek forebears,
although the precise nature of this connection may never be known. How-
ever, the Indian computational style clearly took the mathematical side of
the subject in new directions—most obviously through the use of the sine,
cosine and versed sine, but also through new methods for computing
trigonometric quantities and various interpolation and iterative schemes.
Methods used in Indian spherical astronomy may reﬂect Greek antecedents,
but well-known Greek tools such as the analemma and Menelaus’s Theo-
rem did not leave direct traces in Indian texts so far as we know. Clearly, In-
dian trigonometry was full of its own creative ideas; and both in content and
method, it became something quite distinct from its Greek heritage.
Chapter 3
134

4 '" Islam
Foreign Junkets: The Arrival of Astronomy from India
The birth of Islam in the early seventh century and the spectacular, unprece-
dented growth of its culture over the next decades led in almost no time to
the uniﬁcation of a vast collection of smaller societies. What had been home
to a number of different traditions soon became a single entity stretching
from the borders of India westward through the middle East, across northern
Africa, and eventually to northern Spain and the borders of France. By
adopting both a common religion and Arabic as the common language, the
Islamic world became a permanent part of the global cultural landscape. It
endures and thrives still today even though its political unity began to dis-
solve within a century of its birth.
It did not take very long for traces of Indian learning, including astron-
omy, to ﬁnd their way to the new society;1 one of the more signiﬁcant
sources was the early eighth-century Zij al-Arkand, based on Brahmagupta’s
Khandakhadyaka. In the early 770s a political delegation from Sind (modern
Pakistan) to caliph al-Mansur in Baghdad took along an Indian astronomer;
perhaps even more important than the diplomatic results, this trip led to the
Zij al-Sindhind,2 a translation of a Sanskrit astronomical text inﬂuenced by
both the Paitamahasiddhanta and Brahmagupta’s Brahmasphutasiddhanta.3
More than most early works, the Zij al-Sindhind brought Indian computa-
tional and astronomical techniques to early Islam.
Some of these methods were developed in the most important astronom-
ical treatise to emerge from the Indian tradition in Islam: Abu JaÛfar Muham-
mad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi’s early ninth-century Zij al-Sindhind, based on
the earlier work of the same name. Al-Khwarizmi’s books on arithmetic
(from which the word algorithm, based on his name, is derived) and algebra
(derived from the word al-jabr, the name for a common algebraic operation)
enjoyed considerable inﬂuence, particularly through Muslim Spain and into
the West. Much the same may be said of his Zij, which would be a major
135
1See [Goldstein 1986] for a more detailed summary of the arrival of astronomy in Islam, includ-
ing both the Sasanian sources and the translation period in the ninth century. See also [Lorch
2001a], which contains a substantial bibliography on issues of transmission throughout the me-
dieval period.
2Al-Fazari, who aided in this translation, played a large role in the transmission of Indian methods
to Islam. For instance, the Indian parameters for the base circle radius R3438, 3270, and 150
are all found in his works [Pingree 1971a, 555]. [Pingree 1970b] gathers together many of the
sources and references on al-Fazari’s life and work.
3[Pingree 1971a, 555–556].

source for the Spanish Toledan Tables and existed in various forms for over
a millennium. The Zij’s history is correspondingly complicated; the original
Arabic version no longer exists, and segments have been altered or replaced
over the centuries.4
Al-Khwarizmi’s Zij uses sines and versed sines (sahm, in Latin sagitta) to
solve astronomical problems, and implicitly applies tangents and cotangents to
solve altitude problems using gnomons and shadows. The sine table in the ex-
isting version of this work gives entries to three sexagesimal places and uses
R60, but the commentators al-Biruni and al-Muthanna mention the pres-
ence of a sine table using the Indian parameter R150. It has been argued re-
cently that al-Khwarizmi in fact included two sine tables in his Zij, the existing
R60 table for intervals of 1° as well as a small table for pedagogical pur-
poses including only the kardaja increments of 15° each, something like Brah-
magupta’s ﬁgure 3.8.5 If this claim is true, it is easy to see why the smaller
table disappeared fairly quickly in favor of the more extensive one.
We have seen that the Indian astronomical works inﬂuencing early Islam
in turn owe some debt to their Greek predecessors. In one of the history of
science’s more curious moments, a second path of transmission to the Is-
lamic world opened up for Greek science in the early ninth century with the
establishment of ÚAbbasid caliph al-MaÛmun’s “House of Wisdom” in Bagh-
dad.6 Possibly in connection with this institute, many of the best ancient sci-
entiﬁc works were translated from Greek, Sanskrit, and Syriac into Arabic.
The cream of Greek mathematics, including works by Euclid, Archimedes
and Apollonius, soon found its way to Islam. In mathematical astronomy this
collection included many books that we have seen so far: Euclid’s Phenom-
ena, Aristarchus’s On the Sizes and Distances of the Sun and Moon, Hypsi-
Chapter 4
136
4[Al-Khwarizmi (Suter) 1914] is an edition of a twelfth-century Latin translation of the Zij; [al-
Khwarizmi (Neugebauer) 1962] is a translation and commentary based on it. See [Toomer
1973b] for a survey of al-Khwarizmi’s scientiﬁc achievements. [Van Dalen 1996] also sorts out
the origin of the materials in the extant twelfth-century Latin translation of the Cordoba recen-
sion of the Zij by al-Majriti (ca. 1000).
5[McCarthy/Byrne 2003]. [Hogendijk 1991] reconstructs a sine table with R150 from a manu-
script of a treatise on the astrolabe by al-Khwarizmi, and demonstrates that it is derived by
quadratic interpolation from a table computed for every 15°. The existing R60 table appears to
come from the Ptolemaic tradition (this was ﬁrst asserted in [Bjørnbo 1909, 11]), but whether or
not it is due to al-Khwarizmi himself is uncertain: several authors assume the latter, but
[McCarthy/Byrne 2003] argue the former. See also [van Dalen 1996] for an analysis of al-
Khwarizmi’s table of the equation of time as well as a valuable summary of previous research on
all of al-Khwarizmi’s tables, including the trigonometric ones.
6See [Berggren 2002] for a survey of the translation movements that brought Greek geometry to
Islam, including mathematical astronomy. On the translation movement in general see [Gutas
1998], especially pp. 53–60 for an argument that the House of Wisdom did not play as dominat-
ing a role as has been claimed.

cles’s On the Rising of the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac, and both Theodosius’s
and Menelaus’s Spherics.7 But by far the most important astronomical work
to enter the Islamic world was Ptolemy’s Almagest. Through three transla-
tions beginning in the eighth century, the Almagest was in the strange position
of competing with the theories of its predecessors, in Indian garb. Before
long, it won most of these intellectual battles.
Basic Plane Trigonometry
The construction of the basic trigonometric function was one struggle that
the Almagest partly lost to the Indian works, and partly won. The natural ad-
vantage of the sine in astronomical computation was quickly recognized,
and it became the standard trigonometric function. However, the radius of
the base circle and the methods used to compute sine tables derived from
the Almagest.
Since trigonometry served astronomy almost exclusively in early Is-
lam, the basic identities of plane trigonometry were generally found in the
preliminary chapters of astronomical works, especially the zij. This genre,
which we have mentioned several times already, was one of the most im-
portant forms of astronomical exposition in medieval Islam.8 Over 225 of
these handbooks were compiled, usually containing a wide variety of astro-
nomical subjects and extensive numerical tables, mostly of trigonometri-
cally deﬁned functions. Zijes included the usual topics of planetary motions,
eclipses, and so forth; but they also dealt to some extent with astronomical
functions related to Muslim religious practice, timekeeping, and astrologi-
cal computations. Within planetary theory and spherical astronomy, zijes
after the Greek inﬂux were inspired by a mix of the styles of Ptolemy’s
Handy Tables and the Almagest. Although the tables were normally the cen-
terpiece of a zij, the presentation of topics took its lead from the more theo-
retical Almagest.
Zijes often commence their trigonometric discussions with the stan-
dard identities, particularly the sine sum and difference formulas, the sine
half-arc formula,9 and others. Some of the early zijes, reﬂecting their In-
dian roots, include formulas relating the sine to the surprisingly useful
versed sine and the chord. (Indeed the Arabic word for sine, al-jaib, came
Islam
137
7On the history of these Greek works in Arabic translation see [Matvievskaya 1981].
8The study of zijes was given a proper foundation with the publication of the classic [Kennedy
1956a], which surveyed the contents of twelve zijes and described 125 of them. It has been sup-
plemented recently by the extensive article [King/Samsó 2001]. Benno van Dalen will shortly be
completing a new and considerably expanded zij survey.
9Even quarter-arc and eighth-arc formulas, in al-Biruni’s case. See [Schoy 1927, 10–12].

about by a transcription of the Indian jya [chord] to the Arabic jiba, and
then jaib.10)
Perhaps the earliest astronomer to attack trigonometric identities sys-
tematically was Abu’l-Wafa’ al-Buzjani (AD 940–998), a mathematician
who made substantial contributions to both geometry and arithmetic. His
masterwork of astronomy achieved enough admiration to be called, itself,
the Almagest.11 Abu’l-Wafa’ continued to use the chord and versed sine as
well as the sine, and many of his theorems deal with their interconnections.
He discusses many of the basic theorems in his Almagest, although not nec-
essarily in modern form. For instance, his
(4.1)
corresponds to our sin 2 sin (/2) cos (/2).12
Abu’l-Wafa”s Almagest, to which we shall return later, was not prima-
rily a mathematical work: it still had as its central purpose the study of as-
tronomy. It would not be long before a treatise entirely devoted to plane
trigonometry was written: Book on the Derivation of Chords in a Circle, by
Abu’l-Rayhan al-Biruni.13 One of the greatest of Muslim scientists, al-Biruni
(973–1048) wrote a staggering number of works on astronomy, mathemat-
ics, geography, Indian literature, and many other topics. On Chords, a novel
approach to deriving the trigonometric identities, may have been intended as
the mathematical background to his classic astronomical work, the Qanun
al-MasÛudi.14
The main idea of On Chords is to replace Ptolemy’s Theorem, used in the
Almagest to derive several identities, with the Theorem of the Broken Chord.
In ﬁgure 4.1, 
and D is the midpoint of 
we drop perpendicular
ABC;
AB
BC
>
Crd 
Crd /2 
Crd (180
/2)



=
° −
R
,
Chapter 4
138
10See [von Braunmühl 1900/1903, vol. 1, p. 49] and [Gutas et al. 1998]. The Arabic jiba and jaib
are written the same way when the vowels are removed (as they often are in Arabic script); the
word jaib means a fold, pocket, or gulf.
11For a discussion of Abu’l-Wafa”s Almagest and a translation of some fragments into French see
[Carra de Vaux 1892].
12[Von Braunmühl 1900/1903, vol. 1, pp. 55–56]. Pages 54–59 remain even today a vital contri-
bution to our understanding of the plane trigonometry in Abu’l-Wafa”s Almagest. But see also
[Debarnot 1996, 522] for a transcription of all of Abu’l-Wafa”s identities into modern notation,
and [al-Biruni (Debarnot) 1985, 15–21] on his spherical trigonometry.
13On Chords was translated into German in [Suter 1910/1911] and into Russian in [al-Biruni (Rosen-
feld/Krasnova/Rozanskaja) 1963]; summaries are available in [Saidan 1979] and more concisely
in [Saidan 2000, 169–173]. See also the partial translation into English in [Saud 1979].
14Although Arabic editions exist, this massive work has not yet been translated into a Western lan-
guage. However, extensive and detailed tables of contents were published in [Kennedy 1971b],
and in Russian in [Rosenfeld/Rozanskaja 1969].

DE onto AB. From this conﬁguration al-Biruni establishes the following
propositions:
AEEBBC (the Theorem of the Broken Chord);
If D is the midpoint of 
, then Crd 
DEEBarea (ADC)area (ABC).
Al-Biruni provides multiple proofs of each theorem, including a stagger-
ing twenty-ﬁve of the ﬁrst—one of which he attributes to Archimedes in a
work that is now lost. The reader may recall that this attribution has been
called upon to assert that Archimedes himself had a form of trigonometry.
However, the extraction of trigonometric identities from this theorem is not
trivial, and al-Biruni does not ascribe to Archimedes any trigonometric intent.
Equivalents to the standard identities are demonstrated, as well as a few
less familiar ones. For instance, given Crd  and Crd  al-Biruni shows how
to ﬁnd Crd (()/2) as follows. In ﬁgure 4.1 let 
, and
H be the center of the circle. Extend HK and HT perpendicular to AB
and DE respectively. Then 
15 which gives ET.
HK
ET
=
=
° −
1
2 Crd(180
),



= AB
BC
, 
=
Crd(
) ;
DB 2
(
)
(
)
(
)
AB
BC
CD
⋅
+
=
Crd
Crd
2
AB
Crd 
B
Crd 
Crd 
Crd 








+




=




BC
DB
AD
2
2
;
Islam
139
Figure 4.1
Al-Biruni and the Theorem
of the Broken Chord
15This may be seen by extending AH to the far side of the circle, say to X, and joining BX. Then
AHK ~AXB, and since AH is a radius and AX a diameter, one triangle has half the dimensions
of the other.

Also, from the Theorem of the Broken Chord AE(ABBC) ⁄2,16 so
is also known. But if we have
KE then we have TH, and hence LT. Now the product of LT and the rest of
the diameter is equal to the square of DT,17 so we know DT. But we know ET
already, so by subtraction we have DE. Apply the Pythagorean Theorem to
ADE, and we have AD, which is equal to Crd (()/2).18
Building a Better Sine Table
The reason that the zijes studied identities, at least initially, is the same as
Ptolemy’s intent in the Almagest—to build a fundamental trigonometric
table. But there is a problem that goes beyond the identities: as we have seen
before, a mathematical problem arises if one divides the circle into 360 de-
grees. All geometrically derived sine values, such as Sin 30°, Sin 36°, and Sin
45°, are multiples of 3°. The sine sum and difference laws and the half-angle
formula allow us to compute many other sines, but none for integer-valued
arcs other than the multiples of 3°. This forces the aspiring table builder to use
an approximation of some sort to ﬁnd the crucial value of Sin 1°; once this
step is taken, the identities allow the sines of all other integer-valued arcs to
be found.
Now Ptolemy worked with chords, but it is trivial to convert his method
for dealing with this problem (which we saw in chapter 2) to sines; the result
can be written as
(4.2)
This inequality can be represented visually as in ﬁgure 4.2; on the graph of
the sine function both the lower bound and upper bound are linearly interpo-
lated between the origin and the known sine value, leading to the error
bounds drawn in bold on the ﬁgure.19
In Ptolemy’s case, the upper and lower bounds come to the same value
to all three of the sexagesimal places that he uses. But if one wishes to go be-
yond that (and most Islamic table authors did), the method must be enhanced
2
3 ⋅
°
°
⋅
°
Sin
<Sin 1 <
Sin
3
2
4
3
3
4 .
KE = AE − AK = AE − AB/2 = BC/2 = 1
2 Crd 
Chapter 4
140
16The Theorem gives AEEBBC; add AE to both sides of the equation and the result follows.
17By, for instance, Elements VI.13.
18From [Suter 1910/1911, 53–54].
19It is of course grossly anachronistic to draw these ﬁgures as functions in Cartesian coordinates
(although see the section later in this chapter on astronomical instruments), but ﬁgure 4.2 and
ﬁgure 4.5 will help the modern reader see why Islamic methods provided such sharp improve-
ments on Ptolemy.

somehow. The earliest known improvement is by Ibn Yunus, an Egyptian as-
tronomer of the late tenth century, in his Hakimi Zij. He begins simply
enough by building the bounds from geometrically constructible sines of
arcs closer to 1° than Ptolemy had used:20
(4.3)
Since 
is half as distant from 1° as 
is, Ibn Yunus takes as his estimate
a sine value half as distant from the upper bound as from the lower:
(4.4)
effectively interpolating linearly between the bounds. But Ibn Yunus
is not ﬁnished. He takes this value for Sin 1° as the basis for two compu-
tations of Sin 2°: one using the sine double-arc formula, the other using
Sin 3° and the sine difference formula. The two values of Sin 2° that arise
turn out to be upper and lower bounds for the correct value; hence, their
difference (0;0,0,0,48) gives the sum of the two errors. Ibn Yunus takes
half of this number to be the error in his value for Sin 1° and subtracts it,
giving
(4.5)
Sin1
1 2 49 43 28
1
2
0 0 0 0 48
1 2 49 43 4
° =
−
=
; ,
,
,
( ; , , ,
)
; ,
,
,
Sin 1° =
+
−
=
1 2 49 40 4
1 2 49 45 10
1 2 49 40 4
1 2 49 43 28
2
3
; ,
,
,
( ; ,
,
,
; ,
,
, )
; ,
,
,
,
9
8 °
15
16 °
1;2,49,40,4
8
9
 
Sin
Sin 1
9
8
=
⋅
° <
1; 2,49,45,10.
<
Sin
16
15
15
16
°
⋅
° =
Islam
141
Figure 4.2
Ptolemy’s technique for
bounding Sin 1°. The
curvature of the sine
function is exaggerated
to show the error bounds
more clearly.
20Recall that sine of arcs of the form (3m/2n)° are geometrically constructible.

(as opposed to the correct value 1;2,49,43,11).21 Starting with this fundamen-
tal quantity, Ibn Yunus goes on to compute an impressive table of sines for
every 10 of arc, extracted in ﬁgure 4.3.22
Around the same time in Baghdad, Abu’l-Wafa’ came up with a way to
approximate Sin 1° that was to be revisited every so often for four centuries.
His method relies on the following lemma:
(4.6)
Sin (
Sin 
Sin 
Sin (






+
−
<
−
−
)
)
Chapter 4
142
21Ibn Yunus’s work on this topic is available only in the unpublished doctoral dissertation [King 1972,
78–80], and is summarized in [Debarnot 1996, 525]. Although Ibn Yunus’s application is rather
sloppy, the idea of using two calculations of Sin 2° to correct an estimate of Sin 1° is sound. If  is
the error in the original value for Sin 1°, then the double-arc formula generates an error of about 2
in Sin 2°, whereas the difference formula generates an error of about . Thus the difference in
the two values of Sin 2° is about 3. So, had Ibn Yunus replaced the 1/2 in (4.5) with 1/3, he would
have had a very good estimate indeed for Sin 1° : 1;2,49,43,12. And now that a method to improve
the estimate has been found, there is no reason not to repeat the process using the improved
value of Sin 1° as a new starting point, thereby converging to the true value of Sin 1° iteratively
(or at least, as close as the accuracy in the used value of Sin 3° allows). Of course this is all mod-
ern amusement; although it is in the spirit of Islamic work inspired by its Indian heritage (espe-
cially that of Habash al-Hasib) to do this sort of thing, there is no evidence to suggest that Ibn
Yunus or anyone else thought of this particular idea.
22Taken from [King 1972, 84]; entries recomputed anew.

Sin 
0;10°
0;10,28,19
0;20
0;20,56,38
0;30
0;31,24,57
[1]


1;0
1;2,49,43

2;0
2;5,38,19
[2]


10;0
10;25,8,1
[1]


40;0
38;34,2,8
[1]


89;30
59;59,51,47
89;40
59;59,56,21
89;50
59;59,59,5
90
60;0,0,0
Figure 4.3
An extract from the
sine table in the
Hakimi Zij

(for 90°). This statement is obvious once one examines the
corresponding diagram: it means that successive differences of sines de-
crease as the arcs increase (the higher of the two bold line segments in ﬁgure
4.4 is smaller than the lower one)—i.e., that the graph of the sine function for
0°
90° is concave down.
Abu’l-Wafa’, actually searching for 
, applies the lemma twice 
as follows. Two bracketing values, 
and 
, are found by the
usual geometric means. Since
it follows that 

(the largest of these three differences)
is greater than 
of their sum, the computable
Hence
(4.7)
By a similar argument
(4.8)
and we have bounded 
.23
Sin 1
2 °
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
1
2
15
32
15
32
12
32
° <
° +
° −
°
(
)
1
3
,
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
1
2
15
32
18
32
15
32
° >
° +
° −
°
(
)
1
3
.
Sin
Sin
18
32
15
32
° −
°.
1
3
Sin 15
32 °
Sin 16
32 °
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
16
32
15
32
17
32
16
32
18
32
17
32
° −
° >
° −
° >
° −
°,
Sin 18
32 °
Sin 15
32 °
Sin 1
2 °
Islam
143
Figure 4.4
The lemma to Abu’l-Wafa”s
calculation of Sin 1
2 °
23This method was ﬁrst discussed in the modern historical literature, and was analyzed minutely,
in [Woepcke 1854a, 155–167] as it appeared in the work of the early sixteenth-century scientist
Mirim Chelebi, grandson of Jamshid al-Kashi’s successor at the observatory in Samarqand.
Abu’l-Wafa”s work appears in [Woepcke 1860].

Working with differences of sines, rather than the sines themselves, gave
Abu’l-Wafa’a leg up on Ptolemy and Ibn Yunus. His method is equivalent to
approximating the sine curve by drawing a line between two known points
on the curve, rather than drawing lines from the origin to the given points
(see ﬁgure 4.5, and compare with ﬁgure 4.2). This leads to upper and lower
bounds roughly six times tighter than Ptolemy’s method is able to achieve
with the same givens.24 Abu’l-Wafa”s value 
is
in error only in the ﬁfth sexagesimal place,25 an order of magnitude better
than Ibn Yunus’s value of Sin 1°—and it could have served as a basis for his
lost four-sexagesimal-place sine table. This method was used afterward by
several mathematicians, as late as Jamshid al-Kashi in his early ﬁfteenth-
century Khaqani Zij—but as we shall see in a moment, al-Kashi had consid-
erably more to offer on this point.
One novel approach to the sine table problem, from around the same
time as Ibn Yunus and Abu’l-Wafa’, attacks it with an iterative technique. A
mathematical chapter of al-Biruni’s Qanun al-MasÛudi contains a discussion
of the regular nonagon which turns out to be helpful in the production of a
table of chords.26 Of most interest to us is its use in the determination of
Crd 1°.
Sin 1
2 ° = 0 31 24 55 54 55
;
,
,
,
,
Chapter 4
144
Figure 4.5
Abu’l-Wafa”s
technique for
bounding Sin 1
2 °
24Using correct values of the sines of 
and 
the difference between Abu’l-Wafa”s 
18
32
o,
12
32
15
32
o
o
,
,
upper and lower bounds is 0;0,0,0,5,40,38. Using the correct sines of 
and
, the difference 
between the upper and lower bounds using Ptolemy’s method is 0;0,0,0,33,18,26. See [Debarnot
1996, 527, n. 50] for a similar calculation.
25The correct value is 0;31,24,55,54,0,13.
26The following discussion is based on [Schoy 1927, 18–30, esp. 21–22]; an account in English
of the same material is in [Schoy 1926]. See also [Kazim 1951] for a survey of the trigonometry
in the Qanun al-MasÛudi.
18
32
15
32

One side of a nonagon subtends an arc of 40°; its chord is just as unat-
tainable as that of 1°. However, the chord of the nearby value 42° is avail-
able, and al-Biruni computes it: 0;43,0,14,57,15. Apply the half-arc formula
twice, and we have 
Combine this value with
Crd 30° using the chord summation formula, and we arrive at the chord of an
arc even closer to 40°, namely Crd 40;30°0;41,32,2,34,6.
But there is no reason to stop here. Apply the half-arc formula twice and
the summation formula again, and we arrive at Crd 40;7,30°0;41,9,15,26.
Every time this process is repeated, the difference from 40° decreases by a
factor of four. Apply it eight more times and we are nearly there:
(4.9)
As an approximation to Crd 40° this value is quite good (the last place
should be a 7). From here it is an easy matter to ﬁnd Crd 1°; for instance, use
the chord difference formula with 40° and 36° to get Crd 4°, and apply the
half-arc formula twice.
There is a subtle but crucial change in al-Biruni’s trigonometry in this
example: he uses R1, not 60. Indeed, the sine table in the Qanun al-
MasÛudi uses a unit radius and is hence equivalent to a modern one. This pos-
sibility and its advantages had been known and implemented already in
Abu’l-Wafa”s work27 as well as in the Table of Minutes of al-Biruni’s teacher
Abu Nasr Mansur,28 but it was seldom used afterward by Islamic as-
tronomers. Since calculations were in base 60 in any case, the advantage in
switching to R1 was minimal, equivalent to saving the occasional shift of
a decimal point.
One curious episode in the history of Sin 1° is the novel approach taken
by the twelfth-century mathematician al-Samaw’al ibn Yahya al-Maghribi.
Renowned for his contributions to algebra at a very young age, he also
wrote a lengthy astronomical work late in life (Exposure of the Errors of
the Astronomers) in which he takes to task a number of his predecessors
and contemporaries for various sins.29 Al-Samaw’al’s take on the matter is as
follows.
Crd 40;0,0,0,24,43,9,15,28,7,30° = 0 41 2 32 42 29
;
, ,
,
,
.
Crd10 1
2 ° = 0 10 58 48 41 56
;
,
,
,
,
.
Islam
145
27See for instance [von Braunmühl 1900/1903, vol. 1, p. 58].
28The Table of Minutes applies the notion of auxiliary functions, which we shall discuss later. Abu
Nasr Mansur explicitly sets R1, so one of his functions is simply the modern sine. Indeed, the
title “Table of Minutes” refers to the fact that his functions have their most signiﬁcant sexagesi-
mal place in the minutes position rather than the units position. See [Jensen 1972].
29For one example of al-Samaw’al’s attitude, see [Berggren/Van Brummelen 2003] on his criti-
cism of Abu Sahl al-Kuhi’s work on ﬁnding the dip angle to the horizon when elevated above the
sphere of the earth.

Text 4.1
Al-Samaw’al ibn Yahya al-Maghribi, 
Why the Circle Should Have 480 Degrees
(from Exposure of the Errors of the Astronomers)
They relied on the [bounds on the chord of 1°] from both sides, not for the in-
equality, but to determine the chord . . . between the two bounds. Nobody
knows its value; for them it remains as this approximation and the truth is that
there is no chord that they could rely upon.
But if they divided the circle not by their division, that is on 360, and they
corrected it to 240 or to 480, they would be able to compute the chord of one
[degree] . . . .
Because, if the circle is 480 [parts], then the chord of the [pentagon 96
parts] and of the [hexagon 80 parts] are known, and the chord of their dif-
ference is known, so the chord of 16 is known.
Then the chord of 8 [parts] is known, and the chord of 4 [parts] is known,
and the chord of 2 [parts] is known and the chord of one [part] is known.
And if they did that, they would have been able to compute these chords
according to this division and compute the chord for each [part].30
Explanation: Al-Samaw’al does not approve of the entire approach of
trapping Crd 1° between bounds; for him this is an approximation and not
appropriate for geometrical work. The only recourse is to redeﬁne the
number of degrees in a circle! By shifting from 360° to 480°, all chords
and sines may be found geometrically without any need for bounds, since
what was the geometrically accessible 
becomes 1° in al-Samaw’al’s
new units.
As far as we know al-Samaw’al’s idea did not catch on, but he did con-
struct a sine table based on this model, extracts of which are in ﬁgure 4.6.31
Our last venture into the problem of Sin 1° is also its ultimate solution. The Ira-
nian astronomer Jamshid al-Kashi (?–1429) was without a doubt the greatest
computational scientist of his time; his achievements are still being discovered
today. His Calculator’s Key, on arithmetic and algebra, contains many gems of
elementary, yet sophisticated mathematics, including a method for computing
the ﬁfth root of an arbitrary number.32 His astronomical work the Khaqani
3
4
°
Chapter 4
146
30Translation by Amani Ansari and Glen Van Brummelen.
31Al-Samaw’al’s efforts on chords and the sine table are being prepared for publication in [Van
Brummelen/Kerai, to appear].
32On the Calculator’s Key see [Luckey 1951]; [Berggren 1986, 53–63] is a detailed account of the
extraction of a 5th root.

Zij33 is full of mathematical treasures, a couple of which we shall revisit later
in this chapter. He designed and built a number of ingenious astronomical in-
struments. Closer to our topic, he was the ﬁrst to compute  beyond the equiv-
alent of six decimal places, reaching a full sixteen.34 Late in his relatively short
life he became a leading member of Ulugh Beg’s scientiﬁc court in Samar-
qand, and had a hand in the construction of one of the most accurate and heav-
ily used of all Islamic astronomical handbooks, the Sultani Zij.
Al-Kashi’s original treatise on Sin 1° is lost, but it seems to have pro-
voked a ﬂood of commentaries and variants after his death, so the method
can be reconstructed with some accuracy.35 The ﬁrst of its two central ideas
is to recognize that Sin 1° is a root of a relatively simple cubic equation. One
Islam
147
Figure 4.6
An extract from
al-Samaw’al’s table
of sines for a circle
of 480°

Sin 
1°
0;47,8
[1]
2°
1;34,15
[1]
3°
2;21,20


40°
30;0,0


60°
42;25,35


80°
51;57,41


118°
59;58,33
[13]
119°
59;59,35
[6]
120°
60;0,0
33 Several aspects of the Khaqani Zij have been studied; see for instance [Kennedy 1985] and
[Van Brummelen 2006]. [Kennedy 1998] is a detailed description of the contents of this re-
markable zij.
34On this calculation (based on something similar by Archimedes) see [Luckey 1950]; it has been
described a number of times since then, including a popular account in [Van Brummelen 1998].
35The ﬁve known historical treatises on al-Kashi’s method are summarized in [Rosenfeld/
Hogendijk 2002–2003, 27]. Among the publications on this topic are the following: [Sédillot
1847/1853, vol. 2, 77–83] discusses Chelebi’s work, later published in [Sédillot 1853] and ana-
lyzed in [Woepcke 1854a, 167–175]. [Aaboe 1954] is a clear and concise article describing
the method as found in Chelebi (on which we rely here), and [Van Brummelen 1998] contains a
popular account illustrating the connection to ﬁxed-point iteration. [Rosenfeld/Hogendijk
2002–2003] contains a facsimile and translation into English of another treatise on the subject,
by Qadi-Zadeh al-Rumi or perhaps by Ulugh Beg himself. The argument for attribution of the
treatise to the latter is made in [Ahmedov/Rosenfeld 1975].

of the sine triple-angle identities, easily derived from the sine summation
formula, is
(4.10)
Substituting 1° and xSin1°, we arrive at the fundamental equation
(4.11)
and since Sin 3° may be found by geometric means, we need only solve this
equation.
The second idea is a way to ﬁnd a solution to (4.11) without having to
solve it analytically. Al-Kashi begins by isolating the x term:
(4.12)
We know from previous estimates that x1;_,_,_, . . . , which makes the x3
term in the numerator on the right of (4.12) considerably smaller than
47,6;8, . . . . Thus, subtracting 1 from both sides,
(4.13)
Assuming the bracketed quantity in the numerator is just 1, we perform the
division on the right side of (4.13) and get a result of 0;2, . . . . So, we know
the next sexagesimal place is 2.
To arrive at the next sexagesimal place after that we simply repeat the
process: set the x on the right side of the equation to the current estimate 1;2
and subtract 1;2 from both sides. This gives
(4.14)
and dividing through the right side as before gives the next sexagesimal
place as 49. Al-Kashi continues the process to ten sexagesimal places, con-
cluding with
Sin 11;2,49,43,11,14,44,16,19,16.
(4.15)
This value is accurate to all but the last two places (which should be
26,18)—well beyond any practical astronomical need.
0 0
1 2
36 8
2700
3
; ,_,_,
( ; ,_,_,
)
; ,
,
K
K
K
=
+
0;_,_,_,
= (1;_,_,
K
K
K
)
, ; ,
,
,
.
3
2 6 8 29 53
2700
+
x
x
x
=
+
⋅
° =
+
3
3
900
3
2700
47 6 8 29 53 37 3 45
2700
Sin
, ; ,
,
,
, ,
.
Sin 3° =
−
3
0 0 4 3
x
x
; ,
;
Sin
Sin
; ,
(
) .
3
3
0 0 4
3 36


=
⋅
−
⋅

Sin
Chapter 4
148
36The modern equivalent is sin 33 sin 4 (sin )3.

The tools al-Kashi employs here—the triple-angle identity and the idea
of iteration—had been in place for centuries, for instance in al-Biruni’s work
on the nonagon. But al-Kashi was the ﬁrst to bring these ideas together in
this way, using the language of algebra. What we presume to be the result of
al-Kashi’s labors, a monumental table of sines to ﬁve sexagesimal places for
every minute of arc in Ulugh Beg’s Sultani Zij (see ﬁgure 4.7),37 was the last
word in Islamic sines. The table was not outdone anywhere until Georg
Rheticus’s Opus Palatinum almost two centuries later.
Introducing the Tangent and Other Trigonometric Functions
The earliest trigonometric functions—the sine, versed sine, and chord—are
closely related. The addition of the cosine function did not add much power,
since the cosine of an arc is simply the sine of its complement; so no new
table for the cosine is needed if a sine table is already handy. On the other
hand we have seen that Ptolemy and Indian astronomers would have been
aided by the tangent or cotangent. However, it was a surprisingly persistent
conceptual barrier that kept the tangent in the world of gnomonics, and away
from trigonometry proper.
Tables of the cotangent, known as the “shadow” function, are found in
some of the earliest zijes, but the argument is consistently speciﬁed as an alti-
tude rather than a general arc. Interest in shadows derives primarily from the
study of sundials—the shadow cast by the gnomon tells us about the Sun’s
altitude—and its tradition in the Arabic world is long and detailed.38 Al-
Khwarizmi’s Zij, which contains one of the earliest instances of the shadow
Islam
149
Figure 4.7 An extract from the ﬁrst page of the sine table in Ulugh Beg’s Sultani Zij.
(Columns of differences, used for interpolation, have been suppressed.)
Table of the Sine
0°
1°
4°
0
0;0,0,0,0
1;2,49,43,11
…
4;11,7,23,54
1
0;1,2,49,55
1;3,52,32,31
…
4;12,10,4,35
2
0;2,5,39,49
1;4,55,21,50 [1]
…
4;13,12,45,12
3
0;3,8,29,44
1;5,58,11,7
…
4;14,15,25,44
4
0;4,11,19,38
1;7,1,0,23
…
4;15,18,6,12
5
0;5,14,9,33
1;8,3,49,38
…
4;16,20,46,35
37Six places for arcs between 87° and 90°, where the function increases slowly.
38For surveys of the history of gnomonics in the Arab world see [Schoy 1913] and [Schoy 1923b].

function, seems to have had a table with R (the length of the gnomon) equal to
12;39 al-Battani’s highly inﬂuential Zij al-Sabi (AD 900) and many others fol-
lowed suit (see ﬁgure 4.8).40 The function tabulated was usually
Shadow()Rcot 12cot .
(4.16)
The parameter R12, immortalized on shadow squares on the backs of
astrolabes, derives from Indian sources. According to al-Biruni in his well-
named Exhaustive Treatise on Shadows, this value came about as the ratio of
a hand-span to the width of a ﬁnger:
Many (times) I used to witness the Indians, if they wanted to ascer-
tain the time for their operations . . . , they would pass their hands in
the direction of the sun so that the hand, from the vicinity of the el-
bow, became parallel to the horizon, with the inside of the forearm
and the arm toward the sky. Then they would erect half the middle
Chapter 4
150
Figure 4.8
An extract from
al-Battani’s shadow
table (the cotangent)
 (arc of
altitude)
Shadow (
)
1°
687;29
2°
343;38
3°
228;58


30°
20;47


45°
12;0


60°
6;56


88°
0;25
89°
0;12
[1]
90°
0;0
39See [al-Khwarizmi (Suter) 1914, 60], [al-Khwarizmi (Neugebauer) 1962, 105], [ibn al-
Muthanna (Goldstein) 1967, 87–89], and the summary in [van Dalen 1996, 207]. A cotangent
table with R1, probably due to Habash al-Hasib, is reproduced in [King 2004, 84–87].
40Al-Battani’s Zij was foundational in promulgating Ptolemaic astronomy, and it had a large and
consistent following. See the edition and Latin translation in [al-Battani (Nallino) 1899/1903/1907].
The table of cotangents, although given to only two sexagesimal places, is remarkably accurate
in the entries near the cotangent function’s singularity at 0°. In this regard other eminent table-
makers were not so fortunate.

ﬁnger so that it became a gnomon, and its shadow extended itself
along the inside of the palm and the forearm. Then they measured it
in digits of the other hand.41
Other parameters were used, such as 
and R7 (from the ratio
of a person’s height to the length of his foot), R60, and of course Abu’l-
Wafa”s and al-Biruni’s R1. But 12 was the most common choice.
Al-Biruni’s deﬁnitions of the shadow functions in the Exhaustive Trea-
tise on Shadows, a standard within Arabic gnomonics, are as follows.42 In
ﬁgure 4.9(a) the gnomon is vertical; with argument  the length of the “direct
shadow” (al-zill al-mustawi) corresponds to our cotangent, while the “hy-
potenuse of the direct shadow” (qutr al-zill al-mustawi) is the secant. Simi-
larly, in ﬁgure 4.9(b) the gnomon is horizontal; the length of the “reversed
shadow” (al-zill maÛkus) is the tangent, and the “hypotenuse of the reversed
shadow” (qutr al-zill maÛkus) is the cosecant.43 So all six modern trigono-
metric functions are present—but only in a gnomonic context.
R = 6 1
2
Islam
151
Figure 4.9
Al-Biruni’s deﬁnitions 
of the shadow functions
41[Al-Biruni (Kennedy) 1976, vol. 1, 73].
42These deﬁnitions had already been used, for instance, by al-Battani and Abu’l-Wafa’.
43[Al-Biruni (Kennedy) 1976, vol. 1, 63–65; vol. 2, 23–24].

One nice example of al-Biruni’s masterful handling of gnomonics is his
method to ﬁnd the cardinal points of the compass during the summer months,
after sunrise or before sunset (at a time when the North Star is not visible).
Text 4.2
Abu’l-Rayhan al-Biruni, Finding the Cardinal Points of the Compass
(from Exhaustive Treatise on Shadows)
[See ﬁgure 4.10.] Another [method] is that the graduated circle be ABG, with
center E and EB perpendicular to the diameter AG, and we assume on it BD
equal to the latitude of our locality and GZ equal to the declination of the Sun
at the time [in question]. We join D [to] E, and we extend ZH parallel to GE,
and we draw ET equal to EH. We extend TK parallel to EB, and KLM parallel
to GA; and MS parallel to BE. And we join L [to] S and cut off EO to the
amount of the gnomon set up at E. We extend OF parallel to LS, and we de-
scribe about E and at a distance EF a circle. We observe, in one of the two
halves of the day, the entry of the shadow, and [its exit] from this small circle,
and we pass from it a diameter in it which will be the east-west line, and the
diameter perpendicular to it will be the meridian line.44
Explanation: Our problem is to determine the moment at which the shadow
cast by a gnomon points due east (or west). Al-Biruni tells us to mark off our
terrestrial latitude  and the Sun’s declination  in ﬁgure 4.10. Draw a line
horizontally across from Z to H, and use a compass to draw ETEH. Next
draw straight up from T to K. Al-Biruni asserts that TK is in fact the Sine of
the Sun’s altitude h when it is due east or west of us. If he is right, then 
is h itself. Since LSEOFE is the angle corresponding to this arc and
OE is the gnomon, we know that
EFShadow(h)Cot h,
(4.17)
and the gnomon will cast a shadow of length EF at the moment that the
shadow points due east or west.
Assuming that al-Biruni is correct, all we have to do to determine the
east/west line is to use ﬁgure 4.10 to determine EF, and draw a circle around
the gnomon with radius EF. At the moment the shadow of the gnomon
crosses the circle we will know that the shadow points due east/west, and the
cardinal directions will have been determined.
MA
Chapter 4
152
44[Al-Biruni (Kennedy) 1976, vol. 1, 168–169]. Kennedy’s commentary is in vol. 2, pp. 95–96.
See also [Kennedy 1959] and [Kennedy 1963]. This is an example of the use of an analemma,
which we shall discuss in more detail later in this chapter.

This is very clever indeed, but how do we know that TK is the Sine of h?
Fortunately al-Biruni goes on to prove it. In ﬁgure 4.11 the Sun rises at T and
is due east of us at √; the arc  from the east point to the Sun’s rising point
T is called the ortive amplitude. The Sun’s path, or day-circle, is separated
from the celestial equator by its declination 
so DESin .45 Since
DEG,
(4.18)
But this latter quantity is also HX/EH in ﬁgure 4.10, and since HXSin ,
EH(ET) must be equal to Sin .
A similar argument gets us the second half of the proof. In ﬁgure 4.11
ZT/Z√ Sin  / Cos ; in ﬁgure 4.10 ET/TK is equal to the same ratio.
Since ZT and ET are both equal to Sin , TK must be equal to Z√, which
is Sin h.
Al-Biruni’s unwillingness to simplify the above ratio Sin /Cos  to a tan-
gent reﬂects a general attitude to keep the gnomonic functions away from
trigonometry proper.46 This choice leads to the same problem that Ptolemy
had experienced centuries before: using only a sine table, it is possible to
compute a tangent—but not an arc tangent. In situations where an arc tangent
ED
EG
R
=



=
Sin 
Sin 
Cos 


 .
XB = ,
Islam
153
Figure 4.10
Al-Biruni’s
construction of
an east-west line
using a gnomon
45One way to see this is to draw radii EX and EB; then BEX, and the perpendicular from B
to EX (which is equal to DE) is Sin .
46Converting the ratio of a sine and a cosine to a tangent changes the type of object from a ratio of
two geometrical entities to a single entity; this would not have been natural.

was required, astronomers were forced to convert to an arc sine; i.e, if tan 
a/b, then
47
(4.19)
The usefulness of dividing the sine of an arc by its cosine or vice versa
beyond the conﬁnes of gnomonics was not entirely lost on early Islamic
scientists. Habash al-Hasib, (ﬂ. AD 850), one of the greatest of the mathe-
matical astronomers (the name “al-Hasib” actually means “the calculator”),
tabulated and used the tangent in his Jadwal al-Taqwim (“Table for Finding
the Exact Positions”).48 These tables computed values of simple but useful
combinations of the basic trigonometric building blocks, sines and cosines.
Appropriately chosen, they could be combined to solve a wide variety of as-
tronomical problems; we shall discuss them more systematically later in this
chapter. Among Habash’s auxiliary functions was a tangent with R60, as
well as two other functions using tangents:
(4.20)
where  is the obliquity of the ecliptic.
and Tan
Tan  ⋅ Sin 
-1



R
R
,
Tan  ⋅ Sin 
=
⋅
+




arcSin
R a
a
b
2
2 .

Chapter 4
154
47See for instance Ibn Yunus in [King 1972, 64–65].
48 Detailed information on the Jadwal al-Taqwim may be found in [Irani 1956]; on pp. 128–133
the case is made that Habash was the ﬁrst to use the tangent function to solve astronomical
problems outside of gnomonics. The zij in which this table appeared is summarized in [De-
barnot 1987].
Figure 4.11
The proof of 
al-Biruni’s 
east-west line
construction

The tangent function was frequently useful in the solutions of problems
in spherical astronomy; it arises especially when applying Menelaus’s Theo-
rem (or some equivalent) to a conﬁguration wherein a 90° arc is broken into
two parts. Often one needs to divide the sine of the ﬁrst part by the sine of the
other, which is equivalent to taking the tangent of the ﬁrst part. Thus, al-
though Habash established the tangent only as an auxiliary function and not
as a trigonometric function per se, he did ﬁnd for it a role in the practice of
spherical astronomy.
The tangent and the three minor functions (cotangent, secant, cosecant)
were ﬁnally brought properly into the trigonometric fold with the sine and
cosine in Abu’l-Wafa”s Almagest. Indeed, all six trigonometric functions
may be deﬁned by means of just one of his diagrams.49 In ﬁgure 4.12 the 
argument is 
; we have noted before that Abu’l-Wafa’ introduces R  1.
Then the six functions are:
sineTZ;
cosineET;
tangentBH;
cotangentAY;
secantEH; and
cosecantEY.
With all six functions in his arsenal Abu’l-Wafa’was able to solve astronom-
ical problems more quickly than before. He also quickly demonstrated sev-
eral basic identities involving the new functions, including
50
(4.21)
The advantages of including these functions in the trigonometric stable
were not appreciated by all of Abu’l-Wafa”s colleagues. Ibn Yunus, for ex-
ample, either did not hear of the innovations or chose to continue under the
old regime.51 But with al-Biruni’s adoption, the continued life and accep-
tance of the new functions were assured. Their advantages in spherical
astronomy, as Abu’l-Wafa’ demonstrates dramatically in the section on
spherical astronomy in his Almagest,52 were too great to be ignored.
sec
(tan )
(cot ) .



=
+
=
+
1
2
2
and csc
1

BZ
Islam
155
49[Debarnot 1996, 513–514].
50See either [von Braunmühl 1900/1903, vol. 1, 57] or [Cantor 1907/1913/1901/1908, vol. I, 748].
We have already noted that [von Braunmühl 1900/1903, vol. 1, 54–59] is the only available ac-
count of the trigonometry in Abu’l-Wafa”s Almagest.
51[King 1972, 64].
52Based on notes made by Benno van Dalen.

Streamlining Astronomical Calculation
As the sine and cosine had made the mathematics of astronomical work
more convenient, the tangent and cotangent would also make their presence
felt—but the transition was not immediate. One example of Islamic Ptole-
maic astronomy should sufﬁce for comparison: the solar equation, the key to
the Sun’s motion, which we saw handled with chords in Chapter 2. Recall
that the Sun’s mean position am in ﬁgure 4.13 is found using a mean motion
table; the Sun’s true position is determined by
(4.22)
depending on whether am is less than or greater than 90°.
The following passage is by Kushyar ibn Labban, an Iranian scientist
and Abu’l-Wafa”s colleague. His JamiÛ Zij was an inﬂuential astronomical
handbook, which we shall revisit later in this chapter.
Text 4.3
Kushyar ibn Labban, Finding the Solar Equation
(from the JamiÛ Zij)
[See ﬁgure 4.13.] [Let] ABG [be] the circle of the eccentric orb with E as its
center and AG as its diameter, and [let] D [be] the center of the orbit repre-
senting the ecliptic [i.e., parecliptic; D is the center of the Earth]. Then DE
is the eccentricity. It has been found to be [equal to] 2 parts and 4 minutes plus
half and a quarter [of a minute], based on [taking] EA [equal to] sixty parts.
A is the position of the apogee, B is the body of the Sun, and 
the solar 
mean anomaly. We drop BH perpendicular to AE. It is the Sine of the arc 
.
[We drop] DZ perpendicular to BZ. The angle ZED is equal to the angle
AB
AB
a
a
q a
m
m
=
± (
),
Chapter 4
156
Figure 4.12
Abu’l-Wafa”s deﬁnitions
of the tangent and other
trigonometric functions

HEB, and the two angles Z and H are right. So the ratio of EB to BH is equal to
the ratio of ED to DZ. EB is [equal to] sixty parts. BH and ED are known. So
DZ is known, and ZE is known because HE is the Cosine of the mean anomaly
[and EB:HEED:ZE]. So BZ is known. The [sum of the] squares of BZ and
ZD is equal to the square of BD. So BD is known. The ratio of BD to DZ, which
is known [i.e., which has been computed] based on [taking] BE as the radius, is
equal to the ratio of sixty to DZ in the magnitude in which it [i.e., DZ] is de-
sired [i.e., we want DZ for BD60]. So DZ based on [taking] BD as the radius
is known. It is the Sine of the angle ZBD. So the angle ZBD is known, and it is
the angle of the equation. That is what we wanted to demonstrate.53
Explanation: The goal is to ﬁnd q EBD, given am AEB and parame-
ter eED 2;4,45 (recalling that RBE60). Since DEZ~EBH we
know that
and also that
EB
HE
ED
ZE
a
e
ZE
m
=
=
,
.
or
60
Cos 
EB
BH
ED
DZ
a
e
DZ
m
=
, or
60
Sin 
,
=
Islam
157
Figure 4.13
Kushyar ibn Labban
on the solar
equation
53From [Bagheri 2006, 140–141].

Therefore, since BZ60 ZE,54 we have two of the three sides of BDZ.
An arc tangent would ﬁnish the job, but Kushyar instead applies Pythagoras
to ﬁnd BD and ﬁnishes with
(4.23)
This method, like many of its kind, is very much modeled on Ptolemy’s
Almagest. The conservatism of ﬁnishing with an arc sine rather than an arc tan-
gent is noteworthy, but it would not be long before other astronomers would
move on. For instance, one of al-Biruni’s works contains no less than ﬁfteen
computations of the solar equation, two of which apply the arc tangent55—
although in his masterwork the Qanun al-MasÛudi, he goes back to the arc sine.
Numerical Techniques: Approximation, 
Iteration, Interpolation
As effective as trigonometry powered by geometry can be, we have already
seen several situations where it fails to provide practical results. The difﬁ-
culty of computing Sin 1° is the most obvious instance of this shortcoming,
but recall also the problems encountered by Indian astronomers in back-
tracking from true positions to mean positions of the Sun, Moon and plan-
ets. Finally, although the labor of composing a large astronomical table is
not actually a theoretical barrier for trigonometry, it is a real problem that
astronomers could not have overcome without occasionally abandoning di-
rect computation in favor of the timesaving techniques of interpolation.
Occasionally, to avoid intense calculations certain cumbersome astro-
nomical functions were just replaced with simpler ones. This happened for
instance in the determination of the direction of Mecca, as we shall see later.
The solar equation, relatively simple though it is, was also given this treat-
ment. Rather than use some version of the correct formula
(4.24)
q(am) was sometimes approximated by a multiple of the sine function:
(4.25)
q a
q  ⋅
(
)
max
sin
.
=
a
q a
e
a
R
e
a
m
m
m
(
)
arctan
,
=
+




Sin
Cos
2
q
DE
BD
= arcSin
.
Chapter 4
158
54The subtraction assumes that the Cosine is not a signed quantity. In modern terms the Cosine in
the diagram is actually negative and the sign in this formula should be positive.
55[Kennedy/Muruwwa 1958, 117]. According to al-Biruni one of these two methods actually goes
back to Habash al-Hasib!

Some zijes (for instance, al-Khwarizmi’s56) used a multiple of the decli-
nation function:
(4.26)
presumably in an attempt to improve on the accuracy of (4.25).57 The
“method of sines,” borrowed from Indian astronomy, is a reasonable approx-
imation of q(am) because q increases to a maximum not far from am 90°
before decreasing to zero at 180°. But the peak of q occurs far enough after
90° to make the use of the method of sines easy to spot in a table. As can be
seen from ﬁgure 4.14 neither method is very effective, and the “method of
declinations” is really no better than the method of sines.
The solar equation is only one of a number of astronomical functions
whose behavior resembles the sine; others include equations that arise in the
motions of the Moon and the planets. Other astronomical functions resemble
linear functions at key moments, such as the motions of the Sun and Moon
near an eclipse. It is a natural idea, then, to begin with the simpler motion as
an approximation to the more complicated one, and to ﬁnd a means of im-
proving the approximation step by step. This process leads naturally to the
concept of iteration.
We have seen iteration used in Islam already, for instance by al-Biruni and
al-Kashi in the determination of Sin 1°. The ﬂourishing of iterative methods in
q a
q ⋅
(
)
max
),
=
(a
Islam
159
Figure 4.14 Graphs of the solar equation (shaded with its maximum at am 92°) and
approximations by the methods of sines and declinations (for e2;4,45 and 23;51).
The method of sines is actually slightly closer to the solar equation when am 91°.
56[Kennedy/Muruwwa 1958, 118].
57See for instance [Salam/Kennedy 1967, 493].

India to solve astronomical problems similar to the ones faced by their Muslim
colleagues may well have led to their transmission.58 Indeed, one of the earli-
est and most sophisticated examples of iteration is found in Habash al-Hasib’s
zij, which is known to rely heavily on Indian predecessors.59
The context in which Habash’s iteration occurs is parallax theory, the
details of which would take us too far aﬁeld;60 sufﬁce it to say that Habash is
attempting to generate a function with its maximum some distance m to the
left of 90°.61 In ﬁgure 4.15, zf(y)k sin y is a “method of sines” approxi-
mation to a function that should peak at 90°m. Thus the y values must be
altered continuously somehow to x values, as in the diagram, so that y90°
translates to x90°m while leaving the endpoints at 0° and 180° alone.
Then the approximation
zf(x)k sin (y(x))
(4.27)
would give a function that looks like a sine wave, but with its maximum in
the right place at 90°  m. Now, the most obvious relation that does the
trick is
Chapter 4
160
58Indeed, there are a few traces even of Babylonian approximations (the step and zigzag functions
that we saw in Chapter 1) in early Islamic science. See for instance [Lesley 1957, 136–139] and
[Kennedy/Ukashah 1969].
59The method is described in both [Kennedy/Transue 1956] (mathematically) and [Kennedy
1969a] (historically). Our discussion is based on these two papers, but the presentation is altered
in an attempt at clarity.
60The interested reader may pursue the parallactic context further in [Kennedy 1956b, 49–52].
61Of course the method could be adapted easily to work with a function whose peak is to the right
of 90°, such as the solar equation.
Figure 4.15
The ﬁrst step of Habash 
al-Hasib’s approximation 
process

xym siny.
(4.28)
The problem with (4.28), known as Kepler’s equation for its many appear-
ances in celestial mechanics, is that we really want to get y in terms of x to be
able to execute (4.27), not the other way around—and (4.28) is analytically
unsolvable for y.
But as history has proven again and again, iteration is often able to solve
the unsolvable. Suppose, given x0, we want to ﬁnd y so that yx0 msin y
(rearranging (4.28)).62 Thus, in ﬁgure 4.16 we need to determine y so that the
distance one moves on the horizontal axis from x0 to y corresponds to the
height of the graph of msin y—visually, the place on the curve where a diag-
onal line rising rightward from x0 intersects the graph of zmsin x.63
However, converting from the visual to the quantitative is not so easy
here. Habash describes the following solution: let
y0x0msinx0,
y1x0msiny0,
(4.29)


ynx0msinyn1.
In ﬁgure 4.16 this sequence of computations corresponds to the following
process: determine the height of the graph at x0 (i.e., msin x0) and move di-
agonally downward to the right onto the horizontal axis, thereby adding it to
x0; we end up at y0. The height of the graph at y0 is m sin y0; adding this quan-
tity to x0 corresponds to transferring the height of the graph at y0 over to the
left at x0 and again moving diagonally down to the right. Repeat as
necessary; it should become clear after a few iterations that the yn’s are con-
verging to the desired value of y. Certainly neither Habash nor anyone else
explains why this convergence occurs; likely they were convinced not by any
demonstration, but simply by experience.
Of course this visual description cannot conform to Habash’s or the
originator’s conception of the scheme—but the idea, in some other guise,
may be the same. Since (as is typical) no explanatory writings exist, we may
never know for certain how the method actually came about.
The purpose of schemes like Habash’s was to save the incredible
amount of labor required to put together complete astronomical handbooks,
which often contained dozens of tables computing a dizzying array of math-
ematically deﬁned functions. Although iterative techniques had some cur-
rency, they were the exception rather than the rule. Much more common was
Islam
161
62The relation of this result to the basic equation for ﬁxed-point iteration,  f (), is clear.
63This matches our expectation that x090°m should map to y90°, since x0 is m units to the
left of y90°, and the function at 90° has a value of m sin 90°m.

the practice of computing only, say, every third or tenth entry of a table and
ﬁlling in the rest of the entries by some form of interpolation. Appropriately
applied, the results of these efforts could be virtually indistinguishable from
a table computed entirely by direct methods, and it must have been a sore
temptation to take this short cut often.
Although time was not taken to write about it, perhaps the most com-
monly used method was distributed linear interpolation.64 Already used by
Ptolemy, this simple variant of linear interpolation had the advantage of be-
ing very fast to implement, with results in most cases almost as good as more
sophisticated methods. The idea is to take advantage of the fact that the func-
tion differences to be inserted into the interval cannot usually be divided per-
fectly into equal parts. In ﬁgure 4.17, an extract from one of Kushyar ibn
Labban’s tables for Mars, Kushyar has computed every third entry. In the
gap from av 60° . . . 63°, for instance, the function increases by 1;5 65
minutes. Breaking this into three parts, we ﬁnd that the function must in-
crease by 21, 22, and 22 minutes. Since the function’s rate of increase is de-
creasing (i.e., its graph is concave down), the best course of action is to place
the two 22-minute increments ﬁrst, followed by the 21-minute increment.
Although distributed linear interpolation leads to a distinctive pattern of
differences (see ﬁgure 4.17), the completed table does give the appearance of
a smoothly changing function. Applied in the right situations (and it seems
that the situations indeed were considered carefully), the method, albeit
crude, is effective.
As prevalent as distributed linear interpolation seems to have been, the
written literature of the tenth through the ﬁfteenth centuries passed over it in
favor of various second-order interpolation schemes. The earliest account of
these more advanced methods that has been found so far is attributed to the
Chapter 4
162
Figure 4.16
The second step of
Habash al-Hasib’s
approximation 
process: iteration
64Distributed linear interpolation has been described several times in the secondary literature; see
for example [Rome 1939, 219], [van Dalen 1993, 11], [Van Brummelen 1991, 681–682], and the
example on which our description is based, [Van Brummelen 1998, 278].

tenth-century astronomer al-Khazin;65 other authors include Ibn Yunus
(whom we shall visit in a moment), al-Biruni,66 Nasir al-Din al-Tusi,67 and
Sayf-i-Munajjim (the Ashrafi Zij).68 The schemes were of course applied to
trigonometric tables, but also to other astronomical tables and ephemerides.
Oddly enough two of the best astronomers of medieval Islam, al-Biruni and
al-Kashi,69 produced interpolation methods that can only be described as
misguided; but the others are equivalents of modern second-order formulas.
It seems that many of the algorithms were inspired, either directly or indi-
rectly, by Indian sources; al-Biruni for instance had access to Brahmagupta’s
Khandakhadyaka, from which we have already seen a second-order scheme.70
Islam
163
65Described in [Hamadanizadeh 1978]. See also the survey paper [Hamadanizadeh 1987], which
describes several of the schemes mentioned below. Ulugh Beg’s sine table, for instance, em-
ploys al-Khazin’s method [van Dalen 2002, 351–353].
66Al-Biruni’s errant scheme has attracted some attention. See [Schoy 1927, 40–42] for a descrip-
tion, [Rosenfeld 1959] for a detailed account, [Kennedy 1978] for an attempt to understand its
motivation, and [Rashed 1991] for a discussion of three different interpolation methods by al-
Biruni and a critique by al-Samaw’al.
67Originally described in [Kennedy 1962] and attributed to al-Kashi, but identiﬁed with al-Tusi in
[Hamadanizadeh 1985]. In fact, as Hamadanizadeh points out, this method is the same as al-
Khazin’s and may have been ﬂoating around the scientiﬁc community.
68Described in [Hamadanizadeh 1963].
69Al-Kashi’s system is described and analyzed in [Hamadanizadeh 1980, 41–44].
70A scheme which, for some reason, al-Biruni chose to ignore. See especially [Kennedy 1978] and
[Rashed 1991].
av
p(av)
Differences
60°
23;13
;22
61°
23;35
;22
62°
23;57
;21
63°
24;18
;22
64°
24;40
;21
65°
25;1
;21
66°
25;22
;22
67°
25;44
;21
68°
25;5
;21
69°
25;26
;21
70°
25;47
;21
71°
26;8
;21
72°
26;29
Figure 4.17
Distributed linear interpolation practiced
in an extract of one of Kushyar ibn
Labban’s tables for Mars. The bold
entries have been computed directly; the
others have been interpolated.

The modern understanding of second-order interpolation is that a
parabola is being passed through three given points on the graph of the func-
tion, which is then used to generate other points on the curve. This is obvi-
ously not how the methods were conceived (recall Brahmagupta’s description
in chapter 3), but Ibn Yunus’s description is not all that far away from this
interpretation.
Text 4.4
Ibn Yunus, Interpolating Sine Values
(from the Hakimi Zij)
Sines of arcs found by linear interpolation are always less than the actual val-
ues. . . . If you want to ﬁnd the Sine of an arc other than the half-degrees
whose Sines are given [in the table], and [you want to ﬁnd] the difference be-
tween the Sine found by linear interpolation and the actual value, then ﬁrst
ﬁnd the Sine of the arc in question by linear interpolation. . . . Also ﬁnd the
Sine of the half degree which is in between the two integral degrees less and
greater than the arc in question, using the Sines calculated rigorously for each
degree. Note the Sine of that half degree by linear interpolation, and note the
difference between it and the Sine of the half degree in the Zij, which was cal-
culated rigorously. Multiply the difference by four, and the result will be the
base for interpolation, so keep it in mind. Then look at the minutes of the arc
in question over the integer degrees, and subtract them from 60. Multiply the
remainder by the minutes which you subtracted, and then multiply the product
by the interpolation base: the product will be the difference between the Sine
of the degrees and minutes [of the arc in question found] by linear interpola-
tion and its actual Sine, so add it to the value of the Sine which you found ﬁrst
by linear interpolation. The result will be the Sine of the degrees and minutes
of arc, which you wanted to ﬁnd exactly. Success is with God.71
Explanation: Although Ibn Yunus does not work with an example, we shall.
Our goal is to ﬁnd Sin 9;20°, given that Sin 9°9;23,9,51, Sin 9;30°
9;54,10,17, and Sin 10°10;25,8,1 [1].72 We ﬁrst compute the “interpola-
tion base” , the difference between Sin 9;30° and the value for Sin 9;30° that
one would arrive at by linear interpolation between Sin 9° and Sin 10° (see ﬁg-
ure 4.18 for a visual interpretation); in our case 0;0,1,21.73 Where x is the
Chapter 4
164
71From [King 1972, 82]. The passage has also been translated into German in [Schoy 1923a,
390–391], and the method is discussed in [King 1973b, 354–357]. The latter forms the basis of
our explanation.
72These values are taken from the table of Sines in the Hakimi Zij.
73The linearly interpolated value for Sin 9;30° is 9;54,8,56, which differs from the given value by
0;0,1,21.

amount by which the argument of the desired Sine exceeds 9° (in our case 20
minutes), Ibn Yunus does the equivalent of assuming that the Sine curve ex-
ceeds the line connecting the endpoints by an amount equal to
(4.30)
The x(1x) term provides a nice quantity—a quadratic term—that be-
gins and ends at zero (for x0 and x1 respectively), and reaches its
largest value, 
in the middle when 
The multiplication by 4 and by
 ensure that (4.30) has a maximum value of , as required. Then the
amount x that we must add to the linearly interpolated value of Sin 9;20°
9;43,49,1475 is simply(4.30):
Sin 9;20°9;43,49,144 · (0;20)· (0;40)· (0;0,1,21)
9;43,49,140; 0,1,12
(4.31)
9;43,50,26.
This value turns out to be accurate to all four sexagesimal places.
Muslim astronomers applied several other computational devices to their as-
tronomical tables, mostly hoping to make arithmetical life easy on the user.
To describe them all would take us too far aﬁeld; likely some remain undis-
covered today. One, however, brings us back to familiar ground in Ptolemaic
planetary theory. Recall that the planetary equation of anomaly p is a func-
tion of two variables, one of which (av) has a much greater inﬂuence on
x = 1
2 .
1
4 ,
4
1
74
⋅
−
⋅
⋅
x
x
(
) 
Islam
165
Figure 4.18
Ibn Yunus’s
second-order
interpolation
scheme
74The use of 60 within the quotation stems from treating the excess above 9° as a number of min-
utes, rather than degrees.
75The linearly interpolated value is Sin 9;20°9;23,9,51(0;20)(10;25,8, 1 9;23,9,51)
9;43,49,14.

p than the other (cm). To compute a rectangular grid of entries of a double-
argument function as complicated as p would be too time-consuming,76 so
Ptolemy invented an interpolation scheme to bypass the tabulation, which
we described in chapter 2.
The tenth-century astronomer Kushyar ibn Labban, whose JamiÛ Zij we
have already encountered, implements a clever alternative to Ptolemy’s
scheme. Figure 2.34 is a graphical representation of p(av,cm); the goal is to
compute p for given values of av and cm using only single-argument tables—
i.e., ﬁnd the height of a randomly chosen point X using as data only a few
known arcs on the surface. Ptolemy effectively tabulates function values along
the four arcs AD, BE, CF, and DYEF, and assumes that AX/ABDY/DE
(where a pair of letters represents the difference between two function values;
i.e., the difference between their heights). Since X is the only point in this ratio
not on a tabulated curve, it may be computed. Kushyar, on the other hand, tab-
ulates only BE and DYEF and assumes that X/BY/E (where, again, letters
represent function values). And again in this ratio only X is not tabulated, so it
may be computed. Although Kushyar’s method holds the advantage over
Ptolemy of requiring the tabulation of only two functions instead of four,77 it
does lead to signiﬁcant errors for certain values of the arguments, for the plan-
ets with large epicycles (Venus and Mars). So far, only one other table has been
found that adopts this approach.78
Early Spherical Astronomy: 
Graphical Methods and Analemmas
Outlining the beginnings of spherical trigonometry and astronomy in me-
dieval Islam is a vexed task, not well served by the limited historical evi-
dence. At least three different mathematical approaches to the subject are
possible. First, there is the style of the Greeks exempliﬁed in Ptolemy’s Al-
magest, which relies on Menelaus’s Theorem (or, as the Muslims called it,
the Transversal Figure). Once this result is established, Greek spherical
trigonometry operates solely on the surface of the sphere. Second, we have
the Indian style, which builds its theory primarily through the use of similar
Chapter 4
166
76This is not to say that it was not done, in Islam or surrounding cultures. See for example (among
others) [Tichenor 1967], [Saliba 1976], [van Dalen 1999, 321–328], and [Goldstein 2003].
77To be precise, Kushyar tabulates three functions, but one is simply a constant multiple of the
other. Kushyar also adopts two other computational efﬁciencies in his tables, making them eas-
ier to use but further obscuring their mathematical structure. See [Van Brummelen 1998] for an
account.
78The anonymous Riqani Zij (ca. 1090), in the lunar tables (personal communication, Benno van
Dalen).

plane triangles within the sphere and the Pythagorean Theorem. Third, we
have the tradition of the analemma, involving the rotation of one circle onto
the plane of another. We have seen already that the analemma began in
Greece, although few examples remain. We have also argued that its use in
India might have been overstated; however, it quickly became a prominent
tool in Islamic astronomy. So, we shall begin with the analemma and some
related constructions.
The problem of identifying the sources of Islamic spherical trigonome-
try is not aided by the fact that the earliest extant writings often contain rules
for calculation, but no theoretical descriptions. For instance, al-Khwarizmi’s
zij describes how to solve problems of spherical astronomy such as rising
times and related astrological matters using tables,79 but like his Indian pre-
decessors he does not say how these rules arose in the ﬁrst place. Finally, the
earliest texts do not distinguish clearly between spherical trigonometry and
its application in spherical astronomy, again echoing the Indian approach,
but also not that far removed from the Greeks.
Indeed, it is possible to ﬁnd a great deal of spherical trigonometry buried
within early Muslim solutions to astronomical problems.80 Al-Khwarizmi
gives a geometric procedure to determine the ortive amplitude81  in terms of
the Sun’s declination  and terrestrial latitude  that translates to
(4.32)
which turns out to be equivalent to the Rule of Four Quantities applied to a
right triangle. His calculation of the azimuth  of the Sun in terms of its alti-
tude h as well as  and ,
(4.33)
is equivalent to the other fundamental identity of spherical trigonometry, the
Law of Cosines.82 Indeed, as we shall see later, a very similar problem solved
cos
sin
tan
sin
cos
,


=
−

h
h
sin
sin
cos
,



=
Islam
167
79[Al-Khwarizmi (Neugebauer) 1962, 46–55]. An analemma is used on pp. 50–51 to explain the
Surya Siddhanta’s approach, but as Neugebauer would have realized, this is simply his deriva-
tion of the pattern of calculation. The paper he quotes, [Schmidt 1944], concludes that “the
methods that were used . . . for the computation of the length of daylight thus seem to be essen-
tially independent of Greek and Babylonian methods.”
80[King 2004, 26–38] is a useful compilation of the essential formulas of spherical astronomy in
medieval Islam.
81The distance from the east point of the horizon to the point where the Sun rises, see ﬁgure 4.11.
82These two rules are discussed in [Rosenfeld 1993, 305–306]. The spherical Law of Cosines may
be arrived at using either Indian or Ptolemaic methods.

by al-Battani a few decades later83—also identical to the spherical Law of
Cosines—may have been the path that led Regiomontanus to the purely
trigonometric result. So the early Islamic scientists were certainly capable of
ﬁnding and using rules of the sophistication and importance of the laws of
sines and cosines, but until later the rules remained in their astronomical
contexts, and were not posited independently.
Al-Khwarizmi’s description of (4.32) takes a rather novel form, below.
Text 4.5
Al-Khwarizmi, Determining the Ortive Amplitude Geometrically
(Geometric Construction of the Ortive Amplitude 
for Every [Zodiacal] Sign and for Every Latitude)
[See ﬁgure 4.19.] Draw a circle ABCD and divide its arc AD into 90 parts. From
the point D on the circle lay off the arc DG having the magnitude of the lati-
tude of [your] town and draw a line from this [point] G to the center [of the
circle], that is the line EG. Then from the point A on the circle lay off the arc
AH having the magnitude of the declination of that zodiacal sign for which
you want [to make] the construction. From [the end of] this [arc] draw a line
parallel to the line AE. It is the line HF, which reaches the line BD which is a
diameter. Then look where it cuts the line EG; let it be the point M. Then take
the pair of compasses with opening ME, put its leg in the center point, that is
in the point E, and ﬁnd the place where the other leg cuts the line DE. Let this
be the point N. From the point N raise the perpendicular reaching the arc AG,
it is the perpendicular ON. From [the point O] where [the perpendicular]
reaches count out [the arc] to the point A. The thing you get is the ortive am-
plitude for the sign you wanted.84
Explanation: One will look in vain for a derivation in this passage; this is
simply a description of a method to construct the arc of the solution geomet-
rically. To see that it produces the correct result, note that the sine of the 
purported solution, 
satisﬁes the following relation:
(4.34)
which we know to be true by (4.18).
sin
cos
sin ,



=
=
=
⋅
=
⋅
EN
ME
ME
EF
EF
1
 = AO,
Chapter 4
168
83See [Delambre 1819, 20], [von Braunmühl 1900/1903, vol. 1, 53–54] and [al-Battani (Nallino)
1899/1903/1907, vol. 1, 185].
84From [Rosenfeld 1993, 306].

This sort of technique has been given names like “graphical methods” or
“geometric trigonometry,” the latter since it is a geometric analogue of our
computational trigonometry in the same sense that Book II of Euclid’s Ele-
ments (sometimes called “geometric algebra”) is a geometric analogue of al-
gebra. We have seen a similar diagram earlier in this chapter, in Text 4.3
from al-Biruni’s Exhaustive Treatise on Shadows, although there it was ac-
companied by a proof. Similar diagrams may be found, for instance, in the
works of Habash al-Hasib and al-Mahani.85 Although procedures like this
existed in India, these diagrams went much further.86
The graphical methods are closely related to what have become known
as analemmas in the Arabic tradition. In Greek use, the analemma involved
the rotation of one circle in the celestial sphere onto the plane of another. In
Islam we ﬁnd examples of analemmas similar to the Greek applications, but
the tradition is considerably richer. Analemmas abound to solve a wide vari-
ety of problems, including the usual topics in spherical astronomy, but also
the design of astronomical instruments (especially the astrolabe), mathemat-
ical geography, and astronomical timekeeping.87
Islam
169
Figure 4.19
Al-Khwarizmi’s graphical
solution to the ortive
amplitude problem
85Several examples are in [Kennedy/Kunitzsch/Lorch 1999]; on the same topic see also [Lorch 1998].
86[Kennedy/Kunitzsch/Lorch 1999, 11–12]. Occasionally, such as in the decomposition of the ra-
tio in the middle of (4.34), similar triangles are used in a way that evokes an essentially arith-
metic procedure rather than a geometric one. See also [Lorch 1998, 222–223].
87The literature on analemma methods in Islam is extensive. For examples of its use in spherical
astronomy see for example [Kennedy/Sharkas 1962] and [ÛId 1969]. On instruments see
[Berggren 1991/92], [Lorch 1998] and [Kennedy/Kunitzsch/Lorch 1999]. Applications in 

Sometimes analemmas are accompanied by the equivalent trigonometric
calculations but often they are not, as in the case in al-Biruni’s report of
Habash al- Hasib’s (ﬂ. 850) determination of the direction of Mecca, known
as the qibla.88 One of the earliest in the Islamic world to compose analemmas,
Habash was one of the most remarkable ﬁgures of early Islamic mathematical
astronomy. His analemmas are among his most creative contributions.89
Habash’s analemma for the qibla gives a direct visual marker for the ap-
propriate direction, which may have been more useful to architects and wor-
shippers than a number. The trigonometric analogue would eventually become
known as the “method of the zijes,” on which we shall say more later. For now
we follow the analemma itself, as a particularly clever example of the genre. A
moment’s thought should conﬁrm that the direction of Mecca is the same as
the direction of Mecca’s zenith N in the observer’s sky (line LN in ﬁgure 4.20),
and that the needed data are the latitudes of the observer and Mecca (o and m
respectively) and the difference in longitude L between the two locations.
Al-Biruni describes only the analemma itself with the overly hopeful
statement that “the proof of what Habash said is evident”—dubious, since
the analemma’s circle changes its role no less than three times. Our explana-
tion, adapted from a modern reconstruction,90 is as follows.
The analemma’s main circle (ﬁgure 4.21) begins its life as the meridian
circle, with the observer’s zenith A drawn at left. The diameters of the equa-
tor ZEB and of the parallel circle of Mecca HMY are drawn appropriately ac-
cording to the values of o and M. The circle now becomes the equator;
since diameter ZEB is shared by both the equator and the meridian circle, we
may use ZEB as if it is on the equator. We draw 
In ﬁgure 4.20
dropping a perpendicular from Mecca’s zenith N to the equator produces S;
since ES is the radius of the parallel of Mecca, we may ﬁnd S on the
analemma by drawing ES MY. Now if we drop perpendicular SU onto ZE,
the conﬁguration ZUEST will be identical in the two ﬁgures.
But since diameter ZUEB is also on the meridian, the analemma’s circle
may become the meridian again. This allows us to project U onto Mecca’s
L
ZT
=
.
Chapter 4
170
mathematical geography are [Kennedy 1959], [Kennedy 1963], [al-Biruni (Kennedy) 1976, vol.
1, 168–169; vol. 2, 95–96] which we have already seen, [Kennedy 1984] and [Kennedy 1989].
On the analemma in spherical astronomy and timekeeping see [King 1972] and [King 1999].
88The method attributed here to Habash may actually predate him; see [Berggren 1985, 5]. The ac-
count which follows is based partly on [Kennedy/ÛId 1974, 6–10]. See also [Debarnot, in al-Biruni
(Debarnot) 1985, 49–51] for a corresponding calculation of the qibla for Samarra by Habash.
89 [Debarnot, in al-Biruni (Debarnot) 1985, 42–63] is a detailed survey of Habash’s contribu-
tions to spherical astronomy, including analemmas on pp. 48–51. On analemmas for the qib-
la see also [Schoy 1921], [King 1975, 115–118], [Berggren 1980], [Carandell 1984], and
[Suzuki 1987/88].
90[Kennedy/ÛId 1974].

171
Figure 4.20
Deriving Habash’s
analemma for the qibla.
Dotted lines are within the
celestial sphere; thin dashed
lines and curves will be
used later in this chapter.
Thickly dotted lines follow
the path of projections: N
drops perpendicularly onto
TE to deﬁne S, then S onto
ZE to deﬁne U, then U onto
HY to deﬁne O, and O onto
AE to deﬁne L. The sought
direction of the qibla is LN.
Figure 4.21
Habash’s
analemma for the
qibla

parallel circle, deﬁning O in both diagrams. In fact we may take another
step: project O onto AE, deﬁning L. Now, LN in ﬁgure 4.20 is the direction
line that we want. Since ALE is also on the plane of the great circle through
the two zeniths A and N, our analemma circle becomes the latter circle, and
we may draw LN easily enough in both diagrams.
This procedure gives LN as the correct length in the analemma, but not
the correct direction. However, this problem is easily solved: draw horizon-
tal OXQ, so that OLEX; then draw EFC so that EF is equal in length to
LN. Then EFX in the analemma will be the same as LNO in ﬁgure 4.20,
and the qibla has been established.
No doubt this method is an extremely clever and perfectly correct solu-
tion to a difﬁcult problem. And, as with most analemmas, it is possible to
construct a conventional trigonometric solution that corresponds to the
geometry of ﬁgure 4.21.91 Indeed, it was a popular exercise to convert
analemmas to trigonometric formulas, and we shall see later that this one
was the source of the most common accurate method of solving the qibla
problem. But is the analemma itself properly part of medieval trigonometry?
According to the deﬁnition with which we began this book the answer is
“no”; the method is purely geometric and there is no need to invoke the
quantitative aspect of the subject at all. The exercise of converting an
analemma into a trigonometric solution, as common as it was, is not usually
a trivial affair. The concerns of and tools available to the solver in the two
contexts, related though they may be, differ somewhat.92 Since the
analemma comes ﬁrst in the process, it seems fair to consider it not as part of
trigonometry as such, but rather as a mentoring older sibling.93
Chapter 4
172
91The following modern solution differs from what we shall see later. We begin by noting that
ES MYcos M; therefore SUES sin  Lcos M sin L. Also UOEMsin M, so SO
may be found by subtracting SU from UO. Join EO; then SO, ES and the enclosed angle
ESOL90° are known and Euclid II.12 (the Law of Cosines for obtuse angles) may be
invoked to determine EO. From EO and UO we can ﬁnd UOE, and since SOF90°O
we have FOEOEL.. Thus all of OEL is known. But LN2ALLV(RLE)( RLE),
and so the qibla arc cos(OL/LN).
92For instance, in the above footnote OL is easily found by the analemma simply by dropping the
perpendicular to AE. To ﬁnd the length of OL trigonometrically requires an argument, includ-
ing adding a line segment to the diagram (EO), an invocation of the Law of Cosines, and the de-
termination of a couple of angles. Conversely, at the end of the argument the trigonometry does
not even require the construction of EF. The distinction between analemmatic and trigonomet-
ric reasoning is revealed dramatically in the comparison of four analemmas for the qibla in
[Berggren 1980].
93In a review of [al-Biruni (Debarnot) 1985] Jan Hogendijk points out that Debarnot demonstrates
the link between analemmas and spherical trigonometry, and calls for “a systematic study of
analemma methods in [the] Arabic tradition . . . as a preliminary to writing the history of Arabic
trigonometry” [Hogendijk 1988]. This is not that study; it certainly would be welcomed.

Menelaus in Islam
Spherical trigonometry proper, with trigonometric functions and numeric
computation, quickly became a signiﬁcant part of Arabic astronomy. The
translation movement especially in the ninth century brought in a great deal
of Greek science, and along with it came Greek mathematical techniques.
The Elements was of course a fundamental text for any mathematical enter-
prise, but for the study of spherical astronomy the Almagest was the role
model—even more than Menelaus’s Spherics, which is the fundamental
work on the trigonometry of the sphere.
As we have seen, both the Spherics and the Almagest contain treatments
of Menelaus’s Theorem, although the Spherics is (on the face of it) a mathe-
matical work while the Almagest concentrates on the astronomy. Readers of
chapter 2 will recall that the theorem as stated in the Almagest asserts two
slightly different results with respect to the spherical quadrilateral of ﬁgure
4.22. Both are stated using the chord function, asserting that a certain ratio of
chords is equal to the composition of two other ratios of chords. However,
converting to sines is child’s play; indeed, a leading translation of the Spher-
ics in the Arab world actually uses sines.94 The ﬁrst of the two theorems ex-
pressed in sines (known as “disjunction”95 because the ratio on the left refers
to two separate arcs) is
(4.35)
the second (known as “conjunction” because one of the terms in the ratio on
the left is a combination of two arcs) is
96
(4.36)
Arabic spherical astronomers seized on the “Sector” or “Transversal
Figure” (as they called it) to solve an extremely diverse set of problems, in-
cluding those of spherical astronomy found in the Almagest but also the qib-
la, the design of astronomical instruments, and geography, to name a few.
Generally the arcs were chosen so that some of the combined arcs (a b,
cd, ef, and g f in ﬁgure 4.22) are 90°. This strategy usually led to
Sin( +
Sin
Sin( +
Sin
Sin
Sin( +
a
b
a
g
h
g
f
e
f
)
)
)
=
⋅
⋅
Sin
Sin
Sin( +
Sin
Sing
Sin 
a
b
c
d
d
h
=
⋅
)
;
Islam
173
94Abu Nasr Mansur’s translation, available in [Krause 1936].
95The terms “disjunction” and “conjunction” derive from Ptolemy’s Almagest. See [Bond 1921, 300].
96Of course both results appear identical using modern rather than medieval sines, since the base
circle radius simply cancels out in each of the three ratios.

simpliﬁcations, and in fact (as we shall see) to solutions to some problems
that are equivalent to other important theorems of spherical trigonometry.
One typical example of the use of the Transversal Figure, of interest for
more than just its artistry, is in a short treatise by the great tenth-century
geometer Abu Sahl al-Kuhi. The goal is to solve the familiar problem of rising
times that we saw ﬁrst in the Almagest: in ﬁgure 4.23, given the local latitude
and the Sun’s position on the ecliptic 
, ﬁnd the arc on the 
equator 
(the oblique ascension) that rises above the horizon as arc
=
E
=
√
 = NH
Chapter 4
174
Figure 4.23
Al-Kuhi’s solution
to the rising times
problem
Figure 4.22
Menelaus’s (the Transversal 
or Sector) Theorem

 rises. (Since the equator rotates uniformly it is the circle on which time
may be measured, hence the use of the term “rising time” for equatorial
arcs.)
When we saw this problem before in Ptolemy’s Almagest, we assumed
knowledge of the Sun’s equatorial coordinates  and , but al-Kuhi solves it
(and a few other problems along the way) from scratch:
Text 4.6
Al-Kuhi, Finding Rising Times Using the Transversal Theorem
(from Rising Times of Arcs of a Known Arc of the Ecliptic)
Some of our colleagues who are well-advanced in this art of ours asked us at
the Royal Palace . . . about ﬁnding the rising time of a known arc of the eclip-
tic. . . . And he requested us to do that for him using [only] our knowledge of
the Transversal Figure, which is in Ptolemy’s Almagest, and no other theo-
rems. And he claimed that he can derive that by a way that is shorter, easier
and involves less work than that of the people who know [ just] the Transver-
sal Figure, and that that is not only because of his acuity in this art, but
because of another theorem not known as “The Transversal.” . . . And he
claimed that he and others were freed by it [the new theorem] from knowing
the Transversal Figure in these operations, and from looking into it. But it is
my opinion that, although his judgment may be allowable for himself, it is not
so for others. But [here is] an investigation of it.
If we multiply the sine of a known arc of the ecliptic by the sine of the
whole declination, the result is the sine, expressed in minutes, of the inclina-
tion of that degree. And if that is divided by the cosine of the latitude of the
town there results the sine of the ortive amplitude of that degree in that town.
And if the cosines, expressed in minutes, of each of the ortive amplitude and
of the known arc of the ecliptic area divided by the cosine of the latitude of
that degree there result two sines. The difference between the arc of one of
them and the other is the rising time of that degree in that town. The comple-
ment of one of the two arcs is the rising time in sphaera recta for that degree,
and the complement of the other is the equation of daylight for that degree in
that town. That is what we wanted to prove.97
Explanation: Clearly al-Kuhi was on the cusp of a conﬂict between old (the
Transversal Figure) and new; we shall return to this debate and its likely
combatants shortly.
Although al-Kuhi does not explain his procedure thoroughly, he applies
the Transversal Figure four times to two different spherical quadrilaterals,
Islam
175
97From [Berggren/Van Brummelen 2001, 42].

which we reconstruct below. The advantage of choosing many of the 
arcs to be 90° (
and 
) is obvious; one impor-
tant point in this regard is that it allows the conversion of angle  between 
the equator and the ecliptic into arc 
.
On NZ~√apply (4.36); this gives
or 
simply sin  sin  sin , and we have the declination .
On E√NQ apply (4.36); this gives 
,98
which gives in turn the ortive amplitude .
On E√NQ apply (4.36) but assign the arcs so that EM and MQ are
in the ratio on the left side of the equation; this gives 
, which gives MQ. Its complement is 
the equation of daylight, or ascensional difference, 
On NZ~√apply (4.36) but assign the arcs so that ~M and MZ are 
in the ratio on the left side; this gives 
,
and we have MZ.
Finally, 
~EZQMQMZ.99
If ever proof were needed of the power of the Transversal Figure, this is
it—four successive applications to only two conﬁgurations solve the prob-
lem, and produce several important quantities along the way. However, as we
shall see shortly, this conﬁrmation of its efﬁcacy did not prevent its eventual
replacement at the foundation of spherical astronomy.
The Transversal Figure led scientists in another surprising direction, exem-
pliﬁed in a text by Thabit ibn Qurra (824–901). He was instrumental in
bringing Greek science to the West; he was involved in the production of
excellent Arabic translations of many Greek works, especially those of
Archimedes, and he wrote commentaries on both the Elements and the Al-
magest. His mathematics and astronomy were certainly inspired by his
Greek ancestors, and in this respect he was a leader for many who came af-
ter him. Nevertheless his own mathematical and astronomical output was
exceptionally creative, and extended the Greek ideas in new directions.
sin
sin
sin
cos
cos
sin
90
90
90
o
o
o
MZ
=
⋅


n
ME
=
.
sin
sin
sin
cos
cos
sin
90
90
90
o
o
o
MQ
=
⋅


sin
sin
sin
sin
sin
sin
90
90
90
o
o
o



=
⋅
sin
sin
sin
sin
sin
sin
90
90
90
o
o
o

=
⋅


GZ
Z
NZ NM
G NQ EH EQ
,
,
,
,
,
Chapter 4
176
98The cosine arises, here and elsewhere, by taking the sine of 90° minus the given arc.
99~ZEQ90°, so both ~E and ZQ are equal to 90°EZ.

This characterization certainly applies to Thabit’s On the Transversal
Figure.100 This book may be described as the earliest ever written that deals
speciﬁcally with a trigonometric topic, but its content is quite unexpected. It
begins ordinarily with an account of Ptolemy’s proof of Menelaus’s Theo-
rem, and proceeds to describe a simpler, more elegant proof that avoids the
lemmas used in the Almagest, back in chapter 2. Thabit does introduce his
proof with his own lemma, one that has attracted some attention of its own:
Lemma: (See ﬁgure 4.24.) Given two great circles with common diameter
AG, drop perpendiculars from any two points E and Z on one circle onto the
plane of the other, producing K and L. Then
(4.37)
At ﬁrst glance this lemma is innocuous, but if one drops perpendicular arcs
from E and Z along the sphere to X and Y, with almost no effort (4.37) be-
comes
(4.38)
none other than the Rule of Four Quantities applied to the conﬁguration
AXYZE. Although we do not have an explicit statement from Thabit to this
effect, those who have noticed the connection agree that it could hardly have
escaped Thabit’s notice that this useful result is an obvious consequence of
his lemma.101 There is a passage in Nasir al-Din al-Tusi’s treatise on the
Transversal Figure that quotes Abu Nasr Mansur stating that Thabit wrote on
the Rule of Four Quantities as a replacement to the Transversal Figure in
spherical astronomy; but if that is true, Thabit’s work is now lost.102 If Abu
Nasr was correct, this work would be the ﬁrst explicit statement of the Rule
of Four Quantities with astronomical intent.103
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
,
AE
AZ
EX
ZY
=
Crd
Crd 
2
2
AE
AZ
EK
ZL
=
.
Islam
177
100 On the Transversal Figure is available in Latin in [Björnbo 1924] and [Carmody 1960,
150–164], and in English in the lamentably rare [Lorch 2001b]; see also the discussion
[Bellosta 2004]. On the combinatorial aspects of the treatise see also [Koelblen 1993] and
[Koelblen 1994].
101See for instance [von Braunmühl 1900/1903, vol. 1, 46–47] or [Lorch 2001b, 396]. A French
translation of the lemma, in al-Tusi’s hand, is in [Nasir al-Din al-Tusi (Caratheodory) 1891,
200–202].
102[Lorch 2001b, 6].
103Since the Rule of Four Quantities is a trivial consequence of the Transversal Figure it is not hard
to ﬁnd astronomical problems solved earlier in a manner that appears to reﬂect the Rule, but we
have made the point before that this is not the same thing as stating it explicitly as a theorem.

Thabit continues On the Transversal Figure with what turns out to be a
combinatorial problem. Both theorems of the Transversal Figure assert a
composition of ratios in the form
(4.39)
Some particular application of the Transversal Figure may require the ratio
of, say, c to f, which may be expressed in two ways as
(4.40)
There are altogether eighteen ways in which the original expression can be
rearranged, two for each of the nine pairs of quantities that can be placed in
ratio by (4.39). (Certain ratios, such as a/d, cannot be formed from (4.39) at
all.) Thabit lists all eighteen “modes,” as he calls them, and gives a separate
demonstration for each one.
All of this may appear very strange to the modern reader, who might
simply write adfbce and be done with it, and consider the eighteen vari-
ants merely as trivial rearrangements of the original proposition. However,
ancient and medieval conceptions of ratio104 tie the quantities in ratio to each
other more tightly than a modern reader would. The equivalence of the right
sides of the two equations in (4.40), for instance, is for a medieval mathe-
matician a non-trivial proposition that requires a formal proof.
Thabit seems to have initiated a tradition of interest in this subject, since we
ﬁnd a number of authors discussing it afterward, including such luminaries as
al-Nayrizi, al-Khazin, Ibn al-Haytham, al-Sijzi, Maslama al-Majriti, and Jabir
ibn Aﬂah. These later treatises, some depending on Thabit but others not, gen-
erally worked toward covering what each author considered to be a complete
treatment, either mathematical or astronomical, of the Transversal Figure.105
c
f
a
b
d
e
c
f
a
e
d
b
=
⋅
=
⋅
or
.
a
b
c
d
e
f
=
⋅
.
Chapter 4
178
Figure 4.24
Thabit ibn Qurra’s
lemma to his proof
of the Transversal
Figure
104Thabit actually proposes a new conception of ratios and their composition in a sequel to On the
Transversal Figure, entitled On the Composition of Ratios. See the English translation in [Lorch
2001b, 167–326] and the discussion in [Crozet 2004].
105[Lorch 2001b, 353ff.]; on al-Sijzi’s work see [Berggren 1981], and on Maslama al-Majriti see
[Lorch 1996].

Menelaus’s Replacements
As powerful as the Transversal Figure is, it is not the simplest tool with
which to operate on the sphere. It usually requires that the solver add certain
arcs to the given problem in order to generate one or more appropriate spher-
ical quadrilaterals to hit upon the right version of the theorem to apply, and
then to juggle the six different quantities that emerge until some useful state-
ment appears—as we saw in al-Kuhi’s solution of the rising times problem.
Spherical astronomical applications of the Transversal Figure tended to fol-
low certain patterns: for instance, arcs 90° in length were sought after; and
when angles were included among the givens of a problem, the great circle
for which the angle is at the pole was added to the diagram, so that the angle
could be converted easily to an arc.
These similarities in approach suggest that some simpliﬁed form of the
Transversal Figure might turn out to be useful in astronomical work. For 
instance consider ﬁgure 4.25, where 
is the equator, 
is the ecliptic,
and the angle between them at A is the ﬁxed value . Suppose the Sun is at D
and we wish to determine its declination 
The obvious 
solution is to draw 
with its pole at A so that 
then extend BD
and CE up to the pole F of 
. We now have a transversal ﬁgure, to which
we apply conjunction (4.36). Luckily three of the arcs are 90° in length, so
the result
(4.41)
simpliﬁes nicely to the standard formula Sin  (Sin   Sin /R). This is ba-
sically what Ptolemy does in the Almagest.
But this is also how to prove the Rule of Four Quantities from the 
Transversal Figure, for if we take the arcs 
and 
to be auxiliary to the
main diagram, (4.41) becomes simply
(4.42)
where 
In this sense at least Ptolemy may be said to have known
the Rule of Four Quantities—and many others after him, since this sort of sit-
uation arises very frequently, especially when changing coordinates.106 But it
AE = 90o.
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
,
AD
AE
BD
CE
=
EF
DF
Sin 90
90
90
o
o
o
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin

=
⋅


ABC
CE = ;
CEF
 = BD.
(so
)

 = AD
ADE
ABC
Islam
179
106[Berggren 1985] includes an example involving the “method of the zijes” to determine the qibla
in which the Rule of Four Quantities is applied four times.

is a very different thing to prove the result explicitly as a mathematical theo-
rem (as we have seen Thabit ibn Qurra do, almost), and to assert a role for it
as a starting point for spherical astronomy, independently of the Transversal
Figure.
We are extremely fortunate to have a ﬁrst-hand account of the emer-
gence of the Rule of Four Quantities and other theorems in al-Biruni’s
Maqalid Ûilm al-hay’a (Keys to Astronomy), written only a decade or so after
these discipline-changing events in the last few years of the tenth century.107
The story reconstructed partly from al-Biruni’s work is full of intrigue.
In the last several years of the ﬁrst millennium, Abu Nasr Mansur ibn ÛIraq108
(whom we have met before, with his use of R1 in a set of astronomical ta-
bles) received a request from a colleague to prove various theorems in spher-
ical astronomy, including rising times. His response, the Book of Azimuths,
used the Transversal Figure extensively but included two results derived
from what he called the “ﬁgure that frees” one from needing the Transversal
Figure. The passage in al-Kuhi’s memo in Text 4.6 may well refer to this.
Unfortunately the Book of Azimuths is lost, and we cannot say for
certain what this ﬁgure was. We do know that Abu Nasr’s colleague
Chapter 4
180
Figure 4.25
Deriving the Rule of 
Four Quantities from the
Transversal Figure
107The Keys to Astronomy has been translated into French in [al-Biruni (Debarnot) 1985] (mostly
superceding the summary in [Kennedy 1971a]), which also includes a valuable and extensive
account of spherical trigonometry and astronomy up to the eleventh century, in considerably
more detail than we have space for here.
108On Abu Nasr Mansur see the studies collected in [Samsó 1969]; on spherical trigonometry in
particular see pp. 38–45, 66–70, and 134–152.

Abu’l-Wafa’ (who had also used R1, among other achievements) replied
to it, criticizing Abu Nasr’s use of the old-fashioned Transversal Figure.
Now Abu’l-Wafa’ died in 998, so by then his new-fangled Almagest with its
new theorems and use of tangents would have been already or nearly com-
pleted. Abu Nasr’s defense against Abu’l-Wafa’, the Treatise on the Deter-
mination of Spherical Arcs, luckily is available;109 it contains a proof of a
form of the Rule of Four Quantities110 and a great deal more.
Abu Nasr’s path to the solution of rising times appeals to another, re-
lated theorem: in the same diagram (ﬁgure 4.25)
111
(4.43)
a result closely related to what was eventually called Geber’s Theorem.112 We
proceed, following Abu Nasr, as follows (ﬁgure 4.23):113
From the Rule of Four Quantities applied to ~√GZM we ﬁnd 
which gives us the declination .
From (4.43) applied to the same ﬁgure we ﬁnd 
which gives us the right ascension .
From the Rule of Four Quantities applied to E√HQM we ﬁnd 
which gives us the ortive amplitude .
From (4.43) applied to the same ﬁgure we ﬁnd
which gives us the equation of daylight (ascensional difference) n.
Sin
Sin
Cos
Cos(
)
,



n
=
−
90o
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin(
)
,



=
−
90
90
o
o
Sin
Sin
Cos
Cos
,


=


Sin 

Sin
Sin
Sin
,
=
90o

Sin
Sin
Cos
Cos
,
AD
AB
DB
CE
=
Islam
181
109See [Luckey 1941] for a German translation and [Matvievskaya/Tllashev 1983] for a Russian
translation. See also [Kunitzsch/Lorch 1994], which contains translations of two passages from
Abu Nasr solving the problem of the “ascension of the azimuth”—the earlier treatise using the
Transversal Figure, and the later one using the new methods described in this section.
110As we shall see, Abu Nasr’s approach to this theorem makes it more likely that he thought of it
as a special case of the Law of Sines. The result is the same either way.
111This is easily demonstrated from the Transversal Figure. Assuming that the four long arcs are
all 90°, solve for Sin a/Sin g (according to the assignment of arcs in ﬁgure 4.22) in both the dis-
junction and conjunction versions of the Theorem; then set the results equal to each other. Abu
Nasr establishes the result using the Law of Sines.
112In a spherical triangle with right angle at C, cos Acos a sin B. The theorem is named after
Jabir ibn Aﬂah, a twelfth-century Andalusian astronomer. We shall encounter the man, and the
result, again.
113From [Luckey 1941, 437–440].

Finally, 
n.
In fact, Abu Nasr refers to several of the arcs in the above ﬁgures by
their associated angles, an important point to which we shall return in a
moment. But applications in spherical astronomy were often considerably
smoother to solve when dealing strictly with arcs, and when the Rule of Four
Quantities later became a dominant tool it was typically used with arcs as
above, not with angles.
Indeed, several centuries later the greatest of Muslim computational as-
tronomers, Jamshid al-Kashi, solved spherical astronomical problems relying
on little else than the Rule of Four Quantities as his trigonometric apparatus, 
almost always choosing 
in ﬁgure 4.25.114 In fact in his Khaqani
Zij he even extended its application to the determination of planetary posi-
tions, an unprecedented move. The models for planetary motion that we
have seen thus far take place entirely on the plane of the ecliptic, but in fact
the planets move above and below the ecliptic. Since Ptolemy this problem
had been dealt with somewhat crudely using approximations, but al-Kashi
devised a scheme in which the epicycle is enclosed in a sphere, and the mo-
tions dictated in the Almagest are modeled by the movements of several
great circles on this sphere. The problem of determining the planet’s position
suddenly requires spherical trigonometry, and al-Kashi returns again and
again to the Rule of Four Quantities to solve it.115
That the Rule of Four Quantities was in the air at the end of the tenth
century is underlined by the fact that there was a third claimant to the prior-
ity crown, Abu Mahmud al-Khujandi, who wrote a treatise on its use in solv-
ing astronomical problems. Al-Khujandi may well have been the ﬁrst to use
it, and his work on this topic would be picked up by Kushyar ibn Labban
(whose name we have encountered in the context of interpolation with
double-argument functions).
Although al-Khujandi disputed priority with Abu’l-Wafa’ over the Rule
of Four Quantities, it was clear from the start that Abu’l-Wafa”s contribution
was much deeper and more meaningful than a single theorem. His Almagest
contains a completely new approach to spherical trigonometry and astron-
omy, and includes several new theorems—each of which might serve, on its
own, as an adequate replacement for the Transversal Figure. As the ﬁrst per-
son to use the tangent function on a par with the sine and cosine, one example
that must have come naturally to his attention was the Law of Tangents: in
ﬁgure 4.25,
AE = 90o
Chapter 4
182
114[Kennedy 1985] is a survey of al-Kashi’s approach to spherical astronomy; 23 of 26 problems
are solved with the Rule of Four Quantities.
115For a full account see [Van Brummelen 2006].

(4.44)
As we have found time and again with respect to other theorems, hints of this
relation appear as early as Ptolemy’s Almagest, but it is not until
Abu’l-Wafa”s Almagest that it is stated explicitly.116 He uses it early and of-
ten; for instance, to ﬁnd the right ascension of a given arc of the ecliptic from
its declination he applies it to ~√GZM (ﬁgure 4.23), and arrives immedi-
ately at
117
(4.45)
Curiously the Law of Tangents was rejected by both al-Khujandi and his
follower Kushyar ibn Labban, on the grounds that the use of a table of tan-
gents might lead to numerical problems for arcs approaching 90°, where the
tangent function increases very rapidly.118 However, Kushyar seems later to
have changed his mind, for the Law of Tangents is found as one of the theo-
rems in his JamiÛ Zij.119
In his Keys to Astronomy al-Biruni credits Abu’l-Wafa’ with the Law of
Tangents, but Biruni’s general approach is to discredit Abu’l-Wafa’in favor of
Abu Nasr Mansur—which is perhaps to be expected, since the latter had been
his teacher. Biruni’s main bone of contention is the last of our great theorems
of spherical trigonometry, the spherical Law of Sines, and he leaves no doubt
in the reader’s mind that Abu Nasr Mansur deserves credit. Its statement is
breathtakingly elegant: in an arbitrary spherical triangle (ﬁgure 4.26),
(4.46)
Abu Nasr’s Treatise on the Determination of Spherical Arcs begins with
the Law of Sines, and many of the book’s results are derived from the Law’s
right-angled version.120 The Law of Sines also appears in Abu’l-Wafa”s Al-
magest, but it does not have as central a place; it is derived from the Rule of
Four Quantities.121
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
.
a
A
b
B
c
C
=
=
Sin
Tan
Tan
.


R
=

Sin
Sin
Tan
Tan
.
AB
AC
BD
CE
=
Islam
183
116See [Khairetdinova 1985a] on this point, and for a more general history of the Law of Tangents.
117Based on notes made by Benno van Dalen.
118[Debarnot 1996, 513].
119[Berggren 1987, 25–26].
120See also [Suter 1910] for a German translation, and [Matvievskaya/Tllashev 1983] for a Rus-
sian translation, of another document by al-Biruni containing a proof of the Law of Sines by
Abu Nasr.
121See [Berggren 1986, 174–176] for an account of Abu’l-Wafa”s proof.

Generally, Abu Nasr seems more willing to allow angles to play an inde-
pendent role in spherical trigonometry than does Abu’l-Wafa’. For instance,
Abu Nasr’s statement of the Rule of Four Quantities conﬁnes itself to ADB
in ﬁgure 4.25:
122
(4.47)
The inclusion of A allows the removal of references to C and E, allow-
ing Abu Nasr to focus solely on the triangle of interest with no distracting
external constructions. In fact, in a very real sense this episode may be
said to herald the birth of spherical trigonometry as the study of trian-
gles.123
While Abu Nasr’s focus on the spherical triangle does not immedi-
ately provide much extra power in astronomy, it does lead to further math-
ematical insights—in particular, the notion of the polar triangle. In ﬁgure
4.27, from one of Abu Nasr’s own treatises, consider ABG.124 Draw great
circles with poles A, B, and G, which intersect at H, K, and S. The resulting
polar triangle, HKS, has some elegant properties that recommend it to
the mathematical reader. For one, ABG turns out to be the polar triangle of
HKS, so that polar triangles are dual to each other.125
The main advantage of a polar triangle is its transformation of angles
in the original triangle into sides, and vice versa: the sides of the polar
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
.
BD
A
AD
∠
=
90o
Chapter 4
184
Figure 4.26
The spherical Law of Sines
122In this form the Rule of Four Quantities may be seen as a special case of the Law of Sines,
which is in fact how Abu Nasr proves it.
123This interpretation of the shift in spherical trigonometry in the late tenth century is one of the
many signiﬁcant contributions of Debarnot’s several studies of this period; see for instance
[Debarnot 1996, 506–507].
124Abu Nasr’s work on polar triangles has been analyzed in [Debarnot 1978], which includes a
translation into French of the relevant passage.
125A duality relation between a pair of objects is a transformation that returns the original object
when applied, then applied again to the transformed object. Often the once-transformed object
behaves in one way differently, but in another way analogously to, the original object. In this
case, as we are about to see, angles and sides of polar triangles play reversed roles. Abu Nasr

triangle are equal to the supplements of the angles in the original triangle
(and the angles are supplements of the original sides). As Abu Nasr
shows,
(4.48)
This simple correspondence between sides and angles allows one to
simplify considerably the exposition of solving triangles. For instance, by
the time he reached ﬁgure 4.27 Abu Nasr had already dealt with the case
where three sides of the triangle are known. He handles the case of three
known angles simply by converting to the polar triangle: its three sides are
known, so its angles may be found using the earlier case. They may then be
converted back to the sides of the original triangle using (4.48).
KS
KD
DE
ES
DE
DE
DE
DE
A
=
+
+
=
−
+
+
−
=
−
=
−∠
(
)
(
)
.
90
90
180
180
o
o
o
o
Islam
185
demonstrates the duality of polar triangles as follows: since 
passes through the poles of 
and 
, both of the latter circles must pass through the poles of 
. Since K is the 
intersection of these two circles, it must be a pole of 
. Similarly for H and S.
126Since K
is the pole of 
and hence 
similarly, 
Abu Nasr does not actually go through the equations here; he simply points
out the arcs that are 90° in magnitude and asserts that since 
is known, 
is known.
KS
DE
ES
DE
=
−
90o
.
KD
DE
=
−
90o
;
EGAT KE
,
= 90o
AG
AG
TZ
DE
AG
Figure 4.27
Abu Nasr Mansur and the
polar triangle
126

Systematizing Spherical Trigonometry: 
Ibn Mu\adh’s Determination of the Magnitudes
and Nasir al-Din al-Tusi’s Transversal Figure
One might expect that the fundamental developments that rendered
Menelaus’s Theorem obsolete would trigger someone to write a comprehen-
sive treatise on the reworked ﬁeld, and one would not be disappointed. How-
ever, the very quick arrival of the ﬁrst such work, and especially its appearance
not in eastern Islam but far to the west in Spain, should raise eyebrows. The
book in question is Determination of the Magnitudes of the Arcs on the Surface
of a Sphere127 by one Abu ÛAbd Allah Muhammad ibn MuÛadh al-Jayyani (ca.
989–after 1079), who seems to have spent most of his life in Cordoba.128 Not
much is known about him; he wrote several treatises in astronomy and astrol-
ogy, a couple of which were translated by Gerard of Cremona, and a defense of
Euclid’s conception of ratio. Most tantalizing to us is the fact that he spent sev-
eral of his younger years in Cairo, where he may have studied with Ibn al-
Haytham and learned of the new spherical trigonometry of the East.
Determination of the Magnitudes is the earliest surviving account of
spherical trigonometry independent of astronomical application. It begins
with a statement of the Transversal Figure (without proof), and follows up
with problems of the form: given the sum or difference of two arcs and the
ratio of their sines, ﬁnd the two arcs. This result turns out to be useful in
solving certain spherical triangles and leads Ibn MuÛadh to construct a table
of tangents—not shadow lengths, but explicitly deﬁned as the “division of
the sine by the cosine.”129
Many of Ibn MuÛadh’s theorems have a familiar ring: the Law of Sines,
the Rule of Four Quantities, an equivalent of Abu Nasr’s (4.43), Geber’s The-
orem, the Law of Tangents, and several corollaries. In the section where Ibn
MuÛadh goes on to solve triangles there is a hint that he may have had a pre-
decessor: the order of the triangle problems seems to have been rearranged to
correspond with the givens of each triangle, rather than an ordering according
to which theorems are called upon to solve them.130 Even the polar triangle
makes an appearance, to solve the case of three known angles.131
Chapter 4
186
127Edited and translated into Spanish in [Villuendas 1979]; see also the summary of the text in
[Samsó 1980].
128What is known of Ibn MuÛadh’s life may be found in [Sabra 1967, 84–85].
129The table, which gives the tangent for every 1° as well as a few values for arcs between 89° and
90°, is reproduced in [Villuendas 1979, 118]. [Samsó 1980, 62–64] speculates that it may de-
rive partly from the sine tables of al-Khwarizmi-Maslama.
130[Samsó 1980, 65].
131See [Khairetdinova 1985b] for the connection between Ibn MuÛadh and Nasir al-Din al-Tusi on
the polar triangle, and [Debarnot 1979] on its beginning with Abu Nasr Mansur.

This evidence suggests very strongly that Ibn MuÛadh had extensive ac-
cess to our Eastern writers Abu Nasr Mansur, Abu’l-Wafa’, and al-Biruni, al-
though there may have been an intermediary source. If the link is to be
believed—and how could it not be?—then we have the beginning of a case
that late tenth- and early eleventh-century Eastern scientiﬁc authors were
known, at least to some extent, in Muslim Spain.132
Ibn MuÛadh’s book may or may not have been the ﬁrst work of its kind;
it was followed by several similar treatises on spherical trigonometry more
or less independent of astronomy in the East in the eleventh through thir-
teenth centuries.133 A case can be made that al-Biruni’s Keys to Astronomy
falls into this category, although the astronomical connection is never very
far from al-Biruni’s mind and astronomical problems are solved within its
pages. Beyond doubt, however, the ultimate systematic treatment came with
the thirteenth-century Iranian scientist Nasir al-Din al-Tusi and his Treatise
on the Quadrilateral.134
Few would argue against the claim that al-Tusi was one of the greatest
scientists of medieval Islam.135 His accomplishments, encompassing over 150
treatises, extended beyond the exact sciences to philosophy and theology,
even poetry. Within the sciences he contributed to mineralogy, mathematics
(on the parallel postulate) and medicine, but his central focus was astronomy.
His Ilkhani Zij (named after the Mongol dynasty that ruled thirteenth- and
fourteenth-century Iraq and Iran) was one of the most inﬂuential of the astro-
nomical handbooks, and directly inspired al-Kashi’s previously-mentioned
Khaqani Zij. Among al-Tusi’s other astronomical accomplishments was a
commentary on Ptolemy’s Almagest136 and his supervision of the famous as-
tronomical observatory of Maragha. One of his greatest feats was the al-
Tadhkira f i Ûilm al-hay’a (Memoir on Astronomy).137 Among other things, this
book describes the “Tusi couple,” a pair of circles moving uniformly so as to
produce linear oscillations. This invention became the foundation of efforts to
reconstruct Ptolemaic astronomy to ﬁt more closely the requirements of Aris-
totelian physics.
On the other hand, the Treatise on the Quadrilateral is an unabashedly
mathematical book. Its topics are motivated by mathematical ideas, and it
Islam
187
132The evidence, particularly with respect to al-Biruni, is gathered together in [Samsó 1996].
133Some of these are listed in [Samsó 1980, 61].
134The Treatise on the Quadrilateral is available in Arabic and French translation in [Nasir al-
Din al-Tusi
(Caratheodory) 1891], and in Russian in [Nasir al-Din al-Tusi
(Mamedbeyli/Riznichenko/Rosenfeld) 1952]. A good account of its contents is [von Braun-
mühl 1900/1903, vol. 1, 65–71].
135On al-Tusi’s life see [Ragep, in Nasir al-Din al-Tusi (Ragep) 1993, 3–23].
136See [Saliba 1987].
137The Tadhkira is available in Arabic edition and translation in [Nasir al-Din al-Tusi (Ragep) 1993].

strives for mathematical completeness in a way that an astronomer might
ﬁnd off-putting. As its title indicates, the Treatise goes back to the Transver-
sal Figure as its foundational theorem—but it does so in a more powerful and
thorough manner than had ever been attempted before.
The ﬁrst two of the Treatise’s ﬁve books build toward a theory of plane
trigonometry. Book I deals with the theory of ratios in an “uncompromis-
ingly arithmetical” manner,138 preparing the reader to be able to manipulate
ratios easily in following chapters. Book II handles the surprisingly many
theorems that can be asserted and cases that arise with respect to the plane
version of the Transversal Figure. As we have seen before, this subject can
be as much about combinatorics as about geometry.
These topics set up Book III, where plane trigonometry arises and trian-
gles are solved. Al-Tusi begins in the usual way by solving right-angled tri-
angles when certain elements are given: for instance, given two sides, the
third may be found using the Pythagorean Theorem. Then the angles are
found in a rather old-fashioned way. For instance, to ﬁnd C in ﬁgure 4.28
circumscribe a circle, and rescale the units so that AC 120. Then the length
of AB may be converted to its corresponding arc in a chord table (such as
Ptolemy’s), and this arc is twice C. Next al-Tusi deals with arbitrary trian-
gles, often by splitting them into right triangles.
The heart of Book III comes next, where two important theorems are
demonstrated. The ﬁrst is an explicit statement of the plane version of the
Law of Sines, accompanied by two proofs and explanations on how to apply
it to solve triangles. Since the ﬁrst proof has appeared in several places139 we
give a brief account of the second, in the case where all angles are acute. In
ﬁgure 4.29 consider ABC; extend AB and AC to AD and AF respectively,
both of which are equal to 60. Drop AE perpendicularly onto BC and extend
to H; also drop perpendiculars DK and FT. Then
Combining the two ratios, we arrive at
(4.49)
Today this appearance of the Law of Sines would be more prominent, but
al-Tusi passes quickly on to his next result, which he describes as “very
AB
AC
C
B
=
∠
∠
Sin
Sin
.
AB
AE
AD
AK
R
Sin
B
AE
AC
AT
AF
Sin
C
R
=
=
∠
=
=
∠
and
.
Chapter 4
188
138[Lorch 2001b, 391].
139For instance in [von Braunmühl 1900/1903, vol. 1, 66–67] and [Berggren 1986, 138–139].

useful in the theory of the plane quadrilateral”: given  and the ratio of
Sin  to Sin , determine the two arcs  and —the very problem we have
just seen mentioned in Ibn MuÛadh’s Treatise. We also recognize (4.49) as the
sine equivalent of the two lemmas used by Ptolemy for his proof of the spher-
ical Transversal Figure;140 presumably al-Tusi includes the result here at the
end of Book III since it is still within the domain of plane trigonometry.
Now that his preparations are complete, al-Tusi commences his study of
the spherical Transversal Figure in Book IV. He begins with Ptolemy’s treat-
ment, but extends well beyond it to a thorough study and tabulation of all of the
possible cases that arise when using this theorem to solve problems. We skip
Islam
189
Figure 4.28
Finding angles from sides
in a right triangle, in 
al-Tusi’s Treatise on the
Quadrilateral
Figure 4.29
One of al-Tusi’s proofs of the
plane Law of Sines
140For instance in Lemma A, ﬁgure 2.17(a) in chapter 2, 
The chord of
, AB, is divided into the ratio Sin /Sin . Then the radius HKZ divides  into the in-
dividual arcs. Al-Tusi goes on to mention [Nasir al-Din al-Tusi (Caratheodory) 1891, 80] that
this theorem is very frequent in astronomical operations when 90°. Indeed, in the
 case this corresponds simply to ﬁnding  by means of an arc tangent.
 =
=
AZ and
ZB

.

over Book IV lightly; what is of most interest to us is the chapter’s conclusion,
where al-Tusi introduces the most substantial, and concluding, ﬁfth book:
The ancients did not fail to . . . make use of [the spherical quadrilat-
eral] with conﬁdence, as is seen in Menelaus’s book on Spherics
and in the beginning of Ptolemy’s Almagest. But the moderns, ei-
ther because they were unwilling to engage in the examination of
various ratios and their varieties or to avoid the lengths that the use
of composed ratios involves in practice, imagined and studied other
ﬁgures intended to take the place of the quadrilateral and to gain the
utility that they afford, without needing to resort to many distinc-
tions and composed ratios. Also we believed it useful, having en-
gaged in this study, to speak of the methods used by the moderns, in
order to complete with the help of God all that has been done in this
branch of the science.141
Al-Tusi does not disappoint; Book V contains a thorough re-
examination of spherical trigonometry with the triangle as its focus rather
than the quadrilateral. Thus a study of the properties of a spherical triangle
recalling Book I of Menelaus’s Spherics, as well as a discussion of angles
and their relation to arcs on the sphere, are al-Tusi’s starting points. This lat-
ter point is signiﬁcant; it had only been with Abu Nasr Mansur and his col-
leagues that angles had begun to be taken seriously on the celestial sphere.142
Al-Tusi reﬂects the views of his tenth-century predecessors by allowing an-
gles to stand on their own, but he still feels it necessary to describe quite
carefully how they are deﬁned in terms of the corresponding arcs.
Al-Tusi’s account of modern spherical trigonometry revolves around
two theorems: the Law of Sines and the Law of Tangents. With the Law of
Sines he begins as one might expect, with the right-angled case. He provides
a string of demonstrations, by such familiar names as Abu Nasr Mansur, al-
Biruni, Abu’l-Wafa’and al-Khujandi, and concludes (as one might anticipate)
with a proof of his own based on the Transversal Figure. Several important
results follow as corollaries: in a spherical triangle (such as ﬁgure 4.26) with
a right angle at C,
cos ccos a cos b (which he attributes to tenth-century scientists
al-Nayrizi and al-Khazin);
cos Acos a sin B (Geber’s Theorem); and
the less useful cos
cos
sin
sin
.
A
a
b
c
=
Chapter 4
190
141[Nasir al-Din al-Tusi (Caratheodory) 1891, 114]; translated from French.
142See for instance [Luckey 1937, 124–132], and [Luckey 1941] on Abu Nasr Mansur.

On the Law of Tangents, al-Tusi goes beyond theorem-proving, and
makes a spirited case for the use of tangents and related functions in general.
The fact that he deﬁnes them carefully, in a modern purely geometric spirit
essentially as Abu’l-Wafa’ had done, indicates that he felt some of his read-
ers would not necessarily have accepted them implicitly, or perhaps even
been familiar with them. As with the Law of Sines, the Law of Tangents is
proved several times. One of these proofs comes directly from the Transver-
sal Figure for the case where one angle is right, thereby looking somewhat
old-fashioned; it is nevertheless elegant.
In ﬁgure 4.30 let B in ABC be right, and extend arcs so that 
Then, by one of al-Tusi’s varieties of the dis-
junctive statement of the Transversal Figure, we have
(4.50)
The ﬁrst and third of the ratios in this expression simplify to tangents (di-
vided by R); in the second ratio, 
This gives the desired result
(4.51)
Again as before, al-Tusi goes on to establish several corollaries to the
Law of Tangents, this time using the new functions, including the following:
in a triangle right-angled at C,
cos A cot bcot c;
cot Acos C tan B; and
the less useful cot A sin a tan b cos c.
From here, al-Tusi addresses systematically the solution of all spherical tri-
angles using both the Law of Sines and the Law of Tangents, applying the
polar triangle to the case of three known angles as Abu Nasr had done before
him. But al-Tusi begins by defending charges made by unnamed astronomers
(perhaps al-Khujandi and Kushyar ibn Labban) that the tangent function is
not useful when the arcs exceed 45°, due to its rapid increase and the large
errors that result when interpolating within the tables.
Al-Tusi considers ﬁve cases. In the ﬁrst, he imagines that we are to use
sin atan btan c to solve for a.143 If b 45° (i.e., tan b 1) then we shall
Tan
Sin
Tan
.
BC
AB
DE
R
=
Sin AE
R
=
.
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
.
BC
CF
AB
AE
DE
DF
=
⋅
AD
AE
EF
BF
=
=
=
= 90o.
Islam
191
143Of course al-Tusi uses the medieval functions rather than the modern ones; to avoid having to
describe repeated multiplications and divisions by R we convert to modern formulas.

need to have c less than 45° (i.e., tan c1), since their product must be a sine
and hence less than 1. To avoid using the dangerous part of the tangent table
where 
45°, al-Tusi recommends replacing tan b  tan c with tan c/tan
(90°b). And indeed this conversion works. If we wish to ﬁnd, for instance,
tan 88.6°  tan 0.25°, the use of an accurate tangent tabulated for each degree
and one fractional sexagesimal place gives the result 0;12,1,48, as opposed
to the correct value 0;10,42,44. Using Tusi’s conversion we arrive at the
much better value 0;10,42,51.
It is a matter of (probably futile) debate to pinpoint a moment when
trigonometry became its own subject. The events of the late tenth century
certainly signal the beginnings of an emergence of sorts from astronomy; al-
Biruni’s Keys to Astronomy deals extensively (but not entirely) with spheri-
cal trigonometry on its own. The systematic works by Ibn MuÛadh and others
are deﬁnitively trigonometric, but in terms of their quality they cannot com-
pare to al-Tusi’s Treatise on the Quadrilateral, which has traditionally been
considered the formative work. We leave the case as it stands, and conclude
only with the remark that spherical trigonometry seems to have attracted
more attention as a lively mathematical subject than plane trigonometry ever
did. It is thus an irony that modern students of mathematics include plane
trigonometry as part of their basic tool set, but most have never have heard of
its spherical sibling.
Applications to Religious Practice: 
The Qibla and Other Ritual Needs
We have seen trigonometry mature considerably as it grew within me-
dieval Islam. The expansion to all six modern functions and the discovery
Chapter 4
192
Figure 4.30
Al-Tusi’s demonstration of the
right-angled case of the Law
of Tangents

of associated theorems, in both plane and spherical varieties, transformed
trigonometry into a powerful systematic tool for use within mathematical as-
tronomy, its parent discipline. Astrological applications were also not long in
coming; indeed, astrology would not be completely separated from astron-
omy for some centuries. However, trigonometry was to make itself useful
much further aﬁeld.
Perhaps trigonometry’s earliest new venture, still relying heavily on as-
tronomy, was its support of various aspects of Islamic ritual practice. Among
the ﬁve pillars of Islam (the religious duties of every practicing Muslim) is
the requirement to fast during daylight hours throughout the sacred month of
Ramadan. On the face of it this does not sound astronomical; however, it be-
comes so when one considers what one means by a “month.”
In the Muslim calendar, the months depend on the relative speeds of the
Sun and Moon. The Moon travels about 13 times as fast through the zodiac
as the Sun, passing it by roughly every 291/2 days (see ﬁgure 4.31). When
the Moon moves too close to the Sun it vanishes from sight for a couple of
days, eventually reappearing on the Sun’s other side as a thin crescent.
When the crescent becomes visible, a new month is said to begin. So, the
dates of the fast depend rather delicately on a variety of factors, some of
them meteorological; but what one mostly needs to know are the precise
positions of the Sun and Moon.144 We have seen the Sun’s motion modeled
trigonometrically; although the Moon is more complicated, similar meth-
ods were used to model its motion. Thus, predicting the emergence of the
lunar crescent was a mathematical question, and a difﬁcult one at that. As
early as the eighth century a number of scientists attempted to come up with
an answer, some of their efforts borrowed from Indian astronomy. They in-
cluded in their output various collections of trigonometrically deﬁned ta-
bles to help the faithful determine as accurately as possible the beginning of
Ramadan.145
Another of the pillars of Islam, the daily prayers, requires mathematics
for two reasons. The ﬁve daily times dictated for these prayers are deﬁned
according to lengths of shadows, hence by the altitude of the Sun.146 Also
crucial is the direction in which the Muslim faithful must face while praying:
toward the KaÛba in Mecca, an ediﬁce that represents the geographical center
Islam
193
144Since the ﬁrst visibility of the lunar crescent must take place just after sunrise, the relative po-
sitions of the Sun and Moon with respect to the horizon are also important.
145Studies of a number of these tables have been analyzed recently. While no full survey exists,
[King 2004, 666–668] gives an introduction to the topic, while [King 1987] gives some back-
ground and describes the relation to the earlier Indian theory.
146For a survey of prayer times see [King 2004, 529–622], and on tables for regulating them see
[King 2004, 191–456].

of the religion. This sacred direction, the qibla, has a broader signiﬁcance:
various activities such as recitation of the Qur’an, ritual slaughter of ani-
mals, and bodily functions, are to be performed either in the direction of the
qibla or perpendicular to it.147 Since the qibla generated a great deal of at-
tention among Muslim scientists, we also shall focus on it.
Now in practice, mathematics was not always used to deﬁne the direc-
tion of the qibla. Prayer walls of mosques were oriented according to vari-
ous different traditions, and often pointed only vaguely in the direction of
Mecca. But this situation did not discourage substantial scientiﬁc interest in
the question of determining the qibla precisely, and trigonometry—both
plane and spherical—was available to lend a hand.
The problem is not exclusively mathematical, since it requires knowl-
edge of the coordinates both of Mecca and of the observer’s location. In ﬁg-
ure 4.32, O is the observer with latitude O and longitude LO, and M is
Mecca with latitude M and longitude LM; the goal is to ﬁnd q, the qibla.
Perhaps the most difﬁcult part of this enterprise is to ﬁnd the difference in
longitude  LLOLM. In theory, this could be done by observing lunar
eclipses simultaneously in the two locations and noting the difference in lo-
cal times;148 but in practice, problems in accurately measuring local time and
determining the moments at which eclipse phases begin could cause errors.
Of course this procedure only has to be done once; most users simply looked
up the geographical coordinates in a table.
Some of the earliest solutions to the qibla problem were approximate.
The most common of these, reported by al-Battani, became the most popular
technique and was used as late as the nineteenth century. The identiﬁcation
of al-Battani’s name with this simple method was to leave him open to
Chapter 4
194
Figure 4.31 The lunar crescent and the new month
147For general summaries of the qibla and its connection to Islamic society see [King 1985] and
especially [King 2004, 741–771]; [King 1986] and [King 1996, 128–157] delve into the math-
ematics in greater detail. On the qibla in the Islamic West see [Rius 2000].
148[King 1996, 147].

(perhaps unfair) criticism by later astronomers who were more interested in
precise solutions.149
Text 4.7
Al-Battani, a Simple Approximation to the Qibla
(from the Sabi’ Zij)
[See ﬁgure 4.33.] If you want to know the azimuth of Mecca, which is the az-
imuth of the qibla for prayer, by this method, you extend on [the sundial] a
line from the center of the circle and that line will be the azimuth of the qibla
in that locality. . . . [P]lace one end of a ruler on the latitude difference mea-
sured from the east line in the direction of Mecca with respect to latitude [that
is, north or south] and do likewise from the west line in that direction on the
circumference of the circle until the side of the ruler falls on the same lati-
tude difference. Then draw a line with the side of the ruler to connect the
eastern mark and the western one. Then take the longitude difference and
count it on the circumference of the circle from the meridian in the direction
of Mecca with respect to longitude in the south on the circumference, and do
likewise in the north. Place the side of the ruler on the two points and use it
to draw a straight line. Where these two lines intersect represents the position
of Mecca with respect to azimuth from that locality. Place the edge of the
ruler on the center of the circle and on the point of intersection and draw a
straight line extending it on the sundial to the circumference of the circle in
the south [for localities north of Mecca]. This line is the azimuth of the qibla
in that locality.
If you want to calculate the value of the azimuth of the qibla, take the Sine
of the longitude difference between the two localities and the Sine of their
latitude difference. Multiply each of these by itself and add [the squares],
Islam
195
149Among those who took shots at al-Battani were al-Sijzi, Abu Nasr Mansur, al-Khujandi, and al-
Biruni [Berggren 1982, 50–51]. See also Ibn Yunus in [King 1972, 265–266].
Figure 4.32
The qibla q

then take the square root of the sum. The result is the hypotenuse of the tri-
angle which subtends the right angle, and this is the distance between the
center of the circle and the point of intersection of the longitude and latitude
lines on the circumference of the circle, so keep it in mind. Then go back to
the Sine of the latitude difference and multiply it by the radius [of the base
circle, i.e. 60], and divide [the product] by the hypotenuse of the triangle.
Take the arc Sine of the result and the arc will be the azimuth of Mecca. Mea-
sure it on the circumference from the east point or the west point according
to the direction of Mecca for that locality with respect to longitude and lati-
tude. Make a mark on the circumference at that point and draw a straight line
from the center of the circle to that mark: this line represents the azimuth of
Mecca from that locality.150
Explanation: This rather prolix text actually describes a simple, almost ob-
vious method. Measure the difference in latitude  along the edge of the
circle from E and W (deﬁning A and B), and draw AB. Similarly, measure L
from N and S (deﬁning C and D) and draw CD. The two new lines intersect
at M, and OM is asserted to be the direction of the qibla.
Al-Battani’s calculation works as follows. Since the radius of the circle 
is 60, FMSin L and GMSin ; thus 
The qibla is found using OGM:
OM
L
=
+
(
)
(Sin
) .
Sin

2
2

Chapter 4
196
Figure 4.33
Al-Battani’s
approximate
solution to the
qibla
150From [King 1986, 103–104].

151
(4.52)
Any approximation is a compromise between accuracy and simplicity;
this one tends to the latter. It leads to errors of up to several degrees in the re-
gions in which it was used (although it works quite well in the central lands
of Islam), but it was extremely easy to use. We might think of it as approxi-
mating the arc from the observer to Mecca as the hypotenuse of a plane right
triangle with sides Sin L and Sin .
Readers of previous chapters will recognize in al-Battani’s solution a
common situation: a simpler path was open to him by calculating q
arc Tan (GM/FM). But he did not yet have full command of a tangent func-
tion, and so he needed to convert to an arc Sine.
Perhaps not surprisingly, the earliest precise solution of the qibla problem
complete with proof comes directly from the Transversal Figure, by Bagh-
dadi mathematician and astronomer al-Nayrizi (ﬂ. ca. 900), a contemporary
of al-Battani.152 Al-Nayrizi considers the problem using the celestial sphere
(ﬁgure 4.34) rather than the Earth’s surface; then the goal becomes to deter-
mine the direction one must face to point toward ZM, the zenith of Mecca, given
the observer’s and Mecca’s latitudes O and M and the longitude difference
L. So we need to determine 
the azimuth of the qibla.153 Al-Nayrizi
applies the same sort of economy we saw earlier in al-Kuhi’s approach to
rising times: he uses only two transversal ﬁgures, but applies the theorem
twice to each conﬁguration. First he looks at ﬁgure SCWBNeqA, from which
he deduces by conjunction
(4.53)
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
.
N
S
SA
N C
CB
BW
WA
eq
eq
=
⋅
q
SQ
=
,
′ =



=
+






q
GM
OM
R
L
arc Sin
arc Sin
Sin
(Sin
)
(Sin
)
.





2
2
Islam
197
151q is the complement of the angle usually used to represent the qibla, q SOM.
152Al-Nayrizi’s treatise was translated into German in [Schoy 1922]; an edition and translation
have appeared recently in [Hogendijk 2000]. See also [Debarnot, in al-Biruni (Debarnot) 1985,
62–63].
153The azimuth of a point on the celestial sphere is the position of the point projected onto the
horizon, i.e., the direction one must turn to face the point. We saw in al-Battani’s case that the
qibla was measured with respect to the East point; more typically it was measured, as here,
from the South point. Other points on this diagram are Neq, the north pole of the celestial equa-
tor; and N, E, S, and W, the cardinal points on the horizon. A, B, C and Q are intersections of the
various great circle arcs.

This simpliﬁes to 
(in modern terms), so 
is
known.154 Using the same ﬁgure but applying disjunction, we have
(4.54)
which corresponds to 
so 
is known.
Al-Nayrizi turns next to SCQZMNeqZO. Applying conjunction gives
(4.55)
or 
giving 
the 
distance
between the two zeniths 
Finally, applying conjunction again but 
assigning the arcs in the reverse order gets us the qibla, 
:
(4.56)
or sin
sin
cos
(sin
cos
).
q
CS
Z Z
BC
M
O
M
=
⋅

Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
QS
CS
QZ
Z Z
N
Z
CN
O
O
M
eq
M
eq
=
⋅
q
SQ
=
Z Z
O
M.
sin
cos
cos
sin(
),


O
O
M
M
BC
Z Z
BC
=
⋅
+
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
SN
Z S
N C
CZ
QZ
QZ
eq
O
eq
M
M
O
=
⋅
CS
cos
sin
/cos
,
O
BC
CS
=
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
N
A
AS
N
B
BC
CW
WS
eq
eq
=
⋅
BC
O
BC
L
=
⋅
cot
cos
Chapter 4
198
154Since al-Nayrizi does not have a tangent function he must convert to a sine before ﬁnding 
, as
we have seen before.
BC
Figure 4.34
Al-Nayrizi’s qibla
solution, and the
method of the zijes

Al-Nayrizi’s method is closely related to the most popular precise solu-
tion to the qibla problem, the “method of the zijes”—so named by al-Biruni
because a number of zij authors describe it in their works. This latter method
may be derived from Habash al-Hasib’s analemma for the qibla, which we
saw earlier in this chapter. Some of the many authors who employed this
technique are familiar names like Ibn Yunus, Abu’l-Wafa’, Kushyar ibn Lab-
ban, al-Biruni, Ibn al-Haytham, Ibn MuÛadh, Ibn Ishaq, al-Marrakushi,
Jamshid al-Kashi, and Ulugh Beg.155 We shall follow the method as outlined
in al-Biruni’s Tahdid al-Amakin, where he uses the Rule of Four Quantities to
full effect.
The best way to understand the method of the zijes is to consider it as a
pair of coordinate transformations. We begin by transforming the coordinates
of the zenith of Mecca, from those with respect to the equator (latitude M
and longitude difference L) to a new set with respect to the observer’s
meridian SNeqN. Thus, in ﬁgure 4.34 we must introduce a new great circle
through W and ZM, projecting ZM perpendicularly onto the meridian at K. The
new coordinates are the “modiﬁed longitude difference”
and the
“modiﬁed latitude” 
Once we have L and 
, they may be trans-
ferred to a third set of coordinates measured with respect to the local horizon,
and the altitude of the zenith of Mecca 
Of course, q is
the quantity we want.
Our ﬁrst coordinate transformation begins with an application of the
Rule of Four Quantities to ﬁgure NeqZMBAK. This gives
(4.57)
which simpliﬁes to sin Lsin L cos M. Next, on ﬁgure WZMKAB we
have
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
,
N
Z
Z
K
N
B
AB
eq
M
M
eq
=
h
QZ
M
M
=
.
q
SQ
=
′
M
′
=
M
AK.
 ′ =
L
Z
K
M
,
Islam
199
155The literature of the method of the zijes is substantial. A general description and a text contain-
ing perhaps its earliest appearance (although without proof) may be found in [King 1986,
112–117]. On al-Biruni, al-Kashi and Ulugh Beg see [Berggren 1980]. Al-Biruni’s method as
described in his geographical treatise the Tahdid al-Amakin, along with the accompanying
analemma, is in English translation in [al-Biruni (Ali) 1967, 252–255] with commentary in
[Kennedy 1973, 209–214]. See also [Berggren 1985], a follow-up to [Berggren 1980] in which
the origin of the method is traced back to the theory of sundials in Ptolemy’s Analemma (on this
work see [Luckey 1927]). [Berggren 1985, 5–10] also discusses Ibn Yunus, Abu’l-Wafa’, and
Kushyar ibn Labban on the subject. Also on Ibn Yunus see [King 1972, 256–265]. On al-Biruni
in the Keys to Astronomy see [al-Biruni (Debarnot) 1985, 50–51, 260–264]. On Ibn MuÛadh and
Ibn Ishaq see [Samsó/Mielgo 1994]. On Ibn al-Haytham see [King 1986, 116], [Dallal 1995],
and another treatment of the qibla in [Schoy 1921].

(4.58)
or 
. The ﬁrst transformation is now complete.
The second coordinate conversion begins with the deﬁnition of an inter-
mediate quantity, the “modiﬁed latitude difference” 
The altitude of the zenith of Mecca hM may now be found by applying the
Rule of Four Quantities to ﬁgure WZMKSQ:156
(4.59)
or sin hM cos L cos .157 Finally the qibla itself emerges from ﬁgure
ZOZMQSK:
(4.60)
or sin qsin L/ cos hM.
Al-Nayrizi also pursues a pair of transformations; however, his ﬁrst step 
determines 
and 
, before he turns to hM and q. This procedure is actu-
ally slightly simpler than the method of the zijes since it does not require great 
circle 
but unfortunately it produces numerical instabilities in the
calculations, and al-Nayrizi ended up with a severely ﬂawed value for the qi-
bla of Baghdad.158
To the modern reader the relation of these computations to Habash’s
analemma for the qibla discussed earlier in this chapter must seem somewhat
elusive, so it is worth an explanation here. The modiﬁed longitude difference
in ﬁgure 4.34 corresponds to 
in ﬁgure 4.20, which displays
the derivation of the analemma. Thus, on the plane of that great circle, it
NK
 ′ =
L
Z
K
M
WZ
K
M
,
CS
BC
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
Z Z
Z
K
Z Q
QS
O
M
M
O
=
,
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
WZ
Z Q
WK
KS
M
M
=
,
 ′ =
=
−
′



KZO
O
M.
sin
sin
/cos
′
=
′


M
M
L

Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
,
WZ
Z
B
WK
KA
M
M
=
Chapter 4
200
156[Kennedy 1973, 213] appeals to the Transversal Figure here.
157sin hm can be seen alternately as an expression for the cosine of the distance between the two 
zeniths 
158This occurs in the calculation of 
[Hogendijk 2000, 50, 53]; see also pp. 54–55 on the com-
parison with the method of the zijes. Al-Nayrizi’s qibla of Baghdad is 29;7°, as opposed to the
correct value 13;29°.
CS
Z Z
Z Q
O
M
M
=
−
90o
.

follows immediately that NOSUsin L and EOcos L. Now L
can be determined by observing that sin LSU/ESsin L/cosM. The 
modiﬁed latitude 
in ﬁgure 4.34, is ZEO in ﬁgure 4.20, so
The modiﬁed latitude difference, then,
is  OELO-M .
Turning to the second coordinate conversion, in ﬁgure 4.20 EL is equal
to the vertical height of N (the zenith of Mecca) above the horizon, so it is
the sine of the altitude of Mecca, hM. So ELsin hMEO· (EL/EO)cos
L·cos . Finally, for the qibla itself we need q OLN. We have
sin qON/LNSU/LN sin L/cos hM. Obviously OLN is not properly
represented on the analemma itself (ﬁgure 4.21), so it is transferred to the
middle of the diagram.
Both the approximate and the exact solutions of the qibla formed the ba-
sis for tables from as early as the ninth century, varying dramatically in size
and sophistication. Since q is a function of both the difference in longitude L
and in latitude , the tables had to be constructed with two arguments. And
since q is sensitive to changes in both arguments, existing streamlining proce-
dures such as Ptolemaic interpolation would not have been effective. As a re-
sult qibla tables required a full rectangular grid of entries, and some of them
were truly massive. The best of the known tables (based on an exact formula)
was composed by Shams al-Din al-Khalili, an astronomical timekeeper in late
fourteenth-century Damascus; it contains over 2,800 entries, extracted in ﬁg-
ure 4.35.159 In addition to these computational solutions various instruments
were designed to determine the qibla, most remarkable among them two
brass world-maps that have been the subject of a recent study.160
Astronomical Timekeeping: Approximating the Time of Day
Using the Height of the Sun
Just as important as knowing the direction of the qibla was determining the
time of day. It would seem obvious that we should be able to ﬁnd the time from
the altitude of the Sun in the sky, but it turns out that this apparently simple
problem requires a certain amount of astronomical information and insight. In
fact, the problem led to the entire discipline (until recently understudied) of as-
tronomical timekeeping. If we can solve the problem, this would give the ﬁve
sin
/
sin
/cos
.
′
=
=
′


M
M
UO EO
L

′
M KA
,
Islam
201
159The complete table has been published in [King 1975]. Surveys of qibla tables may be found in
[King 1986, 133–141], [King 1999, 64–70], and [King/Samsó 2001, 90–91]. On speciﬁc tables
based on approximate formulas see also [King 1975, 120–122], [Lorch 1980], and [King 1986,
118–126]; on a speciﬁc table based on an exact formula see [Hogendijk 1994].
160[King 1999].

daily prayer times, since they are deﬁned by shadow lengths. Although ( just as
with the qibla) religious practice did not often follow the astronomers’ re-
sponses to this ritual requirement, the scientiﬁc community continued to show
interest and develop new approaches to problems of timekeeping.
And indeed, there was some cultural and ﬁnancial support for these prac-
tices. Timekeeping, originally the domain of the muezzins who mostly prac-
ticed indigenous folk astronomy, found a new group of practitioners in the
thirteenth century: the muwaqqits (who included al-Khalili among their num-
ber), who were supported by mosques. Others not associated with religious
institutions practiced their craft under the title miqati.161 The ﬁrst mention of
muwaqqits was in Cairo; interest soon spread to Yemen and Syria, and later to
Tunis and Ottoman Turkey. Clearly the niche of interest in the science of the
subject was enough to keep at least some of its specialists in business.162
A couple of quantities must be observed before the problem can be
solved, but fortunately they are within the reach of almost anyone, virtually
regardless of astronomical knowledge. These are the maximum altitude of the 
Sun over the course of the day (
in ﬁgure 4.36) and the semi-diurnal 
H
DF
=
Chapter 4
202
161See the description of the muwaqqits and miqati in [King 1990].
162For a survey of the history of astronomical timekeeping see [King 1990]. Readers with a more
voracious appetite for the subject will ﬁnd it satisﬁed by the two comprehensive volumes [King
2004] and [King 2005].
L \ o
10°
11°
30°
56°
7°
127°
70;50
71;26
[1]
84;0
77;22
[1]
8°
126°
70;49
[1]
71;26
[2]
84;26
76;26
9°
125°
70;47
[1]
71;25
[2]
84;53
[1]
75;30
[1]










30°
104°
67;31
[1]
68;43
[1]
84;29
53;44
[1]










50°
84°
52;46
[2]
55;1
[3]
64;54
[1]
27;4
[1]









64°
70°
13;41
[2]
14;57
[1]
18;17
[1]
4;55
65°
69°
9;15
10;5
[1]
12;26
[1]
3;16
[1]
66°
68°
4;42
[3]
5;8
[3]
6;20
[4]
1;38
[1]
Figure 4.35 An extract from al-Khalili’s qibla table. For ease of use longitudes and
latitudes have been given directly, rather than as differences from Mecca’s longitude and
latitude. Italicized entries (given in red in the original table) indicate that the qibla direction
is southerly rather than northerly.

arc (the Sun’s journey from sunrise to noon 
Along with the Sun’s
declination  determined from the time of year and the local terrestrial lati-
tude , we have enough data to turn to the mathematics.
We ﬁrst need a preliminary result. In ACD we know that ADC,
CDsin H, and AD vers D cos .163 So cos CD/ADsin H/(vers D
cos), which we rearrange to
.
(4.61)
This ratio will be useful to us in a moment, but it also turns out to play a role
in a number of other timekeeping applications.
We are ready to proceed with the original problem. Recall that 
is the hour-angle, or time until noon. So, if the day-circle had a radius equal
to 1, then AS would be equal to AD SD(vers Dvers t). But since the
radius of the day-circle is cos, AS (vers Dvers t)· cos . Therefore ST,
which equals sin h (where h is the Sun’s altitude), is also equal to
.
Setting the two expressions for ST equal to each other and solving for vers t,
we apply (4.61) and arrive at an expression for t in terms of our givens h, D,
and H:
(4.62)
This equation makes t a function of the three variables D, h, and H—es-
sentially impossible to tabulate for all but the most obsessed. Fortunately,
obsessed scientists are not very hard to ﬁnd. In this case the challenge was
met by one thirteenth-century Cairo astronomer, Najm al-Din al-Misri; his
triple-argument table included over 400,000 entries.164 In Najm al-Din’s de-
fense we should note that he found ways to use t(D,h,H) to solve a startling
variety of spherical astronomical problems.165
vers
vers
sin
cos cos
vers
sin
vers
sin
.
t
D
H
D
h
D
H
=
−
=
−
⋅


AS ST
AS
D
t
⋅
=
−
⋅
⋅
((vers
vers ) cos ) cos


t
D
= √
vers D
sin
cos cos
H
=
1


D
JD
=
).
Islam
203
163Assuming that circle 
has radius 1 or R, the versed sine of 
is deﬁned to be the distance from
D to the perpendicular projection JA of J onto diameter DA. JA is of course the sine of the arc.
164On this table see [Charette 1998]. Najm al-Din was not satisﬁed even with this table and had de-
signs to build an even larger one that would avoid requiring the user to interpolate between en-
tries. He calculated that the prospective table would hold 2.65 billion entries, ﬁlling over 5,300
books. The fact that it has not been found is a good indication that he never composed it; it
would have been rather easy to ﬁnd.
165See [Charette 1998, 31–41].
JD
JD

But more commonly, the formidable computational challenge posed by
(4.62) was bypassed by tabulating t (or TDt) for a particular latitude ,
which dropped D from the list of arguments. A number of other varieties ex-
ist: sometimes the argument H was replaced by the Sun’s longitude ; there
are also a number of tables that rearrange (4.62) to give the Sun’s altitude h
as a function of t. These sorts of tables, foundational as they are, may be
found everywhere that timekeeping was studied and applied—as early as the
thirteenth century, and as late as the nineteenth.166
The problem with powerful tables (or indeed powerful tools in general)
is that they can be difﬁcult to build and difﬁcult to use. It is thus not surpris-
ing that many Muslim astronomers adopted two simpler Indian approximate
procedures for ﬁnding the time of day. The ﬁrst, an arithmetic scheme, need
not concern us.167 The second, which had been used in certain Greek sundi-
als (although the Muslims learned about it from Indian sources), is trigono-
metric. One way to think of it is as follows. At the equinox, the semi-diurnal
arc D is equal to exactly six hours or 90°. If we substitute this value into
(4.62) (and convert to TDt), we get the much simpler formula
Chapter 4
204
Figure 4.36
Diagram for solving
problems of
astronomical
timekeeping
166[King 2004, 43–74] is a summary of over 30 sets of tables of this type. One is attributed to the
early giant of astronomical timekeeping Ibn Yunus (see [King 1973b]), but the form we ﬁnd in
the manuscripts likely is due to someone else.
167See [King 2004, 557–558] on the scheme itself, and following pages for its implementation in
legal texts.

(4.63)
where the 
arises simply by the switch from angular to time measure-
ment. 168
But (4.63) works only at the equinox; what does one do at other times of
year? Suppose it is summertime and the day circle is above the equator, as in
ﬁgure 4.36. Then there will be more than six hours between sunrise and noon
(i.e., 
), and (4.63) will be incorrect. But we might have reason to
hope that the approximation does a reasonable job even when the Sun is not
at the equinox. If we measure times T and t in seasonal day hours—that is,
divide the longer summer day into twelve equal periods—then the time from
sunrise to noon will be six hours by deﬁnition, and (4.63) just might give a
decent approximation to the time of day without having to deal with the fact
that the semi-diurnal arc D varies. And this hope turns out to be justiﬁed: in
the lower terrestrial latitudes the error in the approximation is on the order of
only a few minutes of time, and even at the northern limits of civilization the
formula is never wrong by more than about twenty minutes.169
The approximate formula is found in the literature much earlier than the
exact one, in fact almost as early as Arabic science itself. It ﬁrst appears in
the eighth century, including in the works of YaÛqub ibn Tariq, famous for his
introduction of Indian astronomy to Islam.170 The approximate formula is
also found in the works of such luminaries as Habash al-Hasib and the An-
dalusian astronomer al-Zarqallu; it is partly from the latter’s Toledan Tables
that the formula also gained some currency in Europe. Tables for timekeep-
ing of this type, designed either for speciﬁc latitudes or for all, were com-
posed as early as the ninth century and as late as the sixteenth.171
New Functions from Old: Auxiliary Tables
By now the reader may have formed the impression that the methods used
to deal with problems in spherical astronomy often relied on similar notions
JD  90o
1
15
T
h
H
=




1
15
arcsin sin
sin
,
Islam
205
168The Rule of Four Quantities also lurks in this. In ﬁgure 4.36, if we are at the equinox then 
 90°, and the approximation rule follows by considering the ﬁgure J√DF.
169See the error analyses in [Puig 1986, 67–72] and [King 2005, 131–132]. [King 2005, 111–197]
is the fundamental study of this approximate formula, and much of this section and some of the
following one is based on it.
170See [Pingree 1968] for a survey of YaÛqub ibn Tariq’s works and his relation to the Indian
sources.
171[King 2005, 133–147].
JD

and techniques. Of course trigonometric tools such as the Transversal Fig-
ure and the Rule of Four Quantities were used repeatedly, but also the ideas
behind the constructions—projections, transformations of coordinates, and
so on—appeared in different guises in different situations. Inevitably, solu-
tions that come from the same collection of tools often share properties. In
Islamic astronomy these similarities were recognized quite early, and a
number of scientists were led naturally to the idea of tabulating auxiliary
functions.
An auxiliary function has no astronomical import of its own, but appears
frequently as a trigonometric unit within solutions to a variety of astro-
nomical problems. We have already seen a few examples, including in
Habash al-Hasib’s ninth-century Jadwal al-Taqwim, which contains an
early appearance of the tangent. Al-Nayrizi also tabulated a set of fourteen
auxiliary functions, which included among their number the tangent and
cosecant.172 Another example mentioned earlier in these pages is Abu Nasr
Mansur’s “Table of Minutes,” particularly noteworthy for its introduction of
R1 for the trigonometric base circle.
Both Habash’s and Abu Nasr’s auxiliary functions had only a single argu-
ment, so their tables were relatively small. However, much more substantial
double- and even triple-argument tables were on the way. The 400,000-entry
behemoth by Najm al-Din al-Misri which we discussed in the previous sec-
tion was by far the largest of these tables. Najm al-Din went far beyond
Habash’s goal of converting celestial coordinates: his table was designed to
solve, on its own, all major problems of spherical astronomy.
Perhaps the best-executed of all sets of auxiliary tables are those by
Shams al-Din al-Khalili, who computed the qibla tables we saw in ﬁgure
4.35.173 His three tables, all of double-argument functions, comprise a mere
13,000 entries, and are remarkably accurate given the computational task in-
volved; they were to be used extensively for centuries. Like al-Misri, al-Khalili
set himself the task of building tables to solve all problems of spherical as-
tronomy. The functions he chose are
(4.64)
(4.65)
and
g
R
( , )
Sin
Tan
,
 


=
⋅
f
R
( , )
Sin
Cos
,
 


=
Chapter 4
206
172See [Schoy 1923, 392] and [King 2004, 164–165].
173On al-Khalili’s auxiliary tables see [King 1973a] and [King 2004, 378–401].

(4.66)
They are tabulated for every degree of argument, and the values retain rea-
sonable accuracy even in certain places in the table for G where the function
becomes numerically unstable.174
Al-Khalili’s motive for choosing these three functions in particular
might come from his work on the qibla. One correct formula is
(4.67)
where O and M are the latitudes of the observer and Mecca respectively, L
is the observer’s longitude, and h(O, L) is the altitude of Mecca’s zenith
above the horizon. At ﬁrst glance it seems obvious that al-Khalili’s auxiliary
functions are simply taken from portions of this formula, since
q(O,L)G(g(O,h)f(O,M),h).175
(4.68)
However al-Khalili lists a series of astronomical problems that may be
solved with the same auxiliary functions, some of them put together just as
naturally; consider the following example.
Text 4.8
Al-Khalili, Using Auxiliary Tables to Find the Hour-angle
Section on the hour-angle. Find the value of the ﬁrst function [ f] on the page
corresponding to the terrestrial latitude with the altitude as [vertical] argu-
ment and the value of the second function [g] as before in the section on the
half arc. If the declination is southerly add the two values, otherwise take the
difference. The result is the auxiliary sine. Enter it in the table of the third
q
L
R
h
L
R
R
h
L
O
O
O
M
O
O
(
)
arcCos
Sin (
, ) Tan
Sin
Cos
Cos (
, )
,
,






=
⋅
−
⋅






















G x y
R x
y
( , )
arc Cos
Cos
.
=
⋅




Islam
207
174It has been found that al-Khalili generated the table for f from the values in the table for g using
the relation f(,90°n)Cos ng(,n), anticipating the later technique of prosthaphaere-
sis (see chapter 5) by replacing the time-consuming task of multiplication with a much easier
addition. See [Van Brummelen 1991], [Van Brummelen/Butler 1997, 46–48], and a later conﬁr-
mation in [King 2004, 380].
175Oddly enough it does not appear that al-Khalili’s qibla table was computed from his auxiliary
tables; perhaps his qibla table was computed ﬁrst. See [Van Brummelen 1991, 688–689] and
[King 2004, 390].

function [G] with the solar or stellar declination as [vertical] argument, and
you will ﬁnd the hour-angle. If the declination is northerly and the ﬁrst func-
tion is less than the second, subtract the result from 180° and the remainder
will be the hour-angle. If the two functions are equal then the hour-angle will
be 90°.176
Explanation: We shall take advantage of the modern conveniences of nega-
tive numbers and unit-circle trigonometric functions for the following deri-
vation.
Figure 4.36 portrays late morning on a summer day. The Sun, participat-
ing in the daily rotation of the celestial sphere, is approaching its highest
point D, which it will reach at local noon. The path traced by the Sun is
called the day-circle (with center G), and the time remaining until noon is 
represented by the hour-angle
Our goal is to ﬁnd t given the Sun’s
altitude h, its declination , and the local latitude .
From  we may quickly determine GDcos . Drop a perpendicular
from the Sun to GD, deﬁning S; then GSGDcos tcos   cos t. Therefore,
since in SVG S, we have SVGScoscos   cos t  cos . But SV
is also equal to ST GHsin hOG  sin sin hsin   sin . So
cos  cos t cos  sin h sin  sin ,
and solving for t, we arrive at the formula
(4.69)
And again the formula decomposes nicely into the language of al-Khalili’s
auxiliary functions, almost as if they were designed for this use:
tG( f(,h)g(,),).
(4.70)
The best auxiliary functions are those that combine simplicity with the
capacity to solve many important problems. By this standard al-Khalili’s
functions are ﬁrst-rate; they were not surpassed until the modern period.
t
h
h
=
−



=
−












arccos sin
sin sin
cos cos
arccos
sin
cos
sin tan
cos
.








t
D
= √.
Chapter 4
208
176From [King 2004, 381].

Trigonometric and Astronomical Instruments
Until now we have considered the application of trigonometry to astronomi-
cal problems to be the domain of pencil-and-paper; that is, the solution is de-
rived using geometric diagrams, with the aid of trigonometric values usually
obtained from numerical tables. However, in medieval Islam there arose a
healthy tradition of an entirely different sort: the construction of physical,
hand-held instruments made of brass and other metals, etched with curves
and attached to rulers in various ways. These devices, many of which were
ingenious in their mathematical design, allowed the user to solve the under-
lying trigonometric problem simply by adjusting the instrument appropri-
ately, and reading off the answer (usually) as a length measured on a scale.
These instruments177 may not ﬁt what we usually mean by trigonometric
computation. However, they usually handled the problems they were de-
signed to solve with as much accuracy as users required of them, and gener-
ally with considerably more facility and reliability than solutions by means
of tables. Thus they are entitled to an honored place in the history of
trigonometry.178
Among the most common of such instruments, the horary quadrant was
designed to solve precisely the problem we have been studying: determining
the time of day by the altitude of the Sun.179 Some horary quadrants are
called “universal” since they work well for all the terrestrial latitudes for
which they were used (in the Islamic world at least, if not in Europe) and for
any time of year. Sometimes found on the back of an astrolabe, this type of
quadrant was the next most popular astronomical instrument of the medieval
period. It went through a number of revisions starting as early as the ninth
century; one variety found its way to Europe under the name quadrans
vetus.180
The most popular type of universal horary quadrant, in its simplest man-
ifestation, works as follows. The circular edge of the quadrant (ﬁgure 4.37(a))
Islam
209
177See [King 2005], where they are wryly dubbed “instruments of mass calculation.”
178A number of astronomical instruments, especially astrolabes, sundials, and apparatuses de-
signed to predict planetary positions, employed physical geometrical embodiments of the as-
tronomical situation to generate their results. Since they do not employ trigonometry directly,
we pass over them here—although this is admittedly a ﬁne distinction.
179The most comprehensive modern study of the universal horary quadrant is [King 2005,
199–258]. [Charette 2003], which contains an edition and translation of a fourteenth-century
treatise dealing with a number of mathematical instruments, discusses the universal horary
quadrant on pp. 211–215. See also [King 1995] for a concise history of quadrants in general,
[King 2005, 71–80] for descriptions and photographs of the various types of quadrants, and the
outdated but still useful [Schmalzl 1929], also on the history of various types of quadrants.
180See [Lorch 1981, 118–119]. The literature on the quadrans vetus in Latin is considerable; but
[King 2002] traces three varieties of it back to a ninth- or tenth-century treatise from Baghdad.

210
Figure 4.37 The universal horary quadrant. In (a) above the Sun is sighted at noon, and 
a bead N on the plumb line is ﬁxed to lie on semicircle 
. In (b) below, the Sun is 
sighted at some other time of day, and the bead moves to X. Since in our conﬁguration 
X lies on the circular arc corresponding to T2 hours, it is two hours after sunrise 
or before sunset.
ONG

Islam
211
is divided in six equal parts corresponding to six seasonal day hours, and cir-
cular arcs are drawn from O through B, C, D, E, F, and G so that their diam-
eters lie on OG (or its extension). The Sun is sighted along OG at noon, and
a bead is ﬁxed at N on the plumb line along the semicircle corresponding to
noon (T6 seasonal day hours);181 thus AON H, the Sun’s altitude at
noon. At any other time (ﬁgure 4.37(b)) the user sights the Sun and notes the
position of the bead X with respect to the arcs on the plate. In our ﬁgure X
happens to lie on the arc for T2 hours, so it is 2 seasonal day hours after
sunrise or before sunset.
Why does this method work? It relies heavily on the fact that a triangle
inscribed in a semicircle is right-angled. In OGN, GH, and so (assum-
ing the quadrant has radius 1) ON sin H. In the circle corresponding to the
current hour (OXCJ in ﬁgure 4.37(b)) we have two inscribed triangles. In
OXJ J is equal to h, the Sun’s current altitude,182 so OX(ON)OJ
sin h; whereas in OCJ J is equal to T, the time of day measured in hours,
so OC(1)OJ sin T. Hence ON sin h/sin T. So, setting the two expres-
sions for ON equal to each other, we arrive at
sin h  sin H sin T,
(4.71)
the same approximate timekeeping formula that we saw in the previous sec-
tion with (4.63)!183
So, although the universal horary quadrant was designed speciﬁcally to
ﬁnd the time of day, it may be seen more generally as an analog computer to
solve equations of the form (4.71)—a handy alternative to using the auxil-
iary tables for this equation which were common in both medieval Islam and
the European Renaissance.
As old as the study of Islamic science is, it is still changing all the time.
One example of this is an instrument discovered by David King while this
chapter was being written. Constructed by the famous astrolabist Nastulus
(ﬂ. ca. 900), this device is a unique solution to the timekeeping formula
(4.71)—using polar coordinates! In ﬁgure 4.38, the user moves the ruler to
the Sun’s longitude  measured around the outside of the instrument, known
from the time of year. The Sun’s altitude is then found on the ruler, i.e., the
distance from the center.184 The time of day is determined using the six
181If the user does not wish to wait until noon to ﬁnd the time and happens to know  and , he can
simulate noon by positioning the plumb line so that AOX90° , which is equal to H,
the Sun’s altitude at noon.
182This is true because hAOX and OJX are both complements of JOX. A similar argument
applies to establish that OJCT.
183The factor of 15 in (4.63) arises because we are measuring in hours rather than degrees.
184To be completely accurate, the distance is measured from the edge of the center disk that holds
the ruler in place.

oval-shaped curves, which in the morning represent hours since sunrise
working from the center outward, and in the afternoon hours before sunset
working inward.
Although Nastulus’s instrument determines T from h and H (the latter is
found from  and the local latitude—Baghdad’s, in Nastulus’s case), it is
constructed differently. For a ﬁxed value of T, and a set of values of  (mea-
sured radially), Nastulus would have computed or looked up in a table a set
of values of h (measured from the center), which he then plotted on the in-
strument. Somehow, he joined these points in a smooth curve. So, in effect
Nastulus was plotting contour curves of a double-argument function in polar
coordinates!
Chapter 4
212
Figure 4.38 A computer-generated replica of a recently 
discovered instrument for timekeeping by Nastulus

Another instrument related to the horary quadrants but with a more ex-
plicitly mathematical purpose, the sine quadrant also developed in the ninth
and tenth centuries. Both devices, in fact, may be found in the literature as
early as treatises probably by al-Khwarizmi.185 While the initial motivation
for these devices was to ﬁnd the time of day from the altitude of the Sun,
they soon became universal in another sense. If the user was clever enough,
they could be manipulated to solve virtually any problem in spherical
astronomy—including most of the spherical topics discussed in this book,
even the difﬁcult problem of the qibla.186
Perhaps the most startling impression that the sine quadrant leaves on
the modern reader is the appearance of a Cartesian coordinate grid (see for
instance ﬁgure 4.39), which we are accustomed to thinking of as a more re-
cent European invention. These coordinates make it easy to look up the sine
or cosine of any arc: simply set the thread (or ruler) to the appropriate angle
on the curved edge of the quadrant, and follow the horizontal and vertical
lines to the scales on the other two edges. But the sine quadrant is much
more versatile than that.
Text 4.9
Al-Sijzi (?), On an Application of the Sine Quadrant
To determine the ascensions of the signs at sphaera recta.187
[See ﬁgure 4.40.] When AD is the declination of the beginning of Taurus,
and we draw DE parallel to AB, and AZ is the maximum declination,188 and
we draw BZ, and we draw from its intersection [with] DE, which is point T,
line TH parallel to BG and draw BD cutting TH at K, and when BD is divided
into 90, [then] BK is the ascension of the beginning of Taurus.
Explanation: The goal is to determine the right ascension , given the decli-
nation  and the “maximum declination” (the obliquity of the ecliptic) .
Since
BK
BD
KH
TH
(
)
,
=
=
1
Islam
213
185On the sine quadrant see [Schmalzl 1929, 83–99], [Lorch 2000], and [King 2005, 71–74]. On
the contribution of al-Khwarizmi see [King 1983, 28–30], [Charette/Schmidl 2004, 179–181],
and [King 2005, 162–164].
186[King 1975, 109–120] describes several methods of ﬁnding the qibla using a sine quadrant.
187From [Lorch 2000, 259].
188We have removed the phrase “the complement of” before “the maximum declination” to render
the argument correct. See [Lorch 2000, 264].

189
(4.72)
If we grant the author the liberty of interpreting BK as sin  rather
than just  (and this sort of thing was rather common), we arrive at
BK
KH
HB
HB
TH
=
⋅
=
⋅
tan
cot .


Chapter 4
214
Figure 4.39
A sine quadrant constructed
by Muhammad al-Sakasi
al-Jarqasi in Damascus
around AD 1800 (from the
archive of the Institut für
Gechichte der
Naturwissenschaften,
Frankfurt, courtesy of Prof.
David A. King)
Figure 4.40
Using a sine quadrant to ﬁnd
the right ascension
189Of course the author would have expressed, for instance, tan  as Sin /Cos .

sin   tan cot , the same formula we found in Ptolemy’s Almagest in
chapter 2.
There is nothing particularly special about the astronomical context of
this procedure; it is simply a means of composing ratios in order to multiply
two trigonometric quantities. Similar processes are used by our author to
solve other problems involving trigonometric products, which we have seen
time and again in spherical astronomy. With the right construction on the
quadrant’s face, virtually any problem could be solved in this way.
Trigonometry in Geography
One of the most critical innovations in trigonometry in the Islamic world
was the opening up of its applications well beyond astronomy. Although
there are earlier isolated instances of such uses, it is in Islam that we really
see trigonometry applied systematically in another scientiﬁc ﬁeld, namely,
mathematical geography.190 It is no surprise that this discipline is where
trigonometry ﬁrst branches out, since the techniques used in spherical as-
tronomy are transferred easily from the celestial sphere to the Earth’s sur-
face. Thus trigonometry was still being practiced on a grand scale, if not an
astronomical one.
Mathematical geography divides roughly into two parts. Cartography,
the production of maps from projections of the spherical surface of the Earth
onto a ﬂat surface, continued its development from Hellenistic times. As we
saw from Ptolemy’s Geography in Text 2.5, trigonometry needs to be em-
ployed occasionally to locate key points on the maps.191 However, in geo-
desy, the study of the dimensions of the Earth, trigonometry—especially the
spherical variety—becomes indispensable.
And on geodesy, one treatise stands out above all: the Tahdid Nihayat
al-Amakin li-Tashih Masafat al-Masakin (“Determination of Coordinates of
Positions for the Correction of Distances Between Cities”) by al-Biruni.192
This work sets out to determine the relative positions of Ghazna, Baghdad
and Mecca on the Earth’s surface: in other words, its task (in part) is to ﬁnd
the qibla at Ghazna. In fact, our earlier account of the method of the zijes is
taken from this work. But al-Biruni goes beyond the qibla into a variety of
Islam
215
190See the surveys of Islamic mathematical geography in [Schoy 1924] and [Kennedy 1996], the
latter mostly superceding the former.
191See [Berggren 1982] for an edition and translation of a treatise by al-Biruni, containing no less
than eight map projections. Trigonometric methods are used on pp. 58–59.
192The Tahdid is available in an Arabic edition in [al-Biruni (Bulgakov) 1962] and an English
translation in [al-Biruni (Ali) 1967]; [Kennedy 1973] is an extensive scientiﬁc commentary.

related topics, and he ends up with a treatise covering most of the topics in
geodesy: the determination of terrestrial latitudes and longitudes, the size of
the Earth,193 and great circle distances between cities, to name a few.
The problem of the distance between cities is one instance where the
fundamental role played by the qibla in mathematical geography becomes
clear. In ﬁgure 4.41 the two cities are A with coordinates 
and LA,
and B with coordinates 
and LB; then 
The 
goal is to ﬁnd 
One way to proceed is simply to follow the method of the zijes; although
we are now operating on the surface of the Earth rather than the celestial
sphere, the situation is analogous. Only a few years earlier, Abu’l-Wafa’ had
used this method to ﬁnd the distance from Baghdad to Mecca.194 In fact
Abu’l-Wafa’ had given two methods, the second applying his new tangent
function.195 But al-Biruni chose an entirely different course, bringing back a
theorem we have not seen in some time.196
Firstly, notice that AZW, DBX, and HTY (where W, X, and Y are
points on the axis through E) are similar isosceles triangles. Thus
(4.73)
so AZCos A Crd L/R and BD Cos B Crd L/R. But AZBD is a cyclic
quadrilateral (since AD  BZ and AZ BD), so Ptolemy’s Theorem applies
to it:
ABZD  AZBD  ADBZ,
or
(4.74)
This gives AB in terms of the radius of the earth, which al-Biruni had already
determined earlier.
AB
L
R
L
R
A
B
2
2
= 


⋅


+(
)
Cos
Crd
Cos
Crd
Crd
.






AW
AZ
DX
BD
HY
HT
AZ
BD
R
Crd
L
A
B
=
=
=
=
, or Cos
Cos
;



AB.
L
L
L
HT
A
B
=
−
=
.
B
BT
=
A
AH
=
Chapter 4
216
193See [Berggren 1986, 141–143] for an account.
194To be precise, the analogy between ﬁgure 4.34 and ﬁgure 4.41 is as follows: in the latter dia-
gram let Q be the pole of the meridian through A. Then Neq↔E, ZO↔A, K↔P, A↔H, ZM↔B,
and W↔Q.
195[Kennedy 1984] describes both methods (although not drawing the analogy to the method of
the zijes), and includes an analemma and demonstration by Debarnot of the second.
196The following material is taken from [al-Biruni (Ali) 1967, 192–193]; see also the commentary
in [Kennedy 1973, 144–146].

This appearance of Ptolemy’s Theorem is not typical of the Tahdid; usu-
ally al-Biruni applies the Rule of Four Quantities whenever he can. In gen-
eral, the Tahdid contains few of the trigonometric innovations circulating at
the time, even those in al-Biruni’s other works such as the use of R1 and
the tangent function. Perhaps he chose the traditional methods here since
trigonometry was not the main point of this book.
Trigonometry in al-Andalus
Until now we have not spent much time distinguishing between different
geographical regions and local situations in the medieval Muslim world,
which stretched all the way from the borders of India to Spain and covered at
least eight centuries. This shortcoming, which has always afﬂicted the study
of Muslim science, is beginning to be addressed in the research literature.197
The case of Muslim Spain (“al-Andalus,” not the current Andalusia) from
the eighth to the ﬁfteenth centuries, is a strong example of a scientiﬁc sub-
culture with its own concerns and style, one that has been clearly recognized
by the history of science community.198
From the middle of the ninth to the early eleventh century, scientiﬁc
knowledge seems to have been exchanged somewhat freely between eastern
Islam
217
Figure 4.41
Al-Biruni on the distance
between cities
197The importance of concentrating on local situations in understanding Arabic (or any other cul-
ture’s) science, guided by but distinguished from the overarching tradition, was stated strongly
in [Sabra 1996].
198See [Vernet/Samsó 1996] for a summary of the sciences in al-Andalus.

and western Islam. We have already seen a striking example of this in Ibn
MuÛadh’s early eleventh-century treatise on the new spherical trigonometry,
which appeared in al-Andalus not long after its creation in the east. Starting
around this time, however, al-Andalus became gradually less dependent on
eastern Islamic science and developed its own methods and tastes. This
movement might have something to do with why Ibn MuÛadh’s spherical
trigonometry does not seem to have instigated further developments.
Perhaps the most striking characteristic of the Andalusian scientiﬁc
community was the rich interaction of different geographical and religious
cultures that occurred there. Muslim, Jewish and Christian scholars worked
side by side and exchanged information with each other, and the knowledge
they generated spread well beyond Spain. Indeed, we shall see soon that, for
all the signiﬁcant contributions made in eastern Islam, it was Andalusian
trigonometry that transmitted to Europe and provoked advancements there.
However, it is a historical mistake to consider al-Andalus only for its role in
transmission to another culture, and we shall discuss this later.
Two important Andalusian contributions to trigonometry other than
those already raised elsewhere in this chapter deserve some space: one just
before 1100, and the other just after. The ﬁrst accomplishment is a collection
of astronomical tables developed in Toledo by a group of scientists, most
prominent among them Abu Ishaq ibn al-Zarqallu (also known as Azar-
quiel). These tables, lost in the original Arabic but available in two Latin
translations (one by Gerard of Cremona), were not especially original; most
of their content was borrowed from the zijes of al-Khwarizmi (in the
Maslama version) and al-Battani. From the latter, al-Zarqallu borrowed the
table of shadows, but there is no trace of the new eastern acceptance of tan-
gents and other trigonometric functions. As usual, the construction of a sine
table was considered carefully as the mathematical basis for the rest of the
work. Here we ﬁnd a new method of constructing the ﬁrst several sine values
which was to retain some currency for several hundred years.199
One of the sine tables extant in a large portion of the Latin manuscript
tradition of the Toledan Tables uses the radius R150 minutes (the value
likely in al-Khwarizmi’s zij, originally from Indian sources). Al-Zarqallu be-
gins by considering sines in multiples of 15°, the so-called kardajas.200 The
Chapter 4
218
199The trigonometric canons to the Toledan tables are available in Latin in [Curtze 1900, 337–347],
but this publication is rendered obsolete by the recent publication of an edition and translation of
the entire Latin version of the Toledan tables in the four-volume set [F. Pedersen 2002].
200The term kardaja, often thought to be an Arabic version of the Sanskrit kramajya, is in fact a
Persian word for “section” [Richard of Wallingford (North) 1976, 46–47]. It referred to the 
Indian division of a right angle into 24 segments of 
, but by the time of the Toledan tables
it signiﬁed a division into six parts of 15°.
3 3
4 °

calculation of the sines of the six kardajas from 0° to 90° proceeds as fol-
lows. The circles in ﬁgure 4.42 each have radius R150; most of the 
constructions should be obvious at a glance, except that 
is asserted to be
equal to 30°.201 Since the segments that form the regular hexagon inscribed
in the middle circle are all equal to its radius, we know that Crd 60°150,
so GMSin 30°75; thus we may ﬁnd MN Sin 60° easily (using the
Pythagorean Theorem) as well as MLCrd 120°.
FZS
Islam
219
201Following along in the text [Curtze 1900, 344–346]: circle ABGD is divided by two perpendi-
cular lines, AG and BD. Circle VZH is drawn with center B and radius BE; likewise, circle TKI
is drawn with center D and radius DE. Circles ABGD and VZH intersect at two points L and M, 
and 
Now 
are equal, so their chords are also equal. LM
is cut in half by N, and so NBNE is one quarter the diameter of the circle. We can do the same
to the lower part of the ﬁgure, so that IDDT is equal to the other four chords, and we have an
inscribed hexagon LBMIDT with sides equal to R.
LB LE
BM
ME
,
,
, and
LBM
MEL
=
.
Figure 4.42
Calculating the Sines of the kardajas in
the Toledan Tables

Now 
and so 
Then, from ALO (not completely drawn on the
figure),
(4.75)
and half of this is Sin 15°.202 Moving to the top of the circle (presumably for
ease of reference rather than mathematical reasons), QBSin 75° may be
found from FBR and QFSin 15°. We now have the sines of all six kar-
dajas, summarized in the small table of ﬁgure 4.43.203
This work is utterly unremarkable mathematically, but that did not stop
the procedure from being adopted widely. The diagram and accompanying
calculations (although with different values of R) may be found in European
texts as late as the ﬁfteenth century, in works by John of Gmunden and
Georg Peurbach (see ﬁgure 5.11), both major inﬂuences on Regiomontanus.
Our second treatise, not long after 1100, was part of an Andalusian tra-
dition of critical evaluation of scientiﬁc work, rather than simply accepting
ancient authority. Jabir ibn Aﬂah’s Islah al-Majisti (“Correction of the Al-
magest”) is a lengthy collection of arguments against some of Ptolemy’s as-
tronomical inferences; so ﬁerce were some of his words that he would later
earn from Copernicus the title “egregious calumniator of Ptolemy.”204
One of Jabir’s attacks on Ptolemy sounds familiar: he complains that the
Transversal Figure is too cumbersome, difﬁcult to implement and difﬁcult
for students to learn. Jabir seeks to ﬁnd another theorem to replace it, and he
comes up with none other than the Rule of Four Quantities, which he demon-
strates directly. From there he goes on to establish the three main theorems
of his trigonometric stable:205
the Law of Sines, proved ﬁrst for a right triangle, then in the
general case;
AL
R
=
=
+
−
Crd
(Sin
)
(
Sin
) ,
30
30
60
2
2
o
o
o
Crd
,
.
90
11 250
o =
1
2
Sin 45o =
ZH =
=
+
=
Crd
,
,
90
150
150
45 000
2
2
o
Chapter 4
220
202This is essentially an application of the half-angle formula 
see (3.19) for an early occurrence.
203[Curtze 1900, 339], where the entry for a kardaja of 1 is mistakenly recorded as a 0. It has been
argued that al-Zarqallu’s Sine table as a whole was a misguided reconstruction of al-
Khwarizmi’s table, missing in al-Zarqallu’s source [McCarthy/Byrne 2003, 262–265].
204[Lorch 1975, 85]; this paper also contains a summary of the contents of the Islah on pp. 94–99.
Josep Bellver has recently produced an edition and translation of the Islah in his 2007 disserta-
tion at the University of Barcelona. Ironically, some of Copernicus’s spherical trigonometry ap-
pears to derive from the Islah.
205A full account of Jabir’s development of these results is in [Lorch 1995, 3–9].
(Sin
)
(Vers
) ;


2
2
+
2
2
⋅
=
Sin 

where C is right, sin Bcos A/cos a (Geber’s Theorem);
where C is right, cos ccos a cos b.
Jabir’s arguments repeat almost precisely late tenth-century motives for
reinventing spherical trigonometry, and even parallel the shift in focus from
spherical quadrilaterals to triangles—so much that one can hardly avoid the
question of transmission. However, there is no need to insist that it occurred.
Although Jabir’s objections to the Transversal Figure mimic those of Abu
Nasr Mansur and Abu’l-Wafa’, the latter two produced more sophisticated
responses, in Abu’l-Wafa”s case including the tangent function. The tantaliz-
ing presence of Ibn MuÛadh’s book in Spain only a century before Jabir also
fails to support transmission; it shares very little with Jabir’s text beyond su-
perﬁcial similarities. Finally, Jabir was aware of Thabit ibn Qurra’s work on
the Transversal Figure, which contains a proof of the Rule of Four Quantities
not much different from what is found here. So, given that the Transversal
Figure is genuinely awkward to use, it is entirely plausible that Jabir simply
walked a path that, unbeknownst to him, had been traversed before.206
Jabir’s plane trigonometry has a different feel from that of other Islamic
scholars: it uses chords rather than sines, describes procedures rather than
proves theorems, and stays very close to the Almagest. However, it does
present a systematic approach to solving all plane triangles, and in this
Jabir’s work is unique for its time. It has even been suggested that Jabir is the
source for the Western tradition that was to emerge in Europe.207 Indeed, we
shall see that the Islah had considerable inﬂuence there through the seven-
teenth century, partly through a translation by the ubiquitous Gerard of Cre-
mona.
Islam
221
206This is the conclusion arrived at in [von Braunmühl 1900/1903, vol. 1, 81–82]. Lorch feels that
the coincidence of motives is too strong to be ignored, although he is careful not to hypothesize
any speciﬁc links [Lorch 1995, 9].
207[Lorch 1995, 38].
Kardaja
Sine
1
39
2
75
3
106
4
130
5
145
6
150
Figure 4.43
Sines of the kardajas in the
Toledan Tables

The transition to European science was a complex and gradual process,
but it is signaled by the construction of a new set of astronomical tables or-
ganized by King Alfonso X of Castile in the late thirteenth century, partly as
an update to the Toledan Tables.208 Alfonso did his best to preserve Arabic
knowledge, and this effort included supporting the Libros del saber de as-
tronomia, a collection of astronomical works.209 These treatises became part
of the body of Arabic knowledge that was to inform and inspire scientiﬁc
minds in the West to new heights, just as the light was beginning to fade
gradually elsewhere.
Chapter 4
222
208See [Chabás/Goldstein 2003].
209See [Ausejo 1983] and [Ausejo 1984] for studies of the trigonometry in these works, including
the use of Jabir’s theorems. Although the trigonometry remained embedded in its astronomical
context, Ausejo argues that this is no reason to devalue its contribution [Ausejo 1983, 32–33].

5 '" The West to 1550
Transmission from the Arab World
The exact sciences were not of much practical use to Europeans in the early
medieval period, and little technical content was produced or preserved. De-
mands on mathematics extended little further than basic arithmetic in trade
and agriculture, and even in these areas it would not be until the thirteenth
century that decimal place value numeration challenged Roman numerals.
As for astronomy, the most important task for mathematics was in determin-
ing the date of Easter in the Christian calendar, attempted by the early
seventh-century monk the Venerable Bede and others. Finding Easter’s date
was no easy computational feat, but in this and other astronomical activities
of the time, trigonometry had no place.
Although mathematics and astronomy enjoyed renewed interest through
the revival of education in Charlemagne’s court in the ninth century on the
basis of the quadrivium (which included geometry and astronomy), serious
attention to quantitative astronomy began in earnest only with various inﬂu-
ences from Islam. Learning in general found its way to Europe through
several conduits, including Byzantium and Sicily, but the mathematics asso-
ciated with astronomy ﬁltered in primarily by way of Spain, across the Pyre-
nees mountains. As early as the tenth century, a set of scientiﬁc treatises
from Andalusian Spain, composed at the Benedictine monastery of Santa
Maria di Ripoll in Catalonia, was circulating in Europe at least as far as Aus-
tria.1 Through the eleventh century pockets of Arabic astronomy could also
be found in Germany; and the astrolabe and more traveled as far as England.2
The earliest signiﬁcant presence of quantitative astronomy in Europe
was the eleventh-century Toledan Tables, which we discussed in chapter 4.
Designed by al-Zarqallu and based on al-Khwarizmi’s and al-Battani’s as-
tronomical works, the tables traveled to the rest of Europe in a variety of
forms, including a translation by Gerard of Cremona. The tables were to be a
dominant force in the astronomical community, such as it was, until the
Alfonsine Tables replaced them in the late thirteenth and early fourteenth
centuries. Although the tabulated functions were ultimately trigonometric,
readers did not need to know any trigonometry to use them. But the twelfth
century saw a real European astronomical revolution through the translation
223
1 [North 1994, 204–205].
2 See [Kren 1983, 233] for a summary of early Arabic inﬂuences in England. Even some Indian as-
tronomy found its way to England; see [Neugebauer/Schmidt 1952].

of many Greek and Islamic astronomical works, and with these, trigonomet-
ric methods entered Europe.
Al-Khwarizmi’s zij was among the earliest books to be translated; Ade-
lard of Bath produced an edition around 1130, and Robert of Chester
adapted it to the meridian of London. It is in Robert’s revision that we ﬁnd
the ﬁrst occurrence of a form of our word “sine”; the Arabic word for sine
( jaib, which as we have seen is itself a transliteration from the Sanskrit) hap-
pens to coincide with the Arabic word for “a fold or inlet,” which in Latin is
sinus.3 Plato of Tivoli contributed Latin editions of Theodosius’s Spherics,
and al-Battani’s Zij (De motu stellarum in Latin) which also contained
trigonometric content. But by far the greatest translator in mathematical as-
tronomy was Gerard of Cremona, whose efforts included (among many oth-
ers) the Spherics of Autolycus, Theodosius, and Menelaus, Jabir ibn Aﬂah’s
Islah al-Majisti (in the West Elementa astronomica), and most crucially,
Ptolemy’s Almagest.
An Example of Transmission: Practical Geometry
Geometrical knowledge did not disappear completely in early medieval Eu-
rope, but lack of direct access to Euclid’s Elements and the like meant that the
ﬂavor of Greek geometry subsided. The geometry that we ﬁnd from this time
does not pay respect to axioms and proofs; we also witness a freer intermin-
gling of geometry with arithmetic and fairly trivial rudimentary mensuration.4
Indeed, three separate geometrical traditions have been identiﬁed, each with its
own standards and foci: theoretical, practical, and constructive geometry.
Theoretical geometry, the tradition with which Euclid would have been
most comfortable, returned to prominence mostly after the re-introduction of
the Elements into Europe during the “renaissance” of the twelfth through the
fourteenth centuries via translation from Arabic sources. Constructive geom-
etry, hardly a discipline in a formal sense and with little written tradition,
was employed by craftsmen, especially masons.5 Situated between these two
disciplines, with some of the features of each, was practical geometry.
Concerning itself with the uses of geometry in what we might today call
engineering, practical geometry has its origin in the practices of Roman sur-
veyors (the agrimensores), who in turn received some of their knowledge from
Heron of Alexandria’s works in mensuration.6 The scope of practical geometry
Chapter 5
224
3 Hence, for instance, the term “sinus cavity.”
4 See [Evans 1976/77] for a survey of “sub-Euclidean” geometry in the early medieval period.
5 [Shelby 1972] is a survey of constructive geometry, particularly as applied by masons.
6 [Hugh of St. Victor (Homann) 1991, 2]. [Dilke 1971] is a study of the habits and practices of the
agrimensores.

varied somewhat over the centuries, but roughly speaking it encompassed ap-
plications that have to do with measurements of physical bodies. Texts often
divide into three parts: altimetry, the measurement of heights and depths;
planimetry, on surfaces; and stereometry, on volumes.7 Objects subjected to
such measurements included buildings, cities, war machines, instruments of
various sorts (astronomical, musical and scientiﬁc), and even celestial bodies.
Early treatises, of which Gerbert d’Aurillac’s late tenth-century Geome-
tria is the ﬁrst substantial example,8 contained little mathematical and no
trigonometric knowledge. Thus to ﬁnd the height of an object Gerbert had to
rely mostly on similar triangles, which is at least an improvement on the
agrimensores, who had used only congruent triangles.9 Hugh of St. Victor’s
early twelfth-century Practica Geometriae, the ﬁrst treatise to make an ex-
plicit distinction between theoretical and practical geometry, followed Ger-
bert’s example. Situated just prior to an inﬂux of translations of Euclid,
Archimedes and Ptolemy beginning in the twelfth century, neither of these
works were able to make any substantial connection with Greek or Arabic
science and mathematics.
In his discussion of altimetry, Hugh of St. Victor describes how to use a
simple astrolabe to determine the height of an object some distance away on
the surface of the earth, such as a tree, building or mountain.
Text 5.1
Hugh of St. Victor, Using an Astrolabe to Find the Height of an Object
(from the Practica Geometriae)
[See ﬁgure 5.1.] To measure the height of an object in front of you without
moving from your place, raise the astrolabe to the object. Adjust the medicline
until you can see the top of the object through both apertures. Then compare
the medicline degree reading with the whole side of the square. The ratio of the
medicline reading to the whole side [i.e., to twelve] is the ratio of height to in-
tervening space with surveyor’s height added either proportionally or exactly.10
Explanation: The medicline of the astrolabe, otherwise known as the ali-
dade, is the ruler that traverses the back of the astrolabe along the line of
The West to 1550
225
7Hugh of St. Victor’s third section was on cosmimetry, or celestial measurement; the chapters on
volumes are sometimes referred to as crassimetry. The changing boundaries of practical geome-
try through the medieval period and its relation to the craftsmen’s constructive geometry are de-
scribed in [Shelby 1972].
8See [Gerbert (Bubnov) 1899] for a Latin edition, and [Gerbert (Olleris) 1867] for a French trans-
lation.
9[Hugh of St. Victor (Homann) 1991, 16].
10From [Hugh of St. Victor (Homann) 1991, 46].

sight from the eye to the top of the measured object. The horizontal distance
from the center of the astrolabe to the edge of the inscribed square is divided
into twelve equal parts. Take a reading of the height of the medicline where
it crosses the edge of the square. Then, by similar triangles,
(5.1)
Of course, since the astrolabe itself is above the ground, the instrument’s
height must be added to obtain the height of the measured object above
ground level.
Our next example of altimetry, from not much later in the twelfth century,
illustrates dramatically the impact of exposure to translations of Greek
geometrical and astronomical works. The Artis cuiuslibet consummatio, an
anonymous work adapted to French as the Pratike de geometrie, bears lit-
tle resemblance to its predecessor. Although problems such as measuring
the height of a tower using an astrolabe are also to be found (and the
method of solution is similarly crude11), the section on altimetry is now
dominated by astronomy—particularly, problems involving the Sun’s alti-
tude. The ability to use both sexagesimal arithmetic and a Sine table is now
assumed, although the author still refers the reader to the Almagest for
proofs.
reading
12
Height
Distance
=
.
Chapter 5
226
11The use of the astrolabe’s shadow square to solve altitude problems seems to have been a staple
of practical geometry texts through the ﬁfteenth century; see for instance [Simi/Toti Rigatelli
1993, 458–462].
Figure 5.1
Finding the height
of an object
according to Hugh
of St. Victor

Text 5.2
Finding the Time of Day from the Altitude of the Sun
(from the Artis cuiuslibet consummatio)
II.11 To Ascertain the Hour of the Day from the Altitude of the Sun.
Let the Sine of the altitude [of the Sun] be multiplied by 60; let the product be
divided by the Sine of the meridian altitude of the same day. Let the arc of the
Sine which is produced be divided by 15. The quotient will give the hours
completed [since sunrise] if the altitude is taken before noon, and those to be
completed [before sunset] if after. You will ﬁnd in the Almagest the proofs of
this and other things which we do not set forth here lest we make a long work
and hoe another man’s row.12
Explanation: The pattern of calculation in this text derives from ﬁgure 5.2.
The meridian circle13 is given a radius of 60; then ANSin H, where H is
the Sun’s altitude at noon. BP is taken to be the Sine of h, the Sun’s current
altitude. Finally, OP is assumed to be the Sine of time T since sunrise (or, if
after noon, until sunset). By the similarity of OAN and, OBP,
(5.2)
from which T may be found. The division by 15 (360°/24h) the passage
converts T from degrees into hours.
Contrary to the author’s statement, this approximate formula is not
found in the Almagest. But we have seen it already in the context of Islamic
astronomical timekeeping, where its Indian origin was asserted. Other prob-
lems in the Artis cuiuslibet consummatio appear to come from India also,14
perhaps through Islamic intermediaries, so there may be several sources in-
ﬂuencing this text.
More rigorous approaches to the use of trigonometry were being developed
at the same time in Spain. Abraham bar Hiyya (1070–1136), a Jewish ofﬁ-
cial whose job title in the administration of Barcelona gave rise to his
common appellation “Savasorda,” wrote a treatise on mensuration (Hibbur
ha-meshihah we-ha-tishboret,15 translated by Plato of Tivoli as Liber
Sin
Sin
Sin
T
h
H
60
=
,
The West to 1550
227
12[Victor 1979, 243].
13The great circle through the north and south points of the horizon, and through the zenith.
14Otto Neugebauer, quoted in [Victor 1979, 255–257].
15A Hebrew edition is available in [Abraham bar Hiyya (Guttmann) 1913]. See also [Lévy 2001]
for a survey of the work and a call for a new critical edition.

embadorum16) based on the Islamic methods that were available to him.
Although its purpose was as practical as the other practical geometries, the
Liber embadorum was well ahead of its time, bringing to France its ﬁrst ac-
count of Arabic algebra.17 One of the problems in Abraham’s book was to
ﬁnd the area of a segment of a circle, given the length of its chord. To do
this he needed a table of arcs as a function of chord lengths. Perhaps the ﬁrst
trigonometric table in Europe, it uses the peculiar radius R  14, chosen
so that the largest arc (a semicircle) works out to the whole-numbered
length of 44 using the common approximation  ≈22/7.18 Tables of inverse
trigonometric functions were rare enough in Islamic trigonometry, let alone
European, so the appearance of this one (extracted in ﬁgure 5.3) is an ex-
traordinary occasion. In fact, the table is remarkably accurate except for the
ﬁnal few entries, where numerical instability would give any calculator a
headache.19
Abraham’s work was an inﬂuential source for one of the most important
medieval works of mensuration: the Practica geometriae by Leonardo of Pisa,
also known as Fibonacci (1220).20 Although Leonardo was still concerned
Chapter 5
228
16Plato of Tivoli’s translation of the Liber embadorum is available in Latin, and in German trans-
lation, in [Abraham bar Hiyya (Curtze) 1902].
17[Levey 1970, 22].
18From [Curtze 1900, 330]. See also [Katz 1998, 292–293]; the arc chord table is again repro-
duced on p. 294.
19The errors are given in ﬁgure 5.3 in units of the last sexagesimal place. The correct value for a
chord of 25 should be 30;54,53; this entry was either miscalculated or affected by scribal error.
For an explanation of the numerical instability see the following section, and ﬁgure 5.4.
20The standard edition of Leonardo’s collected works is [Leonardo of Pisa (Boncampagni)
1857/1862]; the Practica geometriae opens the second volume. In recent years, Leonardo’s three
major works have all been translated into English: the Book of Squares [Leonardo of Pisa
(Sigler) 1987], the Liber abaci [Leonardo of Pisa (Sigler) 2002], and just as this book was being
completed, the Practica geometriae [Leonardo of Pisa (Hughes) 2008]. See also [Simi 2004] for
an account of this work in Italian and a discussion of its roots.
Figure 5.2
Finding the time of
day from the Sun’s
altitude in the Artis
cuiuslibet
consummatio

The West to 1550
229
with the problems of the surveyor, the great innovation of his work was his
inclusion of proofs, moving the subject much closer to theoretical geometry.21
Indeed, it is a sea change in this tradition to see Leonardo referring extensively
to Euclid, Menelaus and Theodosius, and using implicitly the works of Arabic
Chords
Arcs
1
1;0,2
2
2;0,8 
[1]
3
3;0,26 
[1]
4
4;0,55
5
5;1,44
6
6;2,54 
[4]
7
7;4,42 
[2]
8
8;7,11 
[12]
9
9;9,56
[3]
10
10;13,42
[6]
11
11;18,54 
[21]
12
12;24,38
[15]
13
13;31,9 
[20]
14
14;40,0
15
15,50,10
[1]
16
17;2,16
17
18;16,36
[2]
18
19;33,27
[2]
19
20;53,26
[3]
20
22;17,10 
[1]
21
23;45,6 
[13]
22
25;19,24
[19]
23
27;0,0
[1]
24
28;49,56
[39]
25
31,26,37 
[—]
26
33;20,52
[3]
27
36;27,32
[116]
28
44;0,0
Figure 5.3
Abraham bar Hiyya’s
arc chord table
21In fact, title notwithstanding, Victor is inclined to consider the Practica geometriae as “a general
text-book in geometry instead of a practical geometry” [Victor 1979, 27].

Chapter 5
230
22[Folkerts 2004, 98–104].
23[Leonardo of Pisa (Boncampagni) 1857/1862, 94–96, 104]. See also [Leonardo of Pisa (Hughes)
2008, 344, 354–359].
24The history of practical geometries has been traced through John Love’s 1768 work Geodesia:
Or, The Art of Measuring Land in [Hugh of St. Victor (Homann) 1991, 20–22].
25[Shelby 1983, 207].
mathematicians including the Banu Musa22—alongside the usual references to
the agrimensores.
Much of the Practica geometriae is borrowed from the Liber embado-
rum, including the problem of areas of circle segments, but Leonardo’s
solution differs slightly from Abraham bar Hiyya’s. Rather than using a table
of arc chords, Leonardo refers explicitly to the procedure in Ptolemy’s Al-
magest, going so far as to prove Ptolemy’s Theorem on a quadrilateral in-
scribed in a circle.23 However, Leonardo’s table differs from both Ptolemy’s
and Abraham bar Hiyya’s in its use of the radius R21 (again chosen with a
view to π= 31/7, so that the semicircle has the whole-numbered length of 66).
So, the importance of the Practica geometriae and similar works was
not so much the novelty of their mathematics, but their role as a vehicle for
the dissemination of mathematics to Europe. The continuing role of practical
geometries in taking mathematics to the people ensured that they were vehi-
cles of transmission at least through the eighteenth century.24 In what ways
their seeds really took root is difﬁcult to say; evidence for the inﬂuence of
the more sophisticated methods is scanty.25 However, it is clear that basic
trigonometric methods, at least, were now available for use by a more diverse
audience than ever before.
Consolidation and the Beginnings of Innovation: 
The Trigonometry of Levi ben Gerson, 
Richard of Wallingford, and John of Murs
The trigonometric methods in practical geometries, of course, were not orig-
inal in any signiﬁcant way. However, as time progressed and the methods of
the ancients and the Arabs (at least from Muslim Spain, not the more power-
ful trigonometry of eastern Islam) became more well known, European sci-
entists gradually made more contributions within the existing themes. The
spread of the Alfonsine Tables from Spain through Paris in the 1320s must
have provoked some mathematical curiosity. The increasing availability of
the Almagest, and the disproportionate inﬂuence of Seville astronomer Jabir
ibn Aﬂah’s Islah al-Majisti, helped to direct these interests further. This trea-
tise by Geber (as Jabir was known in Europe), via its translation by Gerard
of Cremona, shaped subsequent trigonometric work starting as early as the

The West to 1550
231
thirteenth century.26 Whatever the motivating factors were, it is around this
time that we ﬁnd two new substantial European astronomical works, both
with some trigonometric novelty.
Levi ben Gerson (1288–1344), a philosopher and theologian who lived
in the south of France, appears to have had access to the knowledge ﬁltering
across Europe, although only in the form of Hebrew translations.27 Never-
theless he seems to have been widely read—his astronomy was inﬂuenced
by Ptolemy, al-Battani, Jabir ibn Aﬂah, and others—and he certainly wrote
widely. Although he authored several mathematical works, he is most known
for his philosophical treatise The Wars of the Lord, a work of such magnitude
that the Astronomy alone, one section of the ﬁfth of its six parts, occupies
over 500 folios.28 Although the Astronomy contains many impressive achieve-
ments, including detailed critiques of al-Bitruji’s planetary models based on
Levi’s own observations and a lunar model that improved upon Ptolemy, it is
best known for its astronomical tables and for its description of the Jacob’s
staff, an instrument used for measuring angles.29
One portion of the Astronomy that circulated on its own, the De sinibus,
chordis et arcubus,30 describes how to compute tables of Sines and versed
Sines (the sagitta)31 and is clearly inspired by Ptolemy’s description of the
construction of a table of chords in the Almagest. Levi deals only with
chords, sines, and versed sines; although the latter can serve the role that
cosines do for us, Levi has no equivalent to the tangent. Beginning with the
geometrically-determined sines and versed sines of 90°, 30° and 18°, Levi
works his way down to the sine and versed sine of 
in the conventional
manner, using basic identities.
From this point, Levi ﬁnds himself in a situation similar to that of
Ptolemy and the Islamic table makers: he knows the sines of all multiples of 
, but not his desired 
. To reach this goal he begins by applying his half-
angle procedure repeatedly to 
and 
(both multiples of 
), which 
3
4 °
3 3
4 °
8 1
4 °
1
4 °
3
4 °
3
4 °
26Jabir ibn Aﬂah’s presence in Europe is an example of happenstance: the work was in the right
place at the right time and rose to undue prominence. See [Lorch 1971] for a full treatment of his
inﬂuence in Europe, and [Lorch 1975] for a survey of his astronomical contributions.
27[Samsó 1973, 279].
28The ﬁrst 20 of 136 chapters of the astronomy appear in Hebrew edition and English translation
in [Levi ben Gerson (Goldstein) 1985].
29What little trigonometry one needs to work with this device allows us to conclude that Levi was
unfamiliar with the tangent, since when a simple tangent will do Levi resorts instead to a more
complex procedure involving a sine—similarly to what we have seen in Ptolemy’s astronomical
calculations.
30Part of De sinibus, chordis et arcubus appears in English translation in [Espenshade 1967] and
[Levi ben Gerson (Goldstein) 1985, 31–47], and in Latin in [Curtze 1898].
31Levi ben Gerson’s astronomical tables, including his table of sines, have been published in
[Goldstein 1974].

Chapter 5
232
brings him down to the sines of 
and 
respectively. Here
he notices that
(5.3)
“so far that a difference in fourths of minutes of a fraction of the ratio is not
apparent. It is allowable that a little may appear in the ﬁfth place”32—i.e., the
ratios begin to differ in the ﬁfth sexagesimal place. Thus
(5.4)
and solving for 
, Levi gets 0;15,42,28,32,27—which is out by 3 in the 
fourth sexagesimal place. Levi’s method is effectively the same as Ptolemy’s,
although he computes only one bound rather than Ptolemy’s two; both assume
that the Sine is a linear function for small arcs.33 This process is an example
of a larger class of methods that Levi calls “heuristic reasoning” (in this in-
stance related to the rule of double false position), which is used repeatedly
in Levi’s Astronomy to solve problems for which a demonstrative solution is
not possible.34
Although most of Levi’s Islamic cousins wrote little about heuristic
methods, falling as they did outside of an analytic written tradition, Levi
spends some time discussing them. For instance, in the context of an astro-
nomical problem, he says:
It is appropriate to know that it is not possible to do in a quick way
a demonstrative research in order to show how our model must be
constructed, so that from it will follow what we see by experience
for any position [of the planet] . . . , because the computations for
our models are deep and difﬁcult. . . . Therefore, the investigations
which lead us to the truth necessarily are of the kind of heuristic
reasoning, which are made from division and experience, which
approach step by step to the truth until it is reached. These types of
reasoning belong to the category of conditional reasoning, and there
Sin 1
4 °
Sin
Sin
1
4
1
4
° +
°
(
)
°
( )
≈
° +
°
°
1
128
1
4
1
128
1
4
;
Sin
Sin
1
4
1
128
1
4
1
64
1
4
1
128
1
4
1
64
° +
°
(
)
° −
°
(
)
=
° +
°
° −
°
,
1
4
1
64
° −
°
1
4
1
128
° +
°
32[Espenshade 1967, 634].
33Although Levi ben Gerson’s method has been called “linear interpolation,” we have seen in
chapter 4 that this term is only partly appropriate.
34[Mancha 1998] presents a number of astronomical examples of Levi’s heuristic reasoning.

The West to 1550
233
are two classes of them. One of which is taken from an excess and a
defect; the second one is taken from two experiences in excess or
from two experiences in defect.35
The methods to which Levi refers here are strongly reminiscent of In-
dian iterative schemes. Levi argues for their use in the same way that modern
numerical analysts do: namely, that analytic techniques are either genuinely
or practically impossible to solve the problem at hand. The case of (5.3) is an
example of the ﬁrst of Levi’s two classes, an excess in the numerator and a
defect in the denominator.
Levi’s interest in numerical methods goes into mostly untrodden territory
in the next passage from De sinibus, where he explains his reason for adopting
a step size of 
for his trigonometric tables rather than the traditional 1°.
Text 5.3
Levi ben Gerson, The Best Step Size for a Sine Table
(from the Astronomy)
We decided to determine these values at intervals of 
not being satisﬁed 
with ﬁnding them at intervals of 1°, as is the case with many such tables, be-
cause we noticed that in some places the error reaches about 15 minutes of arc
when we seek to ﬁnd the arc corresponding to a [given] sine, especially when
the arc is a little more or less than 90°. To illustrate this, let the sine be
59;59,52. According to the tables arranged at degree intervals, the correspon-
ding arc is 89;45,27° if it is less than 90°, or 90;14,33° if it is greater than 90°.
It is clear from the preceding that if this were correct, 0;0,8 would be the
versed sine of 0;14,33°. But it follows from the preceding that when the
amount of the versed sine is 0;0,8, the square of the sine of that arc is
0;15,59,58,56 for that is the result of multiplying 0;0,8 times the remainder of
the diameter. Therefore, the amount of the sine of that arc, 0;14,33°, is
0;30,59,0,53. Therefore, it is clear that the arc corresponding to the aforemen-
tioned sine is greater or less than 90° by about 0;29,35°. Thus, the error intro-
duced by the other method is greater than 0;15°, and for this reason we decided
to arrange these tables at intervals of 
so that no perceptible error arises
from linear interpolation.36
Explanation: Levi knows precisely where to ﬁnd the worst numerical insta-
bility: by trying to determine the arc Sine of a length nearly equal to the radius
of the circle. As indicated in ﬁgure 5.4 the Sine curve reaches its maximum at
1
4 °
1
4 °,
1
4 °
35Quoted from [Mancha 1998, 15–16].
36From [Levi ben Gerson (Goldstein) 1985, 41–42].

90°; inverse linear interpolation for a Sine value near the peak (like 59;59,52)
results in a large error, since the horizontal distance from Sine curve to the
line for linear interpolation between 89° and 90° is so large. This phenome-
non had already caused problems for Muslim astronomers, although it often
remained unnoticed.37
Using inverse linear interpolation Levi gets arc Sin(59;59,52)89;45,27°,
already an error of more than 
(the correct value is 89;30,25°). But perhaps
because Levi does not trust even his improved tables or because he wishes
to make the error appear dramatic, he converts his values to represent Sines
of small arcs, as follows. A moment’s reﬂection conﬁrms that if Sin
(89;45,27°)59;59,52, then Vers (0;14,33°)0;0,8. Now from Elements
III.35 (ﬁgure 5.5)38 we know that
(5.5)
and from this Levi gets Sin(0;14,33°)0;30,59,0,33. But, using his own Sine
table to compute Sin(0;14, 33°)—with small arguments like this, interpo-
lation within a Sine table is reliable—Levi arrives at the correct value
arc Sin(0;30,59,0,33)0;29,35°, more than twice the expected value of
0;14,33°!
Sin
Vers 
Vers 
2


=
⋅
−
(
)
2R
1
4 °
Chapter 5
234
37[Berggren/Van Brummelen 2003] describes the case of al-Samaw’al. In his attempt to correct an
error in the work of his predecessor al-Kuhi on ﬁnding the dip angle to the horizon, he actually
commits an error 50 times the magnitude of the error he is trying to correct, mostly because of
this numerical instability.
38“If in a circle two straight lines cut one another, the rectangle contained by the segments of the
one is equal to the rectangle contained by the segments of the other” [Euclid (Heath) 1925, vol.
2, 71]. In this case the two straight lines are the diameter and the vertical line, the latter extended
downward to the lower half of the circle (not drawn).
Figure 5.4 Numerical instability in ﬁnding arc Sin(59;59,52)

What is remarkable about this discussion is not only that Levi has spot-
ted the problem of error magniﬁcation in interpolation (at its most sensitive
spot, indicating some deeper awareness of the issue), but that he writes about
it at all. Numerical problems such as this one were simply not discussed in
scientiﬁc works of the time, even if trace evidences reveal that they were
considered behind the scenes.
Levi follows this passage with a collection of prescriptions for solving plane
triangles. The presentation, divided into four cases, is clear and concise. One
of these cases contains an explicit statement of the Law of Sines, its ﬁrst ap-
pearance in a European work; it is unclear whether Levi discovered this the-
orem himself, or learned it from an Arabic source.39 Levi does not enter into
spherical trigonometry; astronomical problems involving spherical geome-
try are reduced to plane problems.40
Roughly contemporaneous with Levi but much further north, Richard of
Wallingford was abbot of St. Albans in England in the early fourteenth cen-
tury.41 He is best remembered for a large astronomical clock that he built at
the abbey, but he also wrote a number of astronomical works. He possessed a
genius for inventing novel astronomical instruments, including the rectangu-
lus (which did the same job as the armillary sphere) and the Albion (“all by
one”), an unusually ﬂexible equatorium that enjoyed popularity for centuries.
Although instruments were Richard’s ﬁrst love he did not shy away
from mathematics; indeed, his instruments required considerable mathemat-
ical ingenuity to construct. But Richard also wrote on mathematics proper.
The West to 1550
235
39[Bond 1921, 319]; [Samsó 1973, 280].
40For instance in [Levi ben Gerson (Goldstein) 1985, 58–66 and 151–154].
41Richard of Wallingford’s works have been edited and translated to English in [Richard of
Wallingford (North) 1976]. His position at the monastery means that much information on his
life was recorded; [North, in Richard of Wallingford (North) 1976, vol. II, 1–16] is a thorough
and reliable biography.
Figure 5.5
A trigonometric lemma used in
Levi ben Gerson’s Astronomy

Chapter 5
236
The work that most concerns us, his Quadripartitum,42 takes readers fairly
rapidly from the beginnings of trigonometry to its applications in spherical
astronomy. Divided into four parts (hence the name), the Quadripartitum be-
gins with a set of theorems that leads to a method for the construction of a
table of sines. The work continues in Books II and III with coverage of the
eighteen modes of Menelaus’s Theorem in the style that we saw in chapter 4
with Thabit ibn Qurra several centuries earlier. Finally, it concludes with a
series of applications of Menelaus in spherical astronomy, in the spirit of
similar problems in Books I and II of the Almagest. Although the argument
can be made that the Quadripartitum merely compiles mathematical knowl-
edge from the Almagest and a couple of other sources, it breaks new ground
by dealing with trigonometry more or less apart from its applications, and
thus has some claim to the title of ﬁrst trigonometric work in Christian
Europe.43
The ﬁrst part of the Quadripartitum, on calculating sines, reads much
like the corresponding passage on the table of chords in the Almagest and
clearly owes a debt of inspiration to it. Much of what we ﬁnd in Richard’s
work is expected: various identities are proved involving Sines, chords, and
versed Sines44 (again, we ﬁnd no tangents), many of which may be found in
the Almagest, or Islamic and Indian sources. The identities include proce-
dures for ﬁnding the Sine of half an angle, the use of the Pythagorean Theo-
rem to ﬁnd the Sine of the complement of an arc whose Sine is known, and
procedures for dealing with sums and differences of arcs. A corollary to 1.7
solves a triangle using our often-occurring acquaintance, the plane version of
the Law of Sines.
Book I culminates with several methods for deriving Sin 1°. Richard ar-
rives at this value in the usual way, by applying his identities to known Sines
and chords and noticing that the only accessible Sines of whole-numbered
arcs are multiples of 3°. Richard gives three solutions. The ﬁrst is simply a
recounting of Ptolemy’s approximation to Crd 1° (see chapter 2). The second
comes down to the following equation:
42The Quadripartitum was made available in Latin in [Bond 1923a] and translated into English in
[Bond 1923b] (reprinted with minor alterations in [Grant 1974, 188–198]); see also the accom-
panying article [Bond 1921]. However, this work was rendered obsolete when the entire Quadri-
partitum was published as part of Richard’s collected works in [Richard of Wallingford (North)
1976]. We shall rely on the latter.
43The occasionally repeated claim that Richard’s predecessor and colleague John Maudith was the
ﬁrst European to write on trigonometry is debunked by John North in [Richard of Wallingford
(North) 1976, vol. I, 6–7]; North attributes the canons to Maudith’s astronomical tables (inter-
esting for their use of tangents—the shadow function—among other reasons) to Richard him-
self.
44Richard uses the convention of R150 from the Toledan Tables.

(5.6)
which, although Richard gives no reasoning, is the same idea (applying an
equivalent to linear interpolation) that we saw in the works of Abu’l-Wafa’
and al-Kashi in chapter 4.
Richard’s third method, an elaboration of the second, is unique (so far as
I know). It extends the differences technique of (5.6) to smaller and smaller
increments of arcs, thereby showing how one may ﬁnd Sin(1°) to arbitrary
accuracy.
Text 5.4
Richard of Wallingford, Finding Sin(1°) with Arbitrary Accuracy
(from the Quadripartitum)
Thirdly, and most accurately, and without error such as would be detected by
the mind’s eye, you will proceed as follows for all [the calculations instanced
in] this [treatise].45 Having earlier found 
by 1.3,46 you will ﬁnd
, the sinus of half the former arc. Having found this, again by 1.3, you
will seek 
, the sinus of half the arc. Now ﬁnd 
by
1.7,47 which—as I am quite sure—is to say ﬁnd 
Lastly, halve the arc
of 
giving 
, whose sinus you will ﬁnd by 1.3. Next you will halve
the arc of this. By 1.3, seek Sin
. Find therefore 
, by 1.7,
that is to say, you will ﬁnd 
Again resume the work, take
and by 1.3 seek 
Likewise by 1.3 seek the sinus of half this 
arc, that is, of 
By 1.7 you will ﬁnd 
or 
And proceed in this way even to the 9000th part of a degree, or even to the inﬁ-
nitely small, if by working minutely you wish to do so. This method of working
is the most precise, but the ﬁrst is the more to be recommended.
Sin 1 −
°
(
)
1
1024
.
Sin 255
256
3
1024
+
°
(
) ,
3
1024 °.
Sin
3
512 °.
Sin
3
256 °,
Sin 1 −
°
(
)
1
256
.
Sin 63
64
3
256
+
°
(
)
3
256 °
3
128 °
3
64 °
Sin 63
64 °.
Sin
3
64
15
16
+
°
(
)
Sin 3
64 °
Sin 3
32 °
Sin 3
16 °
Sin1
Sin
Sin
Sin
15
16
1
3
18
16
15
16
° ≈
° +
° −
°
(
),
The West to 1550
237
45From [Richard of Wallingford (North) 1976, 50–53].
46A sine half-angle formula.
47Equivalent to a sine summation formula.

Explanation: Richard does not spell out the details, but he is obviously sug-
gesting the following: from 
apply the half-angle formula twice to
arrive at 
Combine it with 
using the summation formula
and we get 
Presumably, from the latter we can estimate Sin 1° with
(5.7)
We may repeat the process and get
(5.8)
or even
(5.9)
In each iteration the numerator of the angle in the base Sine 
must be a multiple of 3° to make the Sine geometrically accessible. This situation
occurs only for every other angle bisection, which explains why Richard per-
forms two bisections in each iteration.48
The reference to 9000ths of a degree is unclear; it might mean three fur-
ther bisections to 8192nds of a degree, but this step is not one of the stopping
points in the iteration. In any case, Richard could not have stated more
clearly his understanding that the process may continue as far as desired—
although he concludes the passage by discouraging its use.
As noted earlier, the ﬁrst three books of the Quadripartitum appear to serve
the spherical astronomical applications of Book IV: rising times, declina-
tions, diurnal arcs of planets, and so forth. The spirit is that of the Almagest,
relying heavily on Menelaus’s Theorem and often following the Almagest
solutions—hence quite different from the Arabic approach typiﬁed by Geber,
which used the Rule of Four Quantities and other relations involving four
63
64
255
256
1023
1024
,
,
(
)
Sin1
Sin
Sin
Sin
1023
1024
1026
1024
1023
1024
° ≈
° +
° −
°
(
)
1
3
.
Sin1
Sin
Sin
Sin
255
256
258
256
255
256
° ≈
° +
° −
°
(
)
1
3
,
Sin1
Sin
Sin
Sin
63
64
66
64
63
64
° ≈
° +
° −
°
(
)
1
3
.
Sin 63
64 °.
Sin 15
16 °
Sin 3
64 °.
Sin 3
16 °
Chapter 5
238
48Richard could have used the intermediate bisections to generate approximations in a similar 
fashion, e.g., 
but this expression has a slightly 
different form than (5.6)–(5.9). There is really no need for Richard to formulate it in any case,
since he can always proceed to the next iterate and return to the already established form.
Sin
Sin
Sin
Sin
1
33
32
1
3
33
32
30
32
° ≈
° −
° −
°
(
),

trigonometric quantities.49 Since there is not much new in Book IV we shall
not spend time on it—except to note that, at least in one place, Richard was
not above the sorts of approximations that we ﬁnd in Indian spherical as-
tronomy. In IV.15 the goal is to ﬁnd the diurnal arc of a planet; the ﬁrst step
is to determine the planet’s declination ( in ﬁgure 5.6). To get  Richard in-
structs the reader to add the planet’s latitude () to the declination of its
place on the ecliptic (E). Now if  is small (as is usually the case) the error
incurred is not very large; nevertheless, this method is somewhat crude.
We should note, in fairness, that this example is an exception to the rule.
Although Richard’s spherical astronomy has a few logical shortcomings, the
Quadripartitum is for the most part a thorough, rigorous work for its time,
and it deserved the inﬂuence it had in the following centuries.
Although the works of Levi ben Gerson and Richard of Wallingford
stand out, they were hardly the only trigonometric works of the fourteenth
century. Interest in the revival and extension of mathematical astronomy
continued in both England and France. Simon Bredon of Winchecombe
(1300–1372) of Merton College, Oxford,50 wrote a commentary on the ﬁrst
three books of the Almagest, as well as a work on chords which lamentably
has been lost.51 John of Lignères (ﬂ. 1320–1335) and John of Murs (ﬂ.
1317–1345) were both active astronomers (especially in planetary theory) and
played important roles in spreading the Alfonsine Tables. Clearly their col-
leagues were still having issues dealing with the sexagesimal arithmetic used
in astronomy, since they both wrote on it. Their trigonometric efforts were,
as usual, pitched as a precursor to the study of astronomy. John of Lignères’s
canons to his astronomical tables, the Primum mobile, contain some trigonom-
etry and basic spherical astronomy.52 John of Murs also wrote a small trea-
tise, Figura inveniendi sinus kardagarum, on the favorite topic of sine table
construction.53
Of greater interest is John of Murs’s De arte mensurandi.54 Many of its 13
chapters deal with topics related to practical geometry, but this treatise con-
tains much more. The ﬁrst four chapters and part of the ﬁfth, which contain
The West to 1550
239
49In a later, much less successful edition of the Quadripartitum, Richard incorporated some of
Geber’s treatise, especially the proofs [Richard of Wallingford (North) 1976, 23].
50Merton College was a center for scientiﬁc research; Bredon may have been a younger colleague
of Thomas Bradwardine there.
51[Talbot 1962–63] is a summary of Bredon’s works and includes an abstract of his commentary
on the Almagest.
52The trigonometric part of John of Lignères’s canons was published in [Curtze 1900, 390–413];
his sine table is reproduced in facsimile and recomputed in [Glowatzki/Göttsche 1990, 73–79].
53This was published in [Curtze 1900, 413–416].
54The complete De arte mensurandi was published in a Latin edition in [John of Murs (Busard)
1998], superceding [Busard 1974] which contained a Latin edition of a segment of the work.

the text of most interest to us, actually were written by another author.55 As
John says, “[t]his author, whose name I do not know but who was a subtle
geometer, certainly covered the art of the measurement of ﬁgures in a gen-
eral way.” Without doubt practical geometry, concerned as it was with quan-
tifying geometric quantities, had a natural afﬁnity to trigonometry; it is not
surprising that our unknown author put it into practice here. Chapter 2 is de-
voted entirely to the familiar business of constructing a table of chords, and
does so very much in the Ptolemaic style. Of more interest is chapter 3,
which contains a reasonably systematic treatment of solving plane triangles.
The heart of the chapter is theorems III.7 through III.9, in which the au-
thor tackles various triangles. III.7 determines the angles of a triangle when
all three sides are known. His argument may be paraphrased as follows. In
ﬁgure 5.7, drop perpendicular AD onto BC. Then, by Euclid II.13,
(5.10)
Since the right side of this equation involves known quantities and AB is also
given, we ﬁnd
And since BC is known we have DC, and thence BD ( BCDC). But, ap-
plying Pythagoras to the triangle on the left,
BC DC
BC
AC
AB
⋅
=
+
−
1
2
2
2
2
(
).
AB
BC DC
BC
AC
2
2
2
2
+
⋅
=
+
.
Chapter 5
240
Figure 5.6
An approximation in Richard
of Wallingford’s spherical 
astronomy
55Marshall Clagett came to this conclusion in [Clagett 1978, 11–18], retracting his previous opin-
ion in [Clagett 1952].

which gives AD. So in fact all the line segments in the diagram are known.
Now AD is the Sine of the angle at B in a circle with radius RBA (in dot-
ted lines in ﬁgure 5.7). The author tacitly assumes that we know what to do
from here: namely, convert AD to the Sine of an angle with R equal to that
used by an available Sine table56 and use the table to ﬁnd the arc Sine, which
will be the angle at B. A similar process can be used to ﬁnd the angle at C,
and since the angles in a triangle sum to two right angles, we have the angle
at A as well. The triangle has been solved.
So our anonymous author has used Elements II.13, which we defended
against charges of trigonometry early in chapter 1, as the foundation for an
application of the Law of Cosines to ABC. (Of course Euclid would not
have conceived his theorem in this way.) In any case, Theorem III.8 of De
arte mensurandi uses the Law of Sines to solve triangles where two angles
and one side are known; III.9 solves triangles where two sides and an angle
are known by reducing to III.7.57
At this point the reader may be wondering what has become of the
trigonometric functions other than the sine (sinus rectus), versed sine (sinus
versus or sagitta“arrow”), chord (sinus duplatus or corda), and cosine
(complementi sinus “complement of the sine”)—in particular the tangent
(umbra versa),58 which as we have seen was well known and studied in east-
ern Islam. Indeed, we have seen repeatedly that Ptolemy would have bene-
ﬁted from bringing the tangent out of the shadows (gnomon lengths), so to
AB
BD
AD
2
2
2
−
=
,
The West to 1550
241
56This is an easy application of the Rule of Three: as AD is to AB, so is AD (in the new units) to the
radius R of the circle used in the Sine table.
57The case where three angles are known is not discussed; but the lengths of the sides in such a tri-
angle may be determined only in ratio to one another. So, one could assign one side a given ref-
erence length and apply III.8 to solve the triangle.
58The cotangent, when deﬁned, was the “umbra recta.”
Figure 5.7
Applying the Law of Cosines
in the De arte mensurandi

speak, and into his planetary astronomy. The tangent was hardly ignored at
least within astronomical contexts in Europe at this time;59 for instance, John
of Lignères had explicitly deﬁned both tangent and cotangent in the context
of altitude problems in the canons to his astronomical tables.60 We also ﬁnd
the umbra recta and umbra versa on various shadow scales on the backs of
medieval European astrolabes, borrowed from Islamic counterparts.61 But
these limited appearances were not enough to promote the tangent to a
higher status until Regiomontanus.
Interlude: The Marteloio in Navigation
It was around the fourteenth century that trigonometry found a new and
powerful application in seafaring, one that was to keep it in business for
many centuries. There was great commercial interest in traversing the seas
more efﬁciently than simply by hugging the coast, and a number of tech-
niques were devised to achieve this from the thirteenth century onwards.
These methods seem to have been learned quickly; technological develop-
ments that enhance enterprise become ripe for adoption once merchants re-
alize that competitors have a leg up.
Seafaring merchants were decidedly not connected to the academic so-
cial groups that would have been the primary milieu for discussion of mathe-
matics. However, they had the advantage of traveling widely, and many of
these travelers would have encountered some of the leading centers of knowl-
edge in Spain and the Middle East. Leonardo of Pisa learned mathematics
while traveling with his father, a merchants’ representative. His Liber abaci62
(1202) introduced decimal numeration for the beneﬁt of commerce and made
possible advances in several other areas—including, eventually, navigation.
Two of the new navigational methods that surfaced were the marine chart
and the portolan.63 The former, revolutionary in its accurate portrayal of
coastlines, required the use of a few basic facts from Euclidean geometry. The
latter was a written compilation of distances and directions between destina-
tions as well as local landmarks, and was not a mathematical document. Most
Chapter 5
242
59The sixteenth-century astrologer Lucas Gauricus attributed to the late thirteenth-century
astronomer Campanus of Novara a table of tangents [Bond 1921, 323]. This claim has been
repeated since then (see for instance [von Braunmühl 1900/1903, vol. 1, 101] or [Hughes in
Regiomontanus (Hughes) 1967, 7]), but its legitimacy has been questioned [Benjamin/Toomer
in Campanus of Novara (Benjamin/Toomer) 1971, 24] and the table has never been found ([von
Braunmühl 1900/1903, vol. 1, 101] and [Zinner 1990, 93]).
60[Curtze 1900, 399–402].
61[King 2005, 247–252].
62For a recent translation, see [Leonardo of Pisa (Sigler) 2002].
63[Taylor 1960, 5–11].

techniques did not need to be sophisticated mathematically; indeed, it was an
advantage if they were not, as most merchants were not mathematicians.
However, one method, the marteloio,64 was essentially a trigonometric tool.
Developed in the fourteenth century and with its origins possibly as
early as the thirteenth,65 the marteloio was part of a class of techniques
known as “dead reckoning,” in which the ship’s current position is deter-
mined solely from knowledge of earlier positions and directions, speeds, and
times of travel.66 This approach is opposed to, say, nautical astronomy,
which was to make its appearance in the ﬁfteenth century but would have
had the disadvantage of being a fair-weather friend. How the marteloio came
about is a matter for conjecture; the wide travels of seamen admit several
possibilities—perhaps contact with scholars in Spain, Islam, or even within
Europe itself.67 Navigators of the time kept personal notebooks containing
technical knowledge, mostly mathematical, required for their trade. The con-
tent in these books was probably copied from one navigator to another,
which makes tracking the origins of the marteloio a murky business.
One of the best surviving copies of these notebooks was owned by
Michael of Rhodes, a Venetian military and merchant navigator who traveled
extensively around the Mediterranean in the early ﬁfteenth century. His
manuscript contains a typical discourse on the marteloio and we shall follow
excerpts of it here.68
Compass directions were measured using the windrose, a division of the
directional circle into 32 parts; each quarter circle thus was divided into eight
directions, called “quarters,” corresponding to 
° each. These directions and
the distances traveled were crucial to record, because a ship could not sail di-
rectly into the wind. Instead it had to start its approach to a windward des-
tination by traveling at an angle almost 90° removed from the desired direction
(the alargar; see ﬁgure 5.8), typically advancing only slightly toward the
goal (the avanzar). Next, the ship would change its direction to bring the wind
to the other side of the ship, returning it to its course somewhat closer to its
destination.
11 1
4
The West to 1550
243
64The origin of the term marteloio is controversial; it might mean “hammering,” probably an id-
iom referring to the change of watch on a ship. See [Kelley 2000, 40, 48–50].
65[Richey 1992, 271]. A passage in Ramón Lull’s Arbre de Sciencia is the source of this claim; see
[Taylor 1957, 117–119], [Cortesão 1969, vol. I, 206–207], and [Campbell 1987, 441–442].
[Kelley 2000, 144–146] disagrees, arguing that Venice was the origin, or “at least the center of
use,” of the marteloio.
66See [Taylor 1950] for a summary of methods of dead reckoning.
67It has been speculated that the marteloio originated with Leonardo of Pisa’s school [Motzo
1947, LI–LII], although evidence is lacking for any theory.
68The manuscript is being made available in [Long/McGee/Stahl, to appear]. See also the associ-
ated web site http://brunelleschi.imss.ﬁ.it/michaelofrhodes/.

To make the proper course adjustments a small set of tables (ﬁgure 5.9),
the toleta de marteloio, was used. It gives four quantities as functions of the
windrose quarters: the alargar (distance off course), the avanzar (advance),
the ritorno (return), and avanzo de ritorno (advance on return). These tables,
which varied little from one to the other,69 correspond to the modern sine,
cosine, cosecant,70 and cotangent functions respectively—but, as we shall
see, we must be careful to read them appropriately.
Figure 5.8 portrays a typical situation where a ship needs to travel up-
wind. In the ﬁrst leg of the voyage, the ship travels in a direction as close to
the wind as it is able; eventually the winds shift and the ship may return to its
desired course. Assuming that the ﬁrst leg is 100 miles, the alargar gives the
number of miles that the ship is off course, while the avanzar gives the dis-
tance that the ship has advanced when it is ﬁnally able to turn toward its des-
tination. For a ship that is off course (alargar) by ten miles, the ritorno gives
the distance along the second leg required to reach the destination, while the
avanzo de ritorno gives the distance advanced toward the destination while
traveling on the second leg, projected onto the original course.
Text 5.5
Michael of Rhodes, a Navigational Problem from His Manual
And for an example of this rule, let’s say that a land is 100 miles to the east of
you; how much do I want to go east southeast, which is 2 quarters, so that the
land will be north by east of me, which is 7 quarters, and how far would I be
from that place? And below is written the way according to this technique.
Take the distance off course that you want to remain, which is 7 quarters,
which is 
then we will add the 2 quarters that you go and the 7 that you 
seek, which will be 9. So here is the return of 9 quarters, which is 10 1
5 .
98
10 ;
Chapter 5
244
69See [Masiero 1984, 403], which reproduces ﬁve marteloio tables differing in only a few entries.
70[Kelley 2000, 42–43] argues that this may be the ﬁrst practical application of the cosecant function.
Figure 5.8
Deﬁnitions of
terms in the
marteloio

We multiply and we say in this way 
and multiplied together, 
multiplied and divided, is 
miles.71
Explanation: In ﬁgure 5.10 we wish to travel 100 miles east from A to B, but
for some reason (the prevailing winds, or perhaps an intervening obstacle)
we must travel in the direction 2 quarters until at C we are able to
change course. We then travel in direction 7 quarters and reach our des-
tination. We deal only with Michael’s ﬁrst problem, which is how far we
must travel in the ﬁrst leg; i.e., the length of AC. The pattern of calculation in
Michael’s text, which claims to determine AC, is
(5.11)
in our case,
(5.12)
If we convert the alargar and ritorno to their modern equivalents (100 sin 
and ( respectively), (5.11) simpliﬁes to
AC =
⋅
+
=
⋅
=
alargar ( )
10
ritorno (
 miles
7
7
2
98
10
10
99
1
5
48
50
)
.
alargar ( )
10
ritorno (



⋅
+
);
99 48
50
98
10
51
5 ,
The West to 1550
245
71From the Michael of Rhodes web site (http://brunelleschi.imss.ﬁ.it/michaelofrhodes/).
Avanzar de
Alargar
ritorno
(distance off
Avanzar
Ritorn
(advance on
Quarter
course)
(advance)
(return)
return)
1
20
98
51
50
2
38
92
26
24
3
55
83
18
15
4
71
71
14
10
5
83
55
12
61⁄2
6
92
38
11
4
7
98
20
101⁄2
21⁄2
8
100
0
10
0
For every 100 miles
For every 10 miles alargar
Figure 5.9 Michael of Rhodes’s toleta de marteloio

(5.13)
Since the angle at C is 180° (), and the sine of this quantity is the
same as sin (), Michael’s rule is an application of the Law of Sines to
the large triangle in ﬁgure 5.10.
Or is it? Although we can only speculate concerning how Michael (or
the inventor of the method) thought about the marteloio, the pattern of cal-
culation in the text makes it likely that he reasoned as follows. The length of
the perpendicular from A onto BC is the alargar of , since the hypotenuse
of ABD is 100 miles. Now, looking at ACD, the ritorno of C72 gives
the length AC, assuming that the alargar AD is 10 miles. So by the Rule of
Three
73
and solving for AC gives our result.
Had the inventor of the marteloio clearly formulated this rule without
the intervening calculations (that is, without breaking down the triangle into
two parts) and applied it elsewhere in this streamlined form, we could be
conﬁdent in asserting that he was aware of the Law of Sines, and we could
turn to the question of whether he derived the Law himself or learned it from
another source. However, applying the Law of Sines directly to ABC would
not require determining AD, and in similar situations Michael always goes
through this intermediate step. We are inclined to say that the author has not
alargar
ritorno
AC
=
10
,
AC =
⋅
+
=
+
100
100
Sin 





csc(
)
sin
sin(
)
Chapter 5
246
72Whether this means BCA or its supplement is immaterial, since the ritorno is the same.
73Both sides of the equality are the ratio of the dotted line to AC, only in different units.
Figure 5.10
A typical marteloio
problem

sufﬁciently codiﬁed and applied the Law of Sines to be able to assert that he
knew and used it.74
One wonders whether or not the marteloio could have been used in practice
by seamen. Navigators would have had to know only the principles of deci-
mal arithmetic, which had been introduced to Europe in the early thirteenth
century by Leonardo of Pisa in the Liber abaci. Perhaps some would have
been up to the task; the rest of Michael of Rhodes’ book makes it clear that
he, at least, was capable in these matters.75 But not every navigator was
Michael of Rhodes. There were alternatives to the marteloio for seamen not
as arithmetically inclined, for instance the “circle and square,” a graphical
instrument that served a similar navigational purpose.76
Nautical astronomy proper began to emerge in the ﬁfteenth century, and
began to play a signiﬁcant role in the history of trigonometry late in the six-
teenth century. We shall revisit this topic early in the sequel to this volume.
From Ptolemy to Triangles: John of Gmunden,
Peurbach, Regiomontanus
Europe was hardly a single place in these years; in the thirteenth and four-
teenth centuries knowledge did not travel well. The English and French works
that we have seen would not necessarily have been on bookshelves in coun-
tries to the east and south, even as late as the ﬁfteenth century. In this con-
strained environment, the building of university communities could make as
much difference to the intellectual climate as any great discovery did. Three
successive astronomers, John of Gmunden, George Peurbach, and his student
Regiomontanus, contributed in this way to the University of Vienna (which
had already started well with an infusion of mathematics from Paris), turning
it into a haven of astronomical learning.77 This is not to say that the three
The West to 1550
247
74I am indebted to Joel Silverberg for a correspondence on this topic that led me to this view. [Kel-
ley 2000, 43–45] assumes that the Law of Sines is present, and that its application using the
alargar and ritorno (sine multiplied by cosecant, rather than dividing one alargar/sine by the
other) is due to the fact that this allows the navigator to avoid division. Obviously, we disagree.
75In a related manuscript by Pietro de Versi (now known to be written also by Michael of Rhodes),
he says: “This is the raxion called del marteloyo for navigating mentally. . . . This is done by an
artful method for the man who may have the intellect to learn and who might take pleasure in
learning the theory.” [Kelley 2000, 150] takes this as an indication that the marteloio was more
“intellectual challenge than a practical tool.”
76[Taylor 1960, 13–14]; see especially [Kelley 2000, 57–72] for a more detailed description of the
instrument.
77The local activities of our three astronomers at the University of Vienna have been studied recently
in various articles. The teaching careers of all three are proﬁled in [Grössing 1983, pp. 67–141]. 

were not great scholars in their own right. Their roles in mathematical as-
tronomy, culminating with Regiomontanus’s systematic De triangulis omni-
modis, took trigonometry beyond its conﬁnes as a precursor to astronomy to
stand as an autonomous discipline.
The ﬁrst of our trio, John of Gmunden (1380–1442),78 was a student at Vi-
enna and became a lecturer there in 1406. As time went on he focused more
and more on mathematics and astronomy, eventually teaching these subjects
exclusively. His astronomical work was devoted especially to tables and in-
struments and was not particularly novel in itself, but he was well acquainted
with predecessors such as Levi ben Gerson, Richard of Wallingford, John of
Lignères, John of Murs, and Campanus of Novara.79 By bringing these lumi-
naries into his work, John of Gmunden also brought their intellectual presence
to the Viennese astronomical community. Relevant to us in his astronomical
writings are a couple of purported applications of the spherical Law of Cosines
to solve certain spherical astronomical problems, but this claim is subject to
dispute.80 As we shall see, it is likely that Peurbach deserves the credit for this
result.
John of Gmunden’s trigonometric treatise, Tractatus de sinibus, chordis et
arcubus,81 was important less for its contents (which relied heavily on prede-
cessors) than for the calculation patterns that it set in motion. Its instructions for
computing tables of sines begins by following the Toledan Tables in ﬁnding the
sines of the kardajas (multiples of 15°). John continues essentially by follow-
ing Ptolemy: the construction of the regular pentagon gives chords of multiples
of 36°; appropriate combinations of chord addition/subtraction and half-angle
formulas give chords of multiples of 
; and ﬁnally Ptolemy’s approximation 
procedure for the value of Crd 1° allows the rest of the table to be ﬁlled in.82
1 1
2 °
Chapter 5
248
On university life in Vienna see [Uiblein 1980]; on the curriculum see [Gall 1980]; and on Re-
giomontanus’s activities in Vienna see [Hamann 1980b]. [Shank 1997] discusses interactions
between the university and the court on matters of astrology, including the involvements of John
of Gmunden and Peurbach.
78For comprehensive descriptions of John of Gmunden’s life and work see [Klug 1943], the
shorter [Mundy 1943], and especially [Vogel 1973]. [Firneis 1988] (a summary of his astron-
omy) and [Kaiser 1988] (a summary of his mathematics) are part of the proceedings of a con-
ference on the life, work, and culture of John of Gmunden.
79Indeed, John’s astronomical work Compositio et usus intrumenti quod Magister Campanus in
theorica sua docuit fabricare ad inveniendum vera loca planetarum (available in a Latin edition
in [Benjamin 1954]) is mostly excerpted from Campanus’s Theorica planetarum.
80The ﬁrst of these instances is a formula used in determining the Sun’s altitude; [Klug 1943,
50–51] says that the Law is there, but [Vogel 1973, 118] disagrees. In another place it is asserted
that John was able to apply at least a special case of the Law [Firneis 1988, 72].
81A Latin edition of John of Gmunden’s Tractatus is available in [Busard 1971].
82 Around this time Nicholas of Cusa anticipated a method of computing chords, using a sort of lim-
iting process that eventually equates small arcs with their corresponding chords; it represented 

More interesting is John’s idea to use new radii for the base circle. In the
Tractatus he actually gives two sine tables both using established R values,
one the Toledan R150 and the other the Ptolemaic R60.83 However, he
has also been credited with the idea of using the radius R600,000, to be
found later in Georg Peurbach’s tables.84 This combination of decimal and
sexagesimal numeration, possibly considered ﬁrst by John of Lignères,85 be-
gan a journey that would lead eventually to the decimalization of trigono-
metric tables in the work of Regiomontanus. The choice of a large radius,
which allowed the reader to obtain accurate results without using decimal
fractions, emphasizes that the modern familiarity with decimal arithmetic
was not yet present.
George Peurbach (1421–1461)86 arrived as a student at the University of
Vienna not long after John of Gmunden’s death in 1442. We know very little
of his experiences there, but it is tempting to think that John’s legacy in
books and instruments would have beneﬁted Peurbach enormously. Later,
when Peurbach returned to Vienna around 1453, his astronomical reputation
was well established. A series of lectures he gave the following year (which
included a young Regiomontanus in the audience) eventually became his
Theoricae novae planetarum, a popular introduction to the Ptolemaic cos-
mos.87
Peurbach was a prodigious calculator, as evidenced by his Tabulae eclip-
sium which was used to predict eclipses for over a century. His Tractatus super
propositiones Ptolemaei de sinubus et chordis, eventually published in 1541
with Regiomontanus’s sine tables, is simply an abridgment of John of
Gmunden’s Tractatus (see ﬁgure 5.11). But elsewhere, in manuscript, we have
from Peurbach a monumental table of sines with R600,000 with arguments
The West to 1550
249
a signiﬁcant improvement on Ptolemaic methods, but it was not picked up until discovered two
centuries later by Snell. See [Nicholas of Cusa (Hofmann) 1980, 160–177], and commentary in
[von Braunmühl 1900, vol. 1, 112–113].
83These tables are reproduced in facsimile and recomputed in [Glowatzki/Göttsche 1990, 81–93].
84John often wrote each value of his calculations as a whole-numbered multiple of the last decimal
place in the given quantity; this may have led to the idea.
85See [Bond 1921, 320] and [Firneis 1988, 81].
86Peurbach’s precise date of birth is not certain. See [Goldmann 1923] for a discussion and justiﬁ-
cation of this date, and [Hellman/Swerdlow 1978] and [Zinner 1990, 17–30] for summaries of
Peurbach’s life and work.
87The Theoricae novae planetarum, an improvement on the well-known Theorica planetarum
probably by Gerard of Cremona, was translated into English in [Aiton 1987]. Its debt to Islamic
astronomy is obvious and substantial; it includes a number of Muslim innovations, including the
theory of trepidation of the equinoxes. It has even been suggested that Peurbach was aware of
the alternate planetary models of the Maragha astronomers and formulated new models inspired
by them [Dobrzycki/Kremer 1996]. See also [Langermann 1998] for the Theoricae’s inﬂuence
on the Hebrew tradition in the sixteenth century.

separated by only 10 of arc.88 Although Peurbach’s table does not compare
well to Ulugh Beg’s, which was composed during Peurbach’s lifetime (ﬁve
sexagesimal places for every minute of arc; Peurbach’s table corresponds to a
bit more than three places), this was a major step forward for Europe. It set in
motion a trend toward greater and greater accuracy that would culminate with
the great tables of Rheticus and Pitiscus. Peurbach also went on to construct
the ﬁrst European table of tangents in 1455, which he used in conjunction with
a geometric instrument to determine angular altitudes.89 Evidently, Peurbach
and friends had mastered decimal arithmetic to the point that substantial feats
of calculation were now within their reach.
Peurbach’s greatest achievement was the Epitome of the Almagest, an
abridgment of Ptolemy’s classic. More than a summary of its contents, the
Chapter 5
250
88A table of sines by Peurbach with R60,000 is reproduced in facsimile and recomputed in
[Glowatzki/Göttsche 1990, 115–125].
89[Zinner 1990, 26–27].
Figure 5.11
A page from Georg
Peurbach’s Tractatus
showing the calculation of
the kardajas (courtesy of
the Burndy Library)

Epitome enhanced and critiqued the Almagest and so played a large role in
familiarizing European scientists with the Almagest’s strengths and weak-
nesses. Indeed, the Epitome was to be a factor in what led Copernicus even-
tually to overthrow Ptolemaic astronomy. Peurbach’s work on the Epitome
was cut short by his death; his student Regiomontanus delivered on his
promise to bring it to fruition, ﬁnishing it in Rome in 1462 and dedicating it
to Cardinal Bessarion in 1463. It was eventually published in 1496 (see ﬁg-
ure 5.12).
Peurbach’s too-short career was extended, academically at least, by
Regiomontanus’s (1436–1476) equally short career.90 Johann Müller (his
actual name—Regiomontanus is derived from a Latin version of the name
The West to 1550
251
90Among the small industry of works about Regiomontanus, [Zinner 1990] (now available in En-
glish translation) stands out as the central source. Regiomontanus’s writings are available in fac-
simile in [Regiomontanus 1972]; a number of papers surrounding his life and work are collected
in [Hamann 1980a]. One easily-overlooked source is an abridged translation of Gassendi’s bi-
ography of Regiomontanus in [Regiomontanus (Hughes) 1967, 11–18].
Figure 5.12
Peurbach’s and
Regiomontanus’s Epitome of
the Almagest (courtesy of
the Burndy Library)

of his home town of Königsberg) was attracted to Vienna by its reputation
in astronomy, and he began teaching there as early as 1457. The comple-
tion of the Epitome was his ﬁrst major accomplishment, although it was
not published until two decades after his death. Peurbach had conceived
of a book on trigonometry while streamlining the mathematics of the
Almagest for the Epitome; Regiomontanus realized this goal with the De
triangulis omnimodis shortly after the Epitome was completed. But Reg-
iomontanus was ﬁrstly an astronomer; in addition to his work in theoretical
astronomy he was a creative instrument, table, and calendar builder. It is
impressive that, in such a short life, his interests went beyond astronomy to
encompass all areas of mathematics of his time; among his other achieve-
ments, he rediscovered part of Diophantus’s Arithmetica and was well ac-
quainted with the latest developments in arithmetic and algebra.91
Regiomontanus’s place on our stage is dominated by the De triangulis
omnimodis (“On triangles of every kind”; see ﬁgure 5.13). This comprehen-
sive treatment of triangles and their solutions, both plane and spherical, is far
and away the most careful and systematic European work on triangles of its
time. Although De triangulis is without doubt an independent work on
trigonometry, Regiomontanus clearly wished to situate it within the astro-
nomical tradition. At the outset he places De triangulis as a necessary an-
tecedent to the Epitome:
You, who wish to study great and wonderful things, who wonder
about the movement of the stars, must read these theorems about
triangles. Knowing these ideas will open the door to all of astron-
omy and to certain geometric problems. For although certain ﬁg-
ures must be transformed into triangles to be solved, the remaining
questions of astronomy require these books.92
Regiomontanus goes on to refer to his book as “the foot of the ladder to
the stars.”93 Nevertheless the style has changed dramatically: when he refers
back to the classics, it is not so much to the Almagest that he turns, as to Eu-
clid’s Elements. The accounts of the construction of sine and chord tables
are gone, as are any speciﬁc references to astronomical problems. Instead
Chapter 5
252
91Several surveys of Regiomontanus’s mathematics exist, including [Rose 1975, 90–117], [Kaun-
zner 1980], [Folkerts 1977], and an update on recent research in [Folkerts 1990]. See also [Folk-
erts 1996] for his interaction with the Greek mathematical tradition (although not particularly
with trigonometry), and [Folkerts 2002] for his familiarity with Italian mathematics. Finally, [de
Siebenthal 1993, 268–352], the bulk of a chapter on medieval trigonometry, is a mathematical
survey of De triangulis, as is [Delambre 1819, 292–323].
92[Regiomontanus (Hughes) 1967, 27].
93[Regiomontanus (Hughes) 1967, 29].

we ﬁnd a mathematical structure familiar to us: a ﬁrst chapter full of deﬁni-
tions and axioms, and a careful build-up of theorems depending one on
another which ends up covering the solutions of all possible triangle con-
ﬁgurations.
After the deﬁnitions and axioms, Book I begins with nineteen theorems
dealing with basic calculations of quantities in the style of Euclid’s Data: “if
such-and-such is given, then such-and-such is known.”94 Often ignored be-
cause of their seeming triviality when seen algebraically, these theorems nev-
ertheless exemplify the tension between geometry and computation that still
endured in the ﬁfteenth century. We excerpt one theorem to give the ﬂavor.
The West to 1550
253
94The Data is available in three recent translations; see [Euclid (Ito) 1980/1998], [Euclid (Mc-
Dowell/Sokolik) 1993], and [Euclid (Taisbak) 2003]; the latter contains extensive commentary.
Figure 5.13
Petreius’s 1533 edition of
Regiomontanus’s De
triangulis (courtesy of the
Burndy Library)

Text 5.6
Regiomontanus, Finding the Side of a Rectangle 
from Its Area and Another Side
(from De triangulis, I.17)
From any given side of a rectangular parallelogram [of] known [area], one can
determine the other side.
If [the area of] rectangular parallelogram ABCD is known [and] any one
side is also known—for example, AB—then its other side AD can be found.
Extend line AD to Q and line CB to P, until each of the lines AQ and BP is
equal to the given line AB. Complete the square QB by constructing line PQ.
Now by [Euclid] VI.1 the ratio of square QB to parallelogram AC will be as
that of line QA to line AD. Therefore the ratio of square QB to parallelogram
AC is given by deﬁnition, since each of these areas QB and AC is given; for in-
deed, by Theorem 1 above, QB is the square of the given line AB, and the hy-
pothesis has given parallelogram AC. Therefore, the ratio of line QA to line
AD becomes known. But QA and AB are the equal sides of square QB, and
hence the ratio of AB to AD is necessarily known. Therefore since one of the
lines—namely AB—is given, by Theorem 6 above the other line—namely
AD—will be known, and thus the remaining side of the parallelogram has
been determined. Q.E.D.
[Another proof follows.]
The mechanics in brief. Divide the area of the parallelogram by the given
side to ﬁnd the unknown side. For example, if the area of parallelogram AC is
given as 36 square feet with side AB as 4 linear feet, divide 36 by 4 to get 9.
The unknown side is therefore 9 feet long.95
Explanation: (See ﬁgure 5.14.) The argument itself requires no debrieﬁng,
except to note that each step may be justiﬁed by a proposition in the Data.
The implication of the argument is simply that the quotient of two given
quantities is known, as the last paragraph illustrates. However, since we are
dealing with geometrical magnitudes, a Data-style argument is required to
justify each apparently trivial arithmetic operation.
In I.20 Regiomontanus deﬁnes the sine function. From there he goes through
a careful coverage of right-angled triangles, dealing ﬁrst with situations that
can be handled without sines. After these preliminaries, we reach the key
theorems in I.27–30:
I.27: When two sides of a right triangle are known, all the sides can
be found.
Chapter 5
254
95[Regiomontanus (Hughes) 1967, 53–55].

The West to 1550
255
96[Regiomontanus (Hughes) 1967, 71].
I.28: When the ratio of two sides of a right triangle is given, its
sides can be found (if a reference length is speciﬁed).
I.29: When one of the two acute angles and one side of a right tri-
angle are known, all the angles and sides can be found.
Text 5.7
Regiomontanus, the Angle-angle-angle Case of Solving Right Triangles
(from De triangulis, I.30)
If one of the acute angles of a right triangle is given, the ratios of the sides can
be found although the [lengths of the] sides themselves are not known.
If right ABC has C as the right angle and acute B is given, then the ra-
tios of any two of the sides can be found.
A will be found by Theorem 22 above. Therefore by the table of sines
and the directions in Theorem 20 above, each of the sides AC and BC will be
known as long as AB is the whole sine. Thus three known numerical values
may be assigned to the three sides. Then by the deﬁnition of a known ratio, the
theorem has indeed been proven.
The work is simple: Find the sine of the arc of the given angle and that of
its complement, and you will have numerical values for the two sides that in-
clude the right angle. For the third side, ﬁnd the sine of the quadrant. When
this is done, you know that the ratio of any two sides is as the ratio of their
corresponding [sine] values. For example, if B is 36[°], ﬁnd the sine of 36°,
namely 35267, and the sine of its complement, 54°, namely 48541. Further-
more, take 60000 for side AB. Therefore the ratio of AB to AC is as 60000 to
35267. And so on.96
Explanation: Theorem 22 asserts that knowledge of one acute angle of a
right triangle implies knowledge of the other. Theorem 20 simply identiﬁes
Figure 5.14
Regiomontanus’s De 
triangulis I.17

the sine. The calculations rely on the sine table accompanying the De trian-
gulis, which uses R 60,000.
From I.31 to I.41 Regiomontanus deals with isosceles triangles, reducing
each case to the right triangle propositions I.27–I.30. Finally he deals with
arbitrary triangles in I.42–I.57, handling all the various cases of knowns and
unknowns in I.47–I.53:
I.47: side-side-side given;
I.48: two angles given (only the ratios of sides are found);
I.49: side-angle-side given;
I.50: side-side-obtuse angle given;
I.51: side-side-acute angle given;
I.52: angle-side-angle given; and
I.53: angle-angle-side given.
All possible cases and ambiguities are handled. Again, Regiomontanus re-
duces each problem to a right triangle and appeals to one of I.27–I.30. For
instance, in one of the cases of I.53 (ﬁgure 5.15) he proceeds as follows:
suppose AB, B, and C are known. Drop perpendicular AD; then AD 
AB sinB and so
(5.14)
We have again the Law of Sines. But since the perpendicular AD is calcu-
lated as an intermediate stage, we are in the same position as we were in the
marteloio calculations, not fully able to attribute to this theorem “Law of
Sines” status.
Fortunately Regiomontanus remedies this situation at the outset of Book
II with a clear statement and proof of the Law of Sines.97 He goes on to revisit
some of the problems in Book I with his new tool. However, most of Book II
consists of solutions to a variety of triangles with certain quantities known:
the usual angles and sides, but also lengths of perpendiculars, sums or differ-
ences of sides, and so forth. Several theorems are worth noting specially:
II.26: If the area of a triangle is given together with the rectangu-
lar product of the two sides, then either the angle opposite the base
AC
AD
C
AB
B
C
=
∠
=
∠
∠
sin
sin
sin
.
Chapter 5
256
97Since Levi ben Gerson’s De sinibus, chordis et arcubus was found in Regiomontanus’s papers
upon his death it was speculated for a time that this may have been his source for the Law of
Sines. However, it seems clear that Regiomontanus did not have Levi’s work in hand when he
was writing the De triangulis omnimodis [Zinner 1990, 57].

becomes known or [that angle] together with [its] known [exte-
rior] angle equals two right angles.98
Although the area of the triangle is given, Regiomontanus uses the formula
to solve for A; this is the ﬁrst appearance of the 
trigonometric area formula for the triangle. This and a couple of other refer-
ences to the area of a triangle, inconsequential for Ptolemaic astronomy, il-
lustrate again that trigonometry had taken a step away from astronomy into
a mathematical subject on its own.
In a few cases (for example II.12, II.13, and II.23) Regiomontanus is
compelled to use algebra when geometric methods fail him.99 For example:
II.12: If the perpendicular is given and the base and the ratio of the
sides are known, each side can be found.
In ﬁgure 5.16 let AB / AC3/5, AD5, and BC20. If x is the distance
between D and the midpoint of BC, then BD10x and DC10x. Now
AB2 BD2 AD2 x2 20x125, while AC 2 DC 2 AD2 x2 20x
125. But AB2 / AC 29/25. So
Cross-multiplication yields 16x2 2000 680x, from which we may solve
for x. Then the two segments of the base are known, and the Pythagorean
Theorem gives the other two sides of the triangle.
Book III, a transition from plane to spherical geometry, builds the geo-
metrical infrastructure needed before one can approach spherical trigonom-
etry. The ﬁrst 34 propositions deal with the geometry of great circles on
spheres, while the last 22 prove various preliminary propositions about
x
x
x
x
2
2
20
125
20
125
9
25
−
+
+
+
=
.
Area =
⋅
⋅
1
2 AB AC
A
sin
The West to 1550
257
Figure 5.15
Regiomontanus’s De
triangulis I.53
98[Regiomontanus (Hughes) 1967, 133].
99The arithmetic procedures and algebra in De triangulis are studied in [Kaunzner 1990].

spherical triangles. It has been noted that parts of this Book resemble pas-
sages in Menelaus’s Spherics and Jabir ibn Aﬂah’s Islah al-Majisti, but as
with the rest of the De triangulis, Regiomontanus does not disclose his
sources.
Roughly speaking, Books IV and V parallel for spherical triangles what
Books I and II do for plane triangles. In Book IV, after some initial inequali-
ties are proved, Regiomontanus establishes the fundamental theorems. From
there he solves right spherical triangles, and concludes the book with all
cases of the general spherical triangle. The unﬁnished Book V (only 15
propositions)100 begins with an alternative fundamental theorem (the spheri-
cal Law of Cosines) and uses it to solve some triangles; the remaining theo-
rems solve triangles with other sorts of given quantities (differences of sides,
differences of arcs).
The real work in Book IV begins as follows:
IV.15: If, in a sphere, two great circles are inclined toward each other,
and if two points are marked on the circumference of one of them or
one point [is marked] on the circumference of each, and if a perpen-
dicular arc is drawn from either one of the points to the circumference
of the other circle, then the ratio of the sine of the arc that is between
one of those points and the point of intersection of the circles to the
sine of the perpendicular arc extended from that [same marked point]
to the other circle is as the ratio of the sine of the arc found between
the other [marked] point and the point of intersection to the sine of the
arc drawn from that [second marked] point.101
If we wade carefully through this verbiage (typical of statements of spheri-
cal trigonometric theorems), we ﬁnd none other than the Rule of Four
Chapter 5
258
100 [Zinner 1990, 55].
101 [Regiomontanus (Hughes) 1967, 219–221].
Figure 5.16
Regiomontanus’s De
triangulis II.12; also serves
as the diagram for
Rheticus’s De triquetris
Praeceptum Nonum

Quantities.102 Regiomontanus respects this key result as much as the Arabs
had:
I pray that the present verbose and intricate theorem should not
frighten you away at ﬁrst sight, for in things mathematical you will
scarcely make the language be clear enough, much less graceful.
Truly you will pluck the sweetest fruit from this tree, however un-
yielding; and when you have savored this [fruit], you will under-
stand almost the entire present book.103
This praise is somewhat overstated since Regiomontanus uses it to prove
only two further results, fundamental though they are: in a triangle with right
angle at B (ﬁgure 5.17),
IV.18: sin A cos ccos C (Geber’s Theorem); and
IV.19: cos b cos a cos c.
The two theorems we skipped over, IV.16 and IV.17, are the spherical Law
of Sines, ﬁrst for a right-angled triangle and then the general case. The Law of
Sines is really Regiomontanus’s foundation for his solutions of right-angled
triangles in Book IV, and these solutions are in turn the bases for his solutions
of general triangles. The Law of Sines would not have been new to Regiomon-
tanus; indeed, it is found in Jabir ibn Aﬂah’s book and in the part of the Epit-
ome written by Peurbach,104 and was known in Austria as early as 1431.105
Our ﬁnal dalliance with the De triangulis is V.2: in an arbitrary spherical
triangle,
The West to 1550
259
102 To be precise, the case where the angle at the base is right.
103 [Regiomontanus (Hughes) 1967, 221].
104 The part of the Epitome on spherical astronomy is quite different from the corresponding chap-
ters in the Almagest. It is possible that Regiomontanus played a role in the composition of this
section [Zinner 1990, 53].
105 [Zinner 1990, 55, 47].
Figure 5.17
Regiomontanus’s De triangulis
IV.18

(5.15)
Replacing the versed sines with (1 cos)’s and applying the cosine differ-
ence law, we arrive at the spherical Law of Cosines
106
(5.16)
the workhorse of modern spherical trigonometry. We have here the ﬁrst ap-
pearance of the Law in Europe on its own: although Peurbach had given a
solution to a problem involving the Sun’s altitude which was effectively
equivalent, he never posed the Law independently.107 It has been speculated
that Regiomontanus came up with the Law not from Peurbach, but from al-
Battani’s De motu stellarum, which also solves an astronomical problem in a
manner identical to an application of the Law of Cosines.108
Whether the De triangulis is something substantially new has been de-
bated. Many of the theorems on plane triangles were already known, and as
we have seen, authors such as Levi ben Gerson and John of Murs had ap-
proached plane triangles systematically using the sine function.109 In fact it
has been said recently that “Regiomontanus appears on the scene as a very
natural and not especially remarkable successor” to many of the scholars al-
ready mentioned in this chapter.110 Certainly there is no reason to pull De tri-
angulis outside of its tradition and claim undue originality for it. But what
separates the De triangulis from its predecessors is—as its title says—its
universal coverage of all cases of triangles, plane or spherical, and its
demonstrations from ﬁrst principles of the most important theorems. It is re-
markable in the way that Euclid’s Elements is: not because its results were
cos
cos
cos cos
sin sin
,
A
a
b
c
b
c
=
−
vers A
a
b
c
b
c
vers
vers
−
−
=
(
)
sin sin
.
1
Chapter 5
260
106 See for instance [Zeller 1944, 30–31] for a derivation.
107 See [Klug 1943, 50] for a claim that the solution had already been known to John of Gmunden,
and [Vogel 1973, 118] for a reply, ﬁrmly attributing the result to Peurbach. [Vogel 1973, 55–65]
gives a Latin edition and German commentary on Peurbach’s work on the solar altitude. [Zin-
ner 1990, 23] also gives a brief account and quotation from Peurbach’s discovery.
108 See [von Braunmühl 1900/1903, vol. 1, 130–131] and [Zinner 1990, 57–58], although neither
von Braunmühl [von Braunmühl 1900/1903, vol. 1, 513–54] nor Nallino, in [al-Battani
(Nallino) 1899/1903/1907, vol. 1, 185], believe that the law was really on al-Battani’s mind.
109 [Levi ben Gerson (Goldstein) 1985, 43–47] and [John of Murs (Busard) 1998, 20–22,
128–142]; recall however that this part of Murs’s treatise was composed by an anonymous ear-
lier author. There is no direct connection between John of Murs and Regiomontanus; the proofs
of the theorems are different.
110 [North, in Richard of Wallingford (North) 1976, vol. 2, 30–31], an opinion earlier stated by
[Delambre 1819, 292]. Indeed, Gerolamo Cardano accused Regiomontanus of borrowing heav-
ily from Geber, especially the spherical trigonometry (quoted in [Zinner 1990, 190]). The ex-
tent to which this borrowing actually occurred is outlined carefully in [Lorch 1995, 10–11].

new, but its structure codiﬁed the subject for the future. Although not
published until 1533, the De triangulis was to be the foundation of trigono-
metric work for centuries, and was a source of inspiration for Copernicus,
Rheticus, and Brahe, among many others.111
There are several possible Arabic sources that Regiomontanus might
have used for the De triangulis. It is natural to attempt to connect De trian-
gulis with Nasir al-Din al-Tusi’s Treatise on the Quadrilateral, a book that
systematized the study of plane and spherical triangles for eastern Islam as
much as De triangulis did for Europe. Alas, some of the more important the-
orems in al-Tusi’s work do not appear in De triangulis, and the proofs of the
theorems that do appear in both often differ, so if there is a link, it is not di-
rect.112 Rather, as the absence of the tangent function in the De triangulis
suggests, Regiomontanus’s Arabic debt seems to lie mostly in the tradition
of the Toledan Tables and Jabir ibn Aﬂah,113 whose writings were still being
published after Regiomontanus’s death. Several Arabic antecedents have
been suggested for particular theorems in De triangulis, but the smoking gun
of transmission awaits discovery.114
The most remarkable omission from the De triangulis is the tangent.
Regiomontanus began to use this function around this time, but it was not
until the Tabula directionum (written in 1467, published 1490)115 that it en-
tered his scientiﬁc work. The use of the tangent in the Tabula directionum
reveals that he was now aware of its advantages in astronomy, as opposed to
its limited use in altimetry in Peurbach’s writings:
It is not in vain that this table [of tangents] is called ‘fruitful’, for, by
resembling a tree, it is accustomed to produce great and admirable
effects.116
As a feat of calculation, the “tabula fecunda” (ﬁgure 5.18) does not
match Regiomontanus’s best efforts—it gives tangents for intervals of 1°, and
uses a “radius” of 100,000 (that is, the function tabulated is 100,000 tan ).
But the table is after all a ﬁrst attempt, and where entries are vulnerable to nu-
merical instability for arguments near 90°, Regiomontanus’s values could be
The West to 1550
261
111 See for instance [Hughes, in Regiomontanus (Hughes) 1967, 3–4, 8–9].
112 See the extended study [von Braunmühl 1897b]. [Folkerts 1977, 237] states that the link has not
yet been decided upon, and that the issue should be revisited.
113 [Lorch 1971, 62–69].
114 See [Hairetdinova 1970] and [Hairetdinova 1986].
115 [Rosinska 1981] argues that this work depends on Giovanni Bianchini’s astronomical tables.
See also [Rosinska 1980] for a more general survey of the spread of trigonometric tables in the
ﬁfteenth century.
116 Tabula directionum, quote translated in [Zeller 1944, 34].

worse.117 Strictly speaking this was not the ﬁrst European tangent table—
Giovanni Bianchini’s Tabulae magistrales contained one for R1000 as
early as 1463118—but Regiomontanus’s was the ﬁrst to appear in print.
Regiomontanus’s choice of radius here is noteworthy, for it signals the
completion of the shift from sexagesimal to decimal radii in trigonometric
tables. The sine table in the Tabula directionum, the ﬁrst one printed in Eu-
rope,119 uses the same value R60,000 that he had adopted in the De trian-
gulis (presumably inﬂuenced by Peurbach’s earlier choice of R600,000).
However, Regiomontanus suggests changing R to 100,000, due to the
Chapter 5
262
117 A few sample entries: Tan 20°36396 [1]; Tan 40°83909[1]; Tan 60°173207 [2];
and at the trouble spot near the end of the table, Tan 88°2863563 (correct is 2863625), and
Tan 89°5729796 (correct is 5728996). See [Glowatzki/Göttsche 1990, 183] for a complete
recomputation.
118 See [Rosinska 1981b] for a description of Bianchini’s tables, which include a cosecant table for
R10,000, and sine, cosine and cotangent tables for R6000 and R60,000. They are re-
produced in facsimile and recomputed in [Glowatzki/Göttsche 1990, 92–115].
119 The occasionally repeated claim that Peter Apian’s 1533 sine tables were the ﬁrst to be printed
in Europe (for instance [Koyré 1964]) might be a misinterpretation of statements that they were
the ﬁrst printed tables with a decimal radius (e.g., [Kish 1970, 179]). The ﬁrst decimal tables
were Bianchini’s [Rosinska 1981b], but they were not printed. The tables in the Tabula direc-
tionum were published as early as 1490.
Figure 5.18
The ﬁrst printed
tangent table in Europe,
in Regiomontanus’s
Tabula directionum
(courtesy of the Burndy
Library)

obvious computational advantage of a purely decimal scheme. He may have
gained inspiration for this from Bianchini (with whom he corresponded120),
whose earlier tangent and cosecant tables also adopt a decimal base.121
Shortly thereafter Regiomontanus computed sine tables with the staggering
values of R6,000,000 and R10,000,000 for every minute of arc; these
were eventually published in 1541, along with Peurbach’s Tractatus, in the
Compositio tabularum sinuum rectorum.122
The Tabula directionum in particular must have played a role in the
spread of the tangent function and of trigonometric tables in general, for its
popularity rivaled that of De triangulis. Eleven editions were published, and
copies found their way into the grateful hands of Copernicus and Kepler,
among many others.123 Especially through these two works, Regiomontanus
directly inﬂuenced the works of the best scientists through the sixteenth and
well into the seventeenth century.
We would be remiss if we moved on from Regiomontanus without de-
scribing, however brieﬂy, his 1463 Tabula primi mobilis. This large double-
argument table of the function arc sin (sinx siny) was eventually used to solve
63 different, mostly spherical problems. It is thus an heir to the Arabic tradi-
tion of auxiliary functions. Indeed, the tabulated function is identical to the
approximate solar timekeeping formula we saw in the previous chapter—
although there is no evidence of transmission of the notion of auxiliary func-
tion to the West. European auxiliary tables were constructed through the early
seventeenth century, for instance by Magini;124 and Regiomontanus’s table in
various forms continued to be used as late as the nineteenth century.125
The West to 1550
263
120 The surviving Regiomontanus-Bianchini correspondence, which contains many speciﬁc
trigonometric and astronomical calculations, may be found in [Curtze 1902, 185–291], and re-
cently in [Gerl 1989].
121 [Rosinska 1987]. On pp. 419–420 Rosinska infers that Bianchini must have had sine and cosine
tables with a decimal base, but these tables have never been found.
122 Regiomontanus gives a method of computing Sin 1° for a radius of R600,000,000, using an 
equivalent to Ptolemy’s method for his upper bound 
and an Arabic method for his 
lower bound 
, arriving, at Sin 1°10,471,468 (as opposed to the correct
value of 10,471,444). See [Glowatzki/Göttsche 1990, 27] (noting that the inequalities are mis-
takenly reversed). The entries in Regiomontanus’s sine table for R6,000,000 rarely exceed
two units in the last place [Glowatzki/Göttsche 1990, 47].
123 [Zinner 1990, 93].
124 See [King 2004, 188–190] for more on Regiomontanus’s and Magini’s tables (including simi-
larities between the tables of Regiomontanus and Habash al-Hasib), as well as a description of
a similar table by Adolf Heegeman dated as late as 1849.
125 On the problems solved by the Tabula primi mobilis see [von Braunmühl 1900, vol. 1,
122–123]; on other auxiliary tables see [Glowatski/Göttsche 1990, 200-206].
1
3
2
3
1 5
45
sin .
sin
,
° +
(
)'
4
3
45
sin
'
(
)

Successors to Regiomontanus: Werner and Copernicus
Regiomontanus’s most prominent successor in spherical trigonometry was
the Nuremberg astronomer and geographer Johann Werner (1468–1522). His
De triangulis sphaericis, not published until 1907,126 nevertheless made its
mark as one of the best trigonometric works of its time; it has been com-
pared favorably to Regiomontanus’s De triangulis omnimodis.127 The gen-
eral structure of the book, in fact, mimics the spherical parts of De triangulis
omnimodis. The ﬁrst of the four books deals with the geometrical basics of
triangles on the sphere. Book II begins with a buildup to Menelaus’s Theo-
rem (II.8 and II.9), but the key theorems come next. In particular, the Rule of
Four Quantities for right-angled triangles (II.11) is Werner’s favorite device
for solving right triangles in the second half of Book II. When Werner
approaches general spherical triangles in Book III he usually relies either on
the Rule of Four Quantities or on some previous triangle solution—often,
the case of a right-angled triangle with two known sides and the third to be
found (II.20). This case, in turn, is solved using the relation cos a cos bcos c
(where the right angle is at C).
Of most interest in Werner’s book is Book IV. As a practicing scientist
he would have been excruciatingly aware of the tediousness of multiplica-
tion, especially of ﬁgures with ﬁve or even more decimal places such as sine
and cosine values. A clever way around this is suggested by the triangle so-
lutions in Book IV, which rely on equivalents of one of the so-called product
formulas:
(5.17)
Products like the term on the left side of this equation occur all the time, es-
pecially in spherical astronomy. Replacing the product on the left with the
difference on the right was to become a useful labor-saving tool, known as
prosthaphaeresis. It was used for several decades until, and even after, the
more powerful logarithms came along and achieved a similar end.
Since Werner’s work was not published the propagation of prosthaphaere-
sis was not immediate; in fact, the story of its development is downright
murky. It ﬁrst appeared decades later in 1588, in Nicolai Ursus’s Fundamen-
sin
sin
cos(
)
cos(
) .






=
−
−
+
[
]
1
2
Chapter 5
264
126 [Werner (Bjornbo) 1907] is a Latin edition; the companion work De meteoroscopis is in
[Werner (Bjornbo) 1913].
127See for instance [Folkerts 1976, 274]. Also see [Cantor 1907/ 1913/ 1901/ 1908, vol. 2, 452–459]
for a survey of Werner’s mathematics, especially pp. 454–455 for topics of interest to us.

tum astronomicum, along with the corresponding rule for the product of two
cosines,
128
(5.18)
However, it is clear that Tycho Brahe and his assistants were already using
the method by this time. For instance, in their trigonometric manual Trian-
gulorum planorum et sphaericorum praxis arithmetica,129 the spherical Law
of Cosines
(5.19)
is used to solve a side-angle-side triangle. But it is modiﬁed using the prod-
uct formulas to
(5.20)
thereby removing two of the three products.130 The possibility that their in-
spiration was Johann Werner himself (through Tycho’s junior colleague Paul
Wittich), once rejected by historians, has recently arisen again.131 In any
case, prosthaphaeresis became public around 1588 and the trials of comput-
ing products were somewhat relieved, at least in trigonometry.132
Our next astronomer Nicholas Copernicus (1473–1543), only ﬁve years
younger than Werner, is of course famous for introducing the heliocentric
model of the solar system. He was fortunate to begin his studies at the Uni-
versity of Cracow, then a leading academic center. He had the opportunity
there to study the ancient classics such as Euclid and Ptolemy, but also newer
cos
[cos(
)
cos (
)]
            
[cos(
)
cos (
)]cos ,
a
b
c
b
c
b
c
b
c
A
=
−
+
+
+
−
−
+
1
2
1
2
cos
cos cos
sin sin cos
a
b
c
b
c
A
=
+
cos
cos
cos(
)
cos(
) .






=
−
−
+
[
]
1
2
The West to 1550
265
128 It is sometimes stated in the secondary literature that this formula had appeared as early as
the tenth century with Ibn Yunus (originally [Delambre 1819, 112, 164]; see also [von
Braunmühl 1896, 105] and [Juschkewitsch 1964, 300], among others), but this is incorrect
(see [King 1972, 7, 149] or [King 1973b, 360]). The third of the product formulas is sin 
cos 
.
129 This manual was published in facsimile in [Brahe (Studnicka) 1886].
130 Joost Bürgi devised a method to remove the third product as follows: let 
and apply the cosine product formula, arriving at 
See [Dreyer 1916], 
especially pp. 128–129.
131 See [Thoren 1988], which also contains a summary of the debate surrounding the beginnings of
prosthaphaeresis that occurred around the end of the nineteenth century.
132 See [von Braunmühl 1899] on the origin and especially the development of prosthaphaeresis.
cos
cos
cos
cos
cos
.
a
b
c
b
c
x
A
x
A
=
−
+
+
+
−
+
+
(
)
(
)
[
]
(
)
(
)
[
]
1
2
1
2
1
2 cos
cos
cos
b
c
b
c
x
−
−
+
=
(
)
(
)
[
]





=
+
+
−
(
)
(
)
[
]
1
2 sin
sin

European works such as the Alfonsine Tables and Sacrobosco’s De sphaera.
Although Copernicus traveled occasionally his academic life was somewhat
quiet; until the very end of his life he published hardly anything. The arrival
of his young colleague Georg Rheticus (1514–1574) in 1539 changed this
completely: within a year Rheticus published the Narratio prima, an enthu-
siastic account of Copernicus’s heliocentric theory. With Rheticus’s encour-
agement and assistance, the De revolutionibus orbium coelestium was
printed in the year of Copernicus’s death, 1543.133
The story of Copernicus and his heliocentric system has been told count-
less times and we shall not repeat it here, preferring to concentrate on the
mathematics. Rheticus had arranged for the trigonometric portion of De revo-
lutionibus to be published as a separate work, the De lateribus et angulis trian-
gulorum, a year earlier in 1542. The only difference between the trigonometry
of the two works is that the sine table in De lateribus is computed to two ex-
tra digits (R10,000,000 rather than R100,000), and with intervals of 1
rather than 10.134 Copernicus begins, as customary, with a description of the
methods used to construct a table of sines. He follows Ptolemy almost to the
letter—even referring exclusively to chords rather than sines. Indeed, although
the entries in the table are clearly sines, he and Rheticus studiously avoid this
modern terminology, referring to sines instead as “half-chords subtending
double arcs.”135 This conservatism, ironic in a work as revolutionary as De
revolutionibus, was not to last much longer.
Whether or not Copernicus calculated the table in De lateribus remains
unclear; it has been suggested that Rheticus corrected some of the entries us-
ing Regiomontanus’s table as a guide.136 This reliance on existing tables
seems to have been fairly common; Regiomontanus’s own tables in the
Tabula directionum seem to have borrowed Bianchini’s tables in a similar
manner.137
As one might expect, after the tables are done Copernicus deals with
plane and spherical triangles. This work is also not very original, partly in-
spired by the Almagest, partly by colleagues. Whether or not Copernicus re-
lied speciﬁcally on Regiomontanus’s De triangulis omnimodis has been a
subject of some debate.138 Copernicus owned a copy of the Tabula direc-
Chapter 5
266
133 The two most recent translations of De revolutionibus are [Copernicus (Duncan) 1976] and
[Copernicus (Rosen) 1992]; the place to go for a technical understanding of the text is [Swerdlow/
Neugebauer 1984].
134 See the detailed comparison in [Zeller 1944, 44–46].
135 The sine table with R100,000 may be found in [Copernicus (Rosen) 1992, 32–39].
136 [Rosinska 1983]. Swerdlow and Neugebauer’s comparison of the table in De revolutionibus
with Regiomontanus [Swerdlow/Neugebauer 1984, part I, 101] is inconclusive.
137 [Rosinska 1981].
138 For a summary of some of the early debates on this point see [Zeller 1944, 53–56].

tionum, but he seems to have worked on trigonometry independently of
Regiomontanus until Rheticus brought him a copy of the 1533 edition of De
triangulis omnimodis.139 This may have prompted Copernicus to make cer-
tain changes to the section on spherical trigonometry,140 but whether or not
he did so, the revised work still pales in comparison to De triangulis omni-
modis. At least one can say that Copernicus was modern enough to consider
the triangle as the primitive trigonometric entity, rather than chords in a cir-
cle or Menelaus conﬁgurations.
Text 5.8
Copernicus, the Angle-angle-angle Case of Solving Triangles
(from De revolutionibus, I.13, Theorem 1)
If the angles of a triangle are given, the sides are given.
I say, let there be a triangle ABC. Circumscribe a circle around it, in accor-
dance with Euclid, Book IV, Problem 5. Then the arcs AB, BC, and CA will
likewise be given, according to the system in which 360° are equal to two
right angles. But when the arcs are given, the sides of the triangle inscribed in
the circle are also given as chords, in the Table set forth above, in units
whereof the diameter is assumed to have 200,000.141
Explanation: (See ﬁgure 5.19.) Of course the triangle cannot be determined
unless some length is chosen in advance; Copernicus sets the radius of
the circumscribed circle equal to 100,000. He then uses the same technique
that Ptolemy had applied when measuring arcs and corresponding angles;  
for instance, since 
will have the same value in demi-
degrees that C has in degrees. From this, chord AB may be found using
the table.
By now it is probably no surprise that a familiar result lurks behind this.
Applying this theorem twice and combining the results in ratio, we cancel
the arbitrary R100,000 and arrive at an equivalent to the ubiquitous Law
of Sines (AB / BC Crd (2C)/Crd (2A)).
AB
C
=
∠
2
AB
The West to 1550
267
139 See [Zinner 1990, 183–185], also for a more comprehensive discussion of Regiomontanus’s
impact on Copernicus.
140 [Rosen, in Copernicus (Rosen) 1992, 367]. This speculation, speciﬁcally that section I.13, the-
orems 13–15 in De revolutionibus are the result of his study of Regiomontanus’s De triangulis,
is questioned in [Swerdlow/Neugebauer 1984, part I, 103–104] on the grounds that the source
material for these results was readily available elsewhere, and that Copernicus’s account of
these theorems is inferior to Regiomontanus’s.
141 [Copernicus (Rosen) 1992, 40].

Copernicus goes on to solve seven types of plane triangles, including the
side-side-side case which he handles using Euclid’s Elements II.13 (the Law
of Cosines), although he omits the special cases that arise when two angles
and a side are known.142 Turning to spherical triangles (I.14), his fundamen-
tal result is:
Theorem 3: In right spherical triangles, the ratio of the chord sub-
tending twice the side opposite the right angle to the chord subtend-
ing twice either one of the sides including the right angle is equal to
the ratio of the diameter of the sphere to the chord subtending twice
the angle included, on a great circle of the sphere, between the re-
maining side and the hypotenuse.143
This is the spherical Law of Sines applied to a right triangle; it is never
generalized to arbitrary triangles. Thus when Copernicus solves spherical
triangles in the following propositions, he consistently drops a perpendicular
and considers the resulting pair of right triangles.144 Often in his astronomy,
he is dealing with right-angled triangles in any case. For instance, when ﬁnd-
Chapter 5
268
142 [Rossi 1973] gives an account of the plane trigonometry in De revolutionibus, including the
theorems leading to the construction of a sine table.
143 [Copernicus (Rosen) 1992, 43]; see an exposition of the proof in [Zeller 1944, 48–49].
144 One of his results is equivalent to Geber’s Theorem for right-angled triangles. Copernicus re-
ceived a copy of Geber’s work from Rheticus in 1539 and uses Geber’s Theorem in the De rev-
olutionibus to ﬁnd the angle of intersection of the ecliptic with the meridian (see
[Swerdlow/Neugebauer 1984, part I, 102]). However, the theorem was also available in Re-
giomontanus’s Epitome and De triangulis, so we cannot conclude that Geber was Copernicus’s
source.
Figure 5.19
Copernicus’s De revolutionibus I.13,
Theorem I

ing the declination  of a given arc of the ecliptic  (ﬁgure 5.20), he simply
applies Theorem 3 and gets
.
(5.21)
Since 
and 
, this is equivalent to the standard formula
sinsin
sin.
As a systematic mathematical work Copernicus’s spherical trigonome-
try is somewhat deﬁcient; it was pointed out very early (for instance, by Pe-
dro Nuñes and Christopher Clavius145) that several of his statements are in
error, omitting certain possible triangle conﬁgurations. These situations
were not corrected by Rheticus when editing the De lateribus. Since Coper-
nicus’s purpose in presenting the mathematics was primarily to serve his as-
tronomy and the errors did not lead to adverse effects in this regard, we are
inclined not to judge him too harshly or dwell on the matter any further.
For an example of Copernicus’s use of the new trigonometry, we turn to
his determination of the solar eccentricity from three observations of the Sun’s
position—the same problem we saw solved by Hipparchus and Ptolemy in
chapter 2. The solution is a curious mix of the old and new, perhaps what one
should expect in a work steeped in tradition yet breaking new ground. The
Sun is now at the center and the Earth in orbit around it, but the methods re-
mind us sharply of the Almagest solution of the same problem.
In ﬁgure 5.21 ADBC is the Earth’s circular orbit around the Sun. From
observations of the time it takes to travel from autumnal equinox B to 45°
further on, and then on to the vernal equinox A, Copernicus has already 
found 
and 
. We pick up the argument from
here:
BCA =
°
176 19
;
BC =
°
44 37
;
GH = 
EG = 
Crd
Crd
Crd
2
2
2
2
EG
GH
R
=

The West to 1550
269
145 Some of Nuñes’s and Clavius’s criticisms, including discussions of an ambiguity in a plane tri-
angle case, are translated in Rosen’s notes to his translation of De revolutionibus, [Copernicus
(Rosen) 1992, 365–367].
Figure 5.20
Finding the declination in the De
revolutionibus

Text 5.9
Copernicus, Determining the Solar Eccentricity
(from De revolutionibus, III.16)
Therefore BAC is given in terms of 360°°2 right angles. BFC, the angle
of the apparent motion, is 45° in terms of 360°4 right angles; but on the ba-
sis of 360°°2 right angles, BFC 90°. Hence, the remainder, ACD[
BFC BAC], which intercepts 
, is 45;23°°[ 90°°44;37°°]. But 
the entire portion 
. When 
is subtracted [from 
], 
the remainder 
. When this ﬁgure is added 
to 
, the sum, 
. Therefore, since each segment 
and 
is less than a semicircle, the center is clearly con-
tained in 
, the rest of the circle. Let the center be E, and through F draw the
diameter LEFG. Let L be the apogee, and G the perigee. Drop EK perpendicular
to CFD. Now the chords subtending the given arcs are derived from the Table:
AC182,494, and CFD199,934 units, of which the diameter200,000.
Then the angles of ACF are given. According to I on Plane Triangles [I,13],
the ratio of the sides will also be given: CF97,967 of the units of which
AC182, 494. Therefore FD[ CFDCF199,93497,967101,967]
BD
CAD
ACB[
;
]
=
°
176 19
CAD,
;
=
°
177 5 1
2
AD[
;
]
=
°
45 23
AC =
° =
° −
°
131 42
176 19
44 37
;
[
;
;
]
ACB
BC
ACB =
°
176 19
;
AD
Chapter 5
270
Figure 5.21
Copernicus’s
determination of the
solar eccentricity

exceeds half [of CFD199,9342 or 99,967], the excess being FK2,000 of 
the same units [101,96799,967]. The segment 
is less than a
semicircle by 2;54°. Half of the chord subtending this arc is equal to EK and
has 2534 units. Therefore, in EFK the two sides FK and KE which form the
right angle are given. Of the given sides and angles, EF will have 323 units, of
which EL has 10,000; and angle EFK has 
when 360°4 right angles. 
Therefore, the whole angle AFL [ EFK(AFDBFC45°)] has
and the remainder, BFL[ 180°AFL] has 
. 
If EL has 60 units, EF will be approximately 1;56 units. This was the sun’s dis-
tance from the center of the circle, having now become barely 
whereas to 
Ptolemy it seemed to be 
Furthermore, the apogee, which then preceded the 
summer solstice by 
now follows it by 
146
Explanation: Again we witness an application of Ptolemy’s demi-degree 
technique: since 
where 
. Likewise, 
1
1
2
°° =
°
∠
=
∠
=
°°
BAC
BC
BAC
1
2
44 37
,
;
6 2
3 °.
24 1
2 °,
1
24 .
1
31 ,
83 1
3 °
96
51
45
2
3
2
3
° =
° +
°
[
],
51 2
3 °,
CAD [
;
]
≅
°
177 6
The West to 1550
271
146 [Copernicus (Rosen) 1992, 159].
147 Copernicus is obviously working with numbers taken to slightly more precision than is shown
in the text; thus the intermediate calculations occasionally do not appear to work out perfectly.
once ACD is determined to be 45;23°°, we know that 
and
from this addition and subtraction of arcs leaves us with 
147
Our next step is to apply Copernicus’s table of sines (see ﬁgure 5.22) to
ﬁnd AC and CFD—although in this case a chord table would have been 
much easier. To ﬁnd AC we divide 
by 2, look up the result
(65;51°) in the table, and multiply the result 91,247 (obtained by interpola-
tion) by two to get 182,494; similarly CFD 199,934. All of this, of course,
assumes that R100,000.
We turn to ACF; since arcs 
and 
are known we may apply section
I.13, Theorem 1 above to arrive at the ratio CF / AC; but since AC182,494,
we have CF97,967. From here it is an easy matter to determine 
The remaining sides of EFK are easily found. Copernicus’s claim that 
may be veriﬁed by extending CE to a new point X
on the orbit circle. Then 
; and since CEX is a 
diameter, D is right. Therefore CEK ~CXD and is exactly half its size.
DX
CAD
=
° −




Crd 180
EK
CAD
=
° −




1
2 Crd 180
FK
CFD
CF
=
−
=
1
2
2000.
AC
CB
AC =
°
131 42
;
CAD =
°
177 5 1
2
;
.
AD =
°
45 23
;
,

From here eEF is found using Pythagoras.148 Converting to R60 Coper-
nicus ﬁnds 
as opposed to Ptolemy’s value 
Working as it does with a sine table but relying on Ptolemy’s techniques,
Copernicus’s work here occasionally appears cumbersome to modern eyes.
The increasing adoption of the sine function and associated methods would
remove these sorts of artifacts in the following century.
e =
≈
2 29 30
1
24
;
,
.
e =
≈
1 56
1
31
;
,
Chapter 5
272
148 The conversion to R10,000 to determine the position of the apogee may be a remnant of the
use of an earlier sine table.
Half-chords
subtending
Arcs
double arcs
0;10
291
0;20
582
0;30
873


1;0
1745


29;50
49748
30;0
50000
30;10
50252


45;0
70711


60;0
86602


65;40
91116
65;50
91235
66;0
91354


89;40
99998
89;50
99999
90;0
100000
Figure 5.22
Extracts from the sine table
in Copernicus’s De
revolutionibus (interpolation
column omitted)

Breaking the Circle: Rheticus, Otho, 
Pitiscus and the Opus Palatinum
The name of Georg Rheticus (1514–1574) will always be associated with
Copernicus, and rightly so, for it is anyone’s guess how Copernicus’s work
would have propagated if not for the efforts of his junior colleague. But
Rheticus is quite an intriguing character in his own right,149 and he initiated
major changes in how trigonometry was approached. His name refers to the
region of Rhaetia, overlapping the modern nations Austria, Switzerland, and
Germany; he was forced to abandon his family name of Iserin when his fa-
ther, a physician, was executed for ﬁnancial crimes against his patients.150
Rheticus was coming into his own as a scholar just as scientiﬁc and mathe-
matical books were reaching the printed press in healthy numbers. In his reg-
ular visits to eminent scientists he would present recently-printed copies of
important works (including the auspicious book presentations to Coperni-
cus); he must have seemed like a sixteenth-century technology expert, dis-
tributing his new wares to the older generation.
After Copernicus, Rheticus devoted much of his astronomical life to
trigonometry. He suffered a mental illness in 1547, perhaps provoked by an
unsuccessful scholarly trip to Italy, but published the pamphlet Canon doc-
trinae triangulorum just a few years later in 1551.151 The tables in this work
were revolutionary for two reasons: they related trigonometric functions di-
rectly to angles in the triangle as we do today, rather than to circular arcs;
and they contained all six of the modern trigonometric functions (although
under different names), given to seven decimal places. In these respects the
Canon foreshadowed his later masterwork, the Opus palatinum (ﬁgure 5.23);
we shall dwell on these achievements shortly.152
After an incident involving a purported homosexual episode with a stu-
dent, Rheticus was forced to ﬂee his academic position at Leipzig. He spent
most of the rest of his life practicing medicine in Cracow, but continued
working part-time on astronomical matters, especially the construction of a
The West to 1550
273
149 The standard reference work on Rheticus is [Burmeister 1967–1968]; see also the new biogra-
phy [Danielson 2006].
150 It is often said that he was executed for sorcery, but according to [Danielson 2006, 15–17] the
truth is more mundane.
151 The Canon doctrinae triangulorum, like any document quickly superseded by another, is ex-
ceedingly rare. But Rheticus’s works are rare in any case, since they were placed on the Index
expurgatorius [De Morgan 1845, 517]; [Archibald 1949b, 554]. See [Archibald 1953, 131] for
a description of the Canon, and [DeMorgan 1845] for a discussion of its near disappearance.
152 The tables were eventually extended by François Viète; see [Hunrath 1899] for a detailed com-
parison. 

new, massive set of trigonometric tables. In 1574, the year of his death, an
enthusiastic young student, Lucius Valentin Otho,153 arrived on his doorstep.
Recognizing the parallel to his time with Copernicus, Rheticus took Otho
under his wing. Upon Rheticus’s death, Otho took on the project of complet-
ing Rheticus’s magnum opus—but it was not until 1596, under the sponsor-
ship of the palatinate of Frederick IV, that the Opus palatinum ﬁnally saw
the light of day.
No triﬂing work, the Opus palatinum (see ﬁgure 5.23) runs to over
1,400 folio-sized pages and splits roughly evenly into text and tables. The
text, a comprehensive approach to every corner of trigonometry, is divided
quite conventionally into four parts:
Chapter 5
274
Figure 5.23
The Opus Palatinum,
1596. Presumably the
two obelisks refer to
Rheticus and Otho.
(courtesy of the Burndy
Library)
153 On Otho (eventually a professor at the University of Heidelberg) and the Opus palatinum, see
[Hilfstein 1986/87]. It has been suggested [Danielson 2006, 190–191] that Otho’s appearance
might not have been an accident.

De fabrica canonis doctrinae triangulorum, a detailed description
of the methods used to construct the tables;
De triquetris rectarum linearum in planitie, a short section on plane
triangles;
De triangulis globi cum angulo recto, on right-angled spherical
triangles; and
De triangulis globi sine angulo recto, a 340-page tome on general
spherical triangles, written by Otho.154
Perhaps not surprisingly, the text of Opus palatinum seems to have
proved too overwhelming for colleagues and historians to approach; very lit-
tle has been published on it.155 On the other hand the tables were to be the
foundation of the most intense calculations for centuries in many ﬁelds, such
as astronomy, geography, and surveying.
We begin with the introduction to the De triquetris, since this is where
the six trigonometric functions are deﬁned. Rheticus divides right triangles
into three “species,” as follows (ﬁgure 5.24):
a) if the circle’s radius (R) is the hypotenuse, then the perpendicular
and the base are the sine and cosine;
b) if the circle’s radius is the base, then the hypotenuse and the perpen-
dicular are the secant and tangent; and
c) if the circle’s radius is the perpendicular, then the base and the hy-
potenuse are the cotangent and cosecant.
But Rheticus, following Copernicus, rejects these modern names for the
trigonometric functions, and instead refers to them simply as the hypotenuse,
base, and perpendicular of triangles of the three species (see the sample page
of tables in ﬁgure 5.25), reminiscent of the names we saw in Islamic gno-
monics and astronomy in chapter 4. (Thus, although Rheticus introduces
and tabulates the cosine here, the actual term “cosine” did not arise until
twenty-four years later, with E. Günther.156) This elegant conﬁguration is
what led Rheticus to be the ﬁrst European to publish a uniﬁed set of tables
of all six functions. Appearances to the contrary, the circles actually play lit-
tle role in his trigonometry: the arguments of the six functions are the an-
gles in the triangles, not the circular arcs. This novelty is illustrated by the
The West to 1550
275
154 Many copies, but not the one to which I had access, contain an additional section by Otho enti-
tled Meteoroscopium numerorum.
155 Almost the only descriptions of the mathematics of the Opus palatinum in the secondary liter-
ature are a survey in [Delambre 1821, 1–16], and a few extracts in [Zeller 1944, 56–63].
156 Before Günther, Pitiscus had used the term sinus complementi, the sine of the complement
[J. Miller]. Likewise, although Rheticus tabulates the tangent and the secant, the terms them-
selves are due to Thomas Fincke [Archibald 1949a, 397].

lack of reference to any circle in this account of a typical result from De tri-
quetris:
“Praeceptum Nonum,” ﬁrst case (ﬁgure 5.16): In ABC with ob-
tuse angle at A: given AB, BC and B, ﬁnd the remaining side and
angles.
Drop perpendicular AD onto BC. Then ABD and ADC will both be
right; but in ABD, B is given. Thus all the angles in ABD are known, so
its sides are given in ratio to each other (set some side length to
R10,000,000,000, use the table to ﬁnd the other side lengths, and set the
sides in ratio to each other). Since AB is given, AD and BD may be found.
But BCBD DC, so DC is given. Thus in right ADC two sides are
given. Consider ADC as a triangle of the third species and set ADR
10,000,000,000; then we can look up the adjacent side DC in the table and
read off the corresponding side AC along the same row of the table in units
Chapter 5
276
Figure 5.24
Rheticus’s deﬁnitions of the
six trigonometric functions.
Rheticus does not use any of
the modern terms written here;
rather, he refers simply to the
base, perpendicular, and
hypotenuse of each of the
three species.

where AD R, as well as the value of C. Since two angles in the original
ABC are now known, the third (obtuse) BAC is known. Finally, since
AD’s actual length is known, it is a simple matter to compute the length
of AC.
The De fabrica canonis doctrinae triangulorum, which occupies the
ﬁrst eighty pages of the Opus palatinum, describes the evaluation of all six
trigonometric functions but concentrates on the sine. The initial lemmas and
theorems cover the usual topics: the addition and subtraction theorems, the
half-angle formula, and so on. Using the conventional Ptolemaic geometric
methods but calculating with a staggering R1,000,000,000,000,000,
Rheticus builds a table of sines and cosines with argument increments of 45
for angles from 0° to 90°. But now he is in the usual bind: to build a table in
multiples of 1° or some nice fraction of it, like the 10 of arc that will be the
The West to 1550
277
Figure 5.25 The ﬁrst two of 541 pages of the trigonometric tables in Rheticus’s Opus
palatinum. If we ignore the difference columns, successive columns from left to right
represent the sine, cosine, secant, tangent, cosecant, and cotangent of angles from 0 to 10
on these pages, increasing at 10" intervals. The ﬂawed tangent and secant entries that
Romanus complained about may be read at the top right, since cotangents/cosecants of small
angles correspond to tangents/secants of large angles. (courtesy of the Burndy Library)

increment of these tables, he needs to break out of the geometric mold some-
how. He decides to calculate Sin 30.
Rheticus begins with a gigantic project to ﬁnd successively smaller sines
and cosines by applying the half-angle formula repeatedly to sin (0;45°),
generating the sine and cosine of 0;22,30°, then 0;11,15°, and so on for 43 it-
erations, until he ﬁnally reaches
(5.22)
This is the moment when his sine values reach one unit in the last (ﬁfteenth)
decimal place (see ﬁgure 5.26);157 beyond this point all entries would read
zero.
Unfortunately, the table does not get Rheticus very close to sin (30).
The seventh line gives
(5.23)
while the eighth line dips below 30 to 0;0,21,5,37,30°. However, Rheticus
somehow notices that he can go back to an entry in the original 45-
increment sine table for aid. He takes the entry for 
and applies the half-
angle formula 14 times. This results in
(5.24)
which just happens to give the sine of an arc almost exactly 30 less than we
found in (5.23). So, we apply the sine subtraction formula to (5.23) and
(5.24):
(5.25)
Rheticus’s ﬁnal step, transforming this value to one for sin (0;0,30°)—
the heart of the entire operation, and of the tables themselves—is simply an
application of a procedure that goes back at least to Levi ben Gerson, and
through him, back to Ptolemy. In modern language, since the sine function is
nearly linear for small angles, the ratio of two sines will be very close to the
ratio of their corresponding angles:
(5.26)
sin( ; ,
,
,
,
,
, ,
)
sin( ; ,
)
; ,
,
,
,
,
, ,
; ,
.
0 0 29 59 33 37 58 7 30
0 0 30
0 0 29 59 33 37 58 7 30
0 0 30
≈
sin( ; ,
,
,
,
,
, ,
)
.
.
0 0 29 59 33 37 58 7 30
0 000145408594115
° =
sin( ; ,
,
,
,
, ,
,
)
.
,
0 0 12 11 41 22 1 52 30
0 000059122176177431
° =
55 1
2 °
sin( ; ,
,
,
)
.
,
0 0 42 11 15
0 000204530770292068
° =
sin( ; , , , , , , ,
,
,
,
,
, ,
,
,
, ,
,
  
, , ,
,
)
.
.
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 14 19 16 33 45 8 27 54 11 9 23
49 6 5 37 30
0 000000000000001
=
Chapter 5
278
157 We use the modern sine function, since the use of R1010 makes the modern function hardly
different from the historical one. Throughout the De fabrica Rheticus calculates cosines along-
side the sines; we suppress references to the cosines, to save space. We have also removed some
of Rheticus’s checking procedures, to get to the heart of the process.

This result allows Rheticus ﬁnally to reach his goal:
158
(5.27)
Now the work is downhill, if intensive. Rheticus is still in the same bind
he started with—his smallest sine is of 30, three times the smallest sine he
wants (10)—but he knows how to deal with this problem now. He applies
a similar process to (5.23) through (5.27) and arrives at an estimate of
sin (0;0,5°), from which the sines of 10, 20, 30, 40, and 50 are found.
sin( ; ,
)
.
.
0 0 30
0 000145444102929
≈
The West to 1550
279
158 The method is extremely accurate for such small arcs. Had Rheticus entered into (5.26) with cor-
rect sine values, he would have found sin (0;0,30)0.0001454441038203, out by only 2 in the
sixteenth decimal place. However, the correct value for the sine in (5.25) is 0.000145408595006,
and this error transfers to sin 30, which is actually 0.0001454441038201. (The error appears to 
arise in the consecutive halving of sin 
leading to the value in (5.24), which is wrong 
in its last ﬁve digits.) Rheticus only needs 10 decimal places for his sine tables, so the error is
not immediately a problem. But, as we shall see, other errors were to propagate to his tangent
tables in damaging ways.
55 1
2 °
(
),
Figure 5.26 Rheticus’s successive application of the sine half-angle formula, beginning
with 45 (courtesy of the Burndy Library)

The sines of multiples of the 1 are available to us now, and Rheticus
gives a couple of examples of how to use the sines of 10, 20, 30, 40, and
50 to ﬁll in the gaps between the 1 increments. It is now a simple matter,
requiring ﬁve (human) computers a mere twelve years of effort,159 to ﬁll in
all 32,400 entries of the entire sine table. The entire table, including all six
functions and their ﬁrst-order differences for use in interpolation, comprises
388,800 entries and ﬁlls the last half (700 pages) of the Opus palatinum.
Rheticus’s table is an amazing feat of computation, but on a mathemati-
cal level it is no more sophisticated than the calculation of the table of chords
in the Almagest; one wonders whether Rheticus thought he might do better.
Rheticus did pay a visit to the great algebraist Gerolamo Cardano in 1545,
the very year that Cardano’s Ars Magna was published containing solutions
to the cubic and quartic equations. Rheticus was hopeful that he would come
away from his trip with something useful, but he left empty-handed. In fact,
as late as 1554 he wrote that
from Italy I am receiving neither books nor letters. I really would have
loved to see Cardano’s completed work, for I was hoping it would be
of some use to me in grappling with the science of triangles.160
It is tempting to infer that Rheticus was after the solution of the cubic equa-
tion whose root is sin 1° (see (4.11)); this would have transformed utterly
the De fabrica. As is clear from our account, if Rheticus ever did gain any-
thing from Cardano he did not exploit it, in the Opus palatinum or any-
where else.
The Opus palatinum ﬁnally came out around the time that several other
mathematicians had been working on similar projects, so when it was ﬁnally
published it received careful and detailed scrutiny. Unfortunately, the Opus did
not measure up. The same numerical instability that had plagued other schol-
ars’attempts to compute tangent and secant tables, namely dividing by a small
cosine value, afﬂicted Rheticus as well. The last few entries in his tangent table
(see ﬁgure 5.25), compromised by having to divide by the cosine of an angle
close to 90°, are in error by as many as nine of the ﬁfteen signiﬁcant ﬁgures.
Adrianus Romanus (1561-1615), the ﬁrst to notice the ﬂaw, had suspended
work on his own trigonometric tables when he had heard of the impending
publication of the Opus palatinum.161 One of his rather clever methods of
checking the reliability of the Opus tables relies on the identity
Chapter 5
280
159 [Glaisher et al. 1873, 45].
160 [Danielson 2006, 121].
161 Our account of Romanus’s critique is based on [Bockstaele 1992], which contains a Latin edi-
tion of the relevant passage.

The West to 1550
281
(5.28)
This may be veriﬁed by Romanus’s ﬁgure (5.27). ABC is a triangle of the
second species, so BC tan  and AC sec . If CDAC then
162 and so 
With (5.28) in hand Romanus sums several of Rheticus’s entries for
sec  and tan  and compares the result to entries for the corresponding tan-
gent; for instance,
sec 80°
56712818196
tan 80°
57587704831
Sum
114300523027
tan 85°
114300523091
This isn’t bad, but as  gets closer to 90° matters get progressively worse,
until ﬁnally
sec 89; 59, 40°
103132441650242
tan 89;59,40°
103132441165520
Sum
206264882815762
tan 89;59,50°
206264670327177,
an “inexcusable error.”163
Romanus’s disappointment with the quality of this part of the Opus
seems to have led him to a sort of error analysis. He established a set of rules
outlining how many decimal places are needed to be kept in sine values in
order to compute accurate tables: in tables like in the Opus, generally ﬁve ex-
tra decimal places, but up to ten places in entries affecting the trouble spots.
As we have seen, Rheticus had computed ﬁve extra places in his 45-
increment table, but never ten.
Rheticus had been long dead when the errors came to light; tragically, Otho
was already ailing and unable to effect repairs. The work of correcting the tables
fell to Bartholomew Pitiscus, court chaplain of Frederick IV and mathematician
in his own right; indeed, he was the originator of the word “trigonometry.”164
BD =
+
° −
(
)
[
]
tan
.


1
2 90
∠
=
° −
(
)
CAD
1
2 90
 ,
sec
tan
tan
.




+
=
+
° −
(
)
[
]
1
2 90
162 ACB90°, so ACD90°; since ACD
is isosceles, this implies that
163 Romanus, in [Bockstaele 1992, 66]. The correct values are tan 85°114300523028 and tan
89;59;50°206264806085492.
164 The word ﬁrst appears in Pitiscus’s 1595 Trigonometriae, which we shall examine in the an-
ticipated sequel to this book.
∠
=
° −
(
)
CAD
1
2 90
 .

Pitiscus came to suspect that Rheticus had computed yet another sine table
to 15 places for every 10 of arc. Otho conﬁrmed the surmise, but in his
weakened mental state he could not locate the table. After Otho’s death in
1602 Pitiscus actually found it, in bad condition but still usable.
Taking Romanus’s advice and with Rheticus’s posthumous tabular help,
Pitiscus recomputed the sines of angles up to 7° to 20 decimal places. He
used these new values as a ﬁrm basis for correcting the Opus’s tangent and
secant tables, and in 1607 republished Rheticus’s tables with eighty-six
pages of improved entries in Magnus canon doctrinae triangulorum. Six
years later he released a further enhancement, Thesaurus mathematicus.165
With these improvements Rheticus’s tables became the authority and the
computational foundation of many scientiﬁc ﬁelds for centuries. It took over
three centuries before it was eventually replaced less than 100 years ago, by
Andoyer’s 20-place tables of 1915–18.166
We conclude on a curious tangent; strictly speaking it is outside of our
chronology, but its connection to topics in this volume make it hard to resist
here. Among the most contentious ﬁgures in philosophy and theology of his
time, Giordano Bruno (1548–1600) was seen as a heretic and eventually
Chapter 5
282
165 On these two publications see [Delambre 1821, vol. 2, 17–35] and [Archibald 1949a, 394–396].
Pitiscus did not use the decimal point; Magini was the ﬁrst to use it in his 1592 De planis trian-
gulis. He was followed quickly by Clavius in 1593 [Koyré 1964, 48].
166 [Archibald 1949b, 558]; [Andoyer 1915–18]. In an ofﬁcial British report on mathematical ta-
bles as late as 1873 [Glaisher et al. 1873, 45], Rheticus’s tables were praised: “to this day [they]
remain unsuperceded and the ultimate authorities.”
Figure 5.27
Romanus’s tangent-secant
identity for checking
Rheticus’s tables

burned at the stake—although (as with the Galileo incident) the full story is
more complex. What interests us here is his opposition to trigonometry, ex-
pressed in De triplici minimo et mensura.167 This work contains a sustained
attack on trigonometry in general, and on tables in particular. Bruno seems
to object to trigonometry because of its use of approximate methods. Indeed,
as we have seen many times, the key to constructing trigonometric tables is
the determination of the chord (or sine) of the smallest arc in the table, which
inevitably requires a crucial approximative step.
However, Bruno’s complaint has more to do with the proper application
of method in what was being called a mathematical science. As opposed to
practical sciences, geometry was deﬁned by its axioms and the deductive
buildup from them; the approximations involved in constructing tables fall
outside of the deﬁning characteristic of mathematics, and hence must lead to
error.168 This attitude distinctly recalls the twelfth-century astronomer al-
Samaw’al’s rejection of the Ptolemaic approximation of Crd 1° (see chapter
4).169 One wonders whether Bruno would have approved of al-Samaw’al’s so-
lution (the adoption of a 480° circle in order to avoid the approximations),
and so approved of trigonometry’s resuscitation to the world of mathematics.
The West to 1550
283
167 This is one of three works reprinted in facsimile in [Bruno (Canone) 2000].
168 An account of Bruno’s views of mathematics may be found in [Gatti 1999, 143–170]; on
trigonometry see especially pp. 151–152, 160–161.
169 Another example of a similar attitude is al-Kuhi’s polemic against approximative methods in
his correspondence with al-Sabi; see [Berggren 1983].

Concluding Remarks '"
The story of trigonometry is far from over, but the nature of the subject does
begin to change along with the rest of mathematics in the late sixteenth cen-
tury. Through the work of François Viète and many others, symbolic algebra
gave mathematicians the power to mechanize algebraic processes that had
before been challenging, intensive, and often unattainable. Viète himself de-
rived many trigonometric identities and encoded them in tabular form. And
symbolic algebra triggered further transformations: ﬁrst the coordinatization
of geometry, and then the calculus. Oddly enough it would take some time
for trigonometric functions to enter the calculus,1 but the writing was on the
wall.
At the same time the Age of Discovery was starting to place greater de-
mands on ocean-going exploration, and navigators increasingly turned to
spherical trigonometry to map their trajectories across the featureless seas.
This new application of trigonometry, along with astronomy and geography,
was enhanced by the invention of logarithms in the early seventeenth cen-
tury. Logarithms made the calculations needed to pilot a ship or ﬁnd a planet
more efﬁcient, and therefore more reliable.
It was Leonhard Euler who established the language of functions that
we use so subconsciously today in applied mathematics. In the 1730s he dis-
covered that trigonometric functions play a fundamental role in the solutions
of differential equations representing harmonic oscillations. Further, through
this innovation he found a startling unexpected connection between sines/
cosines and exponential functions. These discoveries brought trigonometry
belatedly into analysis, and also brought the hyperbolic trigonometric functions
into the world. Thus trigonometry was drawn into the library of functions; it
gradually became the fundamental tool for modeling periodic phenomena in
the sciences.
This is not to say that trigonometry has not participated in some of the
most important mathematical developments since then. It took on a signiﬁ-
cant role, for instance, in Jean-Baptiste Fourier’s solution of Laplace’s dif-
ferential equation of heat ﬂow in 1807. That solution introduced the notion
that any function may be built of inﬁnite sums of sines and cosines in the
same way that Taylor series expand functions into inﬁnitely long polynomi-
als. The controversy that arose regarding the validity of Fourier’s series
forced deep reﬂection on the nature of series, functions, and continuity, and
led to important developments in what are now called real analysis and set
theory. Meanwhile, Fourier series became a fundamental tool in the analysis
of sound waves.
284

Spherical trigonometry remained a strong component of the school cur-
riculum until the mid-1950s, motivated usually by applications in navigation
and astronomy. While it is still a vital tool in these areas and programmed
into our GPS systems today, hardly anyone studies it anymore. Its fate in
mathematical practice was only slightly less ignominious; it was subsumed
into a special case of the trigonometry of non-Euclidean geometries.
All of these episodes, and others besides, will be the subject of a sequel
to this volume. In the meantime I beg the reader’s patience. The richness of
the story to come will make it worth the wait.
Concluding Remarks
285


Bibliography '"
Aaboe, Asger. Al-Kashi’s iteration method for the determination of sin 1°, Scripta
Mathematica 20 (1954), 24–29.
Aaboe, Asger. On the Babylonian origin of some Hipparchian parameters, Centaurus
4 (1955), 122–125.
Aaboe, Asger. Episodes from the Early History of Mathematics, Random House /
The L. W. Singer Company, 1964. Reprinted Washington, DC: Mathematical
Association of America, 1998.
Aaboe, Asger. On period relations in Babylonian astronomy, Centaurus 10 (1965),
213–231.
Aaboe, Asger. Observation and theory in Babylonian astronomy, Centaurus 24
(1980), 14–35.
Abraham bar Hiyya. Der “Liber embadorum” des Savasorda in der Übersetzung des
Plato von Tivoli, Latin edition and German translation by Maximilian Curtze,
Abhandlungen zur Geschichte der mathematischen Wissenschaften 12 (1902),
1–183.
Abraham bar Hiyya. Chibbur ha-Meschicha weha-Tischboreth. Lehrbuch der
Geometrie des Abraham bar Chija, ed. Michael Guttmann, Berlin: Itzkowski,
1913.
Africa, Thomas W. Copernicus’ relation to Aristarchus and Pythagoras, Isis 52
(1961), 403–409.
Ahmedov, A. A.; and Rosenfeld, Boris A. Who was the author of the Treatise on the
Determination of the Sine of One Degree? [in Russian], Obshchestvennye nauki
v Uzbekistane 10 (1975), 51–53.
Aiton, E. J. Peurbach’s Theoricae novae planetarum, a translation with commentary,
Osiris (2) 3 (1987), 5–43.
Andoyer, Henri. Nouvelles Tables Trigonométriques Fondamentales, 3 vols., Paris:
A. Hermann, 1915–18.
Archibald, Raymond Claire. Bartholomäus Pitiscus (1561–1613), Mathematical Ta-
bles and Other Aids to Computation 3 (1949), 390–397.
Archibald, Raymond Claire. Rheticus, with special reference to his Opus palatinum,
Mathematical Tables and Other Aids to Computation 3 (1949), 552–561.
Archibald, Raymond Claire. The Canon Doctrinae Triangvlorvm (1551) of Rheticus
(1514–1576), Mathematical Tables and Other Aids to Computation 7 (1953), 131.
Archimedes. The Works of Archimedes, transl. Thomas Little Heath, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1897, reprinted New York: Dover, 1953.
Aryabhata. Aryabhatiya, part II, ed. K. Sambasiva Sastri, Trivandrum: Government
Press, 1931.
Aryabhata. Aryabhatiya of Aryabhata, eds. K. S. Shukla and K. V. Sarma, New
Delhi: Indian National Science Academy, 1976.
Aujac, Germaine. Sphérique et sphéropée en Grèce ancienne, Historia Mathematica
3 (1976), 441–447.
287

Ausejo, Elena. Sobre los conocimientos trigonometricos en los Libros del saber de
astronomia de Alfonso X el Sabio, LLULL 6 (1983), 5–36.
Ausejo, Elena. Trigonometría y astronomía en el Tratado del Cuadrante Sennero
(c. 1280), Dynamis 4 (1984), 7–22.
Autolycus. The Books of Autolykos. On a Moving Sphere and On Risings and Set-
tings, edited and translated by Frans Bruin and Alexander Vondjidis, Beirut:
American University, 1971.
Autolycus. Autolycus de Pitane: Histoire du Texte, Suivie l’Édition Critique des
Traités De la Sphère en Mouvement et Des Levers et Couchers, edited and trans-
lated by J. Mogenet, Louvain: Université de Louvain, 1950.
Ayyangar, A. A. Krishnaswami. The Hindu sine-table, Journal of the Indian Mathe-
matical Society 15 (1923), 121–126.
Ayyangar, A. A. Krishnaswami. Remarks on Bhaskara’s approximation to the sine of
an angle, Mathematics Student 18 (1950), 12.
Bag, Amulya Kumar. Trigonometrical series in the Karanapaddhati and the probable
date of the text, Indian Journal of History of Science 1 (1966), 98–106.
Bag, Amulya Kumar. Madhava’s sine and cosine series, Indian Journal of History of
Science 11 (1976), 54–57.
Bag, Amulya Kumar. Mathematics in Ancient and Medieval India, Varanasi:
Chaukhambha Orientalia, 1979.
Bag, Amulya Kumar. A note on the sine table in ancient India, in eds. G. Kuppuram
and K. Kumudamani, History of Science and Technology in India, Delhi: Sun-
deep Prakashan, 1990, vol. 4, 247–252.
Bagheri, Mohammad. Books I and IV of Kushyar ibn Labban’s Jami\ Zij: An Arabic
Astronomical Handbook by an Eleventh-Century Iranian Scholar, doctoral dis-
sertation, University of Utrecht, 2006.
al-Battani. Opus Astronomicum, edition and Latin translation by C. A. Nallino, 3
vols., Milan: Pubblicazioni del Reale Osservatorio di Brera in Milano, vol. 1:
1903, vol. 2: 1907, vol. 3: 1899.
Bellosta, Hélène. Thabit ibn Qurra’s treatise on the Sector-ﬁgure, Arabic Sciences
and Philosophy 14 (2004), 145–168.
Benjamin Jr., Francis S. John of Gmunden and Campanus of Novara, Osiris 11
(1954), 221–246.
Berggren, J. Lennart. A comparison of four analemmas for determining the azimuth
of the qibla, Journal for the History of Arabic Science 4 (1980), 69–80.
Berggren, J. Lennart. On al-Biruni’s “method of the zijes” for the qibla, Proceedings
of the XVIth International Congress for the History of Science (Bucharest,
1981), 237–245.
Berggren, J. Lennart. al-Biruni on plane maps of the sphere, Journal for the History
of Arabic Science 6 (1982), 47–112.
Berggren, J. Lennart. The correspondence of Abu Sahl al-Kuhi and Abu Ishaq al-
Sabi, Journal for the History of Arabic Science 7 (1983), 39–123.
Berggren, J. Lennart. The origins of al-Biruni’s “method of the zijes” in the theory of
sundials, Centaurus 28 (1985), 1–16.
Bibliography
288

Berggren, J. Lennart. Episodes in the Mathematics of Medieval Islam, New York:
Springer-Verlag, 1986.
Berggren, J. Lennart. Spherical trigonometry in Kushyar ibn Labban’s Jami\ Zij, in
David A. King and George Saliba, eds., From Deferent to Equant: A Volume of
Studies in the History of Science in the Ancient and Medieval Near East in
Honor of E. S. Kennedy, New York: New York Academy of Sciences, 1987,
15–33.
Berggren, J. Lennart. Ptolemy’s maps of Earth and the heavens: a new interpretation,
Archive for History of Exact Sciences 43 (1991), 133–144.
Berggren, J. Lennart. The relation of Greek spherics to early Greek astronomy, in
Alan C. Bowen, ed., Science and Philosophy in Classical Greece, New York:
Garland, 1991, 227–248.
Berggren, J. Lennart. Habash’s analemma for representing azimuth circles on the as-
trolabe, Zeitschrift für Arabisch-Islamischen Wissenschaften 7 (1991/92),
23–30.
Berggren, J. Lennart. The transmission of Greek geometry to medieval Islam, Cubo
4 (2002), 1–13.
Berggren, J. Lennart; and Sidoli, Nathan. Aristarchus’s On the Sizes and Distances of
the Sun and the Moon: Greek and Arabic texts, Archive for History of Exact Sci-
ences 61 (2007), 213–254.
Berggren, J. Lennart; and Thomas, Robert. Euclid’s Phaenomena: A Translation and
Study of a Hellenistic Treatise in Spherical Astronomy, New York/London: Gar-
land, 1996.
Berggren, J. Lennart; and Van Brummelen, Glen. Abu Sahl al-Kuhi on rising times,
SCIAMVS 2 (2001), 31–46.
Berggren, J. Lennart; and Van Brummelen, Glen. al-Samaw’al versus al-Kuhi on the
depression of the horizon, Centaurus 45 (2003), 116–129.
Bhaskara I. Mahabhaskariya, ed. and transl. K. S. Shukla, Lucknow: Lucknow Uni-
versity, 1960.
Bhaskara II. The Siddhanta Siromani (with the author’s own commentary called
Vasanabhasya), ed. and transl. Bapu Deva Sastri, Benares (Varanasi):
Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Ofﬁce, 1929.
Biot, J. B. The Oriental astronomer, etc., quatrième article, Journal des Savants
1859, 401–418.
al-Biruni, Abu al-Rayhan Muhammad ibn Ahmad. Rasa‘ilu ‘l-Biruni, Hyderabad,
1948.
al-Biruni, Abu al-Rayhan Muhammad ibn Ahmad. al-Qanun al-Mas\ udi, Hyderabad,
1954.
al-Biruni, Abu al-Rayhan Muhammad ibn Ahmad. Tahdid Nihayat al-Amakin li-
Tashih Masafat al-Masakin, edition by P. G. Bulgakov, Majallat Ma\ had al-
Makhtutat al-Arabiya 8 (1962).
al-Biruni, Abu al-Rayhan Muhammad ibn Ahmad. The treatise on the determination
of chords in a circle by means of a broken line inscribed in it [in Russian], trans-
lated by Boris A. Rosenfeld, S. A. Krasnova, and M. M. Rozanskaja, in From
Bibliography
289

the History of Science and Technology in the East, No. 3 [in Russian], Moscow:
Izdat. Vostocn. Lit., (1963), 93–141.
al-Biruni, Abu al-Rayhan Muhammad ibn Ahmad. The Determination of the Coordi-
nates of Positions for the Correction of Distances Between Cities, translated by
Jamil Ali, Beirut: American University of Beirut, 1967.
al-Biruni, Abu al-Rayhan Muhammad ibn Ahmad. The Exhaustive Treatise on Shad-
ows, 2 vols., translated by Edward S. Kennedy, Aleppo: University of Aleppo,
1976.
al-Biruni, Abu al-Rayhan Muhammad ibn Ahmad. Kitab Maqalid \ilm al-Hay’a. La
Trigonométrie Sphérique chez les Arabes de l’Est à la Fin du Xe Siècle, trans-
lated by Marie-Thérèse Debarnot, Damascus: Institut Français de Damas, 1985.
Björnbo, Axel Anthon. Studien über Menelaos’ Sphärik, Abhandlungen zur
Geschichte der mathematischen Wissenschaften 14 (1902), 1–154.
Björnbo, Axel Anthon. al-Chwarizmi’s trigonometriske Tavler, in Festskrift til H. G.
Zeuthen, Copenhagen: Kgl. Hofboghandel Andr. Fred. Høst & Søn, 1909, 1–17.
Björnbo, Axel Anthon. Thabits Werk über den Transversalensatz (liber de ﬁgura sec-
tora), Abhandlungen zue Geschichte der Naturwissenschaften und der Medizin
7 (1924), 1–91.
Bockstaele, Paul. Adrianus Romanus and the trigonometric tables of Georg Joachim
Rheticus, in Sergei S. Demidov, Menso Folkerts, David E. Rowe, and Christoph
J. Scriba, eds., Amphora: Festschrift für Hans Wussing zu seinem 65. Geburt-
stag, Basel/Boston/Berlin: Birkhäuser, 1992, 55–66.
Bond, John David. The development of trigonometric methods down to the close of
the XVth century, Isis 4 (1921), 295–323.
Bond, John David. Quadripartitum Ricardi Walynforde de Sinibus Demonstratus,
Isis 5 (1923), 99–115.
Bond, John David. Richard Wallingford’s Quadripartitum, Isis 5 (1923), 339–363.
Brack-Bernsen, Lis. The path of the Moon, the rising points of the Sun, and the
oblique great circle on the celestial sphere, Centaurus 45 (2003), 16–31.
Brahe, Tycho. Tychonis Brahe triangulorum planorum et sphaericorum praxis arith-
metica. Qua maximus eorum, praesertim in astronomicis usus compendiose
explicatur, ed. F. I. Studnicka, Prague: Farsky, 1886; reprinted Vaduz, Liechten-
stein: Sändig Reprint Verlag, 1984.
Brahmagupta. The Khandakhadyaka: An Astronomical Treatise of Brahmagupta,
transl. Prabodh Chandra Sengupta, Calcutta: University of Calcutta, 1934.
Braunmühl, von. See von Braunmühl.
Bressoud, David. Was calculus invented in India? College Mathematics Journal 33
(2002), 2–13.
Brown, David. Mesopotamian Planetary Astronomy-Astrology, Leiden: Brill, 2000.
Bruno, Giordano. Poemi Filosoﬁci Latini, ed. Eugenio Canone, La Spezia: Agorà
Edizioni, 2000.
Bulmer-Thomas, Ivor. Theodosius of Bithynia, in Charles Coulston Gillispie, ed.,
Dictionary of Scientiﬁc Biography, vol. 13, New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons,
1976, 319–321.
Bibliography
290

Burgess, Ebenezer. Translation of the Sûrya-Siddhânta: A Text-Book of Hindu As-
tronomy, originally published by Burgess and W. D. Whitney, Journal of the
American Oriental Society 6 (1860), 141–498; reprinted by the University of
Calcutta, 1935 (with different pagination).
Burmeister, Karl Heinz. Georg Joachim Rheticus, 1514–1574. Eine Bio-
Bibliographie, 3 vols., Wiesbaden: Pressler-Verlag, 1967–1968.
Busard, H.L.L. Der Traktat De sinibus, chordis et arcubus von Johannes von
Gmunden, Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Mathematisch-
Naturwissenschaftliche Klasse, Denkschriften 116 (1971), 73–113.
Busard, H.L.L. The second part of Chapter 5 of the De arte mensurandi by Johannes
de Muris, in R. S. Cohen, J. J. Stachel, and M. W. Wartofsky, eds., For Dirk
Struik, Dordrecht/Boston: Reidel, 1974.
Campanus of Novara. Campanus of Novara and Medieval Planetary Theory. Theor-
ica planetarum, Latin edition and English translation by Francis S. Benjamin,
Jr. and Gerald J. Toomer, Madison/Milwaukee/London: University of Wiscon-
sin Press, 1971.
Campbell, Tony. Portolan charts from the late thirteenth century to 1500, in J. B.
Harley and D. Woodward, eds., The History of Cartography, Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, 1987, vol. 1, 371–463.
Cantor, Moritz. Vorlesungen über Geschichte der Mathematik, 4 vols., Leipzig:
Teubner, vol. 1: 1907; vol. 2: 1913; vol. 3: 1901; vol. 4: 1908.
Carandell, Juan. An analemma for the determination of the azimuth of the qibla in
the Risala fi\ilm al-zilal of Ibn al-Raqqam, Zeitschrift für Geschichte der
Arabisch-Islamischen Wissenschaften 1 (1984), 61–72.
Carmody, Francis J. The Astronomical Works of Thabit b. Qurra, Berkeley / Los An-
geles: University of California Press, 1960.
Carra de Vaux, M. le Baron. L’Almageste d’Abû’lWéfa Albûzdjâni, Journal Asia-
tique (8) 19 (1892), 408–471.
Chabás, José; and Goldstein, B. R. The Alfonsine Tables of Toledo,
Dordrecht/Boston/London: Kluwer, 2003.
Chace, Arnold Buffum. The Rhind Mathematical Papyrus, Oberlin, OH: Mathemati-
cal Association of America, 1927/1929; an abridged version reprinted Reston,
VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, 1978.
Chakravarty, A. K. The Suryasiddhanta. The Astronomical Principles of the Text,
Kolkata: The Asiatic Society, 2001.
Charette, François. A monumental medieval table for solving the problems of spher-
ical astronomy for all latitudes, Archives Internationales d’Histoire des Sciences
48 (1998), 11–64.
Charette, François. Mathematical Instrumentation in Fourteenth-Century Egypt
and Syria: The Illustrated Treatise of Najm al-Din al-Misri, Leiden: Brill,
2003.
Charette, François; and Schmidl, Petra. al-Khwarizmi and practical astronomy in
ninth-century Baghdad. The earliest extant corpus of texts in Arabic on the as-
trolabe and other portable instruments, SCIAMVS 5 (2004), 101–198.
Bibliography
291

Chatterjee, Bina. Geometrical interpretation of the motion of the Sun, Moon and the
ﬁve planets as found in the Mathematical Syntaxis of Ptolemy and in the Hindu
astronomical works, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal, Science 15
(1949), 41–89.
Christianides, J.; Dialetis, D.; and Gavroglu, K. Having a knack for the non-intuitive:
Aristarchus’s heliocentrism through Archimedes’s geocentrism, History of Sci-
ence 40 (2002), 146–168.
Clagett, Marshall. The use of the Moerbeke translations of Archimedes in the works
of Johannes de Muris, Isis 43 (1952), 236–242.
Clagett, Marshall. Archimedes, in Charles Coulston Gillispie, ed., Dictionary of
Scientiﬁc Biography, vol. 1, New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1970, 213–231.
Clagett, Marshall. Archimedes in the Middle Ages, volume 3: The Fate of the
Medieval Archimedes 1300–1565, parts I and II, Philadelphia: American Philo-
sophical Society, 1978.
Clagett, Marshall. Ancient Egyptian Science. Volume 2: Calendars, Clocks, and As-
tronomy, Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society, 1995.
Clagett, Marshall. Ancient Egyptian Science: A Sourcebook. Volume 3: Ancient
Egyptian Mathematics, Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society, 1999.
Clark, Walter E. The Aryabhatiya of Aryabhata, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1930.
Copernicus, Nicholas. Copernicus: On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres,
transl. A. M. Duncan, Newton Abbot/Devon: David & Charles, 1976.
Copernicus, Nicholas. On the Revolutions, transl. Edward Rosen, Warsaw/Cracow:
Polish Scientiﬁc Publishers, 1978; reprinted Baltimore/London: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1992.
Cortesão, Armando. History of Portuguese Cartography, 2 vols., Coimbra: Junta de
Investiações do Ultramar-Lisboa, vol. 1: 1969, vol. 2: 1971.
Crozet, Pascal. Thabit ibn Qurra et la composition des rapports, Arabic Sciences and
Philosophy 14 (2004), 175–211.
Curtze, Maximilian. Die Abhandlungen des Levi ben Gerson über Trigonometrie
und den Jacobstab, Bibliotheca Mathematica 12 (1898), 97–112.
Curtze, Maximilian. Urkunden zur Geschichte der Trigonometrie im christlichen
Mittelalter, Bibliotheca Mathematica (3) 1 (1900), 321–416.
Curtze, Maximilian. Der Briefwechsel Regiomontans mit Giovanni Bianchini, Jacob
von Speier und Christian Roder, in Maximilian Curtze, Urkunden zur
Geschichte der Mathematik im Mittelalter und der Renaissance, vol. I, Leipzig:
Teubner, 1902, 185–336.
Czwalina, A., transl. Autolykos. Rotierende Kugel und Aufgang und Untergand der
Gestirne. Theodosius von Tripolis. Sphaerik, Leipzig: Akademische Verlagsge-
sellschaft, 1931.
Dalen, van. See van Dalen.
Dallal, Ahmad S. Ibn al-Haytham’s universal solution for ﬁnding the direction of the
qibla by calculation, Arabic Sciences and Philosophy 5 (1995), 145–193.
Bibliography
292

Danielson, Dennis. The First Copernican: Georg Joachim Rheticus and the Rise of
the Copernican Revolution, New York: Walker Books, 2006.
Datta, Bibhutibhusan; and Singh, Avadhesh Narayan. History of Hindu Mathemat-
ics: A Source Book, Lahore: Motilal Banarsi Das, vol. 1: 1935, vol. 2: 1938.
Datta, Bibhutibhusan; and Singh, Avadhesh Narayan. Hindu trigonometry, revised by
Kripa Shankar Shukla, Indian Journal of History of Science 18 (1983), 39–108.
Dauben, Joseph W., ed. The History of Mathematics from Antiquity to the Present: A
Selective Annotated Bibliography, revised edition on CD-ROM edited by Albert
C. Lewis, American Mathematical Society, 2000.
Davis, Samuel. On the astronomical computations of the Hindus, Asiatic Researches
2 (1799), 225–287.
Debarnot, Marie-Thérèse. Introduction du triangle polaire par Abu Nasr b. ÛIraq,
Journal for History of Arabic Science 2 (1979), 126–136.
Debarnot, Marie-Thérèse. The Zij of Habash al-Hasib: a survey of MS Istanbul Yeni
Cami 784/2, in David A. King and George Saliba, eds., From Deferent to
Equant: A Volume of Studies in the History of Science in the Ancient and Me-
dieval Near East in Honor of E. S. Kennedy, New York: New York Academy of
Sciences, 1987, 35–69.
Debarnot, Marie-Thérèse. Trigonometry, in Roshdi Rashed, ed., Encyclopedia of the
History of Arabic Science, London/New York: Routledge, 1996, vol. 2, 495–538.
Delambre, J.B.J. Histoire de l’Astronomie Ancienne, 2 vols., Paris: Courcier, 1817;
reprinted New York/London: Johnson Reprint Corporation, 1965.
Delambre, J.B.J. Histoire de l’Astronomie du Moyen Âge, Paris: Courcier, 1819.
Delambre, J.B.J. Histoire de l’Astronomie Moderne, 2 vols., Paris: Courcier, 1821.
De Morgan, Augustus. On the almost total disappearance of the earliest trigonomet-
rical canon, Philosophical Magazine (3) 26 (1845), 517–526.
Derenzini, G. L’eliocentrismo di Aristarco da Archimede a Copernico, Physis 16
(1974), 289–308.
De Siebenthal, Jean. Les Mathématiques dans l’Occident Médiéval, Lausanne: Édi-
tions Terre haute, 1993.
Dijksterhuis, E. J. Archimedes, Copenhagen: Munksgaard, 1956; reprinted Prince-
ton: Princeton University Press, 1987.
Dilke, O. A. W. The Roman Land Surveyors: An Introduction to the Agrimensores,
Newton Abbot: David and Charles, 1971.
Diller, Aubrey. Geographical latitudes in Eratosthenes, Hipparchus and Posidonius,
Klio 27 (1934), 258–269.
Diocles. On Burning Mirrors, edited and translated by Gerald J. Toomer,
Berlin/Heidelberg/New York: Springer-Verlag, 1976.
Dittrich, Arnost. Náhrada astronomickych tabulek babylonskych trigonometrickymi
vzorci, Casopis pro Pestování Matematiky a Fisiky 63 (1934), 82–96.
Dobrzycki, Jerzy; and Kremer, Richard L. Peurbach and Maragha astronomy? The
ephemerides of Johannes Angelus and their implications, Journal for the His-
tory of Astronomy 27 (1996), 187–237.
Bibliography
293

Dold-Samplonius, Yvonne. Archimedes: Einander berührende Kreise, Sudhoffs
Archiv 57 (1973), 15–40.
Donnay, J.D.H. Spherical Trigonometry after the Cesàro Method, New York: Inter-
science, 1945.
Dreyer, J.L.E. On Tycho Brahe’s manual of trigonometry, The Observatory 39
(1916), 127–131.
Duke, Dennis. Hipparchus’ coordinate system, Archive for History of Exact Sciences
56 (2002), 427–433.
Duke, Dennis. Hipparchus’ eclipse trios and early trigonometry, Centaurus 47
(2005), 163–177.
Duke, Dennis. The equant in India: the mathematical basis of ancient Indian plane-
tary models, Archive for History of Exact Sciences 59 (2005), 563–576.
Duke, Dennis. Comment on the origin of the equant papers by Evans, Swerdlow, and
Jones, Journal for the History of Astronomy 36 (2005), 1–6.
Erhardt, von. See von Erhardt.
Espenshade, Pamela H. A text on trigonometry by Levi ben Gerson (1288–1344),
The Mathematics Teacher 60 (1967), 628–637.
Euclid. The Thirteen Books of Euclid’s Elements, 2nd ed., transl. Thomas Little
Heath, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1925, reprinted New York:
Dover, 1956.
Euclid. The Medieval Latin Translation of the Data of Euclid, transl. Shuntaro Ito,
Tokyo: Tokyo University Press, 1980; Basel: Birkhäuser, 1998.
Euclid. The Data of Euclid, transl. George L. MacDowell and Merle A. Sokolik, Bal-
timore: Union Square Press, 1993.
Euclid. Euclid’s Data: The Importance of Being Given, transl. Christian Marinus
Taisbak, Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press, 2003.
Evans, Gillian R. The “sub-Euclidean” geometry of the early Middle Ages, up to the
mid-twelfth century, Archive for History of Exact Sciences 16 (1976/77),
105–118.
Evans, James. On the function and the probable origin of Ptolemy’s equant, Ameri-
can Journal of Physics 52 (1984), 1080–1089.
Evans, James. The History and Practice of Ancient Astronomy, New York/Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1998.
Fibonacci. See Leonardo of Pisa.
Firneis, Maria G. Johannes von Gmunden—der Astronom, Österreichische Akademie
der Wissenschaften, Phil.-Hist. Kl., Sitzungsberichte 497 (1988), 65–84.
Folkerts, Menso. Werner, Johannes, in Charles Coulston Gillispie, ed., Dictionary of
Scientiﬁc Biography, vol. 14, New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1976, 272–277.
Folkerts, Menso. Regiomontanus als Mathematiker, Centaurus 21 (1977), 214–245.
Folkerts, Menso. New results on the mathematical activity of Regiomontanus, in Ernst
Zinner, Regiomontanus: His Life and Work, Amsterdam/New York/Oxford/Tokyo:
North-Holland, 1990, 363–372.
Folkerts, Menso. Regiomontanus’ role in the transmission and transformation of
Greek mathematics, in Jamil and Sally Ragep, eds., Tradition, Transmission,
Bibliography
294

Transformation: Proceedings of Two Conferences on Pre-Modern Science Held
at the University of Oklahoma, Leiden: Brill, 1996, 89–113.
Folkerts, Menso. Regiomontanus’role in the transmission of mathematical problems,
in Yvonne Dold-Samplonius, Joseph W. Dauben, Menso Folkerts, and Benno
van Dalen, eds., From China to Paris: 2000 Years Transmission of Mathematical
Ideas, Stuttgart: Franz Steiner, 2002, 411–428.
Folkerts, Menso. Leonardo Fibonacci’s knowledge of Euclid’s Elements and of other
mathematical texts, Bollettino di Storia delle Scienze Matematiche 24 (2004),
93–113.
Fowler, David H. The Mathematics of Plato’s Academy: A New Reconstruction,
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1987, 2nd ed. 1999.
Fowler, David H. Logistic and fractions in early Greek mathematics: a new interpre-
tation, in Paul Benoit, Karine Chemla, and Jim Ritter, eds., Histoire de
fractions, fractions d’histoire, Basel/Boston: Birkhäuser Verlag, 1992, 133–147.
Fowler, David H.; and Robson, Eleanor. Square root approximations in Old Babylonian
mathematics: YBC 7289 in context, Historia Mathematica 25 (1998), 366–378.
Friberg, Jöran. Methods and traditions of Babylonian mathematics I: Plimpton 322,
Pythagorean triples, and the Babylonian triangle parameter equations, Historia
Mathematica 8 (1981), 277–318.
Gall, Franz. Die Wiener Universität zur Zeit des Regiomontanus, in Günther
Hamann, ed., Regiomontanus-Studien, Vienna: Verlag der Österreichischen
Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1980, 211–216.
Gandz, Solomon. The origin of angle-geometry, Isis 12 (1929), 452–481.
Gatti, Hilary. Giordano Bruno and Renaissance Science, Ithaca/London: Cornell
University Press, 1999.
Gerbert d’Aurillac. Oeuvres de Gerbert, transl. A. Olleris, Paris/Clermont/Ferrand:
F. Thibaud, 1867.
Gerbert d’Aurillac. Gerberti Opera Mathematica, ed. N. Bubnov, Berlin: Friedlän-
der, 1899.
Gerl, Armin. Trigonometrisch-astronomisches Rechnen kurz vor Copernicus, Stuttgart:
Steiner Verlag, 1989.
Gillings, Richard J. Mathematics in the Time of the Pharaohs, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1972.
Gingerich, Owen. Did Copernicus owe a debt to Aristarchus? Journal for the History
of Astronomy 16 (1985), 37–42.
Gingerich, Owen. The trouble with Ptolemy, Isis 93 (2002), 70–74.
Glaisher, J.W.L.; Cayley, Arthur; Stokes, G. G.; Thomson, W.; and Smith, H.J.S. Re-
port of the committee on mathematical tables, in Report of the British Associa-
tion for the Advancement of Science, London: Taylor and Francis, 1873, 1–175.
Glowatski, Ernst; and Göttsche, Helmut. Die Sehnentafel des Klaudios Ptolemaios,
Munich: Oldenbourg, 1976.
Glowatski, Ernst; and Göttsche, Helmut. Die Tafeln des Regiomontanus. Ein
Jahrhundertwerk, München: Institut für Geschichte der Naturwissenschaften,
1990.
Bibliography
295

Gold, David; and Pingree, David. A hitherto unknown Sanskrit work concerning
Madhava’s derivation of the power series for sine and cosine, Historia Scien-
tiarum 42 (1991), 49–65.
Goldmann, Arthur. Familienname, Geburtsort und Geburtsdatum des Astronom
Georg Peuerbach, Heimatgaue: Zeitschrift für Oberösterreichische Geschichte,
Landes- und Volkeskunde 4 (1923), 75–77.
Goldstein, Bernard R. The astronomical tables of Levi ben Gerson, Transactions of
the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences 45 (1974), 1–285.
Goldstein, Bernard R.; and Bowen, Alan C. A new view of early Greek astronomy,
Isis 74 (1983), 330–340.
Goldstein, Bernard R. The making of astronomy in early Islam, Nuncius 1 (1986),
79–92.
Goldstein, Bernard R.; and Bowen, Alan C. The introduction of dated observations
and precise measurement in Greek astronomy, Archive for History of Exact Sci-
ences 43 (1991), 93–132.
Goldstein, Bernard R. An anonymous zij in Hebrew for 1400 A.D.: a preliminary re-
port, Archive for History of Exact Sciences 57 (2003), 151–171.
Grant, Edward, ed. A Source Book in Medieval Science, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1974.
Grössing, Helmuth. Humanistische Naturwissenschaft. Zur Geschichte der Wiener
mathematischen Schulen des 15. und 16. Jahrhunderts, Baden-Baden: Valentin
Koerner, 1983.
Gupta, Radha Charan. Bhaskara I’s approximation to sine, Indian Journal of History
of Science 2 (1967), 121–136.
Gupta, Radha Charan. Second order interpolation in Indian mathematics up to the ﬁf-
teenth century, Indian Journal of History of Science 4 (1969), 86–98.
Gupta, Radha Charan. Fractional parts of Aryabhata’s sines and certain rules found
in Govindasvami’s Bhasya on the Mahabhaskariya, Indian Journal of History
of Science 6 (1971), 51–59.
Gupta, Radha Charan. Early Indians on second order sine differences, Indian Journal
of History of Science 7 (1972), 81–86.
Gupta, Radha Charan. Indian approximations to sine, cosine and versed sine, The
Mathematics Education 6 (Section B) (1972), 59–60.
Gupta, Radha Charan. Addition and subtraction theorems for the sine and the cosine
in medieval India, Indian Journal of History of Science 9 (1974), 164–177.
Gupta, Radha Charan. An Indian form of third order Taylor series approximation of
the sine, Historia Mathematica 1 (1974), 287–289.
Gupta, Radha Charan. Sines and cosines of multiple arcs as given by Kamalakara,
Indian Journal of History of Science 9 (1974), 143–150.
Gupta, Radha Charan. Sines of submultiple arcs as found in the Siddhanta-Tattva-
Viveka, Ranchi University Mathematical Journal 5 (1974), 21–27.
Gupta, Radha Charan. Solution of the astronomical triangle as found in the Tantrasam-
graha (A.D. 1500), Indian Journal of History of Science 9 (1974), 86–99.
Bibliography
296

Gupta, Radha Charan. Madhava’s power series computation of the sine, Ganita 27
(1976), 19–24.
Gupta, Radha Charan. Sine of eighteen degrees in India up to the eighteenth century,
Indian Journal of History of Science 11 (1976), 1–10.
Gupta, Radha Charan. Indian values of the sinus totus, Indian Journal of History of
Science 13 (1978), 125–143.
Gupta, Radha Charan. A mean-value-type formula for inverse interpolation of the
sine, Ganita 30 (1979), 78–82.
Gupta, Radha Charan. Munisvara’s modiﬁcation of Brahmagupta’s rule for second
order interpolation, Indian Journal of History of Science 14 (1979), 66–72.
Gupta, Radha Charan. The Marici commentary on the Jyotpatti, Indian Journal of
History of Science 15 (1980), 44–49.
Gupta, Radha Charan. On derivation of Bhaskara I’s formula for the Sine, Ganita-
Bharati 8 (1986), 39–41.
Gupta, Radha Charan. Madhava’s rule for ﬁnding angle between the ecliptic and the
horizon and Aryabhata’s knowledge of it, in G. Swarup, A. K. Bag, and K. S.
Shukla, eds., History of Oriental Astronomy, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1987, 197–202.
Gutas, Dimitri. Greek Thought, Arabic Culture: The Graeco-Arabic Translation
Movement in Baghdad and Early \Abbasid Society (2nd–4th/8th–10th Cen-
turies), London/New York: Routledge, 1998.
Gutas, Dimitri; Eickelman, D. F.; De Blois, F. C.; Sadgrove, P. C.; Afshar, Iradj; and
Balim, Çigdem. Tardjama, in Encyclopaedia of Islam, 2nd edition, vol. X, Lei-
den: Brill, 1998, 225–231.
Hairetdinova, N. G. On the oriental sources of the Regiomontanus’ trigonometrical
treatise, Archives Internationales d’Histoire des Sciences 23 (1970), 61–66.
Hairetdinova, N. G. On spherical trigonometry in the medieval Near East and in Eu-
rope, Historia Mathematica 13 (1986), 136–146.
[See also Khairetdinova, N. G.]
Hamadanizadeh, Javad. A medieval interpolation scheme for oblique ascensions, Cen-
taurus 9 (1963), 257–265. Reprinted in David A. King and Mary Helen Kennedy,
eds., Studies in the Islamic Exact Sciences by E. S. Kennedy, Colleagues and For-
mer Students, Beirut: American University of Beirut, 1983, 526–534.
Hamadanizadeh, Javad. Interpolation schemes in Dastur al-munajjimin, Centaurus
22 (1978), 44–52.
Hamadanizadeh, Javad. The trigonometric tables of al-Kashi in his Zij-i Khaqani,
Historia Mathematica 7 (1980), 38–45.
Hamadanizadeh, Javad. A second-order interpolation scheme described in the Zij-i
Ilkhani, Historia Mathematica 12 (1985), 56–59.
Hamadanizadeh, Javad. A survey of medieval Islamic interpolation schemes, in David
A. King and George Saliba, eds., From Deferent to Equant: A Volume of Studies
in the History of Science in the Ancient and Medieval Near East in Honor of E. S.
Kennedy, New York: New York Academy of Sciences, 1987, 143–152.
Bibliography
297

Hamann, Günther. Regiomontanus-Studien, Vienna: Verlag der Österreichischen
Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1980.
Hamann, Günther. Regiomontanus in Wien, in Günther Hamann, ed., Regiomontanus-
Studien, Vienna: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften,
1980, 53–74.
Hamilton, N. T.; Swerdlow, Noel M.; and Toomer, Gerald J. The Canobic Inscrip-
tion: Ptolemy’s earliest work, in J. L. Berggren and Bernard Goldstein, eds.,
From Ancient Omens to Statistical Mechanics: Essays on the Exact Sciences
Presented to Asger Aaboe, Copenhagen: University Library, 1987, 55–73.
Hayashi, Takao; Kusuba, T.; and Yano, Michio. The correction of the Madhava series
for the circumference of a circle, Centaurus 33 (1990), 149–174.
Hayashi, Takao. A note on Bhaskara I’s rational approximation to sine, Historia
Scientiarum 42 (1991), 45–48.
Hayashi, Takao. Aryabhata’s rule and table for sine-differences, Historia Mathemat-
ica 24 (1997), 396–406.
Hayashi, Takao; Kusuba, T.; and Yano, Michio. Studies in Indian Mathematics:
Series, Pi and Trigonometry [in Japanese], Tokyo: Koseisha Koseikaku, 1997.
Heath, Thomas Little. Aristarchus of Samos. The Ancient Copernicus, Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1913; reprinted New York: Dover, 1981.
Heath, Thomas Little. A History of Greek Mathematics, 2 vols., Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1921; reprinted New York: Dover, 1981.
Heilbron, John. The Sun in the Church: Cathedrals as Solar Observatories, Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999.
Hellman, C. Doris; and Swerdlow, Noel M. Peurbach, Georg, in Charles Coulston
Gillispie, ed., Dictionary of Scientiﬁc Biography, vol. XV (Supplement 1), New
York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1978, 473–479.
Heron of Alexandria. Vermessungslehre und Dioptra, Greek edition and German
translation by Hermann Schöne, vol. 3 of Heronis Alexandrini. Opera quae Su-
persunt Omnia, Leipzig: Teubner, 1903.
Herz-Fischler, Roger. The Shape of the Great Pyramid, Waterloo, Canada: Wilfrid
Laurier University Press, 2000.
Hilfstein, Erna. Was Valentinus Otho a mathematics professor at the University of
Heidelberg? Organon 22/23 (1986/87), 221–225.
Hogendijk, Jan P. Review of [al-Biruni (Debarnot) 1985], Mathematical Reviews
88i:01016 (1988).
Hogendijk, Jan P. al-Khwarizmi’s table of the “sine of the hours” and the underlying
sine table, Historia Scientiarum (2) 42 (1991), 1–12.
Hogendijk, Jan P. The qibla table in the AshraﬁZij, in Anton von Gotstedter, ed., AD
RADICES. Festband zum fünfzigjährigen Bestehen des Instituts für Geschichte
der Naturwissenschaften der Johann Wolfgang Goethe-Universität Frankfurt
am Main, Stuttgart: Steiner, 1994, 81–94.
Hogendijk, Jan P. Traces of the lost Geometrical Elements of Menelaus in two texts
of al-Sijzi, Zeitschrift für Geschichte der Arabisch-Islamischen Wissenschaften
13 (1999–2000), 129–164.
Bibliography
298

Hogendijk, Jan P. al-Nayrizi’s mysterious determination of the azimuth of the qibla
at Baghdad, SCIAMVS 1 (2000), 49–70.
Høyrup, Jens. Mathematics, algebra, and geometry, in David Noel Freedman, ed.,
Anchor Bible Dictionary, New York: Doubleday, 1992, vol. IV, 602–612.
Huber, Peter. Ueber den Nullpunkt der Babylonischen Ekliptik, Centaurus 5 (1958),
192–208.
Hugh of St. Victor. Practical Geometry [Practica Geometriae] Attributed to Hugh of
St. Victor, transl. Frederick A. Homann, Milwaukee: Marquette University
Press, 1991.
Hughes, Barnabas. The chord tables (?) of Hipparchus of Rhodes, CSHPM Bulletin
26 (2000), 4–5, 11.
Hultsch, Friedrich. a Dc c c !a. Reste einer verloren geglaubten
Schrift, Neue Jahrbücher für Philologie und Paedagogik 127 (1883),
415–420.
Hultsch, Friedrich. Winkelmessungen durch die Hipparchische Dioptra, Abhandlung
zur Geschichte der Mathematik 9 (1899), 193–209.
Hultsch, Friedrich. Die Sehnentafeln der griechischen Astronomen, Das Weltall 2
(1901/1902), 49–55.
Hunrath, Karl. Des Rheticus Canon doctrinae triangulorum und Vieta’s Canon
mathematicus, Zeitschrift für Mathematik und Physik 44 (1899), supplement
Festschrift um siebstigen Geburtstage Moritz Cantors, 213–240.
Hypsicles. Die Aufgangszeiten der Gestirne, edited and translated by V. De Falco and
Max Krause, Abhandlungen der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Göttingen,
Philologisch-Historische Klasse (3) 62, 1–85, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und
Ruprecht, 1966.
Ibn al-Muthanna. Ibn al-Muthannâ’s Commentary on the Astronomical Tables of al-
Khwârizmî, Bernard R. Goldstein, transl., New Haven/London: Yale University
Press, 1967.
ÛId, Yusif. An analemma construction for right and oblique ascensions, Mathematics
Teacher 62 (1969), 669–672. Reprinted in David A. King and Mary Helen
Kennedy, eds., Studies in the Islamic Exact Sciences by E. S. Kennedy, Col-
leagues and Former Students, Beirut: American University of Beirut, 1983,
495–498.
Imhausen, Annette. Ägyptische Algorithmen, Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 2003.
Imhausen, Annette. Egyptian mathematical texts and their contexts, Science in Con-
text 16 (2003), 367–389.
Inamdar, M. G. A formula of Bhaskara for the chord of a circle leading to a formula
for evaluating sin °, Mathematics Student 18 (1950), 9–11.
Irani, Rida A. K. The “Jadwal al-Taqwim” of Habash al-Hasib, master’s thesis,
American University of Beirut, 1956.
Jensen, Claus. Abu Nasr Mansur’s approach to spherical astronomy as developed in
his treatise “The Table of Minutes,” Centaurus 16 (1972), 1–19.
John of Muris. Johannes de Muris, De arte mensurandi, edited by H.L.L. Busard,
Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag, 1998.
Bibliography
299

Jones, Alexander. Hipparchus’s computations of solar longitudes, Journal for the
History of Astronomy 22 (1991), 101–125.
Jones, Alexander. The adaptation of Babylonian methods in Greek numerical astron-
omy, Isis 82 (1991), 440–453.
Jones, Alexander. Peripatetic and Euclidean theories of the visual ray, Physis 31
(1994), 47–76.
Jones, Alexander. On Babylonian astronomy and its Greek metamorphoses, in Jamil
and Sally Ragep, eds., Tradition, Transmission, Transformation: Proceedings of
Two Conferences on Pre-Modern Science Held at the University of Oklahoma,
Leiden: Brill, 1996, 139–155.
Jones, Alexander. Studies in the astronomy of the Roman period. II. Tables for solar
longitude, Centaurus 39 (1997), 211–229.
Jones, Alexander. Astronomical Papyri from Oxyrhynchus, 2 vols., Philadelphia:
American Philosophical Society, 1999.
Jones, Alexander. Eratosthenes, Hipparchus, and the obliquity of the ecliptic, Journal
for the History of Astronomy 33 (2002), 15–19.
Jones, Alexander. A route to the ancient discovery of nonuniform planetary motion,
Journal for the History of Astronomy 35 (2004), 375–386.
Jones, Alexander. The Keskintos astronomical inscription: text and interpretations,
SCIAMVS 7 (2006), 3–41.
Juschkewitsch, A. P. Geschichte der Mathematik im Mittelalter, transl. V. Ziegler,
Basel: Pfalz, 1964.
Kaiser, Hans K. Johannes von Gmunden und seine mathematischen Leistungen,
Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Phil.-Hist. Kl., Sitzungsberichte
497 (1988), 85–100.
Kak, Subhash. Birth and early development of Indian astronomy, in Helaine Selin,
ed., Astronomy Across Cultures: The History of Non-Western Astronomy, Dor-
drecht/Boston/London: Kluwer, 2000, 303–340.
Karpinski, Louis C. The place of trigonometry in the development of mathematical
ideas, Scripta Mathematica 11 (1945), 268–272.
Katz, Victor J. The calculus of the trigonometric functions, Historia Mathematica 14
(1987), 311–324.
Katz, Victor J. Ideas of calculus in Islam and India, Mathematics Magazine 68
(1995), 163–174.
Katz, Victor J. A History of Mathematics: An Introduction, 2nd ed., Reading, MA:
Addison Wesley Longman, 1998.
Kaunzner, Wolfgang. Über Regiomontanus als Mathematiker, in Günther Hamann,
ed., Regiomontanus-Studien, Vienna: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der
Wissenschaften, 1980, 125–145.
Kaunzer, Wolfgang. On the transmission of mathematical knowledge to Europe, Sud-
hoffs Archiv 71 (1987), 129–140.
Kaunzner, Wolfgang. On Regiomontanus’s arithmetic and algebra in De triangulis
omnimodis libri quinque, in Ernst Zinner, Regiomontanus: His Life and Work,
Amsterdam/New York/Oxford/Tokyo: North-Holland, 1990, 373–386.
Bibliography
300

Kaye, G. R. Ancient Hindu spherical astronomy, Journal and Proceedings of the
Royal Asiatic Society on Bengal (2) 15 (1919), 153–189.
Kazim, M. A. al-Biruni and trigonometry, in Victor Courtois, ed., al-Biruni Com-
memoration Volume, Calcutta: Iran Society, 1951, 161–170; reprinted in Fuat
Sezgin, ed., Abu l-Rayhan al-Biruni: Texts and Studies III, Frankfurt: Institut für
Geschichte der Arabisch-Islamischen Wissenschaften, 1998, 87–96.
Keller, Agathe. Expounding the Mathematical Seed: A Translation of Bhaskara I on
the Mathematical Chapter of the Aryabhatiya, 2 vols., Basel: Birkhäuser, 2006.
Kelley Jr., James E. Analog and Digital Navigation in the Late Middle Ages, Melrose
Park, PA: Sometime Publishers, 2000.
Kennedy, Edward S. A Survey of Islamic Astronomical Tables, Transactions of the
American Philosophical Society 46 (1956), 123–177.
Kennedy, Edward S. Parallax theory in Islamic astronomy, Isis 47 (1956), 33–53.
Reprinted in David A. King and Mary Helen Kennedy, eds., Studies in the Is-
lamic Exact Sciences by E. S. Kennedy, Colleagues and Former Students,
Beirut: American University of Beirut, 1983, 164–184.
Kennedy, Edward S. Biruni’s graphical determination of the local meridian, Scripta
Mathematica 24 (1959), 251–255. Reprinted in David A. King and Mary Helen
Kennedy, eds., Studies in the Islamic Exact Sciences by E. S. Kennedy, Col-
leagues and Former Students, Beirut: American University of Beirut, 1983,
613–617.
Kennedy, Edward S. A medieval interpolation scheme using second order differ-
ences, in Walter B. Henning and Ehsan Yarshater, eds., A Locust’s Leg: Studies
in Honour of S. H. Taqizadeh, London: Lund, Humphries and Co., 1962,
117–120. Reprinted in David A. King and Mary Helen Kennedy, eds., Studies in
the Islamic Exact Sciences by E. S. Kennedy, Colleagues and Former Students,
Beirut: American University of Beirut, 1983, 522–525.
Kennedy, Edward S. al-Biruni on determining the meridian, Mathematics Teacher 66
(1963), 635–637. Reprinted in David A. King and Mary Helen Kennedy, eds.,
Studies in the Islamic Exact Sciences by E. S. Kennedy, Colleagues and Former
Students, Beirut: American University of Beirut, 1983, 618–620.
Kennedy, Edward S. An early method of successive approximations, Centaurus 13
(1969), 248–250. Reprinted in David A. King and Mary Helen Kennedy, eds.,
Studies in the Islamic Exact Sciences by E. S. Kennedy, Colleagues and Former
Students, Beirut: American University of Beirut, 1983, 541–543.
Kennedy, Edward S. The history of trigonometry, in Historical Topics for the Math-
ematics Classroom, 31st yearbook, Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of
Mathematics, 1969, 333–359. Reprinted in David A. King and Mary Helen
Kennedy, eds., Studies in the Islamic Exact Sciences by E. S. Kennedy, Col-
leagues and Former Students, Beirut: American University of Beirut, 1983,
3–29.
Kennedy, Edward S. al-Biruni’s Maqalid \ilm al-hay’a, Journal of Near Eastern
Studies 30 (1971), 308–314. Reprinted in David A. King and Mary Helen
Kennedy, eds., Studies in the Islamic Exact Sciences by E. S. Kennedy,
Bibliography
301

Colleagues and Former Students, Beirut: American University of Beirut, 1983,
596–602.
Kennedy, Edward S. al-Biruni’s Masudic Canon, al-Abhath 24 (1971), 59–81.
Reprinted in David A. King and Mary Helen Kennedy, eds., Studies in the Is-
lamic Exact Sciences by E. S. Kennedy, Colleagues and Former Students,
Beirut: American University of Beirut, 1983, 573–595.
Kennedy, Edward S. A Commentary upon Biruni’s Kitab Tahdid al-Amakin, an 11th
Century Treatise in Mathematical Geography, Beirut: American University of
Beirut, 1973.
Kennedy, Edward S. The motivation of al-Biruni’s second order interpolation
scheme, in A. Y. al-Hassan, G. Karmi, and N. Namnum, eds., Proceedings of the
First International Symposium for the History of Arabic Science, Aleppo, Insti-
tute for the History of Arabic Science, 1978, vol. II, 67–71. Reprinted in David
A. King and Mary Helen Kennedy, eds., Studies in the Islamic Exact Sciences
by E. S. Kennedy, Colleagues and Former Students, Beirut: American Univer-
sity of Beirut, 1983, 630–634.
Kennedy, Edward S. Applied mathematics in the tenth century: Abu’l-Wafa’ calcu-
lates the distance Baghdad-Mecca, Historia Mathematica 11 (1984), 193–206.
Kennedy, Edward S. Spherical astronomy in Kashi’s Khaqani Zij, Zeitschrift für
Geschichte der Arabisch-Islamischen Wissenschaften 2 (1985), 1–46.
Kennedy, Edward S. Ibn al-Haytham’s determination of the meridian from one solar
altitude, Zeitschrift für Geschichte der Arabisch-Islamischen Wissenschaften 5
(1989), 141–144.
Kennedy, Edward S. Mathematical geography, in Roshdi Rashed, ed., Encyclopedia
of the History of Arabic Science, London/New York: Routledge, 1996, vol. 1,
185–201.
Kennedy, Edward S. On the Contents and Signiﬁcance of the Khaqani Zij by Jamshid
Ghiyath al-Din al-Kashi, Frankfurt: Institute for the History of Arabic-Islamic
Science, 1998.
Kennedy, Edward S.; and ÛId, Yusuf. A letter of al-Biruni. Habash al-Hasib’s
analemma for the qibla, Historia Mathematica 1 (1974), 3–11. Reprinted in
David A. King and Mary Helen Kennedy, eds., Studies in the Islamic Exact Sci-
ences by E. S. Kennedy, Colleagues and Former Students, Beirut: American
University of Beirut, 1983, 621–629.
Kennedy, Edward S.; Kunitzsch, Paul; and Lorch, Richard P. The Melon-Shaped As-
trolabe in Arabic Astronomy, Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag, 1999.
Kennedy, Edward S.; and Muruwwa, Ahmad. Biruni on the solar equation, Journal of
Near Eastern Studies 17 (1958), 112–121. Reprinted in David A. King and
Mary Helen Kennedy, eds., Studies in the Islamic Exact Sciences by E. S.
Kennedy, Colleagues and Former Students, Beirut: American University of
Beirut, 1983, 603–612.
Kennedy, Edward S.; and Sharkas, Haydar. Two medieval methods for determining
the obliquity of the ecliptic, Mathematics Teacher 55 (1962), 286–290. Reprinted
in David A. King and Mary Helen Kennedy, eds., Studies in the Islamic Exact
Bibliography
302

Sciences by E. S. Kennedy, Colleagues and Former Students, Beirut: American
University of Beirut, 1983, 517–521.
Kennedy, Edward S.; and Transue, W. R. A medieval iterative algorism, American
Mathematical Monthly 63 (1956), 80–83. Reprinted in David A. King and Mary
Helen Kennedy, eds., Studies in the Islamic Exact Sciences by E. S. Kennedy,
Colleagues and Former Students, Beirut: American University of Beirut, 1983,
513–516.
Kennedy, Edward S.; and Ukashah, Walid. The chandelier clock of Ibn Yunis, Isis 60
(1969), 543–545. Reprinted in David A. King and Mary Helen Kennedy, eds.,
Studies in the Islamic Exact Sciences by E. S. Kennedy, Colleagues and Former
Students, Beirut: American University of Beirut, 1983, 499–501.
Khairetdinova, N. G. History of the spherical tangent theorem [in Russian], Istoriko-
matematicheskie Issledovaniya 29 (1985), 48–54.
Khairetdinova, N. G. History of the polar triangle [in Russian], Istoriko-
matematicheskie Issledovaniya 29 (1985), 154–159.
[See also Hairetdinova, N. G.]
al-Khwarizmi, Muhammad ibn Musa. Die Astronomischen Tafeln des Muhammed
ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi in der Bearbeitung des Maslama ibn Ahmed al-Madjriti
und der Latein. Uebersetzung des Athelard von Bath auf Grund der Vorarbeiten
von A. Bjørnbo und R. Besthorn in Kopenhagen, edited by Heinrich Suter, Det
Kongelige Danske Videnskabernes Selskab Skrifter, 7. R., Hist. og Filos. Afd. 3
(1), Copenhagen, 1914.
al-Khwarizmi, Muhammad ibn Musa. The Astronomical Tables of al-Khwarizmi,
translated by Otto Neugebauer, Det Kongelige Danske Videnskabernes Selskab,
Historisk-ﬁlosoﬁske Skrifter 4 (2), Copenhagen: Munksgaard, 1962.
King, David A. The Astronomical Works of Ibn Yunus, doctoral dissertation, Yale
University, 1972.
King, David A. al-Khalili’s auxiliary tables for solving problems of spherical astron-
omy, Journal for the History of Astronomy 4 (1973), 99–110.
King, David A. Ibn Yunus’s Very Useful Tables for reckoning time by the Sun,
Archive for History of Exact Sciences 10 (1973), 342–394.
King, David A. al-Khalili’s qibla table, Journal of Near Eastern Studies 34 (1975),
81–122.
King, David A. al-Khwarizmi and new trends in mathematical astronomy in the ninth
century, Occasional Papers on the Near East 2, Hagop Kevorkian Center for
Near Eastern Studies, New York University, 1983, 43 pp.
King, David A. The sacred direction in Islam: A study of the interaction of religion and
science in the Middle Ages, Interdisciplinary Science Reviews 10 (1985), 315–328.
King, David A. The earliest Islamic mathematical methods and tables for ﬁnding the
direction of Mecca, Zeitschrift für Geschichte der Arabisch-Islamischen Wis-
senschaften 3 (1986), 82–149. Reprinted in David A. King, Astronomy in the
Service of Islam, Aldershot, UK / Brookﬁeld, VT, 1993, article XIV.
King, David A. Some early Islamic tables for determining lunar crescent visibility, in
David A. King and George Saliba, eds., From Deferent to Equant: A Volume of
Bibliography
303

Studies in the History of Science in the Ancient and Medieval Near East in
Honor of E. S. Kennedy, New York: New York Academy of Sciences, 1987,
185–225.
King, David A. Mikat: astronomical timekeeping, in Encyclopaedia of Islam, vol. 7,
Leiden: Brill, 1990, 27–32. Reprinted in David A. King, Astronomy in the Ser-
vice of Islam, Aldershot, UK / Brookﬁeld, VT, 1993, article V, 1–20.
King, David A. Kibla: sacred direction, in Encyclopaedia of Islam, vol. 5, Leiden:
Brill, 1991, 83–88. Reprinted in David A. King, Astronomy in the Service of Is-
lam, Aldershot, UK / Brookﬁeld, VT, 1993, article IX, 1–18.
King, David A. RubÛ, in Encyclopaedia of Islam, vol. 8, Leiden: Brill, 1995,
574–575.
King, David A. Astronomy and Islamic society. Qibla, gnomonics and timekeeping,
in Roshdi Rashed, ed., Encyclopedia of the History of Arabic Science, Lon-
don/New York: Routledge, 1996, vol. 1, 128–184.
King, David A. World-Maps for Finding the Direction and Distance to Mecca, Lon-
don: al-Furqan Islamic Heritage Foundation / Leiden: Brill, 1999.
King, David A. A vetustissimus Arabic treatise on the quadrans vetus, Journal for the
History of Astronomy 33 (2002), 237–255.
King, David A. In Synchrony with the Heavens. Studies in Astronomical Timekeeping
and Instrumentation in Medieval Islamic Civilization. Volume I: The Call of the
Muezzin, Leiden/Boston: Brill, 2004.
King, David A. In Synchrony with the Heavens. Studies in Astronomical Timekeeping
and Instrumentation in Medieval Islamic Civilization. Volume II: Instruments of
Mass Calculation, Leiden/Boston: Brill, 2005.
King, David A.; and Samsó, Julio. Astronomical handbooks and tables from the Is-
lamic world (750–1900): an interim report, Suhayl 2 (2001), 9–105.
Kish, George. Apian, Peter, in Charles Coulston Gillispie, ed., Dictionary of Scien-
tiﬁc Biography, vol. 1, New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1970, 178–179.
Klein, Jacob. Die griechische Logistik und die Entstehung der Algebra I, Quellen
und Studien B 3 (1934), 18–105.
Klein, Jacob. Die griechische Logistik und die Entstehung der Algebra II, Quellen
und Studien B 3 (1934), 122–235.
Klintberg, Bo. Hipparchus’s 3600 based chord table and its place in the history of
ancient Greek and Indian trigonometry, Indian Journal of History of Science 40
(2005), 169–203.
Klug, Rudolf. Johannes von Gmunden, der Begründer der Himmelskunde auf
deutschem Boden, Akademie der Wissenschaften Wien, Phil.-Hist. Kl., Sitzungs-
berichte 222 (4) (1943), 1–93.
Knorr, Wilbur. Ancient versions of two trigonometric lemmas, Classical Quarterly
35 (1985), 362–391.
Knorr, Wilbur. The practical element in ancient exact sciences, Synthese 81 (1989),
313–328.
Knorr, Wilbur. New readings in Greek mathematics: sources, problems, publications,
Impact of Science on Society 159 (1990), 207–218.
Bibliography
304

Knorr, Wilbur. On the principle of linear perspective in Euclid’s Optics, Centaurus
34 (1991), 193–210.
Knorr, Wilbur. Pseudo Euclidean reﬂection in ancient optics: A re-examination of
textual issues pertaining to the Euclidean Optica and Catoptrica, Physis 31
(1994), 1–45.
Koelblen, Sabine. Un exercice de combinatoire: Les relations issues de la ﬁgure sé-
cante de Ptolémée, ou les règles des six quantities en proportion, in Un Parcours
en Histoire des Mathématiques: Travaux et Recherches, Nantes: Université de
Nantes, 1993, 1–21.
Koelblen, Sabine. Une pratique de la composition des raisons dans un exercice de
combinatoire, Revue d’Histoire des Sciences 47 (1994), 209–247.
Koyré, Alexandre. Mathematics, in René Taton, ed., History of Science. The Begin-
nings of Modern Science from 1450 to 1800, New York: Basic Books, 1964.
Krause, Max. Die Sphärik von Menelaos aux Alexandrien in der Verbesserung von
Abu Nasr Mansur b. ÛAli ibn ÛIraq, Abhandlungen der Gesellschaft der Wis-
senschaften zu Göttingen, Philologisch-Historische Klasse (3) 17 (1936),
1–254, 1–110 (Arabic numbering).
Kren, Claudia. Astronomy, in David L. Wagner, ed., The Seven Liberal Arts in the
Middle Ages, Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1983, 218–247.
Kugler, Franz Xaver. Die babylonische Mondrechnung, Freiburg: Herder’sche Ver-
lagshandlung, 1900.
Kunitzsch, Paul; and Lorch, Richard. Abu Nasr and Habash on matali\ al-samt,
Zeitschrift für Geschichte der Arabisch-Islamischen Wissenschaften 9 (1994),
43–82.
Langermann, Y. Tzvi. Peurbach in the Hebrew tradition, Journal for the History of
Astronomy 29 (1998), 137–150.
Lejeune, Albert. La dioptre d’Archimède, Annales de la Société Scientiﬁque de Brux-
elles Ser. I, 61 (1947), 27–47.
Leonardo of Pisa. Scritti di Leonardo Pisano. Matematico del Secolo Decimoterzo,
ed. Baldassarre Boncompagni, 2 vols., Rome: Tipograﬁa delle Scienze Matem-
atiche e Fisiche, 1857/1862.
Leonardo of Pisa. Leonardo Pisano Fibonacci The Book of Squares: an Annotated
Translation into Modern English, transl. L. E. Sigler. Boston: Academic Press,
1987.
Leonardo of Pisa. Fibonacci’s Liber Abaci, transl. L. E. Sigler. New York: Springer-
Verlag, 2002.
Leonardo of Pisa. Fibonacci’s De practica geometrie, transl. Barnabas Hughes. New
York: Springer, 2008.
Lesley, Mark. Biruni on rising times and daylight lengths, Centaurus 5 (1957),
121–141.
Levey, Martin. Abraham bar Hiyya, in Charles Coulston Gillispie, ed., Dictionary of
Scientiﬁc Biography, vol. 1, New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1970, 22–23.
Levi ben Gerson. The Astronomy of Levi ben Gerson (1288–1344), edition and trans-
lation by Bernard R. Goldstein, New York: Springer-Verlag, 1985.
Bibliography
305

Lévy, Tony. Les débuts de la literature mathématique Hébraïque: la géométrie
d’Abraham bar Hiyya (XIe–XIIe siècle), Micrologus 9 (2001), 35–64.
Linton, Christopher M. From Eudoxus to Einstein. A History of Mathematical As-
tronomy, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Long, Pamela O.; McGee, David; and Stahl, Alan M. The Book of Michael of
Rhodes: A Fifteenth Century Maritime Manuscript, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, to appear.
Lorch, Richard. Jabir ibn Aﬂah and his Inﬂuence in the West, doctoral dissertation,
University of Manchester, 1971.
Lorch, Richard. The astronomy of Jabir ibn Aﬂah, Centaurus 19 (1975), 85–107.
Reprinted in Richard Lorch, Arabic Mathematical Sciences: Instruments, Texts,
Transmission, Aldershot, UK / Brookﬁeld, VT: Variorum, 1995, article VI.
Lorch, Richard. The qibla-table attributed to al-Khazini, Journal for the History of
Arabic Science 4 (1980), 259–264. Reprinted in Richard Lorch, Arabic Mathe-
matical Sciences: Instruments, Texts, Transmission, Aldershot, UK / Brookﬁeld,
VT: Variorum, 1995, article XIV.
Lorch, Richard. A note on the horary quadrant, Journal for the History of Arabic
Science 5 (1981), 115–120. Reprinted in Richard Lorch, Arabic Mathematical
Sciences: Instruments, Texts, Transmission, Aldershot, UK / Brookﬁeld, VT:
Variorum, 1995, article XVII.
Lorch, Richard. Jabir ibn Aﬂah and the establishment of trigonometry in the West, in
Richard Lorch, Arabic Mathematical Sciences: Instruments, Texts, Transmis-
sion, Aldershot, UK / Brookﬁeld, VT: Variorum, 1995, article VIII, 42 pp.
Lorch, Richard. Maslama al-Majriti and Thabit’s al-Shakl al-Qatta\, in Josep
Casulleras and Julio Samsó, eds., From Baghdad to Barcelona: Studies in the
Islamic Exact Sciences in Honour of Prof. Juan Vernet, Barcelona: Universitat
de Barcelona, 1996, vol. 1, 49–57.
Lorch, Richard. Graphical methods in spherical astronomy in treatises by Habash
al-Hasib and al-Mahani, in Histoire des Mathématiques Arabes. Actes du 3me
Colloque Maghrébin sur l’Histoire des Mathématiques Arabes, Algiers: Associ-
ation Algérienne d’Histoire des Mathématiques, 1998, vol. 2, 221–226.
Lorch, Richard. Some early applications of the sine quadrant, Suhayl 1 (2000),
251–272.
Lorch, Richard. Greek—Arabic—Latin: the transmission of mathematical texts in
the middle ages, Science in Context 14 (2001), 313–331.
Lorch, Richard. Thabit ibn Qurra “On the Sector Figure” and Related Texts, Frank-
furt: Institut für Geschichte der Arabisch-Islamischen Wissenschaften, 2001.
Luckey, Paul. Das Analemma von Ptolemäus, Astronomische Nachrichten 230
(5498) (1927), cols. 17–46.
Luckey, Paul. Thabit b. Qurra’s Buch über die ebenen Sonnenuhren, Quellen und
Studien zur Geschichte der Mathematik, Astronomie und Physik B4 (1937),
95–148.
Luckey, Paul. Zur Entstehung der Kugeldreiecksrechnung, Deutsche Mathematik 5
(1941), 405–446.
Bibliography
306

Luckey, Paul. Der Lehrbrief über den Kreisumfang von Gamsid b. MasÛud al-Kasi,
Abhandlungen der Deutschen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Klasse für Mathe-
matik und allgemeine Naturwissenschaften 1950 (6), Berlin, 1953.
Luckey, Paul. Die Rechenkunst bei Gamsid b. MasÛud al-Kasi mit Rückblicken auf
die ältere Geschichte des Rechnens, Abhandlungen für die Kunde des Morgen-
landes 31 (1), Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner, 1951.
Majumdar, Pradip Kumar. The extant Siddhanta Sarvabhauma—An error in the sine
of one-third part of an angle, Indian Journal of History of Science 13 (1978),
6–10.
Malpangotto, Michela. Sul commento di Pappo d’Alessandria alle Sferiche di Teo-
dosio, Bollettino di Storia della Scienze Matematiche 23 (2003), 121–148.
Mancha, J. L. Heuristic reasoning: approximation procedures in Levi ben Gerson’s
astronomy, Archive for History of Exact Sciences 52 (1998), 13–50.
Maor, Eli. Trigonometric Delights, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1998.
Marar, K. Mukunda; and Rajagopal, C. T. On the Hindu quadrature of the circle, Jour-
nal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society (2) 20 (1944), 65–82.
Masiero, Franco. La raxon de marteloio, Studi Veneziana (2) 8 (1984), 393–412.
Matvievskaya, G. P. The history of spherics in antiquity and the medieval East [in
Russian], in S. K. Sirazhdinov, ed., Mathematics and Astronomy in the Works of
Ibn Sina, his Contemporaries and Successors [in Russian], Tashkent: Fan, 1981,
95–117.
Matvievskaya, G. P. An Outline of the History of Trigonometry [in Russian],
Tashkent: Fan, 1990.
Matvievskaya, G. P.; and Tllashev, K. The works of Abu Nasr ibnÛIraq on spherics [in
Russian], in S. K. Sirazhdinov, ed., On the History of Medieval Eastern Mathe-
matics and Astronomy [in Russian], Tashkent: Fan, 1983, 82–171.
May, Kenneth O. Bibliography and Research Manual of the History of Mathematics,
Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1973.
McCarthy, Daniel P.; and Byrne, John G. al-Khwarizmi’s sine tables and a western
table with the Hindu norm of R  150, Archive for History of Exact Sciences 57
(2003), 243–266.
Menelaus. Menelai sphareicorum, ed. Edmund Halley, Oxford: Sumptibus Academi-
cis, 1758.
Miller, G. A. Archimedes and Trigonometry, Science 67 (1928), 555.
Miller, Jeff. Earliest Known Uses of Some of the Words of Mathematics, http://
members.aol.com/jeff570/mathword.html.
Motzo, Bacchisio R. II compasso da navigare, opera italiana della metà del secolo
XIII, Annali della Facoltà di Lettera e Filosoﬁa della Università di Cagliari 8
(1947), I–CXXXII, 1–137.
Mundy, John. John of Gmunden, Isis 34 (1943), 196–205.
Nadal, Robert; and Brunet, J.-P. Le commentaire d’Hipparque I. La sphere mobile,
Archive for History of Exact Sciences 29 (1984), 201–236.
Nadal, Robert; and Brunet, J.-P. Le commentaire d’Hipparque II. Position de 78
étoiles, Archive for History of Exact Sciences 40 (1989), 305–354.
Bibliography
307

Nadal, Robert; Taha, Abdelkaddous; and Pinel, Pierre. Le contenu astronomique des
Sphèriques de Ménélaos, Archive for History of Exact Sciences 58 (2004),
381–436.
Naraharayya, S. N. Note on the Hindu table of sines, Journal of the Indian Mathe-
matical Society 15 (7) (1924), 105–113.
Naimpally, S. A. Approximate formula for the length of a chord, Ganita-Bharati 9
(1987), 57–58.
Netz, Reviel. The goal of Archimedes’ Sand-Reckoner, Apeiron 36 (2003), 251–290.
Neugebauer, Otto. Zur Entstehung des Sexagesimalsystems, in Abhandlungen der
Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen, Mathem.-phys. Kl., Neue Folge
13 (1), 1927.
Neugebauer, Otto. Untersuchungen zur antiken Astronomie III. Die babylonische
Theorie der Breitenbewegung des Mondes, Quellen und Studien zur Geschichte
der Mathematik, Abteilung B: Studien, 4 (1938), 193–346.
Neugebauer, Otto. Archimedes and Aristarchus, Isis 34 (1942), 4–6.
Neugebauer, Otto. The transmission of planetary theories in ancient and medieval as-
tronomy, Scripta Mathematica 22 (1956), 165–192.
Neugebauer, Otto. The Exact Sciences in Antiquity, 2nd ed., Providence: Brown Uni-
versity Press 1957; reprinted New York: Dover, 1969.
Neugebauer, Otto. The equivalence of eccentric and epicyclic motion according to
Apollonius, Scripta Mathematica 24 (1959), 5–21.
Neugebauer, Otto. On some aspects of early Greek astronomy, Proceedings of the
American Philosophical Society 116 (1972), 243–251.
Neugebauer, Otto. A History of Ancient Mathematical Astronomy, 3 parts, Berlin:
Springer, 1975.
Neugebauer, Otto. Astronomy and History. Selected Essays, New York: Springer,
1983.
Neugebauer, Otto; and Pingree, David. The Pañcasiddhantika of Varahamihira, 2
vols., Det Kongelige Danske Videnskabernes Selskab Historisk-Filosoﬁske
Skrifter 6 (1), Copenhagen: Munksgaard, 1970/1971.
Neugebauer, Otto; and Sachs, A. Mathematical Cuneiform Texts, New Haven: Amer-
ican Oriental Society / Schools of Oriental Research, 1945.
Neugebauer, Otto; and Schmidt, Olaf. Hindu astronomy at Newminster in 1428, An-
nals of Science 8 (1952), 221–228. Reprinted in Neugebauer, Otto, Astronomy
and History: Selected Essays, New York: Springer-Verlag, 1983, 425–432.
Newton, Robert R. The Crime of Claudius Ptolemy, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Uni-
versity Press, 1977.
Newton, Robert R. The Origins of Ptolemy’s Astronomical Parameters, Baltimore:
University of Maryland/Johns Hopkins University, 1982.
Newton, Robert R. The Origins of Ptolemy’s Astronomical Tables, Baltimore: Uni-
versity of Maryland/Johns Hopkins University, 1985.
Nicholas of Cusa. Die Mathematischen Schriften, 2nd ed., transl. Josepha Hofmann,
Hamburg: Felix Meiner, 1980.
Bibliography
308

Nilakantha. Tantrasan˙graha of Nilakantha Somayaji with Yuktidipika and Laghu-
vivrti of San˙kara, edited by K. V. Sarma, Hoshiarpur: Vishveshvaranand Vishva
Bandhu Institute of Sanskrit and Indological Studies, Panjab University, 1977.
Nilakantha. Tantrasamgraha of Nilakantha Somayaji, edition by K. V. Sarma, transl.
V. S. Narasimhan, Indian Journal of History of Science 33 (1998), supplements
to issues 1, 2, and 3.
Nissen, H. J.; Damerow, P.; and Englund, R. Archaic Bookkeeping: Early Writing
and Techniques of Economic Administration in the Ancient Near East, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1993.
North, John. The Fontana History of Astronomy and Cosmology, London: Fontana
Press, 1994.
Ohashi, Yukio. Early history of the astrolabe in India, Indian Journal of History of
Science 31 (1997), 199–295.
Ohashi, Yukio. Remarks on the origin of Indo-Tibetan astronomy, in Helaine Selin,
ed., Astronomy Across Cultures: The History of Non-Western Astronomy, Dor-
drecht/Boston/London: Kluwer, 2000, 341–369.
Pedersen, Fritz S. The Toledan Tables (4 vols.), Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzel, 2002.
Pedersen, Olaf. Logistics and the theory of functions: an essay in the history of Greek
mathematics, Archives Internationales d’Histoire des Sciences 24 (1974), 29–50.
Pedersen, Olaf. A Survey of the Almagest, Odense: Odense University Press, 1974.
Peet, T. Eric. The Rhind Mathematical Papyrus, Liverpool: Liverpool University
Press, 1923.
Peurbach, Georg. Tractatus Georgii Peurbachii super propositiones Ptolemaei de
sinubus et chordis, Nuremberg: apud Iohan. Petreium, 1541.
Pingree, David. Astronomy and astrology in India and Iran, Isis 54 (1963), 229–246.
Pingree, David. The Paitamahasiddhanta of the Visnudharmottarapurana, Adyar Li-
brary Bulletin 31/32 (1967/68), 472–510.
Pingree, David. The fragments of the works of YaÛqub ibn Tariq, Journal of Near
Eastern Studies 27 (1968), 97–125.
Pingree, David. Brahmagupta, in Charles Coulston Gillispie, ed., Dictionary of Sci-
entiﬁc Biography, vol. 2, New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1970, 416–418.
Pingree, David. The fragments of the works of al-Fazari, Journal of Near Eastern
Studies 29 (1970), 103–123.
Pingree, David. Census of the Exact Sciences in Sanskrit, Philadelphia: American
Philosophical Society, vol. A1: 1970, vol. A2: 1971, vol. A3: 1976, vol. A4:
1981, vol. A5: 1994.
Pingree, David. al-Fazari, Muhammad ibn Ibrahim, in Charles Coulston Gillispie,
ed., Dictionary of Scientiﬁc Biography, vol. 4, New York: Charles Scribner’s
Sons, 1971, 555–556.
Pingree, David. On the Greek origin of the Indian planetary model employing a dou-
ble epicycle, Journal for the History of Astronomy 2 (1971), 80–85.
Pingree, David. The recovery of early Greek astronomy from India, Journal for the
History of Astronomy 7 (1976), 109–123.
Bibliography
309

Pingree, David. History of mathematical astronomy in India, in Charles Coulston
Gillispie, ed., Dictionary of Scientiﬁc Biography, vol. 15, New York: Charles
Scribner’s Sons, 1978, 533–633.
Pingree, David. Power series in medieval Indian trigonometry, in Peter Gaeffke and
David A. Utz, eds., Science and Technology in South Asia: Proceedings of the
South Asia Seminar, II, 1981/82, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania,
Dept. of South Asia Regional Studies, 1985, 25–30.
Pingree, David. Aryabhata, the Paitamahasiddhanta, and Greek astronomy, Studies
in History of Medicine and Science 12 (1993), 69–79.
Pitiscus, Bartholomew. Trigonometriae, Augsburg: D. Custodis, 1600.
Playfair, John. Observations on the trigonometrical tables of the Brahmins, Transac-
tions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh 4 (1798), 83–106. (Due to a pagination
error there are no pages 89–96.)
Plofker, Kim. An example of the secant method of iterative approximation in the
ﬁfteenth-century Sanskrit text, Historia Mathematica 23 (1996), 246–256.
Plofker, Kim. The “error” in the Indian “Taylor series approximation” to the sine,
Historia Mathematica 28 (2001), 283–295.
Plofker, Kim. The astrolabe and spherical trigonometry in medieval India, Journal
for the History of Astronomy 31 (2000), 37–54.
Plofker, Kim. Spherical trigonometry and the astronomy of the medieval Kerala
school, in S.M.R. Ansari, ed., History of Oriental Astronomy, Dordrecht:
Kluwer, 2002, 83–93.
Plofker, Kim. Use and transmission of iterative approximations in India and the Is-
lamic world, in Yvonne Dold-Samplonius, Joseph W. Dauben, Menso Folkerts,
and Benno van Dalen, eds., From China to Paris: 2000 Years Transmission of
Mathematical Ideas, Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag, 2002, 167–186.
Plofker, Kim. The problem of the Sun’s corner altitude and convergence of ﬁxed-
point iterations in medieval Indian astronomy, in Charles Burnett, Jan Hogendijk,
Kim Plofker, and Michio Yano, eds., Studies in the History of the Exact Sci-
ences in Honour of David Pingree, Leiden/Boston: Brill, 2004, 552–586.
Plofker, Kim. Relations between approximations to the sine in Kerala mathematics,
in G. G. Emch, R. Sridharan, and M. D. Srinivas, Contributions to the History
of Indian Mathematics, New Delhi: Hindustan Book Agency, 2005, 135–152.
Plofker, Kim. Mathematics in India, in Victor Katz, ed., The Mathematics of Egypt,
Mesopotamia, China, India, and Islam: A Sourcebook, Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 2007, 385–514.
Powell, Marvin A. The antecedents of Old Babylonian place notation and the
early history of Babylonian mathematics, Historia Mathematica 3 (1976),
417–439.
Prakash, Satya. A Critical Study of Brahmagupta and his Works, New Delhi: Indian
Institute of Astronomical & Sanskrit Research, 1968.
Ptolemy, Claudius. Claudii Ptolemaei Pheludiensis Alexandrini Almagestum seu
Magnae constructionis mathematicae opus plane diuinum, ed. George Trebi-
zond, Venice, 1528.
Bibliography
310

Ptolemy, Claudius. Geograﬁa cioè descrittione vniuersale della terra, ed. A. Magini,
Venice: Gio. Battista and Giorgio Galignani, 1598.
Ptolemy, Claudius. The Almagest by Ptolemy, transl. R. Catesby Taliaferro, Chicago:
Encyclopedia Britannica, 1952.
Ptolemy, Claudius. Ptolemy’s Almagest, transl. Gerald J. Toomer, London: Duck-
worth / New York: Springer Verlag, 1984; reprinted Princeton: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 1998.
Ptolemy’s Geography: An Annotated Translation of the Theoretical Chapters, transl.
J. Lennart Berggren and Alexander Jones, Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 2000.
Puig, Roser. al-Sakkaziyya. Ibn al-Naqqas al-Zarqalluh, Barcelona: Universidad de
Barcelona, 1986.
Raja, K. Kunjunni. Astronomy and Mathematics in Kerala, Madras: Adyar Li-
brary and Research Centre, 1995 (reprinted from the Adyar Library Bulletin,
1963).
Rajagopal, C. T. A neglected chapter of Hindu mathematics, Scripta Mathematica 15
(1949), 201–209.
Rajagopal, C. T.; and Aiyar, T. V. Vedamurthi. On the Hindu proof of Gregory’s se-
ries, Scripta Mathematica 17 (1951), 65–74.
Rajagopal, C. T.; and Aiyar, T. V. Vedamurthi. A Hindu approximation to pi, Scripta
Mathematica 18 (1952), 25–30.
Rajagopal, C. T.; and Rangachari, M. S. On an untapped source of medieval Keralese
mathematics, Archive for History of Exact Sciences 18 (1978), 89–102.
Rajagopal, C. T.; and Rangachari, M. S. On medieval Keralese mathematics, Archive
for History of Exact Sciences 35 (1986), 91–99.
Rajagopal, C. T.; and Venkataraman, A. The sine and cosine power series in Hindu math-
ematics. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal. Science 15 (1949), 1–13.
Rashed, Roshdi. al-Samaw’al, al-Biruni et Brahmagupta: les methods d’interpola-
tion, Arabic Sciences and Philosophy 1 (1991), 101–160.
Rawlins, Dennis. An investigation of the ancient star catalog, Publications of the As-
tronomical Society of the Paciﬁc 94 (1982), 359–373.
Rawlins, Dennis. Competence held hostage #2: The Princeton Institute vs. Aubrey
Diller, DIO 4.2 (1994), 55–57.
Regiomontanus, Johannes. Epytoma Joannis de Monte Regio in Almagestum
Ptolomei, Venice: Casparis Grossch and Stephani Keomer, 1496.
Regiomontanus, Johannes. Tabula directionum profectionumque, Impressum Uenetiis:
Ingenio ac impensa Petri Liechtensteyn, 1504.
Regiomontanus, Johannes. De triangulis omnimodis, Nuremberg: Io. Petrei, 1533.
Regiomontanus, Johannes. On Triangles, transl. Barnabas Hughes, Madison: Univer-
sity of Wisconsin Press, 1967.
Regiomontanus, Johannes. Joannus Regiomontani Opera collectea, collected and
with an introduction by Felix Schmeidler, Osnabrück: O. Zeller, 1972.
Rheticus, Georg Joachim. Opus palatinum de triangulis, Neostadii in Palatinatu: Ex-
cudebat Matthaeus Harnisus, 1596.
Bibliography
311

Richard of Wallingford. Richard of Wallingford, edited and translated by John D.
North, 3 vols., Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1976.
Richey, Michael. The navigational background to 1492, Journal of Navigation 45
(1992), 266–284.
Rius, Mònica. La Alquibla en al-Andalus y al-Magrib al-Aqsà, Barcelona: Universi-
tat de Barcelona, 2000.
Rizvi, Syed Aftab Husain. On trisection of an angle leading to the derivation of a cu-
bic equation and computation of the value of sine, Indian Journal of History of
Science 19 (1984), 77–85.
Robins, Gay; and Shute, Charles. Mathematical bases of ancient Egyptian architec-
ture and graphic art, Historia Mathematica 12 (1985), 107–122.
Robins, Gay; and Shute, Charles. The Rhind Mathematical Papyrus: An Ancient
Egyptian Text, London: British Museum Publications, 1987.
Robson, Eleanor. Mesopotamian Mathematics, 2100–1600 BC: Technical Constants
in Bureaucracy and Education, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1999.
Robson, Eleanor. Neither Sherlock Holmes nor Babylon: a reassessment of Plimpton
322, Historia Mathematica 28 (2001), 167–206.
Robson, Eleanor. Words and pictures: new light on Plimpton 322, American Mathe-
matical Monthly 109 (2002), 105–120.
Rodet, Léon. Leçons de calcul d’Âryabhata, Journal Asiatique (7) 13 (1879), 393–434.
Rome, Adolphe., ed. Commentaires de Pappus et de Théon d’Alexandrie sur l’Al-
mageste, 3 vols., Rome: Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, 1931/1936/1943.
Rome, Adolphe. Premiers essais de trigonométrie rectiligne chez les Grecs, Annales
de la Société Scientiﬁque de Bruxelles, Série A 52 (1932), 271–274.
Rome, Adolphe. Premiers essais de trigonométrie rectiligne chez les Grecs, L’Anti-
quité Classique 2 (1933), 177–192.
Rome, Adolphe. Les explications de Théon d’Alexandrie sur le théorème de
Ménélas, Annales de la Société Scientiﬁque de Bruxelles, Série A 53 (1933b),
39–50.
Rome, Adolphe. Le problème de l’equation de temps chez Ptolémée, Annales de la
Société Scientiﬁque de Bruxelles 59 (1939), 211–224.
Rose, Paul Lawrence. The Italian Renaissance of Mathematics, Geneva: Librairie
Droz, 1975.
Rosen, Edward. Regiomontanus, Johannes, in Charles Coulston Gillispie, ed., Dic-
tionary of Scientiﬁc Biography, vol. 11, New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons,
1975, 348–352.
Rosen, Edward. Aristarchus of Samos and Copernicus, Bulletin of the American
Papyrological Society 15 (1978), 85–93.
Rosenfeld, Boris A. Popytka kvadratichnogo interpolirovaniya u Abu Reikhan al-
Biruni, Istoriko-matematicheskie Issledovaniya 12 (1959), 421–430.
Rosenfeld, Boris A. “Geometric trigonometry” in treatises of al-Khwarizmi, al-
Mahani and Ibn al-Haytham, in Menso Folkerts and Jan P. Hogendijk, eds., Ves-
tigia Mathematica: Studies in Medieval and Early Modern Mathematics in
Honour of H.L.L. Busard, Amsterdam/Atlanta: Rodopi, 1993, 305–308.
Bibliography
312

Rosenfeld, Boris A.; and Hogendijk, Jan P. A mathematical treatise written in the
Samarqand observatory of Ulugh Beg, Zeitschrift für Geschichte der Arabisch-
Islamischen Wissenschaften 15 (2002–2003), 25–65.
Rosenfeld, Boris A.; and Ihsanoglu, Ekmeleddin. Mathematicians, Astronomers &
Other Scholars of Islamic Civilisation and their Works (7th–19th c.), Istanbul:
Research Centre for Islamic History, Art and Culture (IRCICA), 2003.
Rosenfeld, Boris A.; and Rozanskaja, M. M. The astronomical work al-Qanun al-
Mas\udi of al-Biruni, Istoriko-Astronomicheskie Issledovaniya Vyp. 10 (1969),
63–95.
Rosinska, Grazyna. L’audience de Regiomontanus à Cracovie au XVe et au début du
XVIe siècle, in Günther Hamann, ed., Regiomontanus-Studien, Vienna: Verlag
der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1980, 315–333.
Rosinska, Grazyna. Giovanni Bianchini—15th-century mathematician and as-
tronomer [in Polish], Kwartalnik Historii Nauki i Techniki 26 (1981), 565–577.
Rosinska, Grazyna. Tables trigonométriques de Giovanni Bianchini, Historia Math-
ematica 8 (1981), 46–55.
Rosinska, Grazyna. Don’t give to Rheticus what is Regiomontanus’s [in Polish],
Kwartalnik Historii Nauki i Techniki 28 (1983), 615–619.
Rosinska, Grazyna. Tables of decimal trigonometric functions from ca. 1450 to ca.
1550, in David A. King and George Saliba, eds., From Deferent to Equant: A
Volume of Studies in the History of Science in the Ancient and Medieval Near
East in Honor of E. S. Kennedy, New York: New York Academy of Sciences,
1987, 419–426.
Rossi, Corinna. Architecture and Mathematics in Ancient Egypt, Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Rossi, Francesco Saverio. Copernico matematico: La sua trigonometria piana, Cul-
tura e Scuola 12 (1973), 317–336.
Roy, Ranjan. The discovery of the series formula for  by Leibniz, Gregory and Ni-
lakantha, Mathematics Magazine 63 (1990), 291–306.
Sabra, A. I. The authorship of the Liber de crepusculis, an eleventh-century work on
atmospheric refraction, Isis 58 (1967), 77–85.
Sabra, A. I. Situating Arabic science: locality versus essence, Isis 87 (1996),
654–670.
Sachs, Abraham. Babylonian horoscopes, Journal of Cuneiform Studies 6 (1952),
49–75.
Saidan, Ahmed. The trigonometry of al-Biruni, in Hakim Mohammed Said, ed., al-
Biruni Commemorative Volume: Proceedings of the International Congress
Held in Karachi, Karachi: Hamdard Academy, 1979, 681–690.
Saidan, Ahmed. al-Biruni on trigonometry, in Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu and Feza Gün-
ergun, eds., Science in Islamic Civilisation, Istanbul: Research Centre for Is-
lamic History, Art and Culture (IRCICA), 2000, 167–178.
Saito, Ken. Mathematical reconstructions out, textual studies in: 30 years in the his-
toriography of Greek mathematics, Revue d’Histoire des Mathématiques 4
(1998), 131–142.
Bibliography
313

Salam, Hala; and Kennedy, Edward S. Solar and lunar tables in early Islamic astron-
omy, Journal of the American Oriental Society 87 (1967), 492–497.
Saliba, George A. The double-argument lunar tables of Cyriacus, Journal for the
History of Astronomy 7 (1976), 41–46.
Saliba, George A. The role of the Almagest commentaries in medieval Islamic as-
tronomy: A preliminary survey of Tusi’s redaction of Ptolemy’s Almagest,
Archives Internationales d’Histoire des Sciences 37 (1987), 3–20.
Samsó, Julio. Estudios sobre Abu Nasr Mansur b. \ Ali b. Iraq, Barcelona: Asociación
para la Historia de la Ciencia Espanola, 1969.
Samsó, Julio. Levi ben Gerson, in Charles Coulston Gillispie, ed., Dictionary of Sci-
entiﬁc Biography, vol. 8, New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1973, 279–282.
Samsó, Julio. Notas sobre la trigonometría esférica de Ibn MuÛad, Awraq 3 (1980),
60–68. Reprinted as article VII in Julio Samsó, Islamic Astronomy and Medieval
Spain, Aldershot, UK / Brooksﬁeld, VT: Variorum, 1994.
Samsó, Julio. al-Biruni in al-Andalus, in Josep Casulleras and Julio Samsó, eds.,
From Baghdad to Barcelona: Studies in the Islamic Exact Sciences in Honour of
Prof. Juan Vernet, Barcelona: Universitat de Barcelona, 1996, vol. II, 583–612.
Samsó, Julio; and Mielgo, Honorino. Ibn Ishaq al-Tunisi and Ibn MuÛadh al-Jayyani
on the qibla, in Julio Samsó, Islamic Astronomy and Medieval Spain, Aldershot,
UK / Brooksﬁeld, VT: Variorum, 1994, article VI, 1–25.
Saraswathi, T. A. The development of mathematical series in India after Bhaskara II,
Bulletin of the National Institute of Sciences of India 21 (1963), 320–343.
Sarma, K. V.; and Hariharan, S. Yuktibhasa of Jyesthadeva: a book of rationales in In-
dian mathematics and astronomy. An analytical appraisal, Indian Journal of
History of Science 26 (1991), 185–207.
Saud, Muhammad. A part of al-Biruni’s Istikhraj al-autar ﬁal-da’irah, in Hakim
Mohammed Said, ed., al-Biruni Commemorative Volume: Proceedings of the
International Congress Held in Karachi, Karachi: Hamdard Academy, 1979,
691–705.
Schmalzl, Peter. Zur Geschichte des Quadranten bei den Arabern, München: Sale-
sianischen Ofﬁzin, 1929.
Schmidt, Wilhelm. Sind die Heronischen Vielecksformeln trigonometrisch? Biblio-
theca Mathematica (3) 1 (1900), 319–320.
Schmidt, Olaf H. The computation of the length of daylight in Hindu astronomy, Isis
35 (1944), 205–211.
Schneider, Ivo. Archimedes. Ingenieur, Naturwissenschaftler und Mathematiker,
Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1979.
Schoy, Karl. Arabische Gnomonik, Archiv der Deutschen Seewarte 36 (1913), 3–42.
Reprinted in Karl Schoy, Beiträge zur Arabisch-Islamischen Mathematik und
Astronomie, Fuat Sezgin, ed., Frankfurt: Institut für Geschichte der Arabisch-
Islamischen Wissenschaften, 1988, vol. I, 49–88.
Schoy, Karl. Abhandlung des al-Hasan ibn al-Haitam (Alhazen) über die Bestim-
mung der Richtung der Qibla, Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen
Gesellschaft 75 (1921), 242–253. Reprinted in Karl Schoy, Beiträge zur
Bibliography
314

Arabisch-Islamischen Mathematik und Astronomie, Frankfurt: Institut für
Geschichte der Arabisch-Islamischen Wissenschaften, 1988, vol. 1, 230–241.
Schoy, Karl. Abhandlung von al-Fadl b. Hâtim an-Nairîzî: Über die Richtung der Qi-
bla Arab. Hdschr. Nr. 2457, 17° der Bibl. nat. in Paris, Sitzungsberichte der Bay-
erischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Math.-Phys. Klasse 1922, 55–68.
Reprinted in Karl Schoy, Beiträge zur Arabisch-Islamischen Mathematik und
Astronomie, Frankfurt: Institut für Geschichte der Arabisch-Islamischen Wis-
senschaften, 1988, vol. 1, 252–265.
Schoy, Karl. Beiträge zur arabischen trigonometrie, Isis 5 (1923), 364–399.
Reprinted in Karl Schoy, Beiträge zur Arabisch-Islamischen Mathematik und
Astronomie, Frankfurt: Institut für Geschichte der Arabisch-Islamischen Wis-
senschaften, 1988, vol. 2, 448–483.
Schoy, Karl. Die Gnomonik der Araber, Band I, Lieferung F of Ernst von
Bassermann-Jordan, ed., Die Geschichte der Zeitmessung und der Uhren,
Berlin/Leipzig: Walter de Gruyter, 1923, 1–95. Reprinted in Karl Schoy,
Beiträge zur Arabisch-Islamischen Mathematik und Astronomie, Fuat Sezgin,
ed., Frankfurt: Institut für Geschichte der Arabisch-Islamischen Wissenschaften,
1988, vol. II, 351–447.
Schoy, Karl. The geography of the Moslems of the Middle Ages, Geographical Re-
view 14 (1924), 257–269. Reprinted in Karl Schoy, Beiträge zur Arabisch-
Islamischen Mathematik und Astronomie, Frankfurt: Institut für Geschichte der
Arabisch-Islamischen Wissenschaften, 1988, vol. 2, 513–525.
Schoy, Karl. al-Bîrûnî’s method of approximation of chord 40°, American Mathe-
matical Monthly 33 (1926), 95–96.
Schoy, Karl. Die trigonometrischen Lehren des Persischen Astronomen Abu’l-Raihan
Muh. ibn Ahmad al-Biruni, Hannover: Orient-Buchhandlung Heinz Lafaire K.
G., 1927.
Sédillot, L. A. Prolégomènes des Tables Astronomiques d’Oloug-Beg, 2 vols., Paris:
L’Institute de France, 1847/1853.
Sédillot, L. A. L’algèbre chez les Arabes, Journal Asiatique (5) 2 (1853), 323–356.
Sen, S. N. Astronomy, in D. M. Bose, S. N. Sen, and B. V. Subbarayappa, A Concise
History of Science in India, New Delhi: Indian National Science Academy,
1971, 58–135.
Sen, S. N. Epicyclic eccentric planetary theories in ancient and medieval Indian as-
tronomy, Indian Journal of History of Science 9 (1974), 107–121.
Sen, S. N. Planetary theories in Sanskrit astronomical texts, in G. Swarup, A. K. Bag,
and K. S. Shukla, eds., History of Oriental Astronomy, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1987, 113–124.
Sengupta, Prabodh Chandra. Brahmagupta on interpolation, Bulletin of the Calcutta
Mathematical Society 23 (1931), 125–128.
Sengupta, Prabodh Chandra. Greek and Hindu methods in spherical astronomy, Jour-
nal of the Department of Letters, Calcutta University 21 (1931), paper 4, 1–25.
Sengupta, Prabodh Chandra. Inﬁnitesimal calculus in Indian mathematics, Journal of
the Department of Letters, Calcutta University 22 (1932), paper 5, 1–17.
Bibliography
315

Shank, Michael. Academic consulting in ﬁfteenth-century Vienna: the case of astrol-
ogy, in Edith Sylla and Michael McVaugh, eds., Texts and Contexts in Ancient
and Medieval Science: Studies on the Occasion of John E. Murdoch’s Seventieth
Birthday, Leiden/New York/Köln: Brill, 1997, 245–270.
Shapiro, Alan E. Archimedes’s measurement of the Sun’s apparent diameter, Journal
for the History of Astronomy 6 (1975), 75–83.
Shelby, Lon R. The geometrical knowledge of the mediaeval master masons, Specu-
lum 47 (1972), 395–421.
Shelby, Lon R. Geometry, in David L. Wagner, ed., The Seven Liberal Arts in the
Middle Ages, Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1983, 196–217.
Shukla, Kripa Shankar, ed. The Surya-Siddhanta with the Commentary of Parames-
vara, Lucknow: Lucknow University Department of Mathematics and Astron-
omy, 1957.
Shukla, Kripa Shankar. Early Hindu methods in spherical astronomy, Ganita 19
(1968), 49–72.
Shukla, Kripa Shankar. Hindu mathematics in the seventh century as found in
Bhaskara I’s commentary on the Aryabhatiya (four parts), Ganita 22 (1971),
115–130; 22 (1971), 61–78; 23 (1972), 57–79; and 23 (1972), 41–50.
Shukla, Kripa Shankar. The Pañca-Siddhantika of Varahamihira (1), Ganita 24
(1973), 59–73.
Shukla, Kripa Shankar. The Pañca-Siddhantika of Varahamihira (2), Ganita 28
(1977), 99–116.
Sidersky, D. La division de la circonférence en 360 parties, Revue d’Assyriologie 26
(1929), 31–32.
Sidoli, Nathan. Hipparchus and the ancient metrical methods on the sphere, Journal
for the History of Astronomy 35 (2004), 71–84.
Sidoli, Nathan. Heron’s Dioptra 35 and analemma methods: an astronomical deter-
mination of the distance between two cities, Centaurus 47 (2005), 236–258.
Sidoli, Nathan. The sector theorem attributed to Menelaus, SCIAMVS 7 (2006),
43–79.
Sidoli, Nathan; and Berggren, J. Lennart. The Arabic version of Ptolemy’s Plani-
sphere or Flattening of the Surface of the Sphere: Text, translation, commentary,
SCIAMVS 8 (2008), 37–140.
Simi, Annalisa; and Toti Rigatelli, L. Some 14th and 15th century texts on practical
geometry, in Menso Folkerts and Jan P. Hogendijk, eds., Vestigia Mathematica,
Amsterdam/Atlanta: Rodopi, 1993, 453–470.
Simi, Annalisa. L’eredità della Practica geometriae di Leonardo Pisano nella geome-
tria del basso medioevo e del primo rinascimento, Bollettino di Storia delle
Scienze Matematiche 24 (2004), 9–41.
Smith, A. Mark. Ptolemy’s search for a law of refraction: A case-study in the classi-
cal methodology of “saving the appearances” and its limitations, Archive for
History of Exact Sciences 26 (1982), 221–240.
Stahl, William H. Aristarchus of Samos, in Charles Coulston Gillispie, ed., Dictio-
Bibliography
316

nary of Scientiﬁc Biography, vol. 1, New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1970,
246–250.
Steinschneider, Moritz. Die arabischen Uebersetzungen aus dem Griechischen,
Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 50 (1896), 161–219.
Strabo. The Geography of Strabo, 8 vols., Loeb Classical Library, ed. and transl. Ho-
race Leonard Jones, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1917.
Suter, Heinrich. Zur Trigonometrie der Araber, Bibliotheca Mathematica (3) 10
(1910), 156–160.
Suter, Heinrich. Das Buch der Aufﬁndung der Sehnen im Kreise von Abu’l-Raihan
Muh. el-Biruni, Bibliotheca Mathematica (3) 11 (1910–1911), 11–78.
Suzuki, Takanori. A solution of the qibla-problem by Abu ‘l-Qasim Ahmad ibn
Muhammad al-Ghandajani, Zeitschrift für Geschichte der Arabisch-Islamischen
Wissenschaften 4 (1987/88), 139–149.
Swerdlow, Noel M. Hipparchus on the distance of the Sun, Centaurus 14 (1969),
287–305.
Swerdlow, Noel M. Ptolemy on trial, American Scholar 48 (1979), 523–531.
Swerdlow, Noel M. Review of [Toomer 1973], Mathematical Reviews 58, #26714
(1979).
Swerdlow, Noel M. The Babylonian Theory of the Planets, Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1998.
Swerdlow, Noel M. The empirical foundations of Ptolemy’s planetary theory, Jour-
nal for the History of Astronomy 35 (2004), 249–271.
Swerdlow, Noel M.; and Neugebauer, Otto. Mathematical Astronomy in Coperni-
cus’s De Revolutionibus, 2 parts, New York/Berlin/Heidelberg/Tokyo: Springer-
Verlag, 1984.
Szabó, Árpád. Eudoxus und das Problem der Sehnentafeln, in Aristoteles. Werk und
Wirkung, Band 1 (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1985), 499–517.
Szabó, Árpád. Strabon und Pytheas—die geographische Breite von Marseille. Zur
Frühgeschichte der mathematischen Geographie, Historia Scientiarum 29
(1985), 3–15.
Talbot, C. H. Simon Bredon (c. 1300–1372). Physician, mathematician and as-
tronomer, British Journal for History of Science 1 (1962–63), 19–30.
Tannery, Paul. L’arithmétique des Grecs dans Héron d’Alexandrie, Mémoires de la So-
ciété des Sciences Physiques et Naturelles de Bordeaux (2) 4 (1882), 161–194.
Tannery, Paul. Aristarque de Samos, Mémoires de la Société des Sciences Physiques
et Naturelles de Bordeaux (2) 5 (1883), 237–258.
Tannery, Paul. Recherches sur l’Histoire de l’Astronomie Ancienne, Paris: Gauthier-
Villars & Fils, 1893; reprinted New York: Arno Press, 1976.
Tannery, Paul. L’inscription astronomique de Keskinto, Revue des Études Grecques
8 (1895), 49–58.
Tannery, Paul. La coudée astronomique et les anciennes divisions du cercle,
reprinted in Paul Tannery, Mémoires Scientiﬁques, Toulouse: Édouard Privat /
Paris: Gauthier-Villars, 1912, vol. 2, 256–268.
Bibliography
317

Taylor, Eva G. R. Five centuries of dead reckoning, Journal of Navigation 3 (1950),
280–285.
Taylor, Eva G. R. The Haven-Finding Art: A History of Navigation from Odysseus to
Captain Cook, New York: Abelard-Schuman, 1957.
Taylor, Eva G. R. Mathematics and the navigator in the thirteenth century, Journal of
Navigation 13 (1960), 3–14.
Theodosius. Theodosii Sphaericorum elementorum, ed. Francisco Maurolico,
Impressit Petrus Spira, 1558.
Theodosius. Die Sphärik des Theodosius, trans. E. Nizze, Stralsund, 1826.
Theodosius. Theodosii De habitationibus liber De diebus et noctibus libri duo, Ab-
handlungen der Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen, Philologisch-
Historische Klasse (2) 19 (1927), edited and translated into Latin by R. Fecht.
Theodosius. Theodosius Tripolites Sphaerica, Abhandlungen der Gesellschaft der
Wissenschaften zu Göttingen, Philologisch-Historische Klasse (2) 19 (3) (1927),
edited by J. L. Heiberg.
Theodosius. Les Sphériques de Théodose de Tripoli, transl. Paul ver Eecke, Bruges:
Desclée de Brouwer, 1927.
Thomas, Ivor. Selections Illustrating the History of Greek Mathematics, 2 vols.,
Loeb Classical Library, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1941.
Thoren, Victor E. Prosthaphaerisis revisited, Historia Mathematica 15 (1988), 32–39.
Thureau-Dangin, F. Numération et Métrologie Sumériennes, Revue d’Assyriologie
18 (1921), 123–142.
Thureau-Dangin, F. L’origine du système sexagesimal, Revue d’Assyriologie 25
(1928), 115–118.
Thureau-Dangin, F. La division du cercle, Revue d’Assyriologie 25 (1928), 187–188.
Thureau-Dangin, F. Encore un mot sur la division du cercle, Revue d’Assyriologie 27
(1930), 53–54.
Thureau-Dangin, F. Mesures de temps et measures angulaires dans l’astronomie
babylonienne, Revue d’Assyriologie 28 (1931), 111–114.
Thureau-Dangin, F. History of the sexagesimal system, Osiris 7 (1939), 95–141.
Thurston, Hugh. Greek and Indian planetary longitudes, Archive for History of Exact
Sciences 44 (1992), 191–195.
Thurston, Hugh. Greek mathematical astronomy reconsidered, Isis 93 (2002), 58–69.
Tichenor, Mark J. Late medieval two-argument tables for planetary longitudes, Jour-
nal of Near Eastern Studies 26 (1967), 126–128.
Toomer, Gerald J. The chord table of Hipparchus and the early history of Greek
trigonometry, Centaurus 18 (1973), 6–28.
Toomer, Gerald J. al-Khwarizmi, in Charles Coulston Gillispie, ed., Dictionary of Sci-
entiﬁc Biography, vol. 7, New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1973, 358–365.
Toomer, Gerald J. Hipparchus on the distances of the Sun and Moon, Archive for His-
tory of Exact Sciences 14 (1974), 126–142.
Toomer, Gerald J. Ptolemy, in Charles Coulston Gillispie, ed., Dictionary of Sci-
entiﬁc Biography, vol. 11, New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1975,
186–206.
Bibliography
318

Toomer, Gerald J. Hipparchus, in Charles Coulston Gillispie, ed., Dictionary of
Scientiﬁc Biography, vol. 15, New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1978,
207–224.
Toomer, Gerald J. Hipparchus and Babylonian astronomy, in Erle Leichty, Maria
de J. Ellis, and Pamela Gerardi, eds., A Scientiﬁc Humanist: Studies in Mem-
ory of Abraham Sachs, Philadelphia: The University Museum, 1988,
353–362.
Tropfke, Johannes. Archimedes und die Trigonometrie, Archiv für Geschichte der
Mathematik, der Naturwissenschaften und der Technik 10 (1928), 432–463.
al-Tusi, Nasir al-Din. Traité du Quadrilatère Attribué à Nassiruddin-el-Toussy,
translated by Alexandre Pacha Caratheodory, Constantinople: Typographie et
Lithographie Osmanié, 1891. Reprinted as vol. 47 of Islamic Mathematics and
Astronomy, Frankfurt: Institut für Geschichte der Arabisch-Islamischen Wis-
senschaften, 1998.
al-Tusi, Nasir al-Din. Traktat o Polnom Chetyrehstoronnike, translated by G. D.
Mamedbeyli, S. P. Riznichenko and Boris A. Rosenfeld, Baku: Inst. Fiz. I Mat.
Akad. Nauk Azerbaidzan. SSR, 1952.
al-Tusi, Nasir al-Din. Nasir al-Din al-Tusi’s Memoir on Astronomy (al-Tadhkira
fi\ilm al-hay’a), edited and translated by F. Jamil Ragep, 2 vols., New York:
Springer-Verlag, 1993.
Uiblein, Paul. Die Wiener Universität, ihre Magister und Studenten zur Zeit Re-
giomontanus, in Günther Hamann, ed., Regiomontanus-Studien, Vienna: Verlag
der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1980, 395–432.
Unguru, Sabetai. On the need to rewrite the history of Greek mathematics, Archive
for History of Exact Sciences 15 (1975/76), 67–114.
Van Brummelen, Glen. The numerical structure of al-Khalili’s auxiliary tables, Phy-
sis 28 (1991), 667–698.
Van Brummelen, Glen. Mathematical Tables in Ptolemy’s Almagest, doctoral disser-
tation, Simon Fraser University, 1993.
Van Brummelen, Glen. Lunar and planetary interpolation tables in Ptolemy’s Al-
magest, Journal for the History of Astronomy 25 (1994), 297–311.
Van Brummelen, Glen. Jamshid al-Kashi: Calculating genius, Mathematics in School
27 (1998), 40–44; reprinted in Chris Pritchard, ed., The Changing Shape of
Geometry, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2003, 130–135.
Van Brummelen, Glen. Mathematical methods in the tables of planetary motion in
Kushyar ibn Labban’s Jami\ Zij, Historia Mathematica 25 (1998), 265–280.
Van Brummelen, Glen. Taking latitude with Ptolemy: Jamshid al-Kashi’s novel geo-
metric model of the motions of the inferior planets, Archive for History of Exact
Sciences 60 (2006), 353–377.
Van Brummelen, Glen; and Butler, Kenneth. Determining the interdependence of
historical astronomical tables, Journal of the American Statistical Association
92 (1997), 41–48.
Van Brummelen, Glen; and Kerai, Yousuf. al-Samaw’al’s curious approach to
trigonometry, to appear.
Bibliography
319

Van Dalen, Benno. Ancient and Mediaeval Astronomical Tables: Mathematical
Structure and Parameter Values, doctoral dissertation, Utrecht: University of
Utrecht, 1993.
Van Dalen, Benno. al-Khwarizmi’s astronomical tables revisited: analysis of the
equation of time, in Josep Casulleras and Julio Samsó, eds., From Baghdad to
Barcelona: Studies in the Islamic Exact Sciences in Honour of Prof. Juan
Vernet, Barcelona: Universitat de Barcelona, 1996, vol. I, 195–252.
Van Dalen, Benno. Tables of planetary latitude in the Huihui li (II), in Current Per-
spectives in the History of Science in East Asia, Seoul: Seoul National Univer-
sity Press, 1999, 316–329.
Van Dalen, Benno. Islamic and Chinese astronomy under the Mongols: a little-
known case of transmission, in Yvonne Dold-Samplonius, Joseph W. Dauben,
Menso Folkerts, and Benno van Dalen, eds., From China to Paris: 2000 Years
Transmission of Mathematical Ideas, Stuttgart: Franz Steiner, 2002, 327–356.
Van der Waerden, Bartel L. History of the zodiac, Archiv für Orientforschung 16
(1953), 216–230.
Van der Waerden, Bartel L. Ausgleichpunkt, ‘methode der perser’, und indische plan-
etenrechnung, Archive for History of Exact Sciences 1 (1961), 107–121.
Van der Waerden, Bartel L. Das heliozentrische System in der griechischen, persischen
un indischen Astronomie, Neujahrsblatt herausgegeben von der Naturforschen-
den Gesellschaft in Zürich 172, Zürich: Kommissionsverlag Leemann AG, 1970.
Van der Waerden, Bartel L. Science Awakening II. The Birth of Astronomy, Leyden:
Noordhoff / New York: Oxford University Press, 1974.
Van der Waerden, Bartel L. On Greek and Hindu trigonometry, Bulletin de la Société
Mathématique de Belgique 38 (1986), 397–407.
Van der Waerden, Bartel L. Reconstruction of a Greek table of chords, Archive for
History of Exact Sciences 38 (1988), 23–38.
Varahamihira. The Pañcasiddhantika of Varahamihira, edited and with commentary
by Otto Neugebauer and David Pingree, Det Kongelige Danske Videnskabernes
Selskab Historisk-Filosoﬁske Skrifter 6 (1) (1970) part I, 1–206, and 6 (1)
(1971) part II, 1–154.
Vernet, Juan; and Samsó, Julio. The development of Arabic science in Andalusia, in
Roshdi Rashed, ed., Encyclopedia of the History of Arabic Science, London/New
York: Routledge, 1996, vol. 1, 243–275.
Vetter, Q. Poznámka k. t. zv. trigonometrii Ahmoseove a k rozmerum pyramidy Chu-
fuovy, Casopis pro Pestování Matematiky a Fisiky 54 (1925), 281–283.
Vettius Valens. Vettii Valentis Antiocheni Anthologiarum Libri Novem, ed. David Pin-
gree, Leipzig: Teubner, 1986.
Victor, Stephen K. Practical Geometry in the High Middle Ages: Artis cuiuslibet
consummatio and the Pratike de Geometrie, Philadelphia: American Philosoph-
ical Society, 1979.
Villuendas, M. V. La Trigonometria Europea en el Siglo XI. Estudio de la Obra de
Ibn Mu\ad El Kitab Mayhulat, Barcelona: Instituto de Historia de la Ciencia de
la Real Academia de Buenas Letra, 1979.
Bibliography
320

Vitruvius. The Ten Books on Architecture, transl. Morris Hicky Morgan, Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 1914.
Vitruvius. On Architecture, 2 vols., transl. Frank Granger, Loeb Classical Library,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1934.
Vogel, Kurt. Beiträge zur griechischen Logistik, Munich: Verlag der Bayerischen
Akademie der Wissenschaften in Kommission der C. H. Beck’schen Verlags-
buchhandlung, 1936.
Vogel, Kurt. Vorgriechische Mathematik. Teil I. Vorgeschichte und Ägypten, Han-
nover: Hermann Schroedel Verlag / Paderborn: Verlag Ferdinand Schöningh,
1959.
Vogel, Kurt. Der Donaurum, die Wiege mathematischer Studien in Deutschland,
München: Werner Fritsch, 1973.
Vogel, Kurt. John of Gmunden, in Charles Coulston Gillispie, ed., Dictionary of Sci-
entiﬁc Biography, vol. 7, New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1973, 117–122.
Von Braunmühl, Anton. Beitrag zur Gechichte der prosthaphäretischen Methode in
der Trigonometrie, Bibliotheca Mathematica (2) 10 (1896), 105–108.
Von Braunmühl, Anton. Beiträge zur Geschichte der Trigonometrie, Abhandlungen
der Kaiserlichen Leopoldinisch-Carolinischen Deutschen Akademie der Natur-
forscher 71 (1897), 3–30.
Von Braunmühl, Anton. Nassir eddin Tusi und Regiomontan, Abhandlungen der
Kaiserlichen Leopoldinisch-Carolinischen Deutschen Akademie der Natur-
forscher 71 (1897), 33–67.
Von Braunmühl, Anton. Zur Geschichte der prosthaphaeretischen Methode in der
Trigonometrie, Zeitschrift für Mathematik und Physik 44 (1899), supplement,
Festschrift zum siebstigen Geburtstage Moritz Cantors, 15–29.
Von Braunmühl, Anton. Vorlesungen über Geschichte der Trigonometrie, 2 vols.,
Leipzig: Teubner, 1900/1903.
Von Erhardt, Rudolf; and von Erhardt-Siebold, Erika. Archimedes’ Sand-Reckoner:
Aristarchos and Copernicus, Isis 33 (1942), 578–602.
Von Erhardt, Rudolf; and von Erhardt, Erika. Reply to [Neugebauer 1942], Isis 34
(1943), 214–215.
Waerden, van der. See van der Waerden.
Wall, Byron Emerson. Anatomy of a precursor: the historiography of Aristarchos of
Samos, Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 6 (1975), 201–228.
Werner, John. Ionannis Verneri De triangulis sphaericis libri quatuor, ed. Axel An-
thon Björnbo, Abhandlungen zur Geschichte der Mathematischen Wis-
senschaften mit Einschluss ihrer Anwendungen Begründet von Moritz Cantor
24, part I, Leipzig: Teubner, 1907.
Werner, John. Ionannis Verneri De meteoroscopis libri sex, ed. Axel Anthon Björnbo,
Abhandlungen zur Geschichte der Mathematischen Wissenschaften mit Ein-
schluss ihrer Anwendungen Begründet von Moritz Cantor 24, part II, Leipzig:
Teubner, 1913.
Whish, Charles M. On the Hindu quadrature of the circle, and the inﬁnite series of
the proportion of the circumference to the diameter exhibited in the four Sastras,
Bibliography
321

the Tantrasamgraham, Yuktibhasa, Caranapaddhati and Sadratnamala, Journal
of the Royal Asiatic Society 3 (1835), 509–523.
Wilkinson, Lancelot. Hindu Astronomy II. The Siddhánta Siromani, Calcutta: Asiatic
Society of Bengal, 1861.
Wilson, Curtis. Hipparchus and spherical trigonometry, DIO 7.1 (1997), 14–15.
Woepcke, Franz. Discussion de deux methods arabes pour determiner une valeur ap-
prochée de sin1°, Journal de Mathématiques Pures et Appliquées 19 (1854),
153–176; 301–303. Reprinted in Franz Woepcke, Études sur les Mathématiques
Arabo-Islamiques, Frankfurt: Institut für Geschichte der Arabisch-Islamischen
Wissenschaften, 1986, vol. 1, 614–640.
Woepcke, Franz. Sur le mot kardaja et sur une méthode Indienne pour calculer les si-
nus, Nouvelles Annales de Mathématiques 13 (1854), 386–395.
Woepcke, Franz. Recherches sur l’histoire des sciences mathématiques chez les ori-
entaux, d’après des traits inédits arabes et persans, troisième article: Sur une
mesure de la circonférence du cercle, due aux astronomes arabes, et fondée sur
un calcul d’Aboûl Wafâ, Journal Asiatique (5) 15 (1860), 281–320. Reprinted
in Franz Woepcke, Études sur les Mathématiques Arabo-Islamiques, Frankfurt:
Institut für Geschichte der Arabisch-Islamischen Wissenschaften, 1986, vol. 1,
573–612.
Yano, Michio. Three types of Hindu sine tables, Indian Journal of History of Science
12 (1977), 83–89.
Yano, Michio. Trigonometry in India, in Helaine Selin, ed., Encyclopaedia of the
History of Science, Technology, and Medicine in Non-Western Cultures, Dor-
drecht/Boston/London: Kluwer, 1997, 987–990.
Zeller, Mary Claudia. The Development of Trigonometry from Regiomontanus to
Pitiscus, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan doctoral dissertation, 1944.
Zeuthen, Hieronymus Georg. Note sur la trigonométrie de l’antiquité, Bibliotheca
Mathematica (3) 1 (1900), 20–27.
Zhitomirskii, S. V. The heliocentric hypothesis of Aristarchos of Samos and ancient
cosmology [in Russian], Istoriko-Astronomicheskie Issledovaniya 18 (1986),
151–160.
Zinner, Ernst. Regiomontanus: His Life and Work, transl. Ezra Brown, Amsterdam/New
York/Oxford/Tokyo: North-Holland, 1990.
Bibliography
322

323
Index '"
360° circle, 17, 33–34, 99, 140
480° circle, 146
Abraham bar Hiyya, Hibbur ha-meshihah 
we-ha-tishboret, 227–30
Abu’l-Wafa’ al-Buzjani, 138, 142–45, 151,
181, 187, 190–91, 199, 216, 237;
Almagest, 138, 155–56, 181–84, 221
Abu Nasr Mansur ibn ÛIraq, 173, 177, 
180, 183, 186–87, 190–91, 195n149,
221; Book of Azimuths, 180; Table of
Minutes, 145, 206; Treatise on the
Determination of Spherical Arcs, 181,
183–85
Abu Sahl al-Kuhi. See al-Kuhi, Abu Sahl
Adelard of Bath, 224
Aﬂah, Jabir ibn. See Jabir ibn Aﬂah
agrimensores, 224–25, 230
alargar, 243–46
Albion, 235
Alfonsine Tables, 222–23, 230, 239, 266
Alfonso X, 222
altimetry, 225–27, 242, 261
altitude, 5
analemma, 66–67, 126, 134, 152n44,
167–72, 199–201, 216n195
al-Andalus, 217–22
Andoyer, Henri, 282
anharmonic property, 64–65
anomaly, solar mean, 83; solar true, 83
Apian, Peter, 262n119
Apollonius, 21n41, 32n68, 36–39, 43n30, 69,
136
arc chord, table of, 228–29
arc sine, 154, 158, 233–34
arc tangent, 85, 88, 92, 153–54, 158, 197,
198n154
Archimedes, 2, 20n38, 25–32, 53, 75–76,
120, 136, 139, 147n34, 176, 225; Mea-
surement of a Circle, 28n56, 32n68, 45;
Sand Reckoner, 3, 22, 27–30
ardha-jya. See jya-ardha
Aristarchus, 22, 28, 30, 37n19, 41, 53, 69,
76; On the Sizes and Distances of the Sun
and Moon, 22–26, 136
Artis cuiuslibet consummatio, 226–27
Aryabhata, 95, 104n26, 114, 123;
Aryabhatiya, 95, 97–102, 124n70, 127
ascensional difference, 8, 81
astrolabe, 67, 136n5, 150, 169, 209, 223,
225–26
astrology, 15, 69, 81, 93, 137, 167, 193
astronomical timekeeping, 201–5
astronomical triangle, 128–29
Autolycus of Pitane, 49n43, 56n61, 224; On a
Moving Sphere, 18; On Risings and
Settings, 18
auxiliary functions, 154, 205–8; tables of,
206–8, 211, 263
avanzar, 243–45
avanzo de ritorno, 244
avis´esa, 131
Azarquiel. See al-Zarqallu
azimuth, 5
Banu Musa, 230
al-Battani, Zij al-Sabi’, 150–51, 194–97,
218, 223–24, 231, 260
Bessarion, Cardinal, 251
Bhaskara I, 102, 124n70; Mahabhaskariya,
102–5, 130
Bhaskara II, 105, 111–13, 127, 132;
Jyotpatti, 105–7; Lilavati, 105, 114;
Siddhantas´iromani, 105
bhuja, 123
bhujaphala, 123–24
Bianchini, Giovanni, 261n115; Tabulae
magistrales, 262, 266
al-Biruni, Abu’l-Rayhan, 136, 137n9, 149,
155, 158–59, 163, 170–72, 187, 190,
195n149, 199, 215; Book on the Derivation
of Chords in a Circle, 31, 138–40;
Exhaustive Treatise on Shadows, 150–53,
169; Maqalid Ûilm al-hay’a (Keys to
Astronomy), 180, 183, 187, 192, 199;
Qanun al-MasÛudi, 31n64, 138, 144–45,
158; Tahdid al-Amakin, 199–200, 215–17
al-Bitruji, 231
Bradwardine, Thomas. See Thomas
Bradwardine
Brahe, Tycho, 261; Triangulorum planorum
et sphaericorum praxis arithmetica, 265
Arabic names are alphabetized after the initial “al-” if it appears. Thus, for instance, “al-Biruni”
appears in the Bs. Historical works are listed under their author’s name, if known.

Brahmagupta, 127, 136; Brahmasphuta-
siddhanta, 112n45, 130–33, 135;
Dhyanagraha, 111–13; Khandakhadyaka,
109–13, 135, 163–64
Bredon, Simon of Winchecombe, 239
Bruno, Giordani, 282–83; De triplici minimo
et mensura, 283
Bürgi, Joost, 265n130
al-Buzjani, Abu’l-Wafa’. See Abu’l-Wafa’ al-
Buzjani
Campanus of Novara, 242n59, 248; Theorica
planetarum, 248n79
Canobic Inscription, 69n90
Cardano, Gerolamo, 260n110, 280; Ars
Magna, 280
cartography, 215
celestial equator, 2, 15–16
celestial sphere, 1, 15–16
centrum, mean (planetary), 87; true (plane-
tary), 87
Chelebi, Mirim, 143n23, 147n35
chord, 9, 40, 137–40, 239; tables of, 41–46,
70–74, 96–99, 105–6, 144–45, 188, 231,
240, 280
Clavius, Christopher, 269, 282n165
climate zones. See klimata
colure, solsticial, 4, 51
complementi sinus, 241
coordinates, ecliptical, 4, 36, 47, 60–61, 80
coordinates, equatorial, 2, 47, 60–61, 63, 80
coordinates, horizontal, 5, 80
coordinates, sidereal, 5, 36
coordinates, tropical, 5, 36
Copernicus, Nicolaus, 22n44, 69, 220, 261,
263–73; De lateribus et angulis triangulo-
rum, 266, 269; De revolutionibus orbium
coelestium, 266–72
corda, 241
cosecant, 151, 155–56, 244n70; tables of,
206, 244–45, 262–63, 275–77
cosine, 96, 149, tables of, 244–45, 262–63,
275–77
cosmimetry, 225n7
cotangent, 12, 136, 149–52, 155–56, 241–42;
tables of, 149–50, 244–45, 262n118,
275–77
crassimetry. See stereometry
day-circle, 5, 153, 208
declination, 2, 8, 47
deferent, 37
degrees, 33–34
demi-degree, 33, 79–80, 85, 91–92, 271
De motu stellarum. See al-Battani, Zij 
al-Sabi’
difference formula, chord, 31, 74–77; sine,
106–7, 137, 140
Diophantus, Arithmetica, 252
diurnal arc, 5
double false position, 232
drkksepjya, 127
eccentricity, of solar model, 39–41
ecliptic, 3, 15
epicycles, 36–38, 121–24
epoch, 83, 95
equant point, 87, 95, 122–23
equation of anomaly (planetary), 87–88
equation of center (planetary), 87–88
equation of daylight, 8, 176
equation of time, 136n5
equatorial coordinates, 2
equinox, autumnal, 4, 15, 36
equinox, vernal, 2, 4, 15, 36
Eratosthenes, 33, 35, 43
Euclid, 49n43, 186; Data, 102n21, 253–54;
Elements, 9, 21, 49, 54, 73, 106, 109n41,
173, 176, 224–25, 229, 240–41, 252, 268;
Optics, 30n59; Phaenomena, 18–20,
51n47, 56n61, 136
Eudoxus of Cnidus, 18, 21n41, 22n45,
32n68, 37, 69
Euler, Leonhard, 284
al-Fazari, 135n2
Fibonacci. See Leonardo of Pisa
Fincke, Thomas, 275n156
ﬁxed stars, 3, 15
Fourier, Jean-Baptiste, 284
Fourier series, 284
Galen, 33n4
Gassendi, 251
Gauricus, Lucas. See Lucas Gauricus
Geber. See Jabir ibn Aﬂah
Geber’s Theorem, 181, 186, 190, 221, 259,
268n144
Geminus, 33n4
geodesy, 216
geography, 65–66, 77–80, 90–93, 215–17
geometric trigonometry, 168–69
geometry, constructive, 224–25; practical,
224–30, 239–40; theoretical, 224
Gerard of Cremona, 186, 218, 221, 223–24,
230; Theorica planetarum, 249n87
Index
324

Gerbert d’Aurillac, Geometria, 225
Gersonides. See Levi ben Gerson
gnomon, 77–78
gnomonics. See sundials
Gregory series, 114n54, 120
Günther, E., 275
Habash al-Hasib, 142n21, 150n39, 158n55,
160–62, 169–72, 199–201, 205; Jadwal al-
Taqwim, 154–55, 206, 263n124
half-angle formula, chord, 32n68, 45–46,
75–77, 138, 145; sine, 46, 108–10, 137,
140, 220n202, 236–37, 278–79
Heegeman, Adolf, 263n124
Heron of Alexandria, 66, 224; Metrica,
53–54
Hipparchus, 9, 34–46, 53–54, 64–69, 97–99,
269; Commentary on the Phaenomena of
Aratus and Eudoxus, 34–35, 66–68; On
the Rising of the Twelve Signs of the
Zodiac, 36
hippopedes, 37
Hiyya, Abraham bar. See Abraham bar Hiyya
hour-angle, 5, 127, 207–8
hours, seasonal day, 5, 205
House of Wisdom, 136
Hugh of St. Victor, 225–26
hyperbolic functions, 284
Hypsicles of Alexandria, On the Rising of
the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac, 34, 36,
136–37
Ibn al-Haytham, 178, 186, 199
Ibn Ishaq, 199
Ibn MuÛadh, al-Jayyani Abu ÛAbd Allah
Muhammad, 186, 199; Determination of
the Magnitudes of the Arcs of the Surface
of a Sphere, 186–87, 189, 192, 218, 221
Ibn al-Muthanna, 136
Ibn Yunus, 141–42, 144, 154n47, 155, 163,
195n149, 199, 204n166, 265n128; Hakimi
Zij, 141–42, 164–65
Index expurgatorius, 273n151
instruments, 209–15
interpolation, 89–90, 115n57, 162–66,
191–92, 271; distributed linear, 162–63;
inverse linear, 234–35; linear, 77, 86, 112,
140–41, 164, 232n34, 234–35, 237;
Ptolemaic, 89, 165–66, 201; second-order,
111–13, 162–65; tables of, 77, 271
iteration, 129–33, 144–45, 159–62, 233,
237–38; ﬁxed-point, 130–33, 147–48,
161n62; two-point, 130, 133
Jabir ibn Aﬂah, 178; Islah al-Majisti
(“Correction of the Almagest”), 220–21,
224, 230–31, 238, 258–61, 268n144
Jacob’s staff, 231
al-jaib, 137–38, 224
al-Jarqasi, Muhammad al-Sakasi, 214
Jaunpuri, Ghulam Husain, 108n36
al-Jayyani. See Ibn MuÛadh
John of Gmunden, 220, 247–49, 260n107;
Compositio et usus intrumenti quod
Magister Campanus in theorica sua docuit
fabricare ad inveniendum vera loca plane-
tarum, 248n79; Tractatus de sinibus,
chordis et arcubus, 248–49
John of Lignères, 239, 242, 248; Primum
mobile, 239
John Maudith. See Maudith, John
John of Murs, 21n40, 239, 248, 260; De arte
mensurandi, 239–41; Figura inveniendi
sinus kardagarum, 239
jya-ardha, 96
Jyesthadeva, Yuktibhasa, 114–21
Kamalakara, 112n46; Siddhanta-Tattva-
Viveka, 107–8
Karanapaddhati, 114n54
kardaja, 136, 218–21, 239, 248–50
al-Kashi, Jamshid, 45n33, 108, 143n23,
146–47, 159, 163, 199; Calculator’s Key,
146; Khaqani Zij, 120n62, 144, 146–47,
182, 187, 237
Kepler, Johannes, 263
Kepler’s equation, 130n86, 161
Kerala, 113–21
Keskintos inscription, 33–34
al-Khalili, Shams al-Din, 201–2, 206–8
al-Khazin, 163, 178, 190
al-Khujandi, Abu Mahmud, 182–83, 190–91,
195n149
al-Khwarizmi, Abu JaÛfar Muhammad ibn
Musa, 135–36, 213; Zij al-Sindhind,
135–36, 149–50, 159, 167, 186n129, 218,
220n203, 223–24
klimata, 65, 80
koti, 123
kotijya, 96
kotiphala, 123
kramajya, 218n200
al-Kuhi, Abu Sahl, 145n29, 174–76, 180,
197, 234n37, 283n169
Kushyar ibn Labban, 182–83, 191, 199; 
JamiÛ Zij, 156–58, 162–63, 165–66, 
183
Index
325

Laplace, Pierre-Simon, 284
latitude, celestial, 4, 47
Law of Cosines (planar), 9, 21, 109n41,
172n92, 241, 268
Law of Cosines (spherical), 129, 167–68,
248, 258, 260
Law of Sines (planar), 109–11, 188–89,
235–36, 241, 246–47, 256, 267
Law of Sines (spherical), 181n110, 183–84,
186, 190–91, 220, 259, 268
Law of Tangents (spherical), 61–62, 182–83,
186, 190–91
Leonardo of Pisa, 228–30, 243n67; Book of
Squares, 228n20; Liber abaci, 228n20,
242, 247; Practica geometriae, 228–230
Levi ben Gerson, 231–35, 239, 248, 260,
278; Astronomy, 231–35; De sinibus,
chordis et arcubus, 231–35, 256n97; The
Wars of the Lord, 231
Liber embadorum. See Abraham bar Hiyya,
Hibbur ha-meshihah we-ha-tishboret
Libros del saber de astronomia, 222
“Little Astronomy,” 18, 22, 49
logarithms, 284
logistics, 89–90
longitude, celestial, 4, 47
Love, John, Geodesia: Or, The Art of Mea-
suring Land, 230n24
Lucas Gauricus, 242n59
Lull, Ramón, Arbre de Sciencia, 243n65
lunar eclipse, 2
Madhava, 113–121
Magini, Giovanni Antonio, 263, 282n165; De
planis triangulis, 282n165
Mahajyanayanaprakara, 114n54
al-Mahani, 169
Mahendra Suri, Yantraraja, 128n82
al-Majriti, Maslama, 136n4, 178, 186n129,
218
al-MaÛmun, 136
manda, 113, 122–23
mandocca, 122
al-Mansur, 135
al-Marrakushi, 199
Mars, motion of, 37–38
marteloio, 110, 242–47, 256
Maudith, John, 236n43
mean and extreme ratio, 73
Menelaus of Alexandria, 53–64, 124;
Elements of Geometry, 54; On the
Triangle, 54; Spherics 53–64, 82, 137,
173, 190, 224, 228, 258
Menelaus’s Theorem, 56–61, 64n73, 66,
81–82, 124, 134, 155, 166, 186, 236, 238,
264; conjunction case of, 173; disjunction
case of, 173. See also Transversal
Theorem/Figure
meridian, 1, 82
Merton College, 239
method of declinations, 159
method of sines, 159–60
method of the zijes, 170–72, 179n106,
198–201, 215–16
Michael of Rhodes, 243–47
miqati, 202
al-Misri, Najm al-Din, 203, 206
Moon, crescent visibility, 193–94; motion of,
36, 193
MuÛadh. See Ibn MuÛadh
muezzins, 202
MUL.APIN, 15–16
Müller, Johann. See Regiomontanus
multiple-angle formulas, 107–8
Munis´vara, 108n36, 111n43; Marici com-
mentary, 106
al-Muthanna. See Ibn al-Muthanna
muwaqqits, 202
Najm al-Din al-Misri. See al-Misri, Najm 
al-Din
Narayana Pandita, 117
Nasir al-Din al-Tusi. See al-Tusi, Nasir 
al-Din
Nastulus, 211–12
al-Nayrizi, 178, 190, 197–200, 206
Newton-Stirling formula, 111
Nicholas of Cusa, 248n82
Nilakantha, 99–102, 113–14, 126;
Aryabhatiyabhasa, 114, 127;
Tantrasan˙graha, 113, 128–29
nonagesimal point, 127–28
nonagon, 144–45
non-Euclidean geometry, 285
North pole, 1
Nuñes, Pedro, 269
oblique ascension, 8, 48, 81, 174
obliquity of the ecliptic, 3, 60
ortive amplitude, 5, 153, 167
Otho, Lucius Valentin, 273, 280. See also
Rheticus, Georg
Oxyrhynchus, 86
Paitamahasiddhanta, 99, 135
Pappus, 49n40
Index
326

parallax, 160
Parames´vara, 113; Siddhantadipika, 130–32
Paulis´asiddhanta, 94, 96
Peurbach, Georg, 220, 247–51, 260–63;
Epitome of the Almagest, 250–52, 259,
268n144; Tabulae eclipsium, 249;
Theoricae novae planetarum, 249;
Tractatus super propositiones Ptolemaei
de cinibus et chordis, 249
Pietro de Versi, 247n75
Pitiscus, Bartholomew, 250, 275n156,
281–82; Magnus canon doctrinae triangu-
lorum, 282; Thesaurus mathematicus, 282;
Trigonometriae, 281n164
planets, 3; motions of, 86–88, 121–24
planimetry, 225
Plato of Tivoli, 224, 227
Plimpton 322, 14
Plutarch, 33n4
polar coordinates, 211–12
polar triangle, 184–86, 191
prayer times, 193–94, 201–2
precession of the equinoxes, 5, 17n23
product formulas, 264–65
prosthaphaeresis, 207, 264–65
Ptolemy, 68–93; Almagest, 18, 30, 35–36,
39–43, 47n37, 56, 59–60, 64, 69–90, 
93, 95–96, 106, 127, 137, 140, 144, 158,
173–77, 182–83, 187, 190, 215, 221,
224–27, 230–32, 236–39, 248–52,
259n104, 266, 269, 278, 280; Analemma,
70, 199n155; Geography, 69, 90–93, 215;
Handy Tables, 69, 93, 137; Harmonica,
69; Optics, 69, 90; Planetary Hypotheses,
69; Planisphaerium, 67–68, 70;
Tetrabiblos, 69
Ptolemy’s Theorem, 74, 106, 138, 216–17,
230
Pythagorean Theorem, 9, 14, 21, 44, 106–9,
124, 126, 167, 188, 236
Pythagorean triples, 14
Qadi-Zadeh al-Rumi, 147n35
qibla, 170–73, 179n106, 192–201, 213, 215;
tables of, 201–2, 206–7
quadrans vetus, 209
quadrants, 209–15; horary, 209–11; sine,
213–15
quintuple-angle formula (cosine), 107–8
qutr al-zill al-mustawi, 151
radius, base circle, 40, 42–44, 70, 96, 99,
112, 120, 135n2, 136–37, 150–51, 218,
228, 230, 236n44, 249–50, 261–63,
266–67, 271–72, 276–77; unit circle, 145,
206, 217
Ramadan, 193
ratio, 178, 186
rectangulus, 235
Regiomontanus, 168, 220, 242, 247, 249–64,
266; Compositio tabularum sinuum recto-
rum, 263; De triangulis omnimodis, 248,
252–61, 264, 266–68; Epitome of the
Almagest (see Peurbach, Georg); Tabula
directionum, 261–63, 266–67; Tabula
primi mobilis, 263
regula falsi, 133
retrograde motions, 37
Rheticus, Georg, 261, 266, 268–69, 273–82;
Canon doctrinae triangulorum, 273; De
fabrica canonis doctrinae triangulorum,
275, 277–80; De triquetris rectarum lin-
earum in planitie, 275–77; De triangulis
globi cum angulo recto, 275; De triangulis
globi sine angulo recto, 275; Meteoro-
scopum numerorum, 275n155; Narratio
prima, 266; Opus palatinum, 149, 250,
258, 273–82
Rhind papyrus, 9–12
Richard of Wallingford, 235–40, 248;
Quadripartitum, 236–40
right ascension, 2, 8, 47, 213–15
Riqani Zij, 166n78
rising times, 5–8, 19, 30, 34, 36, 48, 50–52,
81–82, 174–76, 180–82
ritorno, 244–46
Robert of Chester, 224
Romakasiddhanta, 94
Romanus, Adrianus, 280–82
rule of false position, 133n91
Rule of Four Quantities, 60, 127, 167, 177,
179, 181–84, 186, 199–200, 205–6, 217,
220–21, 238, 258–59, 264
Rule of Three, 126, 241n56
al-Rumi, Qadi-Zadeh. See Qadi-Zadeh al-
Rumi
al-Sabi, 283n169
Sacrobosco, De sphaera, 266
sagitta. See versed sine
sahm. See versed sine
al-Samaw’al ibn Yahya al-Maghribi, 145–47,
163n66, 283; Exposure of the Errors of the
Astronomers, 145–47, 234n37
S´an˙kara, 114; Kriyakramakari, 114;
Yuktidipika, 114
Index
327

Santa Maria di Ripoll, 223
s´ara. See utkrama-jya
Savasorda. See Abraham bar Hiyya
Sayf-i-Munajjim, Ashrafi Zij, 163
secant, 151, 155–56; tables of, 275–77,
280–82
secant method, 133
seqed, 10–12
Severus Sebokht, 33n4
sexagesimal numeration, 13–14, 33, 239,
249
shadow function. See cotangent and tangent
shadow lengths, 77–80, 95, 241–42. See also
sundials
s´ighra, 109–10, 113, 122–24
s´ighrocca, 122
al-Sijzi, 178, 195n149, 213–15
Simon Bredon of Winchecombe. See Bredon,
Simon of Winchecombe
sine, 95–96; origin of word, 137–38, 
224; tables of, 43, 95–109, 120–21,
136–37, 140–49, 186n129, 218–20,
231–39, 244–50, 262–63, 266, 271–72,
275–80
sinus complementi, 275n156
sinus duplatus, 241
sinus rectus, 241
sinus totus, 96
sinus versus, 241
Soene, 90–93
solar equation, 83–86, 156–60
solstice, summer, 4
sphaera oblique, 48n38
sphaera recta, 48n38
spherical quadrilateral, 173
spherics, 18–20, 124
spheropoeia, 19n33
stellar parallax, 28
stereographic projection, 67–68
stereometry, 225
Strabo, Geography, 33n3, 36n17, 65
Strato of Lampsacus, 22
sum formula, chord, 74–77, 145; cosine, 75,
107; sine, 106–7, 137, 140, 237
Sun, apogee of, 83; eccentricity of, FIX
270–71; motion of, 17–18, 36–41, 82–86,
193
sundials, 30, 66, 78, 124, 136, 149–54,
199n155, 204; scaphe, 22. See also
shadow lengths
Suryasiddhanta, 99, 167n79
svadrkksepa, 127
tabula fecunda, 261–62
tangent, 80, 136, 149–56, 241–42, 261;
tables of, 80, 186, 206, 218, 242n59, 250,
261–63, 275–77, 279–82
Tariq, YaÛqub ibn, 205
Taylor series, 113–21, 284
Thabit ibn Qurra, 176; On the Composition
of Ratios, 178; On the Transversal Figure,
177–78, 221, 236
Theosdosius of Bithynia, 49–53, 55–56; On
Days and Nights, 49; On Habitations, 49;
Spherics, 49–53, 109n41, 137, 224, 228
Theon of Alexandria, 42, 59n65, 93
Theorem of the Broken Chord, 31–32, 74,
138–40
Thomas Bradwardine, 239n50
Toledan Tables, 136, 205, 218–23, 236n44,
248, 261
toleta de marteloio, 244–47
Transversal Theorem/Figure, 166, 173–82,
186–92, 197–98, 200n156, 206, 220–21.
See also Menelaus’s Theorem
trepidation of the equinoxes, 249n87
trijya, 96
triple-angle formula (sine), 107–8, 148–49
al-Tusi, Nasir al-Din, 163, 177, 186–92;
Ilkhani Zij, 187; al-Tadhkira fi Ûilm al-hay’a
(Memoir on Astronomy), 187; Treatise on
the Quadrilateral, 187–92, 261
Tusi couple, 187
Ulugh Beg, 199; Sultani Zij, 108, 120n62,
147–49, 163n65, 250
umbra recta, 241n58, 242
umbra versa, 241–42
University of Vienna 247–48
Ursus, Nicolai, Fundamentum astronomicum,
264–65
utkrama-jya, 96
Varahamihira, 94; Pañcasiddhantika, 94–97,
108–10, 123, 125, 127
Vedic astronomy, 94
Venerable Bede, 223
versed sine, 96, 136–38, 231
de Versi, Pietro. See Pietro de Versi
Vettius Valens, 42
Viète, François, 102, 273n152, 284
Vitruvius, 22
Werner, Johann, 264–65; De meteoroscopus,
264n126; De triangulis sphaericis, 264
Index
328

windrose, 243
Wittich, Paul, 265
YaÛqub ibn Tariq. See Tariq, YaÛqub ibn
al-Zarqallu, 205, 218–20, 223. See also
Toledan Tables
zenith, 1
zij, 137
Zij al-Arkand, 135
Zij al-Sindhind, 135
al-zill maÛkus, 151
al-zill al-mustawi, 151
zodiac, 3, 15–16; signs of, 4, 17
Index
329

