free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
PRAISE FOR
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
“If you want to know what role guns are likely to play in the United 
States in this century, you’re certainly not going to get any kind of 
unbiased or accurate answer from general news sources. Frank 
Miniter, who has been writing about guns for his entire career, fills the 
void with his new book. Want to see what’s coming? Here is about as 
good a look at the future of firearms as you are likely to get.”
—David E. Petzal, rifles field editor, Field & Stream
“Guns are demonized, idolized, politicized, and mostly misunder-
stood. With a clear voice, a reporter’s curiosity, and a polemist’s 
agenda, Frank Miniter explores the technology, politics, and influ-
ence of guns in America. His look ahead at the next generation of 
guns and how they will shape public policy is especially fascinating.”
—Andrew McKean, editor in chief, Outdoor Life
“Americans who know their history and understand that all human-
ity is created equal know this: the Second Amendment defines a civil 
right. Chapter Five, ‘How Gun Rights Beat the Media,’ is alone 
worth the price of admission. Read it, and you’ll never watch cable 
TV news the same way again. Read this book and you will be armed 
with the truth about your freedom and what’s to come.”
—J. Scott Olmsted, author of Make Every Shot Count 
and editor of American Hunter

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
“Frank Miniter is one of the finest writers and investigative journalists I 
know. He does a remarkable job describing the context and history of 
firearms in America, and then delves into their contemporary lawful and 
positive use. And in analyzing the criminal use of firearms and the effect 
the government restriction of gun rights has had on our society, this book 
makes a dramatic impact on the national debate. Woven into his narrative 
is the history and big picture of firearm manufacturing in the United States 
(guns kick started the Industrial Revolution) and what effect technologi-
cal developments are having and will have on firearms in the near future.”
—Mark A. Keefe IV, editor in chief, American Rifleman
“The Future of the Gun is an interesting, honest, thought-provoking 
treatment that you won’t want to put down. I would expect no less 
from my amigo Frank Miniter.”
—Jim Wilson, senior field editor, Shooting Illustrated 
and Texas sheriff (ret.)
“The Future of the Gun is an insightful look into gun politics and 
policy, written with Frank’s trademark wit. An important read for 
every American.”
—Chris W. Cox, chief lobbyist, National Rifle Association
“I first met Frank at the Supreme Court covering the Heller case. From his 
work there, I knew he was a top-notch reporter, and he shows his writing 
chops in The Future of the Gun. He’s taken two centuries of the gun in 
our culture and boils it down to give the back-stories on guns in America. 
He uses that foundation to offer an informed, yet highly readable look 
into our future. And he’s done it all in under three hundred pages.”
—Jim Shepherd, editor and publisher, The Outdoor Wire  
Digital Network, including The Shooting Wire,  
and founding member of CNN
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
THE  
FUTURE OF
THE GUN

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
THE  
FUTURE OF
THE GUN
FRANK MINITER

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Copyright © 2014 by Frank Miniter
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or trans-
mitted in any form or by any means electronic or mechanical, including 
photocopy, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system now 
known or to be invented, without permission in writing from the publisher, 
except by a reviewer who wishes to quote brief passages in connection with 
a review written for inclusion in a magazine, newspaper, website, or broadcast.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2014942665
ISBN 978-1-62157-240-4
Published in the United States by 
Regnery Publishing
A Salem Communications Company
300 New Jersey Ave NW
Washington, DC 20001
www.Regnery.com
Manufactured in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Books are available in quantity for promotional or premium use. For informa-
tion on discounts and terms, please visit our website: www.Regnery.com.
Distributed to the trade by
Perseus Distribution
250 West 57th Street
New York, NY 10107
Appendix photos credit: NRA Museums, NRAmuseums.com, except for the 
Remington R-51 photo, which is courtesy of Remington Arms.
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
By the rude bridge that arched the flood,
Their flag to April’s breeze unfurled,
Here once the embattled farmers stood,
And fired the shot heard round the world.
-—Ralph Waldo Emerson, “Concord Hymn”

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Introduction: American Guns: Freedom’s Tool......................................................................................1
PART I: Future Glock?
Chapter One
Every American Should Hear This..........................................................................................................13
Chapter Two
The Rifle Grows a Brain...............................................................................................................................37
Chapter Three
Technology Perfects the Pistol..............................................................................................................59
PART II: The Politician’s View of Your Future
Chapter Four
Embedded with the Gun Lobby..............................................................................................................87
Chapter Five
How Gun Rights Beat the Media...........................................................................................................97
Chapter Six
Into “Gun-Free” America.............................................................................................................................117
Chapter Seven
What Happens to Disarmed Peoples.................................................................................................131
PART III: Winning the Future of the Gun
Chapter Eight
The Gun Marketplace of the Future....................................................................................................151
Chapter Nine
The Solution to Gun Violence.................................................................................................................165
Chapter Ten
The Armed Citizen of the Future............................................................................................................191
APPENDIX: The Evolution of Freedom’s Tool........................................................................................235
NOTES.............................................................................................................................................................................247
INDEX..............................................................................................................................................................................261
Contents

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
1
 I N T R O D U C T I O N
American Guns:  
Freedom’s Tool
Among the many misdeeds of British rule in India, 
history will look upon the Act depriving  
a whole nation of arms as the blackest.
—Mohandas Gandhi, An Autobiography
I
n a way, the future of gun ownership in America is about what 
happens to Mike K.
He grew up in an inner city without a father, joined a gang, stole 
cars, had a felony conviction at eighteen, and odds are should have 
been incarcerated or shot dead by twenty-one. He’s a linebacker-sized 
black man whose first experiences with guns were with illegal 
semiautomatic handguns tucked into pants and stuffed into puffy 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
2	
Introduction
jackets. Yet it was guns that eventually saved him from all the bad 
stuff. We met so he could tell me his story.
We’re seated in little plastic chairs made for middle school students. 
There is a small wood school desk between us. Mike is now in his 
mid-thirties and drives a truck to pay the bills. He has tattoos on his 
arms of his three children’s names. Two of the names are in the shape 
of a crucifix on his left forearm and the third is on his right bicep. The 
two making the cross are wrapped in ivy, his wife’s name. He can’t 
own a gun, because of his youthful felony conviction. “It was nothing 
really. Just a stupid thing,” he tells me, but then he pauses. I sense he 
knows he’s paid a hefty price for his mistakes—and is grateful to be 
alive and in a better place.
He tells me slowly, warily, “You know, I’d be dead or locked up 
if John didn’t teach me to handle a gun.”
John is John Annoni, who is speaking in a nearby classroom to 
thirty kids, most of whom are in middle school. The kids are here for 
Camp Compass, an after-school program designed to save inner-city 
kids from the bad influences of rough neighborhoods. The kids are 
friendly, respectful, and courteous and will shake your hand when 
you meet them and call you sir or ma’am. John has found a way to 
save these kids by using guns as a carrot at the end of a long stick.
The classroom is not in a public school. We’re actually in an 
upstairs room of Joe Mascari’s Carpets & Rugs in Allentown, 
Pennsylvania. If you’re wondering what we’re doing in a carpet store, 
so is Joe Mascari. He never thought he’d give up floor space to a 
program for inner-city kids. It all started when the public school where 
John teaches and began this after-school program told him he couldn’t 
use guns as a teaching device, because guns are a bad influence. John 
says guns helped save him when he grew up in a bad neighborhood; 
and guns, he says, are part of these kids’ lives, though too often in bad 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Introduction	
3 
ways. Teaching them about guns in the right way is what, he thinks, 
makes his after-school program so effective.
Like a lot of kids from these asphalt-and-brick neighborhoods, 
John grew up without a father. His grandmother raised him. On 
weekends he went to his mother’s apartment in the projects. “It was 
a violent and abusive place,” he says, “so I started going out behind 
the projects and hiding in this little woodlot. I’d sit there in the woods 
where nobody could hurt me. Pretty soon I saw a squirrel and I 
started to stalk it. As time goes on I got better at stalking and tracking 
game around that little woodlot. I was safe and happy there until I 
had to go back to the apartment—Mother Nature was saving me. 
Later an uncle took me hunting and I found a real connection to the 
outdoors. Guns, in this very different culture from [what] I knew on 
the streets, helped save my life.”
John says he found himself between two cultures, so he decided 
to take good parts from both. “A lot of students wonder where I grew 
up and what color I am,” he often tells people. “New students 
sometimes ask me, ‘What are you?’ I think they’re looking for a role 
model they can relate to by skin color, so I reply by asking them, 
‘What do you think I am?’ After they guess, I tell them, ‘I’m half-black 
and half-white but I look Spanish and I eat Chinese food.’ They laugh. 
I let them all know I’m just like them.”
A friend of John’s introduced him to Joe Mascari. At first, when 
John broached the idea of having his after-school programs there, Joe 
said, “Are you nuts? This is a carpet store.” But John kept talking 
and pretty soon Joe gave him these rooms to use for free.
Joe’s wife was killed by a knife-wielding murderer. “Most people 
would say he shouldn’t be helping us because of that,” says John, 
“but he gets it. He gets that if she had a gun she might be alive. He 
gets that something is rotten in this inner-city culture and he gets that 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
4	
Introduction
we’re doing something about it. He even says if that thug had come 
to Camp Compass he never would have done such an evil thing. So 
he helps us use guns to teach responsibility, to grow upstanding 
adults.”
Mike K., sitting across from me, tells me that two of his close 
boyhood friends are in jail for “shooting at cops” and that others 
are dead. He waves his tattooed right arm at the city streets of 
Allentown, Pennsylvania, and says, “People blame guns for all that 
bad stuff out there. I tell ’em it’s not guns. I tell them how John used 
guns to save my life.”
He leans closer, puts his hands on the little school desk between 
us, and says, “The only way to save people like me is with good 
examples and by not lying to them about guns and all that. Those 
politicians who blame guns are making the streets worse. They’re 
sentencing kids to death and jail ’cause they just don’t understand.” 
He shakes his head and says, “All those counselors I saw.” He pauses 
again. His eyes tell me he’s repressing a lot of things he doesn’t want 
to get into. He says, “Only John told me the truth. Only John cared 
enough to do that. You tell the truth like he does in your book and, I 
dunno, maybe it’ll make some difference.”
He takes a deep breath and continues, “Back in 1995 I was getting 
into fights, stealing, getting suspended from school and all that. Mentor 
after mentor quit on me. I was a lost cause in their eyes, someone that 
would either end up in jail or dead by twenty-one. Let me tell you I 
was ready to give up, too. But then I was introduced to John. Sure, I 
knew of John from elementary school. I remember walking by his 
classroom, always seeing smiling faces and hearing laughter. It was 
such a positive atmosphere. But I thought he was going to be another 
mentor to quit on me. But then weeks had passed and John was still 
there. He took me out to do positive things. He showed me life!
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Introduction	
5 
“It was weird. Guns in my neighborhood were bad things. The 
guys who had them got them because a gun made them powerful. 
Guns made them cool. Most of my friends got handguns. No one 
taught them about guns. Most of their dads weren’t around. All they 
knew was a gun tucked in their pants made them feared, made them 
dangerous.”
“But you know,” Mike says, “John took me out to a gun range 
and taught me to shoot a shotgun, then a rifle. He showed me how 
to unload a gun and to shoot safely by keeping my finger off the 
trigger until I’m gonna shoot and teaches me to keep the barrel in a 
safe direction and all that. He teaches me responsibility. He shows 
me how a real man handles a gun. He trusted me. No one ever did 
that. I didn’t want to let him down.”
Mike shifts his feet and says, “So I stopped getting in trouble and 
got my grades up. John took me hunting. Soon I’m back in the 
neighborhood showing my friends the picture of the deer I got and 
they think it’s so cool. So all I want to do is go hunting. It was so 
good, so far away from the streets and in my hands was this great 
responsibility, this gun, and all I had to do was handle it right, like a 
man does, and I’d be right and good and maybe get a deer or whatever.
“But looking back now, I know something else was going on. 
When John took me hunting in those days we’d sit and talk about 
what was going on in my life and ways to make things better. I 
connected with John because I looked at him as a big brother, not as 
some social worker and because he was showing me something I 
never saw before—how guns are tools and that when you do things 
right they’re good and you’re good. I finally found someone to look 
up to and a way to prove myself with the very thing my friends feared 
and respected most—guns. I had to earn everything I did with John. 
I had to learn discipline by hunting and shooting.”

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
6	
Introduction
He pauses again and his eyes go down to the wood table before 
coming back up again, and he tells me that some of his friends from 
the streets wanted to pull him back. They thought those hunting 
photos were pretty cool, but they wanted him to hang out and do all 
that bad stuff he was getting away from. Mike says, “Eventually, John 
and I spent less time together. I was finally happy with myself, with 
my life, and I owed that to John. But then one day I was with a group 
of friends and they decided to rob some kids standing on a street 
corner. Not thinking, I stayed in the car instead of leaving. Naturally, 
we got arrested. I thought my life was over because I was the only one 
of adult age—the blame fell squarely on my shoulders. I didn’t know 
what to do or who to turn to. I never had a father figure. My friends 
were all I had. I couldn’t call John. I was scared. I didn’t want to 
disappoint him. Besides, I hadn’t spoken to John in months, why 
would he help me? Although every bone in my body didn’t want to, 
my heart told me to call him. John took me in with open arms. He sat 
me down just like in the beginning of our relationship and we came 
up with a plan to get myself back on the correct path. I have been on 
that same path ever since.”
Mike shifts his weight in his little plastic chair, frowns, and his eyes 
get emotional as he explains that he’s now trying to get his gun rights 
back after that awful mistake almost twenty years ago. He didn’t get 
any jail time for that robbery, just probation. Nevertheless, he has a 
felony conviction so he can’t own a gun. Now his wife can’t have a 
gun because, as a felon, Mike can’t be in the same house with a gun. 
That’s eating away at him. “She’s not safe when I’m out driving the 
truck. She’s not safe because of me,” he says. He has a lawyer helping 
him try to get his Second Amendment rights back. He hopes he can 
have his freedom again. He only wants to live free and to protect his 
family and for his wife to be safe when he’s away driving trucks, but 
the law is stopping him.
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Introduction	
7 
He got mugged recently when he pulled his truck into a loading 
dock to make a delivery. The guy jumped on his truck’s running 
board, pointed a pistol in his face, and said, “Sorry man, I gotta eat. 
Give me whatever money you got.”
“Right there my life was in this guy’s hands,” says Mike. “He 
didn’t want to shoot me and I gave him my wallet and he ran away, 
but it made me think about my wife and kids alone at home and that 
drives me crazy.”
Mike pauses, looks at the floor, and then back at me as he says, 
“In my time on the streets I’ve seen what gun laws do. They ban 
handguns. So then all my old friends have handguns anyway, but the 
law-abiding people don’t. What good does that do? You want to 
make the streets safer, you need to let law-abiding people carry if they 
want. That way you’ll have people who’re responsible being, you 
know, good examples. They’ll show kids by example how guns 
should be treated. There are too many guns out there to just ban 
them. I can take you to places right now where you can buy an illegal 
handgun no problem. You want this to get better, you want a brighter 
future, then enforce the gun laws—let me tell you they’re not—and 
let good people carry concealed if they want to. That would have 
stopped me from doing a lot of the bad stuff I did all those years ago. 
It would reduce violence now.”
Mike’s story is powerful, but he’s far from alone. I talk to other 
people from the rougher parts of town who were saved by John.
Andrew M. is twenty-two years old and of Egyptian descent. He 
is about to graduate from college and become a teacher, like John. 
He says, “When I was in the sixth grade the police came and took my 
father away. It was in all the papers. The whole street knew they were 
arresting my father. He was convicted of rape and is still in jail. My 
father used to walk me to school, but now we had to move and I was 
in a new school in a tough neighborhood. So suddenly I’m all alone—

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
8	
Introduction
just a little scared sixth grader. John sees me there and he knows all 
about it. He says, ‘Don’t worry, it’s my first day, too.’ It wasn’t, of 
course, but he knew just what to say. Right away he welcomes me 
into Camp Compass. He saves my life. I’d be dead or in jail now if 
John didn’t take me in and use guns and hunting to show me how to 
be a positive, hard-working adult.”
Two others join me. Tiffany S. and Mike M. Tiffany is white and 
Mike is black. They tell similar stories. They say the only way to make 
the streets safer is with good examples, with people like John. Tiffany 
tells me about the guns she saw in high school. She went to a rough 
inner-city school with gang problems; illegal guns were easily had and 
were used to victimize people. “You take the freedom to own a gun 
away and you get what John saved us from on these streets. You do 
that and all you have left is the bad,” says Tiffany. She’s twenty-four 
years old now and has a college degree that helped her get a job in a 
hospital.
Tiffany has always had health issues. They make her weak. They 
used to make her feel helpless. She says, “When John took me shooting 
and hunting I learned confidence. He gave me this rite of passage to 
become a good adult.”
Most of the people I talk to tell me they don’t hunt anymore. Many 
don’t even own guns. But they all back gun rights.
I wish those who back “gun-free zones” could meet these people 
and spend time on their streets. Murder and violence took place before 
the invention of guns, and they will continue to take place—and have 
taken place, at high rates—even in localities with stiff gun-control 
laws. Guns don’t cause violence. What guns can do in the hands of 
honest people is equalize the odds between a one-hundred-pound 
woman and a two-hundred-pound potential assailant, or between the 
good guys and the bad guys.
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Introduction	
9 
There are two wildly different gun cultures in America—the 
freedom-loving, gun-rights culture that upholds the responsible use 
of guns for hunting, sport, and self-defense, and the criminal culture 
that thrives in spite of, or even because of, government attempts at 
restricting gun rights. Those two cultures lead to two different futures. 
The path we take will determine the future of the gun and the future 
of our freedom.

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
PART I 
Future Glock?

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
13
C H A P T E R  O N E
Every American  
Should Hear This
Like history it repeats itself.
—A 1904 ad for the Winchester Automatic Rifle, 
a semiautomatic .22 rimfire rifle1
I 
  say, swallowing a laugh, “Just tell me what you really think about 
America’s love affair with the gun, Phil. Don’t let me stop you.”
Phil Schreier, the senior curator for the NRA’s National Firearms 
Museum, and I are standing right in the middle of the biggest gun 
museum in all the world, and he’s just said, “Since David killed Goli-
ath, the person with the more advanced weapon, not the guy with 
biggest muscles, has always won the fight.”

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
14	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
He says this as we’re looking at the “Mayflower gun,” a wheel-
lock carbine brought to America on the Mayflower by John Alden in 
1620. Alden was one of the Pilgrim leaders of Plymouth Colony, so 
his gun was certainly at the first Thanksgiving.
“From the beginning,” says Phil, “handheld guns led to individual 
liberty. When this translates to an armed society, it tends to lead to a 
freer people. Trace the history of the gun and you’ll find out how 
European feudalism was finally ended. They don’t teach that funda-
mental part of history in grade school, do they?”
I’m smiling as I say, “Not in the New York public school I went 
to.”
Phil grimaces and says with a sad look in his brown eyes, “Yeah, 
if school kids were just taught that the ‘shot heard ’round the world’ 
was fired through an American-forged and -rifled barrel, they might 
know a damn thing about American ingenuity and how we really won 
our freedom. That way they might just have a clue what our freedom 
is all about.”
Before I ask him to unpack all that, he says, “School kids—hell, 
even the adults—often don’t even know what the British were after. 
The Redcoats were coming to seize a weapons depot. They were com-
ing for the peoples’ guns. They wanted to disarm the colonists before 
a rebellion began.”
Phil points to a flintlock rifle and says, “This just might be the gun 
that fired the shot heard ’round the world. It’s from that period and 
region. It was the type of muzzle-loading rifle many of the colonists had.”
I look from Phil to this old flintlock rifle, and the connection 
between guns and freedom becomes as vivid as burned black powder. 
Phil, you see, is one of those short, heavyset guys who moves so con-
tinuously and quickly you can’t understand how they stay heavyset. 
But you soon forget about that because what he has to say is so 
authoritative. Phil knows more about the history of American guns 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Every American Should Hear This 	
15 
than anyone. The History Channel calls him when they need an 
expert. When historians at the Springfield Armory, a museum run by 
the National Park Service (NPS) on the grounds of the original armory 
founded by George Washington, were stumped about a particular 
Springfield Model 1903, they called Phil and he dug up the original 
records for them. That’s the kind of history-loving, truth-telling, fact-
ridden gun nut he is.
That’s why I’m here in this gun museum with Phil for a hands-on 
history lesson of the American gun. I’m thankful he’s here to teach it, 
as this history is so politically incorrect that few are exposed to it. Yet 
this history is fundamental to understanding American freedom. 
More than that, if we don’t understand our freedom’s connection to 
the gun from 1775 to today, we’re sure to lose our liberty.
Phil keeps rolling along with the excited tone of a gifted teacher: 
“If you looked down the muzzle of that flintlock rifle, you’d see 
grooves. That’s rifling as you well know, and the rifling grooves in 
this gun were cut by hand by a New England gunsmith in the early 
1770s.”
After a pause for effect, he starts into a speech that gets him so 
worked up his arms begin to flail. He explains that, sure school kids 
learn that on the night of April 18, 1775, hundreds of British troops 
marched from Boston to nearby towns. And yes, they learn that Paul 
Revere and others sounded the alarm and that colonial militiamen 
mobilized to confront the Redcoat column. They are even taught that 
an initial confrontation on the Lexington town green started the fight 
that led to a British retreat from a large force of Americans at Con-
cord. “However,” Phil says, “one small but pretty important fact few 
learn about that battle is the colonists actually had more-advanced 
arms than the British troops.
“What those young minds aren’t taught is that some of the Amer-
icans had rifles, whereas the British had Brown Besses—smoothbore 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
16	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
muskets. The Americans’ rifles could hit a man-sized target at two 
hundred and perhaps three hundred yards, whereas the Brown Bess 
was only accurate to maybe seventy-five yards. And those New Eng-
landers were hunters. They needed to kill squirrels and rabbits to eat, 
so they’d learned to be marksmen. They used these skills and their 
rifle technology by lying behind rocks and trees and shooting the Red 
Coats dead long before the British got close enough to use their .75 
caliber smoothbore muskets.”
Phil points to an older flintlock made in Germany and says that 
though barrel rifling is thought to have been invented in Augsburg, 
Germany, at the end of the fifteenth century, American gun makers 
improved on previous designs by making the American Longrifle 
(what later became known as the “Kentucky rifle”). By looking at the 
German rifle and the American Longrifle, there is no doubt that the 
American Longrifle is quite a bit longer. By looking at features and 
designs of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century flintlocks, gun histo-
rians today can tell where each rifle was likely made. Like schools of 
art, different regions of the colonies used various stock designs and 
other features.
Even though the American rifles were more accurate, the British, 
Phil explains, preferred the smoothbore Brown Bess because it lobbed 
a big bullet and because it is faster to load than a muzzleloader with 
a long-rifled barrel—you have to twist a bullet down a rifled barrel, 
and that takes time. Redcoats were geared for close-quarter engage-
ments between masses of troops. But the Americans at Concord didn’t 
fight that way. They impolitely used their rifles to fire before the 
Redcoats could get close enough to take advantage of the firepower 
from their less-accurate muskets.
There were downsides to American Longrifles, Phil adds. They 
were comparably expensive to make and their production rate was 
slow, as small-arms makers produced them one at a time. So though 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Every American Should Hear This 	
17 
General George Washington made significant use of snipers, most 
American revolutionaries were later armed with smoothbore mus-
kets—many of them made in France.
“Nevertheless,” Phil says, “small, private rifle makers in the 
colonies made it possible for the war to begin on good footing for the 
colonists. This helped to get the public behind the revolution and, as 
a lot of British officers who were targeted during the war found out, 
it damn well helped American troops throughout the war.”
After a pause, Phil’s voice grows smaller as he says inwardly, 
“Thus began the long and lovely relationship between American 
citizens, American gun makers, and the U.S. military. A relationship 
still ongoing, a relationship that keeps us free, a relationship some 
are trying to end. If they succeed our freedom will follow, as real 
freedom is linked to the gun in ways most don’t comprehend.”
His serious expression grows into a Cheshire cat grin. We are just 
getting started, and he’s excited to teach this stuff. This beneficial 
relationship didn’t stop with the American Revolution, he explains. 
After the war, George Washington established the Springfield Armory 
in Springfield, Massachusetts. The armory was founded to produce 
and develop arms for the military. The armory began making flint-
locks in 1795. From then until its closing, in 1968, the armory made 
weapons for the U.S. military. James Woolsey, superintendent of the 
Springfield Armory, a man who looks a bit like Ranger Rick in his 
National Park Service (NPS) uniform, told me when I visited there in 
October 2013 that “though most people aren’t aware of this today, 
the civilian gun market and the government have always worked 
together. Now, of course, all our arms come from the private sector.”
When I ask why the armory closed, Woolsey frowns as he says, 
“The army flubbed the launch of the M14. Meanwhile some savvy 
entrepreneurs in a California aircraft factory were using new materials 
and manufacturing techniques to perfect the AR-15—the precursor 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
18	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
to the M16. Soon the U.S. government’s Springfield Armory fell behind 
technologically. This isn’t politically correct to say,” he adds, “but 
today a very innovative civilian gun market is what’s keeping America’s 
armed forces prepared and better equipped than other militaries.”
From 1777 until it was converted into a technical college in 1968, 
the Springfield Armory was the largest manufacturer of firearms for 
the U.S. military. There is a fascinating museum on the property 
showcasing America’s history of firearms. From muskets used in the 
American Revolution to the Trapdoor Springfield, first produced in 
1868 (the 1952 film Springfield Rifle, starring Gary Cooper, shows 
what a big deal it was), to bolt-action Model 1903s used in World 
War I, to semiautomatic M1 Garands used in World War II, and later 
to M14s, the armory’s firearms were all designed for the military.
“The thing is,” says Woolsey, “civilians simultaneously used these 
firearms types, too. In fact, civilian gun designers, like Samuel Colt 
and John Browning, influenced and often collaborated with the U.S. 
military to design new and better firearms.”
Semiautomatic designs were so popular with civilians in the early 
twentieth century that a 1907 magazine ad for the Savage Model 1907 
(known as the “Savage Automatic Pistol”) read: “Her property—her 
little ones—her own life—she knows are safely protected when she has 
a Savage Automatic in her home. She knows its ten sure shots are at her 
command—quick or slow, as she chooses—one to each trigger pull.”
Mark A. Keefe IV, editor of American Rifleman, says, “What’s 
really interesting is that from about 1900 to 1940 semiautomatic rifles 
were more often used by civilians than the U.S. military. It was the 
civilian market that drove and tweaked semiautomatic rifle designs 
that made it possible for the M1 Garand.”
Phil adds to this by saying, “History teaches us that without the 
civilian gun market, gun innovation would fall on its face. Government 
procurement contracts come bureaucratically slow. If gun companies 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Every American Should Hear This 	
19 
had to solely rely on them, most would stop innovating. This would 
let America fall behind the world. Pretty soon we’d be dependent on 
other nations for our military’s firearms, and our American people 
wouldn’t know how to use them. Our military would lose the great 
advantage that comes from recruiting from a populace in which a 
substantial percentage knows how to shoot. Making sure Americans 
know how to shoot is, of course, why the NRA was founded, in 
1871.”
I knew what he meant, as I’ve interviewed Special Forces soldiers 
to find out if civilian gun ownership helps prepare citizen-soldiers. 
Greg Stube, a former Special Forces sergeant who fought in Afghan-
istan, put it best when he told me, “In my experience, a lot of training 
time in the Special Forces is used to teach those who don’t have gun 
experience. To put it plainly: The Special Forces are in the business 
of creating country boys.”
Stube adds, “I’ve toured the Smith & Wesson plant in Springfield, 
Massachusetts. I saw firearms headed for law enforcement and for 
the civilian market coming off the same lines. This is how America 
has always worked. It’s how it should and must work. I saw again 
and again in training and on the battlefield that soldiers who grew 
up hunting and shooting recreationally are better soldiers. As I said, 
the Special Forces is in the business of creating country boys. If our 
free citizens are barred from using firearms similar to those used by 
the military, then we won’t be as prepared as a nation.
“Also, my experience in war taught me,” says Stube, “that law-
abiding people shouldn’t be put in a position where they’re potentially 
less armed than those who might prey on them. I saw horrific things 
that the Taliban did to unarmed civilians in Afghanistan, things I 
don’t want my children ever to see.”
Steve Adelmann, a retired SOF Operator and owner of Citizen 
Arms, agrees with Stube. He tells me, “America’s firearms culture 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
20	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
helps the military and law enforcement. When I trained new snipers 
for my team, I always found the best shooters had been raised with a 
gun in hand. In fact, drill sergeants and other instructors spend much 
of their limited range time trying to get young men and women with 
little or no gun experience up to par with troops who grew up hunting 
or target shooting. In particular, people who come from urban areas 
use a disproportionate amount of training time just learning to sight 
in their rifles and hit targets at close range.
“I’ve also seen a difference in the abilities of other armed forces,” 
says Adelmann. “I’ve trained with and fought alongside allied soldiers 
from many nations. Soldiers from firearms-friendly places like Israel 
and Scandinavian countries acquit themselves very well with a wide 
variety of arms. Conversely, soldiers from nations with severe gun 
restrictions like England and Australia are far less familiar with fire-
arms and generally don’t have the same comfort levels as Americans. 
They’re very good with the weapons they are issued but the battlefield 
requires enough flexibility to adapt quickly to a wide variety of fire-
arm types.”
Adelmann now builds custom AR-15s for private citizens. He asks 
every customer what they intend to do with their modern sporting 
rifle. He says, “Ninety percent of them list hunting and home defense 
as their first two reasons for ownership. ARs are supremely accurate 
hunting rifles and utilitarian home-defense firearms,” he says. “If 
they’re banned we’ll lose an effective tool for the citizen while military 
and law enforcement entities will suffer down the road. Also, many 
advances in firearm technology come from the civilian market, espe-
cially competition shooting. If manufacturers can no longer sell ARs 
to citizens, much of that innovation will grind to a halt.”
To add an exclamation point to the experiences and views articu-
lated by Stube and Adelmann, consider a letter written by retired 
Army Special Forces Master Sergeant Jeff Hinton and signed by 1,100 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Every American Should Hear This 	
21 
Special Forces operators. Hinton wrote that banning AR-15s and 
“high-capacity” magazines will “only provide us with a false sense 
of security.” He argues that we need to do away with gun-free zones 
and to empower citizens to be the line of defense they’ve historically 
been, whether it was against British Red Coats attempting to enforce 
tyrannical laws, or hostile Indians on the frontier, or dangerous 
criminals.
Phil explains this from a historian’s perspective. He notes that the 
AR-15 (what the media has dubbed an “assault weapon”) is merely 
the latest example of private citizens using and helping to develop a 
firearm type that is closely related to those used by the military. As 
he points to various firearms in the museum, he explains that every 
major firearm type used by the U.S. military has also been owned and 
used by civilians. This goes for lever-action Winchesters, bolt-action 
Krags, pump-action shotguns from Browning, and the modern 
AR-15. “Anti-gun politicians who’re fond of saying that ‘weapons 
of war have no place in civilian hands’ are either unaware of Ameri-
can history or are dishonest,” says Phil.
He then grounds the point historically by explaining that in 1836 
Samuel Colt perfected and patented a revolving handgun by bringing 
together features from previous guns and fashioning them into a 
mechanically reliable revolver. Colt even thought of developing an 
assembly line to manufacture his product. School textbooks often call 
Henry Ford’s use of an assembly line nearly a century later (in the late 
1920s) a major innovation, as Ford used an assembly line to make 
the Ford Model T. But a gun maker a century before had this idea. 
Colt wrote in a letter in 1836 that the “first workman would receive 
two or three of the most important parts and would affix these and 
pass them on to the next who add a part and pass the growing article 
on to another who would do the same, and so on until the complete 
arm is put together.”2

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
22	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
The English gave Colt a patent for his revolver. The United States 
also gave Colt a patent for a “revolving gun” on February 25, 1836. 
These early revolvers were used by Texas Rangers to defeat Coman-
ches. In previous fights, frontiersmen had to get off their horse to use 
a flintlock rifle to fire one shot at a Comanche, a tribe renowned for 
swiftly shooting arrows from horseback. Even if the frontiersman 
killed one Comanche, he’d be killed by others before he could load 
powder and ball down his muzzleloader, prime the firearm, cock it, 
aim, and fire. When armed with a Colt revolver, however, a Ranger 
could fight from horseback and fire multiple shots. This changed the 
nature of Indian fighting on the frontier.3
Colt didn’t know his revolving handgun was proving so effective 
for Texas Rangers. His Patent Arms Company went bankrupt and 
ceased operation in 1842. One constant problem for Colt was the 
government. The Militia Act of 1808 required that any arms pur-
chased by a state militia had to be in current service in the U.S. mili-
tary. This Act standardized arms, but it prevented state militias from 
spending money on guns that might be better suited to their needs or 
terrain. To try to make a sale to the U.S. military, Colt presented his 
revolver to President Andrew Jackson, and though Jackson saw the 
military advantages, the meeting didn’t lead to orders from the U.S. 
government.4
The assets from Colt’s Patent Arms Company had been sold at 
auction. Colt was trying other ideas, including using electric current 
from galvanic batteries to detonate underwater explosives. The U.S. 
government was interested in this concept. They gave Colt funding to 
continue his work for possible use in harbor defense.5
Meanwhile, Captain Sam Walker of the Texas Rangers wanted to 
purchase revolvers from Colt to arm five hundred Texas Rangers who 
had been absorbed into the U.S. Army during the Mexican-American 
War. Walker had been in a troop of fourteen Rangers led by Captain 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Every American Should Hear This 	
23 
John Coffee Hays on June 9, 1844, when they had used Colt’s early 
Paterson revolvers to win the Battle of Walker’s Creek (not named 
after Sam Walker) against a much greater number of Comanches.6
“Walker wrote to Colt,” says Phil. “He didn’t know Colt had 
gone out of business. Walker had been given a blank check to pur-
chase arms for Texas Rangers who would fight in the Mexican-
American War. Walker wanted one thousand revolvers from Colt.”
Walker and Colt met in New York City in 1847.7 As great a 
revolution as the Paterson revolver was, Walker felt it had shortcom-
ings. He told Colt the revolver was too fragile and too difficult to 
reload. Colt seems to have welcomed the criticism. He agreed to 
modify his revolver according to Walker’s suggestions. As they col-
laborated, Walker said he would get the government to buy them.8
Phil explains, “Not having a factory to complete the order, Colt 
made a deal with the Whitneyville Armory, run by Eli Whitney Jr., 
son of the famed inventor of the cotton gin, to produce the new 
revolvers.”9
As Colt worked, Walker went to Washington. Walker was a 
famous Texas Ranger, and his fame helped him secure a meeting with 
President James Polk. After hearing Walker explain the new handgun 
Colt could produce, President Polk and Walker went to the office of 
William Marcy, the secretary of war. President Polk ordered him to 
purchase the weapons. Marcy passed the purchase order for one 
thousand revolvers at twenty-five dollars each to Lieutenant Colonel 
George Talcott, the ordnance chief.10
From Colt’s new design, Eli Whitney Blake (Eli Whitney’s nephew) 
produced one thousand “Walker Colts.” Fully loaded, the revolver 
weighed almost five pounds. Unlike the Paterson, which fired five 
shots, the Walker fired six. The Colt Walker was the most powerful 
handgun then made. It used 60 grains of blackpowder to shoot .44 
caliber lead balls.

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
24	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
With the money Colt made from the sale of the Walkers and a loan 
from his cousin, banker Elisha Colt, Colt later bought the machinery 
and tooling from Blake to build his own factory—Colt’s Patent Fire 
Arms Manufacturing Company, in Hartford. The first revolving-
breech handguns made at the new factory were called “Whitneyville-
Hartford-Dragoons” and became so popular that the word “Colt” 
soon became a synonym for “revolver.” Meanwhile, as Colt produced 
revolvers, people out on the frontier and in the cities thought it a pretty 
good thing that Colt had invented a gun that could rapidly fire six 
shots. No politician thought about passing laws to stop him. To 
everyone it was progress.
Left to work without bureaucrats wagging their fingers, Colt kept 
advancing manufacturing processes by making guns with interchange-
able parts (made by machine and assembled by hand).
“When he did this,” Phil explains, “Colt revolutionized the idea 
of how products are made by making a product with truly inter-
changeable parts. Colt traveled to the first World Fair in London in 
1851 and amazed people there by completely disassembling a half 
dozen revolvers, putting the parts in a bag and shaking them up, and 
then putting the guns back together. This doesn’t seem like a big deal 
now, but at the time it was jaw-dropping revolutionary. Machine parts 
had to be filed and fit at the time to fit individual products. But Colt 
had found a way to make the parts interchangeable. This means any-
one could repair one of his guns by simply replacing a part. This 
reduced labor costs and expertise.”
Soon this novel idea caught on and began to fuel America’s Indus-
trial Revolution. All along Colt was also spreading freedom; for 
example, in 1860s Colt Manufacturing would famously run newspa-
per ads showing women with Colt revolvers and touting, “God made 
man, but Samuel Colt made them equal.” So more than a half century 
before women got the right to vote, Colt was doing something real 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Every American Should Hear This 	
25 
for women’s rights by making them equal to bigger, stronger men—
and no one thought that controversial either.
To make this point even clearer, Phil moves us to another display 
case, this one with revolvers from Horace Smith and Daniel B. Wes-
son. In 1852 they formed a company to produce a lever-action hand-
gun nicknamed the “Volcanic Pistol.” After it failed, Smith and 
Wesson came out with a revolver in 1856—the Smith & Wesson 
Model 1. This was the first revolver that fired a fully self-contained 
cartridge.
Phil points out a Smith & Wesson Model 1, a blackpowder hand-
gun. He then walks me over to the Smith & Wesson handgun Clint 
Eastwood used when he played Dirty Harry and says, “This revolver, 
of course, shoots smokeless powder, self-contained cartridges.” It is 
famously chambered in .44 Magnum (the “most powerful handgun 
in the world”). Except it’s not the most powerful anymore; it has been 
far surpassed by Smith & Wesson’s .500 and by others. That’s the 
thing about American innovation—it keeps evolving to please more 
consumers, unless the government bans it.
We next moved to self-loading (semiautomatic) pistols. Phil points 
to a Model 1911 and says, “People think of semiautomatic pistols as 
being space-age technology, but the truth is perhaps the greatest pis-
tol ever invented, one still carried by cops, civilians, and some in the 
military, is the Model 1911, a gun designed when the Wright brothers 
were still selling bicycles in Ohio.”
The semiautomatic pistol is actually a late nineteenth-century 
invention made for both civilians and the military. After Hiram 
Maxim (1840–1916) introduced his recoil-powered machine gun in 
1883, several private gunsmiths set out to apply the same principles 
to handguns. The first model to gain commercial success was from 
Hugo Borchardt (1844–1924). His C-93 hit the market in 1894. The 
C-93 was too bulky to receive widespread acceptance, but its design 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
26	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
helped other inventors. In 1896, Paul Mauser (1838–1914) introduced 
his first semiautomatic pistol, the Mauser “Broomhandle.” These and 
other innovations quickly led to the Model 1911, a single-action, 
semiautomatic, magazine-fed, recoil-operated pistol chambered in .45 
ACP (Automatic Colt Pistol).
The Model 1911 pistol was the result of a search for a suitable 
self-loading pistol that would replace the variety of revolvers then in 
service. Designed by John Browning (1855–1926), this gun came to 
be after the need for a new and more powerful semiautomatic pistol 
became clear to the U.S. military when American units fought Moro 
guerrillas during the Philippine-American War (1899–1902). The U.S. 
forces were using the then-standard Colt Model 1892 revolver cham-
bered in .38 Long Colt. The Moros frequently used drugs to numb 
themselves to pain, and the .38 Long Colt cartridge didn’t have enough 
knockdown power to stop them. Also, the revolver was slower to 
reload than new semiautomatic pistols. The U.S. Army briefly reverted 
to using the Model 1873 single-action revolver in the .45 Colt; its 
heavier bullet was more effective against charging tribesmen, but there 
was better pistol technology becoming available. This prompted 
then–chief of ordnance, General William Crozier, to authorize further 
testing for a new service pistol.
In 1906 this search for a better handgun led to military test trials. 
Six firearms manufacturing companies submitted pistols. Of the six, 
three were eliminated early on, leaving a Savage, Colt, and DWM (a 
German arms manufacturer) chambered in .45 ACP cartridge. These 
three handguns still needed tweaks, but only Colt and Savage resub-
mitted their designs. Field tests from 1907 to 1911 were held to decide 
between the Savage and Colt designs. Six thousand rounds were fired 
from single Colt and Savage pistols over the course of two days. When 
the guns began to grow hot, they were simply immersed in water. The 
Colt passed with no reported malfunctions, while the Savage designs 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Every American Should Hear This 	
27 
had thirty-seven.11 The Colt Model 1911 was then adopted by the 
U.S. Army on March 29, 1911, thus gaining its designation, Model 
1911. It was adopted by the U.S. Navy and Marine Corps in 1913.
Originally manufactured only by Colt, the Model 1911 was in 
such high demand in World War I that it was also manufactured in 
the government-owned Springfield Armory, making it yet another 
civilian invention that was picked up and manufactured by contract 
by the U.S. government.
The Model 1911 pistol was subsequently widely copied. It quickly 
became popular with civilian shooters in competitive events. Soon 
full sized and compact variants were made available for civilians as 
carry guns. The Model 1911 would serve as the standard-issue side-
arm for the U.S. Armed Forces from 1911 to 1985. In total, the U.S. 
military bought around 2.7 million Model 1911 and 1911A1 pistols. 
The Model 1911 was replaced by the 9mm Beretta M9 pistol as the 
standard U.S. sidearm, but due to its popularity, the Model 1911 has 
not been completely phased out.12
After going through this history, Phil points me to another part 
of the museum and says, “The next big leap forward came from civil-
ians working for a private aeronautics company.”
We stop in front of display cases showcasing the AR-15 and its 
relations. These firearms are what many in the media now call 
“assault weapons.” This deserves a clarification, as the media often 
interchange the terms “assault weapon” and “assault rifle.” Accord-
ing to Bruce H. Kobayashi and Joseph E. Olson in the Stanford Law 
& Policy Review, “Prior to 1989, the term ‘assault weapon’ did not 
exist in the lexicon of firearms.” “Assault weapon” is a political term 
developed by antigun advocates to convince people that some guns 
are too, well, scary, effective, ergonomic, or something, for U.S. citi-
zens to own. The technical term “assault rifle” includes full-auto 
military firearms such as the M4A1 carbine. The AR-15 is not an 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
28	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
assault rifle—it’s not full-auto; it’s semiautomatic (when you pull the 
trigger, it goes bang once). “AR” doesn’t stand for “assault rifle.” It 
stands for the first two letters of the original manufacturer’s name: 
ArmaLite Corporation. AR-15s can’t be configured to be fully auto-
matic. Assault rifles, being full-auto machine guns, are already heav-
ily restricted.
The term “assault weapon” is a relative term used by some to 
include a growing number of firearm makes and models some want 
to ban. To see how this century-plus-old technology suddenly became 
a target for antigun groups and politicians, we need to look back to 
the late 1980s. In 1988, antigun activist Josh Sugarmann, who was 
the communications director for the National Coalition to Ban Hand-
guns and is currently the executive director and founder of the Vio-
lence Policy Center (VPC), recommended that gun-control groups use 
public ignorance and fear to ban everything they can stuff into the 
phrase “assault weapon” when he wrote, “Assault weapons . . . are a 
new topic. The weapons’ menacing looks, coupled with the public’s 
confusion over fully automatic machine guns versus semi-automatic 
assault weapons—anything that looks like a machine gun is assumed 
to be a machine gun—can only increase the chance of public support 
for restrictions on these weapons. . . . Efforts to restrict assault weap-
ons are more likely to succeed than those to restrict handguns.”13 Rich 
Lowry, editor of National Review, has rightly called the term “assault 
weapon” a “manufactured term.”14
The political shift to dubbing these semiautomatic rifles “assault 
weapons” led to the 1994 Assault Weapons Ban (a federal law that 
expired in 2004) and to state bans, such as those in California, Con-
necticut, and New York. Public education from the NRA and many 
other gun-rights groups—including the fact that such firearms are 
rarely used in crimes—has made it politically difficult to pass another 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Every American Should Hear This 	
29 
federal ban on “assault weapon” semiautomatic rifles. According to 
FBI crime statistics, only 2.5 percent of murders were committed by 
a killer using a rifle in 2011. AR-15-type rifles make up an even 
smaller fraction of that percentage.15 Almost four times as many 
murderers used knives (323 used rifles whereas 1,694 used knives or 
another sharp object in 2011) to kill someone. Also, the data show 
that the number of people shot and killed with semiautomatic “assault 
weapons” didn’t change appreciably during the ten-year period 
(1994–2004) that those firearms were banned from being sold.16 
Specifically, reports submitted by state and local law-enforcement 
agencies to the FBI and published annually in its “Uniform Crime 
Reports” indicate that firearms-related murders and the non-negligent 
manslaughter rate per 100,000 people decreased from 6.6 for 1993 
to 3.6 for 2000. The rate held steady at 3.6 for 2001 and fluctuated 
thereafter between a high of 3.9 in 2006 and 2007 and was a low 3.2 
in 2010 and 2011.17 No matter how someone plays with these statis-
tics, they don’t show any correlation with the 1994–2004 ban.
Actually, the true story behind the invention of this class of fire-
arms is very American.
“The AR-15, and its offspring the M16, got their start in an 
American aeronautics company. Some smart engineers wanted to use 
new materials and technology to make guns for the public,” says Phil. 
“Soon after World War II, one of the most remarkable conversations 
in the history of the American gun is said to have taken place when 
an aeronautical engineer named George Sullivan spoke with a Brus-
sels-based arms dealer named Jacques Michault. Michault entertained 
Sullivan with stories about the Germans’ making lighter guns faster 
from stamped parts. This made Sullivan realize that guns could ben-
efit from the aviation industry’s use of new materials and manufactur-
ing techniques. Sullivan, who was a self-described gun nut, understood 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
30	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
that guns were still largely stuck in the nineteenth century—they still 
had heavy wood stocks and blocky, machined steel parts. He saw a 
huge opportunity.”
A few years later, in 1953, Sullivan convinced the Fairchild Engine 
and Aircraft Corporation to establish a division that would invent 
gun designs by utilizing new materials and manufacturing processes 
then being perfected for airplanes.18 Sullivan met Paul S. Cleveland, 
Fairchild’s corporate secretary, at a meeting of an aircraft industry 
committee and discussed using new materials to bring guns up to date. 
Cleveland took this idea to Richard S. Boutelle, Fairchild’s president 
and a long-time gun enthusiast. Boutelle loved the idea and hired Sul-
livan to create a branch of the company that would develop space-age 
small arms.
Sullivan named the Fairchild subsidiary “ArmaLite.” The division 
became known as “George’s Backyard Garage” and was located in 
Hollywood, California.19 The idea was that Sullivan would create gun 
prototypes by utilizing lightweight, modern alloys and plastics that 
the company would then license to firearms manufacturers. The initial 
plan was to produce sporting firearms for the commercial market. 
They hoped that some of the concepts would eventually be used by 
the military. Shortly after Fairchild established its ArmaLite division, 
ArmaLite was invited to submit a rifle to the U.S. Air Force as a 
replacement for the then-standard survival rifle. ArmaLite submitted 
the .22 AR-5, which was adopted and designated the MA-1 Survival 
Rifle, but few were made, as the gun fell out of favor.
Nevertheless, the initial success with the AR-5 led Fairchild to 
reverse strategy and focus on the military market. The decision to 
forgo the average consumer for the military turned out to be a great 
miscalculation. But at the time, Fairchild was flush with revenue from 
other parts of its vast business. For a while this enabled Sullivan to 
experiment freely without worrying about making a profit.
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Every American Should Hear This 	
31 
As he developed new gun designs, Sullivan brought his experi-
mental firearms to the Topanga Canyon Shooting Range for testing. 
This led to the next fortuitous meeting that would change the future 
of the gun. At the range, Sullivan happened to see Eugene Stoner, a 
former U.S. Marine who had served in Aviation Ordnance during 
World War II, shooting what looked to be a homemade rifle. Stoner 
was then a design engineer making dental plates. Sullivan and Stoner 
started talking. Before long, Stoner joined Sullivan’s team as chief 
engineer for ArmaLite.20
For the next five years, almost all ArmaLite’s activity was focused 
on developing military firearms. Stoner had been working on small 
arms independently since World War II, and his patents formed the 
basis of much of ArmaLite’s work. From the beginning, another man, 
Charles Dorchester, directed and coordinated all development pro-
grams, first as general manager of the ArmaLite Division of Fairchild, 
later as president of ArmaLite, Inc. The combined efforts of these 
three individuals quickly resulted in revolutionary changes in combat-
weapon concepts.
In 1955 ArmaLite submitted a gun design, the AR-10, devised by 
Stoner but based on Sullivan’s concepts using anodized aluminum, a 
plastic butt stock, and other materials, to the U.S. Army. The army 
was then searching for a new service rifle. The AR-10 looked like the 
later AR-15 and then M16, but the AR-10 used the larger 7.62 mm 
chambering, a .30-caliber cartridge used by NATO. The chambering 
wasn’t novel, but the AR-10 was a modern, modular-looking rifle, 
using space-age materials. The AR-10 might have looked awkward 
at first, but it lightly fit into a person’s shoulder and pointed well. It 
also weighed 7.25 pounds without a magazine—about two pounds 
lighter than the M14 it was competing with.
The army, however, was skeptical. Time magazine profiled the 
AR-10 and called it a new “aluminum rifle” produced “at no cost to 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
32	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
the taxpayer” and said the rifle “gave promise of being superior.”21 
At the time, the Springfield Armory was still making guns for the U.S. 
military, as it had since George Washington founded it. Sure, civilian 
gun designers had always collaborated with the armory and often 
pushed new designs into the hands of soldiers and citizens alike, but 
if this rifle was accepted, it could mean the end to the armory, as the 
armory was counting on making the M14 and didn’t have the know-
how to make plastic stocks and rifles with anodized aluminum parts. 
Some of the U.S. Army’s leadership were also reportedly turned off 
by ArmaLite’s media blitz.22
The AR-10 didn’t win a military contract for these and other rea-
sons; however, in 1955, U.S. Army Colonel Henry Nielsen and Gen-
eral Willard Wyman got together and discussed the possibility of the 
AR-10 being chambered in a lighter caliber to truly make it a rifle for 
the future. Both were intrigued with the potential of this new rifle 
design. So intrigued that in 1956 both Nielsen and Wyman visited 
Stoner at ArmaLite to discuss the idea of chambering the AR-10 in a 
cartridge that would shoot a .22-caliber, 55-grain bullet at 3,250 feet 
per second at the muzzle.23
Stoner went to work and soon developed the AR-15, a lighter, 5.56 
mm version of the AR-10. More military trials came as Wyman found 
ways to give the AR-15 a chance to win a military contract in 1957. 
Meanwhile, the secretary of the U.S. Army, Wilber Brucker, announced 
the adoption of the M14 as the new service rifle. The M14 had gone 
through years of manufacturing delays and bureaucratic problems 
but was finally ready for full production. Meanwhile, both Wyman 
and Nielsen, ArmaLite’s biggest fans, retired in 1958. After more 
machinations from the military’s bureaucracy, and after ArmaLite’s 
parent company, Fairchild Engine and Aircraft Corporation, hit hard 
times financially, a decision was made to unload ArmaLite. In January 
1959 the AR-15’s design and manufacturing rights were sold to Colt 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Every American Should Hear This 	
33 
for the rock-bottom price of $75,000 and a 4.5 percent royalty on 
future sales.
Colt’s experienced firearms engineers went to work and quickly 
tweaked the AR-15’s design—the biggest change they made was 
relocating its charging handle from under the carrying handle to the 
rear of the receiver. Colt then started a public-relations campaign that 
knocked the M14 for being too old school as they talked up the ben-
efits of the lighter AR-15. The AR-15, with its lighter .223-caliber 
round, gave an infantryman the ability to carry as much as three times 
the amount of ammo as a soldier carrying an M14 chambered in .308 
Winchester. The original AR-15 also weighed less than 6 pounds 
without a magazine, whereas the M14 weighed on average 9.2 
pounds when empty.
Phil says, “A lot of people thought of the .223 as a varmint round. 
These people didn’t think the AR-15’s chambering in the puny .223 
cartridge was a good choice for the military, as the lighter caliber 
wouldn’t have the same stopping power as a .30-caliber round.”
An article in American Rifleman in 1959 reported that “[c]aliber 
reduction is in line with past development. Adoption of a breech-
loading rifle by the United States brought a reduction in caliber from 
.58 to .50 and then to .45, and adoption of smokeless powder brought 
a further reduction to .30. Each of these steps was accompanied by 
a marked increase in effective range and power. However, further 
caliber reduction would entail a marked reduction in range and 
power.”24
The shift to the much smaller .223 cartridge almost derailed the 
AR-15 and might have if it wasn’t for its success in the coming Viet-
nam War. This caliber choice is still hotly debated. As Phil tells me all 
this in the National Firearms Museum, a U.S. Border Patrol agent 
standing nearby interjected, “The .223 is proven. It’s a high-velocity 
round that lets you stay on target longer to make multiple hits.”

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
34	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
The U.S. military still considers chambering its standard-issue rifles 
in a heavier caliber as bullet designs and propellants evolve. To see what 
a touchy topic this is, try raising it at any gun range, military or private, 
and you’ll run into sound, passionate, and entrenched positions from 
every guy who calls himself a rifleman. Phil points out that pretty soon 
American Rifleman was also praising the AR-15’s attributes. In its May 
1962 issue, American Rifleman reported: “It is not at all impossible to 
conceive of such a small bore military rifle. The United States Navy rifle 
was a 6 mm. (.236) for a number of years following 1895. Studies were 
made by most nations, including the United States, of cal. .22 military 
cartridges, sometimes even smaller. Rifles of cal. 6.5 mm. (.256) were 
adopted by several nations before the beginning of this century. The 
fact that they were adopted by very few major military powers, and 
even by those users were not considered fully successful in the test of 
World War II, need not prevent renewed consideration of small bores 
under requirements of the present.”
Though the NRA and conservatives in the U.S. military were still 
somewhat critical of a “varmint round” being used by the U.S. mili-
tary, support for the AR-15 gained traction during weapons testing. 
In 1963 the U.S. military finally ordered eight-five thousand AR-15s 
for the army and nineteen thousand for the air force.25 On July 1, 
1964, the U.S. military ceased production of the M14. Soon, the full-
auto military version of the AR-15 was dubbed the M16. It would 
become the iconic gun of the Vietnam War.
Colt had already begun selling semiautomatic AR-15s to U.S. 
consumers in 1963. The November 1964 issue of American Rifle-
man reported, “A semi-automatic model of the Colt AR-15 cal. .223 
(5.56 mm.) automatic rifle is now offered by Colt’s. Designated Colt 
AR-15 Sporter, it is made for semi-automatic use only, its magazine 
has a removable spacer which limits capacity to 5 rounds, and its 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Every American Should Hear This 	
35 
bolt carrier assembly has a Parco-Lubrite finish. In other respects, 
it is the same as the AR-15 automatic military rifle produced by 
Colt’s for the Army and Air Force.”
The article further explained, “Design of this sporter is such that 
parts required for fully-automatic fire cannot be installed, and the 
Alcohol and Tobacco Tax Div., Internal Revenue Service, U.S. Trea-
sury Dept., does not consider the rifle a ‘Firearm’ in the machine gun 
category.”
Fast-forward a half century and we find American gun enthusiasts 
in an AR craze. According to the research firm Southwick Associates, 
Inc., in 2012 one in five rifles sold was chambered in .223—most of 
these are AR-15-type rifles. Today the AR-15 and its variations are 
manufactured by a long and growing list of companies. ARs are 
popular with civilians and law enforcement around the world because 
they’re accurate, light, portable, and modular. Its design also allows 
it to be accessorized. A civilian can buy after-market sights, vertical 
forward grips, lighting systems, night-vision devices, laser-targeting 
devices, muzzle brakes/flash hiders, bipods, and more, making the 
AR the most versatile rifle platform. It’s also easy to shoot and has 
little recoil, making it popular with women.
The AR-15 is so user-friendly that a group called “Disabled Amer-
icans for Firearms Rights,” which has about twenty thousand mem-
bers, says the AR-15 makes it possible for people who can’t handle a 
bolt-action or other rifle type to shoot and protect themselves. Also, 
its .223 caliber makes it safer to use as a home-defense gun because 
this lighter caliber is less likely to travel through walls.
Phil adds, “Politicians who say the AR-15 is a ‘weapon of war’ 
that civilians shouldn’t be allowed to own are ignorant of our history 
or are lying. Historically, Americans have always owned similar gun 
types to those used in the military. Besides, semiautomatic AR-15s 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
36	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
for sale to civilians are internally different from the full-automatic 
M16. Sure they look similar, but their hammer and trigger mecha-
nisms are different designs. The bolt carrier and internal lower receiver 
of semiautomatic versions are even milled differently so that their 
firing mechanisms can’t be interchanged.”
Phil leads me to the vault located beneath the National Firearms 
Museum and we handle American guns from every era. As he gives 
me this hands-on lesson, he says, “The mainstream media doesn’t tell 
this important story about guns and our freedom. Sure, many of them 
don’t know it—why would they, as it’s not taught. But the thing is, 
they’re also not curious enough to ask. This leads me to conclude 
they’d rather the American people didn’t know this history. When 
people understand the gun’s link to freedom they tend . . . [to cherish] 
their right to keep and bear arms, a freedom men and women fought 
and died for here and on foreign battlefields.”
It’s a freedom that’s at risk today, even as gun technology contin-
ues to advance in ways that can benefit not only the U.S. military but 
the individual American citizen, as we’ll see.
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
37
C H A P T E R  T W O
The Rifle Grows a Brain
When I was a sniper I always critically considered new 
technologies. They can offer a lot of benefits, but their 
capabilities can often be over-hyped. I do, however, see 
digital shooting systems as the future of small arms.
—Steve Adelmann, a retired SOF operator who spent twenty-two years 
 in the U.S. Army and who currently owns Citizen Arms
“S
o this is the future of the gun?”
“Of the rifle anyway,” says Paul Merz, plant manager of 
Remington Arms’ factory in Ilion, New York, as he nods at a dusty 
glass display showcasing the Remington 2020, a shooting system that 
can make long-range marksmanship video-game easy. Remington has 
a website that says its 2020 is “The Only Scope That Lets You See 
the Future.”1 Seeing it here, in this out-of-the way spot in America’s 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
38	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
oldest gun factory, is like finding Buck Rogers’s rocket pistol in your 
grandfather’s gun cabinet.
I laugh at this juxtaposition of past and future.
Paul shrugs at my apparently incongruous laughter and tries to 
impress me with the seriousness of this technology by saying very 
slowly, “The Remington 2020 is a video shooting system with a built-
in ballistics computer that combines readings from a laser rangefinder, 
three gyroscopes, accelerometers, and temperature and air-pressure 
sensors to calculate a shooting plan.”
His engineer voice is so monotone serious that I really have a hard 
time stopping myself from laughing. And regardless, I know all this. 
I also know this is just the beginning of what’s happening right now 
with firearms technology. The truth is gun innovations are just start-
ing to make a tentative but nevertheless giant leap into the digital age. 
Meanwhile, gun-control advocates haven’t a clue what’s going on. I 
ask Paul to open the display case.
Paul’s eyes twinkle. He pulls a dungeon-master-sized set of keys 
from his pocket. As he tries one key, then another, he brags he can 
unlock anything in this aged industrial complex of brick buildings. I 
find this almost as astonishing as the shooting system behind the dusty 
glass. This multi-level series of brick buildings is filled with row after 
row of humming computer numerical controlled (CNC) machines 
and grating, pounding, half-a-century-old, grease-stained lathes and 
barrel reamers. Located near Utica in upstate New York, this old 
soot-soiled factory is the beating heart of Ilion and nearby Mohawk. 
It’s America’s oldest factory that still makes its original product—guns. 
In October of 2013, about 1,400 employees were making 4,900 guns 
per day in this factory.
They’ve been making guns here for a long time. This factory is 
right where Eliphalet Remington began the company as E. Remington 
and Sons in 1816. Upstate New York used to manufacture everything 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Rifle Grows a Brain	
39 
from guns to typewriters to bicycles—in fact, all of those were made 
in this factory. Many of the redbrick factories still frame the edges of 
towns in New York and southern New England, but their windows 
are shattered, the roofs are falling in, and their smoke stacks haven’t 
belched in generations. Remington has outlived almost all of them. 
This place has kept making its increasingly politically incorrect prod-
ucts through almost two centuries. And it hasn’t stopped innovating. 
This factory now makes Marlin lever-action rifles, Bushmaster AR-
15s, and Model 1911 pistols. Some of their designs are at the pin-
nacle of firearms innovation, others are age-old designs made for 
hunters and shooters who are nostalgic for walnut stocks and blued 
metal.
Started when James Madison was president of the United States, 
the factory has grown into a complex series of buildings and floors 
that would give an architect an anxiety disorder. You can walk from 
one building to another and change floors without using stairs or an 
elevator or even getting the notion you’re going up or down. The 
Remington Arms factory is not only an architectural marvel, it is a 
working museum and a state-of-the-art manufacturing facility—
within its walls one can witness the past, present, and future of the 
gun. Business remains brisk; Remington invested about $20 million 
in this factory between 2011 and 2013. It is one of the few businesses 
still thriving in upstate New York, and the work here pays well: In 
2012 the average Remington employee made $47,000. Meanwhile, 
in Herkimer County, where Ilion is located, the median home price 
was just $92,300, according to the U.S. Census Bureau.
While touring the factory, I can’t help but think that this was what 
New York was like when it was at the center of the American Indus-
trial Revolution. The state, of course, has since lost most of its 
machine shops and manufacturers to states with lower taxes and to 
countries with cheaper labor. Remington has stubbornly stayed on. 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
40	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
It’s kept alive by military contracts for sniper rifles, by orders for 
Model 870 pump-action shotguns from police departments and other 
government entities, and from a long list of firearms sold to millions 
of hunters and shooters who’ve nostalgically nicknamed Remington 
“Big Green.”
It has also benefitted from the efforts of New York state to keep 
the factory in Ilion and see off rival states that have tried to lure it 
away. It’s not uncommon for states to use tax breaks, grants, loans, 
and other economic incentives to keep jobs within their borders, but 
it can be controversial when those companies make guns.2 For exam-
ple, in January 2013—a month after the Newtown shooting put 
“assault weapons” back in the news—the Maine Center for Public 
Interest Reporting dug into tax records and found that five companies 
that make semiautomatic firearms had received more than $19 million 
in tax breaks in the last few years.3 This $19 million figure didn’t just 
go to Remington. Kimber, which makes rifles and pistols in Yonkers, 
received $700,000 from Empire State Development in 2009. And a 
Lewis County–based company called Otis Products, which makes 
gun-cleaning equipment, received $2.2 million from the state and the 
local industrial development agency, according to the Maine group.
Even New York’s antigun politicians help Remington when it’s 
politically beneficial to them. In March 2011 New York’s senior U. S. 
senator, Democrat Charles Schumer, boasted on his website that he 
had “joined Remington officials and plant employees to announce 
that Bushmaster Firearms is relocating a manufacturing facility from 
Windham, Maine, to Ilion, NY, bringing over forty new jobs to Cen-
tral New York in the process. Schumer has been a long-time supporter 
of manufacturing at the Remington plant, urging top army officials 
to open up competition for the army’s small arms contracts to other 
U.S. manufacturers and domestic producers across the country like 
the Ilion, New York-based Remington. Today, Schumer applauded 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Rifle Grows a Brain	
41 
Remington’s decision to add new jobs to the productive and capable 
work force already making the factory an economic powerhouse in 
the Mohawk Valley.”4
Bushmaster makes AR-15s, which Schumer calls “assault weap-
ons” and wants to ban nationally, but no one in the mainstream 
media accuses him of hypocrisy.5 Liberal politicians like Schumer 
support gun industries for supplying jobs, but they, along with liberal 
pundits and bureaucrats, are simultaneously the gun industries’ most 
dangerous menace. For instance, after sociopath Adam Lanza took 
a Bushmaster AR-15 into Sandy Hook Elementary in December 2012 
and murdered twenty children and six adults, the California State 
Teachers’ Retirement System, which then held a 2.4 percent interest 
in Remington Outdoor Company (ROC), pressured ROC’s owner, 
Cerberus Capital, a private-equity firm located in New York City, to 
put Remington and its other gun companies up for sale.
The political vulnerability of ROC—Remington, Marlin, Bush-
master, DPMS, Barnes Bullets, and many more gun and ammo com-
panies—prompted former New York governor Eliot Spitzer to publish 
a column at Slate.com saying, “While Cerberus, whose array of 
holdings is vast, is generally immune to public pressure and the oppro-
brium of trafficking in products that while legal may be marketed in 
a loathsome way, Cerberus would not be immune to pressure brought 
by its own investors. . . . Cerberus’ investors are indirect owners of 
Bushmaster, the company that made the weapon that brought evil to 
Newtown, Conn. It is time to determine pension fund by pension 
fund who has invested in Cerberus and bring pressure on those inves-
tors either to get out of Cerberus or have Cerberus change the way it 
runs the gun industry.”6
Spitzer has always been a political opportunist with red-light-
district ethics. Perhaps the most obnoxious hit came from John 
MacIntosh, formerly a partner with a global private equity firm. He 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
42	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
wrote a mean-spirited op-ed for CNN that called for then–New York 
City mayor Michael Bloomberg, billionaire George Soros, and others 
to pay “‘whatever it takes’ to acquire control of [ROC]” and then, if 
a “‘moral turnaround’” of the gun companies isn’t feasible, to commit 
“corporate euthanasia” of Remington, Marlin, Bushmaster, and all 
the rest. He seemed to think the U.S. military, law-enforcement agen-
cies, hunters, and millions of other gun owners would be better off 
buying guns and ammo from foreign manufacturers than from the 
men and women in New York state.
New York governor Andrew Cuomo responded to Newtown with 
what he calls the “toughest gun control in the nation.” It actually 
might be the stupidest. Cuomo rushed to be the first governor to use 
the massacre at Sandy Hook Elementary to massively restrict gun 
rights, and he got his way. The hastily written SAFE Act passed the 
New York State Senate on Monday, January 14, 2013, and the State 
Assembly on Tuesday, January 15. Cuomo signed the bill into law a 
half hour after it passed the legislature.
The next Saturday (January 19, 2013) thousands of gun owners 
gathered in Albany, the state’s capital, to protest. Though they were 
too late, the pushback has since been unprecedented. At least fifty-two 
of New York’s sixty-two counties passed official resolutions in direct 
opposition to the New York SAFE Act—some of these counties directed 
their law-enforcement officials not to enforce the SAFE Act. More than 
325 local municipalities throughout New York voiced public opposi-
tion to the law. The New York State Sheriffs’ Association issued a 
letter criticizing the law. The sheriffs noted, “The new definition of 
assault weapons is too broad, and prevents the possession of many 
weapons that are legitimately used for hunting, target shooting and 
self defense.” Dozens of organizations, including sportsman’s clubs, 
the American Legion, the New York State Association of County 
Clerks, the New York State Association of Psychiatric Rehabilitation 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Rifle Grows a Brain	
43 
Services, the New York State Conservation Council, the U.S. Depart-
ment of Veterans Affairs, and others, publicly denounced the law.
If the breadth of this opposition from New Yorkers surprises you, 
it is worth noting that New York state isn’t all skyscrapers and Man-
hattan scenes seen from Seinfeld episodes. By size New York state is 
thirtieth among the fifty states. By population it is third. By popula-
tion density it is seventh. In 2012 New York state’s population was 
estimated to be 19,570,261, of which 8,336,697 live in New York 
City (NYC). That means 42 percent of New York state’s population 
lives in New York City. Millions more live in the metropolitan areas 
around NYC, anchoring New York state in deep-blue political waters. 
But upstate New York is different. More than 581,000 New York 
residents hunt deer each year. Gun ownership is common upstate.
Cuomo rushed through the SAFE Act because he didn’t want 
opposition from upstate, as well as from a lot of freedom-loving 
citizens in the downstate metropolitan areas, to galvanize. Instead of 
looking for real solutions by getting recommendations from police, 
citizens, gun company employees, and more to see how the state could 
better stop bad guys from getting and using firearms, Cuomo shoved 
an ideological, antigun-rights package through the legislature; as a 
result, some of his law’s mistakes quickly required amendments and 
postponements, while still more are clearly unconstitutional. Among 
the mistakes in the hastily written law was a provision that barred 
police officers from carrying their pistols (the legislature ended up 
passing an exemption for law enforcement). Another provision (now 
postponed) tried to force buyers of ammunition to undergo FBI back-
ground checks (illegal under federal law). Another part of the law so 
strictly limited magazine sizes (to seven rounds) that it would have 
amounted to a de facto ban on most popular handguns. In District 
of Columbia v. Heller (2008), the U.S. Supreme Court reaffirmed that 
the Second Amendment protects commonly owned firearms. So 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
44	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
Cuomo and his allies tweaked the law to allow New York residents 
to have ten-round magazines but stipulated they could only load seven 
rounds into a magazine unless they “are at an incorporated firing 
range or competition, in which case you may load your magazine to 
its full capacity.” On December 31, 2013, Judge William M. Skretny 
of the U.S. District Court for the Western District of New York issued 
a decision invalidating the SAFE Act’s requirement that magazines be 
loaded with no more than seven rounds. Judge Skretny determined 
the seven-round limit to be “arbitrary” and noted that because the 
law allowed for possession of ten-round magazines, the limit could 
“disproportionately affect law-abiding citizens.” As this book was 
being written, this decision was being appealed.
Incredibly, the SAFE Act even gives “licensed clinical social work-
ers” the power to anonymously report someone they think should 
have their guns taken away. The state police are then required to use 
the information provided to determine if the person has, or has applied 
for, a firearms license or has a registered “assault weapon.” If the 
person in question has such a license or firearm, the state police will 
relay that information to the “local firearms licensing official, who 
must either suspend or revoke the license.” Law enforcement will 
likely then use a search warrant to seize the firearms in question. This 
portion of the law also includes immunity from civil liability for the 
social worker, nurse, or other designated person who decides a gun 
owner can’t be trusted with his Second Amendment rights. All that is 
done without even a court hearing. Why a constitutional right should 
be left to the whim of some anonymous and unaccountable person 
will take a very creative lawyer to explain if the legal challenge to this 
law reaches the U.S. Supreme Court.
Of course, all that is just the beginning. The SAFE Act also broad-
ens the already-erroneous use of the phrase “assault weapon” to 
include a lot of popular, commonly owned, and American-made rifles, 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Rifle Grows a Brain	
45 
handguns, and shotguns that are semiautomatic. To accomplish this, 
the SAFE Act replaces a “two features” test the state previously used 
with a “one feature” test. Rifles that are semiautomatic, with a 
detachable magazine, and that have at least one of the following 
characteristics are banned: a folding or telescoping stock; a pistol grip; 
a thumbhole stock; a second handgrip or a protruding grip that can 
be held by the nontrigger hand; a bayonet mount; a flash suppressor, 
muzzle break, or muzzle compensator; and a lot of other cosmetic 
features. Ask for the wrong customization on your Ruger 10/22 and 
you could break the law in the state of New York.
The SAFE Act uses similar criteria to ban shotguns as “assault 
weapons.” As a result, it actually bans Remington’s Model 1100 
shotgun—a gun first sold in 1962 that has since been very popular 
with hunters and clays shooters—if the shotgun has a thumbhole or 
pistol-grip stock. Will this ban really reduce the murder rate? What 
crime studies show that semiautomatic shotguns are a crime weapon 
of choice?
The law also uses a list of features to ban pistols the state now 
considers to be “assault weapons.” More than forty of the firearms 
made in Ilion can’t be purchased by the people who make them. They 
can be manufactured there, the state can tax their sale, but the guns 
must be sold in another state or country.
This is fodder for higher courts because, as the Supreme Court 
made clear in District of Columbia v. Heller, the arms protected by 
the Second Amendment are those weapons “of the kind in common 
use . . . for lawful purposes like self-defense.” In fact, applying this 
“common use” test, Heller struck down the District of Columbia’s 
handgun ban. This makes the SAFE Act very vulnerable to a court 
challenge that in early 2014 was being led by the New York State 
Rifle & Pistol Association (NYSRPA) and backed by the National 
Rifle Association (NRA).

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
46	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
The SAFE Act also bans undefined categories of firearms, such as 
those that are “a semiautomatic version of an automatic rifle, shotgun 
or firearm,” but it doesn’t say what a “semiautomatic version” is. 
Does this only ban semiautomatic firearms made by manufacturers 
that also make automatic firearms with similar designs? If so, what 
designs or features constitute their ban? The only way Remington 
Arms, which makes semiautomatic and automatic firearms (for the 
U.S. military) in Ilion, could answer such questions is by speculating. 
The Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment was written 
and passed to protect us from having to speculate about such things.
Also, the law orders gun owners to discard or permanently mod-
ify “high-capacity” magazines, but it never explains how such maga-
zines can be legally modified. This leaves gun owners in jeopardy of 
being found guilty of a felony at the discretion of any given judge—a 
felony that would take away their Second Amendment rights for life. 
These and many other undefined areas of this law leave gun owners 
and dealers guessing what is legal and what is a felony. This potentially 
turns manufacturers and individuals who think they’re following the 
law into criminals.
If Cuomo had simply stepped into any gun store in America, he 
would have seen that semiautomatic technology is not unusual or 
uncommon. The first successful design for a semiautomatic rifle is 
attributed to German-born gunsmith Ferdinand Ritter von Mannli-
cher, who unveiled the design in 1885.7 The Model 85 was followed 
by other innovative semiautomatic rifles from Mannlicher. Although 
Mannlicher earned his reputation with his bolt-action rifles, he also 
produced a few semiautomatic pistols, including the Steyr Mannlicher 
M1894. A few years later, American gunsmith John Moses Browning 
developed the first successful semiautomatic shotgun, the Browning 
Auto-5. The Auto-5 was first manufactured in 1902 by Fabrique 
Nationale d’Herstal and sold in America under the Browning name. 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Rifle Grows a Brain	
47 
In 1903 and 1905, the Winchester Repeating Arms Company intro-
duced the first semiautomatic rimfire and centerfire rifles designed 
especially for the civilian market. Also, by the early twentieth century, 
several manufacturers had introduced semiautomatic .22 sporting 
rifles, including Winchester, Remington, Fabrique Nationale, and 
Savage Arms. In 1906, Remington Arms introduced the Remington 
Auto-loading Repeating Rifle. Remington advertised this rifle, 
renamed the “Model 8” in 1911, as a sporting rifle.
Today, semiautomatic firearms account for about 20 percent of 
the estimated three hundred million privately owned firearms in the 
U.S. and this percentage is rising, as semiautomatics now make up 
about half of all new firearms bought in the United States—Americans 
bought about five million new semiautomatic firearms in 2012 alone.8
Semiautomatic firearms are not going away. But, fortunately for 
New Yorkers, large portions of the SAFE Act might be. Given the 
Heller and McDonald rulings, it is extremely likely that it will be 
found at least partly unconstitutional by the U.S. Supreme Court.
            
In December 2013, after a year of weathering a political storm, 
George Kollitides, chairman and CEO of Remington Outdoor Com-
pany, sent his employees a memo stating that instead of selling the 
company (worth more than a billion dollars), he and others would 
buy out unhappy stockholders. David Keene, editorial page editor of 
the Washington Times, later told me, “Kollitides is trying to save a 
small town in New York. He could [sell or] move Remington, but it 
would kill that little town.”
Saving the Remington plant in Ilion, New York, seems to me a 
tremendous thing, as Paul Merz, plant manager of the Remington 
Arms factory, finds the right key and slides open the glass case beneath 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
48	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
which lie two historic rifles. One is a Remington Model 700, a bolt-
action rifle first introduced in 1962. The other is a Bushmaster AR-15 
developed in the late 1950s. Both rifles, however, have been brought 
into the future, topped with riflescopes packed with computerized 
brains that calculate shooting solutions.
I pick up the AR-15 and say, “So New York just banned this 
rifle—semiautomatic technology developed when the Wright Brothers 
were still fixing bicycles in Ohio—and,” as I nod at the video scope, 
“this cutting-edge electronic gizmo that calculates long-range shooting 
solutions is still quite legal.”
Paul shrugs and says, “More of those politicians really should visit 
our museum.”
I hold the AR-15 up to my shoulder and look at its video scope, 
which is made by a Texas-based company named TrackingPoint. I’d 
first seen the Remington 2020 in January of 2013 at the SHOT Show 
(which stands for the “Shooting, Hunting, Outdoor Trade Show”) in 
Las Vegas. After it was introduced, some pundits immediately began 
saying it’s so scary it should be banned. Even Field & Stream’s rifles 
editor, David E. Petzal, is still making up his mind about this technol-
ogy. David is arguably the top magazine writer on rifles today. He also 
cohosts a TV show on the Outdoor Channel called Gun Nuts and 
writes a blog by the same name. He told me, “My own personal feel-
ing is these devices are going to be a PR catastrophe for hunters once 
the general media becomes aware of them.”
Here’s why he feels so strongly about this shooting system. The 
TrackingPoint’s product is a video-screen scope (you don’t look 
through its scope; instead you see a video image of what’s downrange). 
It uses a laser rangefinder to measure the distance to the target and 
other instruments to measure temperature, barometric pressure, 
incline/decline, cant, air density, magnus effect drift (spin drift), target 
movement, and Coriolis effect drift from the spinning of the Earth. 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Rifle Grows a Brain	
49 
The riflescope’s computer then takes all that data and uses stored 
ballistic and firearm information including lock time, ignition time, 
rate and direction of barrel-rifling twist, muzzle velocity, and ballistic 
coefficient to calculate a shooting solution. Basically, the scope figures 
out where the rifle needs to be held for the bullet to hit the target.
To put all that in motion, the shooter places a “tag” on a target 
by centering a crosshair on it and pushing a red button located on 
top of the scope. The tag then starts the calculation, which is auto-
matically updated fifty-two times per second. The scope calculates 
the ballistic solution and adjusts the image on the video screen with 
a digital zoom to compensate for yardage so the shooter can see the 
target clearly.
Now here’s the cool-scary part. The system TrackingPoint sells 
directly—not the one sold on the Remington rifles—marries a rifle’s 
trigger with the digital scope, so that when someone pulls the trigger, 
the rifle won’t fire until the crosshair is precisely in line with the tag. 
This theoretically takes shooter error out of the equation. With a 
traditional rifle/scope, a marksman has to learn to breathe properly 
and to apply pressure to a trigger perfectly so that the gun goes off at 
precisely the right moment—even your heartbeat can make the rifle 
shake noticeably at extreme long range—but with TrackingPoint’s 
system none of that matters. A novice can use this shooting system 
to hit targets placed ten football fields away with very little training.
Remington’s 2020 is a little different. It has the same video scope 
and all that software, but it’s not integrated with the rifle’s trigger. 
With the Remington 2020, the rifle will still go boom even if the sight 
isn’t perfectly aligned with the target that has been tagged. Instead, 
you still tag a target, but now the crosshair will go from blue to red 
when it’s aligned with the tag. The shooter can still jerk the trigger, 
flinch, or make any number of other errors and thereby pull the shot. 
Still, the system—when all the data is properly input and the wind 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
50	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
calculation is correct—can put a novice shooter on target at extreme 
long range with very little learning curve.
Bryce Towsley, a gun writer who reviews rifles and optics for 
American Rifleman and many other publications, told me: “I let my 
fifteen-year-old nephew try out the Remington 2020. He was on 
target so fast it shocked me. He’s not an experienced long-range 
marksman; in fact, his mother is antigun. But he had no problem hit-
ting ten-inch steel targets at three hundred yards. He said, ‘Uncle 
Bryce, this is so easy. It’s just like a video game.’”
TrackingPoint is a tech company formally located in Austin, Texas. 
Soon after these digital sighting systems were introduced, the company 
had so much media buzz that management decided to relocate to a 
bigger facility. So they took their then–one hundred employees to a 
forty-eight-thousand-square-foot building in nearby Pflugerville, 
Texas. TrackingPoint’s new facility includes what they say will be the 
world’s longest underground shooting range.
In mid-2013 TrackingPoint’s former CEO, Jason Schauble (also a 
former Remington vice president), told me, “There are a number of 
people who say the gun shoots itself, but it doesn’t. The shooter is 
always in the loop, as you have to tag a target and pull the trigger.” 
Schauble is hard not to like. He’s a former U.S. Marine captain who 
was wounded in Iraq. His right hand is partially paralyzed from being 
shot by an insurgent using an AK-47. He still wears black “kill brace-
lets” commemorating dead friends. While as of early 2014 a military 
contract was still eluding TrackingPoint, Schauble says, “From a 
patriotic standpoint and as a veteran, I would love every soldier to be 
better armed today, and this technology could get them there.”
The founder and chairman of TrackingPoint is John McHale, a 
serial entrepreneur who has started several companies that were 
ultimately sold to Cisco, 3Com, and Compaq. Early in his career, 
he worked on weapons accuracy systems for tanks. The idea for 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Rifle Grows a Brain	
51 
TrackingPoint came to McHale while he was on safari. He was 
frustrated by his inability to shoot a gazelle at three hundred yards. 
He decided the technology was now available to make a better 
sighting system for rifles, and he was just the entrepreneur to do it. 
Soon he hired John Lupher, whose electronics design firm, Austin 
Ventures, had designed software for Motorola’s DVR box and 
Siemens’ cordless handsets. Lupher at first thought McHale just 
wanted a rifle for personal use. He used a Remington Model 700 
rifle and hooked it up to a laptop. It came together so well that 
Lupher jumped ship with eleven other employees to build “Preci-
sion Guided Firearms.”
Schauble, given his experience at Remington, was hired to be 
CEO. They soon began using custom rifles from Surgeon Rifles in 
Prague, Oklahoma, and adding on their shooting system. Before long 
they were selling shooting systems, and the TrackingPoint was used 
to kill a wildebeest in South Africa at 1,103 yards.
The system wasn’t perfect, but because the scope records video, 
customers were able to send in videos documenting their problems, 
which helped the company respond quickly. The main complaint was 
that some of the guns weren’t accurate in extreme hot and cold tem-
peratures, which the company addressed by tweaking the optical 
system.
Lupher told me at the SHOT Show in January of 2014 that “all 
new companies go through growing pains and a learning process,” 
but that the company, while hoping for that elusive big government 
contract, is “finding ways to get our products into the hands of more 
people.”
That is precisely what worries antigun activists. The idea that a 
psychopath with no shooting skills could become a lethal assassin 
using TrackingPoint technology is chilling—at least for people who 
don’t know much about guns and who buy into marketing hype.

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
52	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
Long-range shooting is difficult even with TrackingPoint technol-
ogy, because you need to establish a clear line of sight and the system 
can’t automatically account for bullet wind drift. You have to toggle 
in an estimated wind drift. You can use a handheld device to gauge 
wind speed and direction, but real-world factors are still hard to 
overcome.
If, say, a rifle is chambered in .338 Lapua Magnum—some Track-
ingPoint rifles come in this caliber because it is a long-range caliber 
popular with Special Forces snipers—and is shooting a heavy and 
stable 250-grain MatchKing bullet, well, that bullet will still drift 12.2 
inches at 500 yards from a light 10 mph crosswind and 57.1 inches 
at 1,000 yards from that same wind. You can use a toggle button to 
input wind speed into the scope, but winds are rarely consistent. 
Ridges, flats, and other terrain that hunters contend with when shoot-
ing at game over long distances have variable air currents and mois-
ture contents that will push a flying bullet like turbulence pushes an 
airplane. In a military context, in urban fighting, there would be 
crosswinds from side streets, thermals rising from heating asphalt, 
and many other factors to challenge the best marksman.
At long range, any shooter would likely have only short windows 
of opportunity at a moving target. This makes it hard to “tag” a tar-
get and then make the shot. Also, the scope uses a laser rangefinder 
that needs a reflective target in order to achieve a reliable reading at 
long range. This is never a given. As a hunter I use laser rangefinders 
constantly. Even the best rangefinders need ideal conditions to work 
at ultra long range and often fail at moderate ranges. The Tracking-
Point scope also uses an optical system with a digital zoom that can 
be hard to see in daylight and that gets even harder to see at long 
range.
For these reasons and others, while TrackingPoint’s sophisticated 
system is a tremendous technological advance, it is not a clear and 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Rifle Grows a Brain	
53 
present danger to the public. An aspiring murderer would need about 
$25,000 to buy such a gun and then would need stable conditions, a 
unique opportunity, and a lot of expertise to reliably put rounds on 
a man-sized target at extreme long range.
            
The Remington 2020 costs $5,000. That’s a lot less than the 
TrackingPoint’s price tag of $22,500 to $27,500, but it’s more than 
a week in Saint Thomas. TrackingPoint introduced new price points 
at the 2014 SHOT Show, but the system is still very high-end. Obvi-
ously, average hunters and shooters won’t buy many of these advanced 
rifle systems until they become more affordable, but as with most 
technological advances, that seems inevitable. Does that mean we 
ought to ban it? A lot of engineers, gun writers, and self-described 
gun nuts have been telling me the TrackingPoint is just one big step 
into an entirely new breakthrough—taking firearms technology into 
the digital age. The guns of the future are going to be lighter, more 
accurate, and ergonomic mechanical wonders. There is no reason to 
stop this progress, which will ultimately make firearms not only more 
effective but safer, as we’ll see later.
At the Side Street tavern in Mohawk, I attend the late-afternoon 
happy hour, after Remington’s first shift has left the factory. I order 
a beer from the twenty-one they have on tap and notice that the man 
on my right is wearing a t-shirt beneath an open jacket that says, 
“Cuomo Made Me a Criminal.”
I ask, “How’d our governor make you a criminal?”
He takes a sip from a long-necked bottle of Bud and looks me 
over. After a long pause, he replies with a megaphone voice broadcast 
to attract an audience: “The Second Amendment enshrines my God-
given right to tote my Remington.” He pulls back his jacket. On his 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
54	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
right hip around the side of a bulging stomach is a Model 1911 pistol. 
He says, “The state makes me get a concealed-carry permit to utilize 
a basic human right that’s protected from government infringement 
by the Second Amendment. So I get their damn permission. I apply 
and get my permit,” he growls as he turns to face me. “Took them a 
year to approve me even though I’ve never had more than a speeding 
ticket. They fingerprinted me and made me pay to use my rights. But 
okay, so I comply. Now Cuomo tells me I can only put seven bullets 
in this gun.” He taps the pistol with his right hand as he holds his beer 
with his left. Men and women all around him are holding beers and 
smiling, enjoying the show. “If I load eight rounds of .45, I’m a crim-
inal. That’s how our governor made me a criminal.”
I ask if he made the gun.
“No,” he says, “but a friend made me this beauty.”
“I was just in the factory and saw Bushmasters being made. Must 
be strange making semiautomatic guns you can’t legally buy in this 
state.”
A man beside him who has a gray beard and deep lines beneath 
brown eyes says, “Pisses us off. Remington has been making semi-
autos for more than a century. Now they go and ban the most popu-
lar rifle type being sold today and they want us just to obey and pay 
taxes?”
Others weigh in and want to know who I am and where I come 
from, but I ignore the questions. Instead, I ask a group of guys at the 
bar, “What about micro-stamping? You think you should have to do 
that?”
“Those people running Albany are crazy,” says the bartender as 
she puts a beer on the bar and scurries off.
“It would drive Remington from New York once and for all,” says 
the man with the “Cuomo Made Me a Criminal” t-shirt.
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Rifle Grows a Brain	
55 
Micro-stamping is a patented process that uses a micro-laser to 
engrave a firearm’s make, model, and serial number on the tip of the 
gun’s firing pin so that, in theory, it will imprint the information on a 
cartridge’s primer. With a semiautomatic firearm, this info would theo-
retically be discharged on the cartridge case and maybe left at a crime 
scene. Sounds ingenious, but the trouble is it doesn’t work in real-world 
manufacturing. Studies have found it’s unreliable in the best conditions. 
A study done by the National Academy of Science determined that “[f]
urther studies are needed on the durability of micro-stamping marks 
under various firing conditions and their susceptibility to tampering, as 
well as on the their cost impact for manufacturers and consumers.”9 A 
study done by the University of California at Davis said, “At the current 
time it is not recommended that a mandate for implementation of this 
technology be made. Further testing, analysis and evaluation is 
required.”10 The thing is, even if it works, it’s expensive, and it can be 
removed with one swipe of a file. Criminals can be stupid, but this is a 
no-brainer. Nevertheless, some New York state legislators try every year 
to make micro-stamping mandatory for New York’s gun manufacturers.
I ask about a shooting that took place just around the corner, at 
a barbershop, in March 2013. The gunman killed four people and 
wounded two others, including a man retired from Remington Arms. 
John Seymour, a barber who was shot twice by sixty-four-year-old 
Kurt Myers of Mohawk, was quoted saying from his hospital bed, 
“There’s nothing wrong with guns. This is an unfortunate situation 
that happened in a small town where they happen to make a lot of 
guns. It gives people the wrong idea that guns are bad.”11
“Crazy stuff can happen anywhere, even here in small-town 
America. People also drive drunk and smoke crack while pregnant 
and who the hell knows what else,” says the man with the “Cuomo 
Made Me a Criminal” t-shirt.

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
56	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
Myers, who was broke and had maxed out his credit cards, had 
snapped. He used a shotgun to kill two customers at the barbershop. 
He then drove about a mile to Gaffey’s Fast Lube in Herkimer and 
killed two more men. Myers then ran into an abandoned bar in Her-
kimer. Police killed him there in a shootout the next morning. The 
whole bloody thing rocked this area, a county that didn’t have a 
single murder between 2001 and 2011.12
“Are you a reporter or something?” asks an older gentleman.
“Yeah, I’m here to report the truth about guns in America.”
He rolls his eyes and says, “Reporters don’t tell the truth about 
guns.”
The evening wears on and the beers keep coming. Later another 
Remington employee tells me if he were there at Newtown, armed as 
he likes to be, “that Lanza kid wouldn’t have had a chance.”
Others condemn the murderer’s late mother: “What kind of a 
mother gives a sick kid like Adam Lanza the combination to a gun 
safe?”
They’d like to know why the actions of such a clueless mother and 
her troubled son, a twenty-year-old diagnosed with Asperger’s syn-
drome who kept a spreadsheet in his bedroom rating mass murders, 
should be used as an excuse to take away a constitutional right. And 
why should the actions of a psychopath be allowed to imperil Amer-
ica’s oldest gun factory?
“Lanza’s mother promised to buy him a CZ 83 semiautomatic 
pistol for Christmas,” I add.
“At least it wasn’t a Remington,” one says.
The man with the “Cuomo Made Me a Criminal” t-shirt says, 
“Yeah, I heard that. She really had no clue what she was doing. If 
government wants to do some good, why don’t they work with the 
NRA and teach gun-safety courses. That way maybe she’d have met 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Rifle Grows a Brain	
57 
people who would’ve taught her how to treat guns. What she did was 
like giving an alcoholic the keys to a car.”
            
In the end, the Remington Outdoor Company finally decided that 
its new expansion wouldn’t take place on its historic ground in Ilion, 
New York. Instead, the company bought the old Chrysler building 
in Huntsville, Alabama, where the company expected to create more 
than two thousand new jobs within a decade. CEO George Kollitides 
said, “Remington was careful about exploring all the options when 
considering what could be their home for our next 200 years.” Then, 
in May 2014, Senator Schumer lost his “assault weapons” jobs. ROC 
announced it would be moving its Bushmaster rifle and Remington 
Model 1911 pistol production lines from its nearly two-hundred-year-
old plant in Ilion to its new facility in much more gun-rights-friendly 
Huntsville. The future of the gun looks brighter in Alabama than it 
does in New York.

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
59
C H A P T E R  T H R E E
Technology  
Perfects the Pistol
The pistol took a giant leap into the future with the 
Glock 17. Polymer-framed pistols can now fit anyone’s 
hands—an NFL player and a ballerina can often use 
the same pistol by just changing grips.
—Mark A. Keefe IV, editor of American Rifleman
T
he know-it-all voice from my GPS declares I’ve arrived at Beretta’s 
factory in Accokeek, Maryland. I can’t see how. I’m in a little park-
ing lot with a single-chair barbershop on my right. On my left is a 
six-lane thoroughfare clogged with commuters on their way to Wash-
ington, DC.
As I dig for a paper map, a barber steps out of the little shop and 
asks, “You lookin’ for Beretta?”

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
60	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
I nod, and he points with his scissors down what looks like a 
driveway, but a short minute later that tiny road takes me behind a 
grove of leafless oaks to a small reception area at the front of a mod-
ern gun factory. This facility employs more than three hundred people. 
They come in on three shifts to make semiautomatic handguns, 
machine guns, and shotguns. Just another minute passes before I’m 
in this bustling factory trying to hear Richard Grimes, Beretta’s direc-
tor of manufacturing operations, raise his voice over the steady hum 
of CNC (computer numerical controlled) machines: “We have three 
shifts working around the clock. The machines never stop making 
guns. Nevertheless we’re having trouble keeping up with orders.”
Beretta’s factory is in suburban Maryland because of its contracts 
with the Pentagon. Beretta’s Maryland factory started making M9 
pistols for the military in 1987. In 2012 Beretta announced the U.S. 
Army awarded it another contract for up to one hundred thousand 
M9s. As of September 2012, more than six hundred thousand Beretta 
9mm pistols had been delivered to the U.S. military since the late 
1980s.1
Like many U.S. gun makers, Beretta’s factory in Maryland makes 
guns for law-enforcement, the U.S. military, and civilians from the 
same CNC machines. Though the products Beretta makes are not 
politically palatable to the media elite, their guns are iconic to millions 
of Americans. Beretta shotguns are works of art that might be an over/
under with a grainy walnut stock, blued metal, and engravings of a 
bird dog and maybe a pheasant on its receiver. Or it might be a semi-
automatic Benelli (a Beretta-owned company that also manufactures 
in Maryland) with a carbon-fiber stock and inertia-driven action. In 
either case, the Beretta man stands with his back straight and the 
shotgun in the crook of his arm. He is wearing a shooting vest and 
shooting glasses. He has class. He is how James Bond would look if 
he went skeet shooting. He’s sophisticated, but hardly a snob. He has 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Technology Perfects the Pistol 	
61 
what the Spanish call duende, a characteristic James Michener said 
is almost indefinable, as it means to have taste, refinement, beauty, 
perfection, and elegance all in just the right proportion and with no 
showiness at all.2 He is what the Japanese mean when they use the 
word shibui, which is something a samurai tried to embody but only 
could manage in fleeting moments when life and art met before again 
separating with a bad gesture or misstep.
Naturally, the Beretta man isn’t any more real than James Bond. 
But what archetype is? He’s an American icon men want to be. He’s 
an ideal never reached, but, if you do everything right, you might be 
him for just a manly moment when you shoot a perfect round and 
thereby master yourself. Beretta supplies guns and also fashion for 
the shooting man and woman.
Beretta was founded in 1526 and is still family owned. Matteo 
Recanatini, web and social media manager for Beretta in the United 
States, tells me, “The Beretta family approves every clothing design, 
every tweak to every firearm. They’re conscious that the Beretta image 
is iconic, an ideal. Everything has to perfectly fit that image and to 
function flawlessly.”
The Beretta man doesn’t see firearms in a negative way. To him 
they’re cool. To him they’re a blast to shoot. To him (and increasingly 
her), semiautomatic guns have been the ultimate home-defense guns 
since they were first designed, more than one hundred years ago. To 
the Beretta man, using a firearm properly is a sign of responsibility, 
of maturity.
During my visit to Beretta’s factory in Maryland, we stop by their 
underground gun range. They let me shoot a full-auto ARX-160, a 
gun Beretta makes for law enforcement and some militaries. This 
assault rifle is certainly a gun Ian Fleming would have had Bond use 
when the need arose (Bond carried a Beretta 418 semiautomatic 
pistol in the first five novels before he switched to a Walther PPK). 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
62	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
Shooting short bursts from it was pretty damn fun. That feeling, the 
feel of a gun smoothly operating as you handle it safely and well, is 
what drives gun sports; and it’s something that many antigun advo-
cates don’t understand.
Grown men shoot in Cowboy Action competitions and so own 
six-guns and lever-action rifles. Americans hunt for deer and water-
fowl and other animals and have specialized firearms for the job. Some 
men and women shoot AR-15s, semiautomatic shotguns, and pistols 
in 3-gun competitions. They see guns as a responsibility, as a means 
of self-defense, and as a tool—for competition and for hunting. More 
than one hundred million Americans now own guns, and surely most 
of them resent it when politicians treat them as criminals because they 
want to shoot recreationally and own guns to protect themselves and 
their families.
            
Richard Grimes, Beretta’s director of manufacturing operations, 
tells me he “can’t find enough qualified engineers. Our engineering 
shop has literally tripled in size in the last few decades and America 
is no longer graduating enough engineers. All the new products and 
tweaks to the process take a lot of know-how from a lot of skilled 
engineers.” Engineers have changed the way guns are manufactured. 
It used to be that every component of a gun was dependent on the 
skill of an individual worker. But now guns are made with simple 
interchangeable parts. Grimes lets me assemble a Beretta Px4 Storm 
Sub-Compact pistol. I don’t own a Px4 and had never broken one 
down before. Nevertheless, I have no trouble assembling a pistol in a 
few minutes.
If the antigun fearmongers had their way, this development might 
never have happened. In the 1980s Glock quickly redefined the pistol 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Technology Perfects the Pistol 	
63 
with its series of polymer-framed, short recoil operated, locked-breech 
semiautomatics. Despite initial worries that a “plastic gun” would be 
fragile and unreliable—and propaganda from antigun groups that 
Glocks would be invisible to metal detectors at airports—police 
departments swiftly discovered the superiority of the Glock to their 
age-old revolvers. By 2007, Glock commanded 65 percent of the 
market share of handguns for U.S. law-enforcement agencies.3
The truth is Glock pistols, and all their competitors, still contain 
many vital components made of metal (such as the slide, barrel, and 
ammunition). They can be detected by conventional screening tech-
nologies, but the fear did lead to legislation (The Terrorist Firearms 
Detection Act), and in 1988 Congress banned the manufacture, 
import, or sale of any firearm with less than 3.2 oz of metal in it. In 
December 2013 Congress extended the ban for another ten years. 
The National Shooting Sports Foundation (NSSF), the trade associa-
tion representing firearms manufacturers, backed the extension.
Glock’s founder, engineer Gaston Glock, had no experience with 
firearm design or manufacture at the time his first pistol, the Glock 
17, was being prototyped (before that he’d been making curtain 
rings). Glock did, however, have extensive experience in advanced 
synthetic polymers.4 Glock also introduced ferritic nitrocarburizing 
into the firearms industry as an anticorrosion surface treatment for 
metal gun parts.
Glock got his start by competing for a military contract. In 1980, 
the Austrian military announced it was seeking a new, modern duty 
pistol to replace its World War II–era Walther P38.5 The Austrian 
Ministry of Defence formulated a list of criteria for the new-genera-
tion service pistol. But Gaston Glock wanted to go beyond the basics. 
He assembled a team of handgun experts from military, police, and 
civilian sport shooting circles to define the most desirable character-
istics of a combat pistol. Several samples of the prototype Glock 17 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
64	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
(so named because it was based on the seventeenth set of technical 
drawings) were submitted for trials in early 1982.
The Glock was revolutionary because its design and engineering 
improved the pistol’s ease of maintenance and manufacture. Its exten-
sive use of polymer made it lighter, and unlike most pistols then avail-
able, you didn’t need a gunsmithing course to take one apart. It didn’t 
have all the pins, springs, and lathed bits of steel many pistols were 
then using. The Glock’s simple design made it easy to clean and main-
tain, and far from being less durable or reliable, it was more so.
The Glock 17 was adopted into service with the Austrian military 
and police forces in 1982 as the P80 (Pistole 80), with an initial order 
for twenty-five thousand guns.
By 2002 some two million Glocks had been sold in more than 
forty-five countries. In 2007 Glock passed the five million milestone.6 
Meanwhile, the Glock revolution influenced the designs and materials 
used by other pistol makers. Since the Glock takeover began in the 
1980s, firearms have gotten both simpler and more sophisticated. The 
pistol Gaston Glock submitted to the Austrian military for testing 
weighed just twenty-three ounces, while the next lightest gun in the 
competition was a model from Heckler & Koch that weighed thirty-
three ounces. The Glock 17 had only thirty-four components. The 
other pistols in consideration were much more complex—a Sig Sauer 
in the running had fifty-three parts; a Heckler & Koch had seventy-
seven parts; a Beretta had seventy parts.7
The advances Gaston Glock made have continued. And Beretta is 
as much a beneficiary of these advances as any gun manufacturer.
When I interviewed Matteo Recanatini in December 2012, I asked 
him if labor costs or politics might prompt Beretta to move its facto-
ries to a more gun-friendly state. He told me, “Beretta is about five 
hundred years old and still strong because they invest in people. We 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Technology Perfects the Pistol 	
65 
have a skilled workforce here in this ‘blue’ state so we’re staying and 
investing in the future.”
That optimism was about to change.
            
The day after I left Beretta’s factory in Maryland, Adam Lanza, a 
twenty-year-old resident of Newtown, Connecticut, killed his mother 
before shooting his way into Sandy Hook Elementary. His evil actions 
ignited a national debate that would change the fortunes of many of 
America’s gun makers and gun owners.
On February 9, 2013, a few months after the Newtown murders, 
Sarah Merkle, who was then a fifteen-year-old Maryland resident, 
was finishing her homework just before midnight. But something else 
was keeping her up too. She was upset that state legislators were 
considering a gun-control bill that might ban her Bushmaster AR-15. 
She knew there was a public hearing on the bill in Annapolis the next 
day. She went online and checked to see if there was an age limit for 
speakers. She didn’t see one. Any person who signed up could get 
three minutes at the podium.
She thought about this. She’d been shooting since she was eight 
years old. She started with a shotgun. At eleven years old, she gradu-
ated to an AR-15. To do that she had to prove to her dad she could 
hold it. She’d been competing with the rifle ever since. Because of its 
light recoil, she thought of it as a “girl-friendly gun” and was rated 
“expert” with it. As a member of the Maryland Rifle Team, her next 
goal was to reach the “master” level, but this legislation might stop 
her from continuing to progress as a marksman and competitor.
It might also hurt her in other ways. She knew there were shoot-
ing scholarships at some colleges. The state might ban her dream of 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
66	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
competing in shooting sports and trying for a rifle team scholarship. 
She was so wound up, she wrote a speech.
She finished around 2:00 a.m. and fell asleep. A few hours later, 
her alarm woke her for school. During breakfast she told her dad, 
Mike, she wanted to speak at the public hearing. She asked, “It’s 
today. Can we go? I’ve written a speech and everything.”
Her father knew better than to doubt her. When she was thirteen 
years old, he put her name forward as a good fit to be the secretary 
of the Maryland Rifle Club, a five-hundred-plus-member club that 
has one-hundred- and two-hundred-yard rifle ranges, handgun ranges, 
and more. It’s one of those stalwart clubs that quietly trains people to 
be safe and responsible gun owners. The Maryland Rifle Club was 
founded in 1933. The official mission of the club is to encourage 
“organized rifle and pistol shooting among members of our commu-
nity, with a view toward a better knowledge of the safe handling and 
proper care of firearms, as well as improved marksmanship.” The 
club also decided its mantra should be to develop “honesty, good fel-
lowship, self-discipline, team play and self-reliance which are the 
essentials of good sportsmanship, and the foundation of true patrio-
tism.”
At first the club leadership was skeptical about letting a thirteen-
year-old be its secretary. But those who knew Sarah said they were 
sure she could handle the responsibility.
“I’m like really organized,” says Sarah. “I keep everything sorted 
in separate folders on my computer. It’s just easier when you know 
where everything is.”
She convinced them, and they changed the club’s bylaws to allow 
a person her age to fill the post. She’s been reelected since. No one 
doubts her now. She keeps the minutes at the club’s meetings, responds 
to emails, and handles club applications, among other duties. “I love 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Technology Perfects the Pistol 	
67 
doing it,” she says, “but maybe I’ll be too busy to keep it up later in 
high school or when I go to college or something. We’ll see.”
Bill Perry, the club president, knew Sarah could handle the job. 
Perry says, “A number of years ago, I think when she was eleven, I 
heard this girl screaming during a competition, ‘Close the range. Close 
the range.’ We shut down the range and then I see this little blonde 
girl running out onto the two-hundred-yard range. She stops next to 
one of the targets and picks up this little box turtle and moves it off 
the field. She saw the little thing and couldn’t bear the thought that 
it might get shot. She’s quite the girl.”
Yeah, quite the girl. The whole country was about to find that 
out. Her father agreed to take her to the hearing. He would have to 
take the day off work. Her mother, Karen, was coming too. They 
decided to leave right away.
They arrived at 7:30 a.m. and had to wait until 8:00 a.m. for the 
doors to open. They were still waiting at 9:00 a.m. when the sign-up 
sheet to speak was brought out. “I was the second person in line, and 
by the time I left there was already quite a crowd behind me,” says 
Sarah. “We had never been there before so we weren’t sure how much 
time we really had, but by then we were all hungry so we headed 
down the street to find something to eat.”
When they got back, a pro-gun rally at Lawyer’s Mall was begin-
ning to form around 11:00 a.m. They found out that the hearing in 
the Miller Senate House wouldn’t begin until 1 p.m., so they decided 
to attend the rally.
Sarah began talking to people, and before she knew it she was 
being introduced to Republican Maryland state delegate Kathy Sze-
liga. “Szeliga liked what I had to say, so she put me up on the podium 
at the rally in front of what I was told to be a crowd of four thousand 
people,” says Sarah.

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
68	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
Sarah spoke for a minute and finished by saying, “Martin 
O’Malley, you can’t take my guns, you can’t take my rights.”
She left to cheers and weaved through the crowd to her parents. 
She still had to wait all afternoon and into the evening before she 
would get her three minutes at the podium in the Maryland State 
House, the oldest state capitol in continuous legislative use. It’s also 
the only state house that served as the U.S. capitol. The Continental 
Congress met in the Old Senate Chamber from November 26, 1783, 
to August 13, 1784. Today, the Maryland State House is where the 
Maryland General Assembly convenes for three months each year. On 
February 6, 2013, Maryland’s lawmakers had debated all afternoon—
in the very place George Washington resigned his commission as 
commander of the Continental Army—whether to deny Marylanders 
their Second Amendment rights.
Sarah told me, “You only get three minutes so you have to stay on 
message and be careful with your words. If you get off topic at all you 
won’t have a chance to say what you came to say. So I made sure I 
could say what had to be said in three minutes.”
Of course, she didn’t know her speech would go viral, getting more 
than three million views on YouTube after the Maryland Minutemen 
posted it, in March 2013. She simply wanted to use her First Amend-
ment rights to defend her Second Amendment rights.
The room hushed as she read her speech: “I’m fifteen years old 
and I’ve been shooting for almost eight years. I’ve also been a part of 
the Maryland Rifle Club and Maryland State Rifle Team since I was 
eleven. Because of this, I have become eligible for various shooting 
scholarships around the country to a wide array of even the most 
prestigious colleges that have shooting teams. Achieving stricter gun-
control laws would obliterate any opportunity I could’ve had to attend 
a decent college on a shooting scholarship. Ever since I first learned 
how to shoot, the issue with gun violence around the nation became 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Technology Perfects the Pistol 	
69 
clear; guns are not the problem, people are. Purging our society of 
violence and murder cannot be done through gun-control legislation. 
By signing this legislation you are not signing away gun violence but 
instead confiscating American citizens of our constitutional rights.”
She continued: “You are not eliminating guns from society but 
eliminating our ability to protect our lives, liberty and pursuits of 
happiness. Chicago, Illinois, has had some of the strictest gun-control 
laws in America enacted for the past few years and it is currently more 
than twice as likely for you to be killed in Chicago as in the Afghani 
War. For the past eleven years and four months in the Afghani War, 
2,166 people have been killed. Now, in only eight years in Chicago, 
4,265 people have been killed and 3,371 of them were from being 
shot. Is that really something we want to model our state laws after?”
She finished her three-minute speech by saying, “To abolish or 
severely limit the right of the Maryland residents as a whole to bear 
arms, which is the intent of the proposed legislation, is to essentially 
defeat the purpose of our own U.S. Constitution. The entire founda-
tion of the United States was formed on the principle that the govern-
ment, our government, is a government of the people, for the people, 
by the people, and taking away the people’s right to bear arms is 
taking away the people’s power in the government. The Second 
Amendment, which grants citizens the right to secure their natural 
rights, is the backbone of our democratic American society.”
She was too focused on her speech to remember if the legislators 
were sneering or simply baffled by the politically incorrect truth she 
was dishing out. Outside the legislature, her remarks resonated 
nationally. Millions watched her speech on YouTube, and she soon 
found herself on Fox & Friends being interviewed by Gretchen Carl-
son and on Sean Hannity’s show on Fox News.
Nevertheless, on April 3 the Firearm Safety Act of 2013 (Senate 
Bill 281) received final approval in the House of Delegates by a 78 to 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
70	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
61 vote. On the House floor, the bill was made even worse as delegates 
stripped out a committee amendment that would have exempted 
active-duty military and veterans under age twenty-one from the 
handgun licensing and training requirements. The Maryland Senate 
passed the bill and Democrat governor Martin O’Malley signed the 
legislation. O’Malley said in a statement that the bill strikes “a balance 
between protecting the safety of law enforcement and our children, 
and respecting the traditions of hunters and law-abiding citizens to 
purchase handguns for self-protection.” But Republican Maryland 
Senate minority leader E. J. Pipkin countered, “The fact is the Firearm 
Safety Act of 2013 provides no safety. It says, if you own guns, we’re 
coming for you. That’s the message.”
What the legislation certainly does is ban the sale of forty-five 
types of semiautomatic rifles (what the media call “assault weapons”), 
require citizens who follow the law to be fingerprinted and more 
before they can purchase a handgun, limit magazine capacity to ten 
rounds, require gun owners to report lost or stolen firearms to police, 
and empower state police to audit gun dealers.
As this book was going to press, opponents of the bill had joined 
with the NRA to mount a legal challenge to the law’s constitutional-
ity.
            
To find out if this Maryland law is really helping law enforcement, 
as Governor O’Malley claims, I spent a day with a Maryland sheriff 
who had also testified against the bill that day in Annapolis. I thought 
he’d give a cop’s perspective. I didn’t realize Sheriff Mike Lewis of 
Wicomico County would show me the moving line between two gun 
cultures, between two viewpoints now shaping America’s future of 
the gun.
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Technology Perfects the Pistol 	
71 
In November 2013 I drove south of Washington, DC, to Salisbury, 
Maryland, to meet Sheriff Lewis. Lewis retired as a sergeant after 
twenty-two years with the Maryland State Police in July 2006, was 
elected sheriff that November, and along with running the sheriff’s 
department is a certified instructor with the Maryland Police Training 
Commission. After a knuckle-crunching handshake, he leads me to 
his office. When we sit down, the first thing I ask is, “What do you 
carry?”
He stands right back up and pulls a Kimber Model 1911 semiau-
tomatic pistol from his holster, clears the firearm, and hands it to me. 
I like the 1911’s bright stainless steel and say how much I admire his 
sheriff’s badge printed on the gun’s cherry-wood grips. He smiles and 
takes a set of white ivory grips from his desk and says he puts these 
on for special occasions. As for stopping power, it holds eight rounds 
of .45 ACP. He once had to use that stopping power to kill a bad 
guy—a drug dealer who tried to run him down with his car.
Though Sheriff Lewis is now busy running his sheriff department, 
which has eighty deputies, he still likes to do a few traffic stops every 
morning. He says this keeps him grounded. It reminds him what’s 
going on out there.
As we walk out to his black SUV to cruise around the county, he 
shifts the topic and tells me, “As gun sales have been surging in the 
past few years, the murder rate has been falling. The number of offi-
cers killed in the line of duty is way down from what it was in the 
1970s and before.” He adds, “More good guys with guns helps. We 
can’t be everywhere all the time. That’s why I feel so strongly that our 
governor’s new gun-control law will only impede the good guys from 
defending themselves.”
As he drives we talk about the guns he finds on the bad guys and 
where they come from. He says, “We catch criminals with semiauto-
matic handguns of every make and model. They steal them, buy them 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
72	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
on a black market, or have some guy with a clean record buy them 
from a store. There are too many guns out there to prevent felons 
from getting handguns. The real solution to gun crime is to let citizens 
who pass background checks carry concealed if they want to.”
The black market in illegal gun sales is hard to quantify because 
it’s illegal; however, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and 
Explosives (ATF) estimates there were 190,342 guns lost or stolen in 
the United States in 2012. Most of these guns (177,898) were lost or 
stolen from private residences and vehicles, but 5,762 firearms were 
reported as being stolen from Federal Firearms Licensed (FFL) deal-
ers—gun stores, pawn shops, and so on. The ATF says the number of 
guns stolen from private hands is a guesstimate based on different 
sources of data. An ATF report explains, “This is raw data that has 
not been substantively reviewed by the FBI, has not been screened for 
duplicates or other data entry issues, and does not account for firearms 
that were subsequently found or recovered.”8 The ATF does, however, 
say the number of guns stolen from FFLs is a good statistic because 
in 1994 Congress required FFLs to report the theft or loss of any 
firearm from their inventories to both the ATF and to local police 
within 48 hours of discovery. These statistics on stolen guns from 
2012 are not an anomaly. Each year the ATF estimates that about 
190,000 guns are lost or stolen in the U.S.
The number of guns stolen from Federal Firearms Licensed dealers, 
however, has another caveat. Gun dealers reported 5,762 guns as being 
stolen in 2012, but FFLs also reported 10,915 firearms as “lost” from 
their stores, ranges, and backrooms. Now 10,915 guns aren’t just lost 
in floods or burned in fires. When I asked about this large number of 
lost guns, ATF agent Tim Graten, the bureau’s acting deputy chief of 
public affairs, said, “I really don’t have a good explanation. If we 
suspect the guns are being sold illegally we’ll start an investigation. 
There are instances where we’ve revoked Federal Firearms Licenses. 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Technology Perfects the Pistol 	
73 
Part of that figure is likely from bad record keeping—our agents work 
with people who have FFLs to get their records in compliance.”
            
As I ride along with Lewis, we see two of his deputies who have 
pulled over a van. There is a woman in handcuffs and a man sitting 
on the curb with his head in his hands. The van has New Jersey license 
plates.
Lewis pulls over and steps out. “What’s up?” he asks a deputy 
wearing rubber gloves.
The van had been speeding, but when they pulled the van over 
they discovered the woman was wanted on an assault charge in New-
ark (the man was clean). “They must want her bad,” says Lewis as 
he gets back into the SUV, “because they’re gonna extradite her.”
Lewis takes us back on the road. We go out of town, and as we 
pass a little house on a quiet country road, he slows down and says, 
“Good to see he patched up the bullet holes.”
“Bullet holes?”
Lewis explains that a felon kept driving up to this house owned 
by one of his deputies and shooting holes in it with a .30-caliber rifle. 
“I knew we’d get that guy in a routine traffic stop,” says Lewis. “I 
told all my deputies to be on the lookout for .30 caliber casings when-
ever they stopped a suspicious vehicle. The guy was using an old 
military gun—an M1 Garand. It was very unusual. You never see 
M1s used in drive-bys. That’s how we got him, too.”
We keep cruising in his black SUV with those cop-standard tinted 
windows. He says crisply as he passes a sedan and slows to look 
closely at its driver, “In my twenty-two years as a Maryland state 
trooper and my seven years here as sheriff, I’ve never busted a bad 
guy with a legal gun. The citizens who get concealed-carry permits 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
74	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
don’t commit crimes with their guns. Each person I’ve arrested who 
was later convicted always had their guns illegally.”
Studies back Lewis’s opinion. A study done by Mark Gius, a pro-
fessor in the Department of Economics at Quinnipiac University, using 
concealed-carry-permit and crime data from 1980 to 2009, deter-
mined that “limiting the ability to carry concealed weapons may cause 
murder rates to increase.”9 In his 1998 book, More Guns, Less Crime, 
economics researcher John Lott studied FBI crime statistics from 1977 
to 1993 and found that the passage of concealed-carry laws resulted 
in a decrease in the rates of murder, rape, and aggravated assault, by 
8.5, 5, and 7 percent, respectively. The National Research Council, 
the working arm of the National Academy of Sciences, claimed it 
found “no credible evidence” either supporting or disproving Lott’s 
thesis.10 However, James Q. Wilson wrote a dissenting opinion for the 
National Research Council arguing that all of the committee’s esti-
mates confirmed Lott’s finding that right-to-carry laws decreased the 
murder rate.11
Lott’s findings that more guns equal less crime started a firestorm 
of research. Over and over again, Lott’s research has stood up to 
analysis from his peers. After losing the empirical debate, the Violence 
Policy Center, an antigun group, tried to shift the debate by using 
publicly available media reports from May 2007 through the end of 
2009 to look at crimes committed by concealed-carry permit holders 
in the United States. They determined that people with concealed-
carry permits killed at least 117 people, including 9 law enforcement 
officers during that time period. This number includes people who 
lawfully killed someone in self-defense and people whose cases were 
pending, but excludes cases where individuals had been acquitted. 
That’s a sensational number. The Violence Policy Center used this 
figure to argue that people shouldn’t be allowed to carry a concealed 
firearm. To understand where this ideological group is coming from, 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Technology Perfects the Pistol 	
75 
you should know they maintain a “Concealed Carry Killers” data-
base. But the thing is, there were about twenty-five thousand murders 
with guns during that period,12 meaning that even if their statistic is 
accurate, concealed-carry holders committed less than 0.01 percent 
of the killings done with firearms. Another very controversial number 
is how often gun owners use firearms to stop a crime from taking 
place. Politics makes such an analysis controversial, but it’s also a 
very difficult number to measure. According to Bureau of Justice 
Statistics (BJS) and National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) 
data from 1987 to 1992, about twenty thousand people each year 
used guns to protect property. Another source of information on the 
use of firearms for self-defense is the National Self-Defense Survey. 
This survey was done in 1993 by criminology professor Gary Kleck 
of Florida State University. Citing responses from 4,978 households, 
Kleck estimated that handguns had been used 2.1 million times a year 
for self-defense, and that all types of guns had been used approxi-
mately 2.5 million times a year to scare off bad guys. These and other 
figures vary by such an extravagant margin because law-enforcement 
agencies typically don’t collect or report how many crimes were 
thwarted by gun owners. People also often don’t report crimes that 
were avoided. It’s difficult even to define what constitutes a crime that 
has been stopped or avoided.
Sheriff Lewis says, “I can only cite my decades of experience when 
I say it helps law enforcement when people can utilize their Second 
Amendment rights.”
Though the statistics are problematic, Lewis’s experience with 
guns on the streets runs deep. He started and ran a drug-interdic-
tion unit for the Maryland State Police. From Baltimore on down 
throughout the state, he has busted a lot of bad guys. He is a bull-
necked, megaphone-voiced, highly caffeinated cop who grew up in 
Salisbury, on the Eastern Shore, and saw his friends become stoners 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
76	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
and meth heads. He lost good friends to drugs. His response was 
to buzz-cut his hair and join the state troopers when he was nine-
teen. He became a star police officer, a hard charger who made one 
of the nation’s largest seizures of crack cocaine out on Maryland’s 
notorious Route 13. He became a national expert on hidden com-
partments in autos. Later, back at his sheriff’s office, he showed me 
a car with a hidden compartment he’d just seized. To open the 
compartment, you had to have the cruise control on and the ciga-
rette lighter pushed in. Only then would the compartment rigged 
under the auto open.
He explains, “Dominicans are masters at making these. When I 
pulled this car over, I could tell they were lying. So I looked under the 
car and saw fresh paint.” Lewis says he can tell if a man’s lying by 
watching the pulsing of the carotid artery in someone’s neck. He’s not 
just a human drug dog; he’s also a walking polygraph machine. He 
pulled them out of the car and soon found drugs and cash.
I ask him, “Why do the two polarized sides of the American gun 
debate see guns so differently?” He mulls over the question and finally 
says that he doesn’t know how to explain it. But then he adds: “What 
I can do is show you something that’ll make the whole national battle 
over guns shockingly clear.”
He drives into Salisbury. There is this little Mayberry downtown. 
There are small shops with plate-glass front windows dressed up for 
window shoppers a month before Christmas. There are quiet walk-
ways that would make a 1950s American feel at home. There are 
outdoor café tables under small trees planted in red brick boxes. For 
a moment I see Sheriff Lewis as Sheriff Andy Taylor, a cop with noth-
ing more serious to worry about than Barney’s antics and the town 
drunk who locks himself up after he drinks too much moonshine. 
Salisbury is a small town. In 2012 it had a population of 31,243 
people, according to the U.S. Census Bureau.
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Technology Perfects the Pistol 	
77 
Sheriff Lewis turns a corner and drives a few blocks and we’re in 
another time and place. There are young men on street corners outside 
run-down housing built sometime early in the last century. The teens and 
young men on the street corners are wearing puffy winter coats, baggy 
jeans drooping off their rears, hoodies, and expensive high-topped sneak-
ers. They’re looking at us with tense expressions. Some move quickly off 
the street. I see one speaking into a cell phone as he watches us.
“The whole street knows we’re here,” says Lewis as I feel like we 
somehow went straight from Mayberry to Yonkers. “They know 
what this car is.”
Sheriff Lewis stops and pushes the button to roll down the win-
dow. Two teens nervously walk away, and a third says, “What’s up, 
Sheriff?”
“Why aren’t you boys in school?”
“Got my GED,” says the boy as he looks at his bright-white 
sneakers.
“Stay out of trouble.”
Sheriff Lewis drives farther down the street. He tells me about the 
shootings he has responded to here. He stops at a little white saltbox-
style house and says, “I took a body out of there. He’d been shot in 
a local park and crawled here to his mother.” He talks about other 
shootings. He stops at a home on Charles Street and says there had 
been a drive-by shooting there the previous summer. A car pulled up 
at 1:40 a.m. and shot this guy as he sat on a porch step. “It was 
another gang-related killing,” says Lewis. “They found the victim 
face down, brain-dead.”
Between 2008 and 2012, an astounding 27.6 percent of Salisbury 
residents lived below the official poverty line, according to the U.S. 
Census Bureau.13 The statewide poverty rate in Maryland in 2012 
was 9.4 percent. In 2010 there were 7 murders, 22 rapes, and 575 
burglaries in the little town of Salisbury.14 Before I came to visit, 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
78	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
Sheriff Lewis sent me a YouTube link for a rap video called “Jungle,” 
a video made by a local gang called DDE. “Jungle” was uploaded to 
YouTube on October 11, 2013, and has since been taken down.15 It 
started a police investigation. It featured young men pointing hand-
guns at the camera and making hand motions as if they were firing 
pistols at the viewer. Some of the young men in the video sure don’t 
look twenty-one. “We hear you got that work, we kickin’ in the front 
door,” rapped one of DDE’s members with a pistol in his hands.
Lewis says all the guns used in the video are illegal. He shows me 
some of the places where the video was filmed. He explains that the 
only way to get their illegal guns would be to do blanket and very 
unconstitutional searches. But, he says, even that wouldn’t matter. 
They’d get guns again. They’d learn to hide them as prisoners hide 
shivs in the county jail.
He shows me another run-down house and tells me how an eleven-
year-old boy, Malik, saw his mother shot multiple times by an ex-
boyfriend from New Jersey who came down to murder her. “We 
caught the guy and he’s doing life,” says Lewis. “Now I’m the boy’s 
mentor. When I drove Malik to her funeral, he wanted to use my car’s 
police radio. I let him, not knowing what he wanted to say. So he gets 
on the radio and says, ‘I just want to thank all the cops who came to 
my house and saved my life. I want to thank you all for getting the 
guy who killed my mother.’ Deputies answered him with tears in their 
voices.”
We leave the rough side of town, and I think that’s it. I think he’s 
shown me what he wanted me to see. But I’ve only seen half of it.
He drives about two miles out of town—just one exit on Route 
13—and pulls into a driveway in the suburbs.
“This is my father’s house,” he says. “This is where I grew up.”
We walk into the backyard. His father has built a small Western 
town with a saloon, jailhouse, and everything right here in suburban 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Technology Perfects the Pistol 	
79 
Maryland. There’s a wooden boardwalk and old-fashioned “wanted” 
posters nailed to wood walls. His father is into cowboy-action shoot-
ing competitions. He has collected this stuff from all over Western 
America. The saloon is slathered in Old Western movie posters. There 
are pictures of John Wayne, Gary Cooper, and Roy Rogers. There’s 
a rack of lever-action rifles. There are brass .45 Colt casings and 
black-and-white pictures of Wild West outlaws. Every inch of the bar 
and the building’s walls are covered in pictures, holsters, and guns.
Mike Lewis’s father comes in and gives us a tour that leads back 
to the main house. In a safe he has more than one hundred single-
action Colt revolvers. Some are nineteenth-century relics; others are 
new and have never been fired. There are more paintings and West-
ern-themed art. One entire wall is a hand-painted mural to the Old 
West.
After a lot of small talk about guns and the Old West, Mike’s 
father picks up a single-action Colt .45, gets dead serious, and says, 
“No one is going to take my guns away.”
Sheriff Lewis says just as seriously, “I won’t let them, Dad.”
When we leave, Mike is quiet. He showed me what he didn’t have 
the words to explain. Right there, just two miles apart, are two very 
different gun cultures. Both are misunderstood and misrepresented 
by many in popular culture and politics.
This depresses Mike. He doesn’t like that society is losing touch 
with the good part of America’s gun culture. He loathes the ignorance 
that causes some to blame law-abiding gun owners for the actions of 
killers. “If we don’t try to separate the good from the bad, as I do as 
a cop,” Lewis says, “then we’ll only make problems worse. When I 
meet a person who wants all handguns banned, I ask them if they 
found themselves in a public place with a sociopath determined to kill 
as many people as possible, would they like the sociopath to be the 
only one who has a gun? Do they really believe that ‘gun-free zones’ 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
80	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
are smart policy?” According to a survey done by the National Shoot-
ing Sports Foundation, 14 percent of urban households have at least 
one handgun in them, 31 percent of homes in the suburbs have at least 
one handgun in them, and 27 percent of homes in small towns have 
at least one handgun in them.16 Most gun violence is committed with 
handguns—76.6 percent of murders with guns were committed with 
handguns between 2006 and 2011.17 Yet as you move from cities to 
the suburbs, the rate of handgun ownership doubles even though gun 
violence is primarily a problem of inner cities. Obviously a difference 
in gun cultures, which is effected by gun-control policy, is a factor.
The black community commits and suffers from an astonishingly 
large percentage of this violence. According to the Children’s Defense 
Fund, which certainly is not a pro-gun group, gun deaths among white 
children and teens decreased by 44 percent from 1979 to 2009, while 
deaths among black children and teens rose by 30 percent. Blacks 
made up about 15 percent of the youth population in 2009 in the 
United States but suffered from 45 percent of all child and teen gun-
related deaths. According to FBI statistics used in this report, black 
males aged fifteen to nineteen in 2009 were eight times as likely as 
their white peers, and two-and-a-half times as likely as Hispanics, to 
die from a bullet.18 These stark figures are often used by advocates of 
nationwide bans on handguns and popular rifles. But that is to miss 
the point that these statistics underline that gun violence is far worse 
where gun-control measures are the most restrictive.
The illegal-gun-ownership rate is impossible to estimate—owners 
of illegal guns aren’t likely to confess their felony to a pollster—but 
crime data and murder rates tell us illegal guns are common in inner 
cities. So what does this mean practically and culturally for the people 
living and working in these urban environments? It means that those 
with the illegal guns enforce a reign of terror, with respectable citizens, 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Technology Perfects the Pistol 	
81 
unable to defend themselves, often unwilling to cooperate with the 
police for fear of gang retaliation. And who, in such an environment, 
are young people going to look up to? Many will look up to the more 
powerful members in their communities, the bad guys with guns, 
because they have few or no examples of good guys who can stand 
up to them—thanks in part to restrictive gun-control laws that inhibit 
store owners and law-abiding citizens from protecting themselves.
Advocates for stricter gun-control laws, for federal bans on 
“assault weapons,” and for reductions in the number of concealed-
carry permits issued to private citizens ignore this reality.
The murder rate has actually fallen since the federal ban on assault 
weapons expired in 2004. Meanwhile, during the last few decades, 
the number of Americans with concealed-carry permits doubled, then 
tripled and quadruped, and is still rising. Many proponents of gun 
control act as if these facts don’t exist. Instead, they see that Adam 
Lanza used an AR-15 to murder twenty children in Newtown, but 
they don’t acknowledge that less than 3 percent of murders in the 
United States are committed with rifles of any type. Those killed by 
mass murderers represent less than 0.1 percent of all murders. Few 
know these facts, because the media don’t often report these figures.
Lewis says, “People need to realize that if we’re going to keep our 
good, old-fashioned American freedom we need to acknowledge what 
is good and what is bad with guns in our society.”
A short time later, Detroit’s police chief, James Craig, surprised a 
lot of people by saying if more citizens were armed, criminals would 
think twice about attacking them. While on The Paul W. Smith Show, 
Craig said, “There’s a number of CPL [concealed-pistol license] hold-
ers running around the city of Detroit. I think it acts as a deterrent. 
Good Americans with CPLs translates into crime reduction. I learned 
that real quick in the state of Maine.”

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
82	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
Craig repeated this message at a press conference. Craig spent 
twenty-eight years on the Los Angeles police force. He explained that 
he started to believe that legal gun owners can help reduce crime after 
he became the police chief in Portland, Maine, in 2009. “Coming from 
California, where it takes an act of Congress to get a concealed weap-
ons permit, I got to Maine, where they give out lots of CCWs [carry-
ing concealed-weapon permits], and I had a stack of CCW permits I 
was denying; that was my orientation. I changed my orientation real 
quick. Maine is one of the safest places in America. Clearly, suspects 
knew that good Americans were armed.”19
In 2013, a survey of police officers by the National Association of 
Chiefs of Police found that 86.8 percent of those surveyed think “any 
law-abiding citizen [should] be able to purchase a firearm for sport 
and self-defense.”20 A survey done by PoliceOne.com of fifteen thou-
sand law-enforcement professionals found that almost 90 percent of 
officers believe that casualties related to guns would decrease if armed 
citizens were present at the onset of an active-shooter incident. More 
than 80 percent of respondents support arming schoolteachers and 
administrators who willingly volunteer to train with firearms. Virtu-
ally all the survey’s respondents (95 percent) said a federal ban on the 
manufacture and sale of ammunition magazines that hold more than 
ten rounds wouldn’t reduce violent crime. 21
As I drive back out of Salisbury and across the state of Maryland 
to DC, I pass Beretta’s factories and everything comes full circle. After 
Maryland governor Martin O’Malley signed the legislature’s highly 
restrictive gun-control legislation, Beretta put out a press release say-
ing, “The question now facing the Beretta Holding companies in 
Maryland is this: What effect will the passage of this law—and the 
efforts of Maryland government officials to support its passage—have 
on our willingness to remain in this State?” Beretta then hinted at an 
answer to this question: “Prior to introduction of this legislation the 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Technology Perfects the Pistol 	
83 
three Beretta Holding companies located in Maryland were experienc-
ing growth in revenues and jobs and had begun expansion plans in 
factory and other operations. The idea now of investing additional 
funds in Maryland and thus rewarding a Government that has 
insulted our customers and our products is offensive to us so we will 
take steps to evaluate such investments in other States.”
In January 2014, Beretta gave a more conclusive answer. After 
thirty-five years in Accokeek, Maryland, Beretta announced it would 
open a $45 million dollar state-of-the-art manufacturing and research 
and development facility in Tennessee’s Gallatin Industrial Park. Jeff 
Reh, Beretta USA’s general counsel and vice–general manager, said, 
“I think they [Maryland’s governor and legislature] thought we were 
bluffing. But Berettas don’t bluff.”

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
PART II 
The Politician’s View  
of Your Future

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
87
C H A P T E R  F O U R
Embedded with  
the Gun Lobby
If you want to protect yourself, get a double-barrel shotgun. 
Have the shells for a twelve-gauge shotgun, and I promise 
you as I told my wife, we live in an area that’s wooded and 
somewhat secluded. I said, Jill if there’s ever a problem, just 
walk out on the balcony here, walk out, put that double-
barrel shotgun and fire two blasts outside the house.
—Vice President Biden1
Great advice, Joe. Not only would that be illegal, but then a 
woman would face an attacker with an empty shotgun. For 
tips on safe and responsible gun ownership, ask the NRA, 
not Joe Biden.
—The voice-over of an NRA ad
N
ot long after the shooting in Newtown, Connecticut, I stop by the 
NRA’s Capitol Hill offices to speak to Chris Cox, executive direc-
tor of the NRA’s Institute for Legislative Action.
First, I pause outside. There is this young guy with a pierced lip 
wearing a ski jacket from Patagonia standing in the winter cold on 
the street outside Bullfeathers, a popular Capitol Hill restaurant. He 
has this confused look on his face and a sign in his hands held uncer-
tainly at his knees that reads, “Stop Selling Assault Weapons.”

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
88	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
I walk up to him and ask, “Who are you protesting?”
“The NRA.”
“Why here?”
“Um,” he says looking around, “this blog post said to meet here 
at two this afternoon to protest those baby killers at the NRA.”
“Oh,” I say, “but why this particular spot? Why not up on by the 
Capitol Building where some cameras might see you? Or maybe out 
in Fairfax where the NRA’s headquarters is?”
He looks left toward the Capitol Building and asks, “You think 
everyone else is up there?”
“Could be,” I shrug before asking as I point to his sign, “I’m curi-
ous, what exactly is an assault weapon?”
“You know, one of those military guns,” he says, looking at me 
like I’m a moron.
“But they’re already illegal.”
“Huh?”
“Sure,” I explain, “machine guns have been illegal, unless someone 
has a Class III license—which is damn hard to get—since 1934.”
“Huh?”
“In 1934 Congress passed the National Firearms Act. One thing 
it did was basically outlaw machine guns. You see, prohibition had 
just been repealed and some gangsters had been using Tommy guns—
machine guns—in battles with each other and against police. People 
wanted all that stopped.”
“Are you like an NRA spokesman or something?”
“No, I just think we need to make informed decisions.”
 “Whatever, dude,” he says and starts walking toward the Capitol 
Building.
So I say loudly to his back, “Good luck finding your anti-freedom 
friends.” He doesn’t even turn around.
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Embedded with the Gun Lobby 	
89 
I shrug and go to the NRA’s Capitol Hill offices nearby. I’m buzzed 
in and go upstairs to a boardroom with a cherry wood table sur-
rounded by black cushy chairs. Chris Cox is there to meet me. His 
tie is off and his sleeves are rolled up. He looks worn out, as he’s been 
running back and forth to the Hill to lobby congressmen. Neverthe-
less, he smiles pleasantly. Chris has been the chief lobbyist and prin-
cipal political strategist for the political and lobbying arm of the NRA 
since 2002. Chris develops and executes independent political cam-
paign and legislative initiatives for the NRA, coordinates national 
advertising and direct-mail programs, and has administrative respon-
sibility over NRA-ILA’s $20 million budget. I ask about the political 
challenges facing American gun manufacturers. Chris says, “Antigun 
politicians have been trying for decades to put America’s firearms 
manufacturers out of business through one means or another. They 
want to hold honest entrepreneurs, along with law-abiding gun own-
ers, responsible for the acts of criminals. This is why the NRA fought 
for the successful passage of the Protection of Lawful Commerce in 
Arms Act, which was signed into law in 2005 by President George 
W. Bush. This was a vital first step toward ending the antigun lobby’s 
shameless attempts to bankrupt the American firearms industry 
through reckless lawsuits. Still, they keep trying and we keep rallying 
our members to keep them honest.”
Cox pauses, sits back, and adds, “Instead of trying to create good 
policy that really would help stop murderers, some lawmakers are 
intent on using this emotionally charged time to legislate their anti–
Second Amendment ideology. We’re here to stop them from getting 
away with it and to offer real solutions.”
Both gun owners and gun makers were certainly feeling political 
pressure. In 2013 and early 2014, many gun companies felt forced to 
take their business to more gun-friendly states. Colt began expanding 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
90	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
manufacturing operations in Florida, far from its historic grounds in 
Hartford, Connecticut. Ruger opted to expand manufacturing in 
Arizona and in early 2014 was moving its corporate headquarters 
from Connecticut to Florida. Magpul moved most of its operations 
from Colorado to Wyoming and Texas. HiViz announced it was mov-
ing from Colorado to Wyoming. Shield Tactical said it would move 
from California to Texas. Kahr Arms decided to leave New York for 
Pennsylvania. American Tactical Imports decided to move from New 
York to South Carolina. Stag Arms said it would likely move from 
Connecticut to Texas or South Carolina. PTR Industries (H&K) said 
it was moving from Connecticut to South Carolina. Ithaca Gun Com-
pany indicated it was moving from Ithaca, New York, to South Car-
olina.
As I spoke to Cox in early 2013, the Obama administration was 
working with then–New York governor Michael Bloomberg; Dan 
Gross, president of the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence; and 
others behind closed doors to draft an antigungun wish list that Vice 
President Joe Biden would take to Congress. At the last minute, 
Biden’s White House task force did meet with the NRA and a variety 
of other gun groups, a few victims of gun violence, video-game indus-
try representatives, and others, all in the same hectic, politically 
orchestrated day. Right after those meetings, according to the White 
House, Biden gave his task force’s recommendations to President 
Barack Obama. The Obama administration then released a broad 
range of proposals.
As this was happening, Chris Cox didn’t seem worried, just worn 
out. He tells me that “there is still a clear bipartisan majority in both 
houses of Congress supporting the Second Amendment.” Cox explains 
that politicians listen to the NRA because the NRA has millions of 
members who vote. “The media likes to insinuate we have some kind 
of hold on politicians—both Democrats and Republicans. We do, the 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Embedded with the Gun Lobby 	
91 
voting public. Without millions of Americans behind us, we wouldn’t 
have a chance of convincing some politicians to vote for freedom.”
When I ask about Congress and their overall Second Amendment 
leanings, he concludes, “We have a clear majority. Part of the reason 
we do is we’re nonpartisan. We fight for the basic right to keep and 
bear arms. It’s a cornerstone of our freedom.”
The idea that the NRA is nonpartisan might make leftists cringe, 
but Cox is right. The NRA ignores party affiliation when making its 
congressional “Grades & Endorsements,”2 and is just as happy to 
support pro–Second Amendment Democrats as pro–Second Amend-
ment Republicans.
The NRA was founded in 1871 to teach people to shoot, not to 
fight political battles. Union Army soldiers in the Civil War were such 
poor marksmen that General Ambrose Burnside (1824–1881) said, 
“Out of ten soldiers who are perfect in drill and the manual of arms, 
only one knows the purpose of the sights on his gun or can hit the 
broad side of a barn.”3
When William C. Church, editor of the Army and Navy Journal, 
published a series of editorials about the need for better rifle marks-
manship just after the American Civil War, these editorials and a 
subsequent Manual for Rifle Practice, written by George W. Wingate, 
inspired a group of National Guard officers to form the NRA. The 
NRA subsequently began as a shooting club with a very lofty goal: 
train Americans to shoot better than anyone else in the world. The 
NRA didn’t form a legislative affairs division until debate began for 
the 1934 National Firearms Act. The NRA didn’t establish its lobby-
ing arm—its Institute for Legislative Action—until 1975.4
Though some in the media like to push the narrative that lobbyists 
act against the interests of the American public, the truth is much of 
the lobbying done by corporations and associations is waged in self-
defense against intrusive regulations, taxes, and, in the case of the 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
92	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
NRA, attacks on the Second Amendment. Lobbying is simply the 
exercise of the First Amendment right to “petition the government.”
I ask another gun lobbyist, Larry Keane, the senior vice president 
and general counsel for the National Shooting Sports Foundation 
(NSSF), if any pro-gun organizations had been invited to meet with the 
White House Office of Public Engagement (OPE). Politico has recently 
reported that antigun groups had a secret but regular meeting, known 
as the “Gun Violence Table,” at OPE. 5 Keane says, “I wish. There’s a 
lot we could help them with. But they’re not interested in our input.”
I met with Larry Keane, one of the many faces of the gun lobby, 
at NSSF’s offices in Newtown, Connecticut. He’s a mostly bald attor-
ney who seems to have been born in a dark suit, white shirt, and red 
tie. He serves as the firearms industry’s chief spokesperson for legal, 
legislative, and regulatory matters. He has been appointed to the 
Defense Trade Advisory Group (DTAG), which advises the U.S. State 
Department on export policies. He also serves as the general counsel 
and corporate secretary to the Sporting Arms and Ammunition Man-
ufacturers’ Institute (SAAMI), where he is also the chairman of its 
Legislative and Legal Affairs Committee.
He tells me, “If the Obama administration really wants to do 
something about illegal guns or gun violence then they’d work with 
gun manufacturers, the NRA, and the rest of gun-rights groups. There 
is a lot we all already agree on; such as improving the NICS system 
[National Instant Criminal Background Check System] and prosecut-
ing more straw purchasers. But President Obama isn’t interested in 
working with us. That, in his view, would legitimize us. He, unfortu-
nately, is only interested in scoring political points. He’s in a perpetual 
campaign. That is unfortunate for the American people.”
When I interviewed David Keene, former NRA president and now 
editorial page editor of the Washington Times, before an NRA board 
meeting in Arlington, Virginia, in January 2014, he agreed with his 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Embedded with the Gun Lobby 	
93 
near namesake, Larry Keane. Keene said, “The Obama administra-
tion is treating the gun issue like it’s a political race. They want to 
separate the NRA and to treat the NRA like they do a political oppo-
nent during a campaign. The trouble for them is this isn’t a new issue. 
People already have an educated opinion with regards to gun rights 
and so don’t fall for this ruse. I’m not sure President Obama really 
grasps this.”
David Keene says one simple example illustrates the massive 
misunderstanding the Obama administration has made with regards 
to the American public and the gun issue.
In January 2013, America’s largest outdoor show, the sixty-four-
year-old Eastern Sports and Outdoor Show, which regularly attracted 
two hundred thousand people, fell apart a month before it was about 
to open, after Reed Exhibitions, a British events organizing company, 
announced that firearms and products associated with AR-15s 
(“assault weapons”) wouldn’t be allowed, not even in pictures.
The backlash was swift and effective. Pennsylvania has about one 
million active deer hunters, and some of them, along with many other 
gun owners and outdoorsmen from neighboring states, come to Har-
risburg to see new firearms, to book with outfitters, or just to attend 
seminars on duck calling or fly tying. It’s a big deal, and they weren’t 
about to let a British company ruin it with political correctness. The 
grassroots supporters of the exhibition voiced their displeasure, and 
soon came reports that companies were pulling out in protest of 
Reed’s action. Cabela’s, a major sponsor of the show (Cabela’s has a 
store nearby), was one of the first to announce it was pulling out. 
Soon, groups like the NRA, the National Wild Turkey Federation, 
and the Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation, and companies like Ruger, 
Smith & Wesson, Crimson Trace, Trijicon, and many more started 
to publicly announce they were canceling plans to attend—despite 
real costs to their bottom lines.

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
94	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
Chet Burchett, Reed Exhibitions’ regional president for the Amer-
icas, responded by saying, “Our original decision not to include cer-
tain products in the Eastern Sports and Outdoor Show this year was 
made in order to preserve the event’s historical focus on the hunting 
and fishing traditions enjoyed by American families. . . . In the current 
climate, we felt that the presence of [AR-15s] would distract from the 
theme of hunting and fishing, disrupting the broader experience of 
our guests. This was intended simply as a product decision, of the type 
event organizers need to make every day.”
Talk about being out of touch. AR-15s are among America’s top-
selling firearms. Many, such as Remington’s R-15, are chambered in 
calibers used by deer hunters. Predator hunters have long used them. 
These firearms are mainstream among hunters and in high demand. 
How would the presence of these firearms “distract from the theme 
of hunting and fishing”? Saying that is like banning sports cars from 
a car show while saying sporty, fast, cool, and expensive autos aren’t 
popular, or even particularly useful.
The NRA officially announced: “We had called on Reed Exhibi-
tions to reconsider their decision; unfortunately they have steadfastly 
refused to do so. As a result, the NRA will not be participating in the 
upcoming show in Harrisburg or in any other shows hosted by Reed 
Exhibitions that maintain this policy.”
The NRA’s announcement was a tipping point. Soon many more 
companies were pulling out, and then Reed Exhibitions announced 
the postponement of the show. This very public fight highlights the 
fundamental mistake Reed Exhibitions made: they failed to note that 
America’s gun owners are sticking together as they fight for the Amer-
ica they know and love.
Meanwhile, other shows across the country began announcing 
they were not banning AR-15s from their shows. For example, the 
Portland Sportsmen’s Show—the second-largest consumer sportsmen’s 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Embedded with the Gun Lobby 	
95 
show in the country—contacted The Shooting Wire to say they have 
“no intention of outlawing any legal sporting product from their 
exhibit floor.”
The issue was further complicated by the fact that Reed Exhibi-
tions had long worked with the National Shooting Sports Foundation 
to put on the SHOT Show, an annual trade show for firearms and 
related companies. The NSSF fired Reed Exhibitions and signed a 
contract with another company.
The Eastern Sports and Outdoor Show wasn’t held in 2013. But 
in 2014 the show went on, thanks to the NRA, which put on the 
Great American Outdoor Show in Harrisburg from February 1 
through February 9. The show featured nearly one thousand exhibi-
tors ranging from shooting manufacturers to outfitters to fishing boat 
makers spread out over 650,000 square feet of exhibit hall. The event 
drew an estimated two hundred thousand people and included con-
certs, fundraising dinners, speaking events, archery competitions, and 
outdoor seminars.
The attendees represented a broad swath of America largely 
ignored by the media, derided by the Left, and held in contempt by 
the Obama administration, though Obama himself feels he has to 
pretend to be in favor of gun ownership in general and even had his 
press office at the White House leak a photo of him “shooting skeet” 
with a shotgun held too horizontal for skeet shooting and with a 
choke missing from the bottom barrel (it takes two for skeet)—clear 
signs the shot was a stunt. David Keene says, “Maybe it’s not surpris-
ing that a British company would be out of touch with Americans’ 
civil liberties, but you’d think the Obama administration would 
understand America a little better.”

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
97
C H A P T E R  F I V E
How Gun Rights  
Beat the Media
A gun is a tool, no better no worse than any other tool, 
an axe, shovel or anything. A gun is only as good or as 
bad as the man using it. Remember that.
—Hero Alan Ladd to leading lady Jean Arthur 
 in the 1953 western Shane
I
’m sitting in a trade show booth with three weary, almost identically 
dressed (dark suits, white shirts, forgettable ties) men who run one 
of America’s largest firearms manufacturers. I ask if they have heard 
about movie mogul’s Harvey Weinstein’s comments about the NRA. 
They nod and laugh.
Weinstein was the executive producer of popular gun-happy films 
like Reservoir Dogs (1992), Pulp Fiction (1994), Kill Bill (2003), and 
Inglourious Basterds [sic] (2009). The gun company executives tell 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
98	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
me they love these movies but find Weinstein’s hypocrisy hysterical. 
The day before, Weinstein said on Howard Stern’s radio show, “I don’t 
think we need guns in this country, and I hate it. I think the NRA is a 
disaster area. . . . I shouldn’t say this, but I’ll tell it to you, Howard. 
I’m going to make a movie with Meryl Streep, and we’re going to take 
this head-on. And [the NRA is] going to wish they weren’t alive after 
I’m done with them.”1
“Meryl Streep,” laughs one of the gun makers. “Can he at least 
threaten us with Uma Thurman?”
It’s January 16, 2014, and we’re seated in the back of the com-
pany’s eight-hundred-square-foot booth at the SHOT Show. Some 
sixty-seven thousand people from more than one hundred countries 
are here in Las Vegas to buy and sell guns, optics, ammo, and related 
merchandise in the Sands Expo and Convention Center. Just down a 
little hallway are displays of pistols and rifles. There are crowds of 
people handling them. These people are making orders for their gun 
stores and catalogs. The gun business is booming. After the 2008 
presidential election, these gun makers joked that President Barack 
Obama is the “greatest gun salesman of all time,” but they had no 
idea just how long the joke would last.
The context of Weinstein’s comments actually makes his hypocrisy 
even worse. He was discussing a project based on Leon Uris’s novel 
Mila 18, a book that chronicles a Jewish uprising in German-occupied 
Warsaw during World War II. As Weinstein explained, “It’s not a 
Holocaust story, as much as it’s Jews with guns; it’s my whole phi-
losophy. . . . It’s the idea that when injustice is that great you just can’t 
march into the camps.” This prompted Stern, who is a gun owner, to 
ask Weinstein if he owns a gun. Weinstein replied he doesn’t, saying, 
“I don’t think we need guns in this country. And I hate it.” Weinstein’s 
“I hate it” argument didn’t satisfy Stern. When Stern pushed deeper 
than a three-year-old’s “I hate it,” Weinstein said he would “find a 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
How Gun Rights Beat the Media 	
99 
gun, if [genocide] was happening to my people.” Now that’s a mind 
bender. Weinstein thinks people should be disarmed, but he also 
thinks they should somehow “find” guns if things get really out of 
hand?
If that’s not hypocritical enough, in 2012, following an extortion 
attempt against Weinstein, a source told the New York Post that “[t]
he Weinsteins have always had intense security and been on high alert 
because of the movies they make.”2 The paper also noted that while 
producing The Master, a film the Scientologists didn’t like, Weinstein 
“beef[ed] up his own security.” So Weinstein evidently doesn’t oppose 
armed bodyguards protecting him, but he does oppose the right of 
people who can’t afford bodyguards to protect themselves with hand-
guns. Or maybe he thinks that if the government confiscated all 
private arms, he wouldn’t need armed escorts, because before guns 
were invented people lived in perfect harmony, didn’t they?
What I find most astounding, though, is not Weinstein’s illogic or 
hypocrisy, but the fact that these gun makers are not afraid of a Hol-
lywood producer trying to take away their livelihoods, their freedom, 
their way of life.
This is a big change. A decade ago they would have been gritting 
their teeth and worrying about their future. But today the editorial 
board at the New York Times, the Washington Post, and the other 
big urban papers; those talking heads on CNN and MSNBC and the 
once-big three networks; and those producers in Hollywood and the 
antigun-freedom actors and actresses no longer scare these gun mak-
ers. I knew they would laugh because Weinstein had become the joke 
of the 2014 SHOT Show.
Somehow, despite all those “mainstream” voices manufacturing 
arguments to take away the Second Amendment of the Bill of Rights, 
a majority of Americans still want to retain their freedom. In January 
2014, according to Gallup polling, just 31 percent of Americans want 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
100	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
stricter gun-control laws passed. This was down from 38 percent in 
2013.3 Gallup also reported in January 2014 that “the gap between 
those wanting stricter gun laws and those wanting less strict laws 
narrowed as a result of a sharp increase in the percentage of Ameri-
cans who want less strict laws, now at 16% up from 5% a year ago 
[emphasis in original].”4
The mainstream media is losing the gun-control argument because 
of the efforts of men like Stephen Hunter. He’s a gun owner and his-
torian who spent his career in mainstream newsrooms. When I meet 
him at the SHOT Show, he says, “I’ve always wanted to come to the 
SHOT Show. It’s a rite of passage for any gun owner.”
Steve is now sixty-seven years old and retired from the Washing-
ton Post. In 2003, while at the Post, he won a Pulitzer for movie 
criticism. The Pulitzer committee said Hunter “is forever suggesting 
that art can be a good, lusty, happy thing, that doesn’t always have 
to be an immersion in a new level of human misery.” The Pulitzer 
Prize’s twenty-member board is mostly a who’s who of liberal jour-
nalists and is administered by Columbia University. It often saves its 
honors for those advocating the Left’s causes, but this time they got 
it exactly right.
Steve has the look of an aged professor, but he’s brimming with 
youthful mirth. He’s cynical and sarcastic, amused with human nature. 
He cheerily tells me he was once a “leftist hippie with the long hair and 
all that” and that “he moved by proportions of honesty to becoming 
a gun owner and shooter.” Steve’s final transformation into a full-bore 
gun enthusiast came one fine day in 1985 when he saw an ad for a 
gun—a bright and lovely stainless Smith & Wesson Model 645 to be 
precise. He found this semiautomatic pistol to be intriguing and beau-
tiful, and he wanted one. This contradiction within himself needed a 
final resolution. After some self-evaluation, he decided that “there was 
something fundamentally dishonest about my anti-gun views.”
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
How Gun Rights Beat the Media 	
101 
We find seats in the SHOT Show pressroom—a room crowded 
with bloggers, magazine editors, outdoor television shows hosts and 
the proprietors of YouTube channels for gun enthusiasts. We sit down 
and I ask him about the evolution of his interest in guns.
He says, “When I was a boy the notion that guns were bad stuck 
in my head. My parents [his father was a professor at Northwestern; 
his mother wrote children’s books], teachers, and the suburban Chi-
cago culture I was in told me guns lead to violence. It took me a long 
time to move past the notion that owning a gun would corrupt you, 
that a gun can somehow whisper vile things in your ear until you 
become a worse person, maybe even a sociopath. I thought that a gun 
has an aura that acts like alcohol to an alcoholic—that step by step 
it would make me a bad person.
“There is, of course, an aura surrounding guns,” he continued. 
“There are real, deep reasons why Hollywood glorifies the gun even 
as many of its producers and actors want guns banned. This feeling 
comes from holding a gun, from shooting a gun; you get a feeling of 
a power; you know this mechanical wonder explodes in your hands 
but when used right won’t harm you even as it can do real damage 
down range. This is why guns are a great responsibility and require 
a lot of maturity. This is also why Western films resonate. Out there, 
in the exposed open, is a man with a gun, a true individual who can 
take care of himself. The gun doesn’t make this cowboy good or bad, 
but it does make him potentially lethal and very independent. That’s 
intoxicating. That’s a big part of the reason why all those journalists 
who oppose gun rights keep losing battles. For generations they had 
almost full control of the messaging, but still they lost because people 
are drawn to the gun. When you shoot a gun safely and responsibly 
you can’t help but get this big grin on your face.”
Stephen graduated from Northwestern’s Medill School of Journal-
ism in 1968. He then served in the military as an honor guard at 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
102	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
Arlington National Cemetery. In 1971 he joined the Baltimore Sun’s 
copy desk. He spent ten years in that role before becoming the paper’s 
first full-time film reviewer. In 1980, while still at the Sun, Hunter 
published his first novel, The Master Sniper, about a World War II 
Nazi assassin. Since then Stephen’s novels have won him millions of 
fans, many of them gun owners. His Bob Lee Swagger thrillers, begin-
ning with Point of Impact in 1993, follow a fictionalized Vietnam 
War sniper loosely based on the real Vietnam War sniper and U.S. 
Marine Corps legend Carlos Hathcock. Along the way, Hunter got 
to know his guns. He got to know the gun culture.
In 1997 the Washington Post hired him to review films. He tells 
me most of the editors and reporters at the Post thought of him as 
“crazy uncle Steve.” He says, “I was irreverent, sarcastic, and gregar-
ious—I was a voice they understood. They thought I was all right even 
if I did own and shoot guns. I told them when they’re writing about 
gun control or crime to come and talk to me. I told them I’d save them 
from technical mistakes and help them with sources. Some took me 
up on this. During my time at the Post the news side went from raving 
anti-gun to moderately anti-gun. I had something to do with that.”
In 2007 his book Point of Impact made it to the big screen as 
Shooter, starring Mark Wahlberg. The movie came out just a few days 
after the Virginia Tech shooting. When Wahlberg was asked about his 
use of guns he said, “I haven’t used a gun anywhere other than on a 
movie set. . . . I would love it if they could take all the guns away. 
Unfortunately, you can’t do that so you hope that good people in the 
world have them to protect the people who can’t protect themselves.”5
Not everyone in Hollywood is antigun. Hollywood great Charlton 
Heston was president of the NRA for five years, and occasionally a 
Hollywood type who knows something about guns, like Tom Selleck, 
an NRA board member, can make headlines, as he did in 2011 for 
chewing out an extra for unsafe handling of a prop gun on the set of 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
How Gun Rights Beat the Media 	
103 
Blue Bloods.6 But in general, the culture in Hollywood is not only 
hostile to guns but ignorant about them.
Stephen told me about the time a Hollywood producer optioned 
his 1989 novel, The Day before Midnight, and Stephen took him to 
a gun range to get a taste of what characters in the book do.
“It was one of those busy days at the range,” Stephen said. “You 
could smell the testosterone. There were people pounding away with 
big-game rifles. There were men opening gun cases and slapping each 
other on the backs. There were guys in the pistol lanes shooting semi-
automatics at paper targets. It was loud. It was masculine. You could 
feel the energy. Before we even got to the firing line the producer 
started to tremble. He soon became hysterical. Then he broke and 
ran for the car. Culture shock.”
I ask him how we can bust down this cultural barrier.
“Honestly,” he says, “you need a guy like me. Someone who has 
worked with them, someone they trust. A person they’ve bestowed 
their major awards on—as they have me—and the gun industry needs 
to send that person around to speak to them in their own language. 
Because, really, those editors and reporters don’t want to make all the 
stupid technical mistakes they do. They see themselves as tolerant, 
worldly, and open-minded intellectuals. They don’t really want to 
only give one point of view, and they certainly don’t want to be so 
factually inept with this issue. But the only way to get them to see 
that is through a spokesman they trust and understand. I don’t know 
if such a person exists. I’m sure as hell not going to make a life of 
that—I’ve done my part.”
I ask him how we might reach young reporters before they are 
indoctrinated with political correctness, how we might open their 
minds, and he replies, “Liberal reporters believe in consensus. They 
believe in accord and compromise. Individualism, to them, is akin to 
becoming an outlier, a person fallen from the inner circles of society. 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
104	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
If they step away from the accepted ethos, they’ll be shunned; they 
won’t be promoted. This is often unsaid, but the pressure to conform 
is profound. Everything they’re taught tells them to look for accepted 
values, to conform to the group, and that anything outside those 
norms must be shunned. Though as a group they’re mostly well edu-
cated, they’re also mostly looking inward. Reporters speak to each 
other more than anyone else. They reinforce each other’s values and 
assure each other they’re the smartest people in the room. By asking 
them to accept gun rights, to really accept the idea that an individual 
can stand apart from the state on their own two feet and defend their 
own life with a gun, that’s asking them to violently assault their foun-
dation. Only a few of them have the courage to do that.”
We next talk about the 2007 film Shooter, based on Steve’s thriller 
Point of Impact, and I want to know if he was happy with it and how 
we can help Hollywood get guns right more of the time. He says, “The 
gun handling in Shooter is on another level. They listened and got that 
right. Non-shooters won’t see that in the film, but anyone who knows 
how to handle a gun will recognize this and therefore find it real, 
authentic. That goes a long way to helping a film resonate. I am mostly 
happy with the film. The end though, when I saw it for the first time 
I was cringing and saying, ‘No, don’t shoot him.’”
In the film, the character Bob Lee Swagger (played by Mark Wahl-
berg) is a U.S. Marine gunnery sergeant who served as a force recon 
scout sniper. He reluctantly leaves a self-imposed exile from his iso-
lated mountain home in the Wind River Range at the request of 
Colonel Isaac Johnson (played by Danny Glover) to help track down 
an assassin who plans on shooting the president. In the end Swagger 
kills both conspirators, Johnson and Senator Meachum, as they plan 
their next move while at the senator’s vacation home.
Steve says, “Swagger would never have killed the senator. It’s 
against his code. Hollywood and the urban segment of the audience 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
How Gun Rights Beat the Media 	
105 
don’t get that, but the millions of former military members and gun 
owners out there won’t, on a deep level, believe or feel good about 
this ending. Antoine Fuqua did a great job directing the film, but that 
ending was a big miss. They showed they really don’t understand the 
gun culture in America. Maybe shows like Top Shots and the growth 
in the number of gun owners today will start to seep some of this 
knowledge of guns and the gun culture into Hollywood and change 
this over time.” Steve shifts to another angle to fill out the picture. 
He says he remembers when the fairness doctrine was undone by 
President Ronald Reagan. He says its repeal “unleashed talk radio.” 
Suddenly radio stations didn’t have a government bureaucrat wagging 
their finger and censoring them when they didn’t think a station was 
fair and balanced.
The fairness doctrine was a policy enforced by the Federal Com-
munications Commission (FCC). It was introduced in 1949. It 
required the holders of broadcast licenses to present controversial 
issues in a way that was, in the FCC’s view, honest, equitable, and 
balanced. In Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC (1969), the U.S. 
Supreme Court upheld the FCC’s general right to enforce the fairness 
doctrine where channels were limited, though the Court didn’t rule 
that the FCC had to regulate this speech. Because it regulated frequen-
cies, the government soon snatched the right to regulate content.
Then came FCC chairman Mark S. Fowler. He was a communica-
tions attorney who had served on Ronald Reagan’s presidential cam-
paign staff in 1976 and 1980. Fowler was appointed by President 
Reagan to head the FCC. Under Fowler, the FCC soon began to repeal 
parts of the fairness doctrine. Fowler said the doctrine hurt the public 
interest by violating free-speech rights guaranteed by the First Amend-
ment. In 1987, the FCC abolished the doctrine by a 4–0 vote; known 
as the Syracuse Peace Council decision, the FCC decision stated: “The 
intrusion by government into the content of programming occasioned 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
106	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
by the enforcement of [the fairness doctrine] restricts the journalistic 
freedom of broadcasters . . . [and] actually inhibits the presentation of 
controversial issues of public importance to the detriment of the pub-
lic and the degradation of the editorial prerogative of broadcast jour-
nalists.”
On February 16, 2009, Fowler told conservative radio talk-show 
host Mark Levin that his work toward revoking the fairness doctrine 
had been a matter of principle, not partisanship. Fowler said Reagan’s 
White House staff thought repealing the policy would be politically 
unwise. Fowler said that the White House staff thought the fairness 
doctrine was the “only thing that really protects you [Reagan] from 
the savageness of the three networks . . . and Fowler is proposing to 
repeal it.”7
Instead of doing the politically expedient thing, Reagan supported 
Fowler’s fight to repeal the fairness doctrine’s gag order on free speech. 
Reagan later vetoed a congressional effort, led by Democrats, to make 
the fairness doctrine federal law.
Suddenly, free speech had a chance to flower. Then came Fox 
News and unrestrained social media. In just a few decades, the main-
stream media lost control of the narrative to a diverse universe of 
blogs, internet forums, e-newsletters, radio, and cable news. Gun-
rights group such as the NRA and the Second Amendment Foundation 
found it easier to mobilize grassroots movements.
“The journalists at the big papers have been confused by these 
changes,” Steve says. “They’re for free speech, but they think, for the 
good of society, they should set and moderate the agenda like they did 
for so long. But they’re guilty of groupthink. They’re wed to a very 
urban and often elitist way of thinking and really are afraid to break 
away—even when they do recognize this—because the cost to their 
careers would be too great.”
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
How Gun Rights Beat the Media 	
107 
I ask if they’re told how to write about the gun issue, and Steve 
shakes his head no. “There isn’t a playbook,” he says. “The cultural 
pressure in the newsroom is to conform to the group’s values. The 
values tend to be anti-gun.”
Steve adds, “Regardless, freedom was unleashed. That’s how the 
NRA and others have been able to evolve the argument, to get their 
point of view across despite the media’s reluctance to fairly report this 
issue.”
When I interview David Keene, former chairman of the American 
Conservative Union (ACU) and a former president of the NRA who 
still lobbies for the NRA, he picks up this point and says, “After New-
town, in December 2012, the NRA and gun owners in general had to 
be respectfully silent for a while. It was a time of mourning. Mature 
and sober debate must come later. But even as the NRA stayed silent, 
we saw the narrative evolving. A lot of reporters had the knee-jerk 
reaction of blaming guns, blaming freedom. But soon voices started 
to point out that these ‘gun-free zones’ are ‘victim zones.’ The narrative 
was changing on a grassroots level and it’s all about the narrative. The 
American people have debated this issue before. They’ve become 
educated. They quickly understood that if a good guy with a gun had 
been there, a lot of what happened might have been prevented.”
Keene says, “The only places that saw freedom reduced after 
Newtown were those areas with single-party politics run by Demo-
crats who railroaded through gun-control legislation. Freedom won 
in all the areas where there was a real debate.”
The fact that the unleashing of the First Amendment has been 
helping people understand the Second Amendment is not lost on 
advocates for more gun control. Some politicians see these changes 
and want to turn back the clock. After a Democratic sweep in the 
2008 elections, some Democrats decided it was time to require radio 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
108	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
networks to air liberal points of view through a new fairness doctrine, 
enforced by threat of fines and possibly the revocation of radio 
licenses.
In 2009 Democrat senator Tom Harkin of Iowa said, “We gotta 
get the Fairness Doctrine back in law again.”8 Democrat congress-
woman, and then House Speaker, Nancy Pelosi of California also 
called for its return.9 During an appearance on a radio show in Febru-
ary 2009, former president Bill Clinton said, “Well, you either ought 
to have the Fairness Doctrine or we ought to have more balance on 
the other side, because essentially there’s always been a lot of big 
money to support the right-wing talk shows.”10
In December 2010, Democrat FCC commissioner Michael Copps 
suggested in a speech that broadcasters should be subject to a new 
“public values test” every four years to determine if they should be 
allowed to stay on the air. Copps said news outlets should have to 
prove they are making a meaningful commitment to public affairs; 
they should have to show they are committed to diversity program-
ming (such as giving women and minorities more air time); they 
should have to report to the government what topics they plan to 
cover on air; and private media companies using “public” airwaves 
should be required to make greater disclosures about who funds 
political ads.11 Basically, Copps wanted the FCC’s five-member board 
to be a means of political control over the airwaves.
President Barack Obama didn’t officially come out in favor of this 
censorship; however, his regulatory czar, Cass Sunstein, is for it. Sun-
stein wrote a book titled Democracy and the Problem of Free Speech. 
In the book he argues that capitalism has corrupted free speech by 
giving those with money a louder megaphone that those who don’t 
have the cash to pay for ads. He asserts that James Madison, the 
“father of the U.S. Constitution,” opposed such alleged corruption, 
though Madison, who lived in a time of freewheeling newspapers, 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
How Gun Rights Beat the Media 	
109 
where those with more money could buy more ads or print more 
pamphlets, specifically believed in limiting the power of the federal 
government, not the press, not free speech, not the right of wealthy 
people to spend their wealth as they saw fit. Sunstein argues that the 
government must muzzle corporations and then decide who gets 
airtime and how much, which is not a constitutional view at all.
Sunstein argues that “Sites from one point of view [should] agree 
to provide links to other sites so if you are reading a conservative 
magazine they would provide a link to a liberal site and vice versa. . . . 
If we could get voluntary arrangements in that direction it would be 
great. . . . But the word ‘voluntary’ is a little complicated. Sometimes 
people don’t do what’s best for our society. . . . And the idea would be 
to have a legal mandate as the last resort and to make sure it’s as 
neutral as possible. . . .”12
This effort to curb First Amendment freedom with a new fairness 
doctrine failed, but the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002, 
popularly known as “McCain-Feingold,” silenced corporations, 
unions, and associations, such as the NRA, the Second Amendment 
Foundation, and other gun-rights groups, near elections. The U.S. 
Supreme Court tossed out many of this legislation’s restrictions in 
Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission (2010).
Before the Citizens United case, the NRA responded to this curb 
on its First Amendment right to defend the Second Amendment by 
stating, in 2004, that “NRA News should be deemed a media com-
pany and therefore is entitled to distribute news stories, commentar-
ies and editorials that both mention federal candidates and advocate 
the election or defeat of a federal candidate. Under the relevant cam-
paign finance laws, media companies are permitted to engage in such 
speech without limitation.”13
In 2004 the NRA hired Cam Edwards to do an online radio show 
called Cam & Co. “They hired me because I did straight news,” Cam 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
110	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
tells me. “They didn’t want someone to just pontificate. They wanted 
journalists who could interview NRA leadership, newsmakers, pun-
dits, journalists, congressional leaders, and more. I was a gun owner, 
but I wasn’t known as a gun-rights activist. I was brought in to find 
and report the truth the media often wasn’t reporting. This is the same 
reason the NRA hired Ginny Simone to investigate and report on 
what’s going on that the media overlooks or ignores.”
Cam says, “In the years since a lot has changed. We now have a 
three-hour show and are on SiriusXM Radio and the Sportsman 
Channel and, really, too many mediums to do a conclusive count of 
how many households we reach. What I’ve been surprised about along 
the way, as we report on gun-rights-related issues, isn’t so much what 
the media reports, but what they chose to ignore. The NRA estimates 
that there are now more than one hundred million gun owners in 
America. These people have more than three hundred million guns. 
CNN is ignoring and insulting all of those people. CNN isn’t fading 
away because people aren’t looking for news or because cable news, 
and more, have diversified the field; they’re losing ground because 
they’re often ignoring the truth.
“Just consider that in May of 2013 the government’s Bureau of 
Justice Statistics reported that homicides involving firearms had fallen 
39 percent from 1993 and 2011, but few of the mainstream outlets 
reported this. Also, during this same time frame, gun sales and the 
numbers of new gun owners have been surging,” Cam says, “but this 
got so little coverage that a Pew poll found that most Americans think 
gun violence is going up.”
Cam was referring to a May 2013 Pew report that determined that 
“most Americans are unaware that gun crime is lower today than it 
was two decades ago. According to a new Pew Research Center sur-
vey, [in May 2013] 56% of Americans believed gun crime is higher 
than 20 years ago and only 12% think it is lower.”14
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
How Gun Rights Beat the Media 	
111 
Omitting portions of the truth is a form of lying, but the first 
question is this: Are CNN’s reporters and other news outlets aware 
of what they’re missing? To understand how CNN, in particular, 
became a media outlet only interested in one point of view on guns, 
I called one of its original seven founding members, Jim Shepherd, 
now the editor and publisher of The Shooting Wire. Shepherd has 
held a number of senior news executive positions during his career, 
including with CNN, the Financial News Network, the Golf Channel, 
and other television networks. He left CNN in 1985 after he became 
“disgusted with what they wouldn’t report.”
Jim says, “Part of what happened to CNN is what happened to 
Hollywood. The news, like Hollywood, became trapped in creating 
and fawning over celebrities. Getting Anderson Cooper publicized 
became more important than breaking the big story. When you have 
celebrity reporters telling you how they feel about being in Iraq 
instead of reporting on how our troops are doing, you begin to lose 
perspective. With guns, instead of going to gun ranges, gun owners’ 
homes, instead of interviewing women who’d stopped an attacker, 
and instead of really trying to understand the world such women live 
in and what they’re going through, they just tell us how they feel. 
Katie Couric, Diane Sawyer, and the rest are stars, not reporters. 
They’re not hunting for the truth. They’re telling you what they think, 
and what they think all comes from the cocktail parties on Manhat-
tan’s Upper East Side and from conversations with other reporters.”
He says, “When I was at CNN, the lead stories in the New York 
Times and the Washington Post drove what we covered. They still do 
that for CNN and network news to a large extent. The cable news 
reporters and producers are intellectually lazy. They’re so busy chas-
ing each other they don’t stop to find the truth.”
I ask how we break this cycle, and Jim laughs before saying, “It’s 
happening now. CNN’s ratings are plummeting. Both the Washington 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
112	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
Post and the New York Times have seen their staffs cut as their circu-
lations have dropped. . . . They can’t understand how they’re being 
beaten. They don’t want to hear the truth, that they’ve lost touch. I 
tried to tell them once. They invited me to an annual party at CNN. 
They invited all the founding members on CNN’s twenty-fifth anni-
versary. They asked me to give a speech. I stood up and told them that 
they’re out of touch. I told them they have to go back to their roots 
and question everything. I told them to take off the filter and report 
what they find. Yeah, they’ll never have me back again.”
I want to know how Jim got into guns when he spent his whole 
career at CNN and the newsrooms of the network’s affiliates, and he 
says, “I grew up on a farm in Kentucky. I grew up with guns. But, 
yeah, I didn’t shoot for twenty-five years. I loved my job and got into 
that news culture. I concentrated on business news and international 
news, so I didn’t have a lot of contact with the gun issue. I didn’t get 
back into shooting until I noticed, after I’d started the Golf Wire, that 
the shooting industry needed an online news service. So I started The 
Shooting Wire and The Outdoor Wire.
“I didn’t know it at the time, but I became a part of alternative 
media that was undermining the mainstream media’s influence. I was 
just trying to provide a needed service,” Jim says, “but since we started 
The Shooting Wire, in 2002, we’ve grown so big so fast that I see how 
new media is teaching people about what’s really going on. We’re just 
one voice among a lot of new blogs, newsletters, forums, and all that. 
We’re a big one, but really this is the future. The only way it stops and 
the mainstream media regains control of the narrative and so can 
dumb down people again by not reporting what doesn’t fit into the 
liberal narrative, would be by government fiat. A new fairness doctrine 
or something.”
In closing, Jim says, “A lot of my former colleagues have accused 
me of selling out. Really, that’s how they think. I tell them no, you 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
How Gun Rights Beat the Media 	
113 
sold out a long time ago. Now you’re such a shill you can’t even see 
it.”
I next turn to Tom Gresham for some perspective. Tom is the host 
of Gun Talk, a nationally syndicated radio talk show about firearms. 
His father, “Grits” Gresham Jr. (1922–2008), hosted ABC’s The 
American Sportsman series from 1966 to 1979. This exposed Tom 
to the media from an early age. In the years since, Tom edited for 
magazines such as Alaska and American Hunter. He started his radio 
show in 1995.
Tom says, “I wouldn’t have been allowed on the air when that 
fairness doctrine was in effect. Radio station owners would have been 
reluctant to stir up the FCC’s bureaucrats. And anyway, how would 
they ever have found an opposing view to gun rights that would draw 
an audience? Gun owners have a natural constituency. The millions 
of Americans who join gun clubs to shoot, sight in their hunting guns, 
and to learn to protect themselves have something in common. 
They’re already at least locally organized. They’re a grassroots group 
all by themselves and there are better than one hundred million of 
them. All the anti-gun crowd has is emotion after some madman has 
done something evil. This can stir up well-meaning but dissociated 
people, but when you combat that emotion with facts, the emotion 
burns off like rain on hot asphalt and what you have left are gun 
owners voting their issue.”
Keene says this in another way. “Michael Bloomberg has spent 
millions to fund Mayors against Illegal Guns and still doesn’t have 
any traction. This isn’t just because what he’s selling runs counter to 
hard-won American freedom, but also because how do you build a 
constituency around getting people to become victims? The only way 
to pull that off is with a state-run media that has a monopoly. No, 
that might not even work. I recently traveled to Russia to speak to a 
large and growing gun-rights group. They have a state-run media, 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
114	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
but gun rights are such a practical thing it’s resonating even in mother 
Russia.”
To fully see what Keene is getting at, it’s worth considering where 
the money is being raised on either side of the gun debate. The NRA’s 
funds mostly come from a large grassroots membership base. This is 
also true of Gun Owners of America, the Second Amendment Foun-
dation, and other gun-rights groups. According to OpenSecrets.org, 
gun-rights groups “have given more than $30 million in individual, 
PAC and soft money contributions to federal candidates and party 
committees since 1989.” Meanwhile, the money from gun-control 
advocates comes mostly from wealthy liberals. Billionaire and former 
New York City mayor Michael Bloomberg started a pro-gun-control 
super PAC, Independence USA PAC, in 2012; it spent more than $8.3 
million in several congressional races in 2012. Former congresswoman 
Gabrielle Giffords started a super PAC in January 2013, Americans 
for Responsible Solutions (ARS). ARS reportedly raised more than 
$18 million by January in 2014 from a few well-heeled individuals.15 
OpenSecrets.org says before these antigun super PACs came along, 
the expenditures of “[g]un control groups, by comparison, have been 
barely a blip on the radar screen. They’ve given a total of just under 
$2 million since 1989.”
In 2013 Bloomberg’s Independence USA PAC lost big in its attempt 
to stop a less-well-funded but populist pro-gun movement in Colorado 
that successfully recalled two Colorado state senators who had voted 
for a highly restrictive gun law. In 2013 and early 2014, Bloomberg’s 
group, Mayors against Illegal Guns (MAIG), was also bleeding sup-
port. On February 7, 2014, the mayor of Poughkeepsie, New York—
an upstate city with gang and drug problems—wrote an op-ed to say,
I’m the mayor of one of the largest cities in the Hudson 
Valley, just 90 minutes north of New York City. I’m a life 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
How Gun Rights Beat the Media 	
115 
member of the National Rifle Association and a former 
member of Mayors Against Illegal Guns, or MAIG, started 
by New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg in 2006. I’m no 
longer a member of MAIG. Why? Just as Ronald Reagan 
said of the Democratic Party, it left me. And I’m not alone: 
Nearly 50 pro–Second Amendment mayors have left the 
organization. They left for the same reason I did. MAIG 
became a vehicle for Bloomberg to promote his personal 
gun-control agenda—violating the Second Amendment 
rights of law-abiding citizens and taking resources away 
from initiatives that could actually work to protect our 
neighborhoods and save precious lives. Gun control will 
actually make a bad situation worse.16
After losses in many states and nationally, gun-control groups 
decided they had a message problem. To win public support for gun 
bans, the gun-control movement paid consultants to come up with a 
public-relations playbook. Completed in 2012, Preventing Gun Vio-
lence through Effective Messaging is reportedly the result of opinion 
research done by the firms Greenberg Quinlan Rosner, OMB, and 
KNP Communications.17 In a section labeled “Overall Messaging 
Guidance,” the guide lists its number one “Key Messaging Principle” 
to be “[a]lways focus on emotional and value-driven arguments about 
gun violence, not the political food fight in Washington or wonky 
statistics.” It further explains this strategy by saying, “It’s critical that 
you ground your messaging around gun violence in prevention by 
making that emotional connection.” Its second key principle is, “Tell 
stories with images and feelings.” The playbook says, “Our first task 
is to draw a vivid portrait and make an emotional connection. We 
should rely on emotionally powerful language, feelings and images 
to bring home the terrible impact of gun violence.” They realize 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
116	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
they’ve lost the rational and empirical debates about what really stops 
gun violence and instead want the debate inflamed by unempirical 
emotion.
“If the gun-control groups can’t control the messaging, they won’t 
even talk to you,” says Alan Gottlieb, chairman of the Citizens Com-
mittee for the Right to Keep and Bear Arms and founder of the Second 
Amendment Foundation, when I tell him I can’t get Bloomberg’s 
MAIG or the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence to answer my 
media requests.
In the end, when it comes to defending our Second Amendment 
rights, David Keene says, “I’m optimistic. As long as we have our First 
Amendment intact, I think Americans will push back against these 
attempts to disarm them. But we can’t get complacent. Our freedom 
is always tenuous.”
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
117
C H A P T E R  S I X
Into “Gun-Free” America
She shot him. She’s shooting him. She’s shooting him. 
Shoot him again!
—Donnie Herman on the phone with his wife, Melinda,  
and a police dispatcher as a home intruder opens a closet door  
where Melinda was hiding with their two children1
J
ust after midnight Dick Anthony Heller steps into a backroom in 
a federal building on Capitol Hill in Washington, DC.He takes off 
his holster and revolver. A video camera’s unblinking eye watches as 
he places the Smith & Wesson in a locker in the government building 
he protects forty hours a week. He grabs his bicycle and pushes it out 
of the building. As he goes he waves goodnight to the security guard 
who relieved him. When he steps outside, he pauses to strap on a 
bicycle helmet. He pulls his socks over the bottoms of his pants. He 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
118	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
pushes his bicycle onto a sidewalk under the glare of streetlights. He 
looks up and down the DC street. People have tried to sell him drugs 
while he walked home from work in the nation’s capital. Others have 
approached him with bad intentions. He started riding the bike to 
avoid them. He’s seventy years old now and can’t carry his gun on 
these streets for protection. He must carry a gun to protect govern-
ment officials and property while on duty, but he can’t carry one for 
his own defense even though he went all the way to the U.S. Supreme 
Court and won.
This is disarmed America in all its contradictions. Dick Heller 
loves these streets, this city. He doesn’t understand why he can’t be a 
good, responsible example of a gun owner on them; after all, in 2008 
the U.S. Supreme Court decided 5 to 4 in District of Columbia v. 
Heller that DC’s banning citizens from owning handguns was uncon-
stitutional.
After the Supreme Court win, Heller followed the law to get a 
permit for a handgun. He was fingerprinted, he paid fees, and he 
waited as DC police did a background check on him. He finally got 
his permit to own a handgun in DC. Nevertheless, the District still 
won’t let him carry his registered handgun outside his home.
This is why he is again a plaintiff in a case working its way to the 
U.S. Supreme Court, a case that has been dubbed “Heller II.” He is 
one of five plaintiffs who want the high court to ultimately declare 
the District of Columbia’s gun registry and other gun-control regula-
tions unconstitutional.
The original Heller decision declared the Second Amendment to 
be an individual right. It struck down DC’s outright ban on handguns 
as well as regulations requiring that all firearms, including rifles and 
shotguns, be kept “unloaded and disassembled or bound by a trigger 
lock.” Those DC laws had made it impossible for a homeowner to 
use a firearm in defense of his or her life.
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Into “Gun-Free” America	
119 
He said to me, “I’m just an ordinary guy who decided to make a 
stand because my constitutional rights have been taken from me. I 
carry a gun when protecting people in a federal building, but then I 
have to check in the gun when I leave. I often get off work at mid-
night. So I have to make my way home disarmed through DC. I’ve 
been approached by thugs, but at least I’m a guy. If I were a woman, 
I wouldn’t be able to keep this job. It would be too risky. It’s these 
basic rights to freedom we’re trying to win back.”
After Heller’s first Supreme Court victory, the District of Colum-
bia “obviously grabbed every gun-control restriction they could find 
from the fifty states and included almost all of them in its hastily 
written gun-control ordinances,” he said. “This is how they created 
a system so burdensome to the Second Amendment we still don’t have 
our right to bear arms here in DC even though we won that right in 
court.”
The question in “Heller II” is, when does government red tape 
become so burdensome that it infringes upon the people’s right to 
bear arms?
This challenge to DC’s gun laws has been working its way through 
the courts for a number of years. In October 2011, the U.S. Court of 
Appeals upheld what it called a “basic” registration of handguns, but 
questioned whether any registration of rifles and shotguns is consti-
tutional. The court remanded the case to the district court to gather 
further evidence on whether DC’s gun laws are reasonable.
In December 2013 the plaintiffs’ attorneys, Stephen Halbrook and 
Dan Peterson, deposed DC’s witnesses and filed a motion in U.S. 
District Court for the District of Columbia asking Judge James Boas-
berg for summary judgment on whether DC’s gun registration and 
other laws are “reasonable” based on the evidence.
According to these rules, starting January 1, 2014, every gun 
owner in DC—even those who have a shotgun or rifle—who has 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
120	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
registered a gun since 1976 had to go to police headquarters to be 
fingerprinted and photographed.
Halbrook said to me, “If DC gets its way, gun owners will have 
to do this every three years. Even those who have the time and money 
to make it through this difficult process will find they’re never done, 
as DC is still trying to burden them with expiration and reregistration 
deadlines that, if missed, would turn them into criminals.”
Halbrook also pointed out that long guns are rarely used in crimes 
and says this clearly shows the laws are only designed to impede 
people from legally owning guns. The facts back him up. According 
to data provided by DC to the FBI for 2009, only 2 out of 144 mur-
ders in DC were known to have been committed with a long gun. In 
2010, out of 131 murders in DC, not one is reported to have been 
committed with a rifle or shotgun. In 2011, only 1 murder in DC was 
reported to have been committed with a long gun (a shotgun), out of 
108 murders total. Given that less than 1 percent of murders are 
being committed with long guns, how can DC justify the onerous 
need for fingerprinting residents every three years? For context, real-
ize that for the same time period (2009–2011) ninety-six homicides 
were reportedly committed with knives or weapons other than guns 
and fists.
When questioned about the need for these laws, DC’s witnesses 
weren’t able to cite a single study indicating that its firearm registra-
tion prevents illegal possession of firearms. Actually, studies show that 
registration laws haven’t had a measurable affect on crime rates or 
gun violence. During deposition, DC Police chief Cathy L. Lanier even 
conceded, “It is not clear [to the District] how firearms’ registration 
records could be used to ‘prevent’ a crime.” In fact, she said she 
couldn’t “recall any specific instance where registration records were 
used to determine who committed a crime,” except for possession 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Into “Gun-Free” America	
121 
offenses. Lanier couldn’t even provide a single example of a registra-
tion record being used to solve a crime committed with a long gun.
Now, every fourth grader knows the First Amendment’s protec-
tion of the freedom of speech is a fundamental liberty earned on the 
battlefield and later safeguarded in the Bill of Rights. But few Amer-
icans today understand that the First Amendment, the Second Amend-
ment, and the rest of the Bill of Rights are not rights the government 
is required to enforce, but freedoms government cannot infringe: 
government has not created these rights; these are rights the govern-
ment cannot unreasonably take away from the people.
This is what DC is trying to do with the Second Amendment. They 
are forcing residents to seek permission above and beyond a federal 
background check for owning any firearm. According to DC, “no 
person or organization in the District shall possess or control any 
firearm, unless the person or organization holds a valid registration 
certificate for the firearm.” Possession of an unregistered firearm is 
punishable by imprisonment for one year and a $1,000 fine. For a 
second offense, someone can get five years in the pen and a $5,000 
fine. “Applicants” wishing to exercise their Second Amendment rights 
have to be fingerprinted and photographed at a police station; fees 
have to be paid for each firearm; and restrictions prohibit carrying a 
gun for self-defense.
DC cites as a legal precedent for registering long guns an 1896 
law from the Republic of Hawaii that required a license to possess a 
firearm. Hawaii, of course, was then an independent country. (Hawaii 
became a U.S. territory in 1898 and a state in 1959.) DC argues that 
“laws requiring the registration of certain types of long guns at the 
federal level has [sic] proven ‘highly successful’ in reducing the use of 
such long-guns in crime.” DC naturally doesn’t cite any data or stud-
ies to back up this claim, since there aren’t any. DC also cites an 1893 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
122	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
Florida statute that empowered officials to grant a license to carry a 
pistol or repeating rifle. This law, however, didn’t require a license to 
possess a firearm and, according to background dug up by Halbrook, 
was only passed “for the purpose of disarming the negro laborers,” 
according to one of the justices at the time.
A logical question is why, after the Supreme Court decided Heller 
in 2008, has DC decided to float a reregistration scheme? Halbrook 
noted that DC’s “own witnesses cite no studies showing that periodic 
registration renewal or reporting requirements reduce crime or protect 
police officers.”
DC Police chief Lanier and the officers who oversee the Firearms 
Registration Section are quoted in the brief from the plaintiffs’ attor-
neys noting there were only two handgun applications denied by DC 
in 2011 and 2012. During this period not a single rifle or shotgun 
application was refused. This, of course, isn’t surprising. Criminals 
aren’t likely to voluntarily troop down to the police station to be 
fingerprinted and photographed.
The numbers fill in the details. From 2007 to 2013, the police 
seized twelve thousand unregistered firearms; meanwhile, cops only 
seized thirty-six registered guns during this same period. Of those 
thirty-six guns, only seventeen were involved in charges against a 
registered firearm owner. Of those seventeen cases, only two resulted 
in convictions for a violent crime. Clearly the good guys with the 
guns—the ones being burdened by the gun-control regulations—are 
not the problem.
Actually, this case has also shown that officers responding to calls 
are not even being informed if there is a registered firearm at a loca-
tion. Police cars aren’t equipped with a computer that can access the 
firearms registry, and dispatchers can’t check the registration database. 
As of January 2014, the whole system was simply a gauntlet designed 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Into “Gun-Free” America	
123 
to prevent law-abiding citizens from utilizing their Second Amend-
ment rights.
            
The push against unreasonably restrictive gun laws extends to 
Chicago, which has some of the most-restrictive gun laws in the 
country and yet is both America’s murder capital and in 2012 ranked 
dead last for federal prosecutions of gun crimes. A hero of this fight 
is Otis McDonald. In April 2008, McDonald, a retired maintenance 
engineer, agreed to serve as the lead plaintiff in a lawsuit challenging 
Chicago’s handgun ban, which had been in place since 1982. McDon-
ald is the child of black Louisiana sharecroppers. He was seventeen 
years old when he borrowed eighteen dollars from his mother and 
set off for Chicago in 1951. He was just one of millions of African 
Americans who fled the South during the “Great Migration.” 
McDonald settled in Chicago’s Morgan Park neighborhood. At the 
time, the neighborhood was bustling and relatively safe. In the ensu-
ing years he got married, raised eight children, and spent a career 
working at the University of Chicago, where he started as a janitor 
and worked his way up to become a maintenance engineer. But by 
the time he retired, in 1997, his neighborhood had been lost to gangs. 
McDonald told the Chicago Tribune, “I know every day that I come 
out in the streets, the youngsters will shoot me as quick as they will 
a policeman.”
According to police reports, McDonald’s house was repeatedly 
burglarized. On one occasion, McDonald says, three young men sur-
rounded his car and threatened to “off” him.
McDonald decided to become involved in the gun-rights move-
ment in 2005, when Mayor Richard Daley was pushing a statewide 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
124	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
ban on “assault weapons.” McDonald was concerned that his shotgun 
might be outlawed under the proposed ban, so he started attending 
gun-rights rallies. The connections he formed at those events led to 
his inclusion in the class-action lawsuit against the city of Chicago.
McDonald, a Democrat and longtime hunter, had by then been a 
law-abiding resident of Chicago for more than fifty years. He wasn’t 
an activist. He was simply a person trying to live the American dream. 
McDonald explained, “I was feeling the poor blacks who years ago 
had their guns taken away from them [in the post–Civil War South] 
and were killed as someone wished. That was a long time ago, but I 
feel their spirit. That’s what I was feeling in the courtroom. . . . This 
lawsuit, I hope, will allow me to bring my handgun into the city 
legally. I only want a handgun in my house for my protection.”
McDonald’s case went to the Supreme Court, and as with Heller, 
he won (McDonald v. Chicago, 2010). The Supreme Court opinion 
noted: “[The] number of Chicago homicide victims during the current 
year equaled the number of American soldiers killed during that same 
period in Afghanistan and Iraq . . . 80 percent of the Chicago victims 
were black. . . . If, as petitioners believe, their safety and the safety of 
other law-abiding members of the community would be enhanced by 
the possession of handguns in the home for self-defense, then the 
Second Amendment right protects the rights of minorities and other 
residents of high-crime areas whose needs are not being met by elected 
public officials.”
The Second Amendment battle with the city of Chicago, however, 
didn’t end with the ruling. To sidestep the Supreme Court decision, 
Chicago quickly passed a new ordinance. City officials called the new 
law “the strictest in the nation.” As it turns out, it was perhaps the 
stupidest. The measure prohibited gun stores from opening in Chi-
cago, and it prevented gun owners from so much as stepping outside 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Into “Gun-Free” America	
125 
their homes with a handgun. (In January 2014 U.S. district judge 
Edmond Chang ruled that the city of Chicago couldn’t ban licensed 
firearm dealers from the city.) The law also prevented citizens from 
using a firearm on their porches or in their garages. That’s right, the 
law actually explained where you could and couldn’t defend your life. 
Though precisely what a “porch” is under the law remains to be 
answered. Does screened-in count? How about windows with an air 
conditioner?
Since passing that ordinance in 2010, Chicago has been forced to 
allow residents to purchase handguns—but only after they pay fees 
and navigate onerous restrictions. Officials cite Chicago’s murder rate 
to justify banning concealed handguns. This was the same argument 
used in Washington, DC, when the Heller case was decided. DC’s 
then-mayor Adrian Fenty warned, “More handguns in the District 
of Columbia will only lead to more handgun violence.”2 Knowing 
that Chicago’s gun laws would soon face a similar legal challenge, 
Chicago’s then-mayor Richard Daley said he was “outraged” by the 
Heller decision and said people “are going to take a gun and they are 
going to end their lives in a family dispute.”3
Murders in Washington, DC, however, actually plummeted by 
an astounding 25 percent in 2009, the year after the Heller decision, 
giving DC its lowest murder rate since 1967. DC’s drop was several 
times greater than that of other similar-sized cities that also regis-
tered falling murder rates, says John Lott, author of More Guns, 
Less Crime.
Lott also discovered that jurisdictions with “shall issue” laws, 
granting concealed handgun permits (subject to certain established 
criteria), had lower murder rates than those that didn’t. Peer-reviewed 
studies have confirmed Lott’s findings. For example, a study by 
Carlisle E. Moody and Thomas B. Marvell that was published in 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
126	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
Econ Journal Watch in January 2009, determined: “Many articles 
have been published finding that shall-issue laws reduce crime. Only 
one article, by Ayres and Donohue who employ a model that com-
bines a dummy variable with a post-law trend, claims to find that 
shall-issue laws increase crime. However, the only way that they can 
produce the result that shall-issue laws increase crime is to confine 
the span of analysis to five years. We show, using their own estimates, 
that if they had extended their analysis by one more year, they would 
have concluded that these laws reduce crime.”
Despite all the evidence that guns in the hands of law-abiding 
citizens is a deterrent to crime, Chicago’s mayor Rahm Emanuel and 
police superintendent Garry McCarthy blame the city’s high murder 
rate on less-restrictive gun laws in other states. But Lott’s evidence 
from island states, which are good examples because of their clear 
and tightly controlled borders, belie this claim: “When handgun bans 
were enacted in Ireland and Jamaica, in 1972 and 1974, respectively, 
murder rates doubled over the following decade. And take the more 
recent example in England and Wales, where handguns were banned 
in 1997: deaths and injuries from gun crime more than doubled over 
the next seven years.” Closer to home, Chicago’s murder rate, which 
had been falling relative to similar-sized cities prior to 1982, started 
rising after the gun ban.
I asked Lott what he would do if he were mayor of Chicago. He 
told me that he would “give law-abiding people the ability to protect 
themselves in public and in their homes”; hire more police officers, 
given that Chicago’s police department has actually shrunk (he shows 
how this could be done simply by shifting government resources in his 
book Freedomnomics); and maintain anti-gang units and leave officers 
on established beats, because it “takes years for [police officers] to get 
to know who the good and bad guys are on any given street.”
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Into “Gun-Free” America	
127 
            
In both Heller (2008) and McDonald (2010), the high court split 
5 to 4 in favor of the Second Amendment right of the people to bear 
arms. This could change with the retirement of a single Supreme 
Court justice. Anyone who slogs through the minority opinions in 
either of those cases will find that, with one more vote, the liberal 
block on the high court is poised to vote the Second Amendment right 
out of the Bill of Rights.
“I know it’s a cliché to say this,” Andrew Arulanandam, director 
of public affairs at the National Rifle Association, tells me, “but this 
is why we consider the 2014 midterm election and the next presiden-
tial election to be the most important elections in the history of our 
right to keep and bear arms.”
The NRA, the Second Amendment Foundation, and many other 
gun-rights groups have been involved in court battles across the 
country from Connecticut to California defending an individual’s 
right to own a gun. In an important example, in February 2014 the 
Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals confirmed that the Second Amend-
ment protects an individual right to carry firearms for self-defense in 
public. The decision came in Peruta v. San Diego County.4 The major-
ity opinion in Peruta said, “We are called upon to decide whether a 
responsible, law-abiding citizen has a right under the Second Amend-
ment to carry a firearm in public for self-defense.” The case was 
brought by the California Rifle and Pistol Association Foundation on 
behalf of five individuals who were denied the right to carry a hand-
gun by the San Diego sheriff.
According to California law, a person applying for their Second 
Amendment right to carry a concealed handgun must: (1) be a resident 
of their respective city or county; (2) be of “good moral character”; 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
128	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
(3) have “good cause” for such a license; and (4) pass a firearms train-
ing course. Many rural California counties accept self-defense as “good 
cause” for a person to get a license to carry a handgun, but some urban 
sheriffs and chiefs of police disagree, and in these jurisdictions the few 
who attain permits have to beg, plead, and show imminent danger to 
their lives before they can exercise their right to bear arms.
The Ninth Circuit’s majority opinion attempted to address this 
problem, stating, “It doesn’t take a lawyer to see that straightforward 
application of the rule in Heller will not dispose of this case. It should 
be equally obvious that neither Heller nor McDonald speaks explicitly 
or precisely to the scope of the Second Amendment right outside the 
home or to what it takes to ‘infringe’ it. Yet, it is just as apparent that 
neither opinion is silent on these matters, for, at the very least, the 
Supreme Court’s approach . . . points in a general direction.”
The Ninth Circuit decided 2 to 1 that the restrictive “good cause” 
policy of the San Diego County Sheriff’s Department was unconsti-
tutional. The majority opinion accepts that “the Second Amendment 
right is ‘not unlimited.’ It is ‘not a right to keep and carry any weapon 
whatsoever in any manner whatsoever and for whatever purpose.’ 
Rather, it is a right subject to ‘traditional restrictions,’ which them-
selves—and this is a critical point—tend ‘to show the scope of the 
right.’”5 In this case, the court concluded that the government can ban 
open carry or concealed carry, but the Second Amendment prohibits 
the government from banning both. In Shepard v. Madigan (2013), 
the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals confirmed that a citizen’s right 
to carry a gun is protected outside the home.6 But Peruta was the first 
appellate decision to affirm that licenses to carry cannot be denied to 
law-abiding citizens. The majority decision in Peruta noted that “Our 
opinion is not the first to address the question of whether the Second 
Amendment protects a responsible, law-abiding citizen’s right to bear 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Into “Gun-Free” America	
129 
arms outside the home for the lawful purpose of self-defense. Indeed, 
we are the fifth circuit court to opine expressly on the issue, joining 
an existent circuit split.” The opinion later says, “Our reading of the 
Second Amendment is akin to the Seventh Circuit’s interpretation [in 
Shepard v. Madigan] . . . and at odds with the approach of the Second, 
Third, and Fourth Circuits. . . . We are unpersuaded by the decisions 
of the Second, Third, and Fourth Circuits for several reasons. First, 
contrary to the approach in Heller, all three courts declined to under-
take a complete historical analysis of the scope and nature of the 
Second Amendment right outside the home. . . . As a result, they mis-
apprehend both the nature of the Second Amendment right and the 
implications of state laws that prevent the vast majority of respon-
sible, law-abiding citizens from carrying in public for lawful self-
defense purposes.”
The Ninth Circuit then determined that “states may not destroy 
the right to bear arms in public under the guise of regulating it. . . . By 
evading an in-depth analysis of history and tradition, the Second, 
Third, and Fourth Circuits missed a crucial piece of the Second 
Amendment analysis. They failed to comprehend that carrying weap-
ons in public for the lawful purpose of self defense is a central com-
ponent of the right to bear arms.”
When circuit courts begin calling each other out on constitutional 
questions like this, the U.S. Supreme Court usually takes a case to 
settle the dispute. Whether the U.S. Supreme Court’s nine justices will 
split the same way they did in Heller and McDonald will depend on 
the health of the justices and the outcomes of 2014 and 2016 senato-
rial and presidential elections.

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
131
C H A P T E R  S E V E N
What Happens to  
Disarmed Peoples
From available statistics, among the [twenty-seven] 
countries surveyed, it is difficult to find a correlation 
between the existence of strict firearms regulations and 
a lower incidence of gun-related crimes.
—Library of Congress1
I 
 didn’t set out to embarrass this English journalist. It’s just that he 
had it coming.
Let’s call him Stephen Grey, as that’s his real name. He’s not a bad 
sort. Grey was educated at England’s famed St. Alban’s School and 
studied philosophy at Oxford. He has outsized ears and somehow 
seems too tall for his boyish face. These features give him a look of 
young innocence that you soon find is matched by sincerity. Then you 
run into his intellect and you really like him. He wrote his last book, 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
132	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
Into the Viper’s Nest, after being embedded with soldiers in Afghan-
istan. He saw firsthand what the Taliban did to women. He knows 
all about the barbaric things al Qaeda has done to a few of his col-
leagues. He knows jihadists consider civilians to be fair game. Never-
theless, he doesn’t think average people should have a right to firearms 
for self-defense.
Grey was seated across a table from me at a small dinner party in 
Washington, DC, saying things like, “Americans need to give up their 
guns. They must become responsible citizens of the world.” Mean-
while, the other writers around the table—people who know my 
background—were glancing at me, bracing for the counterattack.
I stayed quiet as he described his utopian vision of a disarmed 
world. I didn’t think he’d be swayed by crime statistics—though there 
are some astounding figures we’ll get into later. What I needed was 
something he hadn’t heard before. So I started with the story of a 
particular Springfield Model 1903, which, I told him, “might make 
you rethink your views.”
He eyed me over his whiskey and soda.
This particular rifle, I explained, was owned by Major John W. 
Hession (1877–1961), an American long-range competition shooter, 
who probably purchased it in 1906. The rifle, chambered in .30-06, 
was constructed at the U.S. government’s Springfield Armory, which 
had been started by George Washington. Hession found the rifle was 
so accurate—he had topped it with a J. Stevens Company riflescope—
that he took it to England to compete in the Olympics in 1908 at the 
Bisley Range. In 1909 he used the rifle to set a world record at eight 
hundred yards at Camp Perry. At the time the Piqua Leader-Dispatch 
(a newspaper that went out of business in 1919) ran the headline 
“World’s Record Is Broken by Hession” on its front page. The feat 
made him a star. So much so that the June 1911 issue of Forest and 
Stream reported that when Hession competed at the DuPont Gun 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
What Happens to Disarmed Peoples 	
133 
Club, they were “especially pleased to have Mr. Hession with them. 
He is regarded by critics as the foremost long-range rifle shot in the 
world. His most remarkable performance, and the one which brought 
him the most fame, was at Camp Perry during 1909. At this time he 
made 67 consecutive bullseyes at 800 yds., a record never before 
equaled nor since broken.”
Hession was a top long-range competitor well into the 1940s. He 
won the Marine Corps Cup Match in 1913 and the British Wimble-
don Cup in 1919 and 1932, and in 1925 he managed to set four 
world records in one day—a day that saw him shoot 102 shots, all 
of them bull’s-eyes. Hession had an understandable attachment to his 
1903 Springfield. Such a profound attachment, in fact, that he later 
did something even more remarkable with this rifle.
After World War I, Britain’s Parliament passed gun-control laws 
that mostly disarmed its citizenry. The belief that there should be “a 
rifle in every cottage,” as proposed by Prime Minister Robert Gas-
coyne-Cecil in 1900, was finished. According to the 1689 Bill of 
Rights “subjects which are Protestants may have arms for their 
defence suitable to their conditions and as allowed by law.” This 
changed with Britain’s Firearms Act of 1920. Its restrictions on the 
private ownership of firearms was partly sold to a war-weary public 
by politicians fanning fears that a surge in crime might occur because 
of the large number of firearms available following the war. Another 
justification for severely restricting firearms ownership was to fulfill 
a commitment to the 1919 Paris Arms Convention.
Whatever the rationales, the Firearms Act of 1920 passed and 
required British citizens who wanted to own a firearm to first obtain 
a firearm certificate. The certificate, which was good for three years, 
specifically listed the firearm a person was approved to own and listed 
the amount of ammunition that person could buy or possess. The 
police even had the power to exclude anyone who had “intemperate 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
134	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
habits” or an “unsound mind.” Applicants for certificates also had 
to convince the police they had a good reason for needing a certificate. 
The 1920 law did not affect those who owned shotguns, but it gave 
government officials complete control over who could own handguns 
and rifles.
In 1933, Britain’s Parliament passed the Firearms and Imitation 
Firearms Bill. This legislation increased the punishment for the use of 
a gun in the commission of a crime. Possession of a real or imitation 
firearm was also made an offense unless the person could show they 
had the firearm for “a lawful object.” The 1937 Firearms Act extended 
restrictions to shotguns and granted chief constables the power to add 
conditions to individual firearms certificates. Clearly the power was 
in the hands of the state, not the individual.
Predictably, these restrictions reduced the number of firearms in 
law-abiding citizens’ hands. Then came the Battle of Dunkirk in 1940. 
As the German war machine advanced at this early stage in World 
War II, the British Expeditionary Force evacuated back across the 
English Channel. The retreat was costly. In their haste, British troops 
abandoned most of their equipment, and a disarmed British people 
awaited an expected Nazi invasion.
Luckily, the British had gun-owning friends across the Atlantic. In 
1940 a group of Americans, headed by C. Suydam Cutting, moved 
quickly to help rearm Britain’s citizens. They established the “Ameri-
can Committee for Defense of British Homes” and ran an ad in the 
November 1940 issue of American Rifleman that read in part: “Brit-
ish Civilians, undergoing nightly air raids, are in desperate need of 
Firearms—Binoculars—Steel Helmets—Stop-Watches—Ammuni-
tion.” The ad then said, “If you possess any of these articles you can 
aid in the battle of Britain by sending these materials to American 
Committee for Defense of British Homes.”
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
What Happens to Disarmed Peoples 	
135 
Hession, who was then working for Winchester Arms, decided to 
make a statement. He sent his prized Springfield Model 1903 to the 
American Committee for Defense of British Homes. Before he did 
this, he had two plates attached to the rifle’s stock. The one on the 
rifle’s butt read: “This rifle was used by Major John W. Hession in 
winning Olympics Bisley England 1908—Grand Aggregate Camp 
Perry 1908—Worlds 800 YD. Record Camp Perry 1909.” A plate 
placed on the rifle’s forend read: “for obvious reasons the return 
of this rifle after germany is defeated would be deeply 
appreciated.”
Hession’s rifle was shipped to England. Before the end of the war, 
the NRA alone sent more than seven thousand private firearms to 
England. The U.S. government, of course, sent many more from the 
Springfield Armory. Congress passed the Lend-Lease Act in March 
1941. Almost immediately, vast quantities of “U.S. Rifle, Cal. .30, 
M1” were headed across the Atlantic.
Winston Churchill was appreciative. He wrote in Their Finest 
Hour: “When the ships from America approached our shores with 
their priceless arms, special trains were waiting in all ports to receive 
their cargoes. The Home Guard in every county, in every village, sat 
up through the night to receive them. . . . By the end of July we were 
an armed nation. . . . Anyhow, if we had to go down fighting . . . a lot 
of our men and some women had weapons in their hands. . . .”
England, of course, was victorious after American troops entered 
the war; and wonderfully, after the war, Hession’s rifle found its way 
back from England to Hession. This rifle can now be seen in the 
NRA’s National Firearms Museum in Fairfax, Virginia.
By the time I gave up the floor, Grey had finished his whisky and 
soda and was staring at the melting ice at the bottom of his glass. I 
concluded by saying, “Sadly, Britain is again a disarmed nation.”

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
136	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
Today, to obtain a firearm certificate in Britain, the police must be 
convinced that a person has “good reason” to own a firearm, and that 
he can be trusted with it “without danger to the public safety or to 
the peace.” British firearms licenses are only issued if a person has a 
recognized sporting, collecting, or work-related reasons for owner-
ship. Since 1946, self-defense has not been considered a valid reason 
to own a firearm—nor has national defense.
England’s Firearms Act of 1997 banned the private ownership of 
handguns almost completely. The ban is so restrictive even England’s 
Olympic pistol team had to go abroad to practice before the 2012 
Summer Olympics in London. This became such a national embar-
rassment that the English government passed a special dispensation 
to allow the shooting events to be held in England during the 2012 
games.
My argument might have been less polished than how it appears 
here in print, but I still thought it was effective. Grey’s response? “The 
world has evolved.”
I took a parting shot: “If your emasculated people ever need to 
protect their freedom from threats domestic or foreign, Americans 
will again be there to help rearm your populace.”
            
Perhaps that wasn’t kind to Stephen, who as I said is a splendid 
chap and a fine journalist. I begin with him, though, because it’s 
revealing that even an Englishman who has traveled into the world’s 
hot zones, as Stephen has, is still skeptical of the natural right to 
defend our lives, a right so English it was included in the English Bill 
of Rights of 1689. This traditional right of an Englishman would later 
influence the inclusion of what would become the Second Amendment 
in our own Constitution’s Bill of Rights (“A well regulated Militia, 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
What Happens to Disarmed Peoples 	
137 
being necessary to the security of a free State, the right of the people 
to keep and bear Arms, shall not be infringed”). Despite England’s 
long history of freedom, the British people have relinquished their 
fundamental right to self-defense, relying entirely on the protection 
of their government. History, of course, teaches that freedom can be 
lost by degrees, with one loss of liberty leading to another.
When this point is raised, gun-rights enthusiasts like to quote, 
“The strongest reason for the people to retain the right to keep and 
bear arms is, as a last resort, to protect themselves against tyranny in 
government.”2 (Though this quotation is often attributed to Jefferson, 
the real author remains unknown.) The argument is historically 
grounded, but it makes people wince—and it should make people 
wince, because armed rebellion should be the last option for a 
repressed people, especially as we know that few armed rebellions 
lead to greater freedom, such as was won with the American Revolu-
tion.
But to understand what happens to a disarmed nation living in a 
European-style socialist state, it’s helpful to look at the riots that 
erupted in London in August 2011.
The riots began in Tottenham, a dicey corner of north London, 
after police shot and killed a twenty-nine-year-old Tottenham resident 
named Mark Duggan. As typically happens, two competing person-
ality profiles of Duggan were quickly pedaled to the public, each a 
slave to the politics of the teller: while some said Duggan was a hard-
ened drug dealer, others said he was a beloved family man. Whatever 
Duggan’s moral character, what isn’t disputed is that police pulled 
over a taxi. Duggan was a passenger. Police say they heard a gunshot 
and that this prompted them to shoot and kill the loveable or cold-
hearted Duggan.
The facts of this incident may be in dispute, but the unmanly 
actions of Tottenham’s gangster youth were not. Whether their  

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
138	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
looting, robbery, and bedlam were childish retaliation for Duggan’s 
death or whether Duggan’s death was a hell of an excuse for a lot of 
rebellious mayhem depends on the view of the teller. Either way, they 
burned autos, looted stores, and mugged people along the Tottenham 
High Road and around other parts of London. The most revealing 
image from the London riots appeared in the August 9, 2011, issue 
of the Daily Mail.3 The newspaper ran a photo of a skinny young 
man taking off his pants on the street in bright daylight as an impa-
tient looter waits with the emasculated Englishman’s sneakers and 
shirt already in his greedy hands. Luckily the feeble Englishman chose 
boxers over briefs, but as I look at this picture I can’t help but won-
der if men such as T. E. Lawrence, Winston Churchill, and Lord 
Acton could have stomached the state of manliness in this generation 
of Englishmen.
To put this cultural shift into perspective, consider the “Tottenham 
Outrage” of 1909.4 Two men in Tottenham, Paul Helfeld and Jacob 
Lepidus, armed with semiautomatic handguns, attempted to rob a 
payroll truck outside a rubber factory on the corner of Tottenham 
High Road and Chestnut Road. Helfeld had an FN M1900 pistol, 
and Lepidus carried a Bergmann 1894 pistol. The truck arrived with 
the workers’ wages, which a guard collected from the car. Lepidus 
jumped him and tried to grab the moneybag. The guard and the thief 
rolled onto the ground, each struggling for control of the money. 
Another guard joined the fight and for a moment restrained Lepidus, 
but Helfeld then stepped into the fray and fired several shots hitting 
one of the guards. The guard’s heavy coat stopped the bullets from 
Helfeld’s FN M1900, which was chambered in .32 ACP, a light pistol 
cartridge, comparable to the velocity and power of a .22 Long Rifle 
used by small-game hunters and target shooters.
Two police officers heard the shots from the nearby Tottenham 
Police Station and came running. When they arrived they found a local 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
What Happens to Disarmed Peoples 	
139 
gas stoker beating Lepidus and the others brawling. The two thieves 
saw the cops and ran with the moneybag.
The chase was on. As they ran one of the officers borrowed a 
revolver from a bystander and shot four times at Lepidus and Helfeld, 
but all his shots missed. The criminals returned fire and one of their 
shots killed a ten-year-old boy, Ralph Joscelyne, who had been help-
ing a baker with his deliveries.
Helfeld and Lepidus ran for a railway footbridge at the end of 
Down Road leading to a park called Tottenham Marshes. A police 
officer, William Tyler, cut them off. Tyler shouted, “Come on, give 
in, the game’s up.” Helfeld didn’t think so. He shot Tyler through the 
head. Another officer caught up and stayed with Tyler, who died 
before reaching the hospital.
Lepidus and Helfeld ran to the River Lea. While searching for a 
crossing, a number of civilian bystanders attempted to arrest them 
but were scattered when the criminals started shooting. The robbers 
crossed Mill Stream Bridge but stopped on the other side to gasp for 
air and to fire more shots at their civilian pursuers, injuring two more. 
At this point a police officer crawled forward with a revolver, but his 
borrowed gun failed to fire. Helfeld and Lepidus saw the officer and 
shot him in the thigh and leg.
The two ran again, this time along the south side of the Banbury 
Reservoir in Walthamstow. Another civilian, a horse keeper, tried to 
stop them and was injured. Another police officer caught up with 
them and fired four shots from a borrowed revolver, but all his shots 
also missed.
Helfeld and Lepidus fired at more people before reaching Salis-
bury Farm. They didn’t get much rest there, as they were chased by 
a growing posse of civilians and police.
Helfeld and Lepidus ran again and managed to hijack a tram, 
wounding another bystander, and headed for Leyton. About forty 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
140	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
police boarded and commandeered another tram to give chase. 
Another police officer, racing after the tram in a horse-drawn carriage, 
was stymied when the criminals shot his horse and the carriage 
crashed.
The thieves jumped off their hijacked tram and stole a milk cart. 
When its owner tried to stop them, they shot and wounded him. They 
drove the horse and cart along Farnham Road into Forest Road, 
where it tipped over. They abandoned the milk cart and hijacked 
another horse and cart. Lepidus was now riding the horse, and Helf-
eld was firing at the people chasing them. The crowd in hot pursuit 
was led by a motorcar—remember this is 1909—with two officers in 
it blazing away with a double-barrel shotgun. The gunfight kept roar-
ing along like a Benny Hill finale with Bonnie and Clyde as guest stars 
until the robbers’ horse and cart swerved and crashed.
Helfeld and Lepidus abandoned the horse and cart and fled to the 
River Ching. Lepidus climbed over a six-foot-high fence. Helfeld had 
trouble getting over the fence. As the crowd neared, Helfeld shot 
himself in the right eye, but survived and was taken to the Prince of 
Wales Hospital.
Lepidus ran into a home. There was a man, woman, and two 
children inside. The mother ran out of the house. Two officers and a 
baker attempted to rescue the children and father. Lepidus looked out 
one of the front bedroom windows but was driven back by gunfire 
from police and civilians. A police officer borrowed a civilian’s hand-
gun, climbed a ladder placed at the back of the cottage, and opened 
a bedroom window. He had a clear shot at Helfeld, but he didn’t know 
how to undo the firearm’s safety.
Other officers, however, stormed the house and fired through a 
door into the room where Lepidus was hiding. When the officers 
busted into the room, they found Lepidus dead. Lepidus had killed 
himself. The other thief died later in surgery.
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
What Happens to Disarmed Peoples 	
141 
The bravery of the officers and civilians involved prompted the 
creation of the King’s Police Medal. The funeral processions for the 
slain officer and the boy who was killed passed through streets lined 
with a half million mournful Londoners.5
These Londoners wouldn’t take their pants off for a looter, and 
they didn’t, unlike many people in the inner cities today, demonize 
police officers; on the contrary, they were ready to assist them and 
even loan guns to them.
Something has changed in the English character since 1909. Could 
it be that the English have been emasculated by losing their right to 
bear arms, their right to self-defense? Since individuals can no longer 
combat crime themselves, and are dependent on the state, they 
increasingly blame the police for not being everywhere all the time, 
and act helpless when crime strikes.
After jihadists attacked and murdered a British soldier in daylight 
on the streets of London on May 22, 2013, the English newspaper 
the Guardian obtained a video of one of two of the killers talking to 
bystanders almost calmly with a bloody knife and meat cleaver still 
in his hands.6 The killers weren’t worried about the bystanders inter-
vening. Watch the video and you’ll see dozens of Londoners in the 
background watching with craned necks, until the police finally arrive 
and shoot the killers in self-defense. A disarmed populace is a popu-
lace that will cower behind locked doors when a victim is raped or 
murdered. A disarmed populace is also a populace that will come to 
resent to the police, as officers are set above citizens, and seem more 
like masters than servants.
            
There are still guns on the streets in London. A report by the 
U.S. Library of Congress noted: “Despite [England’s] stringent gun 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
142	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
laws, newspaper reports indicate that illegal handguns can be pur-
chased for £50–100 (approximately U.S. $70–155). In 2002 a Mem-
ber of Parliament stated that there are some inner-city areas ‘in 
which it is now easier to buy an illegal gun than to find a taxi in the 
rain.’”7, 8
The source of illegal firearms in England is as diverse as any mar-
ket. Some guns come from other European Union nations, arriving 
via ports or the Chunnel,9 and a few have speculated that after the 
ceasefire the IRA began selling surplus guns on a black market that 
leads to England.10
An increase in gun crime caused London’s Metropolitan Police to 
start Operation Trident in 1998.11 Trident was established as a dedi-
cated Operational Command Unit within the Metropolitan Police 
Specialist Crime Directorate. In 2004 this unit expanded with the 
formation of Operation Trafalgar, which was designed to investigate 
all non-fatal shootings in London.
Trident has overstepped on a few high-profile occasions. In 
2006, Trident officers raided the home of vintage gun enthusiast 
Mick Shepherd and seized his gun collection. At the time, press 
reports claimed a huge gun-smuggling racket had been uncovered, 
and that guns sold by Shepherd were linked to a number of mur-
ders. As he awaited trial, Shepherd was imprisoned in the high-
security Belmarsh prison for ten months.12 Shepherd was, however, 
finally acquitted of all thirteen firearms offenses filed against him.13 
Moreover, the Kent Police had, ironically, renewed Shepherd’s 
Registered Firearms Dealers license, after visiting his home and 
inspecting his collection, only a few weeks before arresting him. 
Shepherd commented on his case by saying that gun owners in 
Britain “have been persecuted for years to the extent where people 
now think if they see or hear about guns it is to do with terrible 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
What Happens to Disarmed Peoples 	
143 
murders and armed robberies. . . . Why would a killer buy an 
antique weapon from me for £2,000 when you can get a sub-
machine gun or Mac 10 and Uzis for a few hundred quid off the 
street?”14
You might hope that despite such outrages, Britain’s strict gun 
laws would at least result in a lower murder rate—and you would 
be wrong. Granted, the official number of homicides involving guns, 
as reported by Britain’s Home Office,15 is extremely low. It was sixty-
two in 2000 and fifty-two in 2011, in a country of sixty-three million 
people.16 The trick is, that’s only a part of the total of Britain’s over-
all homicide figure, which is hard to compile because the statistics 
come from local police departments that use different reporting 
criteria—even different definitions of “homicide,” with some count-
ing multiple murders by a single killer as one murder. Because of 
these discrepancies and others, even the UK’s Office for National 
Statistics (ONS) doesn’t stand firmly behind the official homicide 
figures.17
In 2009 an article in Britain’s Daily Mail ran the sensational 
headline: “The Most Violent Country in Europe: Britain Is Also 
Worse Than South Africa and U.S.”18 The article reported that from 
1997 to 2007,
the number of recorded violent attacks soared by 77 per 
cent to 1.158 million—or more than two every minute. The 
figures, compiled from reports released by the European 
Commission and United Nations, also show: The UK has 
the second highest overall crime rate in the EU. It has a 
higher homicide rate than most of our western European 
neighbours, including France, Germany, Italy and Spain.
The UK has the fifth highest robbery rate in the EU. . . . [I]t 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
144	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
is the naming of Britain as the most violent country in the 
EU that is most shocking. The analysis is based on the num-
ber of crimes per 100,000 residents. In the UK, there are 
2,034 offences per 100,000 people, way ahead of second-
placed Austria with a rate of 1,677. The U.S. has a violence 
rate of 466 crimes per 100,000 residents, Canada 935, 
Australia 92 and South Africa 1,609.
This article got a lot of attention, but the fact is, as the article later 
notes, major differences in how crime is reported and measured make 
such comparisons problematic.
One of the better studies on comparative murder rates and gun 
ownership was published in 2007, in the Harvard Journal of Law & 
Public Policy.19 This study—titled “Would Banning Firearms Reduce 
Murder and Suicide?”—looked at figures for “intentional deaths” 
throughout continental Europe and compared them with statistics 
from the United States. The study’s authors were Don B. Kates, an 
American criminologist and constitutional lawyer, and Gary Mauser, 
a Canadian criminologist and university professor at Simon Fraser 
University, in Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada. They determined 
that “the mantra that more guns mean more deaths and that fewer 
guns, therefore, mean fewer deaths” just doesn’t add up. The authors 
wrote:
Since at least 1965, the false assertion that the United States 
has the industrialized world’s highest murder rate has been 
an artifact of politically motivated Soviet minimization 
designed to hide the true homicide rates.
Since well before that date, the Soviet Union possessed 
extremely stringent gun controls that were effectuated by 
a police state apparatus providing stringent enforcement. . . . 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
What Happens to Disarmed Peoples 	
145 
Yet, manifest success in keeping its people disarmed did 
not prevent the Soviet Union from having far and away the 
highest murder rate in the developed world. In the 1960s 
and early 1970s, the gun-less Soviet Union’s murder rates 
paralleled or generally exceeded those of gun-ridden Amer-
ica. While American rates stabilized and then steeply 
declined, however, Russian murder increased so drastically 
that by the early 1990s the Russian rate was three times 
higher than that of the United States. Between 1998–2004 
(the latest figure available for Russia), Russian murder 
rates were nearly four times higher than American rates.20
They note that owning a gun in America is common when com-
pared with many other nations, but that countries such as Norway, 
Finland, Germany, France, and Denmark also have high gun-owner-
ship rates. They found that “[t]hese countries, however, have murder 
rates as low or lower than many developed nations in which gun 
ownership is much rarer. For example, Luxembourg, where handguns 
are totally banned and ownership of any kind of gun is minimal, had 
a murder rate nine times higher than Germany in 2002.”
After looking at areas within England and comparing them with 
the United States, they found a “a negative correlation” between guns 
and crime. They determined that “where firearms are most dense 
violent crime rates are lowest, and where guns are least dense violent 
crime rates are highest.”
They found that it’s a “misconception” that low homicide rates 
are caused by stringent gun controls. They say, “That attribution 
cannot be accurate since murder in Europe was at an all-time low 
before the gun controls were introduced.” They note that a few stud-
ies have dug into this issue. “In 2004, the U.S. National Academy of 
Sciences released its evaluation from a review of 253 journal articles, 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
146	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
99 books, 43 government publications, and some original empirical 
research. It failed to identify any gun control that had reduced violent 
crime, suicide, or gun accidents. The same conclusion was reached in 
2003 by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control’s review of then-extant 
studies.”
The Harvard report also draws on research done by Professor 
Joyce Lee Malcolm in her book Guns and Violence: The English 
Experience. Malcolm is a professor at the George Mason University 
School of Law. Her study of English gun law and violent crime found 
that:
The peacefulness England used to enjoy was not the result 
of strict gun laws. When it had no firearms restrictions 
[nineteenth and early twentieth century] England had little 
violent crime, while the present extraordinarily stringent 
gun controls have not stopped the increase in violence or 
even the increase in armed violence.
Armed crime, never a problem in England, has now 
become one. Handguns are banned but the Kingdom has 
millions of illegal firearms. Criminals have no trouble find-
ing them and exhibit a new willingness to use them. In the 
decade after 1957, the use of guns in serious crime increased 
a hundredfold.21
In the late 1990s, England moved from strict gun controls to a 
complete ban of all handguns and many types of long guns. Hundreds 
of thousands of guns were confiscated. Kates and Mauser concluded: 
“Without suggesting this caused violence, the ban’s ineffectiveness 
was such that by the year 2000 violent crime had so increased that 
England and Wales had Europe’s highest violent crime rate, far sur-
passing even the United States.”
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
What Happens to Disarmed Peoples 	
147 
The authors then reported that in England to “conserve the 
resources of the inundated criminal justice system, English police no 
longer investigate burglary and ‘minor assaults.’22 As of 2006, if the 
police catch a mugger, robber, or burglar, or other ‘minor’ criminal 
in the act, the policy is to release them with a warning rather than to 
arrest and prosecute them.”23 Such a policy would by itself make 
comparing crime statistics hopeless, as a part of England’s nonviolent 
crime is not being investigated.
 Kates and Mauser conclude, “The fall in the American crime rate 
is even more impressive when compared with the rest of the world. 
In 18 of the 25 countries surveyed by the British Home Office, violent 
crime increased during the 1990s.24 This contrast should induce 
thoughtful people to wonder what happened in those nations, and to 
question policies based on the notion that introducing increasingly 
more restrictive firearm ownership laws reduces violent crime.”
The statistical comparisons reported in the Harvard study were 
revealing. “In Russia, where the rate of gun ownership is 4,000 per 
100,000 inhabitants, the murder rate was 20.52 per 100,000 in 2002. 
That same year in Finland, where the rate of gun ownership is exceed-
ingly higher—39,000 per 100,000—the murder rate was almost nil, 
at 1.98 per 100,000. . . .”25 Looking at Western Europe, the study 
showed that Norway “has far and away Western Europe’s highest 
household gun ownership rate (32 percent), but also its lowest mur-
der rate.”26
When the Harvard study focused on intentional deaths in the 
United States compared to Continental Europe, they found that 
America, which is so often labeled as the most violent nation in the 
world by gun-control proponents, comes in seventh—behind Russia, 
Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Belarus, and Ukraine—in murders.
The authors say proponents of more gun restrictions in the United 
States should “at the very least” be able to show “a large number of 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
148	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
nations with more guns have more death and that nations that have 
imposed stringent gun controls have achieved substantial reductions 
in criminal violence (or suicide).” But after their elaborate study, the 
authors concluded “those correlations are not observed when a large 
number of nations are compared around the world.”
Kates and Mauser end by quoting Professor Brandon Centerwall, 
who published his 1991 study on gun-control policies and criminal 
violence with the following: “If you are surprised by [our] finding[s], 
so [are we]. [We] did not begin this research with any intent to ‘exon-
erate’ handguns, but there it is—a negative finding, to be sure, but a 
negative finding is nevertheless a positive contribution. It directs us 
where not to aim public health resources.”
That is undoubtedly true, but there’s another aspect of the British 
experience in particular that is rarely talked about. Before the British 
people were banned from owning guns, it was the people who were 
armed, while the British took great pride that their police officers were 
not. Now the reverse is the true: the British people are disarmed but 
their police force is becoming ever more heavily armed. It is not hard 
to conclude that in a democratic society, the British tradition of an 
armed citizenry and a usually disarmed police force is much healthier 
than the situation today. More guns in the hands of law-abiding citi-
zens not only means less crime, it means more liberty, more courage, 
and a more self-reliant people.
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
PART III 
Winning the Future of the Gun

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
151
C H A P T E R  E I G H T
The Gun Marketplace  
of the Future
No longer will we just shrug when faced with a distorted 
media report about guns. . . . No longer will we continue 
to give money to, or do business with, any outfit which 
in any way labels us as “undesirables.” To shrug and just 
go on is to not just accept the demonization, but it actu-
ally agrees with it and supports it. No longer.
—Tom Gresham, host of Gun Talk
D
on’t give all the credit to Barack Obama, or Nancy Pelosi, or Joe 
Biden, or Eric Holder, or Michael Bloomberg, or George Soros, 
or Hollywood’s hypocrisy, or the biased, anti–Second Amendment 
news media. Sure, gun-ban rhetoric ignited a blaze of gun sales, but 
gun sales were rising long before Barack Obama won the presidency 
in November 2008.
Calls into the FBI’s National Instant Criminal Background Check 
System (NICS)—something gun dealers must do before they can sell 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
152	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
anyone a gun—actually rose every year from 2003 to 2013. In 2003 
there were 8,481,588 NICS checks. In 2005 the number rose to almost 
9 million. In 2006 it surpassed 10 million. In 2007 it grew to just over 
11 million. In 2008 it rose to 12.7 million. In 2009 the number of 
NICS checks passed 14 million. In 2012 the number of background 
checks called into the FBI topped out at 19.5 million, and in 2013 the 
number rose to 21,093,273.1
This is why attributing the growth in gun sales solely to President 
Obama’s antigun stance is disingenuous, because he was an Illinois 
state senator when sales started to rise. Nevertheless, many in the 
media like to say it’s all about the Obama administration because that 
way they can write off rising gun sales as the simple-minded fear from 
America’s gun nuts. As ABC put it in early 2012, Americans are buy-
ing more Glocks and Berettas because of “fears that a second Obama 
administration might restrict gun ownership and the popularity of TV 
shows devoted to doomsday preparation and killing zombies.”2
The unreported truth is that most Americans don’t think about 
guns the way the media do; in fact, support for handgun bans has 
been in steep decline. In 1959, some 60 percent of Americans favored 
handgun bans, according to Gallup, whereas in October 2013, 74 
percent opposed handgun bans.3
To see this from another angle, consider that according to a report 
done by the Congressional Research Service, “Per capita, the civilian 
gun stock has roughly doubled since 1968, from one gun per every 
two persons to one gun per person.”4
Other Gallup polls show that the number of women gun owners 
in America rose from 13 percent in 2005 to 23 percent in late 2013. 
Also, the number of Democratic households with firearms in their 
homes rose from 30 percent in 2009 to 40 percent in 2013.5
Many factors have changed public opinion about guns, and hand-
guns in particular, since 1959. Advocacy and research from the NRA, 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Gun Marketplace of the Future 	
153 
the NSSF, the Second Amendment Foundation, and academics such 
as John Lott (see Lott’s 1998 book, More Guns, Less Crime) began 
to show that gun freedom doesn’t make communities less safe, but 
actually can reduce violent crime. Meanwhile, gun-rights groups have 
been busy fighting for Second Amendment rights in courts and legis-
latures, increasing the number of gun ranges, and adding courses to 
train new gun owners all over America. In 2013 the number of NRA-
certified firearms instructors in the United States surpassed eighty 
thousand.6
You can see this growth reflected in the number of concealed-carry 
permits. From the mid-1980s to today, America has become a mostly 
“shall-issue” nation with regard to concealed-carry permits. (Shall-
issue laws typically prevent local governments from arbitrarily refus-
ing to give concealed-carry permits.) Today all or parts of at least 
forty-one states have “shall-issue” laws. In fact, all fifty states now 
have laws that, to varying degrees, solidify citizens’ right to carry 
certain concealed firearms in public, either without a permit or after 
obtaining a permit. (A court forced Illinois to make it unanimous in 
2013.) Nationally, the NSSF estimates that in 2013 there were at least 
nine million concealed-carry holders in the United States. This is up 
from about one million in the mid-1980s.
All these developments led to more handgun sales. American 
firearm manufacturers produced about 8.3 million guns for sale in 
the United States in 2012. This was a record, and up from 6.2 million 
in 2011, according to the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and 
Explosives (ATF).7 The American gun market is mostly supplied by 
U.S.-based gun manufacturers. Today, Stag Arms, Mossberg, Ruger, 
Smith & Wesson, Colt, and many, many more American companies 
proudly point out that their firearms are made in the USA. In 2011, 
an astounding 66 percent of the new firearms for sale in America were 
made in America. How many other manufacturing industries can 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
154	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
boast that two-thirds of their products are American made and creat-
ing thousands of new American jobs?
Changes in popular culture have also helped drive gun sales. The 
History Channel’s show Top Shots and Discovery Channel’s Sons of 
Guns show this wave of interest in guns and shooting. It’s difficult to 
measure how much the video game industry is affecting the cool fac-
tor of guns, but it is certainly having some effect. The video game 
industry made about $9.5 billion in the U.S. in 2007, $11.7 billion in 
2008, and $25.1 billion in 2010, according to the Entertainment 
Software Association. I saw video games’ gun influence while at a 
barbeque in suburban America when I heard kids laughing in the 
house. I stepped in to see what all the fun was and stopped short.
This twelve-year-old girl had a PS3 Move Assault Rifle Controller, 
a plastic gun made to look like an M4A1 carbine with a M203 gre-
nade launcher, and she was working the trigger like a soldier in a 
firefight as she played Call of Duty: Black Ops 2 on a PlayStation. 
Three boys and another girl were watching. What floored me wasn’t 
that she was a twelve-year-old girl smiling as she expertly torched 
video-game enemies. I’ve reported on the rise of shooting facilities that 
have weekly “ladies’ night at the range” before. What surprised me 
was this twelve-year-old’s parents don’t own guns, don’t like guns, 
and are suspicious of guns, as if guns have a malevolent force radiat-
ing from them that is capable of corrupting the young and old.
I started talking to the kids watching the girl play. They told me 
about the weapons systems they like to use. They then debated with 
one another about the attributes of various assault rifles, such as the 
SCAR-H, Sig 556, and M8A1. They also talked about tactical shot-
guns, submachine guns, and sniper rifles by referring to specific makes 
and models. The game is so realistic they know what all these guns 
look like and how their actions work, as the game offers all these 
firearms and more as options. Now, I know my guns, but even I 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Gun Marketplace of the Future 	
155 
struggled to picture a couple of the models they authoritatively men-
tioned.
Meanwhile, the twelve-year-old girl gunning down her enemies 
hadn’t learned to play this game at home. She had learned at friends’ 
homes. Parents have a hard time keeping teenagers from these games, 
as next-generation video-game consoles were used in an estimated 
190 million U.S. households in 2012.8
Now, social conservatives might fret that such games blur the lines 
between reality and fantasy. Liberals, like this girl’s mother, who stood 
beside me and frowned, have the same worry. I grew up with guns in 
my bedroom and spent as much time in arcades as I could then afford, 
and I don’t remember being influenced by video games or Rambo 
movies to use my .22 rifle or 12-gauge shotgun to harm people. The 
difference between reality and real life was vivid to me and my friends 
who also had guns for hunting. While it’s certainly up to parents and 
other adults to teach gun safety and to be good role models, I’ve 
always been suspicious of those who think video games and movies 
lead to violence. The studies on this are vague, as it’s nearly impos-
sible to measure how such things affect children. It’s interesting to 
consider, though, how this video-game exposure to guns will shape 
the attitudes of these children as they grow up.
As we stepped back outside, I told the mother she needed to talk 
to her daughter about guns. Every child needs to know something 
about gun safety; and like learning to drive a car, learning to shoot is 
a serious thing that requires responsibility and maturity. Outside of 
video games, many groups offer real, safe, and positive experiences 
with guns. The Boy Scouts of America reported that the number of 
“shotgun shooting” merit badges increased 27.8 percent from 1999 
to 2010, and the Scouts have increased their shooting programs. 4-H’s 
shooting programs have also grown, expounding the view that “[i]n 
a society that has chosen to possess firearms, all members, regardless 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
156	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
of age should be provided adequate training to ensure safe, ethical 
and responsible interaction with firearms.”9
The NSSF’s “female participation” statistics in the shooting sports 
show that from 2002 to 2010 an estimated 30.2 percent more women 
began shooting shotguns. The number of hunters actually increased 
nationally by 9 percent from 2006 to 2011, according to a report by 
the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.10 And active-shooting sports, such 
as 3-gun and sporting clays, have taken off. Another factor is an 
increase in gun collecting; in fact, here is one statistic that would 
boggle President Obama’s worldview: in 1975, the ATF says, 5,211 
people had “Collector Type 3” federal firearms licenses, whereas in 
2011 that number had skyrocketed to 60,063 people.
            
Some savvy entrepreneurs are redefining how new and used guns 
are bought and sold. They’re digitally connecting buyers and sellers 
through federal firearms licensed (FFL) gun dealers. Chad Seaverns is 
such a salesman. As the chief operating officer of the National Fire-
arms Dealer Network (NFDN), Seaverns thinks he has a good part 
of America’s gun-buying future in his hands.
“A lot of people don’t know about all the deals out there and new 
buying options for firearms and related products,” says Seaverns. 
“Our company can help them find those deals through live-streaming 
technology.”
When you log on to nfdmall.com, storefronts appear—digital 
street signs for Smith & Wesson, Remington, Ruger, and most every 
other gun maker. You can shop by company or firearm type and find 
all the technical info you need. True, you can’t walk out of a virtual 
mall with a gun, but your order will be sent to a nearby gun dealer 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Gun Marketplace of the Future 	
157 
that has an FFL and where you can pick up your purchase—after 
going through a background check, of course.
The local gun store won’t mind either, because they get the sale. They 
simply pay NFDN a monthly fee for the service. A local gun shop might 
not have a magazine for a Sig Sauer P938, but NFDN’s real-time link to 
the distributors’ databases will likely turn up whatever a person is after. 
Gun owners can even compare prices by using NFDN’s site to check the 
websites of local gun stores as they shop for firearms and accessories.
By having consumers go to local gun dealers to make a purchase, 
NFDN, and other such companies, stay within federal and state laws. 
Basically, unlicensed persons are prohibited from buying guns from 
out-of-state sources, but they can buy if the sale is done through a 
local dealer. Private citizens are also prohibited from transferring 
firearms to anyone they have reasonable cause to believe is not a 
resident of the state the transaction is taking place in. Also, since 1986 
it has been a federal offense for anyone to knowingly transfer a fire-
arm to people who can’t legally buy a gun.
Slaton White, editor of Shot Business, a trade magazine for gun 
stores, and a deputy editor for Field & Stream, says, “The big change 
today isn’t just the growth in gun sales, but that CNC [computer 
numerical control] machining and other modern manufacturing 
processes have increased the models, calibers, and types available. 
Now people can accessorize their guns. AR-type rifles and other 
tactical firearms can be accessorized with lasers, lights, night vision, 
ammo holders, and so much other cool stuff. This is the Starbucks 
generation and people want very personalized products. This has 
grown the market and created even more interest with all the new 
gun owners now entering this market.”
Such marketplace changes are just the beginning of why Seaverns 
thinks he has the future of gun sales in his virtual mall. Many local 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
158	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
gun shops have gone bust. Those independent little stores with the 
gun guru behind the counter are often being out-competed by the 
big-box stores and destination retailers. Well, NFDN works exclu-
sively with these little stores.
“We encourage the stores we work with to have a kiosk in the 
store so they can help customers look up and order anything they 
don’t have in stock,” says Seaverns. “Most products will be delivered 
within a few days. This helps them compete with the big destination 
stores.”
NFDN has already signed up more than 560 local stores and is 
growing. As they expand, NFDN is helping to level the playing field 
for local sporting goods stores. This isn’t to say that one type of store 
is better than another, but rather that more competition—choices for 
gun enthusiasts—is a good thing.
There are, of course, other online players in this market. There is, 
for instance, GunBroker.com, an auction site that links private buyers 
and sellers and uses local licensed firearms dealers as transfer agents, 
while also selling hunting gear, collectibles, and other goods. And there 
is GunsAmerica.com, which calls itself the “[l]argest online gun clas-
sifieds since 1997.” And there are others in this ever-growing field.
Other segments of this marketplace are also growing. MidwayUSA 
recently expanded to include hunting gear to its popular catalog of 
gun parts, cleaning tools, and more. Also, OpticsPlanet.com has been 
expanding fast with a user-friendly website and a growing list of 
optics, bags, and gun-related gear. Steve Ledin, a director at Optics 
Planet Inc., says, “We’ve hired a group of experts with sporting goods 
backgrounds. They answer consumers’ technical questions and more. 
I’d put their knowledge against anyone’s.”
In the traditional retail market, Cabela’s had fifty stores in 2013 
and plans to open thirteen more in 2014. Bass Pro Shops had fifty-nine 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Gun Marketplace of the Future 	
159 
stores (seventy-seven if you add on its Tracker Marine Centers) with 
plans to open about a half dozen more in 2014, and estimated foot 
traffic of 116 million people in 2013. To attain this kind of growth, 
Cabela’s and Bass Pro have turned their retail stores into attractions 
that bring the outdoors inside with record-book-quality taxidermy, 
aquariums loaded with monster bass, and indoor mountains and 
archery ranges. Currently, the largest Cabela’s retail facility is in 
Hamburg, Pennsylvania. It has more than 250,000 square feet of 
floor space. Bass Pro says its average customer stays two and a half 
hours and drives an average distance of fifty-plus miles. Cabela’s has 
similar statistics.
In fact, Ralph Castner, Cabela’s chief financial officer, says, “A lot 
of people drive one hundred miles or more to go to our stores. We’re 
expanding to make their drives shorter and to reach new customers. 
They come a long way because we offer deals on gear, large firearm 
selections, and because our stores host a lot of events and attractions.”
Cabela’s founders, Dick and Mary Cabela and Dick’s brother 
James Cabela, began Cabela’s in 1961 and took the company public 
in 2004. About half of Cabela’s sales come from hunting-related 
merchandise, with about a third coming from the sale of firearms, 
ammunition, and accessories in 2012. About 30 percent of Cabela’s 
revenue comes from catalogs that have long been goody lists for 
sportsmen.
Bass Pro Shops is a privately owned corporation. In 1971, Johnny 
Morris rented a U-Haul trailer and took off across the country filling 
it with the newest premium fishing tackle he could find. When he 
returned to Springfield, Missouri, he set up shop in his father’s liquor 
store, which was located on the way to Table Rock Lake. The site of 
the original Bass Pro store in Springfield now brings in over four mil-
lion visitors annually and is the state’s top tourist attraction.

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
160	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
Cabela’s and Bass Pro Shops, of course, are hardly the only players 
in this market for gun dollars. Other big chain stores offer taxidermy, 
or have gunsmiths on the premises, or hold classes that teach gun 
safety, handling, and more. Dick’s Sporting Goods, Inc., is a good 
example. It was founded in 1948 when then eighteen-year-old Dick 
Stack quit an army surplus store in Binghamton, New York, after the 
storeowner mocked his ideas for stocking fishing tackle. Dick started 
a tackle store with $300 from his grandmother. Dick’s now has more 
than 450 stores in 42 states.
Gander Mountain, headquartered in St. Paul, Minnesota, cur-
rently has 119 Gander Mountain stores in 23 states. Gander Moun-
tain began as a catalog-based retailer in Wilmot, Wisconsin. Gander 
Mountain sold its mail-order business to Cabela’s in 1996, but its 
stores remain as a private company under the majority ownership of 
David Pratt and the Erickson family.
Then there’s Sportsman’s Warehouse, an outdoor sporting goods 
retailer that operates forty-seven stores in eighteen states. Sportsman’s 
Warehouse calls itself “America’s Premier Outfitter.” Sportsman’s 
Warehouse offers concealed-carry classes among other gun-related 
services.
All these competing chains and others are expanding and trying 
to grab a piece of the hot and growing gun market. According to the 
research firm Southwick Associates, Inc., shooting accessories were 
up 30 percent and ammo sales were up 15 percent from 2011 to 2012. 
In 2013 ammo was so popular that there were wide and prolonged 
ammo shortages, especially in .223 and 9mm.
“The biggest change I see is that people in their twenties and thirties 
have become a bigger part of the market,” says Rob Southwick of 
Southwick Associates, Inc. “Those in this demographic are now buying 
rifles—especially modern sporting rifles—and they’re shooting for fun.”
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Gun Marketplace of the Future 	
161 
The NRA is also taking part in the growth. In August 2013 the 
NRA National Sporting Arms Museum opened in the Bass Pro Shops 
flagship store in Springfield, Missouri. The museum has firearms from 
the 1600s to today, including some historically significant firearms 
from the NRA Museum Collection. The museum also has firearms 
and artwork from the Remington Arms Company factory collection. 
In the Springfield museum, you can see a multimillion-dollar collec-
tion of U.S. military sidearms, guns owned by such Wild West outlaws 
as Jesse James, and firearms once owned by such presidents as Teddy 
Roosevelt and Dwight Eisenhower. The museum is open every day 
of the week, and it’s free.
New online options and destination stores get most of the national 
attention, but smaller, independent stores still sell about 40 percent 
of all guns, and some regional stores have been booming. Take, for 
example, Gat Guns, in Dundee, Illinois, located about an hour and 
half west of Chicago. Owned by Greg Torino, Gat Guns has expanded 
several times since first opening in 1979, and has seen the market 
change. Randy Potter, the store manager, noted that they used to deal 
mostly with hunters, but now, “We’re catering more and more to 
suburban moms and dads,” as well as “women and young men who 
want to shoot recreationally and to defend themselves.”
Another must-visit regional store is Bill’s Gun Shop and Range, 
which has two locations in Minnesota (Robbinsdale and Circle Pines) 
and one in Hudson, Wisconsin. John Monson, owner of Bill’s Gun 
Shop, says, “For a while it was challenging just to keep guns and 
ammo in stock. We ran out of ammo twice. . . . We have ranges at all 
our stores, host a ladies’ night every Wednesday, and cherish our 
customers here in Minnesota and Wisconsin. I could sell more guns 
and certainly more ammo online, but I don’t want to do that. I serve 
the customers who come to our stores.”

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
162	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
In Ashland, Virginia, there’s Green Top, a fifty-five-thousand-
square-foot gun store that’s a local landmark. Then there’s ATP Guns 
in Summerville, South Carolina, a store that says it is “The Most 
Lady-Friendly Gun Shop This Side of the Mason-Dixon Line.” They 
have a “Ladies’ Night” every Tuesday and Thursday and explain that 
these training sessions are designed for “ladies that have never shot a 
gun” or who were “trained incorrectly by a guy.”
One reason shooting sports are growing is because of the growing 
number of women who participate—now more than five million, an 
increase of 46.5 percent from 2001 to 2011. Another is the terrific 
diversity of firearms and accessories that make shooting more attrac-
tive to more people. And a third reason is the greater availability of 
training centers. Not only are gun ranges expanding their number of 
shooting lanes, but at the Sportsman Shooting Center in Grapevine, 
Texas, there is a fully enclosed, indoor training center that allows 
people to practice with simulators and also on a live-fire cinema range 
with their own rifle and ammunition and computerized scoring.11 The 
Sportsman Shooting Center might be unique, but the audience it serves 
is a growing one.
            
Meanwhile, gun owners are using technology to defend their civil 
rights. Chris Walsh, a software designer from Richmond, Virginia, 
started FriendorFoe.us in 2009 to keep track of businesses and local 
authorities that allowed him to shop and eat while carrying his con-
cealed handgun. Without really intending it, his website has become 
a hub for Second Amendment enthusiasts to praise or condemn estab-
lishments on the basis of their firearms policies. By early 2014, the 
site’s users had rated more than twenty thousand businesses.
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Gun Marketplace of the Future 	
163 
Walsh says, “I never meant for this site to be used to persuade 
businesses to change their policies, but when a business finds they’re 
losing customers they often clarify or change their policy.” He adds, 
“I’m a big believer in property rights. I don’t dispute a business’s right 
to ban firearms on their property. I’ve just decided to take my business 
elsewhere. Some other gun owners are choosing to do the same.”
When I asked Walsh if he had to give up any favorite restaurants or 
stores, he said, “I had to give up going to Costco, as they have a corpo-
rate policy banning guns. Locally, I also had to stop going to Buffalo 
Wild Wings. As you educate yourself and try to give your hard-earned 
dollars only to those who stand with your freedom, you find there are 
sacrifices. For me though, it’s worth it. For the handful of places I’ve 
had to give up, I’ve easily found new places that support gun owners.”
Gun Talk host Tom Gresham points out that FriendorFoe.us is 
only one example of citizens becoming educated consumers. “Gun 
owners are standing up for a basic human right,” says Gresham. “I 
want to support the companies that also support my constitutional 
freedoms. Technology is now making it easier for us to do this.”
Gresham notes that eBay “blocked firearms from being listed. 
Paypal blocks the use of its service for buying guns. Google blocks 
guns, dealers, and makers from searches in its shopping service. We 
have reports of banks closing the accounts of gun makers simply on 
the basis that they won’t do business with the firearms industry. Each 
of these is a very public way of saying, ‘We don’t do business with 
those people.’ Each is a way of saying that reasonable and responsible 
people should have nothing to do with the firearms business. We are 
being put into the same box as pornography.”
Gresham continued, “No longer will we just shrug when faced 
with a distorted media report about guns. No longer will we just go 
about our business when a politician makes outrageous claims about 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
164	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
gun owners. No longer will we continue to give money to, or do busi-
ness with, any outfit which in any way labels us as ‘undesirables.’ To 
shrug and just go on is to not just accept the demonization, but it 
actually agrees with it and supports it. No longer.”
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
165
C H A P T E R  N I N E
The Solution to Gun Violence
If guns are outlawed only outlaws will have guns
—A bumper sticker retired baseball player  
Ted Williams kept on his truck1
A
t 10:00 a.m. on February 26, 2014, I’m on the thirty-fifth floor of 
a Manhattan high-rise with three agents who have decades of 
experience investigating gunrunning and other crimes for the Bureau 
of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF). I want to hear 
their views on how we can stop sociopaths, gang members, and other 
criminals from shooting people, though one condition of the inter-
view is that I not ask “policy” questions. ATF agents are enforcers of 
the laws, not policy makers.

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
166	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
Charles Mulham has been an agent with the ATF since 1989. His 
hair is buzzed-cop short, and he wears the dark suit, white shirt, and 
tie. He is New York–blunt and charismatic. He tells me that about 80 
percent of the guns found at crime scenes in New York come from 
out of state. The serial number, make, model, and other data, includ-
ing forensic information gathered from guns used by criminals in the 
state of New York, are sent to this ATF Manhattan office. ATF staff 
enter the information into a comparative database that looks for 
similarities to see if the gun has been used in another crime.
An ATF report says, “Every firearm has individual characteristics 
that are as unique to it as fingerprints are to human beings. When a 
firearm is discharged, it transfers these characteristics—in the form of 
microscopic scratches and dents—to the projectiles and cartridge cas-
ings fired in it. The barrel of the firearm marks the projectile traveling 
through it, and the firearm’s breech mechanism marks the ammuni-
tion’s cartridge casing.”2 This information is shared among law-
enforcement agencies, allowing them to track gun-specific information 
and link cases throughout the country.
They can only do this with guns taken from criminals or crime 
scenes, however, as the Firearms Owners’ Protection Act of 1986 
prohibits the establishment of a registration system for guns or gun 
owners at the federal level. According to the ATF, “This provision 
prohibits federal agencies from directly linking ballistic images 
through a centralized computer database to both the firearms them-
selves (a firearms registry) and the identities of the private citizens who 
possess imaged firearms (firearms owners’ registry).”3
Some groups and politicians argue that all firearms sold should be 
test-fired and registered in such a national system. To someone who 
knows little about guns or ballistics, this sounds sensible, but the real-
ity is different. One technical problem is that the science isn’t flawless, 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Solution to Gun Violence	
167 
and even if the ballistics information could be as conclusive as DNA 
evidence, tracing a gun to its original owner typically accomplishes 
nothing, because most armed criminals use stolen or illegally pur-
chased guns. Also, a criminal can easily beat the system by changing 
a gun’s barrel or firing pin, or otherwise altering the firearm so it 
leaves different markings on a cartridge casing or bullet. If the crim-
inal uses a shotgun, there’s not much that sophisticated software can 
do.
Maryland tried instituting a gun-ballistics database in 2000 for 
all handguns sold in the state and gave up a few years later. A 2004 
progress report by the state of Maryland concluded that the program, 
“for all its good intentions, has not proven to be a time saving tool 
for the Firearms Examiner or an investigative enhancement to the 
criminal investigator.”4 In 2005, a Maryland State Police report rec-
ommended repealing the law requiring that all handguns sold in the 
state be registered in their Integrated Ballistics Identification System, 
because the “program simply has not met expectations and does not 
aid in the mission statement of the Department of State Police.”5 
Maryland suspended the program, and laboratory technicians associ-
ated with it were reassigned to the state’s DNA database unit. Trying 
something nationally that couldn’t be made to work in the small state 
of Maryland would be irrational, expensive, and an unnecessary 
invasion of the privacy of more than one hundred million Americans.
The ATF’s more focused “crime gun” database, however, has 
helped investigators. In one example, in September 1995, a bullet 
fired from a passing car killed a nineteen-year-old factory worker. In 
August 2003, Chicago police officers at a traffic stop arrested a driver 
for unlawful possession of a firearm. Using the National Integrated 
Ballistic Information Network, the Chicago Forensic Science Center 
of the Illinois State Police matched the firearm to the 1995 murder, 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
168	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
and in November 2007 traced the gun to the killer (who had bought 
it illegally and sold it after his crime)—a felon and alleged enforcer 
for a street gang. He was convicted of murder and sentenced to fifty 
years in prison.
ATF agent Jason Zamaloff tells me, “Crime guns come from a lot 
of sources. Sometimes, though, a gun is used in multiple offenses. One 
time we found a .357 Magnum revolver that had been used by a bunch 
of different gang members in the Bronx over several years to kill 
people. That gun was simply one of the gang’s favorite community 
guns.”
“Community guns?”
Agent Zamaloff nods and says, “Gangs often share a stash of 
illegal weapons. Whoever is guarding the drugs that night gets a gun.”
Agent Zamaloff oversees the operations-control center of the 
ATF’s Manhattan office. When multiple guns need to be traced fast 
to solve a murder or stop more shootings, it is the center’s technicians 
who analyze the data and help law-enforcement agencies’ investiga-
tions.
In 1991, the ATF estimated that 37 percent of armed criminals 
obtained firearms from street sales, 34 percent from criminal acts and 
associates, 8 percent from relatives, 7 percent from dealers, and 6 
percent from flea markets and gun shows.6 More recently, a Bureau 
of Justice Statistics survey of state prison inmates convicted of gun-
related crimes determined that 79 percent of them bought their fire-
arms from “street/illegal sources” or “friends or family.” These 
“illegal sources” includes theft of firearms, black-market purchases 
of stolen firearms, and straw purchases (purchases where a person 
without a criminal record breaks the law by buying a gun for someone 
who can’t legally own or possess a gun). The survey also found that 
12 percent obtained their firearms from firearms dealers (gun stores, 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Solution to Gun Violence	
169 
pawn shops) and that 1.7 percent obtained firearms from someone 
at a gun show or flea market.7
The ATF estimated that 190,342 guns were lost or stolen in 2012. 
Most of these guns (177,898) were lost or stolen from private owners, 
but 16,667 were reported as being lost or stolen from federal firearms 
licensed (FFL) dealers. The ATF says the number of guns stolen from 
private hands is a guesstimate based on different sources of data.8 The 
ATF says the number of guns lost or stolen from FFLs is a good sta-
tistic, however, because in 1994 Congress required FFLs to report the 
theft or loss of any firearm from their inventories to both the ATF 
and to local police within forty-eight hours of discovery. In 2012, 
FFLs reported to the ATF that 5,762 firearms were stolen and 10,915 
firearms were “lost” from their stores, ranges, and backrooms.
Thefts aside, I ask these ATF agents how nearly eleven thousand 
guns can go “missing” from gun dealers annually, and the three ATF 
officials sit back, grimace, and try to explain what they’re up against.
Agent John Curtis, an area supervisor for the ATF, hands me a 
sample printout of the records FFLs are required to keep, listing the 
makes, models, serial numbers, and other data of guns they’ve sold 
and have in inventory. Agent Curtis says, “They don’t have to keep 
these records on a computer. They just have to include those criteria 
in their records. Most do a good job, but the record keeping of a few 
is less than ideal. We work with them, and if they’re consistently not 
keeping comprehensible records we can start an investigation and 
possibly revoke a federal firearms license.”
“What you’re saying is some of those missing guns are really just 
record-keeping errors?” I ask.
“Some of them.”
“Do you give FFLs some kind of software they could install on 
their computers and use if they wish?”

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
170	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
Agent Curtis says, “No. We follow procedures outlined by the law. 
We encourage them to keep digital records, but we only mandate that 
they accurately record certain criteria.”
“It would be a clever idea,” I suggest, “to give them pre-built Excel 
spreadsheets (or some other program) to help them catalog the flow 
of guns. I worked in a small gun store when I was kid. The owner 
scribbled his records in dog-eared, marble-covered notebook. That 
was back in the ’80s. No doubt many of the small stores would wel-
come such software now. Their databases would then be legible and 
more easily comparable.”
Agent Curtis says, “Whatever we can do to help, we will”—but 
what they can do to help is prescribed by law.
Agent Zamaloff shifts the conversation by explaining the problem 
from a policing point of view. He says, “We’re still in the pre-digital 
world with a lot of this. When reporters call, they often assume we 
can just punch a serial number into a database to trace a gun. We 
explain to them the law says we can’t maintain such a database. What 
we have to do after a gun is found at a crime scene is first call the 
manufacturer. The gun maker then goes through their records and 
tells us which distributor bought the gun with the serial number. We 
then call the distributor. They tell us which store bought the gun. We 
call the store. They dig through their sometimes-paper records and 
tell us who bought the gun.
“Now the average time to crime—the time it takes for a legally 
sold gun to enter the illegal market and then be found at a crime 
scene—is about a dozen years in New York. So there are likely various 
private sales that occurred—these are perfectly legal as long as some-
one doesn’t knowingly sell to someone who can’t legally own a gun—
before a gun makes it to a criminal’s hands, so we often hit a dead 
end.”
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Solution to Gun Violence	
171 
Now I’m tempted to ask about the “universal background checks” 
President Barack Obama and much of the Democratic leadership are 
arguing we need. A universal background check would make private 
gun sales illegal unless a background check of the buyer (or the son 
or daughter inheriting the gun) is performed by the FBI’s National 
Instant Criminal Background Check System. The problem with this 
idea—other than its imposition of a bureaucrat between every grand-
father who wants to give his granddaughter his Model 12 pump 
shotgun—is that criminals will never participate in the system. They 
will get their guns as they have always gotten them—illegally. More-
over, it is already a crime to sell a firearm to a person who can’t legally 
own one.
Agent Curtis tells me, “Often private gun owners don’t keep 
records of their guns’ serial numbers. So when a theft occurs, they 
can only give us vague descriptions of the makes and models of the 
guns stolen. Some gun owners even assume we can plug in their name 
and give them the serial numbers. We can’t. Also, by law most private 
gun owners don’t have to keep such records or even report a theft. 
Some state laws mandate private gun owners report thefts, but no 
federal statute does.”
Gun-control groups want to force Americans to register their 
guns. Meanwhile, gun registries are taboo to gun-rights groups 
because they treat law-abiding citizens as potential criminals, they 
empower the state to peek into private gun cabinets, they have some-
times led to gun confiscations (most recently, this happened in Eng-
land), and they have failed to deter crime, as Canada conceded when 
it scrapped its gun registry in 2012. Canada’s experience, in fact, is a 
revealing example.
In January in 1994, Garry Breitkreuz (pronounced Bright-Krites) 
was a new member of Canada’s Parliament, representing Preeceville, 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
172	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
Saskatchewan, a town of about one thousand residents. At his first 
town hall meeting, he discussed the new gun-control bill, C-68, 
brought in by the Liberal government. It included the creation of a 
long-gun registry. “I’ll never forget that first meeting,” says Garry. 
“Even though it was 39 degrees below zero outside, the place was 
packed and the people heated.”
Now it should be noted that Garry was hardly a gun-rights activ-
ist. Not yet anyway. Sure, he grew up in a rural Saskatchewan home 
and had a .30-30-caliber rifle to hunt deer. “But when it came to the 
gun issue,” says Garry, “I was very naïve.”
Naïve indeed. Garry started the meeting off by saying to the crowd 
that “this long-gun registry seems to make sense. Maybe it’ll catch a 
few criminals. . . .” He had barely started when his constituents made 
it clear they didn’t agree.
“They challenged me,” says Garry, “to do some research to find 
out if forcing people to register their guns will really save lives.”
Garry shut up, listened, and promised to research whether requir-
ing people to register their guns really reduces crime.
“After just a few months of digging into it, I did a 180,” says 
Garry. He and a researcher looked at the cost of the gun registry and 
its effectiveness at reducing crime. To get the answers he needed, he 
filed “Access to Information” requests (the Canadian equivalent of 
“Freedom of Information Act” requests). By 2002 he’d filed more 
than five hundred such requests.
He learned the Canadian government had horribly underestimated 
the costs of the long-gun registry. In 1995 Canada’s Department of 
Justice told Parliament that the Canadian Firearms Program would cost 
$119 million to implement and that this cost would be offset by $117 
million in fees; however, by 2000, Canada’s Department of Justice was 
estimating that the long-gun registry would cost more than $1 billion.
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Solution to Gun Violence	
173 
Garry took his research to the Office of the Auditor General of 
Canada, which reviewed his data and conducted its own audit. In 
2002 the agency reported: “The Department of Justice Canada did 
not provide Parliament with sufficient information to allow it to 
effectively scrutinize the Canadian Firearms Program and ensure 
accountability. It provided insufficient financial information and 
explanations for the dramatic increase in the cost of the Program.”9
“This report blew the lid off,” says Garry.
He says that before the auditor general’s report, even many Con-
servative politicians wouldn’t touch the gun-registry issue. They 
thought it was a losing battle.
“But the public was ahead of the politicians on this issue,” says 
Garry. “In meetings all over the country I was telling people that with 
what they were spending on the registry, we could hire five or six 
thousand police officers.”
This resonated.
Gary A. Mauser, a professor emeritus at Simon Fraser University 
in Burnaby, British Columbia, has also looked deeply into the costs. 
He says, “John Lott and I added up the costs and found that, in total, 
the Canadian government spent about $2.7 billion on this failed 
experiment.” That’s more than twenty times what it was forecast to 
cost.
Beyond the financial costs, Garry spoke about the loss of civil 
liberties that came with having the government invade law-abiding 
Canadians’ gun cabinets, and he cited crime statistics that showed 
that the gun-owners database wasn’t reducing crime rates or helping 
to solve crimes. Economist John Lott, for instance, reported that “[t]
he Royal Canadian Mounted Police and the [Canadian] Chiefs of 
Police have not yet provided a single example in which tracing was 
of more than peripheral importance in solving a case.”

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
174	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
In 2006, Stephen Harper, a Conservative, became prime minister, 
forming a minority government; in 2011, the Conservatives had the 
votes and the will to move against the long-gun registry. When the 
vote came, on February 15, 2012, something unusual took place. In 
the Canadian House of Commons, members of Parliament stand to 
signify their votes. After Garry stood to vote to repeal the long-gun 
registry, they broke into a cheer: “Garry, Garry. . . . ” This just isn’t 
done in the reserved atmosphere of the Canadian Parliament. But 
repeal had become a crusade. The National Post reported that Can-
ada’s public safety minister, Vic Toews, said on the day of the vote 
that the long-gun registry “does nothing to help put an end to gun 
crimes, nor has it saved one Canadian life. It criminalizes hard-work-
ing and law-abiding citizens such as farmers and sport shooters, and 
it has been a billion-dollar boondoggle left to us by the previous 
Liberal government.”
I asked Chris W. Cox, executive director of the NRA’s Institute for 
Legislative Action, how this might affect Americans, and he said, “Gun 
registration in the United States has always been the political fantasy of 
the gun-ban lobby. The clear lesson from Canada is that registration did 
not and does not reduce crime; in fact, since Canada’s long-gun-regis-
tration law went into effect, the U.S. murder rate has dropped almost 
twice as fast as Canada’s. A gun registry only infringes on privacy and 
has led to the confiscation of law-abiding citizens’ firearms in countries 
around the world, and even here in the U.S. That is why the NRA will 
fight any registration effort in the U.S. with every fiber we have.”
Given the failure of gun registries, I ask the ATF agents what else 
we can do to stop people from buying guns illegally.
Agent Mulham says, “Sometimes multiple gun sales can be traced 
to the same straw purchaser. This gives us a chance to build a case.”
“Other times,” says Agent Zamaloff, “guns out there [on New 
York City’s streets] come in fresh from a store sale where someone 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Solution to Gun Violence	
175 
who doesn’t have a criminal record—a straw purchaser—has bought 
a gun for someone who does. Sometimes a straw purchaser will learn 
that a gun has turned up in a crime and will quickly report it as being 
stolen; either way, this gives us a chance to open and possibly broaden 
an investigation into what might be a number of individuals involved 
in a gunrunning ring.”
Agent Mulham says, “We can show you some undercover surveil-
lance video of a gunrunner we caught in Brooklyn, as the case has 
been adjudicated.”
I say I’d like that very much. They use a laptop wired to a projec-
tion screen to show video of a man from Brooklyn named James 
Brady, a felon who moved to Alabama and came up with a very 
stupid criminal scheme. He talked women in Alabama who didn’t 
have criminal records into buying handguns and shotguns for him 
from Alabama gun stores. He then drove the guns to Brooklyn, New 
York, to sell them. A contact on the street tipped off Agent Zamaloff.
“We met Brady posing as buyers. He indicated he had multiple 
buyers and could get us more guns,” says Zamaloff. “We took him 
down fast to keep the rest of his guns off the streets. We ended up 
busting his straw purchasers as well.”
“That’s a very good and simple example of an interstate gunrun-
ning operation,” says Agent Mulham. “This one was small, others 
are more complex.”
I wonder if those Alabama gun-store employees thought some-
thing was funny. One responsibility ATF agents have is checking up 
on gun dealers to make sure their books are in order and to maintain 
relationships, so I ask how often they get to the FFLs in their jurisdic-
tion and how they work with them.
Agent Curtis says, “We have a small staff here in New York and 
we do a lot more than overseeing FFLs. We’re also responsible for 
monitoring alcohol, tobacco, and explosives. In my particular oversight 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
176	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
area, we have about one thousand FFLs to check up on. Some are big 
stores, such as Gander Mountain outlets, and others are small gun 
shops. To tell you the truth, some establishments might go five or even 
ten years without a visit from us. If, however, we trace crime guns to a 
particular FFL, we’ll show up at their establishment unannounced and, 
if we think it necessary, we’ll investigate them.”
Agent Mulham adds, “Most FFLs are staffed with good, law-
abiding people. We maintain strong relationships with them because 
they sometimes tip us off when a buyer seems to be a straw purchaser 
or something. Gun-store owners help us a great deal.”
I nod. My experience with gun-store owners is that they’re almost 
all conservative men who love their country, see guns as a tool for 
freedom, and don’t want to sell a gun to a criminal. They’d also be 
foolish to do so, as the few dollars they’d make isn’t worth the risk of 
losing their businesses and perhaps going to jail.
These agents tell me there is no precise formula for what guns cost 
on the street, but that field agents typically have a good idea. Agent 
Mulham says, “A quality pistol like a Glock might go for double or 
triple retail. Lower-quality guns might be worth only $100 or $200 
more than retail.” Basically, they say, guns are so readily available that 
the black-market price is typically just a few hundred dollars more 
than retail.
            
The ATF’s reputation has suffered recently from scandals, such as 
the Fast and Furious operation in which ATF officials in Arizona let 
semiautomatic rifles, .50-caliber sniper rifles, and other guns be sold 
to known straw purchasers so the guns could be trafficked to Mexican 
drug cartels in some kind of crime-fighting technique that no one at 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Solution to Gun Violence	
177 
the ATF or at their overseer, the U.S. Department of Justice, has ever 
been able to explain. The ATF let about two thousand guns “walk” 
without tracking devices secretly hidden in the guns or any realistic 
surveillance of the firearms in place once the guns were taken from 
the stores. As ATF agent John Dodson, a congressional whistleblower, 
said, they let the guns go, fully aware that the next time they saw the 
guns would be at crime scenes.
When one of the guns—an AK-47—the ATF intentionally allowed 
to go into the arsenals of criminals was used by a drug runner to shoot 
down a U.S. Border Patrol agent, the Obama administration, via the 
U.S. Department of Justice, stonewalled and lied to Congress. After 
a long congressional investigation helped by ATF whistleblowers—
good cops who had argued against the wrongheaded operation from 
the start—President Barack Obama used executive privilege to shield 
Attorney General Eric Holder from having to hand over his emails. 
Holder, of course, runs the Department of Justice, and the ATF is an 
arm of the Department of Justice. This prompted the House to hold 
Holder in contempt.
Even though the ATF has drifted into politically incomprehen-
sible adventures that have, on a few occasions, resulted in congres-
sional investigations, I’ve found that the ATF is mostly staffed with 
good agents attempting to do what might be an impossible job—
keeping America’s more than three hundred million guns out of the 
hands of criminals of all types. The ATF also works closely with the 
National Shooting Sports Foundation (NSSF), the trade association 
for firearms manufacturers, on regulations; they annually staff a 
booth at the NSSF’s trade show (the SHOT Show); and they work 
with gun dealers to help them comply with laws and regulations.
 Nevertheless, thanks to Obama administration programs like 
Fast and Furious, some law-abiding gun owners and dealers are 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
178	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
beginning to see the ATF as an adversary, not a partner. Mike Detty, 
the author of Guns across the Border, was a gun dealer in Tucson 
when the Fast and Furious operation began. He was approached by 
a straw purchaser who obviously wanted to traffic guns. Detty called 
the ATF to alert them and was then sucked into the ATF’s new crime-
fighting technique—letting the bad guys buy and move a lot of guns. 
“The ATF lied to me,” Detty told me at the SHOT Show in Las Vegas 
in 2014. “A number of Arizona gun dealers assisted them. We were 
all told the guns would be interdicted. They weren’t. A lot of gun 
dealers look at the ATF differently now.”
A similar rift is forming between some law-enforcement agencies 
and gun owners and dealers because of state laws that now require 
law-abiding gun owners to report to the police to be fingerprinted, 
to register their guns, and to meet other mandates. By January 2014 
in Connecticut and in the months leading to April 15, 2014, in New 
York, a grand total of perhaps 1.3 million people had to report to 
the police to be fingerprinted and register the firearms they own 
that state politicians deem “assault weapons” for nebulous reasons. 
Connecticut gun owners of “assault weapons” who submitted the 
necessary paperwork—including providing the police with a thumb-
print and having their signature witnessed by a notary public—after 
the deadline received a letter stating that they must do one of the 
following:
1.	 Render the assault weapon permanently inoperable;
2.	 Sell the assault weapon to a licensed dealer;
3.	 Remove the assault weapon from the state; or
4.	 You may make arrangements to relinquish the assault 
weapon to a police department or the Department of 
Emergency Services and Public Protection.10
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Solution to Gun Violence	
179 
The letter was signed “Sincerely, LT. Eric Cooke, Commanding Offi-
cer, Special Licensing and Firearms Unit.”11 However, when a few 
people who received the letters made their copies public, the Con-
necticut States Police’s Special Licensing and Firearms Unit denied 
sending them.
Anna Kopperud, the NRA’s state lobbyist for Connecticut, called 
the CSP’s Special Licensing and Firearms Unit on February 26 and 
27, 2014, to find out and report what options gun owners in Con-
necticut had. “The CSP spent a day and a half telling me there was 
no such letter,” says Kopperud. “When I asked if a letter had been 
forged and, if so, how did someone get gun owners’ addresses, they 
said they didn’t know.”
Questions from me sent to the CSP’s Lieutenant J. Paul Vance 
along with a link to a copy of the letter, however, drew a different 
answer on February 28. Lieutenant Vance said, “The letter was sent 
to people who did not register their weapon by the deadline [by Lieu-
tenant Cooke]. It was simply an effort to assist them and advise them 
of some choices they have.”
It wasn’t made clear if a gun owner who’s in the process of trans-
porting such a firearm out of state or to a gun dealer might be charged 
with a felony if that gun owner is caught doing so. Would the letter 
from Lieutenant Cooke give them safe passage? When state legisla-
tures decide to ban commonly owned guns and require tens of thou-
sands of law-abiding citizens to disarm or report to the police, good 
people can suddenly become “criminals” by simply doing nothing 
different from what they’ve done all their adult lives.
Democrat governor Dan Malloy signed Connecticut’s gun-control 
bill (Senate Bill 1160) into law on April 4, 2013. Four days later, 
President Barack Obama spoke at the University of Connecticut and 
said, “Connecticut has shown the way, and now is the time for Con-
gress to do the same.” CBS reported that “Obama applauded the state 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
180	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
legislature and Gov. Dan Malloy for passing ‘common sense’ bi-
partisan legislation last week that calls for widespread restrictions on 
firearms.”12 The gun-control bill had been written behind closed doors 
and placed on legislators’ desks around 9:00 a.m. on April 3. At about 
12:30 p.m. that same day, the state senate started debating the legisla-
tion as gun owners chanted outside, “Read the bill.” Maybe they’re 
all accomplished speed readers and so did in fact read all the bill’s legal 
language and saw the forty-three times the bill uses the word “felony,” 
mostly as threats to gun owners. Whether they had read it all or not, 
the senate passed the bill 26 to 10 that same day. Hours later, the 
House passed it 105 to 44. At noon the next day, Governor Malloy 
signed the bill. Maybe in their haste they didn’t foresee what they were 
starting. Maybe they didn’t understand they would be tempting tens 
of thousands of citizens to try a little civil disobedience.
The numbers of gun owners who might still have “assault weap-
ons” in Connecticut isn’t a guess. The National Shooting Sports 
Foundation, the trade association for firearms manufacturers, esti-
mates that there were likely 350,000 Connecticut residents with now-
banned “assault weapons” as of late 2013. The NSSF told me, “The 
350,000 number is a conservative estimate based upon numerous 
surveys, consumer purchases, NICS background-check data, and also 
private party transactions.” The NSSF used the same criteria to esti-
mate that at least one million New York residents have firearms that 
are now banned from being sold and that existing owners must reg-
ister with the police.
As of December 31, 2013, according to Lieutenant Vance, the CSP 
had received 41,347 applications to register “assault weapons” and 
36,932 applications to register “high-capacity” magazines. That means 
that more than three hundred thousand Connecticut residents decided 
not to register their “assault weapons,” or moved them out of state, 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Solution to Gun Violence	
181 
or sold them. As this was being written, the NRA was backing a law-
suit, Shew v. Malloy, that challenged the constitutionality of several 
provisions of the Connecticut law, including its expanded bans on 
semiautomatic firearms and its restrictions on magazine capacity.
Under New York’s expansive “assault weapons” category, a semi-
automatic Remington Model 1100 shotgun—a shotgun commonly 
owned by hunters and skeet shoots—with a pistol grip is now an 
“assault weapon.” When I asked how many New Yorkers had regis-
tered their weapons, the state responded: “New York State Police 
cannot release information related to the registration of assault weap-
ons including the number of assault weapons registered. Those 
records you seek are derived from information collected for the State 
Police database and are, therefore, exempt from disclosure.”
The next question is what the states will do about all those gun 
owners who now might be committing felonies. Will the CSP ask for 
search warrants? Connecticut’s Department of Emergency Services 
and Public Protection (DESPP) has been using a “Sale or Transfer of 
All Firearms” form13 at the retail level that acts as a de facto registra-
tion, as it requires that gun sales, along with make, model, serial 
number, and the buyer’s personal information, be reported to the 
DESPP and the police; as a result, the CSP has information on which 
residents might still own unregistered firearms the state considers to 
be “assault weapons.”
When asked if the CSP would use late-registration applications to 
obtain warrants to seize “assault weapons” and to arrest people, 
Lieutenant Vance said, “Again, we don’t make the laws; our legisla-
ture has that responsibility.” It was also unclear whether the CSP 
might use existing gun-registration records to obtain warrants to 
search the residences of the perhaps three hundred thousand Con-
necticut residents who might have such unregistered firearms.

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
182	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
I asked a few gun owners in Connecticut who own or used to own 
so-called assault weapons what they were doing. They told me they 
had always thought of themselves as good citizens but now found 
themselves in an untenable position. One told me, “I just came from 
my local gun store. I had to test a shotgun refitted with a straight stock 
to make it compliant. It still holds nine rounds, but the world is now 
a little safer without that evil pistol grip.”
Another replied, “I have four friends who have either bought 
homes or property out of Connecticut or are shopping hard. This issue 
was the final straw for them.”
Yet another said, “Gun owners are pissed off and nervous. They 
don’t know if the state will enforce based on long-gun purchase 
records held by the State Police, but they are encouraged and feel a 
little vindicated at the level of disobedience.”
Several said they had shipped their “bad” guns out of state.
Rich Burgess, president of a pro-gun-rights group called Con-
necticut Carry, wants to force a public confrontation. He released a 
letter on March 3, 2014, saying, “A recent media tidal wave based on 
false reports and bad journalism has proven a few things about the 
2013 Gun Ban: people from Connecticut and around the nation are 
tired of being threatened; are ready to make a stand; and the State of 
Connecticut does not have the stomach to enforce the edicts and laws 
with which they threaten gun owners. . . . Connecticut Carry calls on 
every State official, every Senator, and every Representative, to make 
the singular decision: Either enforce the laws as they are written and 
let us fight it out in court, or else repeal the 2013 Gun Ban in its 
entirety.”
Laws like these can put average guns owners at odds with law 
enforcement and make the enforcers of such laws seem as adversaries 
rather than partners in keeping the streets safe. This is compounded 
by the fact that the state politicians in New York, Connecticut, and 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Solution to Gun Violence	
183 
other states who voted for recent “assault weapons” bans aren’t 
realistically trying to lower the murder rate; rifles account for less 
than 3 percent of homicides annually, according to the FBI’s “Uniform 
Crime Reports.” The legislators were reacting to the evil deeds of a 
few mass murderers—though statistically, mass murderers commit 
less than one-tenth of one percent of all murders, according to 
research compiled by Grant Duwe, who works for the Minnesota 
State Department of Corrections and is the author of Mass Murder 
in the United States: A History. Also, according to analysis done by 
Mother Jones, a far-left publication, “Nearly 80 percent of the per-
petrators” of mass murders (a total of sixty-seven cases over the last 
three decades) “obtained their weapons legally.”14 What most of the 
mass shootings have in common is the murderer has a mental illness. 
Funding programs to diagnose and treat people in our society who 
have mental-health issues is the more sensible approach, because that 
is the problem.
Agent Mulham says, “I’m a hunter and gun owner. I get it. I don’t 
care if people like you have a million guns. What we’re trying to do 
is keep guns out of the hands of the bad guys.”
            
The FBI’s National Instant Criminal Background Check System 
(NICS) can be a confusing part of the gun issue. For example, the 
Brady Campaign, a group that lobbies for gun bans and much stricter 
controls, sent out a press release in early 2014 saying NICS had 
“stopped more than 2.1 million would-be gun purchases”15 since it 
began, in 1998. The reality, however, is not that 2.1 million would-be 
criminals were stopped by the background-check system. Some of the 
people denied instant approval were later approved, as a name simi-
larity or other technical glitch holds up some background checks. In 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
184	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
2010, the FBI referred about seventy thousand NICS denials to the 
ATF, but the ATF deemed 90 percent of them not worthy of further 
investigation and found that another four percent were incorrect deni-
als.
When I asked Andrew Arulanandam, director of public affairs for 
the National Rifle Association, about NICS, he said, “The Brady 
Campaign is now touting NICS denials, but you know what, the 
Brady Campaign was opposed to starting the NICS check system in 
the first place. The NRA lobbied for it. The Brady Campaign wanted 
long waiting periods for people who wanted to purchase a gun. They 
were against the whole idea of an instant system to approve law-
abiding people.”
A systemic problem is that in 2010, for example, only 62 out of 
72,659 NICS denials led to prosecutions by the federal government, 
and only 13 of those prosecutions resulted in a conviction. That’s a 
conviction rate of .018 percent.
This prompted Republican senator Lindsey Graham of South 
Carolina to say on CNN, “There are nine thousand people in 2010 
that failed a background check who are felons on the run, and none 
of them were prosecuted.”16
Graham was wrong about the “nine thousand” figure. According 
to the FBI, it was actually about “fourteen thousand” in 2010. The 
Washington Post gave Graham a pass on that figure but gave him 
three Pinocchios for saying that no felons were prosecuted,17 as some 
of the denials are prosecuted at the state level. The Department of 
Justice, however, doesn’t know how many NICS denials are prose-
cuted by the states, as they don’t keep any records of such prosecu-
tions.
As I dug deeper, I found that Pennsylvania, for example, runs its 
own background-check system18 and reported that in 2010 “[t]he 
instantaneous background check process yielded warrant information 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Solution to Gun Violence	
185 
that led to the arrest of 114 individuals while they were attempting 
to purchase a firearm last year. The coordinated efforts of PICS [Penn-
sylvania Instant Check System] staff and law enforcement agencies, 
who respond to these notifications, have resulted in the arrest of 
1,365 fugitives since PICS was established in July 1998.”19
Federally, a 2004 Justice Department inspector general report that 
looked at NICS denial prosecution rates explained: “We believe that 
the number of referrals and prosecutions is low because of the diffi-
culty in obtaining convictions in NICS cases. These cases lack ‘jury 
appeal’ for various reasons. The factors prohibiting someone from 
possessing a firearm may have been nonviolent or committed many 
years ago. The basis for the prohibition may have been noncriminal 
(e.g., a dishonorable discharge from the U.S. military). It is also dif-
ficult to prove that the prohibited person was aware of the prohibition 
and intentionally lied to the FFL.”20
Saying these cases don’t have “jury appeal” is another way of 
saying they’re worried about “jury nullification.” According to the 
common-law doctrine of jury nullification, a juror can nullify a law—
refuse to convict a defendant despite the law or instructions from a 
judge—if they believe the law is unjust or that the application of the 
law in a specific instance is unjust. That should tell prosecutors there’s 
something wrong with the law. Perhaps a fifty-year-old man with a 
clear record except for the mistake he made of getting into a bar fight 
when he was nineteen shouldn’t be barred for life from having a gun 
because of that one felony conviction thirty years before.
Also, it is unprofessional for the Department of Justice not to 
pursue cases that aren’t sexy enough or to assume states are prosecut-
ing some bad guys but never confirming this with hard data. This has 
led some politicians to demand answers.
While testifying before the Senate Judiciary Committee, Attor-
ney General Eric Holder was asked why federal prosecutors aren’t 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
186	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
prosecuting many criminals who attempt to buy guns. Holder said, 
“There are reasonable explanations as to why we have those num-
bers, but I want to make absolutely certain we are prosecuting all 
the people who we should who have been denied a gun, after failing 
the instant background system.”21 When Republican senator John 
Cornyn of Texas pressed Holder by asking, don’t “prosecutions 
work as a deterrence?” Holder replied, “We have limited resources.”
Earlier that year, in January 2013, when asked about the Obama 
administration’s lax enforcement of gun laws, Vice President Joe Biden 
said almost the same thing: “We simply don’t have the time or the 
manpower to prosecute everybody who lies on a form, that checks a 
wrong box, that answers a question inaccurately.”22
In 2013, Senators Lindsey Graham, Mark Begich, Jeff Flake, and 
Mark Pryor—two Republicans and two Democrats—introduced a 
bill to reform the National Instant Criminal Background Check Sys-
tem. The NICS Reporting Improvement Act of 2013 was written “to 
clarify circumstances under which a person loses the right to receive 
or possess firearms based on mental illness.” The sponsors of this 
legislation noted that under current law certain mental incompetency 
adjudications don’t have to be reported to the FBI’s NICS.
The NICS Reporting Improvement Act of 2013 would have 
required states and federal entities to add people to NICS who a fed-
eral court ruled were
an imminent danger to themselves or others; found guilty 
but mentally ill in a criminal case; . . . not guilty in a crimi-
nal case by reason of insanity or mental disease or defect; 
. . . incompetent to stand trial in a criminal case; . . . not 
guilty only by reason of lack of mental responsibility under 
the Uniform Code of Military Justice; required involuntary 
inpatient treatment by a psychiatric hospital; required 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Solution to Gun Violence	
187 
involuntary outpatient treatment by a psychiatric hospital 
based on a finding that the person is an imminent danger 
to himself or to others; and required involuntary commit-
ment to a psychiatric hospital for any reason including 
drug use.23
Graham said “Exhibit A” of the need to fix the NICS system is 
the “Alice Boland case.” Boland had made threats against President 
George W. Bush. She told investigating Secret Service agents: “I would 
shoot him and the entire U.S. Congress. . . . If I had a gun I would 
shoot you too.”24 In 2005 a federal district court judge found that 
Boland was schizophrenic and legally insane. In February 2013, 
Boland went to a gun store, passed a background check, and bought 
a semiautomatic pistol. She then took the gun to Ashley Hall, a pri-
vate school in Charleston, South Carolina, and attempted to kill two 
staff members. Though she repeatedly pulled the trigger, the gun 
wouldn’t go off, as she hadn’t chambered a round.
Graham wanted to update NICS so that people like Boland could 
not legally buy guns. The NRA and the NSSF endorsed the legislation. 
Chris Cox, executive director of the NRA’s Institute for Legislative 
Action, said, “This bill will create accurate definitions of those who 
pose serious threats and should be barred from the ability to buy or 
possess a firearm, while protecting the rights of law-abiding citizens 
and veterans.”
Despite the bill’s commonsense solution and bipartisan support, 
Democrats quietly smothered the legislation, presumably because they 
prefer gun bans to reasonable gun law reforms.
Pro-gun groups, however, haven’t given up. The NSSF has been 
lobbying state legislators to add some mental-health records to the 
background-checks system. The NSSF calls its initiative “Fix NICS.” 
Thanks to the NSSF’s efforts, some states have passed legislation 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
188	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
allowing them to report to the NICS people who been found legally 
insane.
Unfortunately, many Democrats have taken a commonsense idea 
and turned it into legislation that is a clear violation of civil liberties. 
For instance, New York’s SAFE Act, passed in January 2013, gives 
healthcare professionals, including nurses and some social workers, 
the right to submit to the state police the names of people they think 
should be denied the right to own a gun. The police can then disarm 
these people without a court order. Others on the Left want to ban 
anyone who has sought treatment for post-traumatic stress disorder, 
including honorably discharged veterans, from owning a gun.
In the end, it comes down to understanding the difference between 
a law-abiding and a criminal gun culture. During a hearing in March 
2013, Senator John Cornyn asked what Attorney General Eric Holder 
meant when, in 1995, he said young people needed to be “brain-
washed” about guns. Holder explained that he was then a U.S. supe-
rior court judge in the District of Columbia, “the murder capital of 
the country,” and was talking about “young black guys.” He wanted 
“to make them think differently about the possession of guns.” He 
said many of the “black guys” coming into his court “should have 
been leaders of the community” but instead they had “used guns 
inappropriately.” Holder said he wanted to counter messages they 
were getting from movies and other parts of popular culture with an 
advertising campaign to “brainwash” them that guns are bad.
Holder should have asked himself why high legal gun-ownership 
rates in nearby rural Maryland and Virginia weren’t resulting in the 
same level of gun violence per capita as he was seeing in inner-city 
DC. If he had, he might have had a better idea than funding an ad 
campaign to convince young people guns are bad—they know guns 
are bad; some inner-city youth are drawn to guns because they are 
bad-ass illegal. An open-minded investigation might have led Holder 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Solution to Gun Violence	
189 
to the nearby NRA headquarters in Fairfax, Virginia, and to the 
NRA’s gun-safety and youth programs as well as to programs devel-
oped by the Boy Scouts, the Izaak Walton League, and more. It would 
have required him to acknowledge that all gun ownership isn’t bad 
and that if DC hadn’t then been living under a handgun ban, maybe 
those young black men he wanted to save could have seen examples 
of responsible, law-abiding gun ownership. Maybe that would have 
helped change the gun culture in DC.
The reality is that the overwhelming majority of American gun 
owners are law-abiding, responsible people. Their Second Amend-
ment rights deserve protection. It is the criminals who deserve pros-
ecution.

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
191
C H A P T E R  T E N
The Armed Citizen  
of the Future
For better or for worse, the TrackingPoint—or some-
thing very much like it—is where rifles are going.
—David E. Petzal, rifles editor, Field & Stream
T
he best way to see into the future of gun design is to begin with a 
firearms innovator who likes to talk. So I ran down Ted Hatfield—
yeah, one of those Missouri Hatfields whose family used to feud with 
the McCoys.
Ted has been a maverick gun builder since the early 1980s. I’ve 
known him for more than a decade and have never seen him without 
a swashbuckler’s infectious grin. For a brief time in 2004, we had 
adjacent offices at the Fairfax, Virginia, headquarters of the National 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
192	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
Rifle Association. The next time I saw him was in 2007 when we ran 
with the bulls in Pamplona, Spain. Ted was then living in Turkey, 
where he was designing the shotgun of the future. By January 2014, 
when I saw him at the SHOT Show, he had a factory outside Chicago. 
He was about to meet with his design team in Turkey to turn his new 
tactical pump-action shotgun into a semiautomatic.
His road to making a hip and high-tech shotgun began after a 
youth spent trying to get himself kicked into an unmarked grave in 
some hinterland. Ted spent his twenties traveling around the world 
twice, which included driving a bus through the Khyber Pass, running 
with those Spanish bulls, and working as a hunting guide in Alaska. 
All that adventuring paused when, near the end of his twenties, some 
fool emptied a Colt Model 1911 chambered in .45 ACP at him outside 
a Houston bar. As he checked himself for leaks, he thought, Guns, 
hmm, maybe I’ll settle down and make guns.
Ted came to this decision in 1979—not exactly a high point in the 
history of American manufacturing, when all the talk was about the 
“Rust Belt,” Jimmy Carter’s “stagflation,” and how entrenched 
unions had made America’s aging factories uncompetitive. Ted says 
he didn’t think about all that. He says if he had, he “might have just 
gone back to sea.”1
 Ted had grown up with guns and had always thought of ways 
they could be tweaked and refashioned. But he didn’t want to just 
make guns. He wanted to make money. This meant he had to make 
and sell a lot of guns. To do this, he decided to produce guns that 
would look custom made, as most black-powder rifles then were, 
but that would be mass produced and so could sell at a more com-
petitive price.
He spent the next few months in his hometown of St. Joseph, 
Missouri, constructing what became a beautiful replica of a rifle his 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Armed Citizen of the Future 	
193 
great-great-grandfather had made before the Civil War. He took the 
rifle and a box of brochures for his new, actually nonexistent, com-
pany to a black-powder shoot in Indiana. Ted handed the rifle 
around and soon had orders for twenty guns—proving to him that 
there was indeed a market. Next, he had to figure out how to make 
the guns at the relatively low prices he had quoted.
He managed to get a loan from a local bank willing to bet on a 
Hatfield. Ted rented out an old garage and began to learn the hard 
way what it took to make guns in the early 1980s. Most of the guns 
then being made in America were coming from large soot-smothered 
factories in New York and New England. These factories had helped 
start and then propel the American Industrial Revolution. In the early 
1980s, however, they were mostly filled with grease-stained lathes, 
churning barrel reamers, and an assortment of other large and expen-
sive machines run by skilled machinists.
The machinists in those factories would take a billet of steel and 
via dozens or even a hundred steps, cut, drill, and grind it into a gun 
part that would be fit with other gun parts and then assembled into 
a gun. Making a profit by producing guns in this way on a small scale 
wasn’t feasible. The best a small operator could do was to buy the 
parts and then assemble, tweak, and expertly fit them together until 
they became a custom rifle that could, say, shoot a one-inch, three-
shot group at one hundred yards—at the time, none of the factory 
guns could reliably do that.
Ted saw a way between these two extremes. During World War 
II, engineers innovated large-scale investment-casting techniques using 
poured steel rather than cut steel, which made detailed design parts 
easier and more economical to produce. The man who recognized 
investment casting’s potential for the civilian gun business and 
exploited this technology best was William Ruger.

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
194	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
Ruger come out with his Ruger No. 1, a single-shot rifle, in 1967. 
Everyone said he was behind the times, as Americans wanted semi-
automatics and bolt-actions in the 1960s. Nevertheless, Ruger’s ele-
gant and accurate single-shot made at affordable prices created a new 
segment in the gun market and is still a classic today. Ruger used this 
success to build his business into one of America’s biggest and most 
renowned gun manufacturers.
Ted discovered that, thanks to Ruger’s pioneering work, the parts 
he needed could be cast in small foundries and made to order. He 
could then assemble and fit the guns in his rented garage.
“Ruger,” he says, “revolutionized the whole business, and some 
of the big boys never realized or admitted it. They were stuck with 
those huge factories and all those tools and unions. They got left 
behind.”
Since there was no way to cast wood, Ted bought an old lathe and 
began turning stocks. This was a slow process, but Ted found another 
technological development that could help him as it was helping many 
other manufacturers: computer numerical controlled (CNC) machin-
ing, which was more affordable and accurate.
Mark A. Keefe IV, the editor of the NRA’s magazine American 
Rifleman, told me that when it comes to making accurate parts, 
“Depending on complexity, it may take a few different dedicated CNC 
machines, but not a city block’s worth of dozens of steps and hundreds 
of workers. Parts that were too expensive to be made by individual 
metal workers can now be made by CNC machines programmed and 
run by much less-skilled operators.”
So Ted found a CNC-operated factory in South Dakota that could 
turn out stocks and jobbed the work out to them. Interestingly, in a 
way, Ted was using available technology to turn back the clock. You 
see, when Eliphalet Remington founded Remington Arms in Ilion, 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Armed Citizen of the Future 	
195 
New York, in 1816, what he did was pull barrel makers, stock fitters, 
and others into one factory to mass-produce guns. Ted, thanks to new 
technology, was subcontracting the jobs to experts to lower overhead 
and other costs. This was something he couldn’t have done in 1960, 
as the technology wasn’t then available, but it is something most gun 
makers, and other manufacturers, now do.
Ted soon began delivering guns and taking more orders.
Other gun manufacturers slowly took notice. Since the 1980s, 
CNC machining has been propelling the future of the gun. When I 
toured Beretta’s factory in Maryland, Richard Grimes, Beretta’s direc-
tor of manufacturing operations, told me, “It takes a lot less training 
for workers to run the CNC machines, and the quality is consistently 
top notch; in fact, all the parts are interchangeable down to thou-
sandths of an inch. Low-skilled workers can assemble them.”
In February 2014, Mike Fifer, CEO of Sturm, Ruger and Com-
pany said at a sportsmen’s club, “Over the past few years I’ve counted 
forty-seven truckloads of old machines come out of our plant in 
Newport, New Hampshire. Those machines have been replaced by 
CNC machining. I’m proud to say we currently have 2,396 employ-
ees here in America making all of our guns for Americans. This 
includes a new plant we’ve opened in North Carolina, a plant so 
high-tech and clean you could eat off the floor. And it includes the 
last twenty employees we have in Connecticut—workers I’m not 
moving or laying off despite Connecticut’s disregard for your rights, 
because they’ve been with us for so long and have too much expertise 
to let go. Our corporate headquarters, however, is in the final stages 
of being moved to Florida.”
CNC means that many gun manufacturers can affordably out-
source work to specialist companies. When I toured the O. F.  
Mossberg & Sons plant in North Haven, Connecticut, Joseph H. 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
196	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
Bartozzi, Mossberg’s senior vice president and general counsel, said, 
“As far as I know we’re the only firearms manufacturer that makes all 
the parts for our AR-15. All the other companies buy barrels, trigger 
mechanisms, or something from other manufacturers.”
In the 1980s Ted was also at the forefront of stock manufacturing, 
as CNC would soon revolutionize stock designs. Today, the complex 
bedding recesses of wooden bolt-action rifle stocks for guns like the 
Sako 85 and the Browning A-Bolt are inletted in seconds by CNC 
cutters. Rifle stocks are often still being roughed out by machines that 
resemble the Blanchard lathe, a machine invented by Thomas 
Blanchard (1788–1864), but are being finished by CNC machining. 
These same machines now make synthetic stocks for rifles and shot-
guns in more configurations than anyone dreamed possible in 1980.
So early on Ted recognized CNC machining was the future. He 
saw this because he had become a businessman, not just an artisan. 
He also knew the black-powder market was only so big, so he targeted 
the classic shotgun market. He began making high-quality, side-by-
side shotguns for the average guy. The side-by-side shotgun is favored 
by rural English gentlemen, and elegant versions are still handmade 
in the Basque region of northern Spain. In America, the side-by-side 
shotgun wasn’t traditionally associated with an aristocracy; it was a 
farmer’s gun, displaced in the twentieth century by pump-action shot-
guns and later by semiautomatic shotguns. Ted, however, knew nos-
talgia runs deep with a portion of America’s shotgunners. In 1985, 
Ted came out with a 20-gauge shotgun with short double barrels and 
beautiful wood. He soon had orders for all he could make. In the late 
1980s, his lowest-grade gun sold for around $2,500, the highest for 
$6,900—whereas a Spanish side-by-side might cost $20,000. Ted had 
come in with a classic work of art at a much more reasonable price.
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Armed Citizen of the Future 	
197 
By the early 1990s, Ted’s office was in an old brick building that 
he shared with a bar. He still had his sleeves rolled up and was 
involved in every facet of the business. He had made a name for 
himself, but the big manufacturers and other new custom shops were 
catching up with him. His profit margins were getting smaller as big-
ger gun manufacturers produced and imported cheaper side-by-side 
and over/under shotguns. As his business declined and his company 
went under, he decided he needed to reinvent himself.
He took a job editing for Sports Afield magazine, a hunting and 
fishing magazine founded in 1887 as a “Journal for Gentlemen.” But 
in the late 1990s, its owners at Hearst decided to change the maga-
zine’s historic focus from hunting and fishing to hiking, mountain 
biking, climbing, and other “nonconsumptive” outdoor sports. 
Because the two audiences couldn’t be more different—they shifted 
from gun-toting, Mossy Oak camo–wearing outdoorsmen who kill 
their own meat to REI-dressed hikers with granola bars in their Eddie 
Bauer bags—this publishing misadventure failed fast, and the title 
was sold in 2000 to the wealthy, self-made publisher Robert E. 
Petersen.
After the trouble at Sports Afield, Ted worked briefly for an 
advertising company. But a meeting with Turkish gun makers at a 
trade show in Fort Worth brought him back to gun design. “They 
were importing Huglu shotguns from Turkey and had a very cool 
miniature-framed 28-gauge side-by-side at a really cheap price,” says 
Ted. “They saw my name was Hatfield and asked if I had anything 
to do with the old Hatfield side-by-side shotguns (which of course 
was my old company). One thing led to another and we formed a 
partnership to develop high-grade shotguns in Turkey under the 
Hatfield name.”

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
198	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
Before they developed and introduced these guns, however, some 
American gun companies contacted Ted to see if he would produce 
shotguns with their names cut into the gun barrels. So instead of 
Hatfield’s, Ted began making side-lock side-by-sides and over/under 
shotguns for Kimber, as well as shotguns for Smith & Wesson. In 2006 
Smith & Wesson told Ted they wanted to create the ultimate police 
shotgun. Soon thereafter Ted and others started working on what 
would become the UTS-15 (which stands for “Urban Tactical Shotgun 
15-rounds”), a pump-action shotgun that holds fifteen shells and 
utilizes a lot of new technology. “When the U.S. economy went down 
the crapper in the fall of 2008,” says Ted, “S&W canceled the project. 
Since S&W had not invested in the original development and our 
relationship was at an end, we carried on and the UTS-15 is the first 
product marketed under the UTAS name.”
The UTS-15 actually began with a highly unorthodox design first 
developed by South Africa’s Truvelo Armory. UTAS obtained patent 
rights and samples of the shotgun. After initial evaluation, it was 
decided to redesign the shotgun almost entirely. They retained its basic 
configuration and dual over-the-barrel magazines, but changed every-
thing else. All development work was carried out at the UTAS facility 
in Turkey, with Ted, who was then living in Turkey, leading the way.
After years of tweaks and design modifications, the UTS-15 was 
unveiled as a tactical, lightweight, short, mostly polymer, pump-action 
shotgun for a new generation. It is the first shotgun ever produced 
with a 100 percent polymer receiver. More than 80 percent of the gun 
is fabricated from carbon-fiber reinforced injection-molded polymer. 
The UTS-15 is basically a close-quarters combat tactical shotgun with 
an overall length of just twenty-nine inches and a fifteen-round capac-
ity. It looks like a very fat M4A1, but it’s all shotgun. It handles as 
well as an AR-15 and would be at home in any futuristic war movie.
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Armed Citizen of the Future 	
199 
The UTS-15 also has an optional built-in LED spotlight and laser 
sight. This is another trend reshaping guns today. Lew Danielson 
developed the concept of integrating a laser system into pistols back 
in the 1990s. He began going to gun shows and selling the idea. 
“They’d send their guns in and we’d fit a laser sighting system into 
their pistol’s frame,” Lew told me when I visited his Oregon facility 
in 2013. The success of this concept led him to start Crimson Trace, 
today’s preeminent laser-sighting-system maker for firearms. You can 
see his products in movies when someone’s gun puts a red dot on a 
target. Integrating the laser sights manually, however, was too expen-
sive. Crimson Trace soon turned to making laser grips and began 
expanding to fit most popular handgun models. They’re still doing 
that today, but technology has now been developed for them to work 
with manufacturers to cost-effectively integrate laser sights and lights 
into firearms again.
Ted’s shotgun is benefiting from this and many other developing 
technologies. His extensive use of polymer and carbon fiber has also 
enabled him to keep the shotgun to just 6.9 pounds unloaded. Many 
firearms now use synthetic stocks, carbon fiber, and even titanium 
barrels to reduce weight. One trend sure to continue is lighter, smaller 
firearms in every category as new materials and manufacturing pro-
cesses are developed and taken from other industries.
Back in the 1980s, Gaston Glock’s invention led other gun com-
panies to use polymer. Polymer helped the Glock 17 hold a record 17 
rounds of 9 mm Luger without becoming as heavy as a rifle. Engi-
neered plastics and other synthetic materials have been used as major 
components in firearms dating back to the Remington Nylon 66 
(produced from 1959 to 1989). Since Glock came to the market, it’s 
hard to imagine the world of handguns without polymer frames or 
rifles without synthetic stocks.

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
200	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
Polymer allows very complex detail to be formed into a mold. 
Molds are expensive to design—they can range from $25,000 to 
$250,000 or more depending on the part—yet once a mold is final-
ized, a manufacturer can literally produce hundreds of thousands of 
complex parts for little more than the cost of the material, the opera-
tor, and other incidentals. “With a mold a gun maker can add thirty-
line-per-inch checkering with no extra labor cost,” Keefe tells me.
It used to be that if a particular handgun didn’t fit well in your 
hands, you simply picked out another model or went down a cham-
bering. Not anymore. Now just about every major maker of a poly-
mer-framed, recoil-operated handgun offers one or more models with 
an interchangeable grip panel. Now, with guns such as the Beretta 
Storm, Ruger SR-9, Heckler & Koch P30, Sig Sauer P250, Smith & 
Wesson M&P, and Springfield XD(M), you can change the contour 
and depth of the backstrap in seconds. This changes how a pistol rests 
in a person’s hands, which affects trigger reach, the length of pull, and 
other ergonomic factors. Essentially, you can now have it “your way” 
with one gun. A former NFL pro and a cheerleader can buy the same 
model and caliber pistol, and, thanks to the pistol’s replaceable grips 
and other features, both will actually have a good chance of having a 
gun that fits them well.
Similarly, rifle manufacturers are developing new materials to make 
lighter rifles. Ever since Winchester released its Featherweight Model 
70, in the 1950s, the popularity of lightweight rifles among marksmen 
and hunters has risen. Most “mountain rifles” now weigh no more 
than six pounds. Remington, for example, uses titanium in its Model 
700 Alaskan Ti. This space-age alloy is half the weight of steel but a 
lot stronger. Browning’s A-Bolt Mountain Ti also has a titanium 
receiver. Ruger’s entry was the M77 Mark II Compact, a rifle with a 
short, sixteen-and-a-half-inch barrel attached to a stock proportioned 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Armed Citizen of the Future 	
201 
accordingly. Kimber designed its own synthetic stock for its 84M 
Montana so that, in standard, short-action chamberings, the 84M 
weighs just a touch over five pounds. Weatherby came out with the 
Mark V Ultra Lightweight and in standard chamberings weighs just 
five and three-quarter pounds. A lot of custom rifle makers have long 
specialized in making lighter and very accurate rifles, but their time 
and expertise is expensive. Because of the entries from major manu-
facturers, these custom gun makers have seen their share of the light-
rifle market shrink.
These manufacturing advances and others—including semisolid 
metal casting and metal injection molding—have made it possible to 
design guns anyone can take apart, clean, and put back together. To 
strip down the UTS-15, for example, you don’t need tools—an ama-
teur can take apart the shotgun in less than a minute. It can also be 
easily modified. The UTS-15 doesn’t even come with a standard sight; 
instead, it has a MIL-STD-1913 Picatinny rail that a consumer can 
outfit with any type of iron sights or optics. The gun has additional 
slots for aftermarket Picatinny rails on both sides of the receiver, and 
a front slot on its hand guard allows someone to attach a tactical 
flashlight or another device. As with AR-15-type rifles, this platform 
allows people in this Starbucks age to get what they want rather than 
just getting a one-size-fits-all design.
“We now have fifteen employees outside Chicago putting this 
shotgun together for the American market,” says Ted. “Back in the 
1980s I had to work with engineers on draft boards.” These days, 
like most gun makers, Ted’s team works with SolidWorks, a 3-D 
CAD/CAM engineering program, to design new guns. “Now we can 
make a part and scan it in with a 3-D laser scanner. We can then 
tweak the part in SolidWorks. Over in Turkey we have a good Solid-
Works draftsman and a couple of engineers as well,” says Ted. Design 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
202	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
changes that used to take years now take weeks or even days as gun 
designers tweak prototypes three dimensionally on computer screens. 
SolidWorks software is attracting a new group of gun designers to the 
firearms industry. Eric Lichtenberg, president and founder of Lichten-
berg Research and Design, for example, says he is a “jack of all 
trades.” He worked in the film industry, but, as many inventors do, 
he has dabbled in many areas. He has been hired by Kodiak Arms and 
other gun companies to help their R&D departments. He says, “Tech-
nology from the aerospace industry, medical-products field, and oth-
ers are being picked up by some savvy gun makers to design guns that 
are lighter and that have other technologies installed. I’m excited. The 
gun industry can at times be too conservative with design, but never-
theless gun technology is about to take a giant leap into the future. 
SolidWorks, for example, can show you where the stress points on a 
new gun design are. It can even actively help you find solutions. What 
used to take years can now take hours.”
Lichtenberg introduced me to a thirty-six-year-old design engineer 
who works for outdoor sports companies but who used SolidWorks 
to create a new revolver in his spare time that is simpler to make than 
a Smith & Wesson J-frame, that has fewer parts than other revolvers, 
and that’s as small as a Derringer, yet packs four shots of 9mm. He 
decided he didn’t want to reveal too much yet on the record, as he 
wants a gun company to purchase and manufacture his new idea; 
however, having seen this gun, I have no doubt it’ll be on magazine 
covers as soon as a gun company can tool up to produce it. He says, 
“I couldn’t have done this a few years ago. I would have needed lathes 
and machinists and more just to get started. Now I’m able to use my 
expertise to creatively try new concepts digitally.”
Ted Hatfield told me, “The pace of innovation is speeding up and 
we’re at the forefront. Now I have what I think is a sound, single, 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Armed Citizen of the Future 	
203 
short-stroke, gas-piston design worked out for our new semi-auto 
shotgun, but we need to turn my wet-bar napkins into engineering 
drawings. Anyway, that project is now well under way, and with a 
little luck we’ll have our new semiautomatic in production by the end 
of 2014.”
Ted adds, “When I started, in the early 1980s, the business was 
dominated by a few big manufacturers and some custom shops. Now 
I order parts made to precise specs worked out on SolidWorks or other 
software. The parts come in from various manufacturers from all over 
the world that have the expertise and the cheapest labor costs I can find 
without compromising quality. My employees then assemble the parts 
that are perfect to a few thousandths of an inch. Before CNC machin-
ing and other advances you still needed skilled labor to use lathes or 
another tools to expertly fit products together. Not anymore.”
Many of the big American gun makers import parts and even 
guns. CVA, for example, is a gun company formally located in Con-
necticut, now headquartered in Georgia, and that has a manufactur-
ing facility in Spain. CVA makes rifles, muzzleloaders, and 
high-quality barrels for a lot of American gun companies. I toured 
their factory in Bergara, Spain, in 2007. CVA calls the barrels coming 
out of its plant “Bergara Barrels.” They are cut and polished to a 
perfection only custom barrels could once reliably attain. They are 
an example of how, during just the last two decades, CNC machining 
and other advances have improved the accuracy of factory rifles and 
ammunition to the point where “minute of angle” groups and smaller, 
can be attained with medium- and low-priced hunting rifles that have 
not been modified by a gunsmith. “This was unheard of twenty years 
ago,” David Petzal, rifles editor for Field & Stream magazine, tells 
me. “Now we have no shortage of rifle manufacturers who guarantee 
one-inch groups at one hundred yards.”

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
204	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
Increased accuracy from factory rifles hasn’t been the only big 
change. Remington, CVA, and other gun makers have developed 
proprietary coatings for metal that make them impervious to the ele-
ments. Thompson/Center Arms uses Weathershield on its Icon, a 
coating that makes stainless steel even more impervious to the ele-
ments. Remington uses a proprietary TriNyte Corrosion Control 
System to produce its XCR (Xtreme Conditions Rifle) with scratch 
and corrosion resistance superior to stainless steel. Ruger has All-
Weather Grey on its M77 MkII, and Mossberg has MarineCoat on 
its 4x4.
Mark Hendricks, CVA’s vice president of technical development, 
says, “We wanted to see if our new muzzleloaders with a nitride finish 
could take the elements. So we shot a few, didn’t clean them, and left 
them out in the snow for weeks. This should rust out and destroy a 
muzzleloader, especially one that was fired. Thanks to the finish, when 
we cleaned them, they looked and performed like new.”
The manufacturing process itself is now less focused on the assem-
bly line than on the craftsman. Aitor Belategui, the director of innova-
tion at CVA’s plant in Spain, told me in March 2014, “We’re now 
making employees responsible for individual guns. They see a barrel 
through the cutting and polishing processes and then take the barrels 
through the other steps of manufacturing and assembling. This makes 
them responsible for the quality of fit, finish, and accuracy with their 
guns.”
“It used to be,” adds Mark Hendricks, “that someone made a lot 
of barrels that then sat in racks until they were carted over by someone 
else to the next stage. But now our employees are more like old-
fashioned gun artisans, as they’re individually building guns and are 
then responsible for their products’ quality. This is taking our guns to 
another level of performance—if that’s possible.”
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Armed Citizen of the Future 	
205 
“Right,” says Aitor, “this also makes it easier for us to complete 
small orders faster and to keep our inventory in step with demand.”
            
American-based manufacturers with Federal Firearms Type 7 
licenses (manufacturer of firearms and/or ammunition) increased by 
282 percent, from 1,941 in 2002 to 7,423 in 2012, according to the 
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF)—in 
1980 there were only 496 American manufacturers with Type 7 
licenses.
Relatively new gun makers include companies like Stag Arms, 
which was founded in 2003. Stag Arms has about two hundred 
employees making AR-15s in Connecticut; however, as this is being 
written, Stag Arms was looking to move to a more gun-friendly state. 
Another example is Magpul Industries, a company that began making 
AR-15 accessories in 1999. Magpul’s quick growth and political 
troubles are a timely example of some of the forces shaping the future 
of the gun. In December 2012 Magpul Industries had been preparing 
to break ground on a new state-of-the-art facility in Colorado. Mag-
pul’s PMAG magazines, AR stocks, grips, and other products were in 
high demand. Started in a home basement in 1999, by 2012 Magpul 
had more than two hundred employees, and the future looked bright. 
But then the state’s Democrat governor John Hickenlooper and Dem-
ocrat-led legislature pushed for a series of gun-control restrictions. In 
early 2013 the Colorado State Senate’s president, John Morse, stood 
on the state’s senate floor and argued that new gun restrictions were 
needed as a way of “cleansing a sickness from our souls.”
Magpul and other companies said they would take their jobs out of 
Colorado if the state banned them from selling some of their products. 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
206	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
The legislature and governor, however, banned so-called high-capacity 
magazines (no magazine can be loaded with more than ten rounds); 
required “universal background checks”; forced gun buyers to pay for 
their own background checks; and more.
In January 2014, Richard Fitzpatrick, chief executive officer of 
Magpul, announced that the company was relocating its manufactur-
ing, distribution, and shipping operations to Cheyenne, Wyoming. 
“Moving operations to states that support our culture of individual 
liberties and personal responsibility is important,” he said, giving full 
credit to Wyoming governor Matt Mead, the Wyoming Business 
Council, and the group Cheyenne LEADS for supporting the reloca-
tion. Magpul’s corporate office, meanwhile, will be moved to Texas. 
Texas governor Rick Perry gave Magpul a big Texas welcome, saying, 
“In Texas, we understand that freedom breeds prosperity, which is 
why we’ve built our economy around principles that allow employers 
to innovate, keep more of what they earn and create jobs.”
            
Gun manufacturers are not only moving out of states that are 
restricting gun rights, they are moving to states that allow them the 
freedom to pursue new technology. One of these emerging technolo-
gies is 3-D printing. Many people find 3-D gun printing controversial, 
because, arguably, it allows anyone to make a homemade gun. But 
people already make homemade guns. I know a well-traveled hunter 
who bought several homemade handguns in rural parts of Africa; 
none of these homemade handguns took more than a hacksaw, an 
open fire, and some scrap metal.
These guns are primitive, but the human ingenuity behind them is 
no different from the stainless steel Model 1911 semiautomatic pistol 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Armed Citizen of the Future 	
207 
with carbon-fiber grip printed out by Solid Concepts on a 3-D printer 
in 2013.2 Solid Concepts, a company based in Austin, Texas, chose 
the Model 1911 because the design is in the public domain. The 
company posted YouTube videos of employees shooting their 
3-D-printed pistol. Kent Firestone, a vice president at Solid Concepts, 
says, “As far as we know, we’re the only 3D Printing Service Provider 
with a Federal Firearms License. Now, if a qualifying customer needs 
a unique gun part in five days, we can deliver. It’s a common miscon-
ception that 3D printing isn’t accurate or strong enough.”3
The worry that people might soon print their own 3-D guns to 
evade authorities is mostly media hype. That fear made headlines in 
2013 after Cody Wilson, a Texas law student and leader of a group 
called Defense Distributed, made available on the internet blueprints 
for a 3-D-printed gun. The group says it exists “to defend the civil 
liberty of popular access to arms as guaranteed by the United States 
Constitution and affirmed by the United States Supreme Court, 
through facilitating global access to, and the collaborative production 
of, information and knowledge related to the 3D printing of arms.”4 
The files to print out the gun, known as “the Liberator,” were down-
loaded more than one hundred thousand times before the Bureau of 
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) took the 3-D-gun 
plans off the internet.
The thing is, traditionally manufactured guns—well-designed 
firearms that aren’t likely to blow up in your hands—are readily 
available at relatively low costs, so there is, for now, a limited market 
for quality 3-D-printed guns. (Ironically, an underground market for 
such guns could be created by stringent gun-control laws.) There’s 
also a misconception that 3-D-printed guns are more dangerous than 
other guns because they can allegedly evade a metal detector. But 
barring a major leap forward in ammunition, 3-D-printed guns will 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
208	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
likely still need metal firing pins, not to mention metal ammunition; 
and, if they were going to shoot a cartridge much heavier than a .22 
LR, the guns would have to use some steel to contain the pressure.
If people are worried 3-D-printed guns will be made in shapes that 
don’t look like guns, that’s not a new problem either. “Pen guns” (guns 
that resemble ink pens) designed to fire a single .22 LR or other light 
cartridge have been around for a long time, as have guns made to 
resemble Zippo liters, stopwatches, and cameras. These inventions 
are neat to see in spy movies—some people buy pen guns for that 
reason—but they’ve never been a problem for the criminal-justice 
system, because easily concealable small pistols and revolvers pack a 
lot more lead, are more accurate, and have been available at afford-
able prices since the late nineteenth century.
The real future of 3-D-printing technology isn’t scary—it’s about 
helping manufacturers make hard-to-find parts for custom guns or 
firearms that have gone out of production. 3-D printing is just another 
aspect of the industry using high tech to help customers have the 
firearms they want.
            
One of my favorite gun nuts is Bryce Towsley. He has a snow-
white beard, an encyclopedic knowledge of guns, and a libertarian’s 
penchant for personal freedom. A few summers ago, he took a road 
trip to Maine to look at a used lathe for making his own gun parts 
and came back with the lathe, a barrel reamer, and so many thousands 
of additional pounds of machinery that he blew out the tires on his 
trailer—at least that’s his story. Upstairs in his barn is his “ammo 
room,” an entire floor filled with stacks of ammo. In the basement of 
his home, he has a gunroom with a vault door. Inside are more than 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Armed Citizen of the Future 	
209 
six hundred rifles, pistols, and shotguns from AR-15s to Colt .45s. 
He writes about guns. He competes in more than a dozen competi-
tions—from 3-gun to Cowboy Action—every year.
So I ask Bryce to lead me through the crowded aisles at the 2014 
SHOT Show to see the latest innovations in gun design and altera-
tions. We check out the new Glock 42. At just under six inches long, 
the G42 is simple, elegant, and the smallest Glock ever made. It is 
chambered in .380 and weighs just 14.36 ounces when loaded with 
6 rounds.
Glock isn’t the only manufacturer making carry pistols that are 
smaller and lighter. Two of the smartest new designs of 2014 are from 
Remington.
We have to wait for a turn to handle the 9mm R-51 pistols that 
are attached to tethers in the Remington Outdoor Company booth. 
This little pistol comes with a laser grip from Crimson Trace and a 
suppressor (where these are legal). Its grip angle is slanted to lower 
muzzle jump and optimize target acquisition. It’s just 6.67 inches long. 
It has a lightweight aluminum frame and is so easy to load that my 
mother’s arthritic hands could work this pistol.
Nearby is a cutting-edge AR-15 from DPMS (another Remington 
company). An engineer shows us the DPMS GII. The semiautomatic 
rifle is chambered in .308 (7.62 NATO). Stripped down, this rifle weighs 
about 6.45 pounds—about 2 pounds less than similar rifles chambered 
in .308. It also has dual ejectors, a monolithic bolt carrier with an inte-
gral gas key, and an improved extractor made from a new alloy.
As we handle these guns and visit other manufacturers, even a 
person unfamiliar with firearms would quickly notice how much 
AR-15s are being tweaked and accessorized to meet demands of law 
enforcement and civilians who might use an AR-15 for home defense, 
for fun at a range, or to compete in fast-growing 3-gun competitions. 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
210	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
Every year the pace of innovation seems to speed up, and the selections 
become more diverse. There is no use in outlining all the new guns of 
2014 here, because by the time this book is published, the next gen-
eration of guns will be ready for the 2015 SHOT Show. The point is 
the market is big and growing and driven by well-tested technological 
advances and an ever-increasing focus on customization.
A good way to see how innovation is changing the gun industry 
is to look at how triggers have changed over the last two decades. Jim 
Carmichel, the now-retired shooting editor of Outdoor Life, used to 
call triggers from the big gun makers “lawyer triggers.” Gun manu-
facturers were worried about lawsuits if a gun went off too easily, so 
most fitted their rifles with triggers so hard to pull they were nearly 
impossible to shoot accurately under real conditions. Any decent rifle-
man had to buy and install (or have installed) an aftermarket trigger 
from Timney Triggers or another company.
This changed in the early 2000s when Kimber, a medium- to high-
end gun maker founded in 1979, started putting exceptional triggers 
on its center-fire rifles. In 2003, engineers at venerable Savage Arms 
found a way to make a trigger both lawyer-proof and light enough to 
pull without jerking a rifle off target. Savage called it the Accutrigger. 
This trigger let shooters adjust the trigger pull from one pound, eight 
ounces, to six pounds without any help from a gunsmith. The innova-
tion gave shooters a fabulous system in an economical package, and 
it gave Savage a remarkable competitive advantage. Since 2003, 
Thompson/Center, Marlin, Mossberg, Weatherby, and others have 
incorporated user-adjustable triggers on a lot of rifles; also, Remington 
(X-Mark Pro), Ruger (LC6), Winchester (MOA), and Browning 
(Feather) named new trigger designs in an attempt to win back some 
of the market share they had lost to Savage.
The marketplace is still pushing engineers to evolve new triggers. 
For example, in January 2014 during a media day at a gun range in 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Armed Citizen of the Future 	
211 
Las Vegas—an event held annually the day before the SHOT Show 
begins that allows writers and editors to see and shoot new gun 
introductions—I thought I heard a machine gun being fired and 
thought cool, a gun with a fun switch. When I got over to shoot the 
“machine gun,” however, I found it was an AR-15 fitted with a 
Tac-Con 3MR Trigger System from a new company called Tactical 
Fire Control, Inc. Every year, arms makers and others in the firearms 
industry show off their smartest designs at the SHOT Show, and it 
always seems there are a handful of standout new guns and prod-
ucts. The Tac-Con 3MR Trigger System is such an invention. It is 
“a drop-in, 3-mode fire control system consisting of Safe, match-
grade Semi-Automatic, and the Tac-Con patented 3rd Mode of 
operation.” The third mode provides a positive reset that dramati-
cally reduces the time between shots. An experienced trigger finger 
can make this thing fly.
The trigger’s reset is achieved by transferring the force from the 
bolt carrier through the trigger assembly to assist the trigger back 
onto the front sear. The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and 
Explosives (ATF) follows guidelines to approve new gun designs. If 
a gun falls into a category that requires a special license to own (such 
as a machine gun), then it can only be sold to someone with such a 
hard-to-get license. The ATF approved this trigger for the general 
market, but to stop worries on ranges, the manufacturer is putting a 
letter from the ATF stating as much into every box.
To understand the trends pushing guns into the future, however, 
“you also must continue to acknowledge the nostalgic streak that runs 
deep and wide in almost every class of firearms,” says Mark A. Keefe 
IV, the editor of the NRA’s magazine American Rifleman. “Maybe it’s 
the appreciation for history, maybe it’s a desire to return to a simpler 
time or to reach back in time. But, in my view, it’s those things and 
more. Mostly, it’s the fact that good design and performance are simply 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
212	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
timeless. But innovation is what drives the industry. So we’re forever 
pushing forward into the past so to speak.”
An example of this is the M1 Garand and the M16, two standard-
issue rifles of the U.S. military whose semiautomatic civilian deriva-
tives dominate the American marketplace for rifles. Indeed, civilian 
AR-15-type rifles have so many new options for sights, lights, grips, 
triggers, and other accessories that former Special Forces soldiers have 
told me that technological advances in the American civilian gun 
market drive the development of battlefield rifles as well.
Keefe says it’s uncertain when a new service rifle for the U.S. armed 
forces will displace the M4 carbines—lightweight versions of the 
Vietnam-era M16—and thereby propel the gun market in a new direc-
tion, but the search for a better rifle is never ending. Many sources 
tell me the U.S. Army won’t replace the M4 until a new infantry rifle 
makes a technological “leap ahead.” In 2014 the U.S. Army had about 
a half million M4s and was reluctant to make a big and expensive 
change without a very good reason for doing so.5
Some of the M4’s critics have been very vocal. For example, U.S. 
Army Senior Warrant Officer Russton B. Kramer, a twenty-year Green 
Beret, told the Washington Times that if you want to improve your 
chances of surviving on the battlefield, you have to modify your M4 
with over-the-counter products.6
Other active and former U.S. soldiers tell me the M4 is fine, but 
that soldiers improve the weapons with civilian triggers, sights, and 
grips. Steve Adelmann, a retired SOF Operator who spent twenty-two 
years in the U.S. Army and who currently owns Citizen Arms, told 
me, “I can’t speak for everyone, but my experience was that aftermar-
ket parts were purchased to upgrade, not to keep guns running. I 
consulted several current armorers and grunts about the Washington 
Times article to see if my recollections were incorrect. To a man they 
backed up my observations.”
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Armed Citizen of the Future 	
213 
The Washington Times also reported that “U.S. Special Opera-
tions Command in 2001 issued a damning private report that said 
the M4A1 was fundamentally flawed because the gun failed when 
called on to unleash rapid firing.” Also, in “2002, an internal report 
from the Army’s Picatinny Arsenal in New Jersey said the M4A1 was 
prone to overheating and ‘catastrophic barrel failure.’” That makes 
the M4 sound like a flawed product, but the M4 carbine remains a 
proven and versatile platform that has yet to be surpassed in a range 
of categories.
The chief criticism of the M4 is whether the “direct impingement” 
gas-operated recoil system lets in sand and dust that jam the carbine 
in desert environments. Republican senator Tom Coburn of Okla-
homa has been pressuring the Pentagon to test M4 alternatives since 
at least 2007. He has even used his senatorial leverage to put some 
army nominations on hold to force the army to listen to him. (The 
first hold was on Peter Geren, for secretary of the army, in 2007; the 
second on Heidi Shyu, for army acquisition chief, in 2013.)7
Criticism with the army’s current small arms doesn’t stop with the 
M4. In 2006, the Center for Naval Analysis made a report public that 
said more than a third of all soldiers using the M249 squad automatic 
weapon (SAW) in combat in Iraq and Afghanistan were dissatisfied with 
its reliability. Also, “30% of these soldiers experienced stoppages with 
their M249 while engaging the enemy in combat. . . . The same survey 
noted that nearly half of all users of the M9 pistol were dissatisfied with 
its use. There is no plan for the Army to issue replacements for the Army’s 
decades-old designs for M9 pistols, M16 rifles, or M249 machine guns,” 
said Coburn. Coburn and other critics think the armed services should 
encourage private manufacturers to present the army with new options.
Coburn stepped into a related gunfight when he wrote that “bal-
listic testing going back to World War I . . . show that the current 5.56 
mm ammunition that is the Army and NATO standard is not the ideal 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
214	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
ammunition for our troops engaging targets greater than 300 meters.” 
Coburn argued that the army should be “conducting robust research 
and analysis on the possibility of intermediate caliber ammunition 
that would be effective at long ranges.”
Adelmann says, “From a purely logistical standpoint, it’s much 
easier to upgrade or replace uppers and other parts of the M4 than it 
is to develop and procure an entirely new system.” Adelmann now 
builds AR-15s for private customers. He adds, “New caliber and bul-
let options are pushing guns into the future, and I see that as a good 
thing. New guns will have to adapt to the advantages they offer.”
            
What would surprise a firearms engineer from 1880 wouldn’t be 
all the new metals, powders, and other advances, but the basic fact 
that we’re still using the self-contained cartridge. As we fly on jets, 
microwave our food, and send text messages from smartphones, we’re 
still using the same nineteenth-century concept of a primer placed at 
the end of a brass cartridge loaded with gunpowder and topped with 
a bullet.
Drew Goodlin, director of new product development for ATK 
Ammunition Systems Group, which includes Federal Premium, Speer 
Bullets, CCI Ammunition, Fusion, and more, tells me, “We have some 
patents on emerging technologies utilizing electricity and chemicals, 
but I don’t see the bullet going away as the choice for hunting, the 
military, or even personal defense for a long time. What’s exciting is 
how much we’ve been able to engineer bullets and shot to more accu-
rately and ethically kill game faster without bullet failures. Though 
there are some emerging alternatives in personal defense, the bullet 
will be the go-to option until something comes along that is as afford-
able and reliable as traditional guns and ammo.”
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Armed Citizen of the Future 	
215 
Bullet design is, of course, an ancient art. From about 1500 to 
1800 AD, lead bullets changed very little, as they were good. Any 
frontiersman with a bullet mold could melt lead over a fire, cast a 
round ball of a certain caliber, and stuff it into a muzzleloader. Then 
came the percussion cap (priming with a fulminating powder made 
of potassium chlorate, sulfur, and charcoal, which is ignited by con-
cussion) in the early nineteenth century, and it was good. Muzzleload-
ers could suddenly be fired in any weather. Finally, during the 
nineteenth century, the self-contained cartridge was developed, and 
they became really good. Cartridges could be loaded, levered, bolted, 
and even driven into place by gasses bled off from a fired cartridge. 
Firearms had entered the modern era.
The next big advance came in 1882 when Major Eduard Rubin, 
director of the Swiss Army Laboratory, made the first copper-jacketed 
bullet. The copper jacket was added because the surface of a lead 
bullet fired at high velocity can melt due to hot gases behind it and 
friction as the bullet travels down a rifle’s bore. Because copper has 
a higher melting point and greater specific heat capacity and hardness 
than lead, copper-jacketed bullets allow greater velocities without 
bullet deformities and other issues.
A copper-jacketed lead bullet is a versatile and efficient killer. Such 
bullet designs work well on medium-sized game (and people) in most 
situations, but they aren’t reliable when they hit hard bone or large 
game. Copper-jacketed lead bullets changed slowly until, in 1946, 
John Nosler had a bullet fail to penetrate far enough into a moose in 
British Columbia. At the time, there were two basic copper-jacketed 
lead bullet options available. The military used full-metal-jacket 
bullets—a single copper alloy envelope around a lead alloy core. 
These bullets achieved good penetration but often failed to expand 
and so zipped right through, leaving a wound only as wide as the 
pointy bullet. The other type was the soft-nose hunting bullet, such 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
216	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
as the one Nosler was using. It has a copper jacket over the bullet’s 
base, but the top is open to expose the softer lead. These bullets 
“mushroom” when they hit a target to leave a large wound channel, 
but they sometimes break apart and fail to penetrate through heavy 
bone or muscle tissue. Copper-jacketed, soft-nose bullets are still used 
by hunters for deer and other medium-sized game. The Remington 
Core-Lokt is such a design and is still an economical and popular 
choice for deer today—though a bonded (a process that chemically 
bonds metals together) Core-Lokt is now available.
Nosler decided hunters needed a more humane alternative for big, 
tough game. He went to work, and by 1947 he was testing his first 
Nosler Partition.8 He designed the bullet with two lead cores separated 
by a “wall” of jacket metal. In a cross-section, the jacket on a Nosler 
Partition looks like an “H” with a lump of lead in its top and bottom. 
The nose of the jacket was made to be fragile. When a Partition hits, 
it expands. Its rear stays intact (the bottom of the H) and penetrates, 
but its front disintegrates. Soon the Nosler Partition became the stan-
dard all other bullet designers measured their ideas against.
Hunters still use and swear by Partitions, but many don’t like that 
half the bullet falls apart. Maximum weight retention, they point out, is 
fundamental to a bullet’s performance. So other bullet makers went to 
work. Petzal says, “When I started big-game hunting in the late 1960s, I 
could look forward to seeing at least one dandy bullet failure every sea-
son. Either a slug would zip right through the animal, not expanding at 
all, or it would blow up and fail to penetrate far enough. Not anymore. 
Now premium bullets do pretty much what they’re designed to do.”
The Swift A-Frame was introduced in 1984, by Kansan Lee Reid. 
The A-Frame resembles the Nosler Partition, but an A-Frame’s front 
core is bonded to the jacket, so the A-Frame retains its weight—usu-
ally better than 90 percent. Also in 1984, Nosler introduced the Bal-
listic Tip—a bullet with a plastic tip—to stop bullet damage in rifle 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Armed Citizen of the Future 	
217 
magazines. At the time, the engineers at Nosler didn’t realize what 
this tip would do to a bullet’s ballistics or performance; however, 
when the design turned out to be accurate and make bigger wound 
channels, the engineers realized they had something special. Polymer 
tips now grace a lot of premium bullets.
In 1989 Barnes came out with the X-Bullet. Randy Brooks of 
Barnes Bullets decided that really big game required an all-copper 
bullet. The X-Bullet he designed would become one of the most-
imitated big-game bullets on the market. It’s a solid copper bullet with 
a small, but deep, hollow point in the tip. When the bullet hits a 
target, its tip folds open into four petals, forming an “X.” Under 
normal conditions it retains 100 percent of its weight, and its penetra-
tion is extreme.
Hunting bullets that expand as an “X” and hold together became 
the standard measurement of premium big-game bullets. In 2003, 
Barnes advanced the technology of the X-Bullet with the introduction 
of the Triple-Shock X (TSX), which has rings cut in the shank for 
higher performance.
Meanwhile, Steve Hornady developed a long list of remarkable 
hunting bullets. Hornady’s InterBonds have earned a solid reputation, 
as have Nosler’s AccuBonds, and Swift’s Sciroccos. These are all 
bonded bullets, meaning the metals in them are chemically bonded 
together so the bullet is much less likely to come apart. Another excel-
lent bonded bullet is the Trophy Bonded Bear Claw. It was originally 
designed by Jack Carter, a Houston-based big-game hunter and bul-
let inventor. When Federal Premium Ammunition began making this 
bullet, they swapped Carter’s pure-copper jackets with gilding metal 
and made other design tweaks. They now market it in their Vital-Shok 
line as the Trophy Bonded Tip.
Mark A. Keefe IV, the editor of American Rifleman, put these 
and many other advances in bullets this way: “Bullets are now an 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
218	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
engineering problem. A bullet can be made to expand and hold 
together through hide and bone, through armor, or even cinder 
blocks. Thanks to a lot of engineers, all you need today is the right 
bullet for the job. Just a few decades ago you didn’t have controlled-
expansion bullets that held their shape after their initial upset. Now 
the marketplace has developed specific bullet/caliber options for very 
specific problems.”
On this topic, Steve Hornady, president of Hornady Manufactur-
ing Company, tells me, “It’s not easy getting a bullet to expand and 
hold together at very different velocities. Our .30-06 Springfield 
Superformance load, for example, sends a 180-grain bullet out the 
muzzle at 2,820 feet per second. This bullet slows to about 2,100 feet 
per second at 400 yards. We need that bullet to reliably expand and 
to hold together on impact at both those velocities. We’ve solved those 
problems. Hunters and others just need to pick the right tool for the 
job. If we don’t have it, we’ll design a better option for them.”
Hornady’s Superformance line of ammo, which was introduced 
in 2011, has custom blends of powders made for specific rifle car-
tridges and bullets. Hornady says its Superformance ammunition 
increases rifle muzzle velocities by one hundred to two hundred feet 
per second over average factory loads and are more accurate.9 People 
have long hand-loaded their own rifle ammunition, but now Hornady 
and other companies are filling the need for customized ammunition. 
Needs for specialized ammunition range from Federal Premium’s 
subsonic .22 LR for small-game hunters who don’t want to disturb 
their neighbors to new calibers and cartridge options to help hunters 
and long-range marksmen extend their range. David Petzal, rifles edi-
tor for Field & Stream magazine, says, “The development and 
improvement of such cartridges as the .338 Lapua, .50 BMG, and the 
various tactical .416s have made shooting long even more possible. 
Before their use, shooting to and beyond one thousand yards was 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Armed Citizen of the Future 	
219 
more of a stunt than serious shooting, but combined with the other 
technology available, they have extended the range of an expert 
shooter from roughly one thousand yards to twice that.”
            
Increasingly, electronics are changing firearms. I knew we were at 
the beginning of a new era in small arms in 2006 when a pair of 
binoculars allowed me to outguess Pete Dube, a smart outfitter and 
guide. Pete and I were lying prone atop a ridge in north-central Wyo-
ming glassing a mule deer buck that was looking to bed down for the 
day.
“That buck’s big, but he must be over a thousand yards off,” said 
Dube.
“No, it’s not quite that far,” I challenged as I watched the mule 
deer through a pair of Leica Geovid BRF 8x42 binoculars.
“Oh, just how far is it then?” he asked incredulously, knowing 
people who don’t live in the wide-open West can’t judge distances on 
the plains.
“Oh, about 830 yards,” I shot back.
He pulled out his rangefinder, took the range, and blurted, “What! 
How the—?”
I didn’t tell him. When you get one up on a savvy guide, you don’t 
give up the advantage easily. You see, the binoculars I carried housed 
the top-quality optics Leica is famous for, but he had no way of know-
ing that it also contained a laser rangefinder.
The buck we were watching bedded down into a shadow and out 
of our sight.
“We’ll have to back off and come around the ridge, down that 
coulee eight hundred yards over there,” whispered Dube.
“Six hundred forty,” I interrupted.

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
220	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
He checked the range and his eyes narrowed.
After crawling out onto the ridge, we started glassing for the buck. 
“I see him,” I said. “He’s one hundred forty-two yards straight 
ahead.”
Pete searched for the buck, but the sun’s low angle was reflecting 
light across his old binoculars’ lenses, washing out the image. The 
glass on the Leica I was using had been treated and smoothed to an 
astounding degree to prevent refraction and reduce glare.
Finally, Pete found the buck and, after using his rangefinder to get 
the exact distance, he winced again and said, “Let me see those!” And 
then he laughed so hard he would have spooked the buck, if not for 
a stiff Wyoming wind.
The next big leap began in 2010 when digital video scopes began 
to hit the market. Raytheon’s Elcan Optical Technologies offered a 
video riflescope that could switch reticles and record shots. It was the 
talk of the gun magazines, but today the Elcan already seems quaint. 
Everything changed when TrackingPoint hit the market, in 2013.
Field & Stream’s David Petzal says,
Ten years ago I was told by a ballistician who worked for 
the army that the next thing was “guided” small-arms 
munitions that could be directed to their targets much in 
the manner of smart bombs or cruise missiles, and that 
these would be of 25mm. These have yet to appear. What 
has evolved is the integrated rifle system with the software 
in the TrackingPoint rifle that is intended for big-game 
hunting. It comes in .300 Win. Mag. [Winchester Magnum] 
and .338 Lapua, and incorporates a scope, laser range-
finder, ballistics computer, and WiFi transmitter. It also 
mostly eliminates the shooter from the equation, since all 
that person does is put the reticle on what they want to hit 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Armed Citizen of the Future 	
221 
and pull the trigger. The electronics decide when the rifle 
will fire.
Petzal adds, “If the past is any indicator, the size and weight of 
the TrackingPoint rifle system will come way down in the future, as 
will the price. The other questions—concerning the sportsmanship 
of using such a firearm, and if it should be in civilian hands at all—
will also be resolved, or forgotten, at some point. But for better or 
for worse, the TrackingPoint—or something very much like it—is 
where we’re going.”
John Snow, the shooting editor for Outdoor Life, tells me, “I don’t 
think TrackingPoint will even be around in a few years. The technol-
ogy might get picked up by someone else and turned into something 
cheaper, but like ArmaLite’s experience developing the AR-15, I don’t 
think TrackingPoint will realize the benefits from its technology. 
People just aren’t ready and the system they’re selling needs improve-
ment.”
TrackingPoint calls its shooting system “precision-guided fire-
arms.” But Snow compares the TrackingPoint to Remington’s failed 
Etronix rifle, which was announced in 1999 and discontinued a short 
time later. Etronix had an innovative battery-operated trigger system. 
Jim Carmichel, former shooting editor for Outdoor Life, noted that 
though electronic triggering “has been brilliantly successful in military 
rapid-fire weaponry, it has fizzled in sporting applications. Back in 
1985 I authored The Book of the Rifle. In it I wistfully described a 
simple ignition system in which the complexities, complications and 
un-reliabilities of traditional percussive ignition were eliminated and 
replaced with a simple circuit that would work somewhat like an 
ordinary electric dynamite cap.”10
Carmichel was pleased to see his vision come to be, but a lot of 
gun owners weren’t impressed or ready for a battery-operated trigger 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
222	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
mechanism. Remington went to the trouble because a rifle with an 
electronic firing system has some remarkable advantages. It has a 
virtually instant lock time (the time between pulling the trigger and 
the gun going bang). This means when you pull the trigger, the gun 
goes off faster. This matters when marksmen are shooting at long 
range, where every problem is magnified. The electronic system is also 
more repeatable than a mechanical system. What killed the idea were 
the costs, some marketing mistakes from Remington, worries that 
cold weather would kill the battery, and the fear that a person in a 
self-defense scenario would find himself helpless thanks to a dead 
battery—sometimes when someone needs a gun to go bang, he really 
needs the gun to go bang.
After gun owners refused to accept Remington’s electronic-ignition 
system, Carmichel wrote, “Let’s suppose that firearms had always 
been fired by electricity when suddenly a gunmaker decided to intro-
duce a new ignition method in which a complicated series of levers 
and sears—all prone to breakage and disorder—released a spring-
driven rod (which had to be reset with each firing) that smashes into 
an explosive chemical to ignite a flash of fire. Do I hear anyone say 
that it would be barely a step beyond starting fire by banging two 
rocks together?”
Meanwhile, Snow certainly has a point that the high cost of Track-
ingPoint’s “fighter jet technology” is pricing out a lot of consumers. 
In early 2014 TrackingPoint did show they are trying to find a larger 
segment of the private market. They introduced a new line of AR-
15s—the 500 Series, manufactured by Daniel Defense. These AR-15s 
come in three calibers—7.62 (.308), .300 BLK, and 5.56 calibers 
(.223). These AR-15s use TrackingPoint’s Tag Track Xact technology 
and are priced at $9,950—about half the cost of TrackingPoint’s long-
range, bolt-action rifles. These ARs can lock onto and hit moving 
targets at distances up to five hundred yards. TrackingPoint says, 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Armed Citizen of the Future 	
223 
“With stabilized target selection, target tracking and guided firing the 
500 Series semiautomatic AR products enable anyone to be an expert 
marksman out to the 500 yard effective range of the firearm, even 
from difficult firing positions, such as kneeling, standing, or even lying 
beneath an automobile.”
At the 2014 SHOT Show, Oren Schauble, TrackingPoint’s direc-
tor of marketing, told me as he held one their Series 500 AR-15s, 
“We’re reluctant to advertise some of the things this semiautomatic 
system can do. You can tag targets at say four hundred yards and 
then use a mode, the Fire Free Mode, to quickly engage those targets. 
A soldier could use this to quickly, in the heat of battle, take out 
multiple targets without having to think about where to hold the 
rifle’s sights—enemy combatants wouldn’t have a chance of accu-
rately returning fire at medium to long range in enough time to mat-
ter.”
To conceptualize how big of an advantage this is, realize that in 
the second Gulf War (“Operation Iraqi Freedom”) U.S. M1 Abrams 
tanks could shoot Iraqi tanks from much greater distances than the 
Iraqis’ tanks could, and U.S. tanks could do this as they drove at high 
speeds thanks to a fire-control computer than calculates shooting 
solutions. This TrackingPoint-type system theoretically gives infantry 
soldiers the same advantages. A soldier could be running and shoot-
ing accurately as he maneuvers. They could also tag a target and then 
shoot while undercover, as the rifle won’t go off until it’s in line with 
the tag.
These electronic shooting systems also appeal to today’s soldiers 
and younger marksmen who can’t imagine life without smartphones 
and iPads—or many without their PlayStation or Xbox. The Track-
ingPoint system, for example, has built-in Wi-Fi and ShotView that 
streams video. A mobile app lets shooters share their experiences with 
others in real time with a smartphone or tablet. The scope also records 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
224	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
each shot with video and audio that can be downloaded to an iPhone 
or Android device and shared on social media like Facebook and 
Twitter. Anyone who doesn’t get how all that will help establish this 
technology isn’t in touch with this generation. Schauble already envi-
sions internet forums and chat rooms set up for marksmen to share 
data and video they recorded at ranges. He says, “It’s Wi-Fi capable, 
so someone shooting a 3-gun competition could live-stream video 
from his rifle as he moves along and shoots in the competition. Of 
course, soldiers can do this too. This way people at a control center 
can watch live and give the soldier advice on enemy combatants to 
come—it’s the future.”
So next I ask TrackingPoint’s CEO, John Lupher, if the system 
could use facial-recognition software to target a certain person at long 
range. Lupher is a Texas A&M– and Stanford-educated engineer who 
has filed numerous patents for the company on target tracking, fire 
control, heads-up-display integration, and networking capabilities. 
Prior to TrackingPoint, he founded Evermore Systems, an Austin, 
Texas, product-development company.
Lupher smiles and says, “Now you’re starting to grasp what the 
future of this technology can be. We’re not there yet though.”
“Could soldiers one-day carry a chip or other device your Track-
ingPoint system could sense and thereby read as good guys in a com-
bat zone?” I ask.
Hollywood screenwriters thought of this for the 1973 movie 
Westworld. In the movie there are guns that can be fired only at 
humanoid robots. They use temperature sensors to keep the guns from 
shooting people. In the movie the robots rebel, override the restric-
tions, and begin shooting people with the guns. In another example 
of fiction meeting reality, science-fiction thinkers took this to another 
level in the videogame series Metal Gear Solid. In the game there are 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Armed Citizen of the Future 	
225 
“nanomite computers” in peoples’ bloodstreams that have an imprint 
of who the person is. “Smart guns” in the game can read a certain 
person’s information.
Lupher says, “That would be more difficult, as a lot of factors can 
affect signals. Such things will one day be possible though. Perhaps 
the scope could read something on the soldier’s uniform.” He gets 
quiet a moment as his minds runs over the possibilities before adding, 
“Right now what’s exciting is TrackingPoint can make shots safer 
and more ethical.”
“And it can help a person used to video games to use those skills 
in real life, I suppose?”
“Yes, now an novice shooter can, within minutes, begin to hit 
targets beyond ten football fields,” say Lupher.
Long-range marksmen I interviewed, however, told me they’re 
excited but skeptical about the development of these “precision-
guided firearms” from TrackingPoint. They think it would be better 
if a military or police sniper could switch to traditional optics if the 
electronic system fails. Many hunters feel the same way, as they’re 
reluctant to rely too heavily on technology. Field & Stream’s David 
Petzal says he thinks they’re the future, but also says, “In real life 
bullets go where they damn well please, not where computations say 
they should. I’ve been fooled badly, many times, going by the book.” 
I interviewed former Special Forces snipers who underlined Petzal’s 
point, telling me that sure, TrackingPoint would help a novice, 
because it takes away the need to control your breathing, to have 
good trigger control, and more. But a novice shooter would still need 
an expert to read the wind—with TrackingPoint, a shooter has to 
manually dial in wind speeds to adjust for a bullet’s wind drift—and 
have experience of other factors that go into making a shot at long 
range.

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
226	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
The U.S. Armed Forces certainly see the potential in this technol-
ogy and are looking to improve it. In 2007 the U.S. Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency (DARPA) in Arlington, Virginia, funded 
Lockheed Martin to develop a technology that can automatically 
account for wind speed and other factors. It’s called the “One-Shot” 
program. In 2008 Lockheed Martin acquired fiber laser specialist 
Aculight Corporation, located in Bothell, Washington, to help build 
this system. They say a sniper will one day be able to use fiber-laser 
technology to illuminate a target at night more than a mile away. The 
fiber laser could even theoretically measure bullet drift caused by 
wind, as it would use light reflections from moving particles between 
the sniper and the target to determine wind direction and speed.11 It’s 
not, however, all about long-range snipers. To help soldiers shoot 
more accurately at shorter distances—ten feet to two thousand feet— 
Lockheed Martin is using One-Shot technology to build a rifle sight 
called the “Dynamic Image Gun Sight Optic” (DInGO).
In 2012 DARPA granted a $6 million contract to Cubic Corpora-
tion, a San Diego–based company, to develop a compact targeting 
system to help snipers hit targets at the “maximum effective range of 
current and future weapons” with their first shot.12
DARPA is reportedly interested in applying One-Shot technology 
to a program called the “Autonomous Rotorcraft Sniper System.” 
This program would have spotters find and track targets with a drone 
or even a manned helicopter. The drone would have a rifle mounted 
in a stabilized turret. The gun would be controlled by a trained oper-
ator. It could fly over a battlefield and take out targets inside buildings 
or behind cover.
Meanwhile, TrackingPoint announced that the U.S. military pur-
chased six TrackingPoint models to test and evaluate.13 To win a 
military contract, TrackingPoint will need to compete with Lockheed 
Martin and other companies in this fast-developing sector.
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Armed Citizen of the Future 	
227 
Retired Special Forces operator Steve Adelmann, who has con-
sulted for companies building these electronic sighting systems, says, 
“When I was a sniper I always critically considered new technologies. 
They can offer a lot of benefits, but their capabilities can often be 
overhyped or just theoretical. I was in the army in the mid-1990s 
when we were using GPS to do things the commercial market only 
became capable of five or so years ago. Despite GPS technology, 
however, the army still trains soldiers to use traditional maps and 
compasses. This is because when technology fails, you don’t want 
your personnel to be helpless. So I see these coming digital optics 
systems as the future of small arms, but continuing to train on core 
sniper skills with mechanical backups will always be vital.”
However it works out for TrackingPoint and Lockheed Martin, 
guns of the future seem irrevocably linked to digital technology. A 
low-end Nikon digital camera can now find a human face in the frame 
and set the exposure for that face. An electronic sight on a pistol 
linked to its firing mechanism could do the same thing. It could find 
someone’s heart, or it could be set to wound. The possibilities are just 
starting to present themselves.
            
Another developing area is so-called “smart-gun” technology. 
Smart guns theoretically offer a way for a firearm to be personalized 
so it will only work for an “authorized person.” Engineers working 
on smart guns have already tried things like radio-frequency identi-
fication (RFID), fingerprint-recognition systems, and magnetic rings 
to keep an unauthorized person from firing a gun. Smart guns have 
long been used in science fiction. The “Lawgiver” gun, for example, 
in the Judge Dredd comics is linked to the DNA of an authorized 
shooter.

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
228	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
The benefit of smart-gun technology is its potential to reduce or 
eliminate accidental use and misuse of guns. Theoretically, a villain 
couldn’t take a gun from a police officer or armed citizen and then 
use that gun. Also, a parent wouldn’t have to worry about a child 
getting their hands on and firing a self-defense gun. The trouble is 
none of the designs work all the time—batteries go dead, temperature 
or moisture can affect electronics—and most require a person to wear 
a bracelet or other device. Gun owners are understandably critical of 
guns that might go click when that big buck is sighted or when a cop 
has to return fire.
Some antigun groups actually oppose this technology—though for 
very different reasons. In a long list of criticisms of smart guns, the 
Violence Policy Center worries that “[p]ackaged with a strong sales 
pitch, [smart-gun] technology could penetrate new markets for [the] 
gun industry.”14 As if making gun ownership safer is a problem.
A bigger problem is politics. Larry Keane, senior vice president 
and general counsel for the National Shooting Sports Foundation, 
told me, “We’re not opposed to smart-gun technology. We’re opposed 
to government mandates. Most firearms manufacturers have been 
reluctant to invest R&D dollars in smart-gun technology because 
gun-control advocates want to make the technology mandatory. If 
that happens, new guns will become prohibitively expensive, which 
is part of what these groups want. This then raises the question what 
would happen to the three hundred million guns now owned by 
Americans that don’t use such a safeguard? If history is any indicator, 
such ideological groups would next say guns without this capability 
should be banned.
“Here’s another dilemma: If a gun company develops a smart gun 
and adds it as an option in their line of firearms, they’d open them-
selves up to lawsuits. Here’s why: If someone steals a gun made by 
that manufacturer that doesn’t have the smart technology installed 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Armed Citizen of the Future 	
229 
and then that criminal uses that gun to rob or kill someone, a trial 
attorney could then file a lawsuit saying that person wouldn’t have 
been robbed or shot if the manufacturer had just installed the safe-
guards it had available on more expensive models. They’d tell a jury 
‘the greedy gun maker doesn’t care.’ Some juries might buy that argu-
ment. Why would gun makers want to expose themselves to that 
liability in our litigious system?”
The political worries are, unfortunately, real; for example, in 2002 
the “Childproof Handgun Bill” was signed into law in New Jersey. 
This law mandates that when smart-gun technology becomes avail-
able, all new handguns sold must be smart guns. In 2013 a German 
manufacturer, Armatix, announced they had developed such technol-
ogy. Armatix says its Armatix iP1 pistol is a viable smart gun that 
uses radio frequencies to identify an authorized shooter—for the 
pistol to go bang, a person must be wearing the company’s “intelligent 
iW1” wristwatch that broadcasts a specific frequency. The New 
Jersey law states that the technology will be required on all new 
handguns sold three years after the state attorney general determines 
that a smart gun is commercially available. (Weapons used by law-
enforcement officers would be exempt.) As this was being written, 
New Jersey’s attorney general had not declared such technology to 
be commercially available.
In April 2013 Attorney General Eric Holder said while testifying 
before a U.S. House of Representatives Appropriations subcommittee:
One of the things we learned when we were trying to pass 
those common sense reforms last year, Vice President Biden 
and I had a meeting with a group of technology people and 
talked about how guns can be made more safe by making 
them either though fingerprint identification, the gun talks 
to a bracelet that you might wear, how guns can be used 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
230	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
only by the person who is lawfully in possession of the 
weapon. It’s those kinds of things that I think we want to 
try to explore so that people have the ability to enjoy their 
Second Amendment rights while at the same time decreas-
ing the misuse of weapons that lead to the kinds of things 
we see on a daily basis, where people, kids especially, are 
struck down.15
When Holder talked about how smart-gun technology could be 
mandated and regulated during a closed-door meeting at the Justice 
Department’s National Institute of Justice, W. P. Gentry, the president 
of Kodiak Arms, tells me, “I looked Holder right in the eyes and told 
him if he mandates my technology I’ll burn it down. I told him I’d 
destroy my smart-gun technology before I let the government use it 
against the American people. Other gun manufacturers backed me 
up.”
Kodiak Arms is a Utah-based manufacturer that has developed 
what they call the “Intelligun.”16 As this book was being written, pre-
orders for the Intelligun were being taken. This first version of the 
Intelligun is a conversion kit for standard Model 1911 pistols. Gentry 
says, “We don’t make a Model 1911. The Intelligun is a conversion 
kit that is easy to install on a 1911 pistol. It’s as simple as changing 
out the grips and the mainspring. If someone isn’t comfortable doing 
this, they can hire a gunsmith or they can send their pistol to us—for 
a small charge—and we’ll install it. Within the next year we’ll have 
Intelligun conversion kits available for other popular handguns. We 
started with the 1911 because it’s the most popular pistol ever made. 
We’ll soon have something for ‘J-frame’ revolvers and eventually for 
Glocks and more.”
The Intelligun uses biometric scanners on a gun’s grips. It doesn’t 
read a fingerprint. It actually takes a series of photos and overlaps 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Armed Citizen of the Future 	
231 
them. It then looks for enough points that match an algorithm. It does 
this in less than a second. If the person is authorized—the gun can be 
programmed to authorize as many as twenty people—it unlocks the 
gun’s firing mechanism. “We use state-of-the-art technology that 
exceeds U.S. Department of Defense requirements. Our biometric 
scanners can see right through sweat and even blood,” says Gentry.
When you pick up the gun, your fingers naturally touch the bio-
metric scanners. A pressure sensor keeps the gun “turned on.” If you 
put it down, the gun locks within a second. The consumer model does 
have a manual override—a key a person can use to unlock a firearm 
that has a dead battery.
Gentry says, “We think our main market is new gun owners. 
There are a lot of parents out there who would like to have a gun for 
self-defense in their home, but they’re reluctant to purchase one 
because they’re afraid little Johnnie or Susie might get their hands on 
the gun. This technology offers another line of safety.”
The Intelligun uses a lithium-ion battery in its grip. There is an 
indicator that tells how much battery life is left. In the consumer 
model, if the battery is dead, the Intelligun locks. Models being made 
for police departments, however, activate if a battery dies. “Police 
departments have asked for this tweak,” says Gentry. “They’re afraid 
a dead battery might leave a police officer in harm’s way.”
Eric Lichtenberg, president and founder of Lichtenberg Research 
and Design, worked as a contractor on the Intelligun. He tells me, 
“The grip on the Intelligun for the Model 1911 is a little thicker than 
standard grips. This is an issue with the batteries that are now avail-
able on the market. That is something that’s changing fast. As we 
develop Intelligun conversion kits for more models this will change.”
Gentry thinks the possibilities for the Intelligun are considerable. 
“We’ve even sold some to schools,” says Gentry. “A few schools have 
quietly put some teachers through firearms-training courses. These 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
232	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
teachers have Intelliguns. A few schools—I can’t tell you which ones, 
as they want it kept quiet—have installed gun safes in various parts 
of schools. They’re hidden in the walls. They have biometric scanners. 
If an authorized person touches the scanner, the box opens, giving 
them access to an Intelligun. If they’re also authorized to use the gun 
they can respond to a school shooting in seconds, not minutes.”
When the Intelligun gun safe is opened, it sends a text message to 
other teachers and school administrators, and it calls 9-1-1 to let the 
police know a gun has been accessed and that a teacher is now armed 
on the premises. This takes the idea of having good guys with guns as 
first responders to an entirely new level.
Gentry says, “We think this is the future. This potentially can 
safely arm good guys right away. And the gun doesn’t send or receive 
any signals. It can’t be turned on or off by anyone in some government 
office. It puts the power in the hands of the individual. This is the key 
to our future. We can use this technology to create a safer country, 
but as we do we have to make certain the technology won’t be twisted 
into something that can be used to reduce the rights of the citizenry 
by empowering the government with mandates and other controls. If 
the government stays out of our way, we are going to save lives and 
enhance freedom.”
Lichtenberg says the biggest obstacle to getting the Intelligun into 
the hands of police officers has been “police unions,” which fear the 
“oversight” this technology could have on their members’ actions in 
the field. Lichtenberg says, “Technology is now available that goes 
beyond authorization. A smart gun could also use a time stamp to 
record when a gun is drawn and if it is fired. GPS technology could 
keep track of where a cop’s gun is and could record everything they 
do with it. Cell phones already do this. It wouldn’t be hard to install 
such technology in the polymer frame of a pistol. This information 
could be available in trials, investigations, and so on. Combined with 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
The Armed Citizen of the Future 	
233 
a small camera, such as are found on iPhones, this could give detailed 
accounts of police actions.”
Kodiak Arms is at the forefront of this technology, but others have 
been dabbling in it for years. In 1999, Mossberg, through its subsid-
iary Advanced Ordnance and an electronics design contract with 
KinTech Manufacturing, developed a smart shotgun called the iGun 
that used radio frequency identification technology.17 RFID technol-
ogy is used in a lot of industries; for example, an RFID tag attached 
to an automobile can be used to track its progress through the assem-
bly line. The iGun couldn’t be fired unless its owner had a device that 
activates the gun. The gun, however, never made it to market. More 
recently, TriggerSmart, an Irish company, patented what it says is a 
working prototype of a personalized gun that works using RFID 
technology; and Biomac Systems, a U.S. and Austrian company, is 
also working on biometric sensors molded into a gun’s grip.
In 2012, in the James Bond movie Skyfall, Bond is given a Walther 
PPK by Q that has a biometric palm-print scanner on its grip. Kodiak 
Arms president W. P. Gentry says that this “is basically the product 
we offer.” In the Bond films, this concept actually began in the 1989 
movie License to Kill, when Q provides Bond with a gun (disguised 
as a camera) using the same idea. In both movies the feature saves 
Bond’s life when an enemy attempts to use his gun.
In the end, whatever technology brings us, the future of the gun 
will be driven, as it always has been, by the needs of hunters, soldiers, 
and individuals exercising their right to self-defense. Ultimately, it’s 
all about that fundamental right. Imagine a woman walking alone, 
at midnight. Under a streetlight’s glare are two men watching her. She 
doesn’t pause. Her hard heels keep tap, tapping along on the side-
walk. She shows not a tinge of hesitation or fear. She is alone, sure. 
Her friends say she shouldn’t go down these streets at night, not 
without a man. But tight behind her belt is something small, but 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
234	
THE FUTURE OF THE GUN
powerful. She has a gun of the future, a small, light, but deadly equal-
izer that takes fear from the night. She has a smart gun with a laser 
grip that knows her personally. She doesn’t live in a place where might 
makes right, where cops come along later to probe and put up yellow 
tape around a victim’s body. She lives in a free society, a city that gives 
her the ability to be equal to anyone. So she only shifts her eyes at the 
idle men as she passes. They’ve seen her before. She isn’t afraid. They 
nod respect. She’s free. Truly free. Truly equal. They know they can’t 
use her gun against her. She knows ultimate freedom is freedom from 
predation. That is the future of the gun. It is the future of freedom.
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
235
A P P E N D I X
The Evolution of  
Freedom’s Tool
The American Long Rifle: Also known as the Kentucky and Pennsylvania 
Rifle, this flintlock design is most likely a descendant of the German 
Jaeger (“hunter”)–type flintlock. In the New World, gunsmiths 
evolved this rifle throughout the seventeenth century into a longer-
barreled firearm with a wooden stock extending the full length of the 
barrel and butt stock with a graceful downward curve. American long 
rifles became so accurate they were formidable tools for snipers in the 
American Revolution.

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
236	
Appendix
Muzzleloader with Percussion Cap: The phrase “keep your powder dry” was 
coined because before the percussion cap was invented (around 1820), 
wet weather often made guns unreliable. The percussion cap changed 
this. It contains a small charge of chemical in a small copper cuplike 
holder that can be quickly pressed onto a nipple in the rear of a gun 
barrel. When the trigger is pulled, the hammer strikes the cap, igniting 
the chemical that sends sparks through a hole in the nipple into the 
gunpowder in the barrel, firing the gun.
Colt Walker: After Samuel Colt went bankrupt and his Patterson Revolver 
went out of production, in 1847 a Texas Ranger named Samuel 
Walker asked Colt to make a new and more powerful revolver. Walker 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Appendix	
237 
wanted the guns to arm his men for the Mexican-American War. 
Walker helped Colt get a government contract for one thousand such 
revolvers. The new revolver was dubbed the “Colt Walker.” It 
remained the most powerful repeating handgun until the introduction 
of the .357 Magnum nearly ninety years later.
Sharps Rifles: The Sharps became known as the “Buffalo gun.” They were 
a series of large bore, single-shot rifles that began with a design by 
Christian Sharps in 1848. Sharps Rifles were renowned for accuracy.
Smith & Wesson Model 1: First sold in 1857, this was the first revolver that 
fired a fully self-contained cartridge. Earlier revolvers from Colt were 
a big advance, but a downside was that reloading required jamming 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
238	
Appendix
loose gunpowder and a lead bulled into each chamber, then placing a 
percussion cap on the nipple of each chamber. S&W’s Model 1 used 
a self-contained cartridge with the primer, powder, and bullet all in 
one neat and weatherproof package.
Henry Rifle: The original Henry rifle was a .44 caliber rimfire, lever-
action, breech-loading rifle designed by Benjamin Tyler Henry in 
1860. Only a few were purchased and used during the American Civil 
War, but this rifle became one of the iconic guns of the West.
Winchester Model 1873: The 1950 movie Winchester 73 with James Stew-
art shows what a big deal this rifle was. The Winchester Model 1873, 
manufactured between 1873 and 1919, was a big advance because it 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Appendix	
239 
was chambered in the heavier .44-40 cartridge—later models, the 
1876 and 1886, were made strong enough to handle true big-game 
cartridges in the .45-70 class.
Colt Peacemaker: The most famous revolver is undoubtedly the Colt 
Single Action Army, introduced in 1873, and also known as “the 
Peacemaker.” It was chambered in Colt .45 and was the standard 
military service revolver from 1872 until 1892.
Mauser 98: The perfection of the bolt-action rifle design is believed by 
many to be the Mauser 98, introduced in 1898. Its design became the 
new standard, and it has influenced bolt-action rifle design ever since. 
The U.S. Model 1903 bolt-action rifle, which served with distinction 
through two world wars in its .30-06 chambering, is basically a 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
240	
Appendix
modified Mauser 1898. Current production sporting rifles such as the 
classic Winchester Model 70 and bolt-actions by Remington, Ruger, 
and others can trace their lineage to the 98.
Mauser Broomhandle: The first auto-loading pistol designs to go into 
production were the German Schoenberger and Borchardt designs in 
1893 and ’94. In 1896 the Mauser firm began manufacturing the first 
semi-auto pistol to gain widespread acceptance, the Model 1896, 
nicknamed the “Broomhandle” for its slender oval cross-sectioned 
grip—a design that inspired the look of Han Solo’s blaster.
Colt Model 1911: John Moses Browning’s greatest creation is certainly the 
Model 1911 pistol. It was rapidly adopted by the U.S. military and 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Appendix	
241 
only slightly modified over time, remaining the primary U.S.-issue 
sidearm through the Vietnam War. Colt and many other gun makers 
still make the 1911 today, as they are still used by some in the military, 
by law-enforcement, and by millions of Americans.
Winchester Model 12: The Model 12 became the standard for pump shot-
guns. It was made from 1912 to 1964. It was used in both world wars 
and by sportsmen for a half century. The Remington Model 870 
pump-action shotgun, first sold in 1951, is its successor.
M1 Garand: The M1 Garand is a semi-automatic rifle chambered in .30-
06 Springfield. General George S. Patton called it “the greatest battle 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
242	
Appendix
implement ever devised.” The Garand officially replaced the bolt-
action M1903 Springfield as the standard service rifle of the U.S. 
Armed Forces in 1936.
AK-47: First made in 1949, there have now easily been one hundred mil-
lion AK-47s made in factories all over the world. The AK-47 is a 
select-fire (semi-auto or full-auto) carbine with a detachable round-box 
magazine. Though not known for accuracy, the AK-47 has a reputation 
for being relatively cheap to produce, and for reliability even in the 
nastiest environments.
S&W Model 29: This was the first revolver from S&W chambered in .44 
Magnum, a cartridge championed by famed gun writer Elmer Keith. 
It was first sold in 1955. Clint Eastwood popularized a Model 29 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Appendix	
243 
chambered in .44 Magnum as “the world’s most powerful handgun” 
in the Dirty Harry movies.
AR-15: The U.S. version of the assault-weapon configuration was intro-
duced in 1963. It was originally known as the AR-15 and was 
designed by Eugene Stoner in the late 1950s. It was ultimately adopted 
as the M-16 and manufactured by Colt and chambered for the 5.56 
NATO, a military twin of the .223 Remington cartridge. Its rear sight 
is mounted on a distinctive integral carrying handle. Early on it had 
reliability issues, but many of these were fixed. Its design is still the 
basis for the service weapon used by U.S. armed forces.
Beretta 92: The Beretta 92 (also Beretta 96 and Beretta 98) is a series 
of semi-automatic pistols designed and manufactured by Beretta. 
The model 92 was designed in 1972, and production of many vari-
ants in different calibers continues today. The U.S. armed forces 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
244	
Appendix
replaced the Model 1911A1 pistol in 1985 with the Beretta 92F, 
the M9.
Glock: In 1982, the semi-auto pistol market was turned upside down by a 
new Austrian manufacturer offering a radically different design with the 
frame made from plastic-like polymer. Traditionalists initially scoffed at 
the 17-round design that doesn’t have an external manual safety other 
than a lever on the face of trigger. Tupperware jokes abounded. Antigun-
rights activists called it “plastic gun” and wanted it banned. The Glock 
quickly proved itself as a simple and reliable pistol as its popularity took 
off. It took years for other pistol makers to catch up with Glock’s advances.
Remington R-51: This little pistol has ray-gun looks and a Luger-like 
shape. The R-51 is a light-carry gun in 9mm. Its grip angle is also 
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Appendix	
245 
slanted to lower muzzle jump and optimize target acquisition. It’s just 
6.67 inches long. It has a lightweight aluminum frame and is one of 
a new trend in light, easy-to-use carry guns. Glock’s G42 is another 
example in how new technology is making it possible to make pistols 
that pack a punch lighter and smaller.

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
247
Notes
Chapter One: Every American Should Hear This
1.	
“Guns Advertisements,” Vintage Ad Browser, http://www.
vintageadbrowser.com/guns-ads.
2.	
William Hosley, Colt: The Making of an American Legend (Amherst: 
University of Massachusetts Press, 1996).
3.	
S .C. Gwynne, Empire of the Summer Moon (New York: Scribner, 2010).
4.	
R. L. Wilson, Colt: An American Legend (New York: Abbeville Press, 
1991).
5.	
“Colt 1839 Revolving Percussion Rifle,” National Firearms Museum, 
http://www.nramuseum.org/the-museum/the-galleries/the-prospering-new-

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
248	
Notes
republic/case-31-the-age-of-industry/colt-1839-revolving-percussion-rifle.
aspx.
6.	
Jeffery Robenalt, “The Battle of Walker’s Creek and the Colt Paterson 
Revolver,” TexasEscapes.com, http://www.texasescapes.com/
JefferyRobenalt/Battle-of-Walkers-Creek-and-Colt-Paterson-Revolver.htm.
7.	
E. B. Mann, “Colt: The Man behind the Gun,” Field & Stream 86, no. 4 
(1982).
8.	
Wilson, Colt: An American Legend.
9.	
The armory was founded by Eli Whitney. See “The Family,” Eli Whitney 
Museum and Workshop, http://www.eliwhitney.org/museum/eli-whitney/
family.
10.	
Dennis Adler, Colt Single Action: From Patersons to Peacemakers (Edison, 
NJ: Chartwell Books, 2008).
11.	
Joseph Poyer, Craig Riesch, and Karl Karash, The Model 1911 and Model 
1911A1 Military and Commercial Pistols (Tustin, CA: North Cape Pub-
lications, 2008).
12.	
Ibid.
13.	
Chapter 2 and Conclusion in Violence Policy Center, Assault Weapons and 
Accessories in America (Washington, DC: 1988), http://www.vpc.org/
studies/awacont.htm.
14.	
Richard Lowry, Legacy: Paying the Price for the Clinton Years (Washing-
ton, DC: Regnery Publishing, 2003).
15.	
“Expanded Homicide Data Table 8,” Crime in the United States, 2011, 
Federal Bureau of Investigation, http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/
crime-in-the-u.s/2011/crime-in-the-u.s.-2011/tables/expanded-homicide-
data-table-8.
16.	
National Research Council, Firearms and Violence: A Critical Review 
(Washington, DC: 2005).
17.	
See “Uniform Crime Reports,” Federal Bureau of Investigation, http://
www.fbi.gov/ucr/ucr.htm.
18.	
“A Historical Review of Armalite,” ArmaLite, Inc., January 2010, http://
www.armalite.com/images/Library/History.pdf.
19.	
Alexander Rose, American Rifle: A Biography (New York: Delacorte Press, 
2008).
20.	
D. T. McElrath, “Golden Days at ArmaLite,” American Rifleman, Decem-
ber 2004.
21.	
“The Aluminum Rifle,” Time, December 3, 1956.
22.	
T. L. McNaugher, The M16 Controversies: Military Organizations and 
Weapons Acquisition (New York, Praeger, 1984).
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Notes	
249 
23.	
Rose, American Rifle.
24.	
“The Armalite AR-15 Rifle,” American Rifleman, June 1959.
25.	
Rose, American Rifle.
Chapter Two: The Rifle Grows a Brain
1.	
The Remington 2020 website can be found at http://shoot2020.com/.
2.	
Matt Richmond, “As NY Institutes New Gun Laws, Focus Shifts to Gun 
Industry Subsidies,” WNYC News, February 5, 2013, http://www.wnyc.
org/story/267157-ny-institutes-new-gun-laws-focus-also-shifts-its-gun-
industry-subsidies/.
3.	
John Christie, “States Have Subsidized Makers of Assault Rifles to Tune 
of $19 Million,” Pine Tree Watchdog, January 2, 2013, http://
pinetreewatchdog.org/states-have-subsidized-makers-of-assault-rifles-to-
tune-of-19-million/.
4.	
“Schumer: 40–50 New Jobs Coming to Remington’s Manufacturing Plant 
in Ilion,” press release, Office of Senator Charles Schumer, March 22, 
2011, http://www.schumer.senate.gov/record.cfm?id=332104&.
5.	
“Face the Nation Transcripts, December 16, 2012: Newtown Tragedy,” 
December 16, 2012, http://www.cbsnews.com/news/face-the-nation-
transcripts-december-16-2012-newtown-tragedy/.
6.	
Eliot Spitzer, “It’s Time to Target Cerberus, the Private-Equity Firm That 
Dominates the Gun Industry,” Slate.com, December 12, 2012, http://www.
slate.com/blogs/spitzer/2012/12/17/newtown_shooting_it_s_time_to_
target_cerberus_the_private_equity_firm_that.html.
7.	
Walter H. B. Smith, Mannlicher Rifles and Pistols: Famous Sporting and 
Military Weapons (Harrisburg, PA: Military Service Publishing Company, 
1947).
8.	
Philip Cook and Jens Ludwig, Guns in America, 1996 (Police Foundation: 
1996); Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives, Annual 
Firearm Manufacturer and Export Reports, 2012, available online at 
https://www.atf.gov/sites/default/files/assets/pdf-files/afmer_2012_final_
web_report_17jan2014.pdf; and Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, 
and Explosives, Firearm Commerce in the United States, 2011, available 
online at http://www.atf.gov/files/publications/firearms/121611-firearms-
commerce-2011.pdf.
9.	
“Report Advises against New National Database of Ballistic Images,” 
press release, National Academies, March 5, 2008, http://www.nssf.org/
share/legal/docs/030508-NatlAcadPR.pdf.

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
250	
Notes
10.	
David Howitt, Frederic A. Tulleners, and Michael T. Beddow, “What Laser 
Machining Technology Adds to Firearms Forensics: How Viable Are 
Micro-Marked Firing Pins as Evidence?,” draft paper, University of Cali-
fornia at Davis, available online at http://www.nssf.org/share/legal/
docs/0507UCDavisStudy.pdf.
11.	
Aaron Smith, “In Remington’s Gun Town, Jobs Are No. 1 Concern,” 
CNNMoney, April 10, 2013, http://money.cnn.com/2013/04/10/news/
companies/remington-guns-jobs/index.html.
12.	
“Crime Rate in Herkimer, New York,” City-Data.com, accessed May 
2014, http://www.city-data.com/crime/crime-Herkimer-New-York.html.
Chapter Three: Technology Perfects the Pistol
1.	
“U.S. Army Awards New Beretta M9 Pistol Contract,” press release, 
Beretta USA, September 2012, http://www.berettausa.com/usarmyawards 
newberettam9pistolcontract/.
2.	
James Michener, Iberia (New York: Random House, 1968).
3.	
Patrick Sweeney, The Gun Digest Book of the Glock, 2nd ed. (Iola, WI: 
Krause Publications, 2008).
4.	
Daniel Horan, “Pistol-Packing by the Millions,” Wall Street Journal, 
January 17, 2012.
5.	
Peter Kasler, Glock: The New Wave in Combat Handguns (Boulder, CO: 
Paladin Press, 1992).
6.	
See the timeline of Glock’s history one the Glock website: http://us.glock.
com/heritage/timeline.
7.	
Paul M. Barrett, Glock: The Rise of America’s Gun (New York: Crown 
Publishing, 2012).
8.	
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives 2012 Summary: 
Firearms Reported Lost and Stolen, U.S. Department of Justice, Office of 
the Director, Strategic Management (Washington, DC: 2012).
9.	
Mark Gius, “An Examination of the Effects of Concealed Weapons Laws 
and Assault Weapons Bans on State-Level Murder Rates,” Applied Eco-
nomics Letters 21, no. 4 (2014), http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.
1080/13504851.2013.854294.
10.	
Charles F. Wellford, John V. Pepper, and Carol V. Petrie, Firearms and 
Violence: A Critical Review (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 
2004), http://books.nap.edu/openbook.php?isbn=0309091241&page=2.
11.	
James Q. Wilson, “Appendix A: Dissent,” in Wellford, Pepper, and Petrie, 
Firearms and Violence.
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Notes	
251 
12.	
“Uniform Crime Reports, 2008 and 2009” Federal Bureau of Investiga-
tion, http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-in-the-u.s/2009/
crime2009.
13.	
“Salisbury, Maryland,” State and County Quickfacts, U.S. Census Bureau, 
accessed May 2014, http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/24/2469925.
html.
14.	
“Crime Rate in Salisbury, Maryalnd,” City-Data.com, accessed May 2014, 
http://www.city-data.com/crime/crime-Salisbury-Maryland.html.
15.	
Kody Leibowitz, “Rap Video Alarms Community, Chief ‘Can’t Arrest Out 
of Problem,’” WMDT 47, October 24, 2013.
16.	
Consumer Handgun Ownership Report, 2011, National Shooting Sports 
Foundation.
17.	
“Expanded Homicide Data Table 8,” Crime in the United States, Federal 
Bureau of Investigation, http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-in-the-
u.s/2010/crime-in-the-u.s.-2010/tables/10shrtbl08.xls.
18.	
DeWayne Wickham, “Wickham: Gun Violence Threatens Young Blacks,” 
USA Today, February 11, 2013, http://www.usatoday.com/story/
opinion/2013/02/11/dewayne-wickham-on-blacks-and-gun-
violence/1906819/; and Children’s Defense Fund, Protect Children, Not 
Guns, 2012, http://www.childrensdefense.org/child-research-data-
publications/data/protect-children-not-guns-2012.pdf.
19.	
George Hunter, “Detroit Police Chief: Legal Gun Owners Can Deter 
Crime,” Detroit News, January 3, 2014, http://www.detroitnews.com/
article/20140103/METRO01/301030038#ixzz2r425mp5E.
20.	
“25th Annual National Survey Results,” National Association of Chiefs 
of Police, 2013, http://www.nacoponline.org/25th.pdf.
21.	
“PoliceOne’s Gun Control Survey: 11 Key Lessons from Officers’  
Perspectives,” PoliceOne.com, April 8, 2013, http://www.policeone.com/
Gun-Legislation-Law-Enforcement/articles/6183787-PoliceOnes-Gun-
Control-Survey-11-key-lessons-from-officers-perspectives/.
Chapter Four: Embedded with the Gun Lobby
1.	
Glenn Kessler, “The NRA’s Claim That Joe Biden’s Gun Advice Is Illegal,” 
Washington Post, February 25, 2013, http://www.washingtonpost.com/
blogs/fact-checker/post/the-nras-claim-that-joe-bidens-gun-advice-is-
illegal/2013/02/25/854b8ca2-7df3-11e2-9a75-dab0201670da_blog.html.
2.	
NRA Members can view the Grades & Endorsements section of the NRA 
website at http://www.nrapvf.org/grades-endorsements.aspx.

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
252	
Notes
3.	
John Houston Craige, The Practical Book of American Guns (New York: 
Bramhall House, 1950).
4.	
Glen H. Utter, Encyclopedia of Gun Control and Gun Rights (Westport, 
CT: Greenwood, 2000).
5.	
Reid J. Epstein, “Joe Biden on Sidelines in Gun Control Talks,” Politico, 
October 28, 2013, http://www.politico.com/story/2013/10/joe-biden-on-
sidelines-in-gun-debate-98966.html.
Chapter Five: How Gun Rights Beat the Media
1.	
“Howard Stern Show: Harvey Weinstein Interview,” YouTube video, recording 
of interview on Howard Stern Show, January 15, 2014, uploaded by 
“M076n7,” January 15, 2014, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lig_
yRICAro.
2.	
Emily Smith, “Aspiring Actor Busted for Trying to Extort Millions from 
Harvey Weinstein,” New York Post, August 23, 2012, http://nypost.
com/2012/08/23/aspiring-actor-busted-for-trying-to-extort-millions-from-
harvey-weinstein-feds/.
3.	
Rebecca Riffkin, “Americans’ Dissatisfaction with Gun Laws Highest since 
2001,” Gallup Politics, January 30, 2014, http://www.gallup.com/
poll/167135/americans-dissatisfaction-gun-laws-highest-2001.aspx.
4.	
Ibid.
5.	
“Gun Control: Where Do Stars Stand on Firearms?,” Celebuzz.com, http://
www.celebuzz.com/photos/gun-control-where-do-stars-stand-on-firearms/
mark-wahlberg-6/.
6.	
“Tom Selleck Loses Temper with Gun-Toting Extra,” ShowBizSpy.com, 
April 1, 2011, http://www.showbizspy.com/article/229667/tom-selleck-
loses-temper-with-gun-toting-extra.html.
7.	
Mark S. Fowler, interview, The Mark Levin Show, February 16, 2009.
8.	
Michael Calderon, “Sen. Harkin: ‘We Need the Fairness Doctrine Back,” 
Politico, February 11, 2009.
9.	
John Gizzi, “Pelosi Supports ‘Fairness’ Doctrine,” Human Events, October 
25, 2008.
10.	
John Eggerton, “Bill Clinton Talks of Re-Imposing Fairness Doctrine or at 
Least ‘More Balance in Media,’” Broadcasting & Cable, February 13, 2009.
11.	
Sara Jerome, “FCC Push to Regulate News Draws Fire,” Hill, December 
6, 2010.
12.	
“Uncovered Audio: Obama’s Regulatory Czar Pushes Creepy Plan for Legally 
Controlling Internet Information,” BlacklistedNews.com, http://www.
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Notes	
253 
blacklistednews.com/_Uncovered_Audio%3A_Obama%E2%80%99s_
Regulatory_Czar_Pushes_Creepy_Plan_for_Legally_Controlling_Internet_
Information_/8740/0/21/21/Y/M.html.
13.	
Nancy Watzman, “NRA Fights Campaign Finance Reform, Disclosure,” 
Sunlight Foundation, January 15, 2013, http://sunlightfoundation.com/
blog/2013/01/15/nra-fights-campaign-finance-reform-disclosure/.
14.	
D’vera Cohn, Paul Taylor, Mark Hugo Lopez, Catherine A. Gallagher, 
Kim Parker, and Kevin T. Maass, “Gun Homicide Rate Down 49% since 
1993 Peak; Public Unaware,” Pew Research, Social and Demographic 
Trends, May 2013, http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2013/05/07/gun-
homicide-rate-down-49-since-1993-peak-public-unaware/.
15.	
Jennifer Bendery, “Gabby Giffords’ Gun Control Group Outraises All 
Other Super PACs,” Huffington Post, February 4, 2014, http://www.
huffingtonpost.com/2014/02/03/gabby-giffords-gun-control-
fundraising_n_4718939.html.
16.	
John Tkazyik, “ICYMI: Valley View: Mayoral Group’s Gun Agenda Is 
Wrong,” Poughkeepsie Journal, February 7, 2014, http://www.
poughkeepsiejournal.com/article/20140207/OPINION04/302070047/
ICYMI-Valley-View-Mayoral-group-s-gun-agenda-wrong.
17.	
“There Is a ‘Gun Control Playbook’ versus Washington Gun Owners,” 
Washington Examiner, August 1, 2013, http://www.examiner.com/article/
there-is-a-gun-control-playbook-versus-washington-gun-owners.
Chapter Six: Into “Gun-Free” America
1.	
Robin Reese, “Georgia Mom Shoots Home Invader, Hiding with Her 
Children,” ABC News, January 8, 2013, http://abcnews.go.com/US/
georgia-mom-hiding-kids-shoots-intruder/story?id=18164812.
2.	
Editorial, “Handguns Supreme,” Washington Post, June 27, 2008, http://
www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/06/26/AR2 
008062603605.html.
3.	
John Lott, “Court’s Gun Decision an Important Win for Americans Who 
Want to Defend Themselves,” Fox News, June 28, 2010, http://www.
foxnews.com/opinion/2010/06/28/john-lott-supreme-court-guns-ban-
washington-chicago-daley-kagan-sotomayor/.
4.	
Peruta v. San Diego documents available at http://michellawyers.com/
guncasetracker/perutavsandiego/.
5.	
Peruta opinion available at http://michellawyers.com/wp-content/
uploads/2010/11/Peruta-Opinion.pdf.

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
254	
Notes
6.	
Mary E. Shepard, et al., v. Lisa M. Madigan, et al., No. 13-2661, FindLaw 
(7th Cir. 2013), http://caselaw.findlaw.com/us-7th-circuit/1648621.html.
Chapter Seven: What Happens to Disarmed Peoples
1.	
Library of Congress, “Firearms Regulations in Various Foreign Countries,” 
May 1998.
2.	
For a discussion of this quotation’s origin, see Monticello’s research on it 
at http://www.monticello.org/site/jefferson/strongest-reason-people-to-
retain-right-to-keep-and-bear-arms-quotation.
3.	
“Forced to Strip Naked in the Street: Shocking Scenes as Rioters Steal 
Clothes and Rifle through Bags as People Make Their Way Home,” Daily 
Mail, August 9, 2011, http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2024001/
UK-riots-2011-London-Birmingham-people-forced-strip-naked-street.
html.
4.	
“An Outrage That Appalled a Nation,” BBC News, January 23, 2009, 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/magazine/7844916.stm.
5.	
Mike Waldren, “The Tottenham Outrage,” Police Firearms Officers Asso-
ciation, http://www.pfoa.co.uk/193/the-tottenham-outrage.
6.	
Vikram Dodd, “Man Killed in Deadly Terror Attack in London Street,” 
Guardian, May 22, 2013, http://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/may/22/
police-respond-serious-incident-woolwich.
7.	
“Firearms-Control Legislation and Policy: Great Britain,” U.S. Library of 
Congress, http://www.loc.gov/law/help/firearms-control/greatbritain.php.
8.	
“Gun Law Off-Target,” Daily Telegraph, Aug. 13, 2002, http://www.
telegraph.co.uk/comment/telegraph-view/3580332/Gun-law-off-target.
html.
9.	
Ian Burrell, “Legitimate Firearm Users Think That Tougher Restrictions 
Miss the Target,” Independent (London), January 15, 2001, http://www.
independent.co.uk/news/uk/this-britain/legitimate-firearm-users-think-
that-tougher-restrictions-miss-the-target-702162.html.
10.	
Paul Lashmar, “Gun UK: A Teenage Girl Is Dead and a Baby Wounded,” 
Independent (London), October 17, 2004, http://www.independent.co.uk/
news/uk/crime/gun-uk-6159840.html.
11.	
Jason Bennetto, “Drug Gangs Force Police to Increase Firearms Officers,” 
Independent (London), January 30, 2004.
12.	
“‘I Was Portrayed as One of Britain’s Biggest Illegal Gun Dealers,’” Brom-
ley Times, July 11, 2007, http://web.archive.org/web/20071020094850/
http://www.bromleytimes.co.uk/content/bromley/times/news/story.aspx?
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Notes	
255 
brand=BMLYTOnline&category=news&tBrand=northlondon24&tCat
egory=newsbmlyt&itemid=WeED11%20Jul%202007%2013:08:29:253.
13.	
Chris Summers, “When Is a Gun Not a Gun?,” BBC News, June 29, 2007.
14.	
“‘I Was Portrayed as One of Britain’s Biggest Illegal Gun Dealers.’”
15.	
The Home Office’s statistics on firearm violence can be found at www.
homeoffice.gov.uk/ publications/science-research-statistics/research-
statistics/crime-research/hosb0212/hosb0212snr?view=Binary.
16.	
“2011 Census: Population Estimates for the United Kingdom,” Office for 
National Statistics, March 2011.
17.	
“Homicide,” chapter 2 in Crime Statistics: Focus on Violent Crime and 
Sexual Offences, 2012–13 (London: Office for National Statistics: 2014), 
http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/crime-stats/crime-statistics/focus-on-
violent-crime-and-sexual-offences—2012-13/rpt—-chapter-2—-homicide.
html.
18.	
James Slack, “The Most Violent Country in Europe: Britain Is Also Worse 
Than South Africa and U.S.,” Daily Mail, July 2, 2009, http://www.
dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1196941/The-violent-country-Europe-
Britain-worse-South-Africa-U-S.html.
19.	
Don B. Kates and Gary Mauser, “Would Banning Firearms Reduce Mur-
der and Suicide? A Review of International and Some Domestic Evidence,” 
Harvard Journal of Law and Public Policy 30, no. 2 (Spring 2007), http://
www.law.harvard.edu/students/orgs/jlpp/Vol30_No2_KatesMauseronline.
pdf.
20.	
William Alex Pridemore, “Using Newly Available Homicide Data to 
Debunk Two Myths about Violence in an International Context: A 
Research Note,” Homicide Studies 5, no. 3 (2001), 267.
21.	
Joyce Lee Malcolm, Guns And Violence: The English Experience (Cam-
bridge: Harvard University Press, 2004).
22.	
Daniel Foggo, “Don’t Bother about Burglary, Police Told,” Sunday Tele-
graph, January 12, 2003.
23.	
Steve Doughty, “Let Burglars Off with Caution Police Told,” Daily Mail, 
April 3, 2006.
24.	
“International Comparisons of Criminal Justice Statistics, 1999,” Home 
Office Statistical Bulletin, 2001.
25.	
Awr Hawkins, “Harvard Study: No Correlation between Gun Control 
and Less Violent Crime,” Breitbart, August 28, 2013, http://www.
breitbart.com/Big-Government/2013/08/27/Harvard-Study-Shows-No-
Correlation-Between-Strict-Gun-Control-And-Less-Crime-Violence.

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
256	
Notes
26.	
Kates and Mauser, “Would Banning Firearms Reduce Murder and Sui-
cide?”
Chapter Eight: The Gun Marketplace of the Future
1.	
See the “Reports and Statistics” page for the National Instant Background 
System on the Federal Bureau of Investigation website: http://www.fbi.gov/
about-us/cjis/nics/reports.
2.	
Alan Farnham, “Gun Sales Booming: Doomsday, Obama or Zombies?,” 
ABC News, April 5, 2012, http://abcnews.go.com/Business/gun-sales-
booming-doomsday-obama-zombies/story?id=16073797.
3.	
Lydia Saad, “U.S. Remains Divided over Passing Stricter Gun Laws,” Gal-
lup Politics, October 25, 2013, http://www.gallup.com/poll/165563/
remains-divided-passing-stricter-gun-laws.aspx.
4.	
William J. Krouse, “Gun Control Legislation,” Congressional Research 
Service, November 14, 2012.
5.	
Saad, “Self-Reported Gun Ownership in U.S. Is Highest since 1993,” Gal-
lup Politics, October 26, 2011, http://www.gallup.com/poll/150353/Self-
Reported-Gun-Ownership-Highest-1993.aspx.
6.	
Kyle Jillson, “NRA Reaches 80,000 Certified Instructors,” NRAblog, 
September 29, 2011, http://www.nrablog.com/post/2011/09/29/NRA-
reaches-80000-instructors.aspx.
7.	
“Annual Firearms Manufacturing and Export Report, Year 2012” Bureau 
of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, https://www.atf.gov/sites/
default/files/assets/pdf-files/afmer_2012_final_web_report_17jan2014.pdf.
8.	
This estimate comes from GrabStates.com, accessed May 2014, http://
grabstats.com/statmain.aspx?StatID=25.
9.	
“Kids ’n’ Guns: National 4-H Shooting Sports Committee Position State-
ments,” National 4-H Shooting Sports, http://www.4-hshootingsports.org/
Kids’N’Guns.php.
10.	
2011 National Survey of Fishing, Hunting, and Wildlife-Associated Rec-
reation: National Overview (Washington, DC: U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service, August 2012), available online at http://www.doi.gov/news/press-
releases/upload/FWS-National-Preliminary-Report-2011.pdf.
11.	
See the Sportsman Shooting Center website at www.sportsmanshooting 
center.com.
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Notes	
257 
Chapter Nine: The Solution to Gun Violence
1.	
Richard Ben Cramer, “What Do You Think of Ted Williams Now?,” 
Esquire, June 1986.
2.	
“The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives’ National 
Integrated Ballistic Information Network Program,” Bureau of Alcohol, 
Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, June 2005, http://www.justice.gov/oig/
reports/ATF/a0530/intro.htm.
3.	
Ibid.
4.	
Senate Bill 584, Maryland General Assembly, 2014, available online at 
http://mgaleg.maryland.gov/2014RS/fnotes/bil_0004/sb0584.pdf.
5.	
“Ballistics Statute Faulted,” Washington Times, January 17, 2005, http://
www.washingtontimes.com/news/2005/jan/17/20050117-102901-
2749r/?page=all.
6.	
“Protecting America: The Effectiveness of the Federal Armed Career 
Criminal Statute,” ATF, March 1992.
7.	
Caroline Wolf Harlow, “Firearm Use by Offenders,” Bureau of Justice 
Statistics, November 2001, https://www.ncjrs.gov/App/Publications/
abstract.aspx?ID=189369.
8.	
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives 2012 Summary: 
Firearms Reported Lost and Stolen, U.S. Department of Justice, Office of 
the Director, Strategic Management (Washington, DC: 2012).
9.	
Office of the Auditor General of Canada, “Deparmtent of Justice: Costs 
of Implementing the Canadian Firearms Program,” chapter 10 in Report 
of the Auditor General of Canada (Ottowa, Canada: Minister of Public 
Works and Government Services, December 2002), http://www.oag-bvg.
gc.ca/internet/English/parl_oag_200212_10_e_12404.html.
10.	
Jim Hoft, “CT Sends Out Letters to Gun Owners: ‘Surrender, Destroy or 
Sell’ Your ‘Assault Weapons,’” Gateway Pundit, February 27, 2014, http://
www.thegatewaypundit.com/2014/02/ct-sends-out-letters-to-gun-owners-
surrender-destroy-or-sell-your-assault-weapons/.
11.	
Ibid.
12.	
“Obama Calls On Congress to Follow CT and Pass ‘Common Sense’ Gun 
Laws,” CBS Local, April 9, 2013, http://newyork.cbslocal.
com/2013/04/08/obama-in-conn-to-promote-gun-legislation/feed/.
13.	
“Connecticut Law Requiring Permit for Certificate for Sale, Transfer of 
Long Guns Takes Effect,” New Haven Register, April 1, 2014, http://
www.nhregister.com/general-news/20140401/connecticut-law-requiring-
permit-or-certificate-for-sale-transfer-of-long-guns-takes-effect.

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
258	
Notes
14.	
Mark Follman, Gavin Aronsen, and Deanna Pan, “A Guide to Mass 
Shooting in America,” Mother Jones, February 27, 2013, http://www.
motherjones.com/politics/2012/07/mass-shootings-map.
15.	
“Brady Campaign Releases a Report Analyzing 20 Years of Effective 
Background Checks,” Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence, http://
www.bradycampaign.org/brady-campaign-releases-a-report-analyzing-
20-years-of-effective-background-checks.
16.	
State of the Union, “Interview with Senator Lindsey Graham,” CNN, 
March 31, 2013.
17.	
Glenn Kessler, “Lindsey Graham’s Claim That No Fugitives Have Been 
Prosecuted after Gun Background Checks,” Fact Checker (blog), Washing-
ton Post, April 4, 2013, http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/fact-checker/
post/lindsey-grahams-claim-that-no-fugitives-have-been-prosecuted-after-
gun-background-checks/2013/04/03/5d20c1fa-9ca9-11e2-a941-
a19bce7af755_blog.html.
18.	
“About PICS,” Pennsylvania State Police, http://www.portal.state.pa.us/
portal/server.pt?open=512&objID=4451&&PageID=461119&mode=2.
19.	
Pennsylvania State Police Annual Firearms Report, 2010, Bureau of 
Record and Identification, available online at http://www.portal.state.
pa.us/portal/server.pt/document/1102470/pennsylvania_state_
police_2010_firearms_annual_report_pdf.
20.	
“Review of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives’ 
Enforcement of Brady Act Violations Identified through the National 
Instant Criminal Background Check System,” U.S. Department of Justice, 
July 2004, http://www.justice.gov/oig/reports/ATF/e0406/exec.htm.
21.	
To see Attorney General Eric Holder’s testimony from March 6, 2013, visit 
“Cornyn Presses Holder on Obama Administration’s Failure to Prosecute 
Gun Crimes,” YouTube video, uploaded by “Senator John Cornyn,” 
March 6, 2013, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WLZqPnR1t_k.
22.	
Caroline May, “Biden to NRA: We ‘Don’t Have the Time’ to Prosecute 
Gun Buyers Who Lie on Background Checks,” Daily Caller, January 18, 
2013, http://dailycaller.com/2013/01/18/biden-to-nra-we-dont-have-the-
time-to-prosecute-people-who-lie-on-background-checks/.
23.	
Tate, “Graham, Begich, Flake and Pryor Introduce Legislation on Mental 
Illness and Gun Violence,” Lindsey Graham official website, March 6, 
2013, http://www.lgraham.senate.gov/public/index.cfm?FuseAction= 
IssueStatements.View&Region_id=&Issue_id=96fef72b-802a-23ad-4948-
c27807a16ef1,7926d5be-cd20-43bf-ab15-d33f725d02f6,c8935458-
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Notes	
259 
2345-49e6-afcf-3bb47eafd453,ca167d00-81ac-4794-a23b-eb3a093f19
2d&Month=3&Year=2013&CFId=93893406&CFToken=91674884.
24.	
“Alice Boland Gets a Gun (Timeline),” press release, Office of Senator 
Lindsey Graham, February 13, 2013, available online at http://www.
scribd.com/doc/125350089/Alice-Boland-Gets-A-Gun-Timeline.
Chapter Ten: The Armed Citizen of the Future
1.	
Geoffrey W. Norman, “The Real Hatfield,” Inc., http://www.inc.com/
magazine/19901001/5391.html.
2.	
See the Solid Concepts website at http://www.solidconcepts.com/3d-
printing/.
3.	
“World’s First 3D Printed Metal Gun Manufactured by Solid Concepts,” 
news release, Solid Concepts, http://www.solidconcepts.com/news-
releases/worlds-first-3d-printed-metal-gun-manufactured-solid-concepts/.
4.	
This mission is quoted in Alexis Kleinman, “The First 3D-Printed Gun 
Has Been Fired (VIDEO),” Huffington Post, May 7, 2013, http://www.
huffingtonpost.com/2013/05/06/3d-printed-gun-fired_n_3222669.html.
5.	
Sydney J. Freedberg Jr., “Army Killed New Carbine Because It Wasn’t 
Twice as Reliable as Current M4,” Breaking Defense, June 14, 2013, 
http://breakingdefense.com/2013/06/army-killed-new-carbine-because-it-
wasnt-twice-as-good-as-current-m4/.
6.	
Rowan Scarborough, “Troops Left to Fend for Themselves after Army 
Was Warned of Flaws in Rifle,” Washington Times, February 19, 2014.
7.	
“Amendment #3186: The Need for Small Arms Modernization by the 
U.S. Army,” available online at http://handbook5.com/a/amendment-
3186-the-need-for-small-arms-modernization-by-the-us-army-w40903.
html.
8.	
“Nosler: History,” Nosler.com, http://www.nosler.com/nosler-history/.
9.	
“Superformance,” Hornady.com, http://www.hornady.com/store/Super 
formance.
10.	
Jim Carmichel, “Electronic Rifle Revisit,” Outdoor Life, September 2009, 
http://www.outdoorlife.com/articles/gear/2007/09/electronic-rifle-revisit.
11.	
John Keller, “Lockheed Martin Relies on Aculight Fiber Laser Technology 
for One-Shot Program’s Sniper Targeting System,” Military & Aerospace 
Electronics, December 1, 2010, http://www.militaryaerospace.com/
articles/print/volume-21/issue-12/electro-optics-watch/lockheed-martin-
relies-on-aculight-fiber-laser-technology-for-one-shot-programs-sniper-
targeting-system.html.

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
260	
Notes
12.	
John Keller, “DARPA Chooses Cubic to Move One Shot Sniper Targeting 
Technology to the Next Level,” Military & Aerospace Electronics, August 
14, 2012.
13.	
“TrackingPoint and the XM 2010,” TrackingPoint Labs, March 10, 2014, 
http://tracking-point.com/labs/military/.
14.	
“‘Smart’ Guns Backgrounder,” Violence Policy Center, http://www.vpc.
org/fact_sht/Smart%20Gun%202013.pdf.
15.	
“Eric Holder Wants Gun Owners to Wear ‘Smart Gun’ Bracelets,” Daily 
Caller, April 7, 2014, http://dailycaller.com/2014/04/07/eric-holder-wants-
gun-owners-to-wear-tracking-bracelets/#ixzz30H847aj3.
16.	
See the Intelligun website at http://intelligun.com/.
17.	
“iGun Technology Corp.,” http://www.iguntech.com/tech.html.
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
261
Index
3-D printing, 206–8
3-gun competitions, 62, 156, 209, 
224
9mm Beretta M9 pistol, 27, 60, 213, 
244
.30-caliber cartridge, 31, 33, 73, 135
.38 Long Colt, 26
.44 Magnum, 25, 243
.45 ACP (Automatic Colt Pistol), 26, 
71, 79, 192, 209
84M Montana, 201
.223 caliber, 33–35, 160, 244
.338 Lapua Magnum, 52, 218, 220
.357 Magnum revolver, 168, 237
A
Accutrigger, 210
Aculight Corporation, 226

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
262	
Index
Adelmann, Steve, 19–20, 37, 212, 
214, 227
Afghanistan, 19, 69, 124, 132, 213
AK-47, 50, 177, 242–43
Alabama, 57, 175
Alden, John, 14
al Qaeda, 132
American Committee for Defense of 
British Homes, 134–35
American Conservative Union 
(ACU), 107
American Longrifle, 16
American Revolution, 17–18, 137, 
235
American Rifleman (journal), 18, 
33–34, 50, 59, 134, 194, 211, 
217
Annoni, John, 2
antigun activists, 27–28, 51, 62, 89, 
99, 102, 245
antigun groups, 28, 63, 74, 92, 107, 
113–14, 228
antigun politicians, 21, 40, 43, 
89–90, 152
AR-5, 30
AR-10, 31–32
AR-15, 17, 20–21, 27–29, 31–35, 
39, 41, 48, 62, 65, 81, 93–94, 
196, 198, 201, 205, 209, 211–12, 
214, 221–23, 243
Arizona, 90, 176, 178
ArmaLite Corporation, 28, 30–32, 
221
armed citizens, 82, 148, 191–234
Army and Navy Journal, 91
Arulanandam, Andrew, 127, 184
assault rifles, 27–28, 61, 154
assault weapons, 21, 27–29, 40–42, 
44–45, 57, 70, 81, 87–88, 93, 
124, 178, 180–83, 243
Assault Weapons Ban of 1994, 28
ATK Ammunition Systems Group, 
214
Australia, 20, 144
B
Barnes Bullets, 41, 217
Bartozzi, Joseph H., 195–96
Basque region, 196
Bass Pro Shops, 158–61
Battle of Dunkirk, 134
Battle of Walker’s Creek, 23
Begich, Mark, 186
Belategui, Aitor, 204
Beretta, 27, 59–62, 64–65, 82–83, 
152, 195, 200, 243–44
Beretta man, the, 60–61
Bergmann 1894 pistol, 138
Biden, Joe, 87, 90, 151, 186, 229
Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 
2002, 109
black market, 72, 142, 168, 176
Blake, Eli Whitney, 23–24
Blanchard lathe, 196
Blanchard, Thomas, 196
Bloomberg, Michael, 42, 90, 113–
16, 151
Boland, Alice, 187
Borchardt, Hugo, 25, 240
Boston, 15
Boutelle, Richard S., 30
Boy Scouts of America, 155, 189
Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun 
Violence, 90, 116, 183–84
Brady, James, 175
Breitkreuz, Garry, 171
Britain, the British, 1, 14–17, 21, 93, 
95, 133–37, 141–44, 147–48
British Columbia, 144, 173, 215
Brooks, Randy, 217
Browning, 21, 196, 200, 210
Browning, John Moses, 18, 26, 46, 
241
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Index	
263 
Brucker, Wilbur, 32
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Fire-
arms and Explosives (ATF), 72, 
153, 156, 165–69, 174–78, 184, 
205, 207, 211
Burgess, Rich, 182
Burnside, Ambrose, 91
Bush, George W., 89, 187
Bushmaster, 39–42, 48, 54, 57, 65
C
C-93, 25
Cabela’s, 93, 158–60
California Rifle and Pistol Associa-
tion, 127
Call of Duty: Black Ops 2, 154
Cam & Co (radio show), 109
Camp Compass, 2, 4, 8
Canada, 144, 171–74
Canadian Firearms Program, 172–
73
Capitol Hill, 87, 89, 117
Carmichel, Jim, 210, 221–22
Carter, Jack, 217
Carter, Jimmy, 192
Castner, Ralph, 159
CBS, 179
Center for Naval Analysis, 213
Centerwall, Brandon, 148
Cheyenne LEADS, 206
Cheyenne, WY, 206
Chicago, 69, 101, 123–26, 161, 167, 
192, 201
“Childproof Handgun Bill” (New 
Jersey), 229
Churchill, Winston, 135, 138
Church, William C., 91
Citizen Arms, 19, 37, 212
Citizens United v. Federal Election 
Commission (2010), 109
Civil War, the, 91, 124, 193, 238
Cleveland, Paul S., 30
Clinton, Bill, 108
CNN, 42, 99, 110–12, 184
Coburn, Tom, 213–14
Colt, 22–24, 26–27, 32–35, 79, 89, 
153, 192, 209, 236–37, 239–41, 
244
Colt, Samuel, 18, 21–24, 236–37
Comanches, 22–23
computer numerical controlled 
machines (CNC), 38, 60, 157, 
194–96, 203
concealed carry, 7, 54, 72–75, 
81–82, 125, 127–28, 153, 160, 
162, 208
Concord, 15–16
“Concord Hymn” (poem), vii
Connecticut, 28, 65, 87, 90, 92, 127, 
178–82, 195, 203, 205
Connecticut Carry, 182
Connecticut State Police’s Special 
Licensing and Firearms Unit, 179
Cooke, Eric, 179
Copps, Michael, 108
Cornyn, John, 186, 188
Cowboy Action, 62, 209
Cox, Chris, 87, 89–91, 174, 187
Craig, James, 81–82
Crimson Trace, 93, 199, 209
Crozier, William, 26
Cuomo, Andrew, 42–44, 46, 53–56
Curtis, John, 169–71, 175
Cutting, C. Suydam, 134
CVA, 203–4
CZ 83 semiautomatic pistol, 56
D
Daily Mail, 138, 143
Daley, Richard, 123, 125
Daniel Defense, 222
Danielson, Lew, 199
Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency (DARPA), 226

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
264	
Index
Defense Distributed, 207
Defense Trade Advisory Group 
(DTAG), 92
Democracy and the Problem of Free 
Speech (book), 108
Derringer, 202
Detty, Mike, 178
Dick’s Sporting Goods, Inc., 160
digital shooting systems, 37
“Disabled Americans for Firearms 
Rights,” 35
disarmed populace, 99, 119, 131–48
District of Columbia v. Heller 
(2008), 43, 45, 47, 118–19, 122, 
125, 127–29
Dodson, John, 177
Dorchester, Charles, 31
DPMS, 41, 209
Dube, Pete, 219
Duggan, Mark, 137–38
E
Eastern Sports and Outdoor Show, 
93–95
Eastwood, Clint, 25, 243
eBay, 163
Edwards, Cam, 109
Eisenhower, Dwight, 161
Elcan Optical Technologies, 220
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, vii
England, 20, 22, 126, 131–32, 134–
36, 138, 141–42, 145–47, 171, 
196
entrepreneurs, 17, 50–51, 89, 156
E. Remington and Sons, 38
Etronix, 221
Evermore Systems, 224
F
Fabrique Nationale d’Herstal, 46–47
Fairchild Engine and Aircraft Corpo-
ration, 30–32
fairness doctrine, the, 105–6, 108–9, 
112–13
Fast and Furious operation, 176–78
FBI. See Federal Bureau of Investiga-
tion
Featherweight Model 70,
Federal Bureau of Investigation 
(FBI), 29, 43, 72, 74, 80, 120, 
151–52, 171, 183–84, 186
Federal Communications Commis-
sion (FCC), 105, 108, 113
Federal Firearms Licenses (FFLs), 
72–73, 156–57, 169, 175–76, 
185, 207
Federal Premium Ammunition, 214, 
217–18
Fenty, Adrian, 125
Field & Stream (magazine), 48, 157, 
191, 203, 218, 220, 225
Fifer, Mike, 195
Firearms Act of 1920 (Britain), 133
Firearm Safety Act of 2013, 69–70
firearms dealers, 29, 46, 70, 72, 125, 
142, 151, 156–58, 163, 168–69, 
175, 177–79
Firearms and Imitation Firearms Bill 
(Britain), 134
firearms manufacturing, 26, 30, 63, 
89, 97, 177, 180, 196, 228
Firearms Owners’ Protection Act of 
1986, 166
firearms registries. See gun registries
Firestone, Kent, 207
Fitzpatrick, Richard, 206
Flake, Jeff, 186
flintlock rifle, 14–17, 22, 235
Florida, 90, 122, 195
Florida State University, 75
FN M1900 pistol, 138
Ford, Henry, 21
Ford Model T, 21
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Index	
265 
Fourteenth Amendment, Due Pro-
cess Clause of the, 46
Fowler, Mark S., 105–6
Fox & Friends (TV show), 69
Fox News, 69, 106
FriendorFoe.us, 162–63
G
Gander Mountain, 160, 176
Gandhi, Mohandas, 1
Gascoyne-Cecil, Robert, 133
Gat Guns, 161
Gentry, W. P., 230–33
Geren, Peter, 213
Giffords, Gabrielle, 114
Gius, Mark, 74
Glock, 59, 62–64, 152, 176, 199, 
209, 230, 244–45
Glock, Gaston, 63–64, 199
Goodlin, Drew, 214
Graham, Lindsey, 184, 186–87
grassroots movements, 93, 106–7, 
113–14
“Great Migration,” 123
Gresham, “Grits,” Jr., 113
Gresham, Tom, 113, 151, 163
Grey, Stephen, 131–32, 135–36
Grimes, Richard, 60, 62, 195
Gross, Dan, 90
Guardian, the, 141
gun-ballistics database, 167
gun bans, 7, 28–29, 41, 43, 45–46, 
53–54, 63, 65, 70, 80–82, 115, 
118, 123–26, 128, 136, 146, 
151–52, 163, 174, 179, 181–83, 
187–89
GunBroker.com, 158
gun control, 8, 28, 38, 42, 65, 69, 
71, 80–82, 100, 102, 107, 114–
16, 118–19, 122, 133, 144–48, 
171–72, 179–80, 205, 207, 228, 
230–31
gun cultures, 9, 70, 79–80, 102, 105, 
188–89
gun debate, 76, 114
“gun-free” America, 117–29
gun-free zones, 8, 21, 79, 107
gun laws, 7, 100, 114, 119, 123, 
125–26, 141–43, 146, 186–87
gun lobby, 87–95
gun market, 17–18, 153, 160, 194, 
196, 212
gun marketplace of the future, 151–
64
gun ranges, 5, 34, 61, 66, 103, 111, 
153, 162, 210
gun registration, 119–20, 174, 181
gun registries, 118, 171–74
gun rights, 6, 8–9, 28, 42–43, 57, 
92–93, 97–116, 123–24, 127, 
137, 153, 171–72, 182, 206, 245
guns
bolt-action, 18, 21, 35, 46, 48, 
194, 196, 222, 239, 242
as fundamental to American free-
dom, 14–15, 121, 206, 233
future of, 1, 9, 31–32, 37–39, 48, 
53, 57, 59, 65, 70, 156–57, 
191–92, 195–96, 202, 205, 
208, 211, 214, 221, 224–27, 
232–34
history of, 13–36, 127, 129
lost or stolen, 70, 72, 167–69, 
171, 175
and responsibility, 4–5, 7, 9, 
61–62, 66, 87, 101, 118, 127–
29, 132, 155–56, 163, 189, 
204, 206
and self-defense, 9, 45, 62, 74–75, 
82, 121, 124, 127–29, 132, 
136–37, 141, 222, 228, 231, 
233
semiautomatic, 1, 13, 18, 25–26, 
28–29, 34–36, 40, 45–48, 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
266	
Index
54–56, 60–63, 70–71, 100, 
103, 138, 176, 181, 187, 192, 
194, 196, 203, 206, 209, 212, 
223
as a tool of freedom, 1–9, 176
U.S. military and, 17–22, 25–27, 
30–36, 40, 42, 46, 50, 60, 73, 
88, 161, 185, 212, 214–15, 
221, 225–26, 240–41, 244
women and, 8, 24–25, 35, 87, 
111, 152, 156, 161–62, 233
Guns across the Border (book), 178
gun safes, 56, 232
gun safety, 56, 101, 155, 160, 189
gun sales, 71–72, 98, 110, 151–54, 
157, 171, 174, 181
GunsAmerica.com, 158
gunsmiths, gunsmithing, 15, 25, 46, 
64, 160, 203, 210, 230, 235
gun stores, 46, 72, 98, 124, 157, 
162, 168, 170, 175–76, 182, 187
Guns and Violence: The English 
Experience (book), 146
Gun Talk (radio show), 113, 151, 
163
gun violence, 68–69, 80, 90, 92, 110, 
115–16, 120, 125, 165–89
H
Halbrook, Stephen, 119–20, 122
handguns, 1, 5, 7, 24–26, 28, 43, 45, 
60, 63, 70–72, 75, 78–80, 99, 
118–19, 124–26, 134, 136, 138, 
142, 145–46, 148, 152, 167, 175, 
199, 206, 229–30
Colt Walker handgun, 23, 236–
37
lever-action, 21, 25, 39, 62, 79, 
238
revolving, 21–22
revolving-breech, 24
Harkin, Tom, 108
Harper, Stephen, 174
Harvard Journal of Law & Public 
Policy, 144
Hatfield, Ted, 191, 193, 197–98, 
202
Hathcock, Carlos, 102
Hays, Captain John Coffee Hays, 23
Heckler & Koch P30, 200
Helfeld, Paul, 138–40
“Heller II” (court case), 43, 45, 47, 
118–19, 122, 124–25, 127–29
Heller case. See District of Columbia 
v. Heller
Heller, Dick Anthony, 117–19, 124
Hendricks, Mark, 204
Herman, Donnie, 117
Hession, John W., 132–33, 135
Heston, Charlton, 102
Hickenlooper, John, 205
high-capacity magazines, 21, 46, 
180, 206
Hinton, Jeff, 20
History Channel, 15, 154
Holder, Eric, 151, 177, 185, 188, 
229–30
Hollywood, 30, 99, 101–5, 111, 
151, 224
home defense, 20, 35, 61, 209
Hornady Manufacturing, 218
Hornady, Steve, 217–18
Hunter, Stephen, 100, 102
hunting, hunters, 3, 5–6, 8–9, 16, 
19–20, 39–40, 42, 45, 48, 52–53, 
62, 70, 93–94, 111, 113, 138, 155–
56, 158–159, 161, 181, 192, 197, 
200, 203, 214–18, 220, 225, 233
I
illegal guns, illegal gun sales, 1, 7–8, 
72, 74, 78, 80, 87–88, 92, 120, 
142, 146, 167–68, 170–71, 174, 
188
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Index	
267 
Independence USA PAC, 114
Indiana, 193
Industrial Revolution (America), 24, 
39, 193
inner city, 1, 3, 142, 188
inner-city kids, 2
inner-city schools, 8
Institute for Legislative Action of the 
NRA (NRA-ILA), 89
Intelligun, 230–32
InterBonds, 217
Into the Viper’s Nest, 132
Iraq, 50, 111, 124, 213, 223
Israel, 20
Izaak Walton League, 189
J
Jackson, Andrew, 22
James, Jesse, 161
Jefferson, Thomas, 137
jihadists, 132, 141
K
Kates, Don B., 144, 146–48
Keane, Larry, 92–93, 228
Keefe, Mark A., IV, 18, 59, 194, 
200, 211–12, 217
Keene, David, 47, 92–93, 95, 107, 
113–14, 116
Kentucky rifle. See American Long-
rifle
Kimber, 40, 71, 198, 201, 210
Kodiak Arms, 202, 230, 233
Kollitides, George, 47, 57
Kopperud, Anna, 179
Kramer, Russton, 212
L
Ladd, Alan, 97
Lanier, Cathy L., 120, 122
Lanza, Adam, 41, 56, 65, 81
laser rangefinder, 38, 48, 52, 219–20
Lawrence, T. E., 138
Ledin, Steve, 158
Leica Geovid BRF 8x42 binoculars, 
219
Lepidus, Jacob, 138–40
lever-action rifles, 39, 62, 79
Levin, Mark, 106
Lewis, Mike, 70–71, 73–81
Lexington, 15
“Liberator,” the, 207
Library of Congress, 131, 141
Lichtenberg, Eric, 202, 231–32
Lichtenberg Research and Design, 
202, 231–32
lobbying, lobbyists, 87–95, 174, 
179, 187
Lockheed Martin, 226–27
London riots of 2011, 138
long-gun, 121, 172, 174, 182
Los Angeles, CA, 82
Lott, John, 74, 125–26, 153, 173
Lowry, Rich, 28
Lupher, John, 51, 224–25
M
M1 Abrams tanks, 223
M4, 212–14
M4A1 carbine, 27, 154, 198, 212–
13
M9 pistols, 27, 213
M14, 17–18, 31–34
M16, 18, 29, 31, 34, 36, 212–13
M77 Mark II Compact, 200, 204
MA-1 Survival Rifle, 30
machine guns, 25, 28, 35, 60, 88, 
211, 213
MacIntosh, Josh, 41
Madison, James, 39, 108
Magpul Industries, 205
Maine, 40, 81–82, 208
Malcolm, Joyce Lee, 146
Malloy, Dan, 179–81

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
268	
Index
Mannlicher, Ferdinand Ritter von, 
46
Marcy, William, 23
MarineCoat, 204
Mark V Ultra Lightweight, 201
Marlin, 39, 41–42, 210
Maryland Minutemen, 68
Maryland Rifle Club, 66, 68
Mascari, Joe, 2–3
Mauser “Broomhandle,” 26, 240
Mauser, Gary, 144, 146–48, 173
Mauser, Paul, 26
Maxim, Hiram, 25
“Mayflower gun,” 14
Mayors Against Illegal Guns 
(MAIG), 113–16
“McCain-Feingold,” 109
McDonald v. Chicago (2010), 124
McDonald, Otis, 47, 123–24, 127–
29
McHale, John, 50–51
Merkle, Sarah, 65
Merz, Paul, 37, 47
Metal Gear Solid (video game series), 
224
Mexican-American War, 22–23, 237
Michault, Jacques, 29
Michener, James, 61
micro-stamping, 54–55
MidwayUSA, 158
Mila 18, 98
militiamen, 15
MIL-STD-1913 Picatinny rail, 201
Model 700 Alaskan Ti, 200
Model 870 pump-action shotguns, 
40
Model 1911, 25–27, 39, 54, 57, 71, 
192, 206–7, 230–31, 240–41, 
244,
Monson, John, 161
More Guns, Less Crime, 74, 125, 
153
Moro guerrillas, 26
Morris, Johnny, 159
Morse, John, 205
Mossberg, 153, 195, 196, 204, 210, 
233
Mulham, Charles, 166, 174–76, 183
murder rate, 45, 71, 74, 80–81,125–
26, 143–45, 147, 174, 183
Myers, Kurt, 55–56
N
National Coalition to Ban Hand-
guns, 28
National Firearms Act of 1934, 88, 
91
National Firearms Dealer Network 
(NFDN), 156–58
National Firearms Museum, 13, 33, 
36, 135
National Instant Criminal Back-
ground Check System (NICS), 92, 
151–52, 171, 180, 183–88
National Park Service (NPS), 15, 17
National Post, 174
National Review, 28
National Rifle Association (NRA), 
13, 19, 28, 34, 45, 56, 70, 87–95, 
97–98, 102, 106–7, 109–10, 114–
15, 127, 135, 152–53, 161, 174, 
179, 181, 184, 187, 189, 194, 
211
National Shooting Sports Founda-
tion, 63, 80, 92, 95, 177, 180, 
228
New England, 15–16, 39, 193
New Hampshire, 195
Newtown Shooting, See also Sandy 
Hook Elementary Shooting, 40
New York City, 14, 23, 41–43, 114–
15, 174–75
New York Post, 99
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Index	
269 
New York state, 28, 37–45, 47–48, 
54–55, 57, 90, 114, 160, 166, 
170, 178, 180–82, 188, 193, 195
New York State Rifle & Pistol Asso-
ciation (NYSRPA), 45
New York Times, 99, 111–12
Nielsen, Henry, 32
Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, 127
North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
(NATO), 31, 209, 213, 244
North Carolina, 195
Norway, murder rate and gun own-
ership in, 145, 147
Nosler, John, 215–17
Nosler Partition, 216
O
Obama administration, 90, 92–93, 
95, 152, 177, 186
Obama, Barack, 90, 92–93, 95, 98, 
108, 151–52, 156, 171, 177, 179
O. F. Mossberg & Sons, 197
Olympics 1908, 132, 135–36
O’Malley, Martin, 68, 70, 82
Operation Iraqi Freedom, 223
Operation Trafalgar, 142
Operation Trident, 142
OpticsPlanet.com, 158
Outdoor Life, 210, 221
P
Paris Arms Convention, 133
Patent Arms Company, 22
Paul W. Smith Show, The, 81
Pelosi, Nancy, 108, 151
Pennsylvania Instant Check System 
(PICS), 185
Perry, Bill, 67
Peruta v. San Diego County, 127
Petzal, David E., 48, 191, 203, 216, 
218, 220–21, 225
Philippine-American War, 26
Picatinny Arsenal, the, 213
Picatinny rails, 210
Pipkin, E. J., 70
Piqua Leader-Dispatch, 132
Plymouth Colony, 14
Polk, James, 23
polymer frame, 59, 63, 199–200, 
232
Potter, Randy, 161
“Precision Guided Firearms,” 51, 
221
Preventing Gun Violence through 
Effective Messaging, 115
pro-gun groups, 187
Protection of Lawful Commerce in 
Arms Act, 89
Pryor, Mark, 186
PS3 Move Assault Rifle Controller, 
154
pump-action shotguns, 21, 40, 196
R
Reagan, Ronald, 105–6, 115
Recanatini, Matteo, 61, 64
Redcoats, 14, 16
Reh, Jeff, 83
Reid, Lee, 216
Remington 2020, 37–38, 48–50, 53
Remington Arms Factory, 37, 39, 47
Remington Auto-loading Repeating 
Rifle (“Model 8”), 47
Remington Core-Lokt, 216
Remington, Eliphalet, 38–40, 194
Remington Model 700, 48, 51
Remington Model 1100, 181
Remington Nylon 66, 199
Remington Outdoor Company 
(ROC), 41–42, 47, 57, 209
Revere, Paul, 15
revolvers, 21–26, 63, 79, 117, 139, 
168, 202, 208, 230, 236–37, 
239–40, 243

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
270	
Index
rifles, 5, 13, 16–17, 20, 30–35, 
37–57, 62, 65–66, 68, 73, 79–81, 
91, 98, 103, 118–20, 122, 132–
35, 138, 155, 157, 160, 162, 172, 
183, 191–94, 196, 199–201, 
203–4, 210, 212–13, 215–18, 
220–24, 226, 235, 237–40, 242
assault, 27–28, 61, 154
automatic, 34–35, 46
flintlock, 14–15, 22
muzzle-loading, 14
semiautomatic, 18, 28–29, 45–48, 
70, 176, 209
Roosevelt, Theodore “Teddy,”161
Rubin, Eduard, 215
Ruger 10/22, 45
Ruger SR-9, 200
S
SAFE Act, 42–47, 188
Salisbury, MD, 71, 75–77, 82,
Sandy Hook Elementary shooting, 
41–42, 65
Savage Arms, 47, 210
Savage Model 1907 (“Savage Auto-
matic Pistol”), 18
Scandinavia, 20
Schauble, Jason, 50–51
Schreier, Phil, 13
Schumer, Charles, 40–41, 57
Seaverns, Chad, 156–58
Second Amendment, 6, 43–46, 
53–54, 68–69, 75, 89–92, 99, 
106–7, 109, 114–16, 118–19, 
121, 123–24, 127–29, 136, 151, 
153, 162, 189, 230
Selleck, Tom, 102
semiautomatic M1 Garands, 18
Seymour, John, 55
Shane, 97
Shepherd, Jim, 111
Shepherd, Mick, 142
Shew v. Malloy, 181
Shooter, 102, 104
Shooting Wire, The, 95, 111–12
SHOT (Shooting, Hunting, Outdoor 
Trade Show), 48, 51, 53, 95, 
98–101, 177–78, 192, 209–11, 
223
Shot Business, 157
Shyu, Heidi, 213
sidearms, 27, 161, 241
Sig Sauer P250, 200
Sig Sauer P938, 157
Simon Fraser University, 144, 173
Skretny, William M., 44
Slate.com, 41
Smith, Horace, 25
Smith & Wesson .500, 25
Smith & Wesson Model 1, 25, 237
Smith & Wesson M&P, 200
Smith & Wesson plant, 19
smoothbore muskets, 16–17
sniper rifles, 40, 154, 176
Snow, John, 221–22
Solid Concepts, 207
SolidWorks, 201–3
Sons of Guns, 154
Soros, George, 42, 151
South Africa, 51, 143–44
Soviet Union, 144
Spain, 143, 192, 196, 203–4
Special Forces, 19–20, 52, 212, 225, 
227
Spitzer, Eliot, 41
Sporting Arms and Ammunition 
Manufacturers’ Institute 
(SAAMI), 92
Sports Afield, 197
Sportsman’s Warehouse, 160
Springfield Armory, 15, 17–18, 27, 
32, 132, 135
Springfield Model 1903, 15, 132, 
135
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
	
Index	
271 
Springfield XD(M), 200
Stack, Dick, 160
Stanford Law & Policy Review, 27
Stern, Howard, 98
Steyr Mannlicher M1894, 46
Stoner, Eugene, 31–32, 243
Stube, Greg, 19–20
Sturm, Ruger and Company, 195
submachine guns, 143, 154
Sugarmann, Josh, 28
Sullivan, George, 29–31
Sunstein, Cass, 108–9
Superformance ammunition, 218
Swagger, Bob Lee (fictional charac-
ter), 102, 104
Swift A-Frame, 216
Swiss Army Laboratory, 215
Syracuse Peace Council decision, the, 
105
Szeliga, Kathy, 67
T
Tac-Con 3MR Trigger System, 211
tactical shotguns, 154
Talcott, George, 23
Taliban, the, 19, 132
technology, 16, 18, 20, 25–26, 
28–29, 36–38, 46, 48, 50–53, 55, 
59–83, 156, 162–63, 193–95, 
198–99, 202, 206, 208, 210, 212, 
214, 217, 219–22, 224–33, 245
Terrorist Firearms Detection Act, 63
Texas Rangers, 22–23
Thompson/Center, 204, 210
Time, 31
Timney Triggers, 210
Top Shots, 105, 154
Torino, Greg, 161
Tottenham, London, 137–39
Tottenham Outrage of 1909, 138
Towsley, Bryce, 50, 208
TrackingPoint, 48–53, 191, 220–27
Trapdoor Springfield, 18
TriNyte Corrosion Control System, 
204
Trophy Bonded Bear Claw, 217
Turkey, 192, 197–98, 201
Tyler, William, 139
U
“Uniform Crime Reports,” 29, 183
universal background checks, 171, 
206
Urban Tactical Shotgun 15-rounds 
(UTS-15), 198
U.S. Army, 22, 26–27, 31–32, 37, 
60, 212, 238
U.S. Department of Defense, 231
U.S. Department of Justice, 177
U.S. Marine Corps, 102
U.S. military and civilians, 60
U.S. Navy, 27
U.S. Supreme Court, 43–44, 47, 105, 
109, 118, 129
UTAS, 198
V
Vance, J. Paul, 179–81
video game industry, 90, 154
video-screen scope, 48
video shooting system, 38
Vietnam War, 33–34, 102, 241
Violence Policy Center (VPC), 28, 
74, 228
Virginia Tech shooting, 102
“Volcanic Pistol,” 25
W
Wahlberg, Mark, 102, 104
Walker, Sam, 22–24, 236–37
Walsh, Chris, 162–63
Walther PPK, 61, 233
Washington, George, 15, 17, 32, 68, 
132

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
272	
Index
Washington Post, 99–100, 102, 111, 
184
Washington Times, 47, 92, 212
Weatherby, 201, 210
Weinstein, Harvey, 97–99
Wesson, Daniel B., 19, 25, 93, 100, 
117, 153, 156, 198, 200, 202, 
237
White, Slaton, 157
Whitney, Eli, Jr., 23
Whitneyville Armory, 23
“Whitneyville-Hartford-Dragoons,” 
24
Williams, Ted, 165
Wilson, Cody, 207
Wilson, James, Q., 74
Winchester Repeating Arms Com-
pany, 47, 135
Winchesters, 13, 21, 33, 47, 200, 
210, 220, 238–41
Wingate, George W., 91
women’s rights, 25
Woolsey, James, 17–18
World Fair of 1851, 24
World War I, 18, 27, 133, 213
World War II, 18, 29, 31, 34, 63, 98, 
102, 134, 193
Wright Brothers, the, 25, 48
Wyman, Willard, 32
X
X-Bullet, 217
Xtreme Conditions Rifle, 204
Z
Zamaloff, Jason, 168, 170, 174–75
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

