NEW for Apple MacBooks
MacBook 
GuideBook 
The
Learn everything you need to master your MacBook
 
 Easy to follow 
user guides
	 All macOS key 
apps covered
	 Get the best 
from your device
macOS 
High Sierra 
Updated 
Edition
BDM’s
www.ebook3000.com


Ian Osborne - Editor
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook is a new kind of Mac magazine. Instead 
of looking at the operating system, the apps and the features in turn, we 
concentrate on what you use your Mac notebook for. If you’re a complete 
beginner, there’s a getting started section. If you’re interested in using 
the Internet, we show you how to get your MacBook online and how to 
use key Internet apps such as the Safari web browser and the Mail email 
client. If you use your notebook for entertainment, check out our guide 
to making the most from iTunes, with the Apple Music service and buying 
movies, music and TV shows from the iTunes store. For productivity, we 
take an in-depth look at Notes, Maps, Contacts, Calendar, Preview and 
Apple Pay. If you want to take things further, check out our guides to the 
MacBook’s key advanced features.
MacBook 
GuideBook 
The
BDM’s
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
3
BDM’S: 	
 
THE MACBOOK GUIDEBOOK 	
  
ISBN 978-1-907306-37-2
Published by: Papercut Limited 
Managing Editor: James Gale 
Art Director & Production: Mark Ayshford 
Production Manager: Karl Linstead 
Editor: Ian Osborne 
Design: Richard Meads, Ben Clark 
Editorial: Dan Davies, James Gale,  
Cliff Smith, Andrea Gale 
Sub Editor: Paul Beard 
Digital distribution by:  
PocketMags.com 
 
Visit us at: www.bdmpublications.com
Papercut Limited 
Registered in England & Wales No: 4308513
Copyright © 2017 Papercut Limited. All rights reserved. 
No part of this publication may be reproduced in any 
form, stored in a retrieval system or integrated into any 
other publication, database or commercial programs 
without the express written permission of the 
publisher. Under no circumstances should this 
publication and its contents be resold, loaned out or 
used in any form by way of trade without the 
publisher’s written permission.
While we pride ourselves on the quality of the 
information we provide, Papercut Limited reserves the 
right not to be held responsible for any mistakes or 
inaccuracies found within the text of this publication. 
Due to the nature of the software industry, the publisher 
cannot guarantee that all software and/or tutorials, tips, 
guides will work on every version of the required 
hardware. It remains the purchaser’s sole responsibility 
to determine the suitability of this book and its content 
for whatever purpose. Any images reproduced on the 
front and back cover are solely for design purposes and 
are not representative of content. We advise all potential 
buyers to check listing prior to purchase for 
confirmation of actual content. 
All editorial opinion herein is that of the writer - as 
an individual - and is not representative of the 
INTERNATIONAL LICENSING: Papercut Limited has many great publications and all are available for licensing worldwide. For more 
information go to: www.brucesawfordlicensing.com Email: bruce@brucesawfordlicensing.com  Telephone: 0044 7831 567372
Follow us on:      Facebook: BDM Publications        Twitter: @BDMpubs
publisher or any of its affiliates. Therefore the publisher 
holds no responsibility in regard to editorial opinion 
and content. Papercut Limited reserves the right not to 
be held responsible for any mistakes or inaccuracies 
found within the text of this publication. Therefore the 
Publisher, editor and their respective employees or 
affiliates will not accept responsibility for loss, damage 
or injury occasioned to any persons acting or refraining 
from action as  a result of the content within this 
publication whether or not any such action is due to 
any error, negligent omission or act on the part of the 
Publisher, editor and their respective employees or 
affiliates. 
The articles in these pages that follow are intended 
as a guide only. We are not advising you to change your 
device, and would actually advise against it if you have 
even the slightest doubts. There are potential risks to 
the hardware and software involved, and you must be 
aware of these before you decide to alter anything on 
your device. Read all of the information here carefully 
and then make up your own mind whether you want to 
follow our guides. We take no responsibility for 
damage to your iMac, MacBook or any other device 
used in the process. If you are unsure, please do not 
buy this publication.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook is an 
independent publication and as such does not necessarily 
reflect the views or opinions of the producers of the 
products contained within. This publication is not endorsed 
or associated in any way with Apple or any associate or 
affiliate company.
Some content may have been previously published 
in other volumes. All copyrights, trademarks and 
registered trademarks for the respective companies 
and developers are acknowledged. Relevant iMac, 
MacBook and Software graphic imagery reproduced 
with courtesy of Apple.  App Store prices, international 
availability, ratings, titles and content are subject to 
change. Some images contained within this publication 
are reproduced under licence from shutterstock.com 
and mockupzone.com. All information was correct at 
time of print.
For all advertising & promotional opportunities 
please contact: enquiries@bdmpublications.com
www.ebook3000.com

BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
4
The MacBook GuideBook
Contents
The MacBook GuideBook
Getting Started with Your MacBook
07
Going Online with Your Mac Notebook
31
Getting the Most from
the Safari App
We take an in-depth look at the Safari App, including its 
basic functionality and also its more advanced features. 
With our help, surfing the web is easy!
34
06	
The Mac Notebook Family
08	
 How to Set Up Your Mac
10	
 Upgrading Your MacBook to macOS Sierra
12	
 Using Gesture Controls
14	
 How to Use the macOS Sierra Desktop Feature
16	
 How to Customise the macOS Sierra Desktop
18	
 How to Use the MacBook’s Menus
20	
 Using the MacBook’s Finder
24	
 Finder’s Key Features
26	
 Using Spotlight Search
28	
 How to Use the Dock
30	
 The Finder’s Tabs & Tags
32	
 Going onto the Internet with Your MacBook
34	
 Using the Safari App
42	
 Setting Up Email on Your MacBook
44	
 Using the Mail App
48	
 Getting the Most From Messages
50	
 Using the FaceTime App
52	
 How to Use Apple’s iCloud Services
58	
 Upgrading iCloud Drive
59	
 iCloud Desktop Documents & Folders
60	
 Your MacBook’s iCloud Keychain

BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
5
www.bdmpublications.com 
Upkeep, Maintenance and Security
103
Contents
Your MacBook as a Productivity Tool
85
86	
 Using the Notes App
90	
 Using the Maps App
94	
 Using the Contacts App
96	
 Using the Calendar App
100	
 Mastering Sierra’s Automator Assistant
102	
 Your MacBook’s Apple Pay Feature
104	
 Using Time Machine on Your MacBook
106	
 Your MacBook’s Auto Save Feature
108	
 Simple Ways to Speed Up Your MacBook
110	
 Running Non-Apple Operating Systems
114	
 Maintenance and Troubleshooting
Taking Things Further with Your MacBook
117
118	
 Using Siri on Your Mac
120	
 How to Use the Notification Centre
122	
 Your MacBook’s System Preferences
128	
 Your MacBook’s Picture in Picture Feature
129	
 Your MacBook’s Mission Control Feature
130	
 Using macOS Sierra’s Universal Clipboard
131	
 Your Mac’s Quick Look
132	
 Your Mac’s App Switcher
133	
 Your Mac’s AirDrop
134	
 How to Use macOS and iOS Continuity
Your MacBook For Entertainment
61
What’s New in macOS High Sierra?
137
138	
Climbing High Sierra
How to Use the macOS 
System Preferences
System Preferences can do much to customise the way 
your MacBook works. We take a look at how they work.
122
Getting the Most	 	
From Maps
The Maps app is the modern way to get around. 
You can use it to navigate from A to B, find 
amenities and more.
90
62	
 Using the iTunes App
66	
 Using the Apple Music Service
68	
 Internet TV and Radio on Your MacBook
70	
 Getting the Most From iBooks
74	
 Using the Photos App
80	
 Mac Gaming with Steam
82	
 Adding Joypads and Controllers
84	
 Integrate Social Media with Your MacBook
Using the	
	
	
 
iTunes App
iTunes is the key to enjoying your digital 
media on your Mac, and subscribing to 
Apple’s streaming Music.
62
144     Keyboard Shortcuts
www.ebook3000.com

  15-inch MacBook Pro      There are two models of 15-inch 
MacBook Pro available and both feature a Touch Bar with integrated 
Touch ID sensor. Available in silver or space grey, they offer a 2.8GHz 
or 2.9GHz processor respectively, and Radeon Pro 555 or 560 discrete 
graphics. Both have four Thunderbolt 3 (USB‑C) ports.
  13-inch MacBook Pro    The 13-inch MacBook Pro lacks a 
discrete graphics chip but instead relies on an integrated chipset; 
Intel Iris Plus Graphics 640 for the cheaper two models and Intel Iris 
Plus Graphics 650 for the more expensive two. They have two or four 
Thunderbolt 3 ports, depending on the model in question.
The Mac Notebook Family
There are three main Mac notebooks: the high-end MacBook Pro, the ultra-portable MacBook Air and the 
stylish (but expensive) MacBook. Let’s take a look at each of these notebook ranges and see how they differ.
  MacBook Air      If you’re looking for a light, portable computer 
that can keep going all day, get a MacBook Air. It lasts for up to 12 
hours between charges. It’s very thin and light too, so you can carry it 
around with you all day without breaking your back. It’s not as 
powerful as the MacBook Pro but it’s good enough for most users.
  MacBook      Could this be the future of 
Mac notebooks? It’s incredibly stylish (it’s 
available in four different colours) and 
boasts some interesting design 
innovations, such as the impressive 
multi-layered battery and new-style 
keyboard buttons. It’s not the most 
powerful notebook Mac, though.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
6
Getting Started with Your MacBook

BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
7
www.bdmpublications.com 
Getting Started with 
Your MacBook
08 	
How to Set Up Your Mac
10 	
Upgrading Your MacBook to macOS Sierra
12	
 Using Gesture Controls
14	
 How to Use the macOS Sierra Desktop Feature
16 	
How to Customise the macOS Sierra Desktop
18 	
How to Use the MacBook’s Menus
20 	
Using the MacBook’s Finder
24	
 Finder’s Key Features
26 	
Using Spotlight Search
28	
 How to Use the Dock
30 	
The Finder’s Tabs & Tags
If you’re new to the Mac, start here. Whether you 
own a MacBook, MacBook Pro or MacBook Air, 
this section is for you. We show you how to set 
up your MacBook for the first time and how to 
upgrade to the latest version of the operating 
system, if it’s not in place already. We also take 
you through the macOS basics, such as using the 
Desktop, the Finder, Menus, Spotlight Search and 
more. We also show you how to use the Dock 
found at the bottom of the screen and how to 
customise your MacBook’s Desktop.
www.ebook3000.com

 Switch it On!      It’s obvious of course but before you can get 
started with your new Mac, you have to switch it on! The power 
button is in the top right corner of the keyboard on a notebook or 
on the back of a desktop Mac. Press it and you hear the start-up 
tone that indicates your Mac is booting up.
 Terms and Conditions     Next comes the notorious Terms 
and Conditions page. We’d recommend that you read through this, 
since it is a legal document, but since you can’t use your new Apple 
laptop computer unless you agree to the terms, you’re going to 
have to click that Agree button sooner or later.
How to Set Up Your Mac
Setting up your new notebook Mac for the first time can be a daunting experience, but it’s nothing to be afraid 
of. In this section we take you through the first-time set up process, from switching it on and setting up or 
logging in with your Apple ID; all the way to having it ready to use. It’s all here.
 Are You Sure?     You’re asked to confirm your acceptance to 
the Terms and Conditions before you can continue. A pop-up 
window appears inviting you to Agree or Disagree. Click Agree 
with your mouse pointer or tap the Enter key to press the button 
highlighted in blue; in this case it’s ‘Agree’.
 Sign In     If you already have an Apple ID, enter your email 
address or username, and then your password to sign in. If you’ve 
forgotten it, click the “Forgot?” link and a reminder is emailed to 
you. If you don’t have an Apple ID, see the boxout over the page to 
see how to create one.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
8
Getting Started with Your MacBook

How to Set Up Your Mac
 iCloud Keychain     With iCloud Keychain, you can share your 
passwords and credit card information between your Apple 
devices; and have them ready for you whenever you need them 
instead of typing them in afresh. Opt for Set up iCloud Keychain 
and press Continue.
 Check for Updates     The first thing we’d recommend that you 
do is to check for any software updates. Even a brand new 
computer may have been sitting on a warehouse shelf for a few 
weeks, and there may have been important updates released 
during that time. Click on the Apple menu, then select App Store.
 Enabling Siri     Siri, Apple’s personal digital assistant for iOS, is 
now available on the Mac. If you wish to use it on your computer, 
check the Enable Siri on this Mac box and then press Continue. We 
show you what Siri can do later in this book.
 Apply any Updates     When the App Store opens you may 
have to log into it using your Apple ID. When you’re in, click on the 
Updates button in the top bar. Checking for updates may take a 
minute or so. Apply any updates that appear.
Creating an Apple ID
  If you don’t already have an Apple ID, when offered the 
sign-in window, click on Create Apple ID (you can also do this 
through System Preferences > iCloud). Add your details using 
the pull-down menus and text fields, clicking Next when each 
screen is completed to move onto the next one.
  Choose a password you can remember; it must be a minimum 
of eight characters, and have at least one uppercase letter and 
one number. Take care with the security questions too, which 
will be used if you ever forget your password. When you’re 
done, agree to the Terms and Conditions.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
9
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

If your MacBook is running an older version of the operating system, you’re probably keen to upgrade to 
macOS Sierra. Fortunately, Apple has made this very easy to do. As long as your MacBook meets the minimum 
system requirements, you can upgrade over the Internet, and it’s free too.
Upgrading Your MacBook 
to macOS Sierra
Minimum Requirements
  The system requirements for Sierra aren’t much tighter than 
those for its predecessor, El Capitan. To upgrade to Sierra, your 
Mac must have at least 2GB of memory, 8GB of free storage space 
and be running OS X 10.7 Lion or later. It must also be one of the 
following models. To check, go to the Apple menu and select 
About This Mac.
iMac - Late 2009 or newer
MacBook - Late 2009 or newer
MacBook Pro - Mid 2010 or newer
MacBook Air - Mid 2011 or newer
Mac mini - Mid 2011 or newer
Mac Pro - Mid 2010 or newer
   1       First of all, open the App Store and find the Sierra operating 
system. Do a search if it’s not immediately visible on the front page. 
Click on macOS Sierra to get to the download page.
   2       When you get to the Sierra download page, you can read all 
about the new OS. When you’re ready, click on Download. It may 
take some time if you have a slow Internet connection.
Upgrading Your Mac to Sierra
Before you start, you should make sure your MacBook is 
powerful and recent enough to run macOS Sierra.
It’s time to upgrade. Make sure notebooks are mains 
powered during the installation of Sierra.
Make a Backup
  Upgrading the operating system is a big step, so as 
always, before making any major change to your computer, 
it’s a good idea to make a backup of your data. The upgrade 
is a very safe process and won’t damage your files by itself 
but there’s always the unexpected risk of a drive failure or 
power cut during the installation process, which could 
leave your Mac crippled. Better safe than sorry!
It’s always a good idea to keep a backup of your 
important files, so make sure yours is up to date.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
10
Getting Started with Your MacBook

   5       Next choose the hard drive you want to install Sierra on. It 
will probably be your Mac’s own hard drive but you can install it on 
an external drive if you wish. Click Install to continue.
   8       It takes a while but eventually your Mac will reboot into 
macOS Sierra. You might have to sign into iCloud and accept 
more terms and conditions but after that, you’re up and running.
   3       When the installer is fully downloaded, it automatically 
launches with this screen. Click Continue if you’re ready to install 
and if not, quit it and install from the Applications folder later.
   6       After entering your admin password, Sierra begins the first 
stage of its installation. All you can do now is wait. Make sure you 
don’t turn off or unplug your Mac during the process.
   4       Next step is terms and conditions. You have to click on Agree 
to continue. If you don’t have time to read them, there’s a copy 
available in About This Mac after the installation.
   7       When the installation is complete, you’ll see a window 
asking you to close down all other apps. Click on this option and 
your Mac will restart, continuing the installation of macOS Sierra.
Upgrading Your MacBook to macOS Sierra
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
11
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Using Gesture Controls
The most striking feature of using a MacBook for the first time is how fluidly you can control your 
experience. Unlike the standard mouse or trackpad control of a PC, you can navigate your MacBook 
using a series of clicks and gestures. For this feature we look at these gesture controls.
One of the things that makes the MacBook such a 
pleasure to use is its large and responsive multi-touch 
trackpad, or the Bluetooth Magic Trackpad. You can use 
the trackpad in much the same way as you would use the 
touchscreen of an iPhone or iPad: to quickly and easily 
access menus, sort through stacks of pictures or 
documents, scroll through documents and to zoom in 
and out of displayed images. Once you get used to it, it’s 
a very easy and intuitive way of controlling your Mac and 
it can do far more than just scrolling up and down your 
documents or websites.
  Secondary Clicking      Some people like to use a 
two-button mouse with their Mac, and this can be handy for 
quick access to shortcut menus by secondary clicking or 
right-clicking. To set up two-finger secondary clicking using 
the trackpad, select Secondary Click in the Point & Click pane 
of Trackpad preferences. To set up a one finger secondary 
click zone in the bottom left or right corner of the trackpad or 
mouse, select Secondary Click in the Point & Click pane of 
Trackpad preferences, and choose an option from the 
pop-up menu.
  Single Click      Unlike most other trackpads, the entire 
MacBook trackpad works the same as the mouse button; and 
you can click anywhere on the track pad to activate apps and 
select icons.
  Multi-touch Gestures      The MacBook’s advanced 
trackpad supports the Multi-touch gestures introduced with 
OS X Lion and which have featured in every OS since. These 
might seem a bit complicated at first, but once you get used to 
them and have a bit of time to practise they will quickly become 
second nature; and before long you’ll wonder how you ever 
managed without them. The trick to using the trackpad 
properly is to practise using more than one finger at once. Some 
gestures use two fingers, while others use three. You need to 
apply light but firm pressure and move your fingers smoothly 
and evenly, all at the same time. Like we said, it takes a little 
practice; but you’ll quickly become proficient at it. To enable 
Multitouch gestures, view instructional videos of the gestures, 
and set other trackpad options, choose Apple > System 
Preferences, and then click Trackpad.
  Scroll Vertically      Place two fingers together on the 
trackpad, then move them up or down. This will scroll vertically up 
or down the document  or web page you’re currently viewing.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
12
Getting Started with Your MacBook

  Switching Between Full-Screen Apps     If you’ve got 
several apps open full screen at once, you can quickly flip between 
them using a gesture. Place three fingers on the trackpad and 
quickly slide them to the left or right. This will scoot the current 
app aside, revealing the next in line.
 Rotating Images      You can rotate images by placing two 
fingers on the trackpad and then turning your hand so that your 
fingers both move in a curve. It can be a little awkward on the wrist 
at first but you’ll soon get used to it. With practice, you’ll wonder 
how you ever did without such a useful gesture.
  Zoom In and Out     Two-finger pinching lets you zoom in or 
out on PDFs, images, photos, and other large visual documents or 
web pages. Place two fingers on the trackpad, then move them 
apart to zoom in, or together to zoom out. The quicker you move 
your fingers, the more you’ll zoom.
  Access Mission Control      You can access the Mission 
Control at any time, even if you’ve got a full-screen app open. 
Simply place three fingers at the bottom of the trackpad and move 
them quickly upwards.
  Force Click       The very latest Apple notebooks feature Force 
Touch trackpads, which can tell a soft tap from a hard tap. A 
hard tap, or Force Click, can be used to preview a file, drop a pin 
in Maps, preview a Safari link, rename a file or folder and more.
  Turn Off Force Click       If you dislike the Force Click 
gesture, and find it gets in the way of your workflow, it’s easy to 
turn it off. Open System Preferences (you can find it under the 
Apple menu in the top left corner), and go to the Trackpad 
pane. Under the first tab, Point & Click, you see a checkbox 
labelled ‘Force Click and haptic feedback’. Uncheck it to turn off 
this feature.
Using Gesture Controls
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
13
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

3
5
4
The desktop is the heart of your MacBook. Think of it as 
the workbench of your computer, where you can store, 
organise and keep the files that you’re currently working 
on in an easy-to-see location. Let’s have a look at the 
components that make up the desktop in macOS Sierra.
  1. Menulet      A Menulet is simply a shortcut or link to the application 
or file. That way you don’t have to navigate to it every time it’s needed.
  2. Utilities      Easy access to Bluetooth and Wi-Fi settings, volume 
level, time and date preferences, some login options and a handy search 
utility.
  3. Apple Menu      From the Apple menu you can log out, shut 
down, restart or put the computer into sleep mode, get comprehensive 
information on the computer’s hardware and software, access the system 
and dock preferences, and open any recent items.
  4. Desktop Wallpaper      Why have a plain background when you 
can spruce it up with your favourite photo? If you’re bored with the same 
one day after day, set it to change regularly.
  5. Folder Icon      Whenever you create a new folder, an icon will 
be placed on the desktop. You can then choose to hide the icon in the 
Documents folder if you wish.
  6. Finder Window       The Finder utility is the central point for 
navigation and file manipulation. Browse and navigate applications, 
documents, external drives and even access other computers, as long as 
they’re connected to the same network. 
  7. Dock      The Dock offers quick and easy access to your favourite 
applications, documents, folders and even the trash can. It’s easily edited 
and customised to make the most of the way you work.
  8.Dock Folder      You can also put folders in the Dock, as shown 
here. The folder can then be accessed like a Dock app.
 9. Open Application Window      Application windows come in 
all shapes, sizes and designs and are all accessible from the Launchpad, 
the Dock, or the Finder.
10. The Trash      To delete a file, folder or application, drag it into here, 
then right-click on it and choose ‘Empty Trash’ from the menu.
How to Use the macOS 
Sierra Desktop Feature
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
14
Getting Started with Your MacBook

1
6
2
9
7
10
How to Use the macOS Sierra Desktop Feature
8
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
15
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Customise the 
macOS Sierra Desktop
Choose New Wallpaper
Use an Image from Your Pictures Folder
   1       To open the Desktop preferences window, click the Apple 
menu, select System Preferences, and select the Desktop & Screen 
Saver option.
   1       Open the desktop preferences: Apple menu> System 
Preferences> Desktop & Screen Saver. Select the Folders item in 
the directory list, click the small arrow icon to open it, then 
select the Pictures folder to display any images found.
   2       Click on the required image to set it as your desktop’s 
wallpaper, as you can see here.
   2        Select the genre of picture required from the left column, 
then click on the image you’d like to use for your wallpaper. The 
desktop is updated immediately, so if you are happy with the 
selection just close the window; if not, choose another, as seen here, 
giving your desktop a fresh new look.
As a MacBook owner you might want to personalise your experience by customising the appearance of 
your Sierra Desktop. You can choose your own wallpaper and even set up a slideshow of your favourite 
pictures. So let’s get started with personalising your copy of macOS Sierra.
Here’s how you can change your desktop image, 
completely changing the screen’s appearance.
You can use one of your own photos as your desktop, 
to make your MacBook look personal.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
16
Getting Started with Your MacBook

Add Your Own Folder to the Folders List
Automatically Change the Wallpaper
   1       Display the desktop preferences: Apple menu> System 
Preferences> Desktop & Screen Saver.
   1       Display the desktop preferences: Apple menu> System 
Preferences> Desktop & Screen Saver. Toggle the Change 
Picture option to show a tick. This will enable the choice menu 
to the right.
   2       The wallpaper can be set to change from every five 
seconds to once a day. It can even be set to change when you 
log in, or when waking the computer from sleep mode, so you 
should be able to find something suitable.
   3       Once you’ve selected a time option, you can opt to 
display the images randomly or simply work through 
sequentially by toggling the Random Order option. Close the 
window and enjoy the slide show.
   2        Click the ‘+’ icon below the directory list to display a Finder 
window, navigate to the required folder, select it and then just 
press Choose.
   3       The required folder should now be visible in the Folders 
section of the directory list. Select your favourite image from the 
thumbnails, then close the window.
You can also add your own folders to the list of sources 
for new desktop images. This is how.
You can even have your MacBook regularly change 
your desktop image to something new.
How to Customise the macOS Sierra Desktop
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
17
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

The Apple Menu
  The Apple menu is 
located at the top left of 
the desktop. To use it 
click on the Apple icon 
once, then choose an 
option. To close it, click 
on the Apple icon again. 
It is always available and 
always contains the 
same set of options:
  Software Update     Use this option to check for any updates 
to the operating system or applications.
 About this Mac     This opens a window displaying 
information such as the software version, hardware 
configuration, startup disk and a software update option.
 Force Quit     In the unlikely event of an application not 
responding, this option will force it to quit, regardless of what is 
still running and whether or not the file has been saved. It’s only to 
be used as a last resort but it’s useful when things go wrong.
How to Use the 
MacBook’s Menus
Menus are an essential part of interacting with your MacBook. Whether it’s a menu accessed by clicking 
on the top bar or a contextual menu found by right-clicking or CTRL-clicking on a file or folder, you need 
to know how to use your menus if you are to get the most out of your MacBook. 
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
18
Getting Started with Your MacBook

   1       Open the Apple menu and choose 
System Preferences. In the System 
Preferences window, click on the Mouse or 
Trackpad icon, second  row, depending on 
which you’re using.
   2       Make sure the Point & Click tab is 
selected at the top of the window. Now click 
on the box next to the Secondary Click 
option, as shown here, to activate the 
right-click.
   3       With Secondary Click activated, 
clicking on the right side of a Magic 
Mouse or with two fingers on a Magic 
Trackpad is the equivalent of 
right-clicking on a two button mouse.
Enabling Secondary (Right) Click
 App Store     This menu option gives 
you another easy way to access the Apple 
Online Store.
 Application Menus     Each application 
has its own unique set of menus located next 
to the Apple menu. They will change when 
an application is active and will revert back 
to the Finder menu when no apps are active. 
Each is clearly labelled to make it easier. We’ll 
add specific details for application menus 
when we look into the applications 
themselves later in the guide.
 Contextual Menu     When you need to 
interact with a specific file or folder it is 
sometimes easier to use the Contextual 
Menu for that item. There are two ways of 
doing this: the first is to hold the ‘CMD’ key 
down and then click on the item; the second 
necessitates having a two button mouse 
and enabling the right-click option in the 
preferences. If that’s the case you can simply 
right-click on the item to display its menu.
 System Preferences     Central point for 
all the various system settings and 
configuration options. You can modify most 
things using this utility.
 Recent Items     Quick and easy access to 
your recently used applications, documents, 
and servers.
How to Use the MacBook’s Menus
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
19
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Components of the Finder
9
1
2
8
3
4
5
6
7
 1. Window Control Options    
  Use the gumdrops to close or minimise the 
window or open it in full-screen mode. See 
the tutorial over the page for more details 
on how to do this.
 2. Navigation Controls    
  The chevron buttons found under the 
gumdrops in the top left corner of the 
window take you forwards or back through 
your navigation history.
 3. View Options    
  These four buttons let you set-up how you 
view the files and folders in the Finder 
window; whether as icons, a list, in columns 
or as a cover flow.
It pays to familiarise yourself with the workings of a Finder window, as seen in the explanation below. The Finder 
underpins the whole of macOS, so lessons learned in this section come in useful whatever you’re doing on your MacBook.
Using the		 	 	
MacBook’s Finder
The Finder can accomplish a huge number of tasks from one central point. You can browse  files, 
folders, documents, or external devices. It’s also the hub for file manipulation, deleting, moving, editing, 
customising, and even adding scripts to manage folder contents. Here’s a guide to using it.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
20
Getting Started with Your MacBook

Using the MacBook’s Finder
 Shortcut Keys     Click a clear space on the desktop once to make 
sure you’re in the Finder, then press the CMD key and the N key 
together. Again, a new Finder window appears.
 Using the Dock     If it isn’t already displayed, move your mouse 
cursor to the bottom of the screen to open the Dock. Click the Finder 
Window to create a new window.
 4. Item Arrangement List     Click on the button marked 
‘Arrange’ for a window offering ways the contents of the window 
should be ordered; according to date, alphabetically and more.
 5. Share Button     The Share button is found in many places 
throughout macOS. Here you can highlight a file or folder and click 
the button to send it by email, AirDrop etc.
 6. Tags Button     You can tag a file or folder to make it easier to 
spot, group it with other documents and folders and more. An item 
can have more than one tag.
 7. Search     If you’re looking for a specific item, type its name or 
contents into the Search field and press Enter. You can then revise 
your search if it’s still not found.
 8. Sidebar     There are various options on the Finder window’s 
sidebar. You can open specific folders like Documents or Downloads, 
access external drives and more.
 9. File/Folder View     This is quite simply, a list of files and 
folders that are contained in the currently open folder. They are 
shown in the format chosen in View Options (see 3).
Displaying a Finder Window
 Using Menus     Click a clear space on the desktop once, open the 
File menu, and select New Finder Window. A window then appears.
There are several ways of opening a new Finder window. 
Let’s take a look at each in turn.
 Relaunch the Finder      If the Finder crashes you can relaunch it 
like you would a crashed app. The easiest way to do this is to  click on 
the desktop to make sure you’re in Finder, hold down the Shift key and 
click on the Apple menu. The Force Quit option has become Force Quit 
Finder. Incidentally you can use this method to quit any running app. 
Just click on one of its windows to bring it to the fore, hold Shift and 
click on the Apple menu.
Window Controls Options
 Close     Click once on the red 
button containing a cross. This will 
work with the majority of windows 
and applications.
 Full Screen     Click the green 
button containing a ‘+’ sign.  Will full 
screen most windows.
 Minimise     Click the orange 
button containing a ‘-‘ sign. Again 
this will work with almost all 
windows and apps.
Navigation Controls
 Using the Forward Control   
  If you’ve moved to a previous page, 
this button offers step-by-step 
navigation to your original starting 
point. Simply 
 click the right-hand arrow as  
many times as needed.
These simple controls allow you to retrace your 
steps backwards and forwards.
The coloured buttons in the top-left corner are used to 
resize or minimise the window.
 Navigate to a Previous Page  
  Click the left hand arrow.  To 
continue stepping backwards, repeat 
step one as many times  
as necessary.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
21
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

View Options
This section is mostly about becoming familiar with the 
layout and visual aspects of a window.
 Change the Way Items are Arranged     Not only can you 
change the way the items are visually displayed, but you can also 
change the way they are arranged within the file and folder view 
area. Let’s have a look at the options:
 Name     Alphabetical. Displays numbers first, then A-Z.
 Kind      This groups each type of item together; documents, 
folders, spreadsheets, images, and so forth.
 Application     Groups together items according to the 
application in which they were created or are opened.
 Date Last Opened     Selecting this option groups items 
according to the last time and date on which they were opened.
 Date Added     This will display the items in order of when they 
were added to the system.
 Date Modified     This option displays the items in order of when 
they were last modified or edited in some way.
 Date Created     This option groups and displays the items 
according to when the individual documents were created.
 Label     Selecting this will group your items by label. If no label is 
found, then they will be grouped as ‘No Label’.
 None     If you have no preference for how items are arranged then 
you can choose this option.
 View Window Contents as Icons     To display your files and 
folders as a collection of icons, first open a Finder window then click 
the first button on the toolbar, showing a group of four squares.
 View Window Contents as Lists     With an open Finder 
window, click the second button on the toolbar to use a simple but 
effective list display.
 View Window Contents as Columns     Click the third button 
on the toolbar to view your files as a series of columns. It’s great for 
quick navigation and easy visual identification using a handy image 
preview column.
  View Window Contents as Cover Flow     The fourth and 
last view option is Cover Flow. This is a visually impressive viewing 
mode that lets you scroll through thumbnails of the files in that 
directory, especially when used with a Magic Trackpad.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
22
Getting Started with Your MacBook

File Sharing Using  the Finder
   1       Open a Finder Window and 
navigate to the  file you wish to share. 
Once  you have selected it, click on the 
Share icon at the top of  this window. 
   2       By clicking on this icon you will 
bring up a drop-down menu. From here 
you will be able to select the method of 
file sharing, which will open the 
appropriate program to do so. 
Perform Tasks Within the Finder
   1       Click on the cog-shaped icon for a drop-down menu. Here you 
can do a range of operations, from opening a file in a specific 
application to checking the file size via the Get Info option.
   2       You can also clean up the entire Finder Window, automatically 
tidying up and or reorganising the order of the files according to 
various criteria such as their name (alphabetical), date, size and more.
You can quickly and easily share 
files using the Finder. Share them 
with Mail, Notes, Messages, 
AirDrop, the Photos app, social 
media accounts and more.
Using the MacBook’s Finder
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
23
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Finder’s Key Features 
The Finder has come on in leaps and bounds since the early days of the Mac operating system. The latest 
version, as found in macOS Sierra, is now more versatile than ever before, with new ways of displaying 
your files and folders to make them easier to sort and locate. Here’s a guide to its key features.
Full-Screen Mode
The Mac’s Enlarge button takes you to a true full-screen 
view of the window you’re currently using. 
   1       You can view a Finder window, and indeed, an application 
window, in full-screen mode. Click on the green Enlarge button in 
the upper left corner of the window and it will expand to fill the 
entire screen. Alternatively, use the View pull-down menu or press 
CTRL-CMD-F.
   2       In full-screen mode, the menus usually found at the top of the 
Mac desktop are still there, but they’re hidden away until you need 
them. To see them, move the mouse cursor to the top of the screen 
and the menu bar slides into view. You can then use it as normal.
   3       To exit from full-screen mode back to the usual window view, 
bring up the Menu bar and then simply click on the green button 
again. The window shrinks to its previous size and no longer takes up 
the entire desktop. 
   4       You can also take a window out of full screen mode using 
the View pull-down menu at the top of the screen or by pressing 
CTRL-CMD-F. You can still close a full-screen window with the red 
button in the top left, though you can’t minimise it with the 
yellow one.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
24
Getting Started with Your MacBook

   1       Click on iCloud Drive in the Finder window’s sidebar. You see 
the iCloud Drive folder is organised according to apps. You can create 
your own folders here too.
   1       When you’re using the Finder’s Icon View, you can replace the 
white background with a black one or even a picture. To begin, with 
the Finder window in question open, select Show View Options from 
the View menu or press CMD-J.
   2       Files and folders found here are synced using iCloud Drive, so 
they’re available online at www.icloud.com and also on other 
devices linked to the same iCloud account.
   2       The window’s Info window opens. Towards the bottom, you 
can see options listed under the header ‘Background’. Select ‘Color’ 
and click on the white square. You can now use the various options to 
change the background colour.
   3       Here we’ve opened the Pages iOS app on an iPad. As you can 
see, the documents in the Mac’s Pages iCloud Drive folder are also 
available to open and edit here.
   3       Select ‘Picture’ and then drag an image into the box to the 
right of the background options to get a pictorial background. 
Alternatively, click on the box and then navigate to the picture you 
want to use through the Finder.
Changing the Finder Window’s Background
Accessing the iCloud Drive 
When using the Finder Window’s Icon View, you don’t 
have to set them on a white background.
iCloud Drive can store and share files across Mac or iOS 
devices logged into the same iCloud account.
Finder’s Key Features
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
25
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Using Spotlight Search
Spotlight used to be hidden away in the top corner of 
the screen, but now it’s front and centre.
Using Spotlight’s New Features
   1       To start using Spotlight, simply press CMD and the space bar at 
the same time, and the new larger Spotlight Search window will 
appear in the middle of the screen.
   3       Spotlight can do instant unit conversions for you. Just type in 
the number and a type of unit, such as kilograms, and Spotlight 
instantly converts into other commonly-used units.
   4        Similarly with distances and lengths, Spotlight will instantly 
convert any measurement unit into more commonly-used units, 
such as light-years into parsecs, kilometres and miles.
   2       Start typing your search query into Spotlight, and immediately 
answers will start to appear, with suggestions based on the contents 
of your computer as well as other sources. This may mean that you 
only have to type a few letters of your search term, although usually 
you’ll have to type the whole thing to get the answer you need.
Spotlight Search is Apple’s unique and ultra-powerful search system that can find almost anything on your 
MacBook. It’s had a major update and a whole bunch of great new features, making it even more powerful 
and integrating it even more into the apps that you use every day. Here’s how to get the most from it.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
26
Getting Started with Your MacBook

   5       Spotlight can also do some currency conversions. Type in a 
number and a currency unit, such as dollars or pounds, and 
Spotlight will give you the value in several other currencies at the 
current exchange rate. 
   9       Spotlight is also closely integrated into the core macOS apps, 
such as iPhoto. Start typing in your search term, such as the title of a 
particular picture, and Spotlight will quickly locate it and take you 
straight to it.
   6       For more conventional searches, Spotlight will pull its 
information from a wide range of sources, primarily Wikipedia and 
documents that it finds on the hard drive of your computer. Search 
results are listed by category down the left side of the search 
window, with the top result displayed on the left in more detail.
   7       If you’re looking for local businesses or sites of interest, simply 
type the name into Spotlight and you’ll quickly find what you’re 
looking for, complete with a link to the Maps app and the option of 
travel directions from your current location.
   8       It’s also possible to find people with Spotlight. If you start 
typing in the name of someone you know, Spotlight will quickly find 
that person in your Contacts list, and display their contact details in 
the results window. Also listed will be things like chat threads, 
Facebook comments and emails from or mentioning that person.
  10      Spotlight can also help you to find music, by searching 
through your iTunes collection to find albums, tracks and artists. 
Type in a band name, a track name or even the name of a band 
member, and Spotlight can find it.
Using Spotlight Search
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
27
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Use the Dock
 Move an Application     To move an item to a new location 
in the Dock, click and drag to the required position. As you move 
the item the adjacent applications will move aside to indicate the 
final position.
 Open an Application     To open an application that’s in your 
Dock, simply drag the mouse pointer onto the Dock and click on its 
icon. The icon bounces as the application opens.
The Dock is a great way of gaining quick and easy access to all of your most used applications, 
documents and folders. It is completely customisable, so over time, you can adapt it to best fit your 
needs. You can keep it on the screen at all times or have it hidden until you need it too. 
Accessing Your Applications from the Dock
Applications can be added, moved, or deleted so you can 
configure the Dock exactly how you want it.
 Add an Application     To add an application to the Dock, first 
click the spaceship icon at the left-hand side of the Dock to bring up 
the Launchpad window, then click and drag the item you want onto 
the Dock. 
 Remove an Application      To remove an application from the 
Dock, simply click and drag the item onto the desktop.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
28
Getting Started with Your MacBook

 Adding and Removing Stacks      You can add, remove and 
move folders in your Dock, in the same way you do with apps. These 
sit to the right of the Dock’s divider, and are called Stacks. 
 Accessing Stacks       To access the files and folders within a Stack, 
click on it to display the contents. Clicking on a document or image 
opens it with an appropriate application, and clicking on a folder 
opens it in Finder.
   1        You can delete a file, folder or app by dragging it into Trash on 
the right-hand side of the Dock. Alternatively, right-click or Ctrl-click 
on it, and select Move to Trash from the contextual menu that 
appears.
   2        To retrieve a file from Trash, click on the Trash icon in the Dock 
to open it in Finder, then drag the file out of the Trash window. To 
empty Trash, right-click on it and choose ‘Empty Trash’, or in the Trash 
window, click on the Empty button (top right). 
 Viewing Options      Right-click or CMD-click on a Stack and a 
pop-up menu gives a range of options. You can opt to show your files 
as a Stack; that is a pile of files, or as a folder. You can also choose how 
the files are displayed when you click on the Stack.
The Trash 
The Trash icon is located at the far right of the Dock and 
works just like a real rubbish bin. Here’s how to use it.
  You can customise your Dock by opening System 
Preferences from the Apple menu, and selecting Dock. From 
here, you can place the Dock on the right, left or bottom of the 
screen, opt to show and hide it, change its size and 
magnification and more. 
Customising the Dock
How to Use the Dock
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
29
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

The Finder’s Tabs & Tags
Finder has some great tricks that make using your MacBook a little easier. For example, with Finder tags, you 
can open more than one Finder page in a single window, saving on valuable desktop space. Tags, on the 
other hand, lets you group files and folders by ‘tagging’ them with a colour, or maybe more than one.
Using Finder Tabs Explained
   1        Open a new Finder window. On the left sidebar are quick 
links to your files and file storage locations. To open a new tab in the 
Finder window, click on any folder in the left sidebar, or from any 
location on your Mac, whilst holding CMD on the keyboard. A new 
tab opens.
   2       To switch between finder tabs, just click on them. To close a 
tab, run the cursor over the tab and click on the ‘X’ that appears. To 
copy a file between Finder tabs, drag it onto the tab you wish to move 
it to, then when the view switches to that tab’s contents, drop it in.
   1       Open a new Finder window and select the file you want to 
colour code by clicking it once to highlight it. With the file selected, 
click on the Tag icon in the middle of the Finder window to open a 
drop-down menu with a selection of colours you can use.
   2       Tap the colour you wish to use and hit Return. An icon appears 
beside your chosen file. To view the files you have added to your 
selection of colour coding, click on the colour you chose from the 
Tags menu on the left sidebar of the Finder Window. 
By making the most of the Finder tabs, you can put 
everything you need at your fingertips.
Colour Coding Files Using Tags
With Finder Tags, you can group files by using colour 
coding options to organise your data.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
30
Getting Started with Your MacBook

Going Online with 
Your Mac Notebook
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
31
www.bdmpublications.com 
32	
Going onto the Internet with Your MacBook
34	
Using the Safari App
42	
Setting Up Email on Your MacBook
44	
Using the Mail App
48	
Getting the Most From Messages
50	
Using the FaceTime App
52	
How to Use Apple’s iCloud Services
58	
Upgrading iCloud Drive
59	
iCloud Desktop Documents & Folders
60	
Your MacBook’s iCloud Keychain
These days everyone’s on the Internet and 
there’s no better way to go online than with your 
MacBook. It’s great for surfing the web, sending 
and receiving email, syncing data with your other 
Apple devices and even making video telephone 
calls. In this section, we show you how to connect 
your MacBook to the Internet using Wi-Fi or a 
cabled connection, how to use the MacBook’s key 
Internet apps like the Safari web browser and Mail 
email client, all the inner workings of Apple’s iCloud 
service and how to make FaceTime video calls on 
your notebook.
www.ebook3000.com

Taking your MacBook online opens up a whole new world. You have two options to get online: using a cable 
connection or via Wi-Fi. The former simply requires you to connect a suitable cable from your router to your 
Mac (an adapter might be needed) but the latter is a little more complex. Here’s how to do it. 
Going onto the Internet 
with Your MacBook
Getting Connected via Wi-Fi 
   1       Make sure your Mac is within range of your wireless router. 
Click on the Wi-Fi icon in the menu bar as shown, and look at the list 
of available Wi-Fi networks. If Wi-Fi is currently turned off, switch it 
on using this same icon.
   2       Find the name of your own Wi-Fi network. If you don’t know 
it, check your router’s instruction manual, or maybe look for a 
sticker on the router itself. Choose that network, and if prompted, 
enter the password. This too should be in the router manual or on 
the router.
   3       Make sure Remember this Network is checked, so you don’t 
have to enter your Wi-Fi password every time you want to go on the 
Internet. Your Mac logs on to the network, and the Wi-Fi icon shows 
it’s made a connection. If the icon is only partly darkened, your 
signal strength isn’t very good; you might wish to move your Mac 
nearer the router.
This short guide will teach you how to connect your Mac to 
the Internet using a new Wi-Fi connection.
  Using Public Wi-Fi     Some high street locations such as 
bars and restaurants offer free Wi-Fi to their customers. There 
are many different ways you can access public Wi-Fi. Some 
locations may have an unsecured connection, some require 
you to ask for their Wi-Fi password, and for others you have to 
register via their pop-up website; just open Safari while in such 
a Wi-Fi zone and then follow the on-screen instructions.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
32
Going Online with Your Mac Notebook

   5       If only one IP address is provided, you must have a router 
capable of sharing the connection, also known as “Network address 
translation” (NAT) or “IP masquerading.” For setup information, check 
the documentation provided with your router or ask the person who 
set up your network. 
   3       If Network Diagnostics can’t resolve the problem, there may be 
an issue elsewhere: either with the ISP you are trying to connect to; 
with an external device you are using to connect to your ISP, or with 
the server you are trying to access.
   6       You can use an AirPort base station to share one IP address 
among multiple computers. If you cannot resolve the issue using 
these steps, it’s time to put in a call to your ISP or network 
administrator and have their technical support team talk you through 
their solutions. 
   4       If you have two or more computers sharing your Internet 
connection via a wireless router, be sure that your wireless network is 
set up properly. You need to know if your ISP provides only one IP 
address or if it provides multiple IP addresses, one for each computer.
   1       Open System Preferences. You can find it under the Apple 
menu in the top bar, as shown here.
   2        Click Network. Click the Assist Me button to open Network Set 
Up Assistant. Select Diagnostics to open the Network Diagnostics 
options screen.
Troubleshoot Your Internet Connection
Having trouble getting online? Network Set Up Assistant 
is here to help you. Here’s how it’s used.
Going onto the Internet with Your MacBook
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
33
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Using the Safari App
The last two releases of the Mac’s OS added many improvements to your Safari web browser, including a 
new simpler toolbar and controls. Safari is your gateway to the Internet, so it’s important that you 
familiarise yourself with its interface before you begin your online adventure.
 1. Navigation Controls     These two arrow control buttons 
enable you to move back and forth between current and 
previously viewed web pages.
 2. Toolbar Buttons     These buttons give you access to 
various Safari features. You can add or remove buttons by 
right-clicking or CTRL-clicking on the toolbar and selecting 
Customize Toolbar. See the section on Customising the Sierra 
Finder for more information.
 3. URL Bar     Enter the website address of your choice or a 
search term that you wish to look up into this bar, then tap the 
Return key.
 4. Reload Page     Sometimes, if a web page fails to load 
properly, you can fix the problem by clicking on this button and 
reloading the page.
5. Share Button     Click on this button to see your options for 
sharing the page you’re viewing using email or social media 
networks, including adding the page to your reading list.
6. Show Open Pages     Click on this button to view all web 
pages you currently have open in the Safari browser, on both 
your Mac and other devices signed into your iCloud.
7. Safari Tabs     When you’re browsing the Internet and you 
want to have several pages open at once, you can view each of 
them in their own separate tabs.
8. Add a New Tab     Clicking this button will open a new 
blank tab, which is then accessible by clicking on the tab and 
entering a search parameter or a URL web address in the URL bar.
 9. Sidebar     This optional display area is opened and closed 
by clicking on the sidebar button in the toolbar, next to the 
Navigation Controls. It’s updated in real time.
 10. Bookmarks     Click on this button in the sidebar to see 
your bookmarks list, with your favourite web pages and sites, 
which can be visited by clicking the link. 
 11. Reading List      From here you can view all the pages 
you have added while browsing, using the Add to the Reading 
List button. 
2
1
13
9
10
11
12
7
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
34
Going Online with Your Mac Notebook

Using the Safari App
 12. Shared Links     This list is a collection of links that have 
been uploaded by Twitter users that you are following. Simply 
tap the link to then open it in the  
main window.
 13. Edit Bookmarks     Previous versions of Safari had an 
Edit button here. This has now been removed but you can still 
go to the Bookmarks menu and select Edit Bookmarks.
 14. Main Window     This is where the web page you’re 
viewing is displayed. You can scroll up and down by using the 
scroll function on your mouse.
15. Links     Click on a web link to be taken to another page. 
Web links can be text, which is usually underlined, or a picture as 
seen here. When you’ve moved to a new page, you can return 
using the back button (see ‘1’).
3
4
5
6
8
14
15
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
35
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Set New Home Page
Display Status Bar
   1       Open a new Safari window and navigate to the web page 
that you want Safari to load each time it starts. Click the Safari menu, 
then select Preferences to display Safari’s preferences dialog box.
A new Safari window or tab opens on your home page. 
You can change this if you wish. Here’s how to do it.
The status bar lets you see where a text or image link is 
going before you click. Here’s how to show and hide it.
   2       You should now see a grey strip along the lower part of the 
window. If you hover the mouse over a link, the status bar tells you 
exactly where the link is headed.
   2       Ensure the General tab is selected and press the Set to 
Current Page button. A small window may pop up requiring 
confirmation; press Change Homepage to continue. The required 
page address now appears in the text box above, and from now on 
Safari opens the new page every time it’s started.
   1       Ensure a Safari window is open and active (that is, the 
window controls in the upper-left are not coloured grey). Click the 
View menu and select Show Status Bar.
Using Links 
You navigate the worldwide web in Safari by using hyperlinks or simply ‘links’. Clicking on one takes you from the 
current page to the page that’s identified by the link. This is how to use hyperlinks to find the web page you need.
   1      A link in Safari can be 
a piece of underlined text, a 
picture or a button, or simply 
an area of the screen. Drag your 
mouse pointer across Safari. 
When it’s over a link, it will turn 
into a hand. Click there to open 
the new page in your browser. 
   2      If you don’t want to navigate 
away from the page that you’re 
currently on, right-click or Ctrl-click 
on the link and from the pop-up 
menu, choose Open in New Tab 
or Open in New Window. This 
way you can look at the new page 
without closing the old one. 
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
36
Going Online with Your Mac Notebook

Using the Safari App
Display Tab Bar
   1       Like the Status bar, the Tab bar can be toggled on and off 
from the standard menus. First of all, open a Safari window and 
ensure it’s active.
   2       Click the View menu in the menu bar at the top of the 
screen, and select Show Tab Bar. Alternatively, press CMD-Shift-T.
   3       Your current page should now have a tab marker just below 
the bookmarks bar. To add a new tab, click the ‘+’ sign at the right of 
the Tab bar.
Add Tools to the Toolbar
There are a variety of alternative tools that can 
be added to the toolbar. 
   1      Open Safari. Right-click or CMD-click on the toolbar 
and select Customize Toolbar. Alternatively, click the View 
menu and select the option from there. A dialog window 
slides down showing a selection of available tools, and an 
option to set it back to its defaults if need be.
   2      Let’s add a home page button to the toolbar as an 
example. First click on the Home tool, then while holding 
the mouse button down, drag the icon to the required 
position on the toolbar. The other tools shift around to make 
room. When you’re happy, release the mouse button.
   3       Repeat this with as many tools as you need. When 
you’re finished, click Done. To remove a tool from the 
toolbar, hold the CMD key and drag it off; it disappears in a 
puff of smoke.
If you prefer to use tabbed browsing, you can set the Tab 
bar to be visible all the time. Here’s how it’s done.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
37
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

   1       Click on the URL field at the top of the browser to access a 
window showing a grid view of website thumbnails you’ve marked 
as favourites, and also those you’ve visited most recently. Click on 
any of the thumbnails to go straight to that site.
   1       For the sites you visit often, there’s a new way to make them 
easy to access. With multiple tabs open and the site in question 
open, click on its tab and from the pop-up menu, select Pin Tab.
   2       To add a site to your Top Sites, click on the URL field at the 
top of the browser to open the Top Sites window. You can now drag 
the URL from the URL field into this window, placing it wherever you 
like. It’s then available whenever you open the Top Sites window.
   2       The site gets a small tab in the left-hand side of the tabs bar. 
This is always in place, ready for you to click on it and open the site. 
You can pin multiple sites in this way, as we’ve done here. 
   3       To remove a site from Top Sites, open the Top Sites window, 
and drag the site you want to remove off the window. It disappears 
in a puff of smoke. You can also drag the site icons around within 
the window to rearrange their order.
   3       To remove a site’s pinned tab, right-click or Ctrl-click on it, 
and from the pop-up menu, select Unpin Tab; it then becomes a 
regular tab. You can reorder the pinned tabs by dragging them 
within the tabs bar. 
Safari’s Top Sites
Pinned Sites 
Top Sites gives you a window full of useful shortcuts to 
your most frequently visited sites.
Safari now has a new trick up its sleeve. Let’s take a look 
at how to pin sites to the Tab bar.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
38
Going Online with Your Mac Notebook

   1       Open Safari and browse to a web page as normal. If you 
want to save the page and read it later, click on the Share button in 
the right side of the toolbar and select Add to Reading List from 
the menu options.
   3       To revisit any of the pages in your list, click on the list entry 
to go straight to it. If you’ve saved a lot of pages, you can search 
your reading list by typing in the search bar at the top of the list, 
and view any unread links by clicking on the Unread button.
   4       To remove a site from your reading list, right-click or 
CTRL-click on the site you want to delete and from the contextual 
menu that appears, select Remove Item.
   2       To view your Reading List, open the sidebar and click on 
the middle button, with the symbol of a pair of spectacles. You 
will see the title, a thumbnail and a brief summary of the page 
that you saved. 
If you don’t have the time to read something now, save it 
for later using the Reading List.
The Safari Reading List 
The Tabs Audio Indicator
If a website plays uninvited audio, it is really 
annoying but with Safari, help is at hand. 
   1      It is annoying if your browser suddenly plays audio 
when you’ve lots of tabs open. In Safari you can tell which one 
is making the sound. Just look for the tab with the speaker 
icon shown on its right.
   2      You can mute this sound by simply clicking on the 
speaker icon. If more than one tab is producing audio, 
right-click on it for more options. You can see which tabs 
are making a sound, mute that particular tab or mute all 
the others.
Using the Safari App
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
39
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

   1       You can add a bookmark for a site by clicking on the Sharing 
icon and selecting Add Bookmark, as shown. You can also use the 
Add Bookmark option from the Bookmarks pull-down menu, or 
press CMD-D. 
   2       You can access your bookmarks by using the Bookmarks 
pull-down menu. Click on one of the listed sites to open it in the 
current window. Bookmarks can be arranged into folders, grouping 
similar sites. 
   3       Click on Bookmarks and select Edit Bookmarks. From here, 
you can edit the names of  bookmarks by right-clicking, arrange 
them into folders (see the New Folder button) and delete them by 
dragging into Trash.
Using Bookmarks 
If you find a site you like and would like to keep coming 
back to it, you can add a Safari bookmark. 
 Show All Tabs     The Show All Tabs view, available via the View 
menu, lets you view thumbnails of all the tabs you currently have 
open, and lets you add new tabs by clicking on the large + symbol. 
You can also view stacks of tabs created by opening new tabs from 
a single site, which is a great way to organise your browsing if you’re 
looking through multiple pages from the same site.
 Privacy Mode     Another useful feature is Privacy Mode, which 
lets you browse the Internet without adding tracking cookies that 
could compromise your privacy, and means that pages viewed in 
this mode won’t show up in your browser history. There are many 
reasons why you might want to use this mode, such as planning a 
surprise anniversary dinner, keeping business secrets safe or simply 
keeping prying eyes from knowing your business. You can activate 
Privacy Mode by selecting New Private Window in the File menu.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
40
Going Online with Your Mac Notebook

 Import Bookmarks     If you want to import bookmarks from 
another browser, first open your second browser and find out how 
to export them. It’s different for every browser. Then, in Safari, 
under the File menu choose Import Bookmarks and navigate to the 
exported file. You can also export your Safari bookmarks for use in 
other browsers from the File menu.
   1       In the History menu, the bottom option clears your 
browsing history (that is, what sites you’ve visited) and website 
data. Hold Alt while you select it, and it deletes your browsing 
history, but keeps the website data.
   2       If you want to clear your history more selectively, in the 
Safari menu select Clear History. A window appears. Using the 
pull-down you can clear the last hour’s browsing, all history from 
today, from today and yesterday or everything.
Clear Your Browsing History 
If you don’t want others to see what sites you’ve visited, you 
need to clear your history. Here’s how to wipe the slate.
 Integrated Spotlight Search     Spotlight search is a closely 
integrated feature of macOS, so it comes as no surprise to find this 
powerful tool embedded into Safari too. From the search bar you 
can find links to web pages, bookmarks, browsing history and 
documents on your hard drive, simply by typing a search term.
 Change Your Search Engine     If you want to change the 
search engine that Safari uses by default, from the Safari menu, 
select Preferences. Click on the Search tab, and from the pull-down 
select the search engine you want to use.
 Safari Extensions     You can add extensions to Safari to 
expand its functionality. Open Safari’s Preferences window (Safari > 
Preferences), and select Extensions. Click on the Get Extensions 
button to access a web page from where they can be installed.
Using the Safari App
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
41
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Setting Up Email on 
Your MacBook
If you signed in with your Apple ID when you set up your MacBook, your iCloud email account is probably already set 
up and running but if it isn’t, or you simply want to add another iCloud account, follow these instructions.
  1       When you first set up your iCloud account, you’re given 
access and storage for your own iCloud-based email client. You can 
use this client on all your macOS and iOS devices, and share email 
between them.
   2       Open the Mail application from the Dock, and then under 
the Mail drop-down list click on the Add Account... link. From this 
pop-up menu select the iCloud link and then click on the 
Continue button.  
   3       Now enter your Apple ID. These are the details you used 
when you initially set up your Mac, and when you have confirmed 
your details you can then click on the Sign In button.  
   4       On the next screen, click on Add Account and your iCloud 
account is added to the Mail app, for you to use as your sole email 
account or alongside others.
Setting Up Your iCloud Email 
For many people, the ability to send and receive emails is their primary reason for having a computer 
and an Internet connection. Here we take a look at what email is, how you can get yourself an email 
address and how you can use your email accounts with Apple’s email client, the Mail app.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
42
Going Online with Your Mac Notebook

   2       macOS Sierra includes a sophisticated email program 
called, simply, Mail. You’ll find it on the Dock; the icon looks like a 
postage stamp.
   1       Before you start you need to have set up an email account 
with your Internet service provider, or one of the free web-based 
email services such as Gmail or Hotmail. Once you’ve done this, you 
should have the information you need to configure your Mac to 
access your email. You’ll need your email address, your password to 
access your email account, and POP or IMAP (incoming) and SMTP 
(outgoing) server addresses. You should be able to get all of these 
from your email service provider.
   3       When you first open Mail you’re prompted to set up your 
first email account. If you’ve previously used Mail or set up another 
account, you can add further new accounts by going to the File 
menu and selecting Add Account.
   4       You’re now asked to enter your full name (this appears in 
your own, and other people’s, contact lists), your email address and 
your password (both supplied by your email service provider). Make 
sure you type them in correctly. Click Continue when you’re done.
   5       Next you’re asked for the incoming mail server address. Most 
domestic email services are POP, and you should have been given a 
POP address when you signed up for your account (if you’re using 
IMAP or Microsoft Exchange you should talk to your network 
administrator). Type it in the box marked Incoming Mail Server. You 
can add a description if you want. When you’ve got it all correct, 
click on Continue.
   6       Finally, you’re asked for the SMTP or outgoing mail server 
address. Type it where it says Outgoing Mail Server. Check the box 
marked Use Only This Server, and if your email service requires it, 
also check the Use Authentication box, and type in your username 
and password again. Once you’re done, click Continue.
Setting up an email account on a MacBook is quite easy 
but how you do it depends on the account you use. 
Setting Up Email
Setting Up Email on Your MacBook
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
43
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Using the Mail App
Millions of people use email every day for their personal and business correspondence, because it is quick, 
easy and convenient. Sierra has a great bundled email application, so sending and receiving emails is as 
easy as typing a message and clicking a button. Here’s how to get the most from the Mail app.
   3       You can send an email without a subject, but if you do that 
the recipient won’t know what the email is about and may ignore or 
delete it. It is always a good idea to put something in the subject 
line, even if it’s just ‘Hello!’ Type the body of your message in the 
large space below. An email can be as long as you like, and you can 
use different fonts, colours and sizes if you really feel the need, but a 
plain text format is easier to read on mobile devices.
   4       Once you’ve finished typing your letter, click the Send 
button in the top-left corner of the email panel to send it on its way. 
Email is usually sent very quickly, and your addressee should receive 
it within a couple of minutes.
   2       To send someone an email, you need to know their email 
address. Type the email address into the box marked To:. If you want 
to send a copy of the email to anyone else, you can add their email 
address in the Cc: box. You can add multiple email addresses in 
either box, separated by commas, if you need to send the same 
message to a lot of people.
   1       To send a new email, simply click on the button in the upper 
left corner of the screen, with a picture  on it that looks like a pen 
writing on paper.
Sending a New Email
This is how to open a new, blank email, write a message 
and send it to a given email address.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
44
Going Online with Your Mac Notebook

Using the Mail App
   1       Once you’ve set up your email account, you can send 
and receive email. As soon as you launch Mail, it connects to 
your email service and collect any email that is waiting for 
you. These messages are shown as a list in your Inbox. Click 
on one and it’s displayed on the right.
   2       While Mail is running, it periodically checks the server 
for new messages. You can also prompt Mail to look at the 
server immediately by clicking the button in the top-left of 
the screen that looks like an envelope.
When you get an email, you can open and read it 
with the Mail app. This is how you do so.
Adding Attachments
Almost any type of file can be attached and 
sent over the Internet along with your email.
   1       To add an attachment to an email, first start an email (or 
reply to one you have received), and then click on the button 
bearing the picture of a paperclip, at the top right-ish of the email 
panel. This will open a Finder window, allowing you to navigate 
to the file or files that you want to send. Select the ones you want, 
then click Choose File to attach them to your email.
   2       In Mail, pictures that you’ve included as attachments are 
shown in the body of the email for more convenient viewing. 
This means you can turn your email into a mini-illustrated article 
if you want.
 Replying to and Forwarding Email     If someone you 
know sends you an email, you’ll probably want to reply to them. 
Simply click on the email so you are viewing the text of it, then at 
the top of the screen you’ll find a row of three buttons. The leftmost 
one has a single left-pointing arrow on it. This is the Reply button. 
If you click on this you’ll see a window pop up that looks a lot like 
the window for a new email, but it will have the responder’s email 
address already in the To: box.
Next to the Reply button is a similar button with two left 
arrows on it. This is the Reply All button; use this with extreme 
care. If you have been sent an email that has also been sent to a 
number of other recipients, hitting Reply All will send your reply 
to everyone who received the original mail. Obviously if your 
reply was meant to be private this is a very bad idea, and has got 
many people into trouble.
The rightmost button of these three is the Forward button, which 
is used to send an email you’ve received to another recipient. 
Forwarding emails is another thing that requires care; make sure 
that you don’t accidentally send private information to someone 
who was not meant to receive it.
Receiving Email
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
45
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Markup
   1       To begin using Markup, start writing a new email as normal, 
then open the photo browser by clicking on the button in the upper 
right corner.
   3       Click on the attached image, and then click on the small 
arrow you’ll see in the upper right corner to bring up the 
drop-down menu. Select Markup.
   4       You can now use the interface that appears to add text, 
drawings or a range of shapes and symbols directly onto the photo, 
right there in the email environment. When you’re finished, click 
the Done button, and either mark up more pictures or send your 
email as normal.
   2       Drag the image you want to attach from the photo browser 
to the body of the email. You’ll see a ghosted out version of the 
image appear below any text you’ve entered.
Markup lets you add notes to pictures attached to email, 
and draw directly onto the image before sending it.
 Show Only Unread Messages      If you’ve got a lot of 
unread messages scattered throughout your inbox, you can 
hide emails you’ve already read by clicking this icon. Now 
only unread messages are shown. Click it again to show all 
your emails once more. It’s great for finding emails that you 
received a while ago but haven’t seen yet.
 Flagging an Email      To mark an email with a flag, 
highlighting it for later reference, click on the Flag pull-down 
and choose a colour. You can add more than one flag to a 
single email. Choose Clear Flag to remove flags you’ve 
already added. The ‘Flagged’ option in the side bar shows 
emails you’ve marked with a flag.haven’t seen yet.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
46
Going Online with Your Mac Notebook

Mail Drop
   1       To use Mail Drop, start writing an email in the usual way. 
If you need to add a very large file as an attachment, such as an 
uncompressed high-resolution photo, drag it into the body of 
the message.
   2       If the attachment is too large for a regular email, it’s stored 
on Apple’s server and offered as a download instead. If the 
recipient is using Mail, it appears like this; there’s a download link 
for the large file.
   3       The download link is good for a month from the date it was 
sent. You can use Mail Drop even if the person you’re sending it to 
uses a different email client or even a PC. The person here used 
Thunderbird on Windows.
Improved Search
   1       Type your search term into the search field in the top-right of 
the Mail window. As you type, options are offered. These include 
people, email subjects, attachments and more.
   2       If you recognise the email you’re looking for from that list, 
click on it to go straight to it. Alternatively, choose an option and 
look through the search results to find it.
   3       You can adjust your search by clicking the first word in the 
field and choosing a new option, as shown here, or even adding a 
second search term for more advanced searches.
If you need to send large attachments via email, the Mail 
Drop feature is very useful. It’s really easy to use too.
Searching in Mail is now even more powerful than before. 
It’s now even easier to find the precise email you want.
Using the Mail App
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
47
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Getting the Most 		 	
From Messages 
When you load up Messages for the first time you’ll need 
to sign in with your Apple ID. This is how.
Setting Up Messages
   1       Open Messages and select Preferences from the Messages 
menu in the top bar. Alternatively, press CMD-Comma on your 
keyboard. Either way, the Preferences window appears.
   3       Click on the General button to select the text size and other 
settings you’d like to use for Messages. The options are 
self-explanatory, so you can customise the app to suit your needs 
and wishes.
   4       If you want to send Messages directly from the Notifications 
panel, open System Preferences and select Extensions. Select Today 
in the left-hand column, and make sure Social is checked. Now, when 
you open your Notifications panel, you can post to LinkedIn, Twitter, 
Facebook and Messages, as shown here.
   2       Click the Accounts button and ensure that the email address 
associated with your Apple ID is enabled. If it isn’t, click the Plus icon 
at the foot of the left-hand column and set it up.
Messages makes it easy to communicate with other Mac and iOS users (iPod touch, iPad mini, iPhone 
or iPad) as well as share files and participate in group chats and all for free and all from your MacBook. 
Keeping in touch means learning how to use the Messages app in macOS, so let’s take a look.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
48
Going Online with Your Mac Notebook

   3       To add pictures, videos and other files, drag and drop 
them into the main conversation window. You can switch 
between conversations by clicking on the recipient’s name in 
the left-hand panel.
   4       You can initiate a group chat by adding more than one name 
to the To field in a new message. Name a group chat by clicking on 
the Details link in the top right and adding a title. From here, you can 
also silence the chat by checking Do Not Disturb or leave it using the 
Leave This Conversation link.
   2       Type your message into the text field at the bottom of the 
main window. If you click on the smiling face on the right-hand side 
of the text field, you can add an emoticon to your message. Messages 
to other iOS users are shown in blue. If you’re messaging someone 
who doesn’t use an Apple device, your messages are shown in green.
Once you’ve entered your Apple ID and signed into 
Messages, you’re ready to start chatting.
Start a Conversation
   1       To start a new message click on the pencil and paper icon at 
the top of the left-hand panel. Type the email address, phone 
number, or name (if they’re in your Contacts) of the person you want 
to message in the To field.
   2       When you’re sent a URL, it’s automatically turned into a 
rich link. Instead of a URL, you see the website’s title and a picture. 
This is only true if the URL is sent on its own, though. A URL within 
a text message is still received as a hyperlink, as you can see here.
The Messages app got a minor revamp with the 
introduction of macOS Sierra. Let’s take a look.
New for Sierra
   1       Send an emoticon on its own and it will be three times the 
size it was previously. Human emoticons offer skin tones and if 
you click and hold a message, you can reply with an instant heart, 
thumb-up and more.
Getting the Most From Messages 
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
49
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Using the FaceTime App
With FaceTime, you can video chat between devices, including iPhones, iPads and of course your 
MacBook. With the FaceTime camera you can use your MacBook as a video phone to chat face-to-face 
with anyone, wherever they are, as long as you both have an Apple device with an Internet connection.
Notebook Macs and the iMac have built-in front-facing 
FaceTime cameras mounted just above the screen, as you can 
see on the MacBook Air shown here. It’s perfect for video 
chatting. Using FaceTime and your Mac’s built-in camera for 
video chat is, as always, very easy. All you need is your Mac, an 
active Wi-Fi connection, an email address and your Apple ID. 
Of course you also need the FaceTime app, but that’s 
pre-installed on your new Mac, and should already be on your 
Dock. It’s the green square icon with a movie camera on it, 
badged with a telephone receiver on a white circle. Click on 
this icon to open the FaceTime application.
Using the FaceTime Camera
   1       Click on the FaceTime app to launch the program. It should 
start straight away, and you’ll see your own face on the screen, as 
well as a panel inviting you to log in with your Apple ID. Type in your 
Apple ID password and click OK.
   2       Next you’ll need to type in your email address. This is the 
address that people can use through the FaceTime app to contact 
you. There will be a brief pause while FaceTime verifies your email 
address. You only have to do this the first time you use the app, then 
you’re ready to go.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
50
Going Online with Your Mac Notebook

   3       Before you make a video call, it’s a good idea to make sure 
whoever you’re calling can see you properly. Using the camera view 
shown here, make sure there are no distracting bright lights behind 
you and your face is well lit. You don’t need to light up like a movie 
studio, but turning on a desk light in a dim room could help.
   5       Accepting a call in FaceTime is simple. When you receive a call, 
the app will automatically open and you will be given four options - 
Accept, Decline, Remind me Later or Reply with Message. If you 
accept the call you will see your camera view in a small inset window. 
   4       Making a FaceTime call is simplicity itself. Just look up the 
person you want to call in your Contacts list, scroll down and you’ll 
find the FaceTime call button. If the person is using an iPhone you’ll 
have the option to call their phone number; if not the call will be via  
the Internet.
    6       While you’re in the call you can mute the microphone by 
hovering your pointer over the picture and clicking the icon that 
appears at the bottom. To end the FaceTime call simply click on the 
middle End button.
Full Screen
End
Mute
Using the FaceTime App
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
51
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Use Apple’s 
iCloud Services
Storing Your Documents in iCloud
   1       Click on your desktop to open Finder, then open iCloud 
Drive from the Go menu. You may need to log into iCloud using 
your Apple ID. You’ll see a Finder window showing the contents of 
your iCloud drive folder, with folders for some apps that store 
output in iCloud.
Storing your files in iCloud is as simple as moving them to 
a folder. They’re then synced with iCloud.
   2       To save any files into your iCloud Drive folder, simply drag 
them from your desktop and drop them in the open iCloud window. 
They are now stored remotely and accessible from any connected 
Apple device.
   3       You can organise your iCloud folder like any other folder, 
including creating new folders within it. To move files into a new 
folder in your iCloud Drive, just drag and drop them where you 
want them.
   4       To move files out of iCloud storage and back to your hard 
drive, just drag them out of the iCloud folder and onto your desktop. 
You will be asked to confirm the move.
You can keep your important files safe in remote online storage, and have them instantly accessible from 
all your Apple devices (your Mac, iPhone, iPod touch and your iPad), with Apple’s revolutionary cloud 
storage service, iCloud. The files you want to keep safe have never been safer, or more easily accessible.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
52
Going Online with Your Mac Notebook

How to Use Apple’s iCloud Services
Sync all your contacts and email inboxes with other Macs 
and iOS devices on the same iCloud account.
Back to My Mac
Mail, Calendars and Contacts in iCloud
   1       Open the Apple menu, select System Preferences, and then 
click the iCloud icon.
   1       Open up the Apple menu and select System Preferences to 
bring up the System Preferences window. Click on Internet Accounts.
   3       Click on the Details button to turn on file sharing. Go back to 
the main System Preferences window, and select Sharing. From 
here, choose the services you wish to allow to be shared over 
iCloud. Ensure Back to My Mac is also enabled on any computer you 
want to access remotely.
   3       Your mail (provided it’s configured), contacts and calendars 
will now be available for all your other Macs and any iOS devices you 
may have with iCloud enabled.
You can access your other iCloud enabled 
computers remotely, over an Internet connection.
   2       Scroll down the list of iCloud features until you get to Back 
to My Mac near the bottom. Check the box next to Back to My Mac 
to enable it.
   2       Click on the iCloud option in the left sidebar to see which 
apps will sync via your iCloud account. If any are unchecked, 
check them.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
53
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

   1       To enable iCloud Photo Library on your Mac, first of all, open 
the Photos app and in the Photos pull-down menu, select 
Preferences as shown, to get the Preferences window.
   3       You can choose between ‘Download Originals to this Mac’, 
to keep a backup copy of your library on your Mac, and ‘Optimise 
Mac Storage’ to leave it all on the cloud.
   4       Now do the same on any other Macs you have. Any 
duplicates should be resolved by iCloud as you go. Naturally, you 
only need a backup of your library on one Mac.
   6       Tap iCloud in the left column, then Photos in the right. 
Switch on iCloud Photo Library to enable syncing, and upload your 
device’s photos to iCloud.
   5       To sync your iOS device’s Photos app with your iCloud Photo 
Library, first open the Settings app from the home screen. It’s the 
one that looks like a machine cog, top-right here.
iCloud Photo Library lets you store all your photos in the 
cloud and view them on all your devices.
   2       In the Preferences window, click on iCloud, and then check 
the box labelled iCloud Photo Library. Your photos are uploaded to 
your iCloud; this may take some time.
iCloud Photo Library
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
54
Going Online with Your Mac Notebook

   7       Some things don’t sync, such as books, cards, calendars, 
slideshows and keyword shortcuts. Smart albums, keywords and 
Faces only sync on Macs, not iOS devices.
    8       All your photographs are shown as thumbnails, and you 
can select and import them at will. Here we’re importing photos 
stored on an iPad onto a Mac using Photos.
   9       You can also review your photos from any computer with a 
web browser. Just go to www.icloud.com, log into your iCloud 
account and open the Photos web application.
   1       To enable Find My Mac on your Mac, you must be signed 
into your iCloud account. Go into System Preferences, click on 
iCloud and make sure the Find My Mac checkbox is ticked.
   2       To locate a stolen Mac from an iPhone or iPad, open the Find 
My iPhone app (it also works for Macs), and click on the Mac from 
the list offered. Again, you need to be signed into iCloud.
   3       You can also find your Mac using the iCloud website’s Find 
My iPhone app. Go to www.icloud.com, sign into your account and 
open the web app, which works like its iOS counterpart.
Enabling Find My Mac on iCloud’s preferences lets you 
locate your computer if it’s ever lost or stolen.
Find My Mac
How to Use Apple’s iCloud Services
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
55
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Safari in iCloud
   1       To let iCloud share all your information from Safari across 
your devices, you need to enable Safari in iCloud preferences. To do 
this, first go to the Apple menu and select System Preferences.
   3       Find Safari in the list that appears in the main window and 
check the checkbox next to it. You can now access all your 
bookmarks and your reading list on your other Apple devices, as 
long as they’re linked to the same iCloud account and also have 
Safari ticked.
   4       If you have tabs open in Safari on another Mac or iOS device, 
you can access them from via the cloud. First open Safari as normal.
Browsing history, bookmarks and passwords can be 
synced with just a few clicks. Here’s how to do it.
   2       Click on the iCloud icon to open the iCloud preference pane. 
It’s found in the middle row, on the left-hand side.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
56
Going Online with Your Mac Notebook

   7       If you want to keep Safari enabled in iCloud but you don’t 
want open tabs to be available on other devices, you need to turn 
on Private Browsing in Safari. To turn on Private Browsing, in the File 
menu, select New Private Window.
   6       You can now see any websites open on other devices. If no 
tabs are open on other devices, you just see a confirmation window. 
Click on one of them to open it in a new tab.
   5       Click on the Tabs icon on the top-right of the Safari 
window, next to the Share button; this will bring up the Tabs 
view and your shared Safari browsing information.
   8       A Private Browsing window has a black URL bar instead of a 
white one. In this window, Safari tabs won’t be made available to 
other computers through the cloud. The computer also won’t store 
any browsing information such as website history, searches and 
autofill information.
   9       To turn off Private Browsing, close this Private Window 
and any tabs you have opened when viewing via this window. To 
activate Private Browsing again, you need to re-open a new 
Private Window.
  10      Remember that Private Browsing is always off by default 
when you start Safari, even if it was enabled the last time you quit. If 
you want to browse privately you need to enable Private Browsing 
manually every time you start Safari.
How to Use Apple’s iCloud Services
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
57
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Upgrading iCloud Drive
   1       To upgrade the iCloud storage 0n your Mac, first go to the 
Apple menu and open the System Preferences. Click on the iCloud 
option, found in the third row, on the left.
   2       In the bottom right corner of this window, there’s a button 
marked Manage.... Click it. From the next screen, you can delete 
documents and data from your iCloud if you wish.
   3       Click Change Storage Plan... in the top right. On the next 
screen, you’re shown your current plan and options to upgrade for a 
higher monthly fee. Click on one to choose, and click Next.
   4       Click the Downgrade Options if you want a smaller, cheaper 
plan. When asked, input your Apple ID and password and you will 
be immediately switched to the new iCloud storage plan.
A new iCloud account comes with 5GB of free storage but if you use your iCloud Drive a lot, you may run 
out of space, especially if you also back up your iOS device to the cloud. Thankfully it’s easy to buy more 
space and the monthly fees are far from expensive. Here’s how to upgrade your iCloud Drive.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
58
Going Online with Your Mac Notebook

Upgrading iCloud Drive and Desktop Documents & Folders 
iCloud Desktop  
Documents & Folders
   1       To switch on iCloud Desktop Documents and Folders on 
your Mac, open System Preferences and click on iCloud. Click on the 
Options button next to iCloud Drive and then check the box next to 
Desktop & Documents Folders. It may take time to set up.
   2       On an iOS device install the iCloud Drive app , if you don’t 
have it already,  by downloading it from the App Store (it’s free). On 
your Home screen, open the app. There’s a new folder called 
Desktop. All files stored on your Mac’s desktop are also shown in here.
   3       Documents and data on your Mac’s desktop can now be 
accessed through the iCloud Drive folder of any Mac or iOS 
device signed into the same iCloud account. All Macs must be 
running Sierra and all iOS devices must have iOS 10.
   4       You can also access your Desktop documents and folders 
using the website. Just point your browser at www.icloud.com 
and sign in. Open the iCloud Drive and the Desktop folder is there. 
You can do this on any Internet-capable device.
With macOS Sierra and iOS 10, you can not only store your documents on your iCloud but also files 
and folders that are found on your desktop. It’s done automatically, so a file on your Mac’s desktop is 
accessible from your iOS device and other Macs. This is how to make use of this feature.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
59
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Your MacBook’s 
iCloud Keychain
Setting Up the Keychain
iCloud Keychain is a great way of storing your passwords in the cloud, so you 
don’t have to remember them. Just follow this procedure.
   2       From this pane select the 
Keychain option and enter your Apple 
ID password to move on. 
   4       You will now receive a code, which 
will be sent to the phone number you 
added to your Apple ID. Enter it here and 
the process is complete. 
   1       Open the System Preferences 
link from the main Apple menu and 
select the iCloud option.
   3       You will now have to enter the 
password you set up initially to protect your 
Apple ID.
Do you get sick of entering your username and password every time you go on an Internet forum or 
shopping site? Help is at hand. With iCloud Keychain, you can store all your password information on the 
cloud and sync it between your Apple devices. Here’s how to go about it.
 Adding to the  Keychain      
The iCloud Keychain works on your 
Apple computers and  
mobile devices running  
Yosemite or later and iOS 7 or above. 
It uses 256-bit AES encryption, so 
it’s highly secure. To start adding 
your passwords, open any page that 
requires you to sign in via Safari, 
such as Facebook or Amazon, and 
begin the sign-in process. You’re 
now asked whether you want to add 
this password to the keychain, if it 
is able. The next time you visit this 
site, the keychain will automatically 
enter your sign-in details.
 Password Generator     Every 
time you create a new account 
while using Safari, you can have 
iCloud Keychain generate a unique, 
hard-to-guess password, and also 
remember it for you.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
60
Going Online with Your Mac Notebook

Your MacBook for 
Entertainment
62 	
Using the iTunes App
66 	
Using the Apple Music Service
68 	
Internet TV and Radio on Your MacBook
70 	
Getting the Most From iBooks
74 	
Using the Photos App
80 	
Mac Gaming with Steam
82 	
Adding Joypads and Controllers
84 	
Integrate Social Media with Your MacBook 
When the working day is done, there’s nothing 
better than relaxing with your MacBook. You 
can use iTunes to listen to your favourite sounds, 
whether they’re stored on your MacBook or 
streamed over the Internet with Apple’s Music 
service. You can watch movies and TV shows, 
again with iTunes, and you can enjoy your digital 
pictures in the Photos app. iBooks is great for 
buying, downloading and reading ebooks and 
you can integrate your social media accounts with 
macOS Sierra too.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
61
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

 1. File Type     This is where you select what 
kind of media you want to look at. Click on Music, 
Movies, TV Shows or Radio to see a list of the 
available media in your library. Click on an album 
to be shown its track listing. 
 2. Main Controls     These are the basic 
controls such as Play, Pause and Skip Track. You 
can also change the play order of your current 
album or Playlist by hitting the Shuffle option to 
the far right of the timer bar, or Repeat the 
current track by tapping the repeat option to the 
far left. The small icon by the album name opens 
up a second options menu. 
 3. AirPlay     If you have an AirPlay compatible 
device, such  as an Apple TV or a speaker, click 
here to stream your music to it, instead of using 
your Mac’s  own speakers. 
 4. Apple Music     These categories are 
used to find, select, play and download songs 
and albums using the new Apple Music 
service. We will show you how to set up and 
use Apple Music, through iTunes for Mac, later 
in this tutorial. 
 5. Store     The iTunes store is where you go to 
buy new music, videos and apps. Clicking on the 
iTunes Store will take you to an online shopping 
interface where you can browse or search for 
whatever you’re looking for. 
Sierra includes the latest version of iTunes, Apple’s versatile and powerful application for buying and 
organising media, and managing your mobile devices. It’s more than just a music player. You can make 
purchases through the application and also import your own music.
Using the iTunes App
Finding Your Way Around iTunes
The latest version of iTunes contains 
many amazing features, including 
sharing across networks or connected 
devices and connecting with friends.
2
11
1
3
13
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
62
Your MacBook for Entertainment

 6. History & Lyrics     Press this button 
to see what’s coming up next, view your 
listening history and even review a song’s 
lyrics. Just play a song, press this button 
and select the lyrics tab, and if they’re 
available for that particular song, they’re 
shown right here.
  8. Browsing Your Collection     
Here you can browse your entire music 
collection. Your music or video collection is 
instantly accessible within a few clicks. To 
browse through, simply scroll up or down 
to find the artist you are looking for.
 9. Favourites     Click the heart icon 
that appears here when you hover your 
pointer over a track to identify your 
favourite songs and albums. Apple Music 
can use this information to refine and 
improve the suggestions it offers you for 
music you might also like.. 
 10. Current Track Listings     This 
area of the display lists all the music tracks 
and videos linked to the album you have 
currently highlighted, complete with 
information on the running time, artist 
name, album title and a quick link to their 
back catalogue on the iTunes store.
 11. Display & Other Options     
From here you can select how you view 
your iTunes collection. You can view by 
Songs, Albums (as shown here), Artists, 
Composers or Genres. You can also reorder 
how your library is displayed within these 
categories using the pull-downs offered 
when you click. 
12. Pop-Up Menu     Click on this icon 
to get a pop-up menu that applies to the 
entire album. Use it to play that album 
next,interrupting what’s already playing, 
add it to a playlist, get info on the album, 
mark it as loved or dislikethe album 
artwork from an online server and more.
13. Playlists    These are user-created 
playlists which you can enjoy or edit in 
iTunes. You can group songs on a theme or 
mood, so there’s always something to suit 
your needs.
14. Total Track Time    Here you find 
the total number of tracks in the album or 
playlist you’re currently looking at, how 
much time it would take to play all of them 
and how much storage they take up.
6
7
8
10
12
9
5
4
Using the iTunes App
 7. Searching Your Collection     For 
those moments when you are struggling to 
place  a certain track or name the artist 
behind it, the search bar comes into its 
own. Simply enter the name of the artist, 
track or video etc, and iTunes will bring up 
all relevant/matching items, which can be 
accessed with a simple click.
14
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
63
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

   1       Before copying your CDs, set the import quality. Click on 
the iTunes menu at the top of the screen and select Preferences. 
Click on the General tab, then Import Settings. If you plan to listen 
to your music on a non-Apple music player, set Import Using: to 
MP3 Encoder. The higher the import quality, the better the sound, 
but the bigger the files.
   2       To begin copying your CDs onto your Mac, pop the CD into 
the disc slot, if it has one. If it doesn’t, you need to use an external 
optical drive like Apple’s USB SuperDrive, as shown here.
   3       A message pops up asking you if you want to import the 
album into your iTunes library. If you plan on copying a lot of 
albums in one go, it might be quicker to tick the box marked ‘Do 
not ask me again’, before clicking Yes.
   4       You will see the track listing of the album appear. The 
progress bar at the top shows you each track being copied, while a 
green tick next to each track tells you which ones have already been 
copied successfully.
   5       Once you’ve successfully imported your album, don’t 
forget to click on the Eject button on the left side-bar. Your CD 
pops back out so you can store it safely away. You’ll never need 
to use it again!
Importing Your CDs into iTunes
 Copyright     Remember that all recorded music, whether 
it was bought on CD or downloaded from iTunes Store, is 
protected by copyright laws. If you copy a CD into iTunes it’s 
OK to play it back for your own use on your home music 
system, listen to it on your iPod or on your car stereo, but you 
mustn’t give (or sell!) copies of it to anyone else. This includes 
uploading it to the Internet or making it available on 
file-sharing sites. If you get caught doing this you will face a 
hefty fine.
Disclaimer - Ripping CDs you own for use in iTunes is a legal grey 
area in some countries, so make sure you’re within the law. 
Copying music you don’t own is definitely illegal.
iTunes can automatically copy CDs onto your hard drive 
in a format that can be played on your Mac.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
64
Your MacBook for Entertainment

Using the iTunes App
   1       To access the iTunes Store, click on the link at the top of 
the iTunes window. You’re taken to the front page of the store, 
where you can decide what you want to buy, and go to the 
appropriate section.
 Deleting Tracks & Albums     To delete a song or album, 
Right-Click, CTRL-Click or Two-Finger Click on it to get the 
contextual menu, and then select Delete. If you bought the 
tracks from iTunes, you can download them again at a later date, 
at no cost.
   3       To add a photo, for display against messages, incoming calls 
and emails from the contact, drag a picture onto the grey circle then 
resize it. You can also click on this circle or the Picture tab and 
navigate to a photo or default image, or even take a new one.
 The Visualizer     While your music is playing, go to View > 
Show Visualizer or tap CMD-T for a light show. In the View menu, 
under Visualizer, you can select from a number of options. 
Obviously, it works best if you view it full screen. Tap Escape to get 
back to the regular iTunes window.
   2       Buying things on the 
iTunes store is safe, secure and 
simple. You just need to click on 
Sign In in the iTunes window’s 
toolbar, and then input your 
Apple ID and password. If you 
don’t have one yet, go to the 
website found at www.appleid.
apple.com and set one up.
 Album Art     If some of your albums lack the cover art 
associated with the CD, go to the File menu and select Library > Get 
Album Artwork. It’s added for as many of the albums as iTunes can 
find. You need to be signed into the iTunes Store and have an 
Internet connection for this to work.
Use the iTunes Store and your Apple ID to buy music and 
TV shows, and also buy or rent movies.
The iTunes Store
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
65
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Using the Apple  
Music Service
Before you can start using the Apple Music service, you 
have to set it up. This is how to get going.
   1       To use Apple Music on your Mac, you must have a 
recent version of iTunes. If you haven’t, open the App Store and 
click the update. To use Apple Music, you must be running OS X 
10.9.5 or later.
   3       On this screen, if you’ve already set up Apple Music on 
another device, click ‘Sign in’ in the top right corner of the screen. 
If not, click the white button to get an account and start your three 
month trial.
   4       Choose between an individual or family membership. Family 
memberships use Apple’s Family Sharing and can cover up to six 
people. You might then be asked to sign into your iTunes account.
   2       Click on the For You section at the top of the screen, as 
shown here. You don’t yet have an Apple Music account and so 
you’re invited to join, and get three months free. Click on the blue 
banner at the top.
Apple Music is a new way to download and enjoy your favourite sounds. For a set monthly fee, you can 
listen to tracks from a library of over 40 million songs. It also has a live global radio station and a social 
platform for recording artists to connect with their fans. Here’s how to set up and use it. 
Setting Up Apple Music
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
66
Your MacBook for Entertainment

Using the Apple Music Service
Now you’ve registered your account, it’s time to enjoy 
some music, streamed directly to your Mac.
   5       After deciding whether you require a password after 15 
minutes or every time you make a purchase, you will see this screen, 
where you can identify musical genres you like. When you’re 
finished, click Next and then choose artists as instructed, then click 
on Done. 
   6       Apple Music makes some suggestions based on your 
choices earlier. You’re now ready to use Apple Music. To register a 
unique nickname, click on the silhouette and then again in the 
pop up window. Choose a nickname. This is used in several Apple 
Music features.
   2        To identify an album that you love, click on the three dots 
icon and select Love from the menu. To love a track, hover the 
mouse pointer over its name and click on the three dots icon that 
appears. This improves future suggestions. 
   1       Under the For You tab shown here, you can search for artists 
and songs available through Apple Music. Click on the Search Bar, 
then on the Apple Music tab. Make your search, and your results are 
presented as shown.
   3       Click on an artist’s name to get to their page, then on the 
three dots icon. In the pop-up menu, click Follow to follow that 
artist. When you’re following, you can see what they’re posting. 
Clicking on the Radio tab gives you iTunes’ new, improved radio 
service, including the global Apple Music station, Beats 1.
   4       To cancel your recurring subscription, click on the Account 
menu and select View My Account. Scroll down to Settings and look 
for Subscriptions. Click on Manage and switch off automatic 
renewal. Music you’ve downloaded from Apple Music cannot be 
played if you close your subscription, so take care.
Using Apple Music
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
67
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Internet TV and Radio 
on Your MacBook
   1       Point your browser at the TVCatchup site, found at www.
tvcatchup.com. To watch what’s currently showing, just click on one 
of the channels. What’s showing now is displayed under the channel 
icon. To see what’s on next, click ‘Next’ in the top right corner.
   3       In the browser view, click on TV Guide to see a guide to 
what’s coming up next on the available channels. Choose a time 
or a date for forward planning and hover over a show for more 
information. Programmes currently being broadcast are shown 
in green.
   4       Clicking on a title of a programme in the TV Guide takes you 
to a page showing more information on that show, such as its genre, 
how long it is and a short description. You can also launch a 
currently-live show by clicking Watch Now on the TV Guide.
   2       Hover your pointer over the picture to see the controls. You 
can AirPlay to a nearby compatible device, pause the broadcast 
and, by clicking the two out-pointing arrows, enter full-screen view. 
In full-screen view, this icon goes back to the browser view.
With a solid Internet connection and your trusty MacBook, you can watch streaming TV broadcasts and 
listen to online radio stations. Just the thing for those overnight hotel stays or when you need some 
music whilst working. Here’s a guide to enjoying TV and radio shows on your MacBook.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
68
Your MacBook for Entertainment

   5       You can, of course, watch Netflix TV shows (www.netflix.
com) and Youtube videos (www.youtube.com) in a web browser but 
open the App Store app and there are several third-party clients you 
can use too. Much more convenient than the web pages.
   6       If you want to see a show after it’s been broadcast, you 
might well be in luck. Go to the web page of the channel in 
question, and see if it has a catchup service like the BBC’s iPlayer, 
shown here. These websites also let you watch the channels’ 
current live broadcasts.
   7       You can find some of the most popular catchup TV 
services at the following web addresses: BBC channels: www.bbc.
co.uk/iplayer; ITV: www.itv.com; Channel 4: www.channel4.com; 
Channel 5: www.channel5.com and Dave: https://dave.uktv.co.uk.
current live broadcasts.
   1      You can listen to Internet streaming radio broadcasts 
through iTunes but you might not find what you’re looking for 
there. To do so, open iTunes, click on Radio at the top of the 
window. To browse according to genre, click Stations and scroll 
to the bottom of the screen. 
   2       If you regularly listen to Internet radio on your Mac, you’re 
better off getting a radio app from the App Store. MyTuner Radio, 
for example, can pick up 30,000 stations in 120 countries. There’s an 
ad-supported free version and a very affordable pro version.
   3       If you don’t plan on listening to Internet radio often, the 
website www.internetradiouk.com might be enough for you. Click 
on a flag at the top of the screen and that country’s streaming 
broadcasts are shown as icons. Volume and stop controls are in the 
centre of the screen.
Internet TV and Radio on Your MacBook
You can also listen to literally thousands of Internet radio 
stations using your MacBook. Here’s a guide to doing so.
Using Internet Radio
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
69
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Here’s how to set up the iBooks app, from opening it the 
first time to organising your digital books collection. 
Setting Up iBooks
   1       Launch the iBooks app and click on Get Started. You’re asked 
to sign in using your Apple ID. Do so. If you need to sign in with 
another account at a later date, use the Sign In/Out option in the 
Store drop-down menu in the top bar.
   3       By clicking on the iCloud icon in the top-right corner of a book, 
you download it to your Mac where it can be read. Once you’ve 
downloaded your picks, you can change how you view them based 
on the five options at the top of this pane.
   4       The Authors and Category views organise your iBooks by 
genre and writer. The List option shows all titles as text only. 
Collections lets you view your iBooks by format including PDFs, 
and All Books shows your complete collection, whatever their 
format or origin.
   2       If you’re already an iBooks user on your iPad or iPhone, you can 
access your books by clicking the Library link in the top-right of this 
pane. From this link you’re taken to your complete iBooks library 
located on iCloud.
The ebook revolution is going strong and with the iBooks app you can read your electronic books on 
your MacBook as well as your iPad, iPhone or eReader. Here is a guide to buying, sampling and reading 
electronic literature on your trusty computer, as well as organising your ebook library.
Getting the Most 
From iBooks
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
70
Your MacBook for Entertainment

You can quickly and easily copy PDFs onto your MacBook 
and into iBooks for reading in the app.
Making Purchases Using iBooks
   1       Click on the iBooks Store link, in the top-left corner of the 
main pane. You have four search options. The standard landing page 
is the Featured option, which shows the latest releases by genre.
   4       Once your purchase has downloaded, the purchase options 
are replaced with a Read button. Click this to begin reading your 
iBook. To make another purchase or browse the iBooks Store, click 
the left-pointing arrow in the top-left corner or click one of the search 
options.
   2       The Top Charts link offers you the best-selling paid and free 
iBooks currently available. Alternatively, enter a title or author into 
the search bar on the top-right. Lastly, you can view all currently 
available titles from the complete A-Z listings of authors on the left.
   3       When you’ve made your selection, click on the cover to be 
taken to the publication’s home page. Here you can download the 
full title or a short free sample. If you opt for the free sample it 
automatically downloads, but the full purchase requires you to log 
in with your Apple ID.
You can quickly and easily copy PDFs onto your 
MacBook and into the iBooks app.
Adding PDFs to iBooks 
   1        Open up iBooks on your Mac and select Add to Library 
from the File menu. From here, open the folder containing the 
PDF files you wish to add to iBooks.
   2       Select Books from 
your iBooks Library and 
you now see these PDF 
files that you just added 
to your collection, which 
can be viewed as normal.
Getting the Most From iBooks
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
71
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Now it’s time to take a look at how to read and navigate 
within the books you’ve downloaded.
Viewing Titles in iBooks
   1       To open an iBook, go to your Library and click on the cover of 
the title you wish to read. It zooms out and automatically opens at 
the start of the book.
   3       Using the mouse, click and hold the cursor and drag it over the 
text, or double-click on a word to select it. This brings up an options 
window where you can add a note, highlight the text or underline it 
in red.
   4       These notes are stored within the iBook itself, and can be 
viewed in a pop-up column by clicking on the third icon on the 
top-left of the pane. A second click returns you to the standard 
reading format.
   5       Returning to the highlight options pop-up menu, click More 
for a second page of options. From here you can look up the word 
using the dictionary, find other examples of its use in the book, 
search the web for it or share it.
   2       Using the mouse, the trackpad or the left and right cursor keys, 
you can navigate through the pages as you read. You can also skip 
back to the title’s table of contents by clicking the middle icon on the 
top-left. Return to the iBooks store by clicking the icon on the far left.
   6        Another option from the pop-up menu linked to highlighted 
text is the ability to have any highlighted text spoken to you via the 
Mac’s own speech software. Simply highlight the section you want to 
hear and click on the Start Speaking link.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
72
Your MacBook for Entertainment

   9       The final option is Bookmark. Click it to place a bookmark on 
the current page, which can be accessed by clicking the 
down-pointing icon, which shows all of your recent and current 
bookmarks for this iBook.
  10       Some iBooks have integrated content such as images and 
videos. These are viewed by following the title’s specific 
instructions, such as pressing the Play button on video clips.
   7       By clicking on the first icon on the top-left, with the two sizes 
of ‘A’ character on it, you bring up a menu containing various 
options to change the appearance of the iBook, from font size to 
background colour.
   8       The next option is Search, represented by the magnifying 
glass icon. Using this you can search for all references to a name or 
word in the entire publication. The results appear below the search 
bar and can be viewed by scrolling.
Sharing iBooks and Using the Wishlist
   When you find a title in the iBooks Store that you wish to 
share with a friend, or if you are a little short on funds and want 
to add the title to your wish list to remind you at a later date, 
you can use the following share feature. When you are on a 
title’s home page, notice the small downward-pointing arrow 
to the right of the price. Click on this arrow to bring up a small 
menu containing links to your sharing options; email, Facebook 
etc. You can also use the Add to Wish List link which will add this 
title to your buy it later list. Your Wish List is viewable from the 
right panel on the Featured home screen. Remove a title by 
hovering the pointer over it, then clicking on the cross icon that 
appears in the top-left.
Getting the Most From iBooks
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
73
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Using the Photos App 
The Photos app got a significant boost with the release of macOS Sierra. Its face recognition feature has 
been improved and it can now group similar pictures according to location, objects and people too. 
There’s even an easy way of making a slideshow. Here’s how to get more from your Photos app.
1
2
11
8
9
10
7
 1. Arrow Buttons     Move forward and backward through 
your option selections in your photo library. If going forwards 
isn’t an option, the forward chevron is missing, as  
seen here. 
 2. Size Slider     This slider sets the size of the thumbnails in 
this management window. If it’s missing, you can’t change the 
thumbnail size on that particular screen.
 3. Slideshow Options     Press this button to choose the 
style and background tune of the Memories slideshow; and to 
start a slideshow of the photographs currently on display.
 4. New Item     Click on the ‘+’ icon to add the photos that are 
visible now to a new album or project. This is where you start if 
you want to lay out a print book, cards or calendar.
5. Share Button     Click on a photo to select it and then here to 
share. Hold CMD and click on several photos to share more than 
one at a time. You can also set it as a desktop picture.
 6. Search Field     You can search your photos according to 
keywords and descriptions that you’ve added yourself (select a 
photo and press CMD-I) or according to what’s in them.
 7. Photos Option     Click on this option  
in the sidebar to see your photos displayed  
as Moments, grouped according to when  
they were taken. Hover over a Moment for further options.
 8. Memories     Click for Memories  
options, which you can apply before playing the slideshow (see 
‘3’). Choose to show all  
the photos from the current selection or just  
a summary.
 9. Shared Albums     Here you can choose to view your 
shared albums, such as those shared with family (see Family 
Sharing) or iCloud (see iCloud Photo Library).
 10. Albums     Here you can access albums that you created 
yourself, as well as those automatically grouping pictures 
showing the same person, taken in the same place and more. 
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
74
Your MacBook for Entertainment

Using the Photos App 
12
3
4
5
6
 11. Info Bar    This bar shows the photos you are currently 
looking at, when they were taken and how many there are. It 
can show other info depending on your selection, and a link to 
show as a memory too.
 12. Your Photos     Here you see your photos.  
Double click on one to open it, single click to select it,  
hold Shift and click on a series of photos to select more than 
one picture.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
75
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

   2       Tap the button here to open and close a bottom bar, 
showing your other photos. Use this to switch between them. The 
slider lets you zoom in and out of a picture, focusing on details or 
on the entire photograph.
   1       Click this to get to the editing tools. There are two buttons 
in the top right corner. Click on the heart to mark the picture as a 
favourite or Done to leave the editing screen. A Revert to Original 
button undoes changes.
    3       The first option in the list of editing tools on the right of the 
photo is called Enhance. Click on it to automatically make 
enhancements to your photographs. If you don’t like them, you can 
always click on Revert to Original at the top.
   4       The second editing control is Rotate. It turns your 
photograph 90 degrees anticlockwise. You can click on it again to 
turn another 90 degrees or, by holding down the Alt button before 
you click, turn it clockwise instead of anticlockwise.
   5       Click on Crop for a range of tools. The dial that appears on 
the right of the photo lets you rotate the picture without being 
restricted to 90-degree rotations. Just click and drag it, as if it 
were a wheel. It’s great for straightening pics.
   6       The next control is Filters. Press it and you’re shown a range 
of filters. Click on one to apply that change to the photograph. Click 
on another filter to replace the current one with a different filter or 
the option marked ‘None’ to remove it.
Photos helps you get the most from your pics with 
powerful editing tools. Here is a guide to how.
The Editing Tools
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
76
Your MacBook for Entertainment

   8       The Retouch tool is great if there are spots or blemishes on 
your picture, or if there’s simply something there you want to 
airbrush out, like this shadow in the background. Simply click and 
drag your pointer over the blemish to remove it.
   7       The Adjustments option lets you change the photo’s 
lighting, exposure, colour saturation and more. You can use more 
than one slider at once on your photo, and if you hover over a slider, 
an Auto button appears to make adjustments automatically.
   9       The Red-Eye tool gets rid of the red-eye effect caused by a 
camera flash. Set your brush to the same size as the red mark using 
the slider, then click on it. Here we did the left eye but not the right 
one. There’s an Auto option in the bottom right.
 Favourites     Hover over a photo and click the heart icon 
in the bottom left corner that appears to identify it as a 
favourite of yours. Click on the Favourites option in the 
sidebar and all your favourite photos are grouped together 
for you to enjoy.
 Faces    Here is where you identify the faces in 
photographs. Click on Add Name to name the person in 
question, drag them to the bar at the top of the window to 
identify them as a favourite and click Add Person to find 
new faces in your collection.
 Places     Click on Places and you see your photos arranged 
on a map, according to where they were taken. This is, of 
course, only possible if your camera or smartphone is 
location aware. Click on a photo stack to look at the pictures.
You can make your own albums but Photos has 
several prepopulated options.
Album Options
Using the Photos App 
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
77
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

   2       Choose Book and you can select a page count and book 
style. You can move the photos around to suit your needs, add text 
if applicable and add pages or further photos using the tools in the 
top right corner. Drag a photo onto an existing one to replace it.
   1       To start a new project, select the pictures you want to use 
(hold CMD and click on them), then click on the ‘+’ icon in the top 
bar. From the pop-up menu, select the type of project you want to 
create: Book, Calendar, Card, Slideshow or Prints. You can add more 
photos later.
   3       Creating a calendar is very similar. Choose the month you 
wish it to start with, pick a style and edit to suit. A new tool button 
in the top right lets you add details from Sierra’s Calendar app to 
your printed calendar. Just the thing for remembering birthdays.
   4       For prints or cards, you once again pick your style and size. 
They’re priced individually and you can order as many or as few as 
you wish. Editing options are available if you want to stylise your 
prints or cards in some way.
   5       When you’ve finished your print project, you can order a 
printed copy using the button in the top right corner. It’s very 
simple. Just follow the on-screen instructions and it’s purchased 
using your Apple ID and chosen payment method, and delivered to 
your home.
   6       As well as paid-for printed projects, you can also make a 
slideshow and export it as a video file. Choose themes, 
background music and various settings using the tools on the 
right and reorder the photos by clicking and dragging them in the 
timeline at the bottom of the window.
You can use the Photos app to create exciting print 
projects like a calendar, a book or a slideshow.
Mastering Projects
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
78
Your MacBook for Entertainment

   2       Choose a theme that sets the way the pictures in your 
slideshow transition from one to another. Then click Music and pick 
a tune, preset or from iTunes. Then press the Play Slideshow button 
to watch your memories.
   1       Select the pictures you want to show in a slideshow and 
press the Play button in the toolbar. Alternatively, in the Moments 
view, hover over a Moment until the three buttons appear on the 
right and press the Play button there.
   2       To share photos using iCloud Photo Library, choose that 
option from the pop-up menu. You can then add the pictures 
to an existing shared album, or start a new one. You can invite 
people to look at the album by typing their email address in 
the invites field.
   4       Finally, if you’ve integrated your social media accounts 
with macOS, you can send pictures directly to Facebook, Twitter 
or Flickr. If you haven’t, open System Preferences (under the 
Apple menu), click on Internet Accounts and then add the one 
you wish to use.
   3       Choose Messages or Mail, and you can share your photos 
using a picture message or an email. Or you can choose AirDrop, 
and send it wirelessly to a nearby device. This is probably the 
easiest way, as long as the recipient also has AirDrop on their Mac 
or iOS device.
A great new addition for the macOS Sierra release of 
Photos is the new Memories slideshow. 
As well as managing and editing your photos, the 
new Photos app also lets you share them.
   1       To share a photo, or a 
group of photos, click on the 
Sharing button. You can use the 
Sharing button on the top bar, 
or hover over a Moment for one 
to appear that shares that group 
of photos.
The Memories Slideshow
Sharing Photos and Projects
Using the Photos App 
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
79
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Mac Gaming	 	 	 	 	
with Steam
   1       First of all, open Safari or your web browser of choice and go to 
www.steampowered.com. Click on the Install Steam button at the 
top and then on the Install Steam Now button on the next page. The 
Steam client downloads.
   3       Open the Steam client and sign in if you already have a Steam 
account. If you don’t, click on Create a New Account and follow the 
instructions. When you’re done, sign into your new account and get 
ready for some gaming.
   4       Click on Store in the top left corner of your client. This takes 
you to the Steam online store. It’s easy enough to navigate your way 
around. You can browse games according to genre and build a wish 
list for later review if you want.
   2       The Steam client is in your Downloads folder and is called 
steam.dmg. Double-click on it to open the disk image file and you 
see a window like this. Drag the Steam client onto the Applications 
folder to install Steam.
There are some great games available for the MacBook. A quick look at the App Store shows a wealth of 
gaming goodies you can enjoy on your Apple computer. However, there is another way. The Steam client 
gives access to all sorts of games you can buy for your MacBook and launch directly from the Steam app.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
80
Your MacBook for Entertainment

Mac Gaming with Steam
   5       To restrict the games shown to only those with a Mac version, 
click on Games as shown, and from the pull-down menu, select Mac 
OS X at the bottom. Click on a game to get to that particular title’s 
page, where you can read all about it.
   6        If considering a purchase, it’s important to check the game’s 
system requirements to make sure it can run on your Mac. To check 
your Mac’s specs, under the Apple menu, click on About This Mac for 
a guide to your own hardware.
   7       Click on the Add To Cart button to add the game to your virtual 
shopping cart. Choose whether you’re buying it as a gift or for 
yourself, then when ready, click on the Cart button to pay, using 
Paypal, a credit card or other sources.
   8       This is the Steam client’s main page. Games you have bought 
are listed in the left-hand column, with your favourites at the top. 
Games that are currently installed on your Mac are bold. Games you 
own but aren’t installed are regular text.
   9       Right-click on a game title for a range of options including the 
chance to install or uninstall it. Uninstalling a game won’t delete your 
saves if it supports Steam Cloud and you don’t have to pay again 
when you reinstall. You can add it to Favourites here too.
  10     To redeem a Steam Code that you have for a game, click on 
Add a Game in the bottom right and select Activate a Product on 
Steam. To play a game, click on the game in question and then click its 
Play button (or right-click and choose Play Game...). 
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
81
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Adding Joypads and  
Controllers 
   1       First download the latest version of the 360Controller driver, 
from https://github.com/360Controller/360Controller/releases. 
We’re going to set up and use the USB version of the joypad, but it 
also works with the wireless version as long as you have the 
Wireless Gaming Receiver for Windows plugged into your Mac.
   3       After the restart, open your System Preferences from the 
Apple menu in the top-left corner. You see there’s a new one – ‘Xbox 
360 Controllers’, found in the bottom row of your System Preferences. 
Plug in your Xbox 360 joypad, and click on the Xbox 360 Controllers 
preference pane to open it.
   4       You see a representation of your controller in the System 
Preferences window. When you press the buttons and move the levers, 
your input is shown on the controller graphic. You can modify its 
functions by inverting the sticks and changing the rumble options.
   2       Open the downloaded disk image, then run the installer. 
Follow the on-screen instructions, and install the driver. It takes only 
1MB of space. You need to enter your admin password during the 
installation, and when it’s done you have to restart your computer.
If you want to add a game controller to your MacBook to play your favourite games, there are several 
options. Here we show you how to connect an Xbox joypad and a third-party application that lets you 
use almost any USB controller on your MacBook, so you can enjoy your gaming.
The Xbox 360’s controller is one of the best gaming 
devices around and you can use it with your MacBook.
Using an Xbox 360 Controller
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
82
Your MacBook for Entertainment

   5       Whether the Xbox 360 joypad works with a particular game 
depends on whether the programmers have included compatibility, 
but plenty of modern games do. Here we see a popular Steam game’s 
configuration screen for the Xbox 360 controller.
   2        When you’ve installed USB Overdrive, it’s configured by 
opening its System Preference pane. Open it, and you can configure it 
for a gaming peripheral such as a joypad or a mouse that doesn’t offer 
native Mac controls. It has to be a USB controller, not a wireless one. 
To start, select the peripheral in question from the pull-down menu 
as shown.
   1       USB Overdrive is a device driver that supports any USB or 
Bluetooth mouse, keyboard, trackball, joystick, gamepad or gaming 
device from any manufacturer. It also lets you configure your 
controller, globally or on a per-application  per-device basis. 
Download it from  www.usboverdrive.com and install.
   6       You can sometimes reconfigure a game’s keyboard or joypad 
controls to work with your Xbox 360 pad, even if it isn’t mentioned 
by name. Just go through the usual key mapping options and, for 
instance, when defining a key for ‘up’, press the joystick up. When 
choosing a key for ‘fire’, press one of your joypad’s buttons.
   3       With the USB Overdrive panel open, clicking on a button or 
other such input on your device adds it to the list of buttons the 
preference can control. If nothing happens, the device is using a 
non-standard protocol, and cannot be controlled with USB Overdrive.
   4      By duplicating a device’s universal settings - that is, the settings 
they use on any application - you can custom configure them for 
specific applications. Start with the universal settings, and then 
customise those controls for the software in question. This can be 
very useful if, say, you like your joypad set up a specific way but would 
prefer it done differently for a particular game.
If you need more options, this inexpensive application 
might just be exactly what you’re looking for.
Using USB Overdrive
Adding Joypads and  Controllers
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
83
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Social networking is second nature to many people. It is how we organise our time, our social lives and 
even how we conduct business. Integrating your favourite social media sites directly with your MacBook 
makes your social networking life much easier. Here’s how to do it in Sierra.
Integrating Facebook and Twitter with macOS
   1       Launch System Preferences by clicking the System 
Preferences icon in the Dock, or selecting System Preferences from 
the Apple menu. In the System Preferences window that opens, 
select the Internet Accounts icon.
   2       When the Mail, Contacts & Calendars preference pane 
opens, click the Facebook or Twitter icon on the right side of the 
pane. Enter your Facebook or Twitter username and password, and 
click Next.
   3       An information sheet will drop down, explaining what will 
happen when you sign into Facebook from your Mac. First, your list 
of Facebook friends will be added to your Mac’s Contacts app, and 
subsequently kept synchronised.
   4       Next, you’ll be able to post status updates to Facebook and 
Twitter from any Mac app that supports this capability. Mac apps 
that currently support Facebook include Safari, the Notifications 
Center, Photos, and any app that includes the Share button or icon.
You can integrate a number of your favourite social 
networking accounts with macOS. Here’s how.
Integrate Social Media 
with Your MacBook
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
84
Your MacBook for Entertainment

86	
 Using the Notes App
90	
 Using the Maps App
94	
 Using the Contacts App
96	
 Using the Calendar App
100	
 Mastering Sierra’s Automator Assistant
102	
 Your MacBook’s Apple Pay Feature
Your MacBook as a 
Productivity Tool
Your MacBook is great for getting things done. 
With its amazing collection of bundled apps, you 
can organise your life with Calendar; keep names, 
addresses and phone numbers handy with 
Contacts; check, edit and annotate images with 
Preview, and more. The Notes app is a powerful 
personal organiser you can sync with your iOS 
devices. You can also find your way around with 
the Maps app, which is great for researching 
routes and investigating local amenities from the 
comfort of your home.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
85
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Using the Notes App
Creating, Editing and Sharing Notes
   1       To create a new note, click on the pen-and-paper symbol in 
the top left corner of the main pane in the Notes window. Start 
typing your note.
   3       To search notes, start typing keywords into the search field at 
the top of the left-hand frame.
   4       To delete a note, open it and use the Delete option in the Edit 
menu or the dustbin button in the toolbar. Deleted notes are kept in 
the Recently Deleted folder for 30 days. To email a note or share it in 
Messages, click on the Share button that appears in the top right of 
the main note panel.
    2       Your notes are listed in the left-hand pane. To select a note to 
read or edit, just click on it. The contents are shown in the right-hand 
pane. To change the font, or use bold, underline or italicise, select the 
text and right-click or CTRL-click for a menu; these options are found 
under Fonts. Alternatively, use CMD-B (bold), CMD-I (italics) or 
CMD-U (underline). To attach an image, simply drag it onto the note.
Notes is a convenient way to jot down your thoughts and ideas. As the name suggests, it’s a virtual 
notepad that’s very simple to use. It’s easily edited and fully searchable, meaning that these notes are 
hard to lose and even harder to do without, and you can sync them using iCloud.
Notes is a useful application. Jot down your thoughts and 
memos, and sync them with all iCloud devices.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
86
Your MacBook as a Productivity Tool

   3       Edit the name of an existing folder by clicking on it to highlight 
it, then clicking again to turn it into a text field as shown. You can then 
type in your new name.
Using Folders
   1       There are several ways to create a new folder, which is shown 
in your sidebar. Press CMD-N, use the New Folder in the File menu or 
press the New Folder link in the bottom left corner . Notes created in 
the iCloud section are stored on your iCloud and can be synced with 
other Apple devices.
    2        Highlight a folder by clicking on it to view all the notes in that 
folder. Alternatively, click on the All option at the top of each category 
to list every note stored on your Mac or your iCloud account or if 
applicable, those created using another compatible service like 
Google Drive.
   4       If you’re syncing your notes with iCloud, they sync with other 
Macs and iOS devices logged into the same iCloud account. In 
System Preferences, found in the Apple menu, click on iCloud and 
then make sure Notes is ticked.
In Notes, you can organise your notes into individual 
folders, so they’re always handy and easy to find.
Notes Online
  You can review your iCloud notes from any computer or 
mobile device with Internet access and a web browser. 
Just go to www.icloud.com and sign in with your Apple ID, 
then click on the Notes option. All your iCloud synced 
notes are there.
The Sidebar
  Click on this icon to show and hide the sidebar. Most users 
will want the sidebar open, as it gives access to your folders 
but if your screen space is tight and you need to review a big 
note, you can close it for a while.
Using the Notes App
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
87
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Advanced Notes Features
The Notes app has a range of advanced features, that 
make it a really versatile note-making application.
   1       Just like the Notes app on iPhone and iPad, you can turn any 
list into a checklist and tick off items when completed. First of all, 
make a list in the usual way, without attempting to format it and then 
highlight the text.
   3       You can attach photographs to your Notes and for advanced 
users, there’s a Photo Browser from which to select them. Choose 
Photo Browser from the Window menu in the top bar to open it and 
then drag photos from the browser into your notes.
   4        There’s also an Attachments Browser. Click on the button with 
four squares to be taken to this screen, where you can opt to view 
attachments by type. Right-click on an attachment to open it or go to 
its respective note.
   2       Now click on the toolbar icon that shows a tick in a circle. Your 
list becomes a checklist, with an empty circle in front of each listed 
item. When you’ve completed a task on your checklist, tap its circle to 
tick it. You click it again to untick it if you wish.
Password Protecting a Note
   1       If you make a private note you don’t want others to 
read, you can lock it with a password. If you’re syncing that 
note using iCloud, it’s locked on your other devices too. First, 
open the note, click the Lock icon and select Lock Note.
   2       You’ll be asked to set up a Notes password, or type it if 
you’ve already set one up. That note is now locked. A lock icon 
appears next to its name and it can only be opened with the 
password. You can close all locked notes or remove a lock from a 
note using the Lock button in the toolbar.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
88
Your MacBook as a Productivity Tool

   5       Attaching documents, web sites, emails and other such data to 
Notes is now a lot easier, as the Notes app has been added to the 
macOS Share button. Now you can click on it in another app and save 
an attachment directly to a note.
   8        To format a piece of text, first highlight it and then press 
the button showing the two As to get a formatting pop-up 
window. From here, you can turn a piece of text into a proper 
heading or title, make a numbered list and more. You can also 
highlight a word or phrase and use CMD-I, B or U to make it Italic, 
Bold or Underlined respectively.
   6       Documents and data that are attached to a note are more 
accessible than before. If you attach a video or audio track for 
example, instead of a preview of the file, you can actually play the 
media from within the note.
   7       You can review PDFs from within notes too and even where an 
attached document cannot be utilised in the note itself, you can still 
open the attachment directly from the app. They’re much more 
clearly displayed in the note.
Collaborative Notes
   1       Collaborative Notes is a new feature introduced with Sierra 
and iOS 10. To make a note collaborative, i.e. able to be edited by 
more than one person, open it and click on the button with a 
head and a plus sign on it. You click it again to untick it if you wish.
   2       Choose the method by which you want to send it, enter 
their details and they’re sent an invitation. When they accept, 
you can see and edit the note. This is only possible if both parties 
are using macOS Sierra or iOS 10.
Using the Notes App
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
89
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Using the Maps App
Maps is the hub for your travel plans. From finding the quickest route to shops by avoiding the worst 
traffic, to planning a trip around the world, the uses and depth of features the Maps app has to offer is 
amazing. You can even see major cities in glorious 3D, or take a spectacular flyover tour.
You can use Maps to find addresses, businesses, 
landmarks, local amenities and much more. 
Finding Places with Maps
   1       To find your current location, click the arrow icon left of the 
search field. To search for a specific location, type the address, 
postcode/zip code or road name into the search field. If there’s more 
than one match, you’re shown a list.
Drop a Pin
  To add a pin to your map, right-click and choose Drop Pin. A 
pin is placed where you clicked, giving access to an 
information box like the one shown here. To remove the pin, 
right-click on it and choose Remove Pin.
   2       You can search for a business by entering the business name 
or type, for example ‘pizza delivery’, into the search field. Pins 
appear on the map indicating all matching businesses in the area. 
To get more information, click on a pin, then on the ‘i’ button next to 
the name. You can get directions, bookmark the location or assign it 
to a contact.
   3       To change the view, click one of the options at the top of the 
pane. You can select from Satellite, which displays a photographic 
map; or Map, which displays a simple graphical map.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
90
Your MacBook as a Productivity Tool

The route planning element of Maps is one of the most 
useful and well-rounded features of the app.
Route Planning Explained
   3       You can view a written step-by-step breakdown of the route, 
which is detailed below the key locational information. Click any of 
these points to be taken to that point on the route.
   4       If there are alternative routes available, these will also be 
displayed as lighter blue lines. You can switch between routes by 
clicking the label marked Route 2, Route 3, etc. Distance and travel 
time will update for each route selected.
   1       To get directions at any time, click the Directions button and 
enter start and finish points. You can select the mode of transport 
(by car or on foot) that you plan to use. Alternatively, click on a 
pinned location, then click on the small car icon next to the name. 
You’re shown a route.
   2       Maps calculates the best route, based on the mode of 
transport you chose. It’s displayed on the map as a blue line. The total 
distance and estimated travel time are also offered. If alternative 
routes are available, these are shown as lighter blue lines. Switch 
between routes by clicking on a light blue line.
   You can get traffic information by clicking the Real-Time 
Traffic Updates icon at the top of the Maps pane. Click Show 
Traffic and current conditions will be displayed on main 
roads. You can turn traffic information off at any time by 
clicking the Real-Time Traffic Updates icon a second time. 
When traffic information is turned on, you will also see small 
workman signs at various places. This means that there are 
scheduled roadworks happening in these locations. Click any 
of the workman icons and then click the Information icon to 
get more details, including possible length of delays and how 
long the works will continue.
Traffic Information
Using the Maps App
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
91
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

The Maps application’s 3D maps are great to look at and 
offer a unique perspective on your chosen city.
Viewing Maps in 3D
   1       Before you can properly view the maps in 3D, you need to 
switch to Satellite view. In standard view the maps still look flat. You 
can show or hide the labels such as the street names and feature 
locations using the View top-bar menu.
   2       To now switch to 3D view, click the 3D button in the centre of 
the view controls in the bottom-right corner of the map screen. The 
camera angle shifts when you do this, but if you’re zoomed out, you’ll 
hardly notice any difference.
   3       Zoom in and you start to see contours, hills and valleys 
rendered before your very eyes. The 3D feature can slow things down 
if you are using a slow Wi-Fi connection, but not by much.
   4       If you’re viewing a large city that has rendered 3D buildings, 
you can increase the camera angle to see the buildings better. 
When this is available, you see an amazing 3D rendering of the 
streets and features of the town in question.
Viewing 3D Locations in Maps
  The 3D Flyover feature of the new Maps app really comes alive when you are viewing a 
big city such as London or New York. When you are viewing a city, you can actually see 
buildings rising out of the map. You can zoom around Big Ben or fly up the side of the 
Empire State Building. It is probably impossible to extend this amazing feature to every 
building in the world, but it would be pretty impressive if you could!
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
92
Your MacBook as a Productivity Tool

 Map     This view is similar 
to your standard hand 
drawn Ordinance Survey 
(OS) map style.
 Satellite      An aerial 
view, which you can zoom 
in and out, all the way back 
into outer space. An option 
in the View menu lets you 
show or hide the labels such 
as street names.
 Transit     Public 
transport options are 
added in this view, which 
is not available 
everywhere yet.
Switch between viewing options using the top right 
corner buttons or the View menu.
Changing the View
Now you’re familiar with the basics of Maps, it’s time to 
look at some of its more sophisticated features.
Personalising the Maps App
 First Time Start Up     Open the Maps app and you will be 
greeted with the following message, asking you to allow the app to 
use your current location. Proceed as you wish but several of the 
options covered here will be unavailable to you should you select 
“Don’t Allow”.
 Adding and Removing Favourites in Maps 
  To bookmark a location, click on the Share link in the toolbar and 
select Add to Favorites. Alternatively, click on a pin, then on the ‘i’ 
icon and click on the Add to Favorites button. To remove a 
favourite, in the window showing the list of currently saved 
favourites, click on the Edit button (bottom-right corner) and click 
on the ‘X’ icon to delete.
 Using Maps Favourites     To review your favourites, click in the 
Search field at the top of the Maps window, and then select Favorites 
from the menu that pops up. Your favourites are listed as pins. You 
can then drag these pins into the search field, or the start and end 
points in the Directions sidebar.
 Sharing Routes     Having selected your choice of route, you can 
share it via social media or email, or send directly to other macOS, OS 
X or iOS devices. The recipient will receive a message with a link 
which, when accessed, will open the Maps app and display the route.
Using the Maps App
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
93
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Using the  
Contacts App 
Here’s how to add new contacts to your Contacts app, 
edit existing ones and share them with others.
Managing and Maintaining Contacts
   1       To create a new contact card, click on the plus button in the 
bottom left of the current card. Select New Contact from the 
window that pops up and you’re given a blank card to fill in, as you 
can see here.
   3       To add a photo, which is displayed against messages, 
incoming calls and emails from that contact, drag a picture onto the 
grey circle then crop and resize it. You can also click on this circle or 
the Picture tab and navigate to a photo or default image, or even take 
a new one.
   4       If you need a piece of information in a contact card that 
doesn’t have a blank field, again click on the Plus button at the foot 
of the screen. This time, select one of the new fields on offer, such 
as: Maiden Name, Nickname or Twitter name. This is then added to 
the card. 
   2       To add details, click on the field and then type in the 
information. After entering a phone number or address, another 
blank is offered, in case you want to add a second one. Click on the 
name of the detail (in blue) for a pop-up window that lets you 
change it. When you’re finished, click Done. To change or add 
information to a card you’ve completed, click Edit.
macOS includes an address book that keeps all your important contact details organised and easily 
accessible, on individual contact cards. Keeping track of friends, family, work colleagues and associates 
has never been simpler. Here’s a quick run down of the key features and how to use them.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
94
Your MacBook as a Productivity Tool

Using the Contacts App 
   5       You can organise your contact cards into groups. To show and 
hide the Groups panel, click on the View menu and select Show/Hide 
Groups. To add a contact to a group, simply drag it from the middle 
panel onto the group in question. A card can be in more than one 
group at a time, without being duplicated.
   6        Smart Groups are groups with a set of rules. They 
automatically include every card that satisfies these rules. Go to File > 
New Smart Group to open one. Here we’re making a Smart Group for 
every contact that says ‘Xmas card’ in the notes. Great for sending out 
greetings cards at Christmas!
   7       To set up a card from a company rather than an individual, or 
display a contact according to the person’s employer instead of his or 
her name, check the box marked Company at the top of the card. This 
reverses the name and company details of the contact, and indexes 
them according to the company name.
   8       If you get an email, a message or other communication from 
many macOS apps with contact details in them, you can 
automatically add them to Contacts. Just click on the address, phone 
number or other such information; then click on the down pointing 
chevron. A pop-up window invites you to add them to an existing 
contact or create a new one.
  If you want to share a contact card with someone else, click the 
icon showing a box with an up-pointing arrow and choose a 
sharing option. You can send the contact as a v-card by AirDrop, 
Mail, Messages and more. The person receiving it then 
double-clicks the v-card to add it to their own address book.
Sharing Contacts
  You can also access your contacts using a web browser on any 
computer, tablet or smartphone that’s connected to the internet. 
Just go to www.icloud.com, enter your details and then click on 
Contacts. Only cards stored under iCloud in your Contacts app 
appear here, so bear this in mind when adding cards.
Using Contacts on iCloud
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
95
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Using the  
Calendar App
Changing the View
There are several ways to view your calendars, and 
moving between them is simple. Here’s how to do it.
   1       Move between Day, Week, Month and Year views using the 
corresponding buttons that appear in the top bar of the calendar.
   3       You can also jump to a specific day by clicking on the date you 
wish to skip to in the calendar box in the upper-right of the Day view 
window, as shown here.
   4       Click the Today button in the top-right corner to get to today’s 
calendar. The arrows either side take you forward or back one year, 
month, week or day, depending on the view you’re using.
    2        In the Year view, clicking on the title bar for any month takes 
you to the Month view for that month. Double-click on a specific day 
in either Year, Week or Month view to go to that day too.
The extremely useful Calendar app comes bundled with macOS Sierra. You can use it to organise your 
life, adding events and reminders and syncing your calendars with your iOS device. It’s great for storing 
birthdays and anniversaries too. Just set an event that recurs every year.
Creating a Backup
  Open the File menu, choose Export and select Calendar 
Archive. You can rename the file and select a location to save it 
to. To load it again, use the Import option.
You can manually create a complete backup of all 
your calendars. Here’s how to do it.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
96
Your MacBook as a Productivity Tool

Using the Calendar App
Creating an Event
You can create a brand new Calendar event in any view 
other than the Year view. Here’s how it’s done.
   1       In Day and Week views you can start to add an event by 
clicking the appropriate time slot. The hours are divided into 
quarters. Alternatively, for all-day events, just click the top bar.
   2       In Month view, double-click on the day of the event and enter a 
name and details in the pop-up window that appears. These can 
include start and end time and date, location and more.
   3       Clicking the ‘+’ button in the toolbar lets you create a quick 
event. Type in a title or brief description, day and/or time and 
Calendar intelligently enters it at the appropriate place.
New Features for Sierra
  macOS Sierra brought two new features to the Calendar app. 
If you have (for example) made a restaurant reservation or 
booked a flight using a third-party app, these can now show 
up in your Calendar. The app can also sync with Maps to look 
up travel conditions and public transport times, sending you 
an alert when it’s time to start a journey.
Searching Calendar
If you need to find events quickly and easily, Calendar has 
a very simple but powerful search function.
   1       Make your events more easily searchable by labelling them 
clearly and adding details in the notes section. The search function 
scans both event names and notes for keywords, so the more details 
you put in, the easier they are to find.
   2       Type any keywords into the search field to the right of the top 
bar of the Calendar window. All results appear instantly in a pane at 
the bottom of the main window. The more keywords you type in, the 
more unwanted results are filtered out.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
97
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

   2       To see a complete list of all your calendars click the Calendars 
button on the left side of the top bar of the Calendar window.
   3       To select which calendars you want to appear active in the 
main view, check or uncheck the boxes as appropriate. Each calendar 
is colour-coded and events appear in the main view in the colour of 
the calendar to which they belong.
    1       To add a new calendar, open the File menu and select New 
Calendar. A box will appear prompting you to enter a name for your 
new calendar.
   4       To change the calendar to which an event belongs, 
double-click the event to edit it then select a different calendar from 
the drop-down menu.
Calendar lets you add as many different calendars as you 
want, and use them for different things. 
Adding and Viewing Additional Calendars
   2       Under the Accounts tab, you can disable calendars you don’t 
wish to be active on the Mac in question, and also choose how each 
calendar account refreshes. The Alerts tab lets you set default alert 
settings, and under ‘Advanced’ you can make a few more 
customisations.
You can change the way the Calendar app functions, 
using its preferences options.
Calendar Preferences
   1       To open the Calendar Preferences, use the Calendar menu 
as shown. Under the General tab, you can change the way the 
app presents itself, set when a day  starts and ends, change the 
default calendar and even switch to an alternative Chinese, 
Hebrew or Islamic calendar.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
98
Your MacBook as a Productivity Tool

   2       Select them from the list that appears, and then press the 
Return key. Repeat this for as many people as you’d like to invite, 
then press Send. Your event details will be emailed to your contacts, 
along with an RSVP link. 
   3       Your calendar entry shows who you’ve invited, and whether 
they’ve replied. If your invitee has an iCloud email, the event is 
automatically added to their Calendar app, and updated whenever 
you make edits.
   1       Double-click an event you’ve created. In the pop-up window 
that appears, click Add Invitees and begin typing the name of a 
person in your Contacts whom you’d like to invite. 
The Calendar app lets you invite your contacts to events 
that you’ve added to your calendar.
Sending Invitations via Calendar
Keeping your Calendar in sync across your Apple devices 
is simple using your iCloud account.
iCloud Calendar
   1       First of all, open System Preferences from the Apple menu as 
shown. Click on the iCloud preference pane, and in the next window, 
make sure the Calendar checkbox is ticked.
   2       To activate iCloud syncing on an iOS device, open Settings, 
and in the left-hand column, tap iCloud. Make sure the Calendar 
switch is on. If it isn’t, switch it on to sync your calendars.
   3       Now, when you return to your Calendar app, all the entries you 
made on your iOS devices are also shown on your Mac, and vice 
versa. It’s a great way of keeping your computer and your tablet or 
smartphone calendars in sync.
Using the Calendar App
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
99
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Step 4  Select Photos from the left-hand column, and then drag 
Scale Images from the middle column into the workflow window. 
You’re offered the chance to add a Copy Finder Items action, so 
the images are duplicated before they’re scaled and the originals 
unaffected. It’s up to you whether you wish to do this, of course, but 
for this tutorial we pressed ‘Add’.
Step 3  Now it’s time to add the photos we’re going to scale. 
We’ve dragged their folder called ‘Summer Holidays’ onto the 
desktop, and created a new one called ‘Summer Holidays (Scaled)’ 
for the scaled pictures. This is just to make it easier to show you 
what’s going on – they can be taken from anywhere. Highlight 
the pictures you want to scale, and drag them onto the workflow 
window as shown. 
Step 1  Automator is in your Applications folder. It’s the app with 
the robot icon. Open it. You’re invited to open a document you’ve 
already created; as we’re starting a new Automator action, press 
New Document instead. We’re going to create a workflow script
to resize photographs, so choose Workflow from the options.
Here we show you how to make a script that 
automatically resizes an entire batch of photographs.
Step 2  The next window looks confusing at first, but it’s actually 
pretty straightforward. The window is divided into three columns. 
The first (left-hand) column lists the types of items on which you 
can perform actions. The second (middle) column shows the actions 
that can be performed on the selected item, and the big window to 
the right is for the workflow we’re about to create.
Creating an Automator Script
Mastering Sierra’s    
Automator Assistant
Automator is a great means of speeding up your work flow but it’s also woefully underused by Mac 
owners. Using Automator’s simple drag-and-drop interface, you can create a chain of instructions and 
carry out complicated tasks at the click of a button. Here’s how to create your first Automator script.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
100
Your MacBook as a Productivity Tool

Step 8  Now the workflow has done its job, we can open up the 
folders we set up earlier and take a look at the results. The two 
pictures here are displayed at actual size. The one on the left is the 
original photograph, the one on the right is the scaled version. 
Quite a difference, and all eight photographs in the folder have 
been similarly scaled. Much quicker than doing it by hand.
Step 9  Press CMD-S or select ‘Save’ from Automator’s File menu 
at the top of the screen and you can save a workflow for later use. 
Save it to iCloud Drive and you can pick it up from any Mac currently 
signwed into your iCloud account. Save it as an Application and you 
can use it simply by dragging and dropping files and folders onto its 
icon. Alternatively, save it as a Workflow to reload into Automator.
Step 10  Another way to make a workflow is by getting 
Automator to record a series of actions carried out by yourself. 
Press the Record button in the top-right of the Automator window 
and this window appears in the top-left corner of your desktop. Do 
whatever it is you want to record into a workflow; such as open a 
document, modify it and close it again; and when you’ve finished, 
press Stop in the Automator Recording window. Your actions are 
recorded as a workflow. You can also use Record to make a specific 
step in a regular workflow, if nothing in the middle column fits 
your needs.
Step 7  Now all that remains is to run the workflow. Press the Run 
button in the top-right corner of the Automator window. If you want 
to see the results at each stage, click on the word Results in some 
or all of the workflow’s specific tasks, as shown. Progress is shown, 
as each item that’s been worked on appears in the window. A tick 
appears next to the word ‘Results’ in each task; if a red cross appears 
instead, there was a problem.
Step 6  Now we must set the scale size. As you can see from the 
info box in the bottom-left, pictures can be scaled according to the 
length of their longest side, or as a percentage of the original size. 
We’re setting the longest side to 600 pixels; scaling will keep the 
photographs in proportion, so we don’t have to set the shortest 
side too.
Step 5  As you can see, the workflow now has three items 
in it – Get Specified Finder Items, Copy Finder Items and Scale 
Images. To instruct your workflow to copy the scaled photos 
into the correct folder, simply drag it (in this case, the one called 
‘Summer Holidays (Scaled)’) onto the Copy Finder Items box in 
the workflow window. As you can see, the To: pull-down menu 
now shows the correct folder.
Mastering Sierra’s Automator Assistant
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook 101
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Your MacBook’s 
Apple Pay Feature
   1       First of all, you need to allow Safari to check for Apple Pay data 
on websites. In Safari, open Preferences, in the Safari top-bar menu, 
and click on the Privacy tab. At the bottom of this window, check the 
Apple Pay box.
   3        When you’re shopping online, look for the Apple Pay logo at 
the checkout. When you see it, you can click on the Apple Pay logo 
and follow the on-screen instructions to finish your payment using an 
Apple Watch or iPhone.
   4       Payment by Apple Pay is a great alternative to services like 
PayPal or inputting your credit card on every store but it’s only 
available on sites that support the service. More are being added all 
the time, of course.
    2        You also need to set up 
your iPhone for Apple Pay 
payments on your Mac. Launch 
the Settings app and tap Wallet & 
Apple Pay. Make sure the switch 
marked ‘Allow Payments on Mac’ 
is switched to On.
Apple Pay has revolutionised the way we pay for goods in shops but with Sierra, you can also use it 
in online store checkouts. With a compatible store, you can simply click an Apple Pay button on the 
website, then complete your purchase with an iPhone or Apple Watch. Here’s how it works.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
102
Your MacBook as a Productivity Tool

Upkeep, Maintenance 
and Security
104	
 Using Time Machine on Your MacBook
106	
 Your MacBook’s Auto Save Feature
108	
 Simple Ways to Speed Up Your MacBook
110	
 Running Non-Apple Operating Systems
114	
 Maintenance and Troubleshooting
In this section, we show you how to keep data 
safe on your MacBook and what to do if things 
go wrong. It’s important to back up your data 
regularly, so that you don’t lose valuable files 
should you suffer a drive failure. For this, we show 
you how to use Time Machine, which keeps your 
backups up to date and handy. We also show you 
how to use your MacBook’s auto save feature, 
to keep a file you’re working on up to date and 
round off with a guide to common problems on 
the MacBook and how to fix them.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook 103
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

To begin, let’s look at the initial set up of your 
external drive and the Time Machine app itself.
   4       Once your external drive is connected and formatted 
correctly, you can always access Time Machine by opening System 
Preferences from Launchpad or the Applications folder on your Mac. 
Check the Show Time Machine in Menu Bar box and you can also 
access it from the menu bar.
   1       Connect an external hard drive, via USB, FireWire or 
Thunderbolt, to your Mac. It should be at least the size of your Mac’s 
hard drive. The larger the drive, the further back in time you will be 
able to store backups. Now open System Preferences and click on 
Time Machine in the bottom row.
    2       Click the Select Disk... button and you will be presented 
with a window listing your currently connected drives. Select the 
drive on which you would like to store your Time Machine backups. 
If your external drive isn’t already formatted as ‘Mac OS Extended 
(Journaled)’, Time Machine invites you to erase and reformat it. 
   3       If you choose to reformat your disk, all data currently on the 
drive is wiped so if there’s something on there you want to keep, 
move it first. You might get a pop-up asking if you would like to use 
the connected drive with Time Machine. Click Decide Later so the 
Time Machine settings can be configured to your requirements first.
Setting Up Time Machine
Time Machine is a backup utility that is a key part of macOS. It creates incremental backups of your files 
to a specified location, such as an external hard drive. These files can later be browsed and restored by 
running the Time Machine application. It’s great for restoring deleted or incorrectly changed files.
Using Time Machine on 
Your MacBook
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
104
Upkeep, Maintenance and Security

Using Time Machine on Your MacBook
Follow this guide to backing up your boot drive using 
Time Machine with macOS and your external drive.
   1       There’s an option to encrypt backups. This stops anyone 
from accessing the data on your drive without the password you 
specify. If you choose to encrypt your backups, simply enter and 
verify your password, enter a hint, and then proceed by clicking 
Encrypt Disk. You can click Choose Different Disk to return to the 
previous screen.
   2       You’re now presented with a window that shows the 
status of your currently selected drive to be used for Time 
Machine backups.
   3       By default, Time Machine is configured to back up all data 
on your Mac’s hard drive. If you click the Options button, you can 
add locations on your Mac’s hard drive not to be backed up. To 
exclude a new item, press the ‘+’ icon to reveal the file browser. 
Browse to the file or folder you don’t want included in your backups, 
and click the Exclude button.
   4       To remove an item from the list of excluded backup items, 
click the item once to highlight it, and then click the ‘-’ icon. You can 
either Cancel or Save your changes to return to the previous screen. 
   5       To retrieve a file from Time Machine, Choose Enter Time 
Machine in the Time Machine menu and then navigate to the file you 
want. You can get hold of an older version of a current file or one 
you’ve deleted. When you’ve found it, highlight it and press Restore.
Backing Up to Time Machine
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook 105
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

The Auto Save feature is both user-friendly and powerful. Allowing you to revert to previously saved 
versions of a document means you should never find yourself in the position of editing a document in 
error, and then accidentally saving it over the original version. Here’s how to use the feature.
   1      You can rename documents in their own window. Just click 
on the name of the document in the title bar and select Rename, 
then type in the new name. You can also duplicate or move the 
document to iCloud from here.
   2       If at any point you want to revert to the previously saved 
version of the document you’re working on, go into the File menu, 
select Revert To and then Last Saved.
   3      You can browse all previous saved versions of the 
document by going into the File menu, selecting Revert to and 
then Browse all Versions.
   4        You’ll see a display of all previously saved versions of the 
document in a cascade. Select the one you want to use and click 
the Restore button to open it up.
Your MacBook’s 
Auto Save Feature
Here’s how to make the most of macOS’s versatile and 
extremely useful Auto Save feature.
Auto Save Explained
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
106
Upkeep, Maintenance and Security

Your MacBook’s Auto Save Feature
   6       :ou can maLF a duplicatF oG tIF documFnt Zou`SF woSLinH 
on usinH tIF LFZboaSd sIoStcut $.%4)*'54.
   7      4aWF a copZ oG tIF documFnt Zou`SF woSLinH on undFS a 
diGGFSFnt namF usinH tIF LFZboaSd sIoStcut 
$.%4)*'5015*0/4.
   2      *G Zou`SF not suSF wIFtIFS ZouS .ac is compatiblF witI 
1owFS /ap opFn 4ZstFm 1SFGFSFncFs and sFlFct &nFSHZ 4aWFS 
in tIF sFcond Sow.
Power Nap lets your MacBook check for emails and 
updates silently while in Sleep mode.
Power Nap
   3      *G ZouS .ac suppoSts 1owFS /ap Zou`ll sFF an option 
to FnablF it bZ clicLinH a cIFcLboY. *G Zou don`t IaWF tIF 
option tIFn unGoStunatFlZ ZouS .ac isn`t compatiblF.
   5       :ou can HFt a bFttFS looL at a saWFd WFSsion oG ZouS 
documFnt bFGoSF SFstoSinH it bZ simplZ clicLinH on it to FnlaSHF 
tIF window as sIown. 5Iis doFsn`t commit Zou to SFstoSinH it. 
:ou can clicL on tIF cuSSFnt WFSsion oG tIF documFnt to FnlaSHF 
tIat instFad oS on tIF dFsLtop outsidF tIF documFnts to SFtuSn 
to tIF scSFFn sIown in tIF pSFWious stFp.
w   .ac#ooL 	&aSlZ  and latFS
w   .ac#ooL "iS 	-atF  and latFS
w   .ac#ooL 1So 	all modFls witI 3Ftina displaZ
w   .ac mini 	-atF  and latFS
w   i.ac 	-atF  and latFS
w   .ac 1So 	-atF 
 
   1      1owFS /ap is compatiblF witI tIF GollowinH .acs
#%.`s 5IF .ac#ooL (uidF#ooL 107
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

 Another useful hardware upgrade is to exchange your hard drive 
for a solid state drive, or SSD for short. Because it has no moving 
parts, an SSD is able to retrieve information far quicker than a 
traditional hard drive. This is especially noticeable when booting 
your Mac; an SSD boots up much faster. It uses less power too, 
and is quieter in operation. On the downside, they cost more per 
GB than hard disk drives (HDDs); so your SSD is likely to be lower 
capacity than your old HDD.
Not every Mac has 
removable storage, 
but if yours does 
- and it’s currently 
running on a hard 
drive - consider 
getting an SSD. 
The easiest way to 
upgrade is to get a 
USB caddy for a 2.5-
inch hard drive, and 
put your new SSD in 
it. Then download 
and use an application such as SuperDuper! or Carbon Copy 
Cloner, and clone your hard drive to the SSD. You can then remove 
your HDD and replace it with the SSD. Put the HDD in the now-
vacant caddy and you have a handy portable drive too. If your Mac 
uses 3.5-inch drives, you can still use a 2.5-inch SSD, but you need 
a bracket to fit it into your 3.5-inch drive bay. You can probably 
buy one with your SSD.
 One of the most effective ways to speed up your Mac is to add 
more memory, or RAM. A computer’s RAM stores the information 
used by the processor, so if you don’t have enough, the processor 
has to keep waiting, and therefore isn’t used to its fullest capability. 
To find out how much memory you already have installed, click on 
the Apple menu in the top-left corner of your desktop and select 
About This Mac. In the window that appears, click on the Memory tab. 
You’re shown how much RAM you have, and how they’re arranged 
in your Mac’s memory slots. In the bottom-right corner there’s a link 
to Apple’s support site that gives instructions on how to upgrade 
your memory. You can buy extra RAM online, and it’s usually much 
cheaper than upgrading through the Apple Store at the time of 
purchase. Most memory manufacturers have easy-to-follow websites 
that make it simple to find the right RAM for your Mac.
 Use the About This Mac feature to find out how much memory 
your Mac has installed. The more you have, the better.
Upgrade Memory
Buy an SSD
Slim Boot Drive
Not every Mac can enjoy a memory upgrade in this way. The latest 
Mac notebooks, the 21.5-inch iMac and the most recent Mac mini 
don’t have user-upgradeable RAM, for example. If the Memory tab 
is missing from the About This Mac window, you’re out of luck. But 
if you’re in a position to upgrade your memory, it’s a great way to 
speed up your Mac.
 While on the subject of your hard drive, your Mac uses it as virtual 
memory, to temporarily store information used by the processor. 
The fuller your drive, the less room there is for the Mac to do this, 
which can slow it down severely. Make sure your boot drive - that is, 
the Mac’s main drive containing the operating system - isn’t more 
than three-quarters full. If it is, consider moving some files such as 
movies or data to an external drive.
There are all sorts of things you can do to make your MacBook run faster. Some require component upgrades, 
while others just need a little tinkering with your software. Here we cover some of the best and simplest things 
you can do to get your computer up to speed once more. It’s amazing what you can do.
Simple Ways to Speed Up 
Your MacBook
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
108
Upkeep, Maintenance and Security

Dashboard Tips
Trim Login Items
Close Apps and Tabs
Check Browser Extensions
Useful Applications
Simple Ways to Speed Up Your Mac
 Something that can really slow down your Mac’s boot time is 
running too many Login Items. These are the applications and 
processes that load automatically when you switch on your Mac, 
and include helpers and agents for programs such as Dropbox, 
iTunes and Stickies. The more Login Items you have, the longer 
it takes to boot your Mac. To remove Login Items, open System 
Preferences (under the Apple menu) and click on Users & Groups. 
Highlight the current user in the left-hand column; and in the right, 
click on a Login Item you no longer need. Now click on the minus 
sign at the foot of this window to remove it.
 Apple has become less interested in the Dashboard and its widgets 
with every recent version of OS X; so much so that in El Capitan, 
the Dashboard is switched off by default (open System Preferences 
and go to Mission Control to switch it on). If you use the Dashboard, 
every open widget cuts into your Mac’s resources, so switching off 
those you don’t need is a good way to speed up your Mac. Go to the 
Dashboard and click on the minus sign in the bottom-left corner; 
then close selected widgets by clicking on the relevant ‘X’ icons 
that appear. Or if you’re running a pre-El Capitan version of OS X 
but never use the Dashboard, go into Mission Control as described 
earlier and switch it off.
 You should also refrain from having too many applications open 
at the same time. Remember, closing an app window doesn’t 
close the application itself. It’s still running, and using precious 
resources. If your Mac seems to have slowed down, it’s a good idea 
to go to your Dock and quit out of a few. You should soon notice a 
speed improvement.
Too many open browser tabs can cause the same problems for your 
web surfing as too many open apps does for your Mac as a whole. 
Although modern web browsers handle multiple open sites much 
better than they used to, having too many tabs open can still cause 
stutters and hangs. If this is happening to you, just close a few 
tabs. It usually improves matters. It’s also a good idea to clear your 
browser cache every now and then, getting rid of the accumulated 
junk that builds up over time. To do this in Safari, open Preferences 
and click on the Advanced tab. Check the box at the bottom that 
says Show Develop Menu in Menu Bar; and then from this new 
Develop menu, select Empty Caches.
 If your web browser is really misbehaving badly, it might be that 
you’ve installed an extension that’s not working properly. In Safari, 
open the Preferences again, and click on Extensions. Turn them off 
one by one until you find the rogue extension; simply click on an 
extension in the left-hand column, and in the right-hand window 
uncheck the box that says ‘Enable [Extension Name]’. When you’ve 
found the one that’s causing problems, delete it by clicking its 
Uninstall button. You can try downloading it again to see if it was a 
damaged install causing problems.
 There are several useful applications for keeping your Mac in tip-
top condition. In Applications > Utilities you’ll find Activity Monitor, 
which shows all the running processes on your Mac. If something’s 
hogging resources, you can force-quit it from this app too. iStat 
Menus is a great way to monitor your Mac - including memory 
usage, CPU resources and processes. And CleanMyMac is a very 
user-friendly way of sorting out your computer. You can sweep 
away system and iPhoto junk, look for large files you haven’t used in 
a while and delete them, clean-uninstall applications and perform 
several other useful maintenance tasks.
Finally, if you’ve a problem with your Wi-Fi network not reaching the 
corners of your house, or struggling to cope with thick, heavy walls, 
consider using HomePlug AV networking. These devices use your 
house’s electrical wiring as virtual Ethernet cables, and can prove 
more stable than Wi-Fi.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook 109
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

  4     Boot Camp Assistant’s introduction window offers some 
good advice. Make sure you’ve backed up your hard drive before 
you try to partition it and install Windows. That way, if anything 
goes wrong you’re not facing disaster. If you’re using a notebook 
computer such as a MacBook Pro or a MacBook Air, connect it to the 
mains instead of using its battery power.
  2     Remember, your Mac must also meet the minimum system 
requirements of the OS you’re installing. Check the website of the 
operating system in question if you’re unsure. Here we’re installing 
Windows 8, so we checked at http://windows.microsoft.com/en-GB/
windows-8/system-requirements. 
  3     Boot Camp Assistant is 
found in Applications > Utilities. 
You can also open it using the 
Launchpad. Just click on the 
Launchpad icon in the dock, or 
do the thumb-and-three-finger 
pinch on your trackpad. When 
Launchpad appears, type ‘Boot 
Camp’ in the search field at 
the top of the screen as shown 
here. You could also open Boot 
Camp Assistant by typing it into 
Spotlight. The choice is yours.
  1     To use Boot Camp, you 
need an Intel-based Mac and 
at least 20GB of free space. You 
also need an operating system 
to install on your Boot Camp 
partition, of course. For the 
purposes of this tutorial we’re 
installing Windows 8, but other 
versions of Windows can also 
be installed. You also need a 
USB drive of at least 8GB that 
can be reformatted.
You can install and use a Windows operating system 
using macOS’s Boot Camp Assistant. Here’s how.
Using Boot Camp
Have you switched to Mac but still use your old PC for a software package that isn’t available on Apple 
computers? With macOS’s Boot Camp feature, you can install a Windows operating system on your MacBook 
and dual boot, and even run a version of Linux. Here’s a guide to how it’s done.
Running Non-Apple 
Operating Systems
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
110
Upkeep, Maintenance and Security

 10    After several restarts your Mac boots up into Windows. You 
have to select a few options to set it up, just as you would an off-
the-shelf Windows PC; but when you’re done, you have Windows 
on your Mac! You can install software, configure your settings and 
generally treat it exactly as if it were a Windows PC.
  9     When you’ve set the partition, click on the Install button and 
follow the on-screen instructions to install Windows. The partition 
is created and installation starts. When asked where you want to 
install Windows, select the Boot Camp partition. Click Advanced 
Options, then opt to format the partition. The task is automatically 
carried out and installation continues.
  8     You must now set up the size of your Windows partition. How 
much of your hard drive space do you want to give over to Windows 
and its associated applications? The default is the bare minimum 
- that is, 20GB - but if you want to give it more, move the slider to 
enlarge or reduce the partitions for macOS and Windows. If you 
want an equal split, click on the Divide Equally button.
  6     If you get a message saying the external drive cannot be used 
as it’s not correctly formatted, open Disk Utility (from Applications 
> Utilities), click on the drive in the side bar, and from the Format 
pull-down select MS-DOS (FAT). Click on Erase, and the drive is wiped 
clean and reformatted. Go back to Boot Camp Assistant and press 
Continue. The Windows support software is downloaded.
  7     When instructed, type your admin password. You’ll be told 
to insert the Windows OS disc too. Do so. If you don’t have an 
optical drive on your Mac, buy or borrow an external one. Apple’s 
own USB Super Drive is ideal, though there are cheaper third-
party alternatives if you’re on a budget. When you’re ready, press 
Continue again. 
  5     Click Continue, and you’re given the chance to download the 
latest Windows support files from Apple (you should), and to install 
Windows 7 or later (whether you check this box depends on which 
version you’re installing). Choose your options, make sure your 
USB drive is inserted and then click on Continue again to proceed. 
Windows support software is downloaded to this drive.
Running Non-Apple Operating Systems
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook 111
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

  1     To choose which operating system to use when you start up 
your Mac, hold the ALT key while it boots. You get a screen offering 
you a choice of boot disks. From this screen you can select Windows 
or Mac OS, using the arrow keys on your keyboard. Press Enter after 
making your selection.
  1     It’s wise to back up your hard drive before doing this. 
Open Boot Camp Assistant once more, and press Continue on the 
opening screen. As you can see, the option to install Windows has 
now become an option to remove it. Check the Remove Windows 
box, but uncheck the option to download the latest support 
software from Apple. Press Continue. 
  2     To change the operating system that boots by default - that 
is, if you start up your Mac without holding the ALT key - open 
System Preferences and select Startup Disk. You can then make your 
choice from the operating systems on offer, as shown. The one you 
select is the one that boots on restart.
  2     On the next screen, you’re told that your hard drive will be 
restored to a single volume. The Windows partition and its contents 
will be erased. Press Restore and enter your admin password when 
instructed. The process takes a while, so don’t worry if the progress 
bar doesn’t seem to be moving. When it’s finished, the Windows 
partition is gone.
Booting into Windows
If you decide you no longer want a Windows Boot Camp 
partition on your hard drive, it can be quickly removed.
Virtualisation  An alternative to dual booting your Mac 
is virtualisation, that is running the second operating system 
on a virtual machine from within macOS. Using software such 
as Parallels Desktop (shown here) or VMware Fusion, you 
can run Windows and Linux operating systems and software 
without leaving Sierra. You can even install a Mac OS X virtual 
machine so that you can run El Capitan or an even older Mac 
operating System alongside Sierra.
Having installed Windows in a Boot Camp partition, how 
do you boot your Mac into Windows OS?
Removing Boot Camp
Using Virtualisation
In many ways, virtualisation is a more elegant way of 
running non-Apple operating systems. Here’s how 
it’s used.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
112
Upkeep, Maintenance and Security

  7     Double-click on the partition; and on the window that 
springs up, select Use as: Ext4 journaling file system and Mount 
Point ‘/’. In the Device for Boot Loader Installation pull-down, select 
/dev/sda1. Click OK. Check Format the Partition. Double click on 
the very small partition called /dev/sda1, and make sure the Use 
as: pull-down is set to EFI Boot Partition. Click OK. Press the Install 
Now button and follow the on-screen instructions. The earlier 
tutorial steps on Booting into Windows also apply to Ubuntu, but 
you must have your USB flash drive plugged in before you switch 
from Mac OS to Ubuntu.
  6     If you’re using a Bluetooth keyboard and mouse, you might 
need to use USB peripherals at this stage. There’s a disk icon on 
the desktop called Install Ubuntu. Open it, and again follow the 
on-screen instructions. When asked if you want to unmount 
disk partitions, decline to do so. You’ve already set one up. For 
Installation Type, choose Something Else; then choose the boot 
partition (you should be able to identify it by its size).
  5     Now it’s time to reboot using the flash drive installer you 
created earlier. Restart your Mac holding down the Alt key, until you 
get to the grey screen showing the boot drives. Choose the USB 
drive called EFI Boot, navigating to it with your keyboard’s arrow 
keys and selecting it with Enter. You get shown some boot options. 
Choose to Boot Linux from ISO File, then follow the on-screen 
instructions until you get to the Linux desktop. 
  4     You must now partition your hard drive. Open Disk Utility 
and select your main hard drive in the left-hand column. Select the 
Partition tab and click the ‘+’ button under the Partition Layout 
window. Click on Macintosh HD 2 and resize it by dragging the 
divider up and down, or simply by entering the size of the partition 
you want in the Size window.
  3     Double-click on Create Live USB; and in the Finder window 
that appears, navigate to your downloaded Ubuntu iso and click on 
Open. Choose the flash drive you want to turn into a bootable USB 
drive; then press Next. Press Begin Installation, and follow the on-
screen instructions to install Ubuntu on the USB drive. You’re told 
when it’s done.
  1     First we must download a Linux operating system installer. 
We’re going to use Ubuntu (www.ubuntu.com), one of the most 
popular versions of Linux available. Make sure you download the 
correct one for your Mac. We’re going for the regular 64-bit image. 
Ubuntu is free, and you’re quite entitled to download it from the 
Internet and install it on however many computers you wish.
  2     You now need a flash drive of at least 2GB. Make sure 
there’s nothing important on it, so it can be erased. Use Disk Utility 
to reformat it as an MS-DOS FAT drive (seeStep 6 earlier in this 
tutorial). The easiest way to create a bootable Linux flash drive is to 
download the utility Mac Linux USB Loader (http://sevenbits.github.
io/Mac-Linux-USB-Loader). Launch the application.
Installing a Linux OS
Running Non-Apple Operating Systems
You can also install a partition for a Linux distribution, 
and boot it from a USB flash drive. Let’s take a look.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook 113
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Modern computers like the Mac are amongst the most complicated 
machines ever designed. When you consider just how complex they 
are and how many lines of code go to make up the programs that 
run on them, it’s an amazing testament to the quality of the Mac 
hardware and software that they’re usually so stable and reliable. 
However, no machine, even a really well made one, can ever be 100 
per cent perfect. If something goes wrong with your Mac: if it stops 
working, the screen freezes up, there’s a problem with the battery, 
the hard disk or the operating system and apps installed on it, you 
don’t always need to call the Genius Bar to get it fixed. There are a 
number of things you can try for yourself that might help and could 
save you the cost of a service call; so let’s take a look at some of the 
things that can go wrong and what you can do about them.
On rare occasions an application might freeze; macOS 
provides a way to ‘force quit’ a frozen app.
  1      Press CMD-ALT-Esc or choose Apple menu > Force Quit from 
the menu bar. The Force Quit window appears. If the app is identified 
as ‘not responding’, select it and click Force Quit. The application 
quits, leaving all other applications open and unaffected.
  2      If you’re still having problems, try restarting your Mac. 
Under the Apple menu, choose Restart. Your open windows will 
reopen if you check the box in the pop-up window that appears, 
so you won’t have to restart every open application when you’re 
back on.
  3      If the problem occurs only when you use a particular 
application, try updating it. Open the App Store and check for 
updates or use the option in the app’s menu on the top bar, found 
next to the Apple menu. If you still have problems with that app, try 
reinstalling it.
Macs are known for their stability and reliability but even so things can occasionally go wrong. Don’t 
panic as these guides are designed to help. Here we take you through the most common issues we’ve 
experienced and how to solve them; so you might not need a trip to the Apple Store after all.
Maintenance and 
Troubleshooting 
Clearing a Frozen Screen
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
114
Upkeep, Maintenance and Security

Maintenance and Troubleshooting 
If your MacBook fails to start when you press power, or if 
it won’t finish booting, try these simple tricks and tips
  1      Make sure the power cable or adapter is plugged into your 
Mac and a mains power outlet and make sure your mains electricity 
is working. This sounds silly but you’d be surprised how many 
people call computer service centres during a power cut.
  2      For notebooks, check whether the battery needs to be 
charged. Plug it into the mains. If the light on the power adapter 
glows amber, it’s charging. Let it charge up for about 30 minutes 
and then try starting it up again. You should only use the charger 
that came with your Mac.
  4      If the problem persists and you can find no way of fixing it, 
book a Genius Bar appointment at your local Apple Store. Here 
Apple’s team of experts can talk you through the problem and if 
they can’t solve it, they can advise as to whether a repair is needed.
  3      Again for notebooks, if the charger fails to start charging 
or simply stops charging, and you don’t see the indicator light on 
the power adapter turn on when you plug in the power cord, try 
unplugging and replugging the power cord to reseat the 
MagSafe plug.
If you’re having trouble booting up your Mac, help is 
at hand from the Mac’s Recovery Drive. 
   1        If your Mac begins to start 
up but won’t finish, maybe stopping 
on the grey screen or giving you a 
folder with a question mark on it, try 
rebooting from the Recovery Drive. 
Press the power button to turn off 
the Mac, then turn it on again whilst 
pressing the Alt button. 
   2       When the boot drives appear on the screen, use the arrow 
keys to select the Recovery HD and press Enter to boot it. Your 
Mac boots but with limited functionality. When it’s done, use the 
Apple menu to restart your Mac again in the normal way and it 
should boot normally.
If Your MacBook Won’t Start
Using the Recovery Drive
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook 115
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

  1      First make sure the router you’re trying to connect to is 
switched on and has a wireless access point. Usually there are 
indicator lights on the front that tell you this, so check in the 
manual. If there seems to be a problem, restart your router by 
switching it off and on again.
  1      You can find your Disk Utility app in the Utilities folder 
within the Applications folder. Or just open Launchpad, the silver 
Dock icon with the space ship, and launch Disk Utility from there. 
On the Launchpad screen, Disk Utility is found in the folder 
marked ‘Other’.
  2      Check the Wi-Fi status icon in the menu bar. It can have up 
to four bars indicating signal strength. If signal strength is low, try 
moving closer to the router. Remember, the signal can be blocked 
by thick walls or other obstructions, so moving around in the 
room might help.
  2      Click on the drive you wish to check and then press the First 
Aid button. Disk Utility’s First Aid feature then checks your disk for 
errors and if necessary, repairs and corrects them. This process 
might take some time if you haven’t run First Aid recently.
  3      When you’re done, click the triangle next to Show Details to 
see what was repaired. Please note that you can also run First Aid 
from the Recovery HD (see Using the Recovery Drive earlier in this 
feature). This might be necessary if you’re having difficulties 
booting your Mac.
  3      If you’re still having problems, go to the Apple menu and 
open System Preferences. Click on Network and select your Wi-Fi 
connection. Then press the Assist Me button at the foot of the 
screen, to diagnose and hopefully solve problems with your Wi-Fi 
connection.
Wi-Fi is usually very reliable but sometimes problems do 
occur. Here’s how to troubleshoot it.
Problems with Wi-Fi
The MacBook’s Disk Utility application can do much to 
diagnose and even repair problems with drives.
Use Disk Utility
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
116
Upkeep, Maintenance and Security

Taking Things Further 
with Your MacBook
118	
 Using Siri on Your Mac
120	
 How to Use the Notification Centre
122	
 Your MacBook’s System Preferences
128	
 Your MacBook’s Picture in Picture Feature
129	
 Your MacBook’s Mission Control Feature
130	
 Using macOS Sierra’s Universal Clipboard
131	
 Your Mac’s Quick Look
132	
 Your Mac’s App Switcher
133	
 Your Mac’s AirDrop
134	
 How to Use macOS and iOS Continuity
There’s plenty more you can do with your MacBook. 
The macOS Sierra operating system is packed with 
features that help you get more from your exciting 
Apple computer. Siri is a great personal digital 
assistant and is now available on the MacBook as 
well as iOS devices. With System Preferences, you 
can customise and modify the way your MacBook 
works whilst features like Handoff and Continuity 
bring your MacBook and other Apple devices closer 
together. Don’t miss Sierra’s picture-in-picture 
feature too, or its multitasking split-screen view.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook 117
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Using Siri on Your Mac
Setting Up Siri
   1       You might have activated Siri during the Sierra set up 
procedure. If not, under the Apple menu, select System Preferences. 
Click on Siri in the bottom row. If it isn’t already ticked, click on 
Enable Siri, on the left. If you want Siri in the menu bar, check that 
box too.
Before you get started with Siri, let’s take a look at its 
system preference pane and set up options.
   2       You can change the language that Siri understands and also 
speaks in using the pull-down menu. You can also change the 
English language voice from a British male to a female voice and a 
different accent, and set up a keyboard shortcut for Siri if you wish.
   3       To launch Siri, click on the icon in the Dock, click on the 
menu bar icon if you’ve opted for one or press the keyboard 
shortcut, again if you have one set up. A Siri window appears in the 
top right corner of the screen, as you can see here.
   4       Using Siri requires an Internet connection, so your MacBook 
can send your voice message to Apple’s servers to be analysed. If 
you don’t have an Internet connection, you cannot use Siri until you 
go online again.
It took a long time but at last, with the Sierra update, Siri has come to the MacBook. Apple’s digital 
personal assistant lets you communicate with your computer by speaking, just like you already do with 
the iPad and iPhone. Let’s take a look at what Siri can do for you and how to make the most of it.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
118
Taking Things Further with Your MacBook

Using Siri
   1       Siri is great for checking your appointments. You can ask 
what appointments you have coming up for the rest of the week or 
month, what’s coming up between two dates, and more. Just ask 
Siri a question in regular English and it will probably understand 
you perfectly.
   4       Finally, why not have a bit of fun? Try asking “What is zero 
divided by zero” for an amusing response. Tell Siri you’re drunk and 
it suggests you call a taxi and ask “How many [anything] does it take 
to screw in a lightbulb?” for a take on this famous joke.
   3       Siri can get information from a lot of macOS’s preinstalled 
apps. For example, you can make calculations and conversions using 
Siri, which harnesses the power of the Calculator app. Just ask a 
question in this vein and Siri provides the answer.
New line - Move to the next 
line
New paragraph - Start a new 
paragraph
All caps - Make the next word all 
uppercase
All caps on ... all caps off - Make 
part of what you say 
uppercase
No caps - Make the next word 
lowercase
No caps on ... no caps off - Make 
sure part of what you say is all 
lowercase
Space bar - Prevent a hyphen 
from appearing in a normally 
hyphenated word
Period - .
Comma - ,
Apostrophe - ’
Exclamation mark - !
Question mark - ?
Ampersand - &
Asterisk - *
Open parenthesis - (
Close parenthesis - )
Open bracket - [
Close bracket - ]
Open brace - {
Close brace - }
Dash -
Hyphen -
Em dash  ̶
Percent sign - %
Copyright sign - ©
Registered sign - ®
Section sign - §
Dollar sign - $
Cent sign - ¢
Pound Sterling sign - £
Degree sign - °
Caret - ^
At sign - @
Pound sign - #
Greater than sign - >
Less than sign - <
Forward slash - /
Back slash - \
Vertical bar - |
Smiley - :-)
Frowny face - :-(
Wink - ;-)
Now that Siri is up and running, let’s take a look at what 
Siri on the MacBook can do and how to use it.
   2       You can send a message using Siri, instead of looking up the 
person in Contacts and then typing the message itself. Just say, 
“Send a message to X”, and Siri will find the person and ask what you 
want to say. Speak your message and you can then check and send it.
Siri Dictation Commands
Siri also understands dictation as well as words, so if you are dictating an email, for instance, this useful list of dictation 
commands that Siri recognises prove very useful. Just speak the word and the action or punctuation is added.
Using Siri on Your Mac
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook 119
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

There are two ways of accessing the Notification Centre. 
Use a mouse click or a trackpad gesture.
Responding to Notifications
   1       Click the icon showing three horizontal lines preceded by 
bullet points, which is found on the far right-hand side of the 
Apple menu bar at the top of the screen. Click on the Notifications 
tab at the top to see your notifications.
   1       Clicking on any notification in Notification Centre takes you 
to its app. Iffor example the notification is a new message, you will 
be taken to Messages where you can type your response. To get rid 
of an app’s notifications, click the cross to its right that appears 
when you hover over it. 
   2       To turn off all on-screen alerts, go to the Notifications 
panel, scroll down to see the Do Not Disturb switch which mutes 
notifications for the rest of the day. Alternatively hold Alt and 
click on the Notifications icon in the menu bar. When muted this 
icon is greyed.
   2       Alternatively, use a two fingered right-to-left swipe on a 
trackpad. This works with a Magic Trackpad (shown here) or a Mac 
notebook’s built-in trackpad, but you must swipe at the extreme 
right side of the trackpad.
The Notification Centre gathers together all your important updates, notifications and everything else 
you need to know, all in one place. You can configure it to suit your needs, and it also provides on-screen 
reminders and alerts so you’ll never miss a thing. Here’s how to access and use this handy feature.
How to Use the  
Notification Centre 
Accessing Notification Centre
Having read them, here’s what you can do with your 
Notification Centre notifications.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
120
Taking Things Further with Your MacBook

   4       Alert Style controls how notifications appear on the 
screen. If you select Banners, notifications will appear briefly 
on-screen and then disappear. Choose Alerts and the notification 
remains on the screen until it’s actioned or manually dismissed. 
Choosing None turns off the app’s pop-up notifications. 
   5       All notifications appear in the Notification Centre sidebar 
pane regardless of the option you choose here. You can select 
different Alert Style settings for different apps, so some are shown 
as banners, some as alerts and some not at all.
   6       Using the pull-down menu, you can change the order in 
which Notification Centre displays its notifications. Order them 
manually by app and then you can drag the apps in the left-hand 
window into a preferred order.
  1      To open the Notification Centre Settings pane, open the 
Apple menu and select System Preferences. You’ll find Notifications 
in the top-right corner.
   2       Alternatively, open the Notification Centre, and click on the 
cog icon in the bottom-right corner. The preference pane for 
Notification Centre is opened.
   3       In the Notification Centre Settings pane you’ll see a list 
of all your apps. You can select which ones you want to appear 
in Notification Centre here. Click on one of these apps to show 
its options.
Notification Centre Settings
Notification Centre is very flexible and can be set up to 
work exactly the way you want it to. 
How to Use the Notification Centre 
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook 121
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Your MacBook’s 	 	
System Preferences
When using a new MacBook for the first time, it’s easy to begin using it for day-to-day tasks without 
configuring it properly or exploring the settings. It’s well worth taking a few minutes to familiarise 
yourself with the System Preferences controls and the many options contained therein.
 General     General is the first options group, and clicking it allows 
you to customise several different view options such as the colour of 
buttons and icons, the colour of highlighted items in Finder, and 
how scrollbars appear. It also allows you to control whether 
applications should open the windows or documents you last 
viewed when you relaunch an application. Each of the options is 
clearly explained, and changing any of them will not negatively 
affect the operation of your computer. By default, menus and 
highlights are blue.
 Accessing the System Preferences      
As long as you read what you’re adjusting before making any 
changes, delving into System Preferences can make using your Mac 
a lot more enjoyable. There are several ways to open the System 
Preferences pane. You can click on the Apple icon in the top left 
corner of the screen and select System Preferences..., click on the 
Dock icon showing cogs on a silver square, or open it from the 
Launchpad or Applications folder. Opening System Preferences 
reveals a window with a grid of icons split into categories, each 
representing a different area of options you can configure.
 Language & Region     Language & Region lets you control 
the localisation of your Mac, allowing you to select the language 
you’d like macOS to be in. To change the language, first add a new 
one to the list of Preferred Languages by clicking the ‘+’ icon and 
selecting the one you want. Now drag the language you wish to use 
to the top of the Preferred Languages list and restart. You can also 
change the region your Mac is to be used in, the calendar used, the 
day on which a new week starts and whether your menu bar clock is 
12 or 24-hour.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
122
Taking Things Further with Your MacBook

Your MacBook’s System Preferences
 Desktop & Screen Saver: Desktop     Desktop & Screen 
Saver is split into two tabs. The Wallpaper tab allows you to set your 
wallpaper, or a folder with multiple wallpapers on your computer. 
The + and - icons at the bottom of the left column allow you to add 
or remove folders of pictures to use as desktop wallpapers. This can 
be particularly handy when combined with the Change Picture 
feature, also at the bottom, which cycles through all of the images in 
the specified wallpaper folder. 
The Translucent Menu Bar option controls whether the bar across 
the top of your screen is a solid grey/silver colour, or whether your 
wallpaper is visible through it.
 Desktop & Screen Saver: Screen Saver      
The Screen Saver tab allows you to select the source of photographs 
to be displayed in your screen saver, including the popular National 
Geographic, the style in which they are displayed, and the duration 
your Mac should be idle before the screen saver starts. If you don’t 
want your screen saver to display photographs, you can scroll down 
the left column to select a more traditional screen saver.
 Dock     This controls the appearance of the Dock, the row of icons 
at the bottom of your screen. You can customise the position of the 
dock, the size of the icons, and whether the dock should auto-hide 
and display only when you hover your mouse over the bottom of the 
screen, allowing for more of your screen space to be taken by 
programs you’re using.
 Mission Control     The Mission Control options allow you to 
control how applications are grouped and arranged in Mission 
Control, which is accessed from the Applications folder, LaunchPad, 
or by pressing the F3 key. Mission Control is useful for quickly 
switching between applications or open windows, and seeing what 
is currently running on your Mac.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook 123
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

 Energy Saver     Energy Saver is a settings panel available to 
those using Mac notebooks. Here you can configure  when your 
display is put to sleep, when the computer is put to sleep, and 
whether the hard disks are put to sleep. These settings can be 
customised for when your Mac is running on battery power, and 
when the power adaptor is connected.
 Security & Privacy     Security & Privacy controls the password 
protection of your user account, as well as when macOS should 
require you to enter your password. It also controls encryption of 
your files, the firewall, and your privacy settings. Security settings 
should be changed with care, as incorrectly setting them could make 
your Mac susceptible to malicious software. Be sure to read the 
labels next to each setting before confirming changes.
 Spotlight     Spotlight, the magnifying glass at the top right of 
the preferences window, lets you control which items are indexed 
and searchable through Spotlight. You can select or deselect file 
types, or head in to the Privacy section to ensure no files in a specific 
location are returned in Spotlight results, regardless of type.
 Notifications     Notifications controls which applications can 
display alerts and notifications on the screen, and the style in which 
they are displayed. You can also customise how many items each 
notification category displays in the Notification Center, which is 
accessed by pressing the icon at the top right of the screen.
 Extensions     Using the Extensions preference pane, you can 
activate and deactivate extensions that you’ve installed yourself and 
also Apple extensions. For example, you can change which apps 
appear in the Share menu.
 Displays     The Displays options vary depending on the type of 
Mac you’re using. Typically you can control the screen resolution of 
your Mac, and also the mirroring settings if any AirPlay devices are 
available on your network. You can also configure and calibrate the 
colour profile of your screen(s).
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
124
Taking Things Further with Your MacBook

Your Mac’s System Preferences
 Trackpad     Trackpad settings are for those using Mac 
notebooks, or those who have a Magic Trackpad connected. Similar 
to the mouse settings, you can control tracking, scroll, and click 
speeds, as well as enable and disable gestures. Adding the 
secondary (right) click to the bottom right corner of the trackpad is a 
very handy setting here.
 Printers & Scanners     Printers & Scanners controls the 
settings for printers and scanners you have connected to your 
computer, and also allows you to browse the network your Mac is 
connected to, to add new printers and scanners. You can also select 
the default printer and default paper size. 
 Sound     With Sound, you can enable, disable, and change the 
default sound effects for different events within macOS. You can also 
select the default input and output devices, which is useful if you 
happen to be using external audio interfaces or microphones.
 Keyboard     Keyboard lets you customise the functionality of the 
F-keys. You can also control whether keys repeat when you hold 
them down, and the backlight settings if you’re using a backlit 
keyboard. You can also view the keys required for keyboard 
shortcuts, and change them to different shortcuts if you’d prefer. The 
Dictation settings are also here.
 Mouse     Similarly, Mouse allows you to control the tracking, scroll, 
and click speed of the mouse (if you’re using one). You can also find 
settings for adding and troubleshooting Bluetooth mice here.
 iCloud     The iCloud settings allow you to control which data is 
synchronised with your iCloud account. From here you can view 
your iCloud account, manage the items that are currently being 
synchronised, and increase or decrease the amount of space 
available on your account.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook 125
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

 Bluetooth     Bluetooth is where you configure the majority of 
your wireless peripherals, such as Bluetooth keyboards and mice, as 
well as any other Bluetooth devices you might have. You can also 
disable Bluetooth entirely, which can help save battery life if you do 
not use any of these devices.
 Users & Groups     With Users & Groups you can add new user 
accounts to your Mac, change the password of an existing account, 
configure which applications run when you log in, and also set up 
the Guest User account. The Guest User account is particularly 
useful if you want to let people use your Mac for a short amount of 
time without being able to access your files or saved passwords. 
Once they have finished their session and log out of the Guest User 
account, all of their data is deleted.
 Sharing     Sharing allows you to configure various methods of 
sharing on your Mac. You can control whether other devices on the 
network can remotely view and control your screen, which of your files 
are accessible across the network, whether you’d like to grant access to 
attached printers, scanners and other devices, and so on. Each sharing 
setting can be controlled independently, and clicking the Help icon at 
the bottom right corner of the window after selecting an item provides 
a clear explanation of what the setting does.
 Parental Controls     
When used in conjunction 
with a second user account, 
the Parental Controls options 
help you make your Mac 
child-friendly by controlling 
which content can or can’t 
be accessed, and when the 
Mac can be used.
 Internet Accounts      Internet Accounts is a hub for all of the 
accounts your Mac has set up on it. These accounts are used for 
sending e-mails, as well as sharing on social networks on which 
you have profiles. The + and - icons can be used to add and 
remove accounts, and clicking an account allows you to further 
modify its settings.
 Network     This allows you to configure the network devices 
and locations to which your Mac can connect. You can add new 
VPNs here, as well as control your DHCP and DNS settings. Chances 
are, unless you know what you’re doing or you’ve been asked to 
change these settings by a network administrator or your Internet 
Service Provider (ISP), you won’t need to make any changes here.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
126
Taking Things Further with Your MacBook

Your Mac’s System Preferences
 Date & Time     Date & Time has additional localisation controls, 
allowing you to select whether your time zone is set automatically 
based on your current location. You can also select to have the time 
and date set automatically, and control whether macOS displays a 
12 or 24-hour clock.
 Siri     This is where you configure the Mac’s new Siri feature. You 
can switch it on or off with the checkbox in the left column and 
change the language, accent, input source, keyboard shortcut and 
more in the right. If you don’t want to show Siri in the top bar, 
uncheck the box at the bottom of the pane.
 Time Machine     Time Machine is a fantastic automated backup 
utility that ensures your files are kept backed up. Here you can 
enable and disable Time Machine, manage your backups, and 
configure new backup disks.
 Accessibility     Additional to the Dictation & Speech settings, 
Accessibility allows you to control more typical accessibility features 
such as screen contrast, cursor size, and keyboard settings. You can 
also configure spoken commands, which allow a user to launch 
programs by speaking. Each of these options has very flexible 
settings, and the Help icon at the bottom right provides a lot of 
additional information.
 Startup Disk     Startup Disk is a setting that you will likely never 
change, but should you ever attach an additional hard drive to your 
Mac from which you would like to be able to boot, or if you’d like to 
configure your Mac’s hard drive so that you can connect it to 
another Mac and boot from it, this is where you do so.
 App Store     App Store controls how available updates are 
handled by default. You can choose whether you want your Mac to 
automatically install new updates, check for updates but not install 
them, or not background check at all. 
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook 127
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

   1       Picture-in-picture (PiP) won’t work with all web video, but if 
the website has implemented the feature, when you watch a video 
a PiP icon appears in the video controls when you hover your 
pointer over the video.
    2       Click on the PiP icon to watch the video in its own 
window. You can drag the video window into any corner of the 
screen. Hover over it and click on the ‘X’ icon to close the separate 
video window again.
   3       It also works with iTunes videos. Once again, hover over the 
video window to bring up the video controls, and click on the PiP 
icon for a floating window. You can watch your movies while doing 
something else.
   4       The floating video window always sits on top of your 
on-screen windows, even when you’re using an app in full-screen 
mode. You can resize the floating video screen by dragging one of 
its corners too.
With Sierra’s Picture in Picture feature, you can float a video window from Safari or iTunes over your desktop 
or even a full-screen app. You can carry on working on whatever it is you’re doing, while watching your 
video at the same time. Here’s how to get this up and running on your MacBook.
Your MacBook’s Picture in 
Picture Feature
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
128
Taking Things Further with Your MacBook

Picture in Picture and Mission Control 
Apple has introduced a few new features to Mission Control, making window management simpler and 
more instinctive. It looks very similar to previous versions of Mission Control and is activated in the same 
way. But underneath the surface it boasts some interesting features. Let’s take a look at them.
Mission Control in a Nutshell
Your MacBook’s Mission 
Control Feature
The new Mission Control will be familiar to those who 
have used it on previous versions.
   4       You can still use the Exposé buttons in Sierra. F3 takes you 
straight to Mission Control. You can clear the Desktop with Fn-F11 
too. This combination of familiar features and new material makes 
Mission Control great to use.
   1       To activate Mission Control, swipe upwards with three 
fingers on a trackpad or tap the F3 key on your keyboard. This is 
unchanged from previous versions of the Mac’s operating system, 
unless you’ve modified the gesture settings yourself.
   3       You can open a document in full screen from Mission 
Control simply by dragging its window upwards, onto the strip 
showing the desktops. You can also create a new desktop space by 
clicking the plus sign, whether the Spaces bar is open or not.
   2       Unlike previous versions of Mission Control, open windows 
are presented in a single layer instead of being stacked according to 
which application produced them. Click on a window to bring its 
app to the fore.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook 129
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Universal Clipboard is a great way to shuttle small sections of data between your MacBook and other Macs 
and iOS devices, as long as the Macs are running Sierra, iOS devices are on iOS 10 and all your devices are 
signed into the same Apple account. Here’s a guide to cutting on one device and pasting on another.
   1       To use Universal Clipboard, the devices in question must be 
logged into the same iCloud account. If they’re yours, they probably 
already are but if you have trouble using this tutorial, it might be 
worth checking. 
    2       Now you can copy and paste a piece of text from one 
device to another, quickly and easily. On your MacBook, simply 
copy it to your clipboard by highlighting the text in question, then 
pressing either CMD-X to cut it or CMD-C to copy.
   3       Now, on your iOS device, double tap on the place where you 
want to paste the text you cut or copied on your MacBook. From the 
pop-up menu, select Paste and it appears. There might be a slight 
lag while the text uploaded to iCloud.
   4       It works the other way too. You can copy text from your iOS 
device running iOS 10 and paste it on your Mac using CMD-V. It 
works for images and video too. We copied this photo from Photos 
on our iPad and pasted it into TextEdit on our MacBook.
Using Sierra’s 
Universal Clipboard
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
130
Taking Things Further with Your MacBook

Universal Clipboard and Quick Look 
Quick Look is an incredibly useful and time saving feature that lets you inspect a document or image 
without actually opening it. It’s great for picking through a selection of photographs to find the one you 
want or checking a text doc before emailing it to a friend or professional contact. 
   1       To use Quick Look, single-click on a file or folder in Finder, 
and press the Space Bar. It’s as simple as that. A window opens 
previewing that file. Tap Space again to close it.
   3       Another way to use Quick Look is to highlight a group of 
files before pressing Space. The Quick Look window gains two extra 
controls – chevrons to cycle through the files and a button to look 
at thumbnails of them all. It’s a great way to find a specific picture in 
a folder full of photos.
Getting the Most from Quick Look
   2       After opening a Quick Look window, you can share the file or 
open it in its native app from the top bar. Just click on one of the 
buttons in the top right corner.
   4       Press the button with four squares on it, found on the left 
side of the toolbar next to the chevrons, to see all the selected files 
as thumbnails - as shown. You can then click on one of them to view 
that particular file in Quick Look. The Sharing and Open buttons 
only appear when a single file is viewed.
Your MacBook’s 
Quick Look
Quick Look is a really handy tool when you’ve 
familiarised yourself with it. This is how it’s used. 
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook 131
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

   1       Using the App Switcher is also very simple. Hold the CMD 
key and press Tab. A window showing the icons of all your open 
apps is displayed.
   3       You can move forwards or backwards through the list of open 
apps using the arrow keys at the bottom right of your keyboard. 
   2       You can toggle through these apps by repeatedly pressing 
the Tab key and releasing CMD when you’ve highlighted the app 
you want.
   4       You can also click on one of the app icons with your mouse 
pointer. When you get used to App Switcher, you’ll wonder how you 
did without it.
When you get into the habit of using App Switcher, you 
find your productivity is significantly boosted.
Switching Apps with App Switcher
With App Switcher you can toggle between apps that are currently running on your MacBook without 
taking your hands off the keyboard. It’s a really great feature that significantly speeds  up your workflow if 
you use it on a regular basis. Here’s how to get the most from the App Switcher feature.
Your Mac’s App Switcher
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
132
Taking Things Further with Your MacBook

App Switcher and AirDrop
   4       On your Mac, AirDrop is available from the sidebar in Finder 
windows, from the Share menu (the square with the up-pointing 
arrow) and, in Finder, from the Go pull-down menu. On an iOS 
device, you AirDrop through the Share menu.
   2       To use AirDrop on your Mac, Wi-Fi must be switched on. If 
it’s off, click on the menulet at the top of the screen and switch it on.
   1       To use AirDrop to transfer a 
file between a Mac and an iOS 
device, you need a Mac released in 
2012 or later. The iOS device must 
be running iOS 7 or later. From the 
Apple pull-down menu (top left 
corner of the screen), select About 
this Mac to see when it was made. If 
it’s older than 2012, but still has 
AirDrop in the Finder window’s 
sidebar, it can only AirDrop files 
with other Macs.
   5       On your Mac, you can drag and drop a file onto a nearby 
device shown in the AirDrop window, or click on it after selecting 
AirDrop from a Share menu. Remember, the two devices have to be 
no more than around 30 feet apart. The person you sent it to is then 
offered the chance to accept or reject this file.
   6       When someone tries to send you a file using AirDrop, you 
also get the chance to accept or reject it. Make your choice, and if 
you accept it, it’s saved to your Downloads folder.
   3       Your iOS device, which must be no older than an iPhone 5, 
iPad (4th generation), iPad mini or an iPod touch (5th generation), 
must have both Bluetooth and Wi-Fi active. Swipe up from the 
bottom of the screen to get to Control Center, and tap the Bluetooth 
and Wi-Fi icons if they’re not already on.
AirDrop is arguably the simplest way to share files between a MacBook and another Mac or an iOS 
device. It uses a direct connection so the devices don’t have to be on the same wireless network; they do 
have to be in close proximity though, and meet some fairly exacting system requirements.
Your MacBook’s AirDrop
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook 133
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

  1      The system requirements for Instant Hotspot are pretty 
stringent. Your MacBook must be mid-2012 or newer and running 
Yosemite or later. To find out when your MacBook was made, click 
on the Apple icon in the top left and select About This Mac. Your 
iOS device must be an iPhone 5 or later, iPad (4th generation) or 
later, an iPod touch (5th generation) or later or any iPad mini.
With Instant Hotspot, you can use your iPhone like a 
portable Wi-Fi modem. Here’s how.
  2      Make sure your MacBook and all the iOS devices you want to 
use with Instant Hotspot are signed into the same iCloud account. 
On an iOS device, go to Settings > iCloud, and on a Mac, open 
System Preferences (under the Apple menu, top left corner) and 
click on iCloud.
  3      Make sure your iPhone has a cellular connection to the 
Internet. You should see a 3G or 4G symbol at the top of the screen. 
With Instant Hotspot, there’s no need to go into Settings and turn 
on Personal Hotspot. Instead, it’s a persistent connection.
  4      To access your Instant 
Hotspot Internet connection, 
on a Mac, click on the Wi-Fi 
menulet in the top right of 
the screen, and select your 
iPhone from the list. On an 
iOS device, do the same 
through Settings > Wi-Fi. 
An indicator on the top of 
the iPhone’s screen shows a 
connection has been made. 
If you can’t do this, check 
your mobile phone carrier 
supports personal hotspots. 
These days, most carriers do 
indeed offer this service.
Instant Hotspot
With a Mac running OS X 10.10 or later and an iOS device with iOS 8 or later installed, your Apple gear 
works together seamlessly. You can make and receive calls on your MacBook, send and receive text 
messages on any of your devices and share files between your MacBook and iOS devices with AirDrop.
How to Use macOS and 
iOS Continuity
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
134
Taking Things Further with Your MacBook

  2      Make sure all the 
Macs and iOS devices you 
wish to use for Continuity 
phone calls are logged into 
the same iCloud account 
(see Step 2 on the previous 
page for more details), and 
that they’re also on the same 
Wi-Fi network. On your Mac, 
click the Wi-Fi menulet in the 
top right end of the menu 
bar at the top of the desktop. 
On an iOS device, open 
Settings and look at what’s 
listed under Wi-Fi.
Continuity lets you take phone calls on your Mac, iPad or 
iPod touch, through your iPhone.
Phone Calls
  1      The system requirements for Continuity phone calls are 
much less taxing than for some of its other services. All you need 
is an iPhone running iOS 8 with an activated carrier plan (that is, a 
contract or an in-credit pay-as-you-go account), and a Mac running 
Yosemite. If you want to take calls on other iOS devices, these too 
must be running iOS 8.
  3      All these devices must also be signed into FaceTime using 
the same iCloud account. On your MacBook, launch the FaceTime 
app and sign in. If you’re already signed in using a different account, 
from the FaceTime pull-down menu, open Preferences and sign out. 
On an iOS device, go to Settings > FaceTime and sign in. On your 
iPhone, make sure FaceTime and iPhone Mobile Calls are on. 
  4      To answer a call on your MacBook, wait for the notification 
to appear, as seen here. You can then click on one of the options 
therein. They’re pretty self-explanatory. Answering the call on your 
Mac means using its built-in mic and speakers, so be careful about 
taking a private call in a public place. To make a call on your Mac, 
click a phone number in Contacts, Calendar or Safari.
  5      To initiate a telephone 
call using an iOS device other 
than your iPhone (maybe 
an iPad, or an iPod touch), 
again you tap on a number in 
Contacts, Calendar or Safari. 
To answer an incoming call 
on this device, simply Slide to 
Answer, as instructed on the 
screen. With your Mac and 
your iOS devices set up to use 
Continuity Phone Calls, all your 
devices ring when there’s an 
incoming call, so it can get a 
little noisy if you have all of 
them to hand.
  6       If you want to switch off Continuity Phone Calls on one 
or more of your devices, on your MacBook, open FaceTime’s 
preferences and uncheck the box marked ‘iPhone Cellular Calls’. 
On an iOS device, go to Settings > FaceTime and turn off ‘iPhone 
Mobile Calls’.
How to Use macOS and iOS Continuity
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook 135
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

  2      Setting up is pretty simple. You must first enable iMessage 
on both your Mac and the non-iPhone iOS devices you wish to 
use for texting. On your Mac, open the Messages app and go to 
Preferences (under the Messages pull-down menu). Enter your 
Apple  ID, if it’s not already there. On an iOS device, go to Settings 
> Messages > Send & Receive and again enter your Apple ID if 
necessary.
  3      Finally, on your iPhone, you must go to Settings > Messages 
and turn on Text Message Forwarding. Tap on this option, and 
you’re shown a list of devices logged into the same iCloud account. 
Switch on all the ones with which you want to share your text 
messages. Each device displays a verification code you must type on 
your iPhone.
  5      Sending text messages through your Mac is incredibly 
convenient, especially when sending long messages that would 
take a long time to type on your iPhone’s keyboard. It’s great 
for replying too - you can just use whichever device is nearest. If 
you’re working on your Mac, you get to read and reply to your text 
messages without even reaching for your phone.
  6      You can initiate a text message chat with someone who 
doesn’t use an Apple device by clicking a phone number or Message 
icon in Safari, Contacts or Calendar. Here, in Contacts,  click on the 
icon and select a number from the pop-up. A message window will 
soon appear.
  1      To send or receive an SMS (Short Message Service) or MMS 
(Multimedia Messaging Service), from your Mac you must be 
running Yosemite or later. You also need an iPhone running iOS 8.1 
or later. Text messaging from an iPad or iPod touch also demands 
they be using iOS 8.1 or later. On iOS devices, go to Settings > 
General > Software Update to check you’re up to scratch.
SMS and MMS Messaging.
  4      All your SMS and MMS messages now appear on your Mac 
and/or iOS devices, regardless of whether the person who sent 
them uses an iPhone. If the sender is using a non-Apple device, the 
speech bubbles you send are green instead of the blue that’s used 
for iMessages, that is, messages sent between Apple devices.
You can now see SMS messages on your MacBook, 
regardless of what phone the sender has.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
136
Taking Things Further with Your MacBook

What’s New in macOS 
10.13: High Sierra?
138	
 Climbing High Sierra
138	
Introducing High Sierra
138	
New in the Photos App 
139	
Siri Rocks the House 
140	
Going on Safari with Apple’s Web Browser
140	
Taking a New Look at Video Standards
141	
iCloud Flying High 
141	
Coming Soon in Mail
142	
Apple Takes a Virtual Reality Trip
142	
Fun Photos in the FaceTime App
142	
Spotlight on Spotlight
143	
Notable Notes Features 
143	
A New File System
143	
A New Metal API 
The next version of macOS is coming soon, and it’s looking good. Called macOS 10.13: High Sierra, it’s not a 
feature packed update but rather optimises, polishes and perfects the features already present in macOS. 
That’s not to say there are no new features in High Sierra. The Photos app gets a substantial revision and there 
are some great little tweaks and touches added to Safari, Mail, Notes, FaceTime, Spotlight and more. We could 
soon see Apple enter the exciting world of virtual reality too. Over the next few pages, we take a look at High 
Sierra and what it can do for you and your MacBook. 
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook 137
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

At the Worldwide Developers Conference 2017, Apple announced 
the latest release of its Mac operating system, macOS 10.13: 
High Sierra. It’s named after a Californian mountain range and is 
intended to be a maintenance release, so the focus is on polishing, 
optimising and improving existing features and facilities rather than 
adding new ones. It’s the same sort of thing Apple did with Snow 
Leopard and Mountain Lion. That’s not to say there’s nothing new 
to report, though. Over these next six pages, we take a look at new 
features added to apps such as Photos, Safari, Notes and more. 
The new operating system arrives in ‘the fall’, which usually means 
late September or early October. A public beta is out now but 
we advise against installing it on your main Mac, as it may still be 
buggy. Like the last few releases of the Mac operating system, it will 
be free to download and use. 
However, is your Mac capable of running macOS High Sierra? If 
you’re already running macOS 10.12: Sierra, the answer is a definite 
‘yes’ but here’s a list of compatible Macs:
• MacBook Pro (2010 and later)
• MacBook (Late 2009 and later)
• MacBook Air (2010 and later)
• Mac Pro (2010 and later)
• iMac (Late 2009 and later)
• Mac mini (2010 and later)
What is High Sierra? On what Macs can you run it? When 
will it be released? How much will it cost?
Introducing High Sierra
New in the Photos App
Photos is one of the Mac’s post popular apps and it’s 
getting some new features in High Sierra.
  1      The Photos app gains both organisation and editing tools 
with High Sierra. For example, it now has an always-on sidebar, with 
a great many more options on display. 
  2      The Imports view now puts all your past imports in the 
order in which they were imported, making it really easy to find (for 
example) last month’s wedding snaps.
macOS 10.13: High Sierra is largely a maintenance build, optimising and polishing existing features 
instead of adding new ones. It’s not without its interesting tidbits though. For example, the Photos and 
Safari apps have some really great additions. Let’s see what’s coming in High Sierra.
Climbing High Sierra
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
138
What’s New in macOS 10.13: High Sierra?

  3      In the top right corner of the app window, there’s a filter 
option, that lets you filter your photos by keywords, favourites, only 
show edited photos, only show videos and more.
  4      The People option has been improved. Now the thumbnails 
of folks in your photos are bigger and the app does a better job of 
recognising people and grouping photos they’re in.
Climbing High Sierra
  5      The Photos editing tools get a boost, with new features such 
as curves for fine-tuning things like colour and contrast. You can 
modify colours only in a selective range too.
  6      Photos now integrates with editing apps such as Pixelmator 
and Photoshop. Switch between Photos to a compatible app and 
edits are retained and restored to your photo library.
  7      Apple has long let you order prints, books and calendars 
straight from Photos. This is to open up to third parties, so you can 
order from companies other than Apple.
As well as getting a more natural voice sound, Siri can 
learn your music preferences and suggest something for 
you to listen to based on your tastes. It can also tell you 
about albums and songs that are playing.
Siri Rocks the House
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook 139
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Going on Safari with Apple’s Web Browser
After Photos, Safari is the app that got the biggest update with macOS High Sierra. It’s not a radical overhaul but 
Apple’s trusty web browser gets some significant, and very welcome new features.
  1      Some online advertisers track your online behaviour, 
showing ads for things you’ve enquired about online. To protect 
your privacy, High Sierra Safari can block this tracking.
  3      You can tailor specific settings like the zoom level, location 
services, content blockers and more for individual websites. These 
settings are then applied whenever you load that site.
  2      Something else High Sierra Safari can block is videos that 
automatically start playing when you load a web page. You can 
override this for pages where you want a video to autoplay.
  4     Safari’s Reader view is turned off and on by clicking on the 
icon in the top left of the URL bar. In High Sierra Safari, you can surf 
the web with Reader view always on.
Taking a New Look at Video Standards
The current video standard is H.264 encoding. High Sierra 
introduces a new, more powerful standard, H.265, also known as 
High Efficiency Video Coding or HEVC; introduced here by Apple’s 
Craig Federighi at WWDC 2017.
The new video standard offers up to 40 per cent better 
compression and is great for streaming 4K video content. High 
Sierra gives software encoder support for HEVC for all Macs and the 
hardware acceleration for the latest models. 
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
140
What’s New in macOS 10.13: High Sierra?

iCloud Flying High
A few new features have been incorporated into iCloud, 
Apple’s cloud computing service. Let’s take a look.
Dropbox users have enjoyed this feature for a while and now it’s 
coming to iCloud. With High Sierra, share a file in your iCloud Drive 
just by sending someone a link. 
All your Messages are now synced in iCloud, so all your 
conversations and attachments are visible on all your Apple 
devices, as long as they’re signed into your iCloud account.
Climbing High Sierra
iCloud Photo Library syncs your photo albums over all your Apple 
devices and if you need storage for the whole family, you can buy 
family storage space for iCloud too.
Coming Soon in Mail
Mail is another app that is only lightly updated in High 
Sierra but the forthcoming features look great.
Mail’s search function gets an upgrade in High Sierra. Harnessing 
the power of Spotlight, we’re promised it will almost always find 
the message you’re looking for.
In full-screen view, instead of having an email you’re composing 
appear as a floating window,  you can use a split-screen view in High 
Sierra, with your email on one side and received mails on the other.
If you send and receive a lot of emails, you’ll be glad to know in 
High Sierra, the app is optimised to use up to 35 per cent less 
storage space for your mailbox than it did before.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook 141
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Apple Takes a Virtual Reality Trip
When it comes to the burgeoning virtual reality (VR) revolution, Apple has so far lagged behind; maybe this will 
change with the release of the new iMacs, which are very graphically capable.
Although to date Apple hasn’t entered the VR arena, judging by 
patents the company has filed, it’s been exploring the technology for 
around a decade. More was revealed at WWDC.
Apple is working with Valve on bringing the Steam VR gaming 
platform to the Mac. Virtual reality games are already available on 
Steam but to date, only for the PC.
According to Apple’s Craig Federighi, the powerful graphics 
capabilities of the new Macs make them ideal for virtual reality. High 
Sierra includes programming tools for VR creation.
An awesome Star Wars-themed virtual reality demo was shown 
alongside High Sierra at the launch event. If the controls are as good 
as the graphics, it will be amazing to use.
Fun Photos in the 
FaceTime App
There’s a new feature 
in FaceTime called Live 
Photo. This allows you to 
take photographs of your 
FaceTime chats. The photo 
is then added to your 
Photos Library.
Spotlight on Spotlight
Spotlight is more powerful. If travelling by plane, you can 
enter your flight number to see, flight times, gate number and 
more. It shows multiple Wikipedia entries for searches too. 
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
142
What’s New in macOS 10.13: High Sierra?

Notable Notes Features
Notes is great for keeping your jottings in sync across 
Apple devices, and it’s gained some new features.
In High Sierra, you can pin important notes to the top of your list, 
so they’re always to hand. Just swipe it right and click on the pin. 
Repeat these actions to remove the pin again.
You can also add small tables to notes in High Sierra, as you can see 
here. This feature is currently a little basic but we hope it grows into 
something really powerful and useful.
A New File System
Data file systems are at the root of all modern 
technologies and Apple’s is about to get an overhaul.
Apple’s old file system, HFS, has its roots in technologies 30 years 
old. It’s to be replaced by Apple File System (APFS) which is better 
suited to today’s computing needs.
The new file system, which is available from Disk Utility in High 
Sierra, is optimised for modern, 64-bit data structures and is much 
faster in operation than the old HFS.
Climbing High Sierra
A New Metal API
The graphics API is what programmers use to get the very most 
from the Mac’s graphical potential. With High Sierra, Apple 
releases a new version of the Metal API, called Metal 2.
There’s a new version of the Metal application 
programming interface (API) but what does it do?
The graphics API is what programmers use to get the very most 
from the Mac’s graphical potential. With High Sierra, Apple 
releases a new version of the Metal API, called Metal 2.
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook 143
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Finder Shortcuts 
These shortcuts are available when you’re using Sierra’s 
Finder features, like windows and folders.
Command + [	
	
Go to the previous folder
Command + ]	
	
Go to the next folder
Command + ↑	
	
Navigate up one level
Command + ↓	
	
Navigate down one level
Option + Double click	
Open the selected folder in a 		
	
	
	
	
new window and close the 	
	
	
	
	
	
current window
Command + Double click	
Open selected folder in a new tab
Command + Tab	
	
Cycle forward through your 	 	
	
	
	
	
opened applications
Command + Shift + Tab	
Cycle backward through your 	
	
	
	
	
opened applications
Space	
	
	
Launch Quick Look
Command + A	
	
Select all items in Finder
Command + Option + A	
Deselect any selected items
Command + N	
	
Open new Finder window
Command + Shift + K	
Open Network window
Command + I	
	
Get info on an item
Command + J	
	
Show view options
Command + Option + Esc	
Force quit an application
File and Folder Shortcuts 
You can cut, copy, paste, duplicate and open files and folders 
directly from the keyboard, using these handy shortcuts.
Command + Delete		
Move the selected item to Trash
Command + Shift + Delete	
Empty Trash
Command + drag file/folder	 Move the selected item to  
	
	
	
another location
Option + drag file/folder	
Copy item to another location
Command + L	
	
Make alias of selected items
Command + D	
	
Duplicate the selected item
Command + C	
	
Copy the selected item 
Command + X	
	
Cut the selected item
Command + V	
	
Paste copied/cut item
Command + Z	
	
Undo action
Command + Shift + N	
Create new folder
Command + Option + N	
Create new Smart folder
Command + O	
	
Open the selected item
Common Application Shortcuts 
Not every application supports every one of these shortcuts, 
but where they do, they come in very useful.
Shift + Command + /	
Show the Help menu
Command + ,	
	
Open App Preference
Command + `	
	
Cycle through open App windows
Command + H	
	
Hide the current window
Command + Option + H	
Hide all open windows
Command + M	
	
Minimise the current window
Command + Option + M	
Minimise all windows
Command + W	
	
Close the selected window
Command + Option + W	
Close all windows
Desktop Shortcuts 
With these shortcuts, you can access Mission Control, your 
application windows and hide/show the Dock.
Function + F3	
	
Launch/Quit Mission Control
Function + F10  	
	
See all Application windows
Function + F11 -	
	
Show the Desktop
Option + Command + D	
Toggle Dock On/Off
Mission Control Shortcuts
When you’re in Mission Control, these shortcuts help you 
navigate your way around your desktop and apps.
Control + ←	
	
Move to space on left
Control + →	
	
Move to space on right
Control + #	
	
Switch to a specific numbered (#) 	
	
	
	
	
desktop
Screenshots
There are plenty of reasons why you might want to take a 
screenshot on your Mac. This is how you do it. 
Snap entire screen	 	
Cmd-Shift-3
Snap selected area	 	
Cmd-Shift-4 and drag over an 	
	
	
	
	
area while dragging, hold the 	
	
	
	
	
space bar to move the selected 	
	
	
	
	
area, hold Shift to change size in 	
	
	
	
	
one direction only or Option to 	
	
	
	
	
start selecting from the centre
Snap a window	
	
Cmd-Shift-4, press space bar 	 	
	
	
	
	
and click on the window	
Whilst Apple’s classic pointer driven interface is great for just about anything, you can make using your 
MacBook even more quick and efficient by memorising a few simple keyboard shortcuts. The macOS has 
dozens of preconfigured keyboard shortcuts; here are some of the most useful.
Keyboard Shortcuts
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook
144
The MacBook GuideBook

Keyboard Shortcuts
Power Button (⌽)
Press once	
	
Put Mac to sleep
Press again	
	
Wake Mac up
Hold	
	
	
Force Mac shutdown
Command + Control + ⌽	
Force Mac to restart
While Starting
Option (hold)	
	
Display bootable volumes
Shift (hold)	
	
Start in Safe Mode
Left Shift (hold)	
	
Bypass automatic login
C (hold)	
	
Boot from other media
Boot, Sleep and Shutdown Shortcuts
These are not strictly speaking keyboard shortcuts, but 
are used when either starting or shutting down your Mac 
to access various advanced options.
Display and Accessibility Shortcuts
These shortcuts control your display, and also features as-
sociated with Apple’s Accessibility options. 
F1	
	
	
Decrease screen brightness
F2	
	
	
Increase screen brightness
Command + F5	
	
VoiceOver on/off
Option + Command + F5	
Display Accessibility controls
Command + Option + 8	
Zoom On/Off
Command + Option + +	
Zoom in
Command + Option + -	
Zoom out
Document Shortcuts
These shortcuts come in very handy when you’re creating or 
editing a document, and they work in  most apps. 
Command + B	
	
Bold the selected text, or turn 	
	
	
	
	
bold type on or off
Command + I	
	
Italicise the selected text, or turn 	
	
	
	
	
italics on or off
Command + U	
	
Underline the selected text, or 	
	
	
	
	
turn underlining on or off
Command + T	
	
Show or hide the Fonts pane
Command + D	
	
When saving a document, this 	
	
	
	
	
selects the Desktop folder
Command + Control + D	
Highlight a word and this 	
	
	
	
	
	
shortcut shows its definition
Command + Shift + :	
Display the Spelling and 	
	
	
	
	
	
Grammar pane
Command + ;	
	
Spellcheck the document
Option + Delete	
	
Delete the word to the left of 		
	
	
	
	
the cursor
Control + H	
	
Delete the character to the left 	
	
	
	
	
of the insertion point. Or use 	 Delete
Control + D	
	
Delete the character to the right 	
	
	
	
	
of the cursor
Fn + Delete	
	
Forward delete on keyboards 		
	
	
	
	
without a Forward Delete key
Control + K	
	
Delete the text between the 	 	
	
	
	
	
cursor and the end of the line or 	
	
	
	
	
paragraph
Fn + Up Arrow	
	
Scroll up one page
Fn + Down Arrow	 	
Scroll down one page
Fn + Left Arrow	
	
Move to the beginning of  
	
	
	
a document
Fn + Right Arrow	
	
Move to the end of a document
Command + Up Arrow	
Move the cursor to the beginning 	
	
	
	
	
of the document
Command + Down Arrow	
Move the cursor to the end of the 	
	
	
	
	
document
Command + Left Arrow	
Move the cursor to the beginning 	
	
	
	
	
of the current line
Command + Right Arrow	
Move the cursor to the end of the 	
	
	
	
	
current line 	
	
T (hold)	
	
Start in FireWire target  
	
	
disk mode
N (hold)	
	
Start from NetBoot server
X (hold)	
	
Force Mac startup
Command + R (hold)	 	
Start in Recovery Mode
⏏  (hold)		
	
Eject discs
Shutting Down
Control + ⏏	
	
Show restart/sleep/ 
	
	
	
shutdown
Command + Option +	
Quit all of your opened  
Control + ⏏	
	
applications	
Shift + Control + ⏏		
Put displays to sleep
Command + Shift + Q	
Log out
Command + Shift + 	
Log out (immediately) 
Option + Q	
BDM’s: The MacBook GuideBook 145
www.bdmpublications.com 
www.ebook3000.com

Don’t miss these other great 
BDM publications
Available now at your local retailer
Follow us on Facebook: BDM Publications
Follow us on Twitter: @BDMpubs
Visit us at: www.bdmpublications.com | www.ultimatephotoshop.com

www.ebook3000.com

Getting started step-by-step
If you’re new to the MacBook, you’ll appreciate 
our guide to setting it up and learning to use 
the operating system’s key features such as the 
Desktop, the Dock, Finder windows and more. 
We also teach you those all-important trackpad 
gestures that really help your workflow.
The ideal computer for work or play
We help you put the MacBook at the centre of 
your digital lifestyle and help you use it for both 
leisure and productivity. For entertainment, 
there’s iTunes, Apple Music, iBooks and more. 
For getting things done, we show you apps like 
Calendar, Notes, Contacts and Maps.
Keeping your hardware secure
Online safety can be a daunting experience 
but we make it easy with a step-by-step guide 
to getting your MacBook on the Internet. We 
also give you in-depth guides to its online 
applications, such as Safari, Mail and the 
iCloud service. Even experienced users might 
learn something.
Inside macOS High Sierra
The Mac’s new operating system, macOS 10.13: 
High Sierra, is here and it’s really good. We take 
a look at what it can do for you, highlighting all 
of its key features and how they work. With our 
help, you’ll soon be ready to install and use this 
new OS with confidence.
It’s amazing what you can do with your 
MacBook. Whether you own a Pro, Air or 
MacBook model, your Mac is ideal for the 
Internet, entertainment, productivity, and 
more. With our in-depth, plain-English guides, 
you can do more. We show 
you how to get up and 
running with your Mac 
notebook, how to find your 
way around its operating 
system and how to get the 
most from its key apps. We 
also show you how to take things further, with 
advanced features like Siri and Family Sharing. 
It’s all in The MacBook GuideBook.
MacBook 
GuideBook 
The
This guidebook can be used with the following:
MacBook
MacBook Air 11-inch
MacBook Air 13-inch
MacBook Pro 13-inch
MacBook Pro 13 & 15 inch with Retina display
New MacBook Pro with Touch Bar
macOS 
10.13: 
High Sierra 
unveiled!
BDM’s

