
THE POLYMATH
i

ii

THE POLYMATH
A CULTURAL HISTORY FROM 
LEONARDO DA VINCI TO 
SUSAN SONTAG
PETER BURKE
YALE UNIVERSITY PRESS
NEW HAVEN AND LONDON
iii

Copyright © 2020 Peter Burke
All rights reserved. Th is book may not be reproduced in whole or in part, in any form (beyond 
that copying permitted by Sections 107 and 108 of the U.S. Copyright Law and except by 
reviewers for the public press) without written permission from the publishers.
For information about this and other Yale University Press publications, please contact:
U.S. Oﬃ  ce: sales.press@yale.edu yalebooks.com
Europe Oﬃ  ce: sales@yaleup.co.uk yalebooks.co.uk
Set in Adobe Garamond Pro by IDSUK (DataConnection) Ltd
Printed in Great Britain by Gomer Press Ltd, Llandysul, Ceredigion, Wales
Library of Congress Control Number: 2019952805
ISBN 978-0-300-25002-2
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
iv

Nothing is more beautiful than to know everything
(Plato)
Ah, but a man’s reach should exceed his grasp,
Or what’s a heaven for?
(Robert Browning, Andrea del Sarto)
Specialization is for insects
(Robert Heinlein)
In memory of Asa Briggs, David Daiches, Martin Wight and the Sussex 
project to ‘redraw the map of learning’
And for Maria Lúcia, who is able to do three things at the same time
v

vi

vii
 
 
List of Plates 
viii
 
 
Preface and Acknowledgements 
x
 
 
Introduction: What is a Polymath? 
1
 
1 
East and West 
10
 
2 
Th e Age of the ‘Renaissance Man’, 1400–1600 
26
 
3 
Th e Age of ‘Monsters of Erudition’, 1600–1700 
47
 
4 
Th e Age of the ‘Man of Letters’, 1700–1850 
83
 
5 
Th e Age of Territoriality, 1850–2000 
127
 
6 
A Group Portrait 
170
 
7 
Habitats 
191
 
8 
Th e Age of Interdisciplinarity 
213
 
 
Coda: Towards a Th ird Crisis 
240
 
 
Appendix: 500 Western Polymaths 
247
 
 
Notes 
278
 
 
Further Reading 
316
 
 
Index 
318
CONTENTS

viii
 1. Portrait of Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519), by Francesco Melzi 
(1515–17).
 2. Illustration by Leonardo da Vinci, from Luca Pacioli, De Divina 
Proportione (1509).
 3. Diagram from the autograph manuscript of Nicolaus Copernicus 
(1473–1543), De Revolutionibus Orbium Coelestium (1543).
 4. Engraving of the Museum Wormianum, by G. Wingendorp (1655).
 5. Portrait of Juan Caramuel y Lobkowitz (1606–1682), by Nicolas 
Auroux (1675).
 6. Portrait of Christina, Queen of Sweden (1626–1689), by David 
Beck (c.1650).
 7. Dispute of Queen Christina Vasa and René Descartes, by Nils Forsberg 
after Pierre-Louis Dumesnil the Younger (1884).
 8. Portrait of Gottfried Leibniz (1646–1716), by Christoph Bernhard 
Francke (1695).
 9. Portrait of Madame de Staël (1766–1817), by Marie Eléonore 
Godefroid (c.1818–49).
10. Reading of Voltaire’s tragedy L’Orphelin de la Chine in the salon of 
Madame Geoﬀ rin, by Anicet Charles Gabriel Lemonnier (1812).
11. Frontispiece of Voltaire, Elémens de la philosophie de Newton (1738).
12. Portrait of Emanuel Swedenborg (1688–1772), by Per Kraﬀ t the 
Elder (c.1766).
PLATES


PLATES
ix
13. Portrait of Th omas Young (1773–1829), by Henry Briggs (1822).
14. John Herschel (1792–1871), photo by Julia Margaret Cameron 
(1867).
15. Portrait of Alexander von Humboldt (1769–1859), self-portrait 
(1814).
16. Portrait of Mary Somerville (1780–1872), by Th omas Phillips 
(1834). 
17. Philosophers (S. N. Bulgakov and P. A. Florensky), by Mikhail Nesterov 
(1917).
18. Portrait of Herbert Simon (1916–2001), by Richard Rappaport 
(1987). Richard Rappaport / CC BY 3.0.
19. Paul Otlet (1868–1944) at his desk (1937).
20. Susan Sontag (1933–2004), photo by Jean-Regis Rouston (1972). 
Roger Viollet via Getty Images.
21. Fuld Hall, Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, photographer 
unknown (early 1950s). From the Shelby White and Leon Levy 
Archives Center, Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, NJ, USA.
22. Th e University of Sussex, prospectus photo by Henk Snoek (1964). 
Henk Snoek / RIBA Collections.

x
For the last twenty years or so I have been working, on and oﬀ , on the 
history of knowledge, publishing a general survey, A Social History of 
Knowledge (2 vols., 2000–2012), an introduction to the subject, What is 
the History of Knowledge? (2016), and most recently Exiles and Expatriates 
in the History of Knowledge (2017). Like the book on exiles, the present 
study developed out of the general survey to become a book on its own. 
I have been drawn to this topic for a long time. Although my mathemat-
ical and scientiﬁ c illiteracy makes polymathy out of the question, I have 
long shared the view famously expressed by the French historians Lucien 
Febvre and Fernand Braudel that one writes better history by escaping 
from the conﬁ nes of that discipline, at least from time to time.
As a student at Oxford, taking a three-year course in history, I went 
to lectures in other disciplines – to Gilbert Ryle on philosophy, for 
instance, to Roy Harrod on economics, to J. R. R. Tolkien on medieval 
literature, to Michael Argyle on psychology and – most important for 
my future – to Edgar Wind on art history. As a postgraduate student, I 
began reading in sociology and anthropology, and attended seminars in 
the history of science as well as one organized by Norman Birnbaum and 
Iris Murdoch on the concept of alienation.
When I heard that the new University of Sussex was going to be 
organized in an interdisciplinary manner, I immediately applied for 
a position there and taught in the School of European Studies from 
1962 to 1979, collaborating in teaching with colleagues in art history, 
 PREFACE AND 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS


PREFACE AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
xi
sociology, and English and French literature. Th anks to these experi-
ences, at Sussex in particular, I felt that this was a book that I really had 
to write, about individuals and small groups concerned with the big 
picture as well as with detail and often engaged in the transfer or ‘transla-
tion’ of ideas and practices from one discipline to another.
It has been a pleasure to keep company, however indirectly, with this 
gifted group of men and women, the polymaths discussed in this book, 
some of whom were old acquaintances, and in a few instances personal 
friends, while the achievements of others were discovered only in the 
course of the research.
I should like to thank Tarif Khalidi and Geoﬀ rey Lloyd for their 
comments on chapter 1; Waqas Ahmed for sending me a questionnaire 
on polymaths in 2013 as well as an early draft of his book; Christoph 
Lundgreen, Fabian Krämer and the ‘Zwei Kulturen’ Research Group at 
the Berlin Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften for a fruitful 
discussion of my ideas; and Ann Blair, Steven Boldy, Arndt Brendecke, 
Chris Clark, Ruth Finnegan, Mirus Fitzner, José Maria García González, 
Michael Hunter, Gabriel Josipovici, Neil Kenny, Christel Lane, David 
Lane, Hansong Li, Robin Milner-Gulland, William O’Reilly, Ulinka 
Rublack, Nigel Spivey, Marek Tamm and Marianne Th ormählen for 
information, suggestions and references.
Some of my thoughts about polymaths have been presented in print as 
well as in lectures.1 I hope that this fuller version is an improvement on its 
more sketchy predecessors. Presenting the same ideas in diﬀ erent places or 
contexts has often suggested modiﬁ cations. Hence I am extremely grateful 
to the audiences of my lectures on this topic in Belo Horizonte, Berlin, 
Brighton, Cambridge, Copenhagen, Engelsberg, Frankfurt and Gotha for 
their various questions and comments. My warm thanks also go to Robert 
Baldock and Heather McCallum at Yale University Press for welcoming 
the manuscript, and to their two anonymous readers and my copy-editor 
Richard Mason for their constructive suggestions. As usual, Maria Lúcia 
read the whole manuscript and oﬀ ered wise advice.

xii

1
 INTRODUCTION
WHAT IS A POLYMATH?
‘History,’ it has been said, ‘is unkind to polymaths.’ Some are forgotten, 
while many are ‘squashed into a category we can recognize’.1 Th ey are 
remembered, as we shall see again and again in what follows, for only 
one form or a few forms of their varied achievements. It is time to redress 
the balance. In fact, an increasing number of studies of individual poly-
maths have been published in recent years, perhaps in reaction against 
our culture of specialization. I have made grateful use of many of these 
monographs, which include not only studies of intellectual giants such 
as Leonardo and Leibniz but also some near-forgotten ﬁ gures such as 
Dumont Durville and William Rees.2 General surveys are more diﬃ  cult 
to ﬁ nd, although their number is increasing, especially in the form of 
short contributions to journals or radio programmes.3
In attempting such a survey, this book oﬀ ers an approach to the 
cultural and social history of knowledge. All forms of knowledge, 
practical as well as theoretical, deserve to have their histories written. 
Hunter-gatherers needed a wide range of knowledges to survive, while 
farmers were celebrated as ‘many-sided’ by the geographer Friedrich 
Ratzel, who was a polymath himself.4 Artisans, midwives, merchants, 
rulers, musicians, footballers and many other groups require and 
possess a segment of knowledge in which some individuals excel. In 
the last few years, the term ‘polymath’, once conﬁ ned to scholars, has 
been extended to individuals whose achievements range from athletics 
to politics.

THE POLYMATH

2
DEFINITIONS
Th e ‘polymath discussion group’, for instance, has deﬁ ned the polymath as 
‘someone who is interested in and learning about many subjects’.5 Th is 
book, on the other hand, will concentrate on academic knowledge, formerly 
known as ‘learning’. It focuses on scholars with interests that were ‘encyclo-
paedic’ in the original sense of running around the whole intellectual 
‘course’ or ‘curriculum’, or at any rate around a major segment of that circle.
For this reason I have excluded two entrepreneurs: Elon Musk, who 
took degrees in economics and physics before founding Tesla and other 
companies, and Sergei Brin, who studied mathematics and computer 
science before founding Google together with another computer scientist, 
Larry Page. I also hesitated before including that many-sided man John 
Maynard Keynes, since most of his sides were not academic. Keynes was 
described by his friend Leonard Woolf as ‘a don, a civil servant, a specu-
lator, a businessman, a journalist, a writer, a farmer, a picture-dealer, a 
statesman, a theatrical manager, a book collector, and half a dozen other 
things’. On the other hand, Keynes himself remarked that ‘the master 
economist must possess a rare combination of gifts. He must reach a high 
standard in several diﬀ erent directions and must combine talents not 
often found together. He must be mathematician, historian, statesman, 
philosopher – in some degree.’ On that criterion, not to mention his 
interest in the many interests of Isaac Newton, Keynes certainly qualiﬁ es.6
A few famous writers of ﬁ ction will be discussed in the chapters that 
follow, notably Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, George Eliot, Aldous 
Huxley and Jorge Luis Borges, but this is essentially because they also 
produced non-ﬁ ction, usually essays. In similar fashion, Vladimir 
Nabokov is included, not as the author of Lolita but as a literary critic, 
an entomologist and a writer on chess, while August Strindberg appears 
as a cultural historian rather than as a dramatist. Conversely, Umberto 
Eco will appear in these pages as a scholar who also wrote novels.
DISCIPLINES
Deﬁ ning a polymath as an individual who has mastered several disci-
plines raises the question: what is a discipline? Th e history of academic 


INTRODUCTION
3
disciplines is a double one, both intellectual and institutional. Th e term 
‘disciplines’ in the plural comes from ‘discipline’ in the singular, itself 
derived from the Latin word discere, ‘to learn’, while disciplina translated 
the ancient Greek word askesis, meaning ‘training’ or ‘exercises’. In clas-
sical antiquity, the idea of discipline moved back and forth between at 
least four domains: athletics, religion, war and philosophy. Discipline 
was learned by following the rule of a master (thus becoming his 
‘disciple’) and internalizing it, practising a kind of asceticism of self-
control, both of the mind and the body.
In the course of time, the term ‘discipline’ came to refer to a particular 
branch of knowledge. In ancient Rome, the study of thunder and light-
ning was known as disciplina etrusca, because specialists in this practice 
were Etruscans. In the ﬁ fth century, Martianus Capella wrote about seven 
‘disciplines’, otherwise known as the seven liberal arts: grammar, logic, 
rhetoric, arithmetic, geometry, music and astronomy. Th e idea of ‘disci-
plines’ in the plural implied organization, institutionalization and indeed 
the beginning of a long process of specialization.7 In order to avoid 
projecting later attitudes onto the past, I include magic as a discipline 
when writing about the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and try to 
avoid referring to ‘biology’, ‘anthropology’ and so on when discussing the 
time before these names came into use.
Making life more diﬃ  cult for the historian, the criteria for calling a 
scholar a ‘polymath’ have changed over the last six hundred years. As 
traditional disciplines have fragmented, the idea of ‘many’ disciplines has 
been diluted and the bar set lower. A recent article describes living indi-
viduals who have made original contributions to two disciplines, such as 
law and economics, as ‘polymaths’. However odd it may seem to call two 
‘many’, it has become a signiﬁ cant achievement to keep two intellectual 
balls in the air at one time.8
AIMS AND METHODS
Th is study is based for the most part on a prosopography, a collective 
biography of a group of ﬁ ve hundred individuals active in the West 
between the ﬁ fteenth century and the twenty-ﬁ rst, listed in the Appendix. 

THE POLYMATH

4
Appropriately enough, what he called ‘the prosopography of scholars’ 
was one of the ‘passions’ of Pierre Bayle, a leading polymath of the seven-
teenth century.9 Despite its concern with collective biography, the book 
does not make much use of statistics. Although it will note the numbers 
of males and females, clerics and laity in the group, many other questions 
cannot be answered in this precise manner.
Even deciding which polymaths were Catholic or Protestant presents 
its diﬃ  culties. Converts from Catholicism to Protestantism include 
Sebastian Münster and Philip Melanchthon. Converts from Protestantism 
to Catholicism include Lucas Holstenius, Christina of Sweden, Peter 
Lambeck and Nicholas Steno, while Justus Lipsius moved backwards 
and forwards between the two faiths. Benito Arias Montano was oﬃ  -
cially a Catholic, but apparently a member of a secret sect, the Family of 
Love. Jean Bodin may have converted to Judaism. Giordano Bruno 
seems to have invented his own religion. Isaac Newton was oﬃ  cially an 
Anglican, but did not believe in the Trinity.
Besides generalizations, the book oﬀ ers case studies. It focuses on the 
giants, the ‘monsters of erudition’, a phrase that goes back to the Dutchman 
Herman Boerhaave, who was active at the turn of the eighteenth century 
and himself made contributions to medicine, physiology, chemistry and 
botany. It also oﬀ ers thumbnail sketches of polymaths of the second rank, 
discussing individual itineraries and peculiarities.
Th is book aspires to be more than a gallery of individual portraits, 
however fascinating their sitters may have been. Th e portraits need 
framing, sometimes by comparison and more often by contextualization. 
One of the principal aims of this study is to describe some intellectual 
and social trends and so to answer general questions about forms of social 
organization and climates of opinion that are favourable or unfavourable 
to polymathic endeavours. It will be necessary to distinguish places and 
times where curiosity is encouraged or discouraged, the latter often for 
religious reasons, as in the famous case of St Augustine, who included 
‘the investigation of nature’ among the ‘things that it does no good to 
know and that men only want to know for the sake of knowing’. But 
Augustine also felt the pleasure of knowledge (rerum cognitione laetitia).10


INTRODUCTION
5
Th e thread through the history that follows is composed of the oppo-
site but entwined stories of specialization and synthesis. It is usually if 
not always a mistake to reduce any kind of history to a simple linear 
story. Many major trends have been accompanied by a movement in the 
opposite direction. Th e rise of organized specialization has coexisted for 
a considerable time as the counter-movement of organized interdiscipli-
narity. As the division of intellectual labour has increased, even poly-
maths have become a kind of specialist. Th ey are often known as 
‘generalists’ because general knowledge, or at least the knowledge of 
many disciplines, is their speciality. Th eir distinctive contribution to the 
history of knowledge is to see connections between ﬁ elds that have been 
separated and to notice what specialists in a given discipline, the insiders, 
have failed to see. In this respect their role resembles that of scholars who 
leave their native country, whether as exiles or expatriates, for a place 
with a diﬀ erent culture of knowledge.11
A major concern in this study is the survival of polymaths in a culture 
of increasing specialization. One might have expected the species to have 
become extinct in the eighteenth, nineteenth or at the latest the twen-
tieth century, but it has shown an astonishing resilience. To explain this 
resilience involves studying the habitat of the species, its cultural niche, 
often but not always the university. Universities have been by turns 
favourable and unfavourable to polymaths. Some polymaths have 
preferred a career outside the university because it oﬀ ered more freedom. 
Others have moved from one faculty or department to another, as if 
rebelling against restriction to a particular discipline. A few universities 
have been ﬂ exible enough to accommodate these moves, as we shall see.
At a more personal level, questions about polymaths include: what 
drove these individuals? Was it a simple yet omnivorous curiosity, what 
Augustine called knowing ‘for the sake of knowing’, or does something 
else underlie what a memoir of the political scientist Harold Lasswell 
calls his ‘passion for omniscience’?12 What prompts shifts from one disci-
pline to another? Is it a low threshold of boredom or an unusual degree 
of open-mindedness? How have polymaths found the time and the 
energy for their many-sided studies? How have they made a living?

THE POLYMATH

6
TYPES OF POLYMATH
Distinctions between types of polymath will recur in these pages. It 
seems useful to describe some of them as passive (as opposed to active); 
limited (as opposed to general); or serial (as opposed to simultaneous). 
By ‘passive’ polymaths I mean individuals who seem to know everything 
but produce nothing (or, at any rate, nothing new). On the frontier 
between passive and active are the systematizers or synthesizers such as 
Francis Bacon or Auguste Comte. ‘Limited’ polymaths is an obvious 
oxymoron, but a term is needed for scholars who master a few related 
disciplines, whether in the humanities, the natural or the social sciences. 
In what follows, this type will be described as ‘clustered’.
Scholars who juggle several subjects more or less simultaneously may 
be contrasted with what might be called ‘serial’ polymaths – on the 
model of serial polygamists – who move from ﬁ eld to ﬁ eld in the course 
of their intellectual lives. One of them, Joseph Needham, began an auto-
biographical essay with the question ‘How did it happen that a 
biochemist turned into a historian and sinologist?’13 Following the trail 
and attempting to understand trajectories of this kind has been one of 
the great pleasures of writing this book.
Another possible typology distinguishes just two varieties of poly-
math, the centrifugal type, accumulating knowledge without worrying 
about connections, and the centripetal scholar, who has a vision of the 
unity of knowledge and tries to ﬁ t its diﬀ erent parts together in a grand 
system. Th e ﬁ rst group rejoices in or suﬀ ers from omnivorous curiosity. 
Th e second group is fascinated – some would say obsessed – with what 
one of them, Johann Heinrich Alsted, called ‘the beauty of order’.14
Th is distinction between centrifugal and centripetal echoes the 
contrast oﬀ ered by Isaiah Berlin in a famous lecture on Tolstoy, between 
what he (following the ancient Greek poet Archilochus) called ‘foxes’, 
who know ‘many things’, and ‘hedgehogs’, who know ‘one important 
thing’.15 Th e contrast should not be made too sharp, as Berlin himself 
recognized when he described Tolstoy as a fox who believed that he ought 
to be a hedgehog. Most if not all polymaths can be located on a continuum 
between the two extremes, and a number of them were (and are) pulled 


INTRODUCTION
7
in both directions, a creative tension between centripetal and centrifugal 
forces.
Take the case of the seventeenth-century German Johann Joachim 
Becher, a physician turned mathematician, alchemist and adviser to the 
emperor Leopold I on what we call ‘economic policy’. In the language of 
his time, Becher was a ‘projector’, an individual with ambitious and 
often unrealistic schemes, which in his case included turning sand or 
lead into gold. ‘He published works on chemistry, politics, commerce, 
universal language, didactic method, medicine, moral philosophy and 
religion.’ Becher’s interests appear to be centrifugal, but what held them 
together, so it has been suggested, was the idea of circulation, both in 
nature and society.16
THE MYTHOLOGY OF THE POLYMATH
Th e knowledge of individual polymaths has often been exaggerated, so 
much so that we might speak of the ‘mythology’ of the species. Th ey are 
sometimes described as knowing everything, rather than as mastering 
the academic knowledge of their particular culture. Th is kind of descrip-
tion goes back a long way. Th e medieval poet John Gower described 
Ulysses as ‘a clerk knowende of everything’. Th e seventeenth-century 
Jesuit Athanasius Kircher has been described as ‘the last man who knew 
everything’.17 Later candidates for the title include the Cambridge don 
Th omas Young, the American professor Joseph Leidy and, most recently, 
the Italian physicist Enrico Fermi, who was described more than once in 
this way in his own time, although, as a recent biographer points out, 
‘His knowledge of science beyond physics was superﬁ cial, and his knowl-
edge of history, art, music and much else besides was limited, to say the 
least’.18 Th e facile use of the adjective ‘last’ underlines the need for a 
study concerned, like this one, with the long term.
Somewhat more modestly, a book of essays about Umberto Eco was 
subtitled, appropriately enough for an admirer of Alfred Hitchcock, ‘the 
man who knew too much’, a phrase that has also been applied to the 
computer scientist and cryptanalyst Alan Turing and to the natural philos-
opher Robert Hooke.19 In similar fashion, more than one polymath has 

THE POLYMATH

8
been described as ‘the last Renaissance man’ – the philosopher Benedetto 
Croce, for instance, and the behavioural scientist Herbert Simon. Th e 
biochemist–sinologist Joseph Needham has been called a ‘twentieth-
century Renaissance man’ and the critic George Steiner ‘a late, late, late 
Renaissance man’. Hooke has been described as ‘London’s Leonardo’, 
Pavel Florensky as ‘Russia’s unknown Da Vinci’, and Harold Lasswell ‘A 
kind of Leonardo da Vinci of the behavioural sciences’, ‘as close to the 
discipline’s Renaissance person as any political scientist who has ever 
lived’.20 Th e term ‘Renaissance Woman’ has also been applied widely, 
from musicology to ‘sexology’.21
Th e language used in the previous paragraphs reinforces the myth 
of the solitary genius who achieves everything by him- or herself, as in 
the famous story of Blaise Pascal’s childhood, rediscovering geometry 
without the beneﬁ t of books or tutors. Some polymaths are indeed rela-
tively solitary, Leonardo more than most, but the young Leonardo was a 
renowned performer at the court of Milan. Again, Giambattista Vico, 
often described as solitary, led a sociable life in Naples, at least in his 
youth. Small groups often stimulate the creativity of their members and 
some polymaths have become famous for ideas that probably originated 
in group discussions of the kind discussed in chapter 8.22 All the same, if 
I did not believe that certain polymaths made a diﬀ erence in the world 
of learning, I would not have written this book.
Many achievements will be discussed or at least mentioned here, but 
this study does not oﬀ er a simple success story. Polymathy comes at a 
price. In some cases, those of the so-called ‘charlatans’ discussed below, 
the price includes superﬁ ciality. Th e idea that polymaths are frauds 
goes back a long way, at least as far as ancient Greece, when Pythagoras 
was denounced as an impostor. Th e seventeenth-century bishop Gilbert 
Burnet, a man of broad enough interests to experience the problem 
himself, wrote that ‘Very often those who deal in many things are slight 
and Superﬁ ciall in them all’.23 In other cases, we ﬁ nd what might be 
called the ‘Leonardo syndrome’, in other words a dispersal of energy that 
shows itself in fascinating or brilliant projects that are abandoned or 
simply left unﬁ nished.


INTRODUCTION
9
Th e book concentrates on Europe and the Americas, North and 
South, from the ﬁ fteenth century to the twenty-ﬁ rst. It begins with the 
uomo universale of the Renaissance but focuses on the long-term conse-
quences of what might be called two crises of knowledge, the ﬁ rst in the 
middle of the seventeenth century and the second in the middle of 
the nineteenth, both of them responses to the proliferation of books 
(it is still too early to predict the long-term consequences of a third 
crisis, following the digital revolution). All three crises produced what 
might be called ‘explosions’ of knowledge, in the sense of both rapid 
expansion and fragmentation. Responses to fragmentation will be 
discussed in due course.
In order to remind readers that the modern West is not the only 
region in which polymaths have ﬂ ourished, the following chapter oﬀ ers 
brief sketches of some wide-ranging scholars from the ancient Greeks to 
the end of the Middle Ages, together with still briefer remarks about 
China and the Islamic world. Writing that chapter required the author 
to move out of his own intellectual comfort zone, but in order to write 
about polymaths one has to be prepared to swim out of one’s depth.

10
In a pre-disciplinary epoch, or in a period such as the Middle Ages in 
which only a few academic disciplines existed, there might seem to be 
little need for a concept such as ‘polymath’. Wide-ranging curiosity was 
normal at this time and might even be described as the default setting. 
So was the practice of writing books about a wide range of topics. Since 
there was less to know than would become the case from the Renaissance 
onwards, it was possible – with a mighty eﬀ ort – to master at least the 
dominant forms of knowledge (leaving aside the knowledges required by 
many everyday practices). All the same, in classical antiquity (both Greek 
and Roman), traditional China, the Islamic world and the Western 
Middle Ages, a number of individuals were already admired for their 
unusual breadth of knowledge – and a few were already criticized for 
lacking depth.
THE GREEKS
Like many debates, a discussion of the value of knowledge is ﬁ rst 
recorded in ancient Greece. Th e philosopher Heraclitus (c.535–c.475 
bc), discussing a variety of many-sided individuals, claimed that ‘much 
learning (polymathiē) does not teach understanding (noos)’ (Fragment 
40).1 On the other side of the debate, the philosopher Empedocles 
(c.495–435 bc) asserted that ‘learning (mathē) increases wisdom’ 
(Fragment 17), while it is surely signiﬁ cant that some Greeks revered the 
goddess Polymatheia.
 1 
 EAST AND WEST


EAST AND WEST
11
In various forms this debate would recur over the centuries, always 
the same in essence yet always diﬀ erent in emphases and circumstances. 
Th e essential conﬂ ict is between breadth and depth, between Isaiah 
Berlin’s ‘fox’, who ‘knows many things’, and his ‘hedgehog’, who ‘knows 
one great thing’. However, this contrast becomes entangled in diﬀ erent 
places and periods with conﬂ icts between amateurs and experts, theory 
and practice, pure and applied knowledge, detail and the big picture, 
rigour and impressionism.2
Turning from generalization to individuals with an unusual appetite 
for diﬀ erent kinds of knowledge, one might begin with Pythagoras and the 
Sophists, although we only know about them via the testimonies of disci-
ples or critics, together with a few surviving fragments of their writings.
Th e interests of Pythagoras of Samos (c.570–c.495 bc), a spiritual 
teacher or guru who founded something like a sect, ranged from reincar-
nation to athletics and vegetarianism (though beans were forbidden to his 
followers). He is remembered as a mathematician, and especially as the 
author of a famous theorem, although these claims have been challenged. 
Reactions to Pythagoras, like responses to so many later polymaths, were 
mixed. Once again, Empedocles and Heraclitus took opposite sides. 
Empedocles praised Pythagoras as ‘a man of immense knowledge’, whereas 
Heraclitus criticized him as ‘the prince of impostors’ (or ‘praters’: kopidōn).
More wide-ranging than Pythagoras were the so-called ‘Sophists’, who 
might be described as walking encyclopaedias. Th ey were itinerant teachers 
of a wide range of subjects, a whole curriculum (the original meaning 
of the Greek term encyklios paideia, from which our term ‘encyclopaedia’ 
is derived). Some of them claimed to be able to answer any question, 
allowing listeners to consult them just as we consult encyclopaedias in 
print or online.
One of the most famous of these Sophists was Hippias of Elis (c.460–
399 bc), who is supposed to have taught astronomy, mathematics, 
grammar, rhetoric, music, history, philosophy and the art of memory (an 
art of obvious use to orators). He is remembered today thanks to a 
dialogue by Plato, Hippias Minor, in which he appears as an arrogant 
individual whose pretensions are demolished by Socrates. In the dialogue, 

THE POLYMATH

12
Hippias boasts that he is able ‘to speak on anything that anyone chooses 
of those subjects which I have prepared for exhibition and to answer any 
questions that anyone asks’.3
On the positive side, Aristotle (384–322 bc) became famous for his 
writings on a great variety of topics. In his case breadth does not seem to 
have led to the charge of superﬁ ciality. Aristotle is most often remem-
bered as a philosopher concerned with logic, ethics and metaphysics, but 
he also wrote on mathematics, rhetoric, poetry, political theory, physics, 
cosmology, anatomy, physiology, natural history and zoology.4
Two versatile scholars were compared to athletes, Posidonius of 
Rhodes (c.135–c.51 bc) and Eratosthenes of Cyrene (245–194 bc).
Posidonius, nicknamed ‘the athlete’, wrote on philosophy, astronomy, 
mathematics, geography and history.Why he should have been given such 
a nickname is an intriguing question. Athletes were respected in ancient 
Greece, while the parallel between the discipline necessary for an athlete 
and for a scholar has already been noted. In the Olympic Games, there was 
a place for what would later be called the ‘all-rounder’, especially in the ﬁ ve 
events held on the same day, the ‘pentathlon’. On the other hand, it is not 
a good sign that the comparison of the polymath with the athlete goes 
back to the description of Hippias by Plato’s Socrates.
Th e case of Eratosthenes of Cyrene presents a similar ambiguity. 
Eratosthenes, the librarian in charge of the most famous library in the 
Greco-Roman world, in Alexandria, was nicknamed ‘Pentathlos’ for his 
combination of interests in ﬁ ve subjects. In fact, he studied what by 
our reckoning would add up to at least seven subjects: grammar, 
literature, philosophy, geometry, geography, mathematics and astronomy. 
Eratosthenes was also known as ‘Beta’, a nickname reminiscent of the 
description by a British historian of one of his colleagues as ‘captain of the 
second eleven’. In other words, the name ‘Pentathlos’ is at least as likely to 
be a criticism as a tribute.5
THE ROMANS
In Rome, unlike Greece, we ﬁ nd not only the praises of outstanding intel-
lectual all-rounders but also recommendations to students of particular 


EAST AND WEST
13
disciplines to acquire a wide knowledge, perhaps as an antidote to creeping 
specialization.
Cicero (106–43 bc), one of the most eloquent public speakers of the 
Roman world, began his treatise on the orator (De oratore) by empha-
sizing the need for wide knowledge (scientia . . . rerum plurimarum) as a 
condition for success in this art. Th e treatise continues in the form of a 
dialogue between Marcus Crassus and Mark Antony, in which Crassus 
claims that ‘whatever the topic’, the orator will speak better about any 
branch of knowledge than someone who conﬁ nes himself to it.6 Another 
famous treatise on rhetoric, the Institutes of Marcus Fabius Quintilianus 
(ad 35–100), known as ‘Quintilian’, also argues that the would-be orator 
needs to know about all subjects. Th e author cites the names of eight 
polymaths, ﬁ ve Greek – including Hippias – and three Roman, including 
Cicero. Th e context, ironically enough, is the increasing specialization of 
rhetoricians, along with grammarians and jurists.7
A similar argument to that of Cicero and Quintilian on the orator was 
put forward in the case of the architect by Marcus Vitruvius Pollio 
(d. ad 15). Vitruvius claimed that his profession was a ‘multidisciplinary’ 
branch of knowledge (scientia pluribus disciplinis et variis eruditionibus 
ornata). According to him, the ideal architect would have a knowledge of 
literature, draughtsmanship, geometry, history, philosophy, music, medi-
cine, law and ‘astrology’ (including what we call ‘astronomy’).8
Exemplary polymaths include one expatriate Greek, Alexander of 
Miletus (Lucius Cornelius Alexander, d. 36 bc), who was taken to Rome 
as a slave tutor and was nicknamed ‘Polyhistor’, in other words an indi-
vidual who enquires into many things. Th ree Roman polymaths are 
frequently mentioned in classical texts: Cato, Varro and Pliny the Elder.
Marcus Porcius Cato, otherwise known as Cato the Elder (234–149 
bc), was cited by Quintilian for his knowledge of war, philosophy, 
oratory, history, law and agriculture, and by Cicero’s Crassus because 
‘there was nothing that could possibly be known and learned at that 
period [a hundred years earlier] that he had not investigated and acquired 
and, what is more, written about’.9 In his long life, in which he also held 
political and military posts Marcus Terentius Varro (116–27 bc) wrote 

THE POLYMATH

14
over seventy works on antiquities, language, agriculture, history, law, 
philosophy, literature and navigation, not to mention his satires. Cicero 
described Varro as ‘a man outstanding for his intellect and his universal 
learning’ (vir ingenio praestans omnique doctrina), while Quintilian 
declared that he wrote on ‘many, almost all kinds of knowledge’ (Quam 
multa paene omnia tradidit Varro!).10 Varro’s treatise on ‘disciplines’ in the 
plural (Disciplinae) has been described as ‘the ﬁ rst encyclopaedia that is 
securely attested’.11 Th e text has been lost but it is known that it dealt 
with the seven liberal arts, with architecture and with medicine.
Pliny the Elder (ad 23–79) practised law, commanded a ﬂ eet and 
advised emperors but, as his nephew remarked, ‘he thought all time not 
spent in study wasted’. Some slaves read to him while he dictated to 
others. Pliny wrote on grammar, rhetoric, military and political history, 
and the art of ﬁ ghting on horseback as well as the encyclopaedic Natural 
History which made him famous and which covers much more than 
what was later understood by ‘natural history’. Th e author boasts in his 
preface that he had consulted about two thousand volumes and that not 
a single Greek had written about all parts of his subject single-handed. 
Although he based some statements on his own observation, Pliny was 
essentially a compiler. On the other hand, the preface to his Natural 
History denounced plagiarists. He may have guessed that his own work 
would be plagiarized in later centuries.
CHINA
It would be strange if omnivorous curiosity and wide-ranging knowledge 
were not to be found outside the Western tradition. In fact, ‘Study widely’ 
is a famous phrase from the classic text Zhongyong (‘Doctrine of the 
Mean’). Th e Chinese had a word or words for polymathy, boxue (‘broad 
studies’) or bowu (‘broad learning’), while the term for an individual who 
had mastered these studies was boshi, ‘broad scholar’. Th ese concepts 
emerged between the ﬁ fth and the second centuries bc.12
Like the Greeks, Chinese scholars also engaged in debate about the 
range of studies, which had important consequences for the famous 
system of selecting civil servants by competitive examination.13 During 


EAST AND WEST
15
the Song dynasty (960–1279) the examinations required knowledge of 
classics, poetry, history and politics. In a famous document concerning a 
failed attempt at reform, ‘Th e Ten-Th ousand-Word Memorial’, the 
statesman Wang Anshi (1021–86) complained about the generality of the 
education of future administrators. Th e capacity to rule, he asserted, was 
‘best developed by specialization, and ruined by too great a variety of 
subjects to be studied’.14 In later centuries the pendulum swung between 
specialist and general studies. In his Instructions for Practical Living, for 
instance, Wang Yangming (1472–1529) dismissed broad studies as super-
ﬁ cial, preferring the knowledge and cultivation of the self to any kind of 
knowledge of the outside world.15 On the other hand, examinations in 
‘broad scholarship and extensive words’ were held in 1679 and 1736.16
Comparisons are rendered diﬃ  cult by diﬀ erences in terminology – 
‘there is no term that corresponds to Greek philosophia’ in classical 
Chinese thought, for example – and also in classiﬁ cation. Chinese ‘maps 
of the relevant intellectual disciplines, theoretical or practical and applied, 
are very diﬀ erent both from those of the Greeks and from our own’.17 
Diﬀ erences between the Chinese and the Greek packages of studies also 
create obstacles to comparison. Th e theory of music, for instance, the art 
of divination and the criticism of painting and calligraphy were all 
important for Chinese scholars.
Th e life and work of three individual scholars may oﬀ er some idea of 
the range and interests of Chinese polymaths. In the period of the 
‘Warring States’, Hui Shi (370–310 bc) had wide interests. His works 
have been lost but he is vividly evoked in a famous collection of anec-
dotes, the Daoist text Zhuangzi. According to this text, Hui Shi was ‘a 
man of many devices’, while ‘his writings would ﬁ ll ﬁ ve carriages’. On 
the other hand – a recurrent criticism of polymaths – the text claims that 
Hui ‘abused and dissipated his talents without really achieving anything’.18
From the Song dynasty, outstanding ﬁ gures include two scholar–
oﬃ  cials, Su Song (ad 1020–1101) and Shen Gua (ad 1031–1095). Su 
Song is most famous for the construction of a tower for the use of court 
astronomers and for describing its mechanical clock, which was driven 
by a water-wheel, in an illustrated treatise. Su also made maps, including 

THE POLYMATH

16
maps of stars. Together with assistants, he produced a treatise on what we 
know as pharmacology, discussing the medical uses of plants, minerals 
and animals.19
As for Shen Gua, he has been described as ‘perhaps the most interesting 
character in all Chinese science’.20 He wrote on rituals, tianwen (combining 
astronomy with astrology), music, mathematics, medicine, administra-
tion, the art of war, painting, tea, medicine and poetry, as well as making 
maps (including an early relief map). When he was sent on a mission to 
Mongolia, he made notes on the customs of the peoples he encountered 
there. An annalist of the time remarked on Shen’s ‘vast’ knowledge, while 
in the twentieth century he was described as a Chinese Leibniz (although, 
unlike Leibniz, he does not seem to have tried to integrate his diﬀ erent 
kinds of knowledge).21 Shen’s most famous work, produced after he had 
been forced to retire from the civil service, was a collection of what we 
might call ‘essays’, entitled Mengxi Bitan (‘Brush Talks from the Dream 
Brook’) and organized according to the categories of many Chinese ency-
clopaedias, including ‘Ancient Usages’, ‘Philological Criticism’, ‘Strange 
Occurrences’ and ‘Calligraphy and Painting’.22 Th e miscellaneous genre of 
‘brush talks’ (bitan) was ideal for a polymath.
Comparisons and contrasts between polymaths in ancient Greece and 
in China may be illuminating, along the lines of a classic account of the 
study of nature in these two cultures.23 Th e contributions to knowledge 
by Greek polymaths are linked to their careers as teachers, something 
that Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato and the Sophists had in common. Th e 
contributions of Chinese polymaths from the Han dynasty onwards 
developed out of their work as government oﬃ  cials in a culture in which 
successful candidates in the state examinations were expected to be 
generalists, not specialists. It was thanks to this shared expectation that 
British civil servants (required to pass examinations that were originally 
inspired by the Chinese system) are sometimes described as ‘mandarins’.
Among the polymaths already mentioned, Su Song was President of 
the Ministry of Personnel and, later, Minister of Finance, while Shen Gua 
was at one time head of the Bureau of Astronomy. He was also active 
in supervising the draining of rivers, as a ﬁ nancial oﬃ  cial and as the 


EAST AND WEST
17
commander of an army. Shen’s varied interests were ‘shaped by his ex  -
perience as a civil servant’.24 Th e opportunity to write his essays came 
when he was disgraced, after the faction with which he was associated 
lost power (in Europe, we owe major works such as Machiavelli’s 
Th e Prince and Lord Clarendon’s Th e History of the Rebellion to similar 
circumstances).
EARLY MEDIEVAL EUROPE
Returning to the Western tradition, we ﬁ nd that late antiquity and the 
early Middle Ages witnessed both a critique and a loss of secular knowl-
edge. Leading Christian writers opposed learning altogether. One was 
Tertullian (c.ad 155–c.240), who claimed that, ever since Christ, ‘we do 
not need curiosity’ (Nobis curiositate opus non est). Another, as we have 
seen, was St Augustine, who criticized a ‘vain’ curiosity, ‘excused in the 
name of understanding and knowledge’ (vana et curiosa cupiditas nomine 
cognitionis et scientiae palliata).25
Although the early Middle Ages is no longer viewed as the ‘Dark 
Ages’, a time of ignorance, it is diﬃ  cult to deny the loss of knowledge, or 
more precisely of certain knowledges, between the years 500 and 1000. 
Th e decline of towns was accompanied by the decline of literacy. Libraries 
shrank. Pliny had had access to two thousand books, but in the ninth 
century the libraries of the monasteries of Reichenau and St Gall, major 
intellectual centres in their day, each contained only some four hundred 
books. Where later polymaths would face the problem of ‘too much 
to know’, Early Medieval ones suﬀ ered from the problem of ‘too little’. 
In Western Europe, the knowledge of Greek was lost, and together 
with it the knowledge of much of the classical tradition, condemned as 
pagan. Many texts, including Varro’s survey of ancient knowledge, were 
no longer copied and so disappeared. Much medical and mathematical 
knowledge was lost. Th e correspondence of two eleventh-century 
scholars, Raginbold of Cologne and Radolf of Liège, shows them 
discussing what might be meant by the phrase ‘the interior angles’ of a 
triangle. As a leading medievalist has remarked, this is ‘a forcible reminder 
of the vast scientiﬁ c ignorance with which the age was faced’.26

THE POLYMATH

18
In this situation, a major task of scholars was a salvage operation, an 
attempt to preserve and bring together what remained of the classical 
tradition, rather than to add to it (the so-called ‘barbarian’ invaders of 
the Roman Empire brought their own knowledges with them, but these 
were usually transmitted orally and so failed to survive the centuries). As 
the scholars of this period assembled the fragments of ancient Greek and 
Roman learning, they also classiﬁ ed them, both in the curriculum of the 
schools attached to cathedrals and in encyclopaedias. Th e ‘seven liberal 
arts’ came to be divided into the trivium (grammar, logic and rhetoric, 
the three subjects concerned with words) and the quadrivium (arith-
metic, geometry, astronomy and the theory of music, the four subjects 
concerned with numbers).
It might be said that in these circumstances it would have been easier 
than it used to be to become a polymath, since there was less to study. 
On the other hand, ﬁ nding the necessary books had become more 
diﬃ  cult. Wide-ranging scholars who were able to reunite fragments 
of knowledge were even more necessary than before. Among the most 
outstanding of these scholars were Boethius, Isidore of Seville and 
Gerbert of Aurillac.27
Boethius (c.480–524) was a Roman senator, consul and magister oﬃ  -
ciorum, in other words head of the oﬃ  cials serving Th eoderic, King of the 
Ostrogoths, who had settled in Italy near Ravenna. Most famous for his 
book Th e Consolation of Philosophy, Boethius also wrote on logic, rhetoric, 
arithmetic, music and theology, as well as translating or commenting on 
texts by Pythagoras, Aristotle, Plato, Archimedes, Euclid, Ptolemy and 
Cicero. Boethius was described in his own time as ‘fat with much learning’ 
(multa eruditione saginatum).28 Aware of the threat to knowledge in his 
time and the need to preserve it, he salvaged a considerable part of Greek 
learning by making it available to readers of Latin.29
Isidore of Seville (c.560–636) called his encyclopaedia the Etymologies 
because he began his discussion of each topic (the ﬁ rst of which is ‘disci-
pline’) with the origin of the word for it, beginning with the seven liberal 
arts and moving on to medicine, law, theology, languages, animals, the 
cosmos, buildings, ships, food and clothes (his interest in technical 


EAST AND WEST
19
knowledges deserves noting). Known as ‘the Christian Varro’, Isidore 
actually cites Varro twenty-eight times, but at second hand, a reminder 
that works by many ancient writers had been lost by the early Middle 
Ages. It is thought that he had a team of assistants.30
Gerbert of Aurillac (c.946–1003) was a French monk who studied in 
Spain and taught at the cathedral school in Rheims before becoming 
abbot of the famous monastery of Bobbio in northern Italy and ﬁ nally 
pope, taking the name of Sylvester II. His interests ranged from Latin 
literature, especially the poems of Virgil and the plays of Terence, to 
music, mathematics, astronomy and what we call ‘technology’ – he made 
use of an astrolabe and an abacus and is said to have constructed an organ.
Like Pliny, Gerbert ﬁ lled his waking hours with study. ‘At work 
and at leisure,’ he wrote of himself, ‘I teach what I know and I learn what 
I do not.’31 His learning became legendary. Th e chronicler William of 
Malmesbury, a twelfth-century English monk, wrote that Gerbert absorbed 
the quadrivium with such ease that he made these disciplines appear to be 
‘below the level of his intelligence’, as well as surpassing the Alexandrian 
scholar Ptolemy in the study of astrology. William also called Gerbert a 
necromancer, as if no one could know so much without supernatural help, 
and described his construction of the head of a statue that would answer all 
his questions, the tenth-century equivalent of Alexa.32 Th e story reveals 
more about normal expectations in the tenth and eleventh centuries than 
it does about Gerbert, although it should probably be interpreted as an 
expression of wonder, not so much at his mastery of diﬀ erent disciplines as 
at his knowing things that no one else knew, at least in Western Europe.
THE ISLAMIC WORLD
Another reason for William of Malmesbury’s suspicions about Gerbert 
was that he learned from the Muslims (a Saracenis). When he was studying 
in Catalonia, Gerbert did indeed do this. By his time, scholars of Arab, 
Turkic and Persian origin had recovered much more Greek knowledge 
than was available in Western Europe. Greek texts were translated into 
Arabic and Pahlevi, either directly or indirectly (via Syriac-speaking 
Christian scholars). Some of the most learned scholars in the Islamic 

THE POLYMATH

20
world between the tenth and the twelfth centuries wrote commentaries 
on the many works by or attributed to Aristotle and may have been 
inspired to emulate his breadth of knowledge.
Th e Arabs had a phrase with a similar meaning to ‘polymath’: tafannun 
ﬁ  al-’ulum, a scholar whose knowledge was ‘many-branched’ (mutafannin). 
However, although the package of disciplines that scholars needed to 
master was similar to the western package it was not identical with it. 
Th eir Falsafa translates well as ‘philosophy’ – indeed, it is the same word, 
moving from Greek into Arabic – while Fikh translates as ‘law’, and Adab 
translates more or less as what the Greeks called paideia, aimed at producing 
the Adib, ‘the gentleman scholar’. Th e intellectual baggage of such a scholar 
‘would typically have consisted of a formidable array of the arts and 
sciences of his age: the web of the religious sciences, poetry, philology, 
history and literary criticism, together with a solid acquaintance with the 
natural sciences, from arithmetic to medicine and zoology’.33
In similar fashion to Quintilian on the orator and Vitruvius on the 
architect, the great scholar Ibn Khaldun, whose achievements will be 
discussed below, wrote that a good secretary ‘will have to concern himself 
with the principal branches of scholarship’.34 Th e branches most diﬀ erent 
from western ones at this point were the interpretation of the Quran 
(Tafsir), the study of accounts of Muhammad’s words and deeds (Hadith), 
and what we call ‘pharmacology’ (Saydalah). Th e classiﬁ cation of knowl-
edge included divisions such as ‘rational knowledge’ (al-‘ulum al-‘aqliyya) 
and ‘the knowledge of the ancients’ (al-‘ulum al-awa’il).
Another way of praising Islamic scholars was to call them ‘complete’ 
(kāmil). It has been suggested that ‘Many-sidedness was a quality sought 
by all men of learning.’35 Th e education oﬀ ered in madrasas, schools 
attached to mosques, encouraged this many-sidedness since students 
could easily move from one teacher (shaykh) to another. A study of medi-
eval Damascus argues that ‘exposure to many ﬁ elds and many shaykhs 
was the ideal, rather than specialized training in single subjects’.36
Th e contributions to knowledge made by individual polymaths such 
as these are diﬃ  cult if not impossible to evaluate. It was generally 
believed, both in the Islamic world and in the medieval West, that the 


EAST AND WEST
21
function of the scholar was to transmit traditional knowledge rather than 
to transmit something new. Although some empirical research was 
carried out and discoveries were made, many learned works took the 
form of commentaries on the books of earlier scholars. In any case, in 
manuscript cultures there is generally less emphasis on individual authors 
than in cultures of print. Works by disciples might circulate under the 
name of their masters, while copyists often felt free to leave out or even 
to insert passages in the text that they were transcribing (some treatises 
cursed scribes who changed the text in this way).
Among the many-sided scholars of the Islamic world, outstanding 
ﬁ gures living between the ninth and fourteenth centuries (according to 
the western chronology) include the following four: Al-Kindi, Ibn Sina 
(known as ‘Avicenna’), Ibn Rushd (‘Averroes’) and Ibn Khaldun.37
Al-Kindi (801–73) came from Basra and studied in Baghdad. He 
wrote on philosophy, mathematics, music, astronomy, medicine, optics 
and ciphers, as well as on the manufacture of glass, jewellery, armour and 
perfume, ﬁ elds of practical knowledge that make him comparable to the 
Chinese scholar Su Song, discussed earlier. Al-Kindi was described by a 
fourteenth-century writer as ‘a versatile man’ who mastered ‘philosophy 
in all its branches’.38 A recent study also refers to ‘the astonishing range 
of Al-Kindi’s interests’.39 Appropriately enough, some of his writings 
were studied by Leonardo da Vinci.
Ibn Sina (c.980–1037) came from Bukhara. When he was still a teen-
ager, he was given permission by Mansur II to use the emir’s great library 
there. Nicknamed ‘the prince of physicians’, Ibn Sina became well known 
for his works on medicine and for his critical commentary on Aristotle. 
At the age of twenty-one he compiled an encyclopaedia, the Compendium 
(Kitab al-Majmu), and he went on to write two more encyclopaedic 
works. Th e ﬁ rst of these, Th e Canon (Al-Qanun), was concerned with 
medicine. Th e second, Th e Cure (Al-Shifa), was an attempt to cure igno-
rance by expounding on logic, physics, metaphysics, mathematics, music 
and astronomy. Ibn Sina also wrote on geography and poetry. He both 
studied alchemy and criticized it. He was also active as a jurist and as a 
vizier to an emir in what is now Iran.40

THE POLYMATH

22
Ibn Rushd (‘Averroes’, 1126–98), who came from Córdoba, was 
active as a physician and as a judge. Th anks to his commentary on almost 
all the works of Aristotle, a major enterprise, Ibn Rushd was known as 
‘the Commentator’. He also produced his own studies of rhetoric, 
poetics, astronomy, medicine, philosophy, mathematics and music.41
Following Ibn Rushd there was something of a hiatus in the list of 
Islamic polymaths until the appearance of Ibn Khaldun (1332–1406). 
He was born in Tunis, lived in Fez and Granada, and died in Cairo. He 
wrote in the intervals between his three careers, a political one as a 
diplomat and an adviser of rulers, a legal one as a judge and an academic 
one as a teacher. Ibn Khaldun spent four years in retirement in a castle in 
what is now Algeria in order to write his masterpiece, the Muqaddima, 
which oﬀ ers general reﬂ ections as an introduction to a history of the 
Muslim world, the Kitab al-‘ibar. Th e Muqaddima has been acclaimed as 
a contribution to sociology and political science, although these disci-
plines did not exist in the author’s time. Th inking with the intellectual 
categories of his own day, we may say that what made the Muqaddimah 
possible was Ibn Khaldun’s knowledge of geography, philosophy, theology 
and medicine as well as his acute understanding of history and his gift 
for generalization. It was the West’s loss that, unlike some of his prede-
cessors, Ibn Khaldun was not known there until relatively recently. A 
manuscript of his major work was brought to Leiden in the seventeenth 
century, but the ﬁ rst translations into European languages were only 
made in the nineteenth century, while his fame in the West dates from 
the twentieth.42
THE HIGH MIDDLE AGES
Th e twelfth-century scholar Bernard of Chartres is reputed to have said 
that he and his colleagues were ‘like dwarves standing on the shoulders 
of giants’, in other words ancient Greeks and Romans. It might be more 
exact to say that medieval western scholars were standing on the shoul-
ders of Muslim scholars who in turn stood on the shoulders of the 
ancients. In the early Middle Ages, the challenge to scholars had been to 
save and preserve what remained of the classical tradition. In the later 


EAST AND WEST
23
Middle Ages, it was to recover and to master not only the ancient Greek 
knowledge that had been lost but also the new knowledge produced in 
the Islamic world.
A major innovation of this period, from the eleventh century onwards, 
was the foundation of universities, notably at Bologna and Paris, institu-
tionalizing a package of disciplines. Undergraduates were supposed 
to study the seven liberal arts, the trivium and quadrivium described 
above. Th e postgraduate disciplines were theology, law and medicine, 
oﬀ ering professional training for clergy, lawyers and physicians. Despite 
these early signs of specialization, some medieval scholars carried on the 
polymathic tradition. Among the most outstanding of these were the 
following six: Hugh of St Victor, Vincent of Beauvais, Albert the Great, 
Robert Grosseteste, Roger Bacon and Ramón Lull.43
Both Hugh and Vincent became famous for their encyclopaedias. Th e 
monk Hugh of St Victor (c.1096–1141) came from Saxony but worked 
in Paris. He wrote on theology, music, geometry and grammar but is best 
known for his Didascalicon, an encyclopaedia divided into three types of 
knowledge: theoretical (philosophy, for example), practical (such as poli-
tics) and ‘mechanical’ (architecture, for instance, and navigation).44 Th e 
Dominican friar Vincent of Beauvais (c.1190–1264) compiled, with the 
help of assistants, an encyclopaedia known as Th e Great Mirror (Speculum 
Maius), drawing on the writings of Muslim scholars such as Ibn Sina as 
well as on ancient Greeks and Romans. Like the Didascalicon, Vincent’s 
encyclopaedia was divided into three parts, in his case the knowledge of 
nature, doctrine and history. Th e liberal and mechanical arts, law and 
medicine were all included in the section on ‘doctrine’.45
Two of the polymaths active in this period were Englishmen, Robert 
Grosseteste (c.1175–1253) and Roger Bacon (c.1214–c.1292). Robert, 
who became bishop of Lincoln, was doubtless nicknamed ‘Big Head’ 
(Grosseteste) on account of his many-sided learning. He taught philos-
ophy and theology at Oxford and wrote the ﬁ rst Latin commentary on 
Aristotle, but is best known for his writings on nature – on the stars, on 
light, on colour, on the origin of sounds, on the heat of the sun and 
possibly on the tides. He is also ‘the ﬁ rst thinker on record to have 

THE POLYMATH

24
identiﬁ ed refraction as the underlying cause of the rainbow’.46 He learned 
Greek late in life and was one of the few medieval western scholars to 
know that language.47
Roger Bacon, a Franciscan friar, may have been a pupil of Grosseteste’s. 
He studied and taught philosophy and theology at Oxford but he too is 
best known for his investigation of nature, ranging from astronomy to 
optics and alchemy. Like Leonardo later, he attempted to construct a 
ﬂ ying machine.48 Th anks to the ﬁ rst-hand accounts written by three 
of his Franciscan colleagues, all missionaries, Roger acquired up-to-date 
knowledge about the Mongols, whose rapid conquests were terrifying 
Europeans at this time.49 He also wrote on mathematics and on language. 
A sign of Bacon’s reputation as a polymath in his own time is the story 
(also attached to Gerbert of Aurillac, as we have seen) that he had a 
brazen head in his study that answered all his questions. Th e mythology 
of polymaths goes back a long way.
Th e most ambitious medieval polymaths were surely Albert the Great 
and Ramón Lull. Albert (Albertus Magnus, c.1200–80) should be distin-
guished from Albert of Saxony (c.1316–90), who contributed to logic, 
mathematics and physics. Albert the Great was a German Dominican, 
known in his own day as ‘Doctor Universalis’ or ‘Doctor Expertus’, titles 
that testify to the breadth of his knowledge. One of his students called 
Albert ‘a man so godlike in every branch of knowledge (vir in omni scientia 
adeo divinus) that he can properly be called the wonder and marvel of our 
age’.50 Albert studied theology, philosophy, alchemy, astrology and music, 
commented on all the known works of Aristotle and was familiar with the 
work of some leading Muslim scholars. He also made his own observa-
tions and classiﬁ cation of plants and minerals. He was said to possess a 
statue, or, as we would say, a robot, that was able to move and say ‘Hello’ 
(salve), if not to answer questions like the brazen heads of his colleagues 
Gerbert and Roger.
As for the Catalan friar Ramón Lull (or Llull, 1232–1316), he demon-
strated his versatility by writing about 260 diﬀ erent works, including 
two romances, a book on the art of love and the Tree of Knowledge (Arbor 
Scientiae); by learning Arabic in order to work as a missionary in North 


EAST AND WEST
25
Africa; and above all by his Ars Magna (Great Art), described by Umberto 
Eco as ‘a system for a perfect language with which to convert the inﬁ del’. 
Th e Ars Magna makes use of logic, rhetoric and mathematics in order to 
teach readers how to discover, remember and present arguments, 
employing wheels to allow diﬀ erent ideas to be combined (a technique 
known as the ars combinatoria, apparently borrowed or adapted from the 
zairja of Arab astrologers). Th ree hundred years later, Lull’s art would 
attract the attention of the greatest polymath of the seventeenth century, 
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz. Needless to say, in an age of computer 
science, Lull’s discussion of the art of combination has been receiving 
increasing attention.51

26
In Europe in the ﬁ fteenth and sixteenth centuries, the amount of infor-
mation in circulation rapidly increased. In the movement now known as 
the Renaissance, scholars laboured to recover ancient Greek and Roman 
knowledges that had been lost during the Middle Ages. Th e exploration 
and conquest of parts of Europe, Asia and the Americas brought new 
knowledge in its train, while the invention of printing allowed both old 
and new knowledges to circulate further and faster. Nonetheless, it was 
still possible in this period for at least a few scholars to dominate the 
kinds of knowledge taught and studied in universities, which now 
included not only the medieval trivium and quadrivium, mentioned 
earlier, but also the ‘humanities’ (studia humanitatis), a package of ﬁ ve 
disciplines – grammar, rhetoric, poetry, history and ethics – that were 
supposed to make students more fully human.
When we think of the Renaissance, however, we generally call to 
mind not only scholars but also artists and above all the so-called 
‘Renaissance Man’, a personage who has long made regular appearances 
in the titles of scholarly books.1 As we have seen, a number of twentieth-
century polymaths, among them Benedetto Croce, Herbert Simon and 
Joseph Needham, have been described as late examples of the species. 
Th is association of versatile individuals with the Renaissance owes much 
to the great Swiss cultural historian Jacob Burckhardt.
In his famous essay on Th e Civilisation of the Renaissance in Italy, ﬁ rst 
published in 1860 but frequently reprinted to this day, Burckhardt 
 2 
 THE AGE OF THE 
‘RENAISSANCE MAN’
14001600


THE AGE OF THE ‘RENAISSANCE MAN’
27
presented a few individuals of the period – notably Francesco Petrarca, 
Leonbattista Alberti, Giovanni Pico della Mirandola and Leonardo da 
Vinci – as examples of what he called the ‘all-sided’ or at least the ‘many-
sided’ man (der allseitige Mensch, der vielseitige Mensch).2 Of these ‘giants’, 
as he calls them, Burckhardt dwelt in particular on Alberti and Leonardo.
Other nineteenth-century writers described major ﬁ gures of the 
Renaissance in similar fashion. Before Burckhardt, the French historian 
Edgar Quinet had characterized Leonardo as ‘a citizen of every world . . . 
Anatomist, chemist, musician, geologist, improviser, poet, engineer, 
physicist’.3 After Burckhardt, and perhaps following him, George Eliot 
praised Alberti in her novel Romola for his ‘robust universal mind, at 
once practical and theoretic, artist, man of science, inventor, poet’.4
THE IDEAL OF UNIVERSALITY
Th e ideal of many-sidedness or the ‘universal man’ (uomo universale) was 
put forward in the Renaissance itself. One of the great teachers of ﬁ fteenth-
century Italy, Vittorino da Feltre, ‘used to praise that universal learning 
that the Greeks call encyclopaedia, saying that to beneﬁ t his fellows the 
perfect man should be able to discuss natural philosophy, ethics, astronomy, 
geometry, harmony, arithmetic and surveying’. His ideal was knowledge of 
‘many and various disciplines’.5 Again, a speaker in a dialogue on ‘civic life’ 
(la vita civile), written by the Florentine Matteo Palmieri, asks ‘how a man 
might learn many things and make himself universal (farsi universale) in 
many excellent arts’.6 A famous incarnation of the ideal of universality was 
the ﬁ gure of Faust. Th e hero of the original German Faustbuch of 1587 
had an ‘insatiable desire for knowledge’.7
Th ese formulations of the ideal of universality concentrate on academic 
knowledge, the central topic of this study. Other versions are more ambi-
tious and demand ability in the world of action (the vita activa) as well as 
that of thought (the vita contemplativa), a contrast often vividly described 
at this time as one between ‘arms’ and ‘letters’.8 Some versions also demand 
ability in the ﬁ ne arts. For example, in Baldassare Castiglione’s dialogue 
on the courtier, ﬁ rst published in 1528, one speaker argues that the perfect 
courtier should not only be skilled in ﬁ ghting and be ‘more than passably 

THE POLYMATH

28
learned’ (più che mediocremente erudito) in the humanities, but also have 
mastered the arts of dancing, painting and music.9
Th e ideal of universality was also expressed by the emperor Maximilian 
in his romance of chivalry, the Weisskunig, which was written a few years 
before Castiglione’s book. Th e hero of the romance is presented as skilled 
in calligraphy, the liberal arts, magic, medicine, astrology, music, painting, 
building, hunting, ﬁ ghting and even carpentry, as well as knowing eleven 
languages.10 In France, François Rabelais oﬀ ered a vivid image of a many-
sided education in his imaginary biographies of the giants Gargantua and 
Pantagruel. Gargantua studied not only the liberal arts but also medicine 
and the art of war, and when it rained he went to see craftsmen at work. 
He advised his son Pantagruel to study in the same way: liberal arts, law, 
medicine and natural history, in short ‘an abyss of knowledge’ (un abysme 
de science).11
In England, the idea of universal knowledge goes back to the early 
sixteenth century, when the printer William Caxton referred to ‘an unyver-
sall man almost in all scyences’.12 Th e ideal of many-sidedness was formu-
lated in Sir Th omas Elyot’s Book Named the Governor (1531), a treatise on 
the education of upper-class males. Elyot not only discusses what he calls 
the ‘circle of doctrine’ that students should follow but also suggests that a 
gentleman should know how to compose music, paint and even sculpt as 
well as studying academic subjects.13 However, this vision of the noble 
amateur, already visible in Castiglione’s reference to being ‘more than pass-
ably learned’, should be distinguished from the ideal of the individual who 
is driven, like Alberti, to excel in everything he attempts.
THE MYTH OF UNIVERSALITY
Despite some of the spectacular examples of versatility already discussed, 
it may be argued that Burckhardt and some of his contemporaries exagger-
ated the distinctiveness of the intellectual species they described as the 
‘universal’ or ‘Renaissance’ man (the case of the ‘Renaissance woman’ will 
be discussed later in the chapter). Several of the contemporary testimonies 
quoted above are less clear-cut than they may appear at ﬁ rst sight. 
Castiglione, for instance, allows some speakers in his dialogue to challenge 


THE AGE OF THE ‘RENAISSANCE MAN’
29
many-sidedness, condemning people who ‘are always trying to do things 
they don’t know about and neglecting what they do know about’, a passage 
that is generally taken to refer to Leonardo.14
Again, the literally ‘gargantuan’ educational programme described by 
Rabelais has often been taken seriously as the expression of a Renaissance 
ideal, but it may also be read as a parody of that ideal. As for Faust, his 
insatiable thirst for knowledge was condemned in the original Faustbook 
as an example of his spiritual pride. Doctor Faustus was not presented as 
a hero, but as a warning. Th e condemnation of curiosity by theologians 
such as Augustine was still taken seriously in the sixteenth century.
Burckhardt himself was a versatile individual who wrote poetry, 
sketched and played the piano as well as teaching and writing both 
history and art history (which had already become separate disciplines in 
the German-speaking world in his day). As a historian, Burckhardt 
refused to specialize in a particular period and wrote about the cultural 
history of Greece, the age of Constantine and (in posthumously 
published lectures) what he regarded as the world crisis of his own time. 
No wonder then that he was attracted to many-sided ﬁ gures such as 
Alberti and Leonardo and wished to see them as typical of their age, a 
golden age that preceded an iron age of intellectual and cultural speciali-
zation. In this way Burckhardt contributed to what was described earlier 
as the ‘mythology’ of the polymath.15
Th ere are many deﬁ nitions of myth. Th e one followed here has two 
main features. It is a story about the past which is employed to justify or 
to criticize a situation in the present, and a story in which the protago-
nists are larger than life. Th e story may be completely false, but is not 
necessarily so. Inside the shell of exaggerations, it often contains a kernel 
of truth. Let us see whether and to what extent some individuals of this 
period lived up to the ideal of universality.
ACTION AND THOUGHT
Leon Battista Alberti’s combination of abilities was noted by Burckhardt. 
Th e anonymous biography of Alberti, generally taken to be an autobiog-
raphy, described him as an individual so ‘versatile’ that he mastered all 

THE POLYMATH

30
the ﬁ ne arts, together with physical exercises such as horsemanship, 
jumping and hurling the javelin.16 Th ere is no way of verifying his claims 
to physical feats, but some of his contemporaries were impressed by 
Alberti’s intellectual range. Th e humanist Cristoforo Landino asked 
(rhetorically), ‘What branch of mathematics was not known to him? 
Geometry, arithmetic, astronomy, music – and in perspective he did 
marvels.’ In any case, some of Alberti’s achievements are still extant: the 
buildings he designed, his treatises on painting and architecture, his 
dialogue on the family, his little book on mathematical games and his 
self-portrait on a bronze medallion.17
Th anks to a biography written by one of his pupils, we know that the 
ﬁ fteenth-century Dutch scholar Rudolf Agricola, best known for his 
studies of logic, was another man of ‘many-sided knowledge’ (multiplex 
scientia) who emulated Alberti by practising painting, sculpture, music 
and gymnastics, and who also built an organ.18
In the sixteenth century, a number of individuals who lacked the wide 
range of Alberti and Agricola still combined an active life with a contem-
plative one, arms with letters. For example, the Spanish noblemen 
Garcilaso de la Vega and Alonso de Ercilla lived a double life as soldiers 
and poets. Garcilaso fought in Europe and North Africa and became 
famous for his lyrics, while Ercilla served in what is now Chile and turned 
the conﬂ ict between the indigenous inhabitants and the Spaniards into 
an epic. In Elizabethan England, Philip Sidney, a soldier who died in 
battle in the Netherlands, remains famous for his poetry and his romance 
Arcadia.
Another Elizabethan who combined arms and letters, Walter Raleigh, 
was closer to the ideal of the uomo universale. He described himself on 
the scaﬀ old, before his execution on a charge of conspiracy against King 
James I, as ‘a soldier, a captain, a sea-captain and a courtier’. He might 
have added that he was a poet and a scholar, the author of a history of the 
world. He was also an adventurer in Virginia and what is now Venezuela, 
while his book the Discovery of Guiana (1596) reveals his interest in foreign 
lands and their inhabitants. Contemporaries described Raleigh as ‘An 
indefatigable reader’ and ‘a great chemist’ (in other words, an alchemist).19


THE AGE OF THE ‘RENAISSANCE MAN’
31
As for James Crichton, this young Scottish nobleman was described 
by a contemporary as ‘admirable in all studies’ (omnibus in studiis admir-
abilis). Th e ‘admirable Crichton’, as he is still known, arrived in Italy in 
1579 when he was nineteen and became a kind of intellectual knight-
errant, issuing challenges to university professors to debate with him. 
Crichton made a great impression on at least some Italians before his 
early death, murdered by the son of his employer, the Duke of Mantua, 
and was described by one of them as follows: ‘He knows ten languages 
. . . philosophy, theology, mathematics and astrology . . . He has a perfect 
knowledge of the Cabala . . . improvises verses in all metres . . . makes 
informed comments on politics’, not to mention his prowess as a soldier, 
athlete, dancer, and as ‘a marvellous courtier’.20
Other individuals of this period combined learning with a career in 
public life, including two English lawyers, both of whom occupied the 
highest post in their profession, that of Lord Chancelllor: Th omas More 
and Francis Bacon. More was a humanist and a theologian as well as the 
author of Utopia, while Bacon published essays, a biography of King 
Henry VII and the Advancement of Learning, a reﬂ ection on the methods 
by which knowledge might be increased. Bacon carried out experiments 
in natural philosophy and is said to have met his death from pneumonia 
following an attempt to preserve chickens by freezing them.21
SCHOLARS
Only a few of the ‘Renaissance men’ described so far count as polymaths 
in the strict sense, but there was no shortage of many-sided scholars in 
Europe in this period, described at the time as ‘knowing much’ (multi-
scius), an adjective used by the Spanish humanist Juan Luis Vives, or as 
individuals of multiplex scientia, the phrase employed by the biographer 
of the Dutch humanist Rudolf Agricola. To be a humanist, teaching the 
humanities, required the mastery of ﬁ ve disciplines, as we have seen. 
Desiderius Erasmus, the most famous humanist of all, also mastered 
philology and theology. He did not wish to explore further, however, and 
reminded his readers that Socrates had criticized the interest in ‘unneces-
sary disciplines’ such as astrology and geometry, believing that the proper 

THE POLYMATH

32
study of mankind is man. In the words of a sympathetic historian, 
Erasmus only ‘aspired to a kind of polymathy’.22
Other humanists were more adventurous, following the example of 
Aristotle rather than Socrates. Philip Melanchthon, for instance, now 
remembered as a theologian, Luther’s right-hand man in Wittenberg, 
studied or taught not only rhetoric and Greek but also mathematics, 
astronomy, astrology, anatomy and botany.23
Giovanni Pico della Mirandola in particular aimed at universality. 
Pico is well known for his Oration on the Dignity of Man, a kind of mani-
festo for Renaissance humanism, but his interests were much wider. 
When he was only twenty-three, in 1486, he proposed to defend 900 
theses – ‘dialectical, moral, physical, mathematical, metaphysical, theo-
logical, magical and cabalistic’ – though the proposed defence, in Rome, 
never took place. Pico argued that mathematics was ‘the method for 
investigating everything that is knowable’ (via ad omnis scibilis investiga-
tionem). He learned Hebrew, Aramaic and Arabic, and was particularly 
fascinated by the study of the secret Jewish tradition of the Cabala (or 
Kabbalah), which he ‘launched . . . into the Christian world’. He was 
interested not only in the mystical tradition of the Cabala but also in the 
use of Hebrew letters and words for magical purposes, a technique that 
Pico compared to Ramón Lull’s art of combination.24
Pico was described by a character in a dialogue by Erasmus, the 
Ciceronianus, as an ‘all-sided man’ (ingenium ad omnia factum), while the 
life of Pico by his nephew referred to him as an example of ‘men who are 
experts in every kind of discipline’ (viri omni disciplinarum genere consu-
matissimi). As we shall see, later polymaths and their admirers often 
referred to Pico as an exemplar.25
Pico should not be viewed as an individual who broke with tradition. 
His 900 theses begin with sixteen conclusions ‘according to Albert’, in 
other words the ‘Universal Doctor’, Albert the Great. Th ey also referred to 
Ibn Rushd, Ibn Sina and Al-Farabi. Th e intellectual tournament that Pico 
proposed at Rome followed a medieval precedent, that of the quodlibet, as 
practised at the university of Prague and elsewhere, in which a university 
teacher would prepare questions for disputation in all disciplines.26


THE AGE OF THE ‘RENAISSANCE MAN’
33
A substantial number of individuals (50 of my 500, all born before 
1565) have a good claim to be regarded as Renaissance polymaths. Th e 
ﬁ ve examples that follow include a German, two Frenchmen, an 
Englishman and a Swiss: Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa, Jean Bodin, 
Joseph Scaliger, John Dee and Conrad Gessner.
Agrippa is believed to have been the model for that symbol of omnis-
cience, Doctor Faustus. In his play on this theme, Christopher Marlowe 
makes Faustus boast that he will become ‘as cunning as Agrippa was’ (the 
word ‘cunning’ referred at this time to knowledge in general). Before 
following an academic career, Agrippa served as a soldier, thus joining 
arms and letters, and he was also employed as a diplomat and a physician. 
His interests included theology, philosophy, law, medicine, alchemy, magic 
and the secret Jewish tradition of the Cabala, which also fascinated Pico. 
Describing himself as ‘a glutton for books’ (helluo librorum), Agrippa made 
considerable use of the work of Pliny the Elder and wrote a commen-
tary on a work by Lull. His books include Th e Vanity of the Sciences (1527), 
a general survey of knowledge from a sceptical point of view, and Occult 
Philosophy (1531–3), a treatise on magic (natural, celestial and religious), 
in which he argued that it could help resolve problems raised by the scep-
tics. According to rumour, Agrippa’s black dog was actually a devil. As in 
the cases of Gerbert, Roger Bacon and Albertus Magnus, Agrippa was 
regarded with a mixture of wonder and suspicion.27
Jean Bodin was described by the historian Hugh Trevor-Roper as ‘the 
undisputed intellectual master of the later sixteenth century’.28 He owes 
much of his fame to his study of the state, Six Livres de la République 
(1576), which argued in favour of absolute monarchy (the word répub-
lique in the title means ‘commonwealth’, not ‘republic’ in the modern 
sense). Th e book combines political theory with what would be known 
much later as ‘political science’, oﬀ ering a pioneering comparative ana -
lysis of political systems. In his Method for the Easy Comprehension of 
History (1566), a guide for students in the form of a bibliographical 
essay, Bodin had linked the study of history with that of law, recom-
mending the comparison of the laws ‘of all or the most famous common-
wealths’ in order to select the best ones. He described the ideal jurist as 

THE POLYMATH

34
‘a living encyclopaedia’ and emphasized the need for historians to study 
geography (including climate) and philosophy, referring to those who 
did as Geographistorici and Philosophistorici.29
Bodin’s other books are known only to specialists. One, the 
Demonomania (1580), describes the activities of witches and their pact 
with the devil, who, according to the author, tries to persuade judges in 
witchcraft trials to be lenient. Bodin criticizes Agrippa for studying the 
occult. Another book, the Th eatre of Nature (1596), is a kind of encyclo-
paedia in the form of a dialogue, combining natural history, natural 
philosophy and natural theology and mobilizing speciﬁ c examples from 
astronomy to zoology in order to show that everything in nature has a 
useful purpose in God’s plan. Bodin also contributed to what is now 
known as economics. He has ‘a strong claim to be regarded as the pioneer 
formulator of the quantity theory of money’, put forward in response to 
the arguments of a royal oﬃ  cial concerned with the recent rise in prices.30
Bodin was probably the author of the anonymous ‘Dialogue of the 
Seven’ (Colloquium Heptaplomeres) in which the participants are 
presented discussing the various virtues of Catholicism, Calvinism, 
Lutheranism, Judaism, Islam and natural religion. In any case, he was 
active in attempts to end the wars between Catholics and Protestants in 
France.31
Another Frenchman, Joseph Scaliger, might be considered to be a 
worthy rival of Bodin for the title of ‘intellectual master’ of his time. 
Known in his day as the ‘Hercules’ of the Republic of Letters, described 
by Immanuel Kant as a ‘marvel’ of memory and more recently as a ‘titan 
of learning’, Scaliger was essentially a philologist, a peerless example of the 
scholar’s scholar, provoking the emulation of the polymath John Selden, 
as we shall see.32 His editions of classical texts, from the Roman polymath 
Varro to the poets Catullus, Tibullus and Propertius, were marked not 
only by brilliant emendations but also by innovations in method, notably 
the reconstruction of the history of the textual tradition.
Scaliger combined the approach of classical philologists with that of 
lawyers such as Jacques Cujas, with whom he had studied, learning how 
to ﬁ t fragments of evidence together. His edition of an astronomical 


THE AGE OF THE ‘RENAISSANCE MAN’
35
poem by the ancient Roman Marcus Manilius required him to study the 
history of that discipline. Scaliger also became an orientalist, learning 
Hebrew, Aramaic and Arabic. He made use of all these knowledges in 
his masterpiece ‘On the Correction of Chronologies’ (De emendatio 
temporum, 1583), supplemented by the ‘Treasury of Chronologies’ 
(Th esaurus temporum, 1606). In these books Scaliger oﬀ ered a systematic 
critique of the sources in diﬀ erent ancient languages and drew on astro-
nomical information, like Isaac Newton a century later, in order to 
resolve contradictions between Greek, Roman, Babylonian and other 
chronologies.33
Th e English scholar John Dee is sometimes thought to have served as 
a model for the protagonist of Christopher Marlowe’s play Doctor Faustus 
(like Agrippa in the case of the original German Faustbook). He was 
neglected by historians until relatively recently – again like Agrippa – 
because his studies included disciplines such as astrology, angelology, 
magic and alchemy that are no longer taken seriously by mainstream 
scholars, despite their continuing appeal to enthusiasts of the occult. 
Dee’s interests also extended to mathematics, astronomy, philosophy, 
law, physics, navigation and geography (which he had studied in the 
Netherlands with the famous cartographer Gerard Mercator). Dee took 
a particular interest in some of his polymath predecessors, including 
Albertus Magnus, Roger Bacon, Ramón Lull and Pico della Mirandola. 
His library was one of the largest of his day, with some four thousand 
printed volumes and manuscripts, including treatises on architecture, 
music, antiquities, heraldry and genealogy as well as the disciplines 
already mentioned. In short, ‘in groping for universal knowledge he was 
a complete Renaissance man’, virtually ‘omnidisciplinary’.34
In his relatively short life – he died at the age of forty-nine – Conrad 
Gessner acquired a reputation as a humanist, a physician, a naturalist, 
and an encyclopaedist. He was variously described as a ‘polyhistor’, as 
‘the Pliny of our Germany’ (and later as a ‘monster of erudition’, a phrase 
to which the following chapter will return).35
Gessner was a professor of Greek at Lausanne. He published a number 
of editions of ancient Greek texts, but he is most often remembered for 

THE POLYMATH

36
his massive bibliography cum biographical dictionary, the Universal 
Library (1545). In 1,300 pages, Gessner oﬀ ered information about 
10,000 works by 3,000 authors who wrote in Latin or Greek, producing 
an invaluable reference work that was intended, at least in part, to help 
with the discovery and preservation of classical texts.36 He later produced 
a comparative study of some 130 languages (Mithridates, 1555).
As if this was not enough, Gessner was also active as a physician in 
Zurich and as a contributor, like other humanists of his generation, to 
the study of nature as well as of culture. He produced books on animals 
(Historiae animalium, ﬁ ve volumes, 1551–8), baths (De Germaniae et 
Helvetiae Th ermis, 1553) and fossils (De fossilium genere, 1565), as well as 
leaving botanical manuscripts that might have become another book had 
the author lived a little longer. Th e tradition of Renaissance humanism 
remains apparent in the interest that Gessner takes in the opinions of 
ancient writers such as Aristotle and Pliny, but he also relied on his own 
observation of plants and animals. A genus of ﬂ ower and a genus of 
moth have been named after him.
To understand how Gessner was able to publish so much on so many 
topics in his short life, scholars have recently been focusing on his working 
methods. Much of his information came from correspondents, whose 
letters he often cut up and rearranged under topical headings. Other 
information came from visitors as well as from his wide reading, while the 
task of organizing the mass of material was delegated in part to assistants 
and amanuenses. Even so, Gessner’s achievement is impressive.37
UNITY AND CONCORD
What drove these individuals to study such a wide range of subjects? In 
Gessner’s case it may have been simple fox-like curiosity, though the 
passion for order and the need to remedy what he once described as 
the ‘disorder of books’, doubtless played a part. In the case of other poly-
maths, the ‘hedgehogs’, the main aim was the uniﬁ cation of knowledge, 
a theme that will echo through later chapters of this book. Pico, for 
instance, oﬀ ers a clear example of a polymath driven by the desire to 
reconcile conﬂ icting ideas (those of Plato and Aristotle, for instance) and 


THE AGE OF THE ‘RENAISSANCE MAN’
37
conﬂ icting cultures (Christian, Jewish and Muslim). No wonder then 
that he was known in his own day as ‘the Prince of Concord’, a title all 
the more appropriate because his family owned the Italian town of 
Concordia.
Again, Cardinal Nicholas of Cusa, who was active as a philosopher, 
theologian, lawyer, mathematician and astronomer as well as a diplomat 
and cardinal, was driven by the idea of reconciling conﬂ icts. His treatise 
De Concordantia Catholica was concerned to heal divisions in the 
Church.38 Pico knew about Nicholas and hoped to visit his library in 
Germany.39 Another polymath, the Frenchman Guillaume Postel, was 
also driven by the desire for concord. His book on the subject, De Orbis 
Terrae Concordia, emphasized common elements in the religions of the 
world.40
Bodin too was concerned with harmony, an unsurprising response to 
the religious wars in France in his day. He viewed nature as a harmonious 
system, while his book on politics discussed harmonic justice and was in 
turn discussed by the astronomer Johannes Kepler in his treatise 
Harmonies of the World (1619). It has been suggested that ‘the goal of 
universal synthesis inspires all of Bodin’s work on law’; that he had an 
‘obsession with system’; that the central theme of his Heptaplomeres is 
harmony; and that his Th eatre of Nature exempliﬁ es the attempt to bring 
‘order and coherence to ever-increasing quantities of knowledge’, an 
attempt that became more and more diﬃ  cult from the seventeenth 
century onwards, as we shall see.41
A vision of the whole often underlay the compilation of encyclopae-
dias, a task that was still performed by individual scholars in this period, 
despite its increasing diﬃ  culty as printed books multiplied. Th e Spanish 
humanist Juan Luis Vives wrote about the whole of learning in his book 
On Disciplines (1531). Conrad Gessner produced encyclopaedias of 
books and animals. Gerolamo Cardano, an Italian physician remem-
bered today for his contributions to mathematics, was also the author of 
two encyclopaedic works, On Subtlety (1550) and On the Variety of Th ings 
(1558). Th e Croatian scholar Paul Skalić published his Encyclopaedia in 
1559, while the Swiss Th eodor Zwinger, a professor at the University of 

THE POLYMATH

38
Basel, produced his Th eatre of Human Life in 1565. Th e Th eatre contained 
example after example of human behaviour arranged under moral cate-
gories. By its third edition, the book contained 4,500 pages and over six 
million words.42
ARTISTS AND ENGINEERS
Th e creativity of participants in the movement now known as the 
Renaissance has sometimes been explained in terms of what we might 
call ‘de-compartmentalization’, in other words the breakdown or at least 
the weakening of barriers to communication between diﬀ erent groups, 
bridging ‘the gap which had separated the scholar and thinker from the 
practitioner’.43
For example, some humanists, such as Alberti, were on friendly 
terms with painters and sculptors (in Alberti’s case, with Masaccio 
and Donatello). Alberti advocated a general education for painters 
and (following the ancient Roman Vitruvius) for architects as well. 
Another humanist, Georg Agricola, was a physician who worked in the 
mining town of Joachimsthal (now Jáchymov in Czechia). In his most 
famous work, ‘On Metallurgy’ (De re metallica, 1556), Agricola drew on 
the practical knowledge of miners as well as on his own reading and 
observation.44
Academics held no monopoly of many-sidedness at this time. In this 
period, to be an artist or an engineer was to be a kind of polymath. 
Alberti’s friend Filippo Brunelleschi, for instance, remains famous for 
two rather diﬀ erent achievements. One was to design and to oversee the 
building of the dome of the cathedral of Florence, overcoming problems 
of structural engineering that others had thought insoluble. Th e other 
was to rediscover the rules of linear perspective. Th ese rules were illus-
trated by what was apparently a masterpiece of illusionism, a lost painting 
of the Baptistery of Florence, intended to be viewed from the back 
through a spyhole that showed a mirror. It has been suggested that 
Brunelleschi applied to painting the techniques of surveying that he had 
learned when measuring the ruins of ancient buildings in Rome. If this 
was the case, his achievement oﬀ ers an impressive example of the way 


THE AGE OF THE ‘RENAISSANCE MAN’
39
in which polymaths contribute to knowledge, transferring ideas and 
practices from one discipline to another.
Brunelleschi had actually been trained as a goldsmith, a training that 
led him to sculpture and to participation in a famous competition for 
the best design for the doors of the Baptistery in Florence (he came 
second to a more specialized rival, the sculptor Lorenzo Ghiberti). 
Brunelleschi was also a great inventor of machines, large and small, and 
the ﬁ rst individual to take out a patent for invention. His brain-children 
ranged from an early alarm clock to a machine that would hoist the 
heavy beams essential to the structure of his famous dome. An early 
biography of Filippo declares that he was not only a mathematician but 
also ‘learned in the Bible’ and a student of the works of Dante. In addi-
tion, he wrote verse, using the sonnet as a medium for insulting his rivals 
and critics.45
Brunelleschi’s friend Mariano ‘Taccola’, otherwise known as ‘the 
Sienese Archimedes’, was active as a notary, a sculptor and a superin-
tendent of roads as well as a military engineer, working for the emperor 
Sigismund. He is remembered for his two treatises on machines of 
diﬀ erent kinds, including discussions and illustrations of some of 
Brunelleschi’s inventions as well as of some ingenious weapons of war.46
Another Sienese, Francesco di Giorgio Martini, a former pupil of 
Taccola’s, was trained as a painter but revealed a variety of other gifts in 
the course of his career. He was placed in charge of the water supply in 
Siena before becoming an architect and a military engineer in the service 
of the Duke of Urbino and of two kings of Naples. Carrying on the 
tradition of Brunelleschi and Taccola, Martini wrote on architecture, 
fortiﬁ cation and machines, including a pump, a saw and a moving 
chariot that was probably for use in pageants.47
In his famous biographies, assembled in Lives of the Artists, Giorgio 
Vasari referred to several artists, including Giulio Romano and 
Primaticcio, as universale, while the Duke of Urbino went one better by 
describing the architect Bartolomeo Genga by an invented adjective, 
omniversale. In these cases, the terms probably refer to versatility in the 
arts.48 In the case of Leonardo, it goes well beyond them.

THE POLYMATH

40
LEONARDO
Th e most famous example of the ‘Renaissance Man’, Leonardo da Vinci, 
is also one of the least typical.49 He was not a humanist and, like the 
engineers mentioned in the previous section, he lacked a humanist 
education. He may not have gone to school at all, and in later life he was 
only able to read Latin with some diﬃ  culty. Leonardo was trained as an 
artist in the workshop of the famous Florentine master Andrea Verrocchio, 
where he learned not only to paint and sculpt but also to design weapons 
of war, drawing on the Tuscan engineering tradition from Brunelleschi 
to Francesco di Giorgio (who later became a friend of his). Leonardo is 
the outstanding example of the extraordinary tradition of innovation in 
ﬁ fteenth- and sixteenth-century Florence, in which masters passed on 
their knowledge to apprentices in their workshops. It is possible to iden-
tify chains of artists, each of whom taught the one before, yet developed 
his own style. Verrocchio, for instance, taught not only Leonardo but 
also Ghirlandaio, who taught Michelangelo.
Leonardo left Florence for Milan, bringing himself to the attention of 
the Duke, Lodovico Sforza, by promising to make bridges, cannon, cata-
pults and mines, and – in the tenth place on his list – to produce works 
of sculpture and architecture. He was given the post of the Duke’s engi-
neer (ingeniarius ducalis), concerned not only with canals and fortiﬁ ca-
tions but also with producing ‘special eﬀ ects’ for court pageants. At the 
court of Milan, Leonardo also became known as a skilled musician, 
playing the lyre and singing, gifts appreciated in the world of Castiglione’s 
courtier. In addition, he invented new musical instruments and carried 
out research on sound.50 Leonardo later worked as a military engineer for 
the Republic of Venice and for the Pope’s son Cesare Borgia when Cesare 
was attempting to conquer the Romagna. Leonardo designed many 
machines, including a mechanical lion, a giant crossbow, a wheel-lock 
gun, ﬂ ying machines and a kind of submarine.51
Besides the tradition of painters and sculptors, Leonardo belonged to 
a Tuscan tradition of artist-engineers that included, as we have seen, 
Brunelleschi, Taccola and Francesco di Giorgio. Indeed, in the case of 
some of the machines pictured in his notebooks, it is diﬃ  cult to say 


THE AGE OF THE ‘RENAISSANCE MAN’
41
whether they are simply his inventions or whether he was drawing on a 
common stock of knowledge and ideas. Nevertheless, Leonardo exceeded 
his predecessors in many ways.
King Francis I of France, according to the sculptor Benvenuto Cellini, 
‘said that he did not believe that a man had ever been born who knew so 
much as Leonardo’.52 Th ere is no need to rely on the king’s testimony. 
Th e 7,000-odd pages of Leonardo’s notebooks, some of which were 
named ‘the Atlantic manuscript’ thanks to their volume, bear witness to 
the breadth of their author’s interests, which put even Alberti in the 
shade.
In most ﬁ elds, Leonardo was an autodidact who described himself in 
one of his notebooks as ‘a man without learning’ (omo sanza lettere), 
although he went on to declare with pride that his knowledge was based 
on experience rather than texts.53 In fact, he gradually amassed a library, 
listing 116 volumes in 1504. He studied the ancient writer Ptolemy on 
cosmography, for instance, Vitruvius on architecture, medieval texts on 
optics and anatomy, and the writings of earlier polymaths such as Pliny, 
Roger Bacon, Al-Kindi and Ibn Sina.54
It is likely that Leonardo learned even more from conversation with 
experts. He wrote notes to himself such as the following: ‘Get the master 
of abacus to show you how to square a triangle . . . Ask Maestro Antonio 
how bombards are placed on bastions by day or at night. Ask Benedetto 
Portinari how to run on the ice in Flanders.’ When he was living in 
Milan, Leonardo made friends with a professor of medicine at the nearby 
University of Pavia, Marcantonio della Torre, and they conducted dissec-
tions together.
Leonardo learned most of all by this kind of ‘hands-on’ investigation 
and observation. He turned to the study of anatomy, including the prac-
tice of dissection, in order to represent both humans and horses more 
accurately, but he continued to investigate out of curiosity. Anatomy has 
been described as the ﬁ eld ‘in which he made the most far-reaching 
discoveries’. He seems to have been the ﬁ rst to study the development of 
arteriosclerosis and he also discovered the function of the aortic valve in 
the heart.55 In similar fashion, Leonardo began studying optics as an aid 

THE POLYMATH

42
to his art, but went on to discover that, for example, ‘Th e pupil of the eye 
dilates and contracts according to the brightness and darkness of the 
objects in view.’56
Leonardo was also an enthusiast for geometry, claiming to have found 
the solution for squaring the circle and writing, ‘Let no one read me who 
is not a mathematician.’ He also studied what are now known as the 
ﬁ elds of mechanics, hydraulics, chemistry, botany, zoology, geology and 
cartography. Ironically enough, it now takes many specialists to assess 
Leonardo’s achievements in all these disciplines.
He was fascinated by the movement of water, for example, which he 
observed by dropping grains or dye into it.57 He carried out chemical 
experiments with paint and the preparation of surfaces for painting.58 
His notebooks reveal his careful observation of plants and so does his 
famous painting Th e Virgin of the Rocks (the version in the Louvre), in 
which he showed only the ﬂ owers that would be found in a moist grotto 
at a particular season. Th e Alpine geology as well as the botany is accu-
rate in the Louvre Virgin: ‘the surfaces of the fractures are weathered in 
accordance with the respective hardness of each type of rock’.59 Leonardo 
also collected fossils, which he viewed as evidence of the history of the 
earth. He calculated the age of trees by examining their rings.60 He care-
fully observed not only horses and birds but also bats, lizards and croco-
diles.61 Th e maps he made reveal his interest in geography.62 As the artist 
Giorgio Vasari remarked in his biography of Leonardo, ‘to whatever 
diﬃ  cult things he turned his mind, he solved them with ease’.
Vasari was of course exaggerating the achievements of his hero. It is 
virtually needless to say that Leonardo’s wide range of interests had a 
negative side, the failures. Th e giant crossbow did not work in practice, 
the circle was not successfully squared, and the poor condition of the 
famous Last Supper, already visible a few years after it was painted, is the 
result of failed experiments in chemistry. As Leonardo’s contemporaries 
noted, whether with dismay or glee, he failed to meet many deadlines 
from his patrons or indeed to ﬁ nish many of his projects, notably the 
great equestrian statue of Francesco Sforza (the father of Duke Lodovico) 
that the artist described simply as ‘the horse’. He planned treatises on 


THE AGE OF THE ‘RENAISSANCE MAN’
43
painting, water, anatomy, optics, ﬂ ight and mechanics, none of which 
were completed while some may not even have been begun. One of the 
greatest artists of his time, if not of all time, Leonardo was described in 
his late forties as ‘out of all patience with his brush’ (impacientissimo del 
penello).63 As we shall see, a number of other polymaths failed to ﬁ nish 
projects owing to the dispersal of their interests and energy. It is for this 
reason that I coined the phrase ‘Leonardo syndrome’.
At ﬁ rst sight, Leonardo oﬀ ers a spectacular example of the fox, the 
individual interested in almost everything and practising a centrifugal 
approach to knowledge. Yet, as several scholars have pointed out, to 
speak of a ‘dispersal’ of interests in his case is misleading. What appears 
to be pure curiosity usually turns out to be linked to his main preoccupa-
tions. He noted analogies between light and sound, between the branches 
of trees, rivers and arteries, between ﬂ ying and swimming, animals and 
machines, writing for instance that ‘A bird is an instrument working 
according to mathematical law’. Some of his discoveries depended on 
these analogies. He explained the function of the valves of the heart, for 
example, by comparing the movement of blood in the human body to 
the movement of water. In short, Leonardo worked on the assumption 
that ‘all the apparent diversities of nature are symptoms of an inner 
unity’.64 In this way, ‘invisible threads connect the fragments’ that are 
scattered in the ocean of his notebooks.65
THE RENAISSANCE WOMAN
Today, references to the ‘Renaissance Man’ naturally evoke the question, 
what about the Renaissance Woman? One question prompts another: 
what about learned ladies in earlier periods? Late antiquity oﬀ ers one 
example of a female polymath, Hypatia of Alexandria, who wrote on 
philosophy, mathematics and astronomy.66
In the twelfth century, the German nun and later abbess Hildegard 
of Bingen was a visionary, poet and playwright as well as a scholar and 
a teacher (magistra) of other nuns. Drawing on her experiences in the 
inﬁ rmary of her convent, she wrote a guide to healing herbs, the Physica, 
and another to illnesses and their causes and cures (Causae et curae). She 

THE POLYMATH

44
also studied and wrote on philosophy, theology, music, astronomy and 
astrology.67
On the frontier between the late Middle Ages and the Renaissance, 
Christine de Pizan, who came from Venice and lived in France, wrote 
over forty books, including biography and works on morals (Livre des 
trois vertus, 1405), war (Livre des Faits d’Armes, 1410), fortune (Livre de 
la Mutacion de Fortune, 1403) and political philosophy, as well as her 
most famous work, the Cité des Dames (1405), which argues for the 
ability of women by presenting a pageant of famous women in the past.68
In Renaissance Europe, women were doubly disadvantaged, since 
learning was diﬃ  cult of access while a career as a soldier was out of the 
question. In order to study, women had to overcome a number of obsta-
cles, notably their exclusion from university, in practice if not in prin-
ciple, thanks to the common view that learning was not for females. 
Th ey were expected to conﬁ ne themselves to careers as housewives, 
mothers or nuns. Castiglione’s famous dialogue discussed the court lady 
(gentildonna da corte) as well as her male counterpart, but limited her 
knowledge to literature, music, painting, dancing and entertaining men 
gracefully.69
In similar fashion, Burckhardt and other nineteenth- and early 
twentieth-century writers assumed that the many-sided individuals of 
the Renaissance were all male, an assumption that has been questioned 
by later feminist historians. Th ese scholars have pointed out that a small 
group of women, usually of noble birth and educated by private tutors, 
overcame the obstacles in their way, studied the humanities and wrote 
letters, speeches, poems and occasionally treatises in Latin or the vernac-
ular. Not very much is known about any of them, but something is 
known about a few.
In Italy between 1350 and 1530, according to one historian, three 
women ‘achieved considerable fame’ in this respect, while nine more 
achieved ‘some visibility’.70 Th e three most famous for their learning 
were Isotta Nogarola, Laura Cereta and Cassandra Fedele. Isotta, who 
came from Verona, corresponded with Guarino Veronese, a leading 
humanist from the same city. She also wrote orations and a dialogue 


THE AGE OF THE ‘RENAISSANCE MAN’
45
about Adam and Eve.71 Laura Cereta, from Brescia, studied Latin, 
philosophy, mathematics and astronomy at a convent. She wrote to male 
humanists about the education of women and collected eighty-two of 
her letters into a manuscript volume.72 Cassandra Fedele, from Venice, 
studied classics and philosophy, wrote poems, delivered speeches in 
Padua and Venice in praise of learning, corresponded with leading male 
humanists and wrote a treatise, now lost, about the order of knowledge, 
De scientiarum ordine.73
Th ese scholars were only rarely wide-ranging. A study of Cereta, for 
instance, notes that she ‘expresses no interest in speculative philosophy, 
dialectic, theology, law or medicine’.74 Of these and other female human-
ists, it has been remarked that ‘Much of their writing is mediocre; but 
then much that was written by male humanists is mediocre as well’.75 
Mediocre humanists are not included among the polymaths studied in 
this book, so if we wish to avoid a double standard, only Cassandra 
Fedele qualiﬁ es.
Outside Italy, learned ladies included Caritas Pirckheimer, elder sister 
of the humanist Willibald Pirckheimer, who was educated at home 
before entering the convent of Saint Clare in her native Nuremberg, ﬁ rst 
as a student, then as a nun and ﬁ nally as abbess. Caritas was praised for 
her learning by leading humanists, among them Erasmus.76 A Spanish 
contemporary of Caritas, Beatriz Galindo, nicknamed ‘La Latina’, was 
able to study at the University of Salamanca, was called to court by 
Queen Isabella of Castille and taught Latin to the queen and her daugh-
ters. She also wrote a commentary on Aristotle.77
In England, famous examples of learned ladies included Margaret 
Roper, daughter of Th omas More, who wrote to his daughter recom-
mending ‘humane letters and so-called liberal studies’, followed by medi-
cine and sacred literature. Margaret studied Greek as well as Latin and 
translated Erasmus. Again, the ﬁ ve daughters of the Protestant humanist 
Anthony Cooke all studied Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Italian and French. Two 
of his daughters, Anne and Elizabeth, also made translations, Anne from 
Latin and Elizabeth from French.78 At this time, translation was considered 
a more appropriate occupation for women than writing original works.

THE POLYMATH

46
Perhaps the most remarkable Renaissance woman – although she 
lived until 1645 – was the Frenchwoman Marie de Gournay. In France, 
in 1584, Gournay, a young noblewoman who had taught herself Latin, 
discovered the essays of Montaigne. Her discovery made her so excited 
that her mother wanted to give her a drug to calm her down. Later, 
Gournay met Montaigne in person, became a kind of daughter to him 
and edited later editions of his essays. She wrote poems and a romance, 
made translations from the classics, practised alchemy and published 
both a miscellaneous volume, L’Ombre (Th e Shadow, 1626), and a 
polemical treatise on the equality of men and women.79
All the same, it has to be conceded that these ladies, who were truly 
learned, do not qualify as many-sided by the standards of the time. For 
rivals to Hildegard of Bingen in the Middle Ages, it is necessary to wait 
until the seventeenth century, as we shall see.

47
 3 
 THE AGE OF ‘MONSTERS 
OF ERUDITION’
16001700
If the Renaissance was the age of the ‘universal man’, bridging the worlds 
of thought and action, the following age was that of a more academic 
ideal, that of the universal scholar, or what the Dutchman Hermann 
Boerhaave, a polymath himself, described as the ‘monster of erudition’.1
THE AGE OF POLYMATHS
Retrospectively, the seventeenth century appears to have been the golden 
age of the many-sided scholar, even if scholars of this kind do not appear 
to have excelled, like some of their predecessors in the Renaissance, in 
fencing, singing, dancing, horsemanship or athletics. Ninety-two poly-
maths on the list in the Appendix were born in the century running 
from 1570 to 1669, over double the number of the thirty-nine born 
between 1470 and 1569.
Intellectual curiosity, which had often been condemned by theolo-
gians from Augustine to Calvin, was rehabilitated by some inﬂ uential 
philosophers, notably Francis Bacon. Noted earlier as an example of the 
‘Renaissance Man’, Bacon made his most important contributions to 
learning in the seventeenth century. He claimed to take ‘all knowledge’ 
as his province, classifying it and discussing problems of epistemology. 
Hia motto was Plus Ultra, in the sense of going ‘beyond’ what was already 
known, instead of pausing at the intellectual Pillars of Hercules, repre-
sented on the title page of his Great Instauration (1620) with a ship 
sailing between the pillars and the motto, ‘many will pass through and 
knowledge will be increased’ (multi pertransibunt et augebitur scientia).2

THE POLYMATH

48
It is easy to forget the intellectual range of a number of seventeenth-
century scholars because they are mainly remembered today for only a 
few of their many achievements. Th e Dutch scholar Hugo Grotius, for 
instance, remains famous as a jurist, but he was also active as a historian 
of the Netherlands and as a lay theologian. Th e German Samuel 
Pufendorf is remembered as a political theorist, but he was also active as 
a lawyer, a historian, a philosopher, a political economist and, like 
Grotius, a lay theologian.
Turning to the natural sciences, the Danish nobleman Tycho Brahe 
and his former assistant Johannes Kepler are pigeon-holed today as 
astronomers, although Tycho also practised alchemy and medicine while 
Kepler made important contributions to mathematics and optics, not to 
mention what is now known as ‘the history and philosophy of science’ 
and even ‘science ﬁ ction’ – his Dream (the Somnium) tells the story of a 
visit to the moon.3 As for Galileo, his interests were far from being 
conﬁ ned to the mathematics, physics and astronomy to which he owes 
his current reputation. Galileo also studied medicine and wrote about 
the relative merits and defects of painting and sculpture and the poetry 
of Ariosto and Tasso.4
Among the French, René Descartes, remembered today as a philoso-
pher, made important contributions to mathematics and wrote on optics 
and astronomy. His ‘Treatise on the Passions’ dealt with what would later 
be known as psychology.5 Th e French scholar Pierre Gassendi, also clas-
siﬁ ed as a philosopher, was active as an astronomer and a mathematician, 
as well as making contributions to the study of classical antiquity and the 
theory of music. Indeed, Gassendi was described by an English contem-
porary as ‘the most accomplished general scholar, we have had of late’.6 
Blaise Pascal is relatively fortunate to be remembered not only as a 
philosopher but also as a theologian, a mathematician and what we call 
a physicist, thanks to a famous experiment on air pressure.
Despite John Evelyn’s eulogy of Sir Christopher’s ‘Accomplishments 
. . . thro’ all the learned cycle of the most useful knowledge and abstruser 
sciences’, Wren is generally remembered as an architect.7 He was also a 
professor of astronomy, ﬁ rst at Gresham College in London and then at 


THE AGE OF ‘MONSTERS OF ERUDITION’
49
Oxford, improving telescopes, observing comets and oﬀ ering a new 
explanation of the rings of Saturn. He dissected ﬁ sh and dogs. He 
designed a number of ingenious machines, including one that allowed a 
writer to produce two copies of a text at the same time. He contributed 
to the study of mathematics, magnetism, mechanics and meteorology. 
Had it not been for the Great Fire of London, the greatest English archi-
tect might have spent his days as a scholar rather than designing the new 
St Paul’s and (along with another polymath, Robert Hooke) the many 
‘Wren churches’. He was also the architect of Kensington Palace, the 
library of Trinity College, Cambridge, and the chapels of Emmanuel and 
Pembroke in the same university.8
As for Isaac Newton, until relatively recently scholars forgot, or more 
exactly preferred to ignore, the studies of theology, alchemy and chro-
nology that took so much of his time, alongside his more famous contri-
butions to mathematics and natural philosophy.9 In his Chronology of 
Ancient Kingdoms Amended (1728), Newton made use of astronomical 
knowledge – as the sixteenth-century polymath Joseph Scaliger had done 
– as a means of reconciling diﬀ erent chronological systems, arguing that 
‘Th e surest arguments for determining times past are those taken from 
astronomy.’10 Newton attempted to interpret the prophecies recorded in 
the Bible and corresponded with some of the leading theologians of his 
time, while keeping secret his divergences from orthodox Christianity. 
He certainly qualiﬁ es as a polymath, even if, unlike his rival Leibniz, 
discussed below, he was not a monster of erudition.
FEMALE POLYMATHS
Women as well as men participated in this golden age of wide-ranging 
scholars. At least eight female polymaths of note were active at this time: 
Marie de Gournay (discussed in the previous chapter as a ‘Renaissance 
Woman’); Bathsua Makin; Anna Maria van Schurman; Elisabeth, 
Princess Palatine; Margaret Cavendish; Christina, Queen of Sweden; 
Elena Corner; and Sister Juana Inés de la Cruz.
Th e Englishwoman Bathsua Makin (née Reynolds) belonged to 
the circle of Samuel Hartlib, a friend of Comenius. Described by a 

THE POLYMATH

50
contemporary as ‘England’s most learned lady’, her interests included 
languages, poetry, shorthand, medicine and education. When she was 
young, Makin published a volume of verse in Greek, Latin, Hebrew, 
Spanish, German, French and Italian. Towards the end of her life, she 
published An Essay to Revive the Ancient Education of Gentlewomen (1673), 
arguing for the right of women to receive a good general education.11
Bathsua Makin corresponded – in Hebrew – with the Dutchwoman 
Anna Maria van Schurman, ‘the Dutch Minerva’. Schurman was allowed 
to study at the University of Utrecht, the ﬁ rst female to study at a 
Dutch university, listening to lectures behind a screen so that the male 
students would not stare at her. She learned not only Greek and Latin 
but also Hebrew, Arabic, Aramaic and Syriac, wrote letters on philos-
ophy, theology and education, and produced, though she did not publish, 
a grammar of ‘Ethiopian’.12 Like Gournay, Schurman might be described 
as a ‘Renaissance woman’, given her accomplishments in painting, 
engraving and embroidery as well as in the humanities.
Elisabeth, Princess Palatine, was the daughter of the ill-starred 
Frederick V of the Palatinate, the ‘Winter King’ of Bohemia, who was 
defeated and forced into exile by the emperor Ferdinand II. She lived in 
the Netherlands and then in Westphalia, where she became the abbess of 
a Protestant convent. Elisabeth knew Latin, French, German, Dutch and 
Italian as well as English. She also studied mathematics, astronomy, 
history, philosophy and the Bible, and corresponded with several scholars 
of the day, exchanging ideas with Anna Maria van Schurman and holding 
her own in arguments with Descartes.13
Margaret Cavendish (née Lucas), who became the Duchess of Newcastle, 
was interested in both political and natural philosophy. She studied anatomy, 
although what she called ‘the modesty of my sex’ prevented her from 
carrying out dissections.14 She published her best-known book, Observations 
upon Experimental Philosophy, in 1666, claiming – with the modesty of her 
sex or the false modesty of the noble amateur – to provide ‘here a bit and 
there a crumb of knowledge’. She also wrote a biography of her husband, a 
number of plays and the utopian romance Th e Blazing World (1666), which 
has been described, like Kepler’s Dream, as an early example of science 


THE AGE OF ‘MONSTERS OF ERUDITION’
51
ﬁ ction. Eccentric in her dress and manner, she was nicknamed ‘Mad 
Madge’. John Evelyn called her ‘a mighty pretender to learning’, but some 
other male scholars took her seriously.15
Christina of Sweden, who came to the throne as a child after her father 
Gustav Adolf was killed in battle in 1632, spent much of her time in study 
both before and after her abdication in 1654.16 She liked to be known as 
the Swedish Minerva, called herself ‘versatile’, and claimed in her memoirs 
that ‘At fourteen, she knew all the languages, all the sciences and all the 
accomplishments her instructors thought ﬁ t, or were able, to teach her.’ 
According to a contemporary, ‘elle sait tout’. Th e queen was well read in 
the classics, including the Roman historian Tacitus. In philosophy she was 
particularly interested in Neoplatonism and Stoicism and compiled a 
collection of maxims entitled Les sentiments heroïques. Brought up as a 
Lutheran, she became a sceptic and ﬁ nally converted to Catholicism, 
taking a particular interest in the ideas of the Spanish mystic Miguel de 
Molinos. She spoke German, Dutch, Danish, French and Italian, and 
learned Hebrew in order to read the Old Testament in its original language.
Other polymaths collected books and other objects, but Christina 
collected scholars. Among the learned men to be found at her court, at 
least for short periods, were the polymaths Gabriel Naudé, René Descartes, 
Samuel Bochart, Pierre-Daniel Huet, Hiob Ludolf, Claude Saumaise, 
Isaac Voss, Herman Conring and Marcus Meibom. She delighted in 
asking them diﬃ  cult questions (Huet wrote to his friend Gassendi that 
the queen was even more intelligent than Anna Maria van Schurman). 
She had intended to study mathematics and philosophy with Descartes, 
but when he arrived at her court she was too busy to do so because she 
was learning Greek.17 Christina’s interests included astronomy, astrology 
and alchemy. She was particularly interested in comets and subsidized 
research on them. After her abdication, she practised alchemy herself in a 
laboratory in her palace in Rome. It seems appropriate that among the 
paintings she owned was a portrait of Pico della Mirandola.
Elena Corner was the daughter of a Venetian patrician. A child prodigy, 
she was educated at home by tutors chosen by her father, who realized that 
her learning might be employed to recover the status of a family that had 

THE POLYMATH

52
once been one of the most illustrious in Venice but had fallen into decline. 
She studied classical literature, modern languages, mathematics, the natural 
sciences and theology. Refused permission by the bishop to take a doctorate 
in theology, she took one in medicine instead, at the University of Padua, 
in 1678. She became a member of several learned academies and was 
frequently asked to demonstrate her knowledge in public.18
Still more famous for her learning was the Mexican Juana Ramírez, 
known as Juana Inés de la Cruz or ‘Sister Juana’ after she entered a 
convent. Juana was described by contemporaries as ‘the Mexican Phoenix’ 
and a ‘Phoenix of Erudition in all sciences’. She wrote of herself that as a 
child she had a strong ‘desire for learning’ and studied in her grandfa-
ther’s library. Like Schurman, she wished to study at university (which 
she hoped to attend dressed as a man) but her mother did not allow her 
to do so. Sister Juana knew Latin (which she apparently mastered after 
twenty lessons) and also Greek and Nahuatl. As well as writing the poems 
that are now famous, she studied theology, philosophy (including natural 
philosophy), law, literature and music theory. She refused oﬀ ers of 
marriage and entered a convent in order to be free to study.
In her convent, Sister Juana accumulated an impressive library, some 
volumes of which appear in the background to the two contemporary 
portraits of her. Her writings – on music, on philosophy, on the position of 
women – often quote two earlier polymaths, Pliny and Kircher. She also 
made references to ancient writers such as Cicero and Tacitus, Fathers of the 
Church such as Jerome and Augustine, medieval philosophers, Renaissance 
writers on classical mythology and legal scholars such as Francisco Suarez. 
Her devotion to learning was criticized by the bishop of Puebla. She was 
forbidden to publish her ideas and ordered to give away her books.19
THE LANGUAGE OF POLYMATHY
Th e history of language supports the idea that the seventeenth century 
was a time when polymaths became more important and also more 
visible. From the late sixteenth century onwards, a set of connected ideas 
about both knowledgeable people and general knowledge became current 
in several European languages.


THE AGE OF ‘MONSTERS OF ERUDITION’
53
In the case of knowledgeable people, the most common terms were 
‘polyhistor’ and ‘polymath’ itself. Th e ancient Roman writer Pliny was 
described as a polyhistor by the Swiss encyclopaedist Th eodor Zwinger 
(possibly implying that his work was disorganized as well as encyclo-
paedic).20 Another Swiss encyclopaedist, Conrad Gessner, was himself 
described as a polyhistor, as we saw in the previous chapter.21 Wide-
ranging books were sometimes given the same title, as in the case of a 
guide to the world of learning by Daniel Morhof, Polyhistor (1688). Th e 
concept was discussed in an inaugural lecture at the University of Leiden 
in 1632 and also in later academic dissertations, for instance in Heidelberg 
in 1660, Leipzig in 1715, Altdorf in 1718 and Jena in 1721.
Th e Elizabethan scholar Gabriel Harvey coined the term ‘omniscians’, 
but his coinage never became common currency. In English, the term 
‘polymath’ came into use a little later. Th e Oxford don Robert Burton, 
for instance, referred to ‘Polumathes and Polihistors’ in his Anatomy of 
Melancholy (1621).22 All these terms were usually neutral or terms of 
approval, at least before the eighteenth century. In contrast, the Italian 
poligrafo, like the French polygraphe, was pejorative, describing profes-
sional writers who wrote a great deal on many subjects because they were 
paid for piece-work.23 Another new word that came into use in this 
period was the Italian term virtuoso. It spread into other languages, 
among them English, to refer to amateur scholars with wide interests 
that were often expressed not by writing but by collecting a variety of 
objects – coins, for instance, weapons from diﬀ erent parts of the world, 
shells, stuﬀ ed animals and ﬁ sh.24
Still richer was the vocabulary used to describe the wide-ranging 
knowledge of these individuals. In Latin, we ﬁ nd a whole cluster of 
terms, among them scientia universalis, pansophia and polymathia. 
Usually neutral, polymathia was occasionally used in a pejorative sense to 
mean ‘straying from one’s discipline’, an early critique of what we call 
‘interdisciplinarity’.25 Italians praised individual artists and writers for 
being versatile. Th e French spoke or wrote of polymathie or science 
universelle. Favourite English adjectives to describe scholars were ‘curious’ 
and ‘ingenious’. As for nouns, the English sometimes used the term 

THE POLYMATH

54
‘omniscience’ but preferred ‘general learning’, the title of a treatise by the 
second-generation scholar Meric Casaubon.26
A general discussion of polymathia may be found in a treatise published 
by a well-read and well-travelled scholar from Hamburg, Johannes 
Wower (1603). ‘By perfect polymathy’, Wower explains, ‘I understand 
knowledge of diverse things, taken from every kind of study [ex omni 
genere studiorum] and ranging very widely.’ Th e polymath is described as 
‘wandering freely and with unbridled speed through all the ﬁ elds of the 
disciplines’ [per omnes disciplinarum campos].27
Later discussions of the topic include treatises by two Dutch scholars, 
Gerard Voss and Marcus Boxhorn. Voss wrote a book about the arts and 
sciences in which he described philosophy, mathematics and logic as 
polymatheia because they were encyclopaedic, while his former student 
Boxhorn, professor of rhetoric at the University of Leiden, gave his inau-
gural lecture on polymathy. Boxhorn’s own interests extended well 
beyond rhetoric to include an edition of Tacitus, books on politics and 
war, an oration on dreams, a history of the world and a comparative 
study of the history of languages.28
As for pansophia, the term literally means ‘universal wisdom’. In the 
eyes of some of its adepts, this noble dream was associated with the 
discovery of the reality behind appearances as well as with attempts to 
reunite the Christian churches, reform learning, harmonize philosophies 
and create a universal language, thus reconciling disagreements. Pansophia 
was also associated with an even broader vision that included the end of 
conﬂ ict (in the age of the Th irty Years War), the coming ‘universal reform’ 
of all that was wrong with the world, and even the hope of a return to the 
age before Adam’s Fall.29 Th e links between pansophia and polymathy are 
particularly clear in the case of two scholars from Central Europe, a 
German, Alsted, and his Czech student Comenius.
THE POLYMATH AS ENCYCLOPAEDIST: ALSTED
Johann Heinrich Alsted was professor of philosophy and theology at the 
University of Herborn in Hesse. A proliﬁ c scholar, he is best known for an 
encyclopaedia that he published in 1630. With the help of the binary 


THE AGE OF ‘MONSTERS OF ERUDITION’
55
oppositions popularized by an earlier Protestant scholar, Petrus Ramus, the 
seven volumes of this encyclopaedia describe and classify not only all the 
academic disciplines of the time but other knowledges as well, including 
the mechanical arts, magic, alchemy and the art of memory. Outwardly, 
Alsted was a good Calvinist who must have been aware that Jean Calvin 
had condemned curiosity. In private, though, as his letters reveal, he was 
fascinated by many unorthodox forms of knowledge, including the art of 
combination expounded by the medieval Catalan friar Ramón Lull.30
Th is art underlay Alsted’s encyclopaedic enterprise, one of the last of 
its kind to be carried out single-handed (an encyclopaedia in a single 
volume was published in Hungarian in 1655 by János Apáczai Csere, 
who, like Alsted, made use of the dichotomies of Ramus in organizing 
his material).31 Alsted’s work encouraged the shift in the meaning of the 
term ‘encyclopaedia’ from its original sense of a curriculum (an intellec-
tual track around which students were expected to run) to a book that 
brought diﬀ erent knowledges together. An encyclopaedia was, at least in 
theory, both a product of and a means to universal knowledge. Alsted 
prefaced his book with the claim that, although only God is all-wise, he 
‘impresses the image of his perfection’ on those who embrace ‘the whole 
orb of the disciplines’ (universum disciplinarum orbem).32
THE POLYMATH AS PANSOPHIST: COMENIUS
Alsted may have been a fox, but Jan Amos Komenský, better known as 
Comenius, was certainly a hedgehog. Comenius came from Moravia 
(now part of Czechia), studied with Alsted in Herborn, and became a 
bishop in the church of the Bohemian Brethren. After 1621, when his 
church was banned in Bohemia, Comenius became a nomad, a refugee 
in Poland, Sweden, England, Transylvania and the Netherlands. 
Th roughout this time he devoted himself to the reform of education and 
the critique of natural languages, arguing that ‘the meaning of words 
should be ﬁ xed, with one name for each thing’.33 His reforms were 
intended as steps towards pansophia, which would be attained, together 
with universal harmony, in the last days of the world, which he, like 
many people at this time, believed to be near at hand.34

THE POLYMATH

56
Comenius was not the ﬁ rst scholar to use this term. He criticized an 
older polymath, Peter Lauremberg, for publishing a book called Pansophia 
(1633), describing it as ‘unworthy of so sublime a title’.35 His own 
‘Introduction to Pansophia’ (Pansophiae Prodromus, 1639), described it 
as sapientia universalis, a term translated by his follower Samuel Hartlib 
as ‘general knowledge or wisdom’ (elsewhere, Hartlib used the phrase 
‘common learning’, while another book by Comenius was translated 
into English under the title A Patterne of Universall Knowledge, 1651).36 
In a third little treatise on the subject Comenius quoted Aristotle, ‘the 
wise man ought to KNOW EVERYTHING, so far as possible’ (sapi-
entem debere OMNIA SCIRE, quantum possibile est).37 In the thought of 
Comenius, pansophia was associated with the ideas of panaugia or paner-
gesia (a universal ‘dawn’ or ‘awakening’), pampaedia (universal educa-
tion), panglottia (a universal language) and panorthosia (a universal 
reform, or a reform of the world).38
MONSTERS OF ERUDITION
Th e most important reason for calling the seventeenth century a golden age 
of polymaths was the presence of a number of what Hermann Boerhaave, 
himself no slouch in the ﬁ eld of learning, described as ‘monsters of erudi-
tion’: individuals who spanned the disciplines and produced many volumes, 
all the more impressive when one remembers that their learning was the 
result of reading by candlelight while their books were produced by writing 
with a quill. Alsted surely qualiﬁ es for the title, while six more monsters 
will be discussed in what follows: Nicolas-Claude Fabri de Peiresc, Juan 
Caramuel, Olof Rudbeck the Elder, Athanasius Kircher, Pierre Bayle and 
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz.
THE POLYMATH AS COLLECTOR: PEIRESC
Th e French magistrate Nicolas-Claude Fabri de Peiresc, conseiller in the 
Parlement of Provence, is one of the most famous examples of one type 
of early modern scholar, often described at the time as a virtuoso, an indi-
vidual with enough time and money to spare to acquire diﬀ erent kinds 
of learning as a kind of hobby.


THE AGE OF ‘MONSTERS OF ERUDITION’
57
Collecting was one of the principal activities of the virtuoso, together 
with the display of items in ‘cabinets of curiosities’ or Wunderkammer, as 
they were known in German at this time. Th e cabinets contained both 
natural objects and the work of human hands, chosen because they were 
rare, exotic or extraordinary in other ways. Th eir owners were often indi-
viduals of wide interests, such as Ole Worm and Hans Sloane, two schol-
arly physicians best known for the collections that they assembled in 
their spare time.
Worm, who was physician to Christian IV of Denmark, was 
particularly interested in Scandinavian antiquities such as megalithic 
tombs, urns and ship-burials. His collection, displayed in the Museum 
Wormianum, was immortalized in an engraving that showed human 
artefacts such as spears and drinking-horns alongside stuﬀ ed ﬁ sh and the 
skulls of animals.39 Sloane, who was physician to Queen Anne and her 
two successors, was able to accumulate a huge and varied collection, 
thanks to his income from Jamaican plantations and his fees for treating 
aristocratic patients. He has been described as ‘collecting the world’.40
However, Worm and Sloane were surpassed by Peiresc, both as collec-
tors and as polymaths. Peiresc’s collection, documented from his letters, 
reveals his enthusiasm for what we call ‘material culture’: manuscripts in 
diﬀ erent alphabets, coins, statuettes, vases, amulets, medieval seals, late 
antique gems and even Egyptian mummies. He was interested in nature 
as well as culture and owned a crocodile skin, a menagerie of live animals 
and a botanical garden, which was a kind of outdoor collection and 
included exotic plants such as papyrus.
Peiresc was described by his friend the painter Rubens as someone 
who ‘possesses in all ﬁ elds as much knowledge as any one professional in 
his own’ (possede in tutte le professioni quanto ciascuno nella sua propria).41 
He studied law, visited Italy, the Netherlands and England, and spent 
some years in Paris as secretary to the president of his Parlement before 
settling down and spending the last fourteen years of his life in Provence, 
often in ill health and ‘shut up in his study’, as his secretary described 
him, but travelling in his imagination thanks to his library, his collection 
and his letters.42

THE POLYMATH

58
Peiresc is remembered today for his passion for antiquities (the clas-
sical scholar Arnaldo Momigliano once called him the ‘archetype 
of all antiquarians’).43 He was interested in the ancient world, the 
European Middle Ages (Charlemagne, for instance, or the troubadours), 
and also in China, in Benin, in the Indians of Canada and especially in 
the Mediterranean world, past and present, and its many peoples: 
Etruscans, Phoenicians, Egyptians, Jews and Arabs. Peiresc’s knowledge 
of North Africa, past and present, was unusual for a European of his 
time.44 He was fascinated by diﬀ erent manners and customs – shooting 
arrows while on horseback, drinking from the skulls of enemies and 
so on.
Peiresc appears to have been an intellectual fox, but religion was a key 
to some of his diverse interests. He studied the early or ‘primitive’ Church 
and its relation to Judaism and paganism, leading him to investigate 
cults such as Gnosticism and Mithraism from late antiquity. His interest 
in the Eastern Christians included curiosity about their chants and their 
musical instruments.45 He was fascinated by the history of the Bible, 
which drew him into the study of Hebrew, Coptic, Samaritan (a dialect 
of Aramaic) and ‘Ethiopian’ (Ge’ez), while his omnivorous curiosity led 
him to examine other aspects of these cultures for their own sake. Peiresc’s 
study of diﬀ erent languages led to a concern with the relation between 
them. He was aware that the spread and mixing of languages could be 
used as evidence for the migrations of peoples.
Peiresc was interested not only in the ‘human sciences’ (scienze 
humane, as he was possibly the ﬁ rst to call them), but in the natural 
sciences as well. He was fascinated by the tides and currents of the 
Mediterranean. He was especially active in astronomy, observing eclipses, 
examining the satellites of Jupiter, discovering the nebula of Orion and, 
with his friend Pierre Gassendi, making a map of the moon. He mobi-
lized a circle of friends to observe Jupiter at the same time in diﬀ erent 
places in order to correct maps of the Mediterranean.46 He studied 
anatomy, reading William Harvey on the circulation of the blood soon 
after the book was published in 1628 and himself dissecting the eyes of 
animals, birds and ﬁ sh. His interests also included fossils and volcanoes.


THE AGE OF ‘MONSTERS OF ERUDITION’
59
Peiresc did not publish the results of his researches, whether from lack 
of time or an aristocratic reluctance to write books that would be exposed 
for sale. Instead, Peiresc acted as a kind of intellectual broker, soliciting 
and oﬀ ering information via his many letters. Some of these letters were 
addressed to fellow scholars in centres of scholarship such as Rome, Paris 
and Leiden. Other letters were addressed to individuals beyond the fron-
tiers of Europe where new knowledge – new to Europeans – could be 
obtained. Peiresc’s network included many agents and informants, 
among them merchants in Cairo and friars in Sidon and Istanbul. To the 
agents who bought items for his collections, Peiresc sent detailed wish 
lists, and, to the informants, elaborate questionnaires.47
THE POLYMATH AS SCHOLASTIC PHILOSOPHER: 
CARAMUEL
Th e Spaniard Juan Caramuel y Lobkowitz was a Cistercian monk who 
lived a nomadic life, spending ten years in the Spanish Netherlands and 
ten years in Prague before becoming a bishop in Italy, ﬁ rst in Campania 
and then in Vigevano in Lombardy. An eighteenth-century biographer 
called him ‘omniscient’, while he was known in his own day as ‘the 
phoenix of Europe’.48 Th e comparison with the phoenix was intended to 
imply uniqueness, as the poet John Donne explained in his Anatomy of 
the World: ‘Every man alone thinks he hath got/To be a phoenix, and that 
there can be/None of that kind, of which he is, but he.’ All the same, the 
term was applied to one scholar after another, from Erasmus to Benito 
Feijoo, who will be discussed in the following chapter.49
Caramuel, a child prodigy in mathematics, is said to have known 
twenty-four languages (including Hebrew, Arabic and even some Chinese, 
learned from a native speaker whom he met in Vienna in 1654). Well 
known in later life for his sermons, he was also active as a diplomat and an 
amateur architect. In Prague, he became a friend of two more polymaths, 
the Italian Valeriano Magni and the Czech Jan Marcus Marci. Caramuel 
criticized Descartes, corresponded with Kircher and befriended Gassendi.
Caramuel wrote more than sixty books, including a life of St Benedict, 
a history of Gregorian chant, an unpublished encyclopaedia of music and 

THE POLYMATH

60
a treatise on architecture, as well as studies of grammar, poetry, 
oratory, mathematics, astronomy, physics, politics, canon law, logic, 
theology and philosophy (carrying on but also modernizing the tradition 
of scholasticism). One of his books, the Apparatus Philosophicus (1665), 
oﬀ ered a brief account of ‘all the sciences and arts’. Caramuel was commis-
sioned by Philip IV of Spain to prove his right to the Portuguese throne, 
using genealogical, historical and legal arguments, and by the emperor 
Ferdinand III to justify the negotiations with Protestants that ended the 
Th irty Years War. In his last years as a bishop in Vigevano, Caramuel 
found the time to write not only religious and political works but also 
a paper on river management, with special reference to embankments 
on the Po.50
In his Th eologia rationalis (1654), Caramuel tried, like Th omas 
Aquinas, to reconcile theology with reason. In moral philosophy, he tried 
to apply mathematical rules, but he also defended the doctrine of ‘proba-
bilism’, in other words the idea that since certainty is unattainable, we are 
allowed to follow a probable opinion (he was also one of the ﬁ rst math-
ematicians to study probability).51 Like Alsted, Caramuel was interested 
in the ideas of Ramón Lull, recommending his art of memory to intending 
preachers, though he also noted that Lull often promised what he could 
not perform. Like other polymaths, from Lull to Neurath, whose work 
will be examined later, Caramuel was driven by a vision of the unity of 
knowledge. Linking many of his endeavours, from logic to music and 
architecture, was ‘the dream of mathematics as a unifying language for 
the universe’. Th is dream of mathesis universalis was shared by other 
seventeenth-century polymaths, including Descartes and Leibniz.52
THE POLYMATH AS PATRIOT: RUDBECK
Th e Swede Olof Rudbeck, rector of Uppsala University, was a ﬁ gure larger 
than life. A big man with a loud voice and enormous self-conﬁ dence, 
Rudbeck’s projects were on an appropriately grand scale. He contributed 
to the study of anatomy, languages, music, plants and antiquities (including 
what we now call ‘archaeology’). He began with anatomy. His dissection of 
around four hundred animals such as cats and dogs led him to the discovery 


THE AGE OF ‘MONSTERS OF ERUDITION’
61
of the lymphatic system, as well as generating a dispute over priority 
with another polymath, the Danish scholar Th omas Bartholin. Sent to 
study medicine in Leiden, Rudbeck discovered botany. As professor of 
theoretical medicine at the University of Uppsala, he lectured on anatomy, 
botany and chemistry but he also taught music, mathematics, physics 
and astronomy. Rudbeck designed an anatomy theatre for the University 
of Uppsala and an aqueduct for the city. He wrote music. He was an 
active cartographer. He headed a team that attempted both to describe and 
to illustrate all known plants, thus associating the University of Uppsala 
with advances in botany almost a century before Linnaeus. In fact, 
Linnaeus was a student of Rudbeck’s son Olof Rudbeck the Younger, 
whose interests included medicine, ornithology and linguistics as well 
as botany.53
For better or worse, however, Rudbeck senior is most widely known 
today as the author of the Atlantica, a huge unﬁ nished treatise on 
northern antiquities.54 Th anks to this project, on which he embarked 
late in his career, he is often viewed as an eccentric, but his interest in 
the civilization of the North in the remote past may be located in a 
Swedish tradition, known as ‘Gothicism’ because it included the belief 
that the Swedes were the descendants of the Goths as well as the idea that 
civilization began in Sweden.55 Th e polymath Johannes Bureus, for 
instance, who was tutor to the young king Gustav Adolf, searched for the 
lost wisdom of the Goths.56 A colleague of Rudbeck’s at the university, 
Olaus Verelius, professor of Swedish antiquities, identiﬁ ed a site in old 
Uppsala with a temple of the ‘Hyperboreans’, a people that, according to 
Herodotus and other ancient Greeks, lived ‘beyond the North Wind’ 
(the Bora).
Rudbeck took these claims much further, identifying the Swedes not 
only with the Goths but also with the Scythians and the Trojans. He 
argued that civilization (including writing, calendars and astronomy) 
arose in the North and that Plato’s Atlantis was located in Sweden. He 
might be described as both obsessive and ethnocentric in his grand claims 
for the North, for Sweden and even for Uppsala – he located the capital 
of Atlantis in the village of old Uppsala, not far from his university.

THE POLYMATH

62
In order to support his assertions, Rudbeck attempted to synchronize 
diﬀ erent chronologies, ancient and modern. He compared the myths 
and customs of ancient peoples with those of modern Scandinavians, 
arguing, for instance, that sun worship began in Northern Europe. 
Inventive in his methods, Rudbeck also drew on the evidence of nature, 
according to him ‘the wisest and most certain of books’. For instance, his 
method of dating was based on a careful study of the humus, an approach 
that archaeologists would develop centuries later. ‘He cut a trench 
through barrows in Old Uppsala and drew the vertical sections, noting 
the characteristics of each layer,’ and measured each stratum in order to 
calculate its age.57
Rudbeck even practised a kind of experimental archaeology, reminis-
cent of a later Scandinavian scholar, the Norwegian Th or Heyerdahl, 
who took the raft Kon-Tiki from Peru to the Tuamotu Islands in 1947 
in order to support his claim that Polynesia was settled by immigrants 
from South America. In similar fashion, in order to show that Jason’s 
famous ship the Argo could have been transported from the Black Sea to 
the Baltic, Rudbeck supervised an attempt to transport a ship over land.
Rudbeck combined wide learning with many original ideas, but he 
often found what he wanted to ﬁ nd, especially when Sweden was 
concerned. Some criticisms of his work will be discussed later.
THE POLYMATH AS PANSOPHIST: KIRCHER
Even more monstrously wide than Rudbeck’s was the learning of the 
German Jesuit Athanasius Kircher, described by the German writer 
Philipp von Zesen as ‘easily the phoenix of the learned of this century’. 
Kircher wrote thirty-two books and has been described, as we have seen, 
as ‘the last man who knew everything’, or, somewhat more modestly, as ‘a 
Renaissance man’ and ‘the last of the polymaths’.58 His works include 
studies of China and Egypt, the geography of Tuscany and Latium, 
magnetism, mathematics, mining and music. In his studies of acoustics 
and optics, Kircher drew analogies between the propagation of light and 
sound. He also wrote on scientia universalis itself, in a book entitled, in 
honour of Ramón Lull, the ‘Great Art of Knowledge’ (Ars Magna Sciendi).


THE AGE OF ‘MONSTERS OF ERUDITION’
63
Kircher knew twelve languages, studied medical chemistry, observed 
eclipses, and attempted to break codes and to decipher the Egyptian 
hieroglyphs, presenting his interpretation, thanks to a subsidy from the 
emperor, in sumptuous folio volumes entitled Oedipus Aegyptiacus 
(1652–4).59 He was also an inventor who constructed a sunﬂ ower clock, 
a water organ, a perpetual-motion machine, a magic lantern and a box 
(the arca musarithmica) to assist the composition of music for a given 
text. He wrote a story about a visit to the moon, the Ecstatic Heavenly 
Journey, surely an attempt to surpass a similar but shorter story by 
Johannes Kepler.
It remains diﬃ  cult not to be impressed by the way in which Kircher 
was able to marshal masses of information in his enormous folios and to 
draw on sources in many languages, ‘writing in Latin, Italian, Spanish, 
German, Dutch, Greek, Hebrew, Armenian, Arabic and Coptic, and 
reading in many more’.60 He made serious contributions to knowledge 
and some of his synthetic works were also valuable, notably the book 
about China.
Th ere was, however, a downside to these achievements. Kircher was 
prone to errors and he was often criticized by scholars in particular ﬁ elds 
– by Marcus Meibom on the history of music, for instance, by Marin 
Mersenne on magnetism, and by Hiob Ludolf on language. Ludolf, a 
major ﬁ gure in what we would call comparative linguistics, warned a 
colleague, ‘Please keep your distance from Kircher. He does not have as 
scholarly a command of languages as he claims.’61
Kircher sometimes promised more than he could perform, as in the 
notorious cases of his claims to square the circle and to interpret Egyptian 
hieroglyphs, which (like Renaissance humanists) he viewed not as a form 
of writing but as emblems with a hidden meaning.62 More serious than 
his failures was his continued belief in his success, a case of hubris that is 
not unparalleled among polymaths and that probably led (together 
with the common prejudice against Jesuits) to accusations of fraud. It 
might be said that, compared with his leading scholarly contemporaries, 
Kircher possessed a surplus of curiosity, enthusiasm, energy and inge-
nuity (a quality much prized in his time), but that his critical faculty was 

THE POLYMATH

64
relatively weak, as some contemporaries were aware.63 His career illus-
trates the risks already involved in attempting polymathy at this time.
Kircher’s interest in Pico della Mirandola and especially in Ramón 
Lull place him in a polymathic tradition. So does his belief in the unity 
of knowledge, discussed in the previous chapter. Th is belief led Kircher 
to draw analogies between diﬀ erent phenomena (light and sound, for 
instance). It also encouraged or drove him to attempt to produce a 
synthesis between knowledges – pagan and Christian, Eastern and 
Western. If Comenius had not been a Protestant, Kircher would doubt-
less have admired him. In any case he practised a kind of pansophia, even 
if it was not associated with plans for the reform of the world.64
THE POLYMATH AS CRITIC: BAYLE
Less wide-ranging than Kircher, but still extremely broad, was the 
learning of Pierre Bayle, a French Protestant pastor who became a refugee 
in the Dutch Republic in the 1680s. Bayle once confessed to being 
‘hungry to know everything’ (aﬀ amé de savoir tout).65 He taught at 
Protestant academies, ﬁ rst in France (in Sedan) and then in Rotterdam, 
but gave up an academic career when he was invited to become the editor 
of a scholarly journal, Nouvelles de la République des Lettres, which 
appeared once a month and lasted for three years (1684–7). He wrote 
most of the ‘news’ (mainly book reviews) by himself. Bayle was far from 
the only Protestant exile to produce a cultural journal, and some of his 
colleagues might also be described as polymaths – Henri Basnage, for 
instance, wrote on history, theology, language and even mechanics. 
However, Bayle’s interests were even wider than those of Basnage. Th ey 
are revealed by his famous Dictionnaire Historique et Critique (1697).
Th is ‘dictionary’ was a historical encyclopaedia, designed to replace an 
earlier reference book, Le Grand Dictionnaire Historique, published by a 
Catholic priest, Louis Moreri, in 1674 and, in Bayle’s view, insuﬃ  ciently 
critical. Bayle’s dictionary was much larger than Moreri’s, and it has become 
famous for its footnotes or ‘remarks’, occupying more space than the text 
and oﬀ ering opportunities for the author to express his own ideas and to 
cast doubt on much that others had presented as reliable information. Th e 


THE AGE OF ‘MONSTERS OF ERUDITION’
65
dictionary, like the journal that Bayle edited, was concerned not only 
with history, philosophy, theology and literature, but also with the study 
of nature. Bayle seems to have been well informed about recent devel-
opments in what we call the natural sciences. Th e Nouvelles discussed 
medicine, anatomy, physics, chemistry and natural history, while the 
Dictionnaire includes famous ‘remarks’ on the rationality of animals 
(‘Rorarius’), and on the ideas of Galileo and Newton (‘Leucippus’).66
Bayle’s vast correspondence (now becoming available online, like the 
letters of Peiresc and Kircher) oﬀ ers more clues to his interests and also 
to his informants.67 For example, for news about the English branch of 
the Republic of Letters, Bayle relied on French exiles there, including his 
friend Daniel de Larroque, the surgeon Paul Buissière and the librarian 
Henri Justel (who translated publications of the Royal Society for him). 
For German news, he obtained information from another friend, the 
pastor and scholar Jacques Lenfant. For natural philosophy, Bayle turned 
to two leaders in the ﬁ eld, Christiaan Huygens in physics and Antonie 
Leeuwenhoek, a pioneer in the use of the microscope, in what is now 
known as microbiology. Skilled in networking himself, it is no surprise 
to ﬁ nd that Bayle admired his predecessor Peiresc, devoting an article in 
his Dictionnaire to him and describing him as ‘Procurator-General’ of 
the Republic of Letters, an allusion to Peiresc’s knowledge of the law and 
also, perhaps, to his ability to procure information.68
THE POLYMATH AS SYNTHESIZER: LEIBNIZ
Th e most famous example of a seventeenth-century polymath is of course 
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz. He is usually remembered today – like 
Aristotle – as a philosopher.69 Once again, this label is little more than a 
symptom of our own propensity to squeeze scholars into single ﬁ elds. In 
his own day, Leibniz was active not only as a philosopher but as a math-
ematician and a theologian. He was a linguist, interested in families of 
languages and showing an early awareness of the analogies between the 
grammars of Finnish and Hungarian.70 He was also a historian, a jurist, 
a writer on politics and an expert on China who once described himself 
as a one-man ‘oﬃ  ce of address’ for information on the subject.71

THE POLYMATH

66
Leibniz was aware of the importance of Peiresc’s researches and hoped 
for the publication of his many letters.72 All the same, he himself was 
reluctant to publish, so much so that, as he once wrote to a friend, 
anyone who knew only his published work did not know him. His papers 
reveal his interest in ‘botany, psychology, medicine and natural history’ 
as well as ‘astronomy, physics, chemistry and geology’.73
As if this were not enough, Leibniz was also engaged in many prac-
tical activities – diplomacy, the reform of the law, the foundation of 
learned academies (the Berlin Academy in 1700, the Academy of Sciences 
of St Petersburg in 1725) and the management of libraries.74 His interest 
in technology led him to the invention of a calculating machine, a 
cipher machine, and improved lenses, pumps and watches. His visits to 
mines were concerned not only with the study of geology but also with 
improving the eﬃ  ciency of production. He had ideas for the reform of 
coinage, for a dye factory and for the organization of archives.
As one of his patrons put it in a moment of semi-exasperation, Leibniz 
was a man of ‘insatiable curiosity’, a phrase that has been repeated more 
than once by students of his work.75 He was described by one contemp-
orary as ‘deeply versed in all sciences’, and by another as ‘so comprehen-
sive and universal a genius’.76 Posterity agreed. Th e French polymath 
Bernard de Fontenelle compared him to someone driving an eight-horse 
carriage, since ‘Leibniz could manage all the sciences simultaneously’.77 
In a dictionary of scholars published in 1733, Leibniz appeared as ‘a 
famous polymath’, while a well-known nineteenth-century German 
scientist, Emil Du Bois-Reymond, called him a scholar with ‘knowledge 
of everything and of the whole’ (All- und Ganzwisser).78
Combining as he did acute curiosity with a desire for order, Leibniz 
was an obvious choice for the post of librarian. In fact, he catalogued a 
private library, that of Baron von Boineburg, before becoming librarian 
to the Duke of Brunswick in Hanover, and then, for a quarter of a 
century, in Wolfenbüttel. He was oﬀ ered similar appointments at the 
Vatican and in Paris and he himself applied for the post of imperial 
librarian at Vienna. Plato claimed that for an ideal state to come into 
existence, either philosophers would have to become kings or kings 


THE AGE OF ‘MONSTERS OF ERUDITION’
67
would have to become philosophers. In similar fashion, one might 
suggest that, for an ideal library to be established, philosophers would 
have to become librarians or librarians would have to become philoso-
phers. Th e link between the classiﬁ cation of books and the classiﬁ cation 
of knowledge is indeed clear in Leibniz’s practical and theoretical work.79
What drove Leibniz was more than curiosity, insatiable as this was. In 
the tradition of Lull, Alsted and Comenius (to whom he once addressed 
a poem), he had a dream of reforming all the sciences. Aware that the 
task was too great to carry out single-handed, Leibniz both preached and 
practised collaboration, from consulting fellow scholars to founding 
learned journals and academies and attempting to organize a collective 
‘Th esaurus’ or encyclopaedia. Th e dream of reform underlies projects of 
his such as a universal language that would eliminate misunderstandings 
between scholars who spoke in diﬀ erent tongues; the logical calculus, 
reducing complex arguments to simple calculations; and the scientia 
generalis, deﬁ ned as ‘the science which contains the principles of all the 
other sciences’.80
MINOR POLYMATHS
In the art of the Italian Renaissance, the outstanding achievements of 
Leonardo, Raphael and Michelangelo were linked to those of an unusual 
number of relatively minor artists. In similar fashion, the age of the seven 
‘monsters’ was also the age of many lesser polymaths (some of whom are 
listed in the Appendix), who provide yet another reason for calling this 
century a golden age.
Many of these individuals were professors, including Samuel 
Pufendorf, who lectured on law at the University of Lund and wrote on 
history, philosophy and what he called the ‘discipline’ of natural law; 
Isaac Barrow, a colleague of Newton’s at Cambridge, who has been 
described as ‘one of the last Renaissance universal scholars’, and Daniel 
Morhof, a professor at the University of Kiel, whose Polyhistor (1688) 
was long used as an introduction to scholarship.81 However, four of the 
most remarkable minor polymaths of this period – ‘minor’, relative to 
the seven monsters – followed careers outside the academic world. Th ey 

THE POLYMATH

68
were respectively a bishop, a lawyer, a soldier and an administrator: 
Pierre-Daniel Huet, John Selden, Luigi Marsili and Nicolaes Witsen.
Th e diversity of the interests and achievements of Pierre-Daniel Huet, 
who became bishop of Avranches in Normandy but resigned this 
position to have more time to study, oﬀ ers a remarkable example of an 
intellectual fox. As he wrote of himself in old age, he ‘ﬂ ew’ from disci-
pline to discipline and read ‘immoderately’. A later polymath, Charles de 
Sainte-Beuve, called him ‘the man of the widest reading who ever 
existed’.82 Unsurprisingly, Huet accumulated a library of more than eight 
thousand volumes. Th e range of his contributions to knowledge is not so 
diﬀ erent from that of the seven ‘monsters’ described earlier, even if he is 
less well known today and sometimes regarded as a scholar of the second 
rank.83
Although he only became a priest at the age of forty-six, Huet’s 
interest in theology began much earlier. He studied with the polymath 
biblical scholar Samuel Bochart, who took his pupil with him when he 
was invited to Stockholm by Queen Christina. Discovering in the queen’s 
library a manuscript commentary on the Gospel of St Matthew by the 
Greek scholar Origen, Huet edited it and translated it into Latin. He 
learned Hebrew and Syriac to help in his biblical studies.
Th ese studies led Huet, like his teacher Bochart, to examine myths 
from a comparative point of view. Bochart argued that the story of Noah 
was a prototype for later myths, while Huet oﬀ ered a similar argument in 
the case of the story of Moses, making use of accounts by missionaries of 
myths current in Canada, Peru and Japan. Biblical studies also led Huet 
towards geography, with one study of the terrestrial paradise and another 
of the voyages of King Solomon. He wrote on philosophy, notably a 
critique of Descartes (1689) and a treatise, Th e Weakness of Human 
Understanding (posthumously published, 1723).84 He published an essay 
titled the Origin of Romances (1670), the ﬁ rst history of this literary genre, 
and wrote a romance himself, Diane de Castro.85 Huet was later active as 
a historian, producing a history of his native city, Les origines de la ville de 
Caen (1702), and a pioneering study in what we call economic history, 
Histoire du commerce et de la navigation des anciens (1716).


THE AGE OF ‘MONSTERS OF ERUDITION’
69
Like other virtuosi of his day, Huet was also interested in mathematics 
and the natural sciences. His enthusiasm for geometry is evident in his 
Demonstratio Evangelica (1679), presenting a proof of the truth of 
Christianity in the form of deductions from axioms. He was the 
co-founder of the Académie de Physique in Caen (1662), concerned 
with the study of nature in general and anatomy in particular. Huet 
himself carried out many dissections, especially of ﬁ sh. His other inter-
ests included astronomy, natural history and chemistry. His original 
contributions to science include a discussion of sound waves and precise 
descriptions of the snail, the leech and the salamander. Huet also invented 
an instrument to measure the humidity of the atmosphere and another 
to measure the speed of wind.86
After Bacon, the seventeenth-century lawyer with the most remark-
able range of learning was surely another Englishman, John Selden, 
despite competition from the Dutchman Hugo Grotius. Selden and 
Grotius were involved on opposite sides in a controversy over the freedom 
of the seas, but they respected each other as scholars.
A contemporary, Lord Clarendon, noted Selden’s ‘stupendous learning 
in all kinds and in all languages’.87 His interests included medieval 
English history and oriental studies. His pursuit of the history of law 
(common law, civil law, canon law, maritime law and natural law) led 
him in a number of directions, including the English Middle Ages and 
ancient Israel (much of his late career was spent studying the Talmud and 
writing on Jewish law). His lively curiosity took Selden still further, into 
the study of ancient religions and the publication of a book, On the 
Syrian Gods (1617). In it he emulated the famous study of chronology by 
Joseph Scaliger, a sixteenth-century scholar whom Selden described as 
the ‘mighty prince’ of the commonwealth of learning.
Selden built up a library of about eight thousand books and manu-
scripts. His learning was combined with analytical power, shown in his 
comparisons between diﬀ erent systems of law and between diﬀ erent 
gods (Baal and Jupiter for instance, or Astarte and Venus). His pene-
trating intelligence is also revealed, together with his wit, in his posthu-
mously published Tabletalk.

THE POLYMATH

70
Despite the breadth of his interests, Selden insisted on going back to 
the sources. As he wrote with pride in his treatise Titles of Honour (1614), 
‘I vent to you nothing quoted at second hand, but ever loved the foun-
tain’. For his oriental studies, Selden learned Hebrew, Aramaic and 
Arabic. For his studies of medieval England, he learned Anglo-Saxon and 
examined oﬃ  cial records in the Tower of London. He also made use of 
the evidence of inscriptions and coins. His critical approach to texts was 
sharpened by a keen sense of anachronism and a concern with chro-
nology. A versiﬁ er himself on occasion, he made friends with the poets 
John Donne, Michael Drayton and Ben Jonson. It was Jonson who best 
summed up Selden’s combination of broad interests with specialized 
knowledge by comparing him to a compass: ‘. . . keeping one foot still/
Upon your centre, do your circle ﬁ ll/Of general knowledge.’88
As we have seen, Renaissance writers often combined arms and letters. 
In the seventeenth century, by contrast, Luigi Marsili (or Marsigli) oﬀ ers 
a rare example of a military polymath. A professional soldier in imperial 
service, he combined this activity with a wide range of studies, becoming 
a leading virtuoso of his time. He was an individual with a strong dose of 
curiosity. Captured by the Turks at the siege of Vienna in 1683 and put 
to work in a coﬀ ee house, Marsili put the knowledge he acquired in 
captivity to good use on his release by publishing a treatise on coﬀ ee, 
Bevanda Asiatica (1685).
Following his retirement (in disgrace, following the surrender of the 
fortress of Breisach in 1703), Marsili had more time for reading, writing 
and accumulating an extensive collection, which he later presented to 
the University of Bologna. His publications include an account of the 
armed forces of the Ottoman Empire and studies of phosphorus, coral, 
mushrooms and the sea. His masterpiece, Danubius (1726), presents 
observations on the river – as the title page claims – from geographical, 
astronomical, hydrographic, historical and physical points of view.89
Nicolaes Witsen was another man of action, several times burgo-
master of Amsterdam and one of the administrators of the Dutch East 
India Company. However, the ‘many-sided’ Witsen lived a ‘second life’ 
as a scholar.90 He found the time to collect curiosities, study natural 


THE AGE OF ‘MONSTERS OF ERUDITION’
71
history and publish books on ancient and modern shipbuilding and also 
on what he called ‘North and East Tartary’ (especially Siberia), including 
a map of that territory.91 Witsen’s interest in geography extended to 
South Africa, Australia and New Zealand. He was a friend of the poly-
maths Isaac Voss and Nicholas Steno, corresponded with Leibniz and, 
thanks to his extensive network, was able to help his friend Hiob Ludolf, 
yet another polymath, acquire texts in languages from many parts of the 
world, including Khoekhoe, spoken by the so-called ‘Hottentots’ of 
southern Africa.
Witsen’s extensive collection of curiosities included shells (some of 
them from Australia), plants, stuﬀ ed animals, ancient coins and statues, 
Scythian ornaments from Siberia, a kris from Java, an ancient Chinese 
mirror, many Chinese landscape paintings and statues of Hindu gods 
from Kerala. His network was of great service in this respect: the statues 
from Kerala, for instance, came to Witsen via the Dutch governor of 
Ceylon.92
CONCORD
Th e previous chapter mentioned the desire for intellectual and especially 
for religious harmony as one motive driving polymaths of the Renaissance, 
from Pico to Bodin. Th is drive, like the conﬂ icts to which it responded, 
continued to be a powerful one in the seventeenth century.
Comenius, as we have seen, hoped and worked for universal harmony. 
Caramuel attempted to reconcile faith and reason. Kircher hoped that 
his work would reveal the harmony underlying the apparent conﬂ ict 
between traditions, which he described as discors concordia. Huet wrote a 
book about the concord between faith and reason. Samuel Pufendorf 
was interested in reconciling the religious views of Catholics and 
Protestants in the divided Germany of his day.
Leibniz, who was born just before the end of the Th irty Years War, 
was also preoccupied with conﬂ icts and ways of ending them. Th e point 
of his logical calculus, like the universal languages devised by scholars 
such as the English polymath John Wilkins, was to make it unnecessary 
for philosophers to disagree. He attempted, like Pico, to reconcile 

THE POLYMATH

72
conﬂ icts in philosophy, in his case between Cartesianism and scholasti-
cism. He also tried by means of natural theology (a kind of lowest 
common denominator of belief) to reconcile conﬂ icts between religions 
(Protestantism and Catholicism) as well as between cultures (China and 
the West). In this sense he may be described as the last of the pansophists.
ORIGINALITY VERSUS PLAGIARISM
Th e ﬂ ourishing of polymaths in the seventeenth century appears all the 
more remarkable when we remember that the bar over which they had to 
jump was raised at this time. In the Renaissance, as in the Middle Ages, 
scholars could make a reputation for wide-ranging knowledge even if 
they failed to make discoveries or to oﬀ er original ideas. In the seven-
teenth century, by contrast, scholars were increasingly expected to make 
fresh contributions to knowledge.
Evidence for this assertion includes the priority disputes and accusa-
tions of plagiarism that proliferated from the late sixteenth century 
onwards. Th ey did not begin at that time: in the ﬁ fteenth century, Filippo 
Brunelleschi was the ﬁ rst individual to protect his intellectual property 
by taking out a patent, for a new design for a ship, in 1421, ‘in order that 
the fruit of his genius may not be harvested by another’. In conversation 
with his friend Taccola (Mariano di Jacopo), Brunelleschi told him, ‘Do 
not share your inventions with many people’ because rivals will steal 
them and attribute the credit to themselves.93 What was new in the 
seventeenth century was the frequency of accusations of plagiarism.
John Dee, for example, was accused by Tycho Brahe and Johannes 
Kepler of stealing their information and ideas, and in his turn Dee 
accused others of theft. Olof Rudbeck and Th omas Bartholin both 
claimed to have been the ﬁ rst to discover the lymphatic system. Newton’s 
followers accused Leibniz of stealing their master’s ideas about the 
calculus, while Newton was in his turn accused by the polymath Robert 
Hooke of stealing his ideas about the refraction of light and about the 
inverse square law of gravitational attraction.94
In order to safeguard their priority, some natural philosophers announced 
their discoveries in a coded manner by means of anagrams, a favourite 


THE AGE OF ‘MONSTERS OF ERUDITION’
73
literary device of the period. For example, when Galileo, looking through 
his new telescope, found that the planet Saturn was formed from three 
diﬀ erent bodies, he communicated this discovery by means of the myste-
rious message SMAISMRMILMEPOETALEUMIBUNENUGTTAUIRAS.95 
When Christiaan Huygens observed that Saturn was surrounded by a ring, 
he announced this discovery in the Latin anagram, AAAAAA CCCCC D 
EEEEE G H IIIIIII LLLL MM NNNNNNNNN OOOO PP Q 
RR S TTTTT UUUUU.96 Robert Hooke produced the anagram 
CEIIINOSSSSTTUV to reveal his law that the tension in a solid is propor-
tional to the force applied to it.97
As schoolboys used to know, in classical Latin the term plagiarius 
originally referred to someone who kidnapped a slave, but it was applied 
by the poet Martial to literary theft, from which he, like Horace and 
Virgil, claimed to suﬀ er. At the Renaissance, terms such as ‘stealing’ were 
current in literary circles. What was relatively new in the seventeenth 
century was the extension of the idea to scholarship. Between 1673 and 
1693 at least four treatises were devoted to this subject.98 Once again, the 
history of language oﬀ ers precious evidence of the history of conscious-
ness. In French, plagiaires is a seventeenth-century word. In English, the 
term ‘plagiary’ is ﬁ rst recorded in 1601; ‘plagiarism’ in 1621; ‘plagiarist’ 
in 1674; and ‘plagiarize’ in 1716.
EXPLAINING THE GOLDEN AGE
What made the seventeenth century into a golden age of polymaths? 
Answers to big questions such as this are necessarily speculative, but a few 
points may be worth making. Th ey suggest that the achievements described 
above were not the result of the miraculous birth of giants (or monsters), 
but were encouraged by social and cultural change. In the ﬁ rst place, 
seventeenth-century Europeans enjoyed an extended moment of freedom 
from the traditional suspicion of curiosity on one side and from the rise of 
the division of intellectual labour, which produced another climate that 
was – and remains – unfavourable to many-sidedness, on the other.
In the second place, the ongoing discovery of the New World by 
Europeans and their increasing contacts with Asia and Africa – whether 

THE POLYMATH

74
by trade, missions or conquest – was a powerful stimulus to curiosity, 
revealed by the formation of many ‘cabinets of curiosities’ displaying 
exotic objects from these parts. Some Europeans became familiar with 
many new plants, trees, animals, birds, ﬁ sh, insects, peoples and their 
languages and customs. New knowledge was arriving at a rate that excited 
the curiosity of scholars without overwhelming them. For example, the 
ﬁ ve hundred species of plants described by the ancient Greek physician 
Dioscorides had expanded by 1623 to the six thousand described by 
Caspar Bauhin.
Another kind of new world was revealed in the course of the so-called 
‘Scientiﬁ c Revolution’ of the seventeenth century by the use of new 
instruments, the telescope and the microscope, revealing objects that 
were very far away, such as the planets, and a world of living things that 
were near but very small, like the louse famously illustrated in Robert 
Hooke’s Micrographia (1665). Hooke’s contemporary, the Dutchman 
Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, was the ﬁ rst to observe and describe bacteria 
with the aid of a still more powerful microscope.
Other ﬁ elds of knowledge were explored by new methods, notably 
systematic experiment. Amateurs were able to make original contribu-
tions to the study of nature as well as culture at a time when new discov-
eries were still described in a language close to that of everyday life, while 
many experiments were simple enough to carry out at home. Many 
discoveries within the reach of individuals using relatively simple instru-
ments were still waiting to be made at this time. In its turn, the accumu-
lation of information was a stimulus to scholars to turn it into knowledge 
by verifying and classifying it.
A third relevant point concerns the reorganization of what contem-
poraries called the ‘Commonwealth of Learning’ or the ‘Republic of 
Letters’ (Respublica litterarum), an imagined community held together 
by correspondence between scholars living in diﬀ erent countries and on 
occasion divided by religion. Th e seventeenth century was a time of 
increase in the density of the postal networks in Europe.99 Th is revolu-
tion in communications underlay the expansion of the personal networks 
of individual scholars. Four of the seven monsters (Peiresc, Bayle, Leibniz 


THE AGE OF ‘MONSTERS OF ERUDITION’
75
and Kircher) maintained large networks of correspondents, providing 
information that would have been diﬃ  cult to ﬁ nd in Aix-en-Provence, 
Rotterdam, Wolfenbüttel and even Rome.
Peiresc’s correspondence, for instance, runs to 10,000 letters, including 
letters to fellow polymaths such as Selden, Gassendi, Grotius and 
Kircher.100 Bayle’s own letters, recently edited, ﬁ ll fourteen printed 
volumes.101 Leibniz too kept in regular contact with other scholars by 
letters, of which more than 15,000 survive. Still wider was the network 
of Kircher, who corresponded with his fellow polymaths Peiresc, Gassendi 
and Caramuel as well as drawing on the resources of Jesuit missionaries. 
He was even able to assemble a team of Jesuits to observe magnetic vari-
ation in diﬀ erent parts of the globe.102 Just as Roger Bacon had derived 
his information about the Mongols from three Franciscan missionaries, 
so Kircher, thanks to the Jesuit network, had access to ﬁ rst-hand knowl-
edge of China.
Some polymaths are best known as intellectual brokers. Samuel 
Hartlib, for instance, a Pole who studied in Germany and lived in 
England, was a disciple of both Bacon and Comenius who devoted his 
life to diﬀ using their ideas, as well as other kinds of information. His 
vast correspondence made Hartlib what a colleague of his, John Dury, 
called ‘the hub of the axletree of knowledge’. Hartlib was known at the 
time as an ‘intelligencer’, gathering information in order to spread it by 
means of a newsletter. In similar fashion, Henry Oldenburg, a German 
who lived in England and had joined Hartlib’s circle, owed his extensive 
knowledge to his activities as secretary of the Royal Society.103 Another 
networker was the Florentine librarian Antonio Magliabechi, a passive 
polymath who made no original contribution to any discipline but was 
widely consulted by scholars on a variety of subjects – as the 20,000 
letters to him that survive testify.104
Th e expansion of the postal system also underlay the rise of news-
sheets and journals in the seventeenth century, including, in the second 
half of the century, learned journals such as the Philosophical Transactions 
of the Royal Society of London (1665), edited by Oldenburg, the Journal 
des Savants (1665) in Paris, the Giornale de’ Letterati (1668) in Rome, the 

THE POLYMATH

76
Acta Eruditorum (1682) in Leipzig and the Nouvelles de la République des 
Lettres in Amsterdam (1684). Th is new form of communication included 
learned articles, obituaries of scholars, accounts of experiments and – a 
new literary genre – book reviews, thus making it possible for readers to 
keep up to date with events in the world of learning.
In short, the seventeenth century was a time of relative equilibrium 
between the conﬂ icting demands for wide knowledge and for original 
contributions. Th e increasing pressure to make discoveries, together with 
the ever-increasing proliferation of books, would make it increasingly 
diﬃ  cult to become a polymath after the year 1700. Th e delicate equilib-
rium was already perceived by a few observers as tipping into a crisis of 
knowledge.
THE CRISIS OF KNOWLEDGE
Th e laborious lives of the scholars described in this chapter have suggested 
that the seventeenth century was the apogee of the general scholar.105 
However, there was also a dark side to the intellectual history of that 
century. Th e seventeenth century was also an age of doubt. Th e years 
around 1650 reveal what has been called a ‘crisis of consciousness’ or a 
‘crisis of the European mind’, forming part of what historians have chris-
tened the ‘general crisis of the seventeenth century’.106
Th e term ‘crisis’ has been used about too many changes, devaluing the 
intellectual currency. In what follows I shall therefore try to use the word 
in a relatively precise sense, close to its origins in ancient Greek medi-
cine, when a ‘crisis’ was the moment when a patient hovered between 
recovery and death. Let us think of a crisis as a moment of turbulence 
leading to a change of structure. In other words, it is a ‘tipping point’ or 
‘critical threshold’, often reached after a long period of gradual change.107
Th e intellectual crisis of the seventeenth century had a number of 
aspects. One was the transition from an organic image of the world – the 
world as alive, as an ‘animal’ – to the view of the universe as a huge 
machine.108 A second aspect of the crisis was the rise of scepticism, or, as 
it was often called at this time, ‘Pyrrhonism’, after the ancient sceptical 
philosopher Pyrrho of Elis. Doubts were aired about the knowledge both 


THE AGE OF ‘MONSTERS OF ERUDITION’
77
of nature and of the past.109 Some thinkers argued in favour of cultural 
relativism, notably the polymath Pierre Bayle, who famously wrote that 
‘History is dished up very much like meat . . . Each nation and religion 
takes the same raw facts and dresses them in a sauce of its own taste, and 
each reader ﬁ nds them true or false according to whether they agree or 
disagree with his prejudices.’110
INFORMATION OVERLOAD
A third aspect of the crisis, the one most relevant to the subject of poly-
maths, was the increase in the amount of knowledge available, a collec-
tive beneﬁ t but also a reason for individual anxiety because there was ‘too 
much to know’.111 Following the invention of printing (with moveable 
type, in Europe) in the mid-ﬁ fteenth century, the production of books 
increased, at ﬁ rst relatively slowly but then at a vertiginous rate. According 
to a recent calculation, around 345,000 titles had been printed by the 
beginning of the seventeenth century.112
Anxiety about this explosion of knowledge – ‘explosion’ in the sense 
of expansion combined with fragmentation – was expressed more and 
more frequently. Complaints that there were too many books multiplied 
and so did metaphors such as the ‘ﬂ ood’ of books in which readers feared 
drowning or the ‘forest’ in which they felt themselves to be lost.113
Th e English polymath Robert Burton made the point in his vivid way 
when he wrote, in a much-quoted passage, of the ‘vast Chaos and confu-
sion of Bookes’; ‘we are oppressed with them, our eyes ache with reading, 
our ﬁ ngers with turning’. Another well-known complaint came from the 
French librarian Adrien Baillet, who feared the return of barbarism as a 
result of ‘the multitude of books which grows every day in prodigious 
fashion’, making it increasingly diﬃ  cult to identify what was really worth 
reading.114 Even the widely read Leibniz wrote of the ‘horrible heap of 
books that is constantly increasing’ (horrible masse de livres qui va toujours 
augmentant).115 Printing, once viewed as a solution to the problem of 
information scarcity, had become a problem itself.
In order to cope with the overload, scholars became more concerned 
with the organization of knowledge, writing the information they needed 

THE POLYMATH

78
or expected to need on paper slips that were arranged in boxes or pasted 
into volumes. One polymath, Vincent Placcius, published a book titled 
Th e Art of Taking Notes (De arte excerpendi, 1689), recommending storing 
the slips on hooks organized by topic and hanging from metal bars in a 
‘closet’.116
Th e proliferation of books was not the only reason why scholars felt 
that there was now too much to know. Another reason was the very 
discovery of new worlds of knowledge that was noted earlier as a stim-
ulus to broad learning. Th e glamour of these new knowledges may have 
inspired scholars to expand their interests, but the downside of this 
‘advancement of learning’, as Francis Bacon memorably described it, was 
an increase in what is now known as ‘information anxiety’. Discoveries 
were being made too rapidly for individuals to digest. Th e six thousand 
plants described by Caspar Bauhin in 1623 had multiplied by 1682 to 
the eighteen thousand described by John Ray.117 It may even be the case 
that the seventeenth century is remembered as a golden age of polymaths 
precisely because it became more diﬃ  cult for later generations to live up 
to the ideal of universal knowledge.
Th e challenge was to incorporate the new information into intellec-
tual systems, old and new, without those systems breaking apart.118 Th e 
problem of fragmentation was already being perceived as serious by some 
scholars by the middle of the seventeenth century.
FRAGMENTATION
Th e spread of new words such as ‘polymath’ in the seventeenth century 
was not necessarily a good sign. Indeed, the more frequent use of the 
terms is more likely to be an indication of the growing consciousness of 
a problem. In his play Philosophaster, Robert Burton distinguished the 
true scholar Polumathes from the arrogant individual ‘Polupragmaticus’, 
who claims, like ancient Greek sophists, to be ‘omniscient’.
Among the best-known discussions of the problem are two treatises 
mentioned earlier, Polymathia (1603) by Johannes Wower and Polyhistor 
(1688) by Daniel Morhof.119 Wower and Morhof presented polymathia as 
a concern with the connections between diﬀ erent disciplines, scientiarum 


THE AGE OF ‘MONSTERS OF ERUDITION’
79
cognatio et conciliatio.120 To some seventeenth-century polymaths, these 
connections seemed to be at risk. Looking back at Alsted’s encyclopaedia, 
we may view it as an attempt not so much to express as to restore the 
unity of knowledge at a time when this unity was under threat. Alsted’s 
student Comenius was worried by what he called ‘the tearing apart of the 
disciplines’ (scientiarum laceratio).121 He complained in vivid language 
that ‘Metaphysicians sing to themselves alone, natural philosophers chant 
their own praises, astronomers dance by themselves, ethical thinkers 
make their laws for themselves, politicians lay their own foundations, 
mathematicians rejoice over their own triumphs and theologians rule for 
their own beneﬁ t’.122
‘ ’Tis all in pieces, all coherence gone.’ Th e awareness and the 
fear of intellectual fragmentation was memorably expressed by John 
Donne in his poem An Anatomy of the World.123 Scholars expressed a 
similar concern. Th e polymath John Selden noted that diﬀ erent ﬁ elds 
of learning had become severed, although, as his own intellectual itin-
erary showed, ‘every one hath so much relation to some other, that it 
hath not only use often of the aid of what is next it, but through that, 
also of what is out of ken to it’.124 Again, the Puritan divine Richard 
Baxter complained that ‘We parcel arts and sciences into fragments, 
according to the straitness [narrowness] of our capacities, and are not so 
pansophical as uno intuitu to see the whole.’125 Th ere is, of course, a 
danger of taking this remark out of context. Baxter was making a point 
about the human condition and contrasting ‘us’ with God and perhaps 
the angels. All the same, the date of his comment, the mid-seventeenth 
century, is surely signiﬁ cant, and so is his reference to pansophia, a move-
ment that should be interpreted as – among other things – a response to 
fragmentation.
Th e need to see the whole was emphasized by other scholars such as the 
English divine Th omas Fuller and the polymath Isaac Barrow. Fuller 
declared that learning ‘hath so homogeneal a body, that the parts thereof do 
with a mutual service relate to, and communicate strength and lustre each 
to other’.126 In his treatise Of Industry, Barrow wrote that ‘he can hardly be 
a good scholar, who is not a general one’. General knowledge was made 

THE POLYMATH

80
necessary by what Barrow called the ‘connection of things, and dependence 
of notions’, so that ‘one part of learning doth confer light to another’.127
Comenius oﬀ ered pansophia as a solution to this problem. For 
Morhof, on the other hand, pansophia was the problem, or at least part 
of it. His solution was not only to reject it altogether but polymathy as 
well, which he viewed as too ambitious and too vague, given ‘the limita-
tions of the human mind’ (mentis humanae angustia). He was particu-
larly critical of scholars who tried to ‘inhabit’ all disciplines at the same 
time and he warned his readers against exaggerated ambitions. ‘Th ose 
who wish to live everywhere will live nowhere and dominate nothing, or 
at best visit many places superﬁ cially’ (qui nusquam habitabunt, nusquam 
dominerunt, si ubique habitare volent, aut levi percursatione plurime attin-
gent). Morhof’s ideal was more limited: historia literaria, in other words 
the history of scholarship, or, more exactly, scholarship approached 
through its history.128
Another Anglican clergyman, Meric Casaubon, the son of the famous 
scholar Isaac Casaubon, and himself a polymath who wrote on theology 
and natural philosophy, edited classical texts, and studied antiquities and 
medicine, was the author of an essay, written in 1668, on what he called 
‘generall learning’ in which he admitted to a ‘sad apprehension . . . of the 
decay of learning, and great danger of approaching barbarism’. Casaubon 
dated this decay from the beginning of the seventeenth century, in other 
words his father’s time, on the grounds that it had become much more 
diﬃ  cult than before to become a good scholar: ‘for a man to make 
himself considerable . . . soe much labour, soe much industrie was 
required, as is enough to fright any, whom God hath not endowed with 
extraordinarie courage, and strength of bodie withal’.129 It is possible that 
the son was projecting his sense of inferiority to his father onto the whole 
century. All the same, the younger Casaubon was not alone in his worries.
POLYMATHS UNDER FIRE
At this point it may be illuminating to return to the polymaths discussed 
earlier in this chapter, looking this time not at their achievements but at 
their weaknesses. A critique of polymathy is as old as ancient Greece, as 


THE AGE OF ‘MONSTERS OF ERUDITION’
81
we have seen, but criticisms cluster in the late seventeenth and early 
eighteenth centuries, so many signs of crisis.
Gilbert Burnet wrote to Leibniz that ‘Very often those who deal in 
many things are slight and superﬁ cial in them all’ (he exempted Leibniz 
himself from this generalization). Burnet was criticized for the same 
fault. He ‘stayed no longer upon a science than after he had got some 
view of it’, preferring ‘the appearance of knowing many things rather 
than any one perfectly’.130 Again, Newton criticized Hooke because he 
‘does nothing but pretend and grasp at all things’ rather than providing 
proof for his hypotheses.131
Th e virtuosi, like the more specialized ‘antiquaries’, were sometimes 
criticized for missing true knowledge in their passion for detail. Hans 
Sloane, for instance, a successful London physician who owned a huge 
and varied collection (including 32,000 medals and 50,000 volumes), 
was called a ‘a master of only scraps, pick’d up from one and from another, 
or collected out of this book and that, and these all in confusion in his 
head’.132 In other words, Sloane collected bits and pieces of knowledge in 
the way that he accumulated material objects.
LEONARDO SYNDROME
A number of polymaths have been diagnosed as suﬀ ering from what might 
be called the ‘Leonardo Syndrome’. Leonardo was and is notorious, as we 
have seen, for beginning many projects but bringing few to completion. In 
principle he was a hedgehog, with a vision of connections between 
diﬀ erent kinds of knowledge, but in practice he was a fox, dispersing his 
energies. A similar point might be made about Peiresc. Gassendi noted that 
the variety of his friend’s interests and his drive to learn more and more 
prevented him not only from ﬁ nishing particular projects but even from 
beginning to write. Leibniz criticized another polymath, Johann Joachim 
Becher, as ‘concerned with too many things’ (polypragmon).133 Kircher too 
tried to do too much, complaining on one occasion that he was so busy 
that ‘I don’t know which way to turn’ (ut quo me vertam nesciam).134
Even Leibniz seems to have felt the strain of keeping up his diﬀ erent 
knowledges. Th e downside of his enthusiasm for diﬀ erent projects was 

THE POLYMATH

82
their tendency ‘to snowball into things of unmanageable proportions’.135 
His history of the Guelphs, for instance, did not conﬁ ne itself to the 
Middle Ages, as originally intended, but expanded backwards into what 
were later known as ‘prehistoric’ times. As Leibniz wrote wearily to 
another polymath, Placcius, answering a question about his projects, ‘I 
have pursued many but perfected and completed none’. Writing to 
Placcius again, nearly twenty years later, he declared that ‘I often don’t 
know what to do next’. To another correspondent, he complained about 
‘the division of my concerns among too many things’.136
Lesser ﬁ gures faced the same problem. Th e virtuoso John Evelyn, for 
instance, planned but did not ﬁ nish a history of trades and an encyclo-
paedia of gardening. Robert Hooke has been called ‘London’s Leonardo’ 
in a positive sense of the phrase, but it may also be argued that he suﬀ ered 
from the syndrome. Even a sympathetic biographer describes Hooke as 
someone who ‘habitually took on too much’ and ‘whose versatility 
condemned him to miss the mark by a whisker’.137
Hooke’s friend Christopher Wren certainly had solid achievements to 
his credit – St Paul’s Cathedral among them – but he too began projects 
without ﬁ nishing them, among them a treatise on architecture. A study 
of his contribution to mathematics calls him a ‘dabbler’ whose ‘diversity 
of interest prevented him from attaining the heights which his ability 
allowed’.138 Th e Mexican polymath Carlos de Sigüenza y Góngora, 
despite or because of his intellectual ambitions, ‘failed to publish anything 
other than occasional pamphlets’. Th e biographer of Luigi Marsili 
remarks on ‘the amazingly broad span of Marsili’s interests’, but also 
notes that on occasion he ‘abruptly lost interest in one piece of work to 
turn to something diﬀ erent’.139
Despite their remarkable achievements, the giants of the seventeenth-
century scholarly world may be viewed as a kind of human litmus paper, 
revealing problems that would become more and more acute as the years 
passed. In response to these problems, a more limited ideal of general 
learning became dominant in the eighteenth century and the ﬁ rst half of 
the nineteenth: the ideal of the ‘man of letters’.

83
 4 
 THE AGE OF THE ‘MAN 
OF LETTERS’
17001850
In his old age, one of the leading scholars mentioned in the previous 
chapter, Pierre-Daniel Huet, reﬂ ected on what he believed to be the 
decline of learning: ‘I hardly know anyone today who can be described 
as a true scholar.’ Indeed, he continued, ‘some people pride themselves 
on their ignorance, ridicule erudition, and describe learning as pedantry’.1 
In similar fashion, a scholar from a later generation, Giambattista Vico, 
to be discussed below, complained in a letter written in 1726 about the 
‘exhaustion’ of European scholarship in all departments of knowledge 
(per tutte le spezie delle scienze gl’ingegni d’Europa sono già esausti). To 
support his complaint he noted that in his time in his native city of 
Naples, the price of learned works in Latin had fallen by more than half.2
Scholars often complain about the decline of learning, but in this case 
there is other evidence of a major change in the intellectual climate at the 
beginning of the eighteenth century. It was becoming less favourable to 
polymaths.
THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY
One such sign was the decline in the reputations of two of the ‘monsters’ 
discussed in the previous chapter, Olof Rudbeck and Athanasius Kircher, 
whose intellectual ediﬁ ces turned out to have serious ﬂ aws, like the ‘feet 
of clay’ of the statue described in the Book of Daniel. Leibniz, for instance, 
declared that, although he admired Rudbeck’s intelligence and learning, 
‘I cannot approve of many of his opinions’. He argued that Rudbeck’s 

THE POLYMATH

84
etymological conjectures were often unfounded and joked that he was 
afraid that the French scholar Paul-Yves Pezron, who wrote about the 
origins of the Celts, ‘might Rudbeckize somewhat’ (nonnihil Rudbeckizet).3 
Rudbeck’s ideas in the Atlantica were also criticized by colleagues in 
Sweden in his own day, while his reputation declined after his death. His 
ideas about Sweden as Atlantis became the object of satire.4
As for Kircher, his supporters, including two fellow monsters, Peiresc 
and Leibniz, became increasingly suspicious of his scholarship as time 
went by. Peiresc, initially enthusiastic about Kircher’s contribution to the 
study of ancient Egypt, came to suspect fraud, as well as complaining 
that some of his protégé’s interpretations were based only on intuition, as 
if they had ‘come to him through the spirit’.5 Leibniz, who had expressed 
admiration for Kircher’s book on China in 1670, confessed to doubts 
about the Ars Magna Sciendi in 1680, while by 1716, commenting on 
Kircher’s Egyptian studies, he concluded that ‘he understands nothing’.6 
According to another polymath, Isaac Voss, ‘even his friends’ wished that 
Kircher ‘had not written his Oedipus’, with its claims to be able to read 
Egyptian hieroglyphs.7
Kircher’s declining reputation was in part the result of a major change 
in the world view of educated people around the beginning of the eight-
eenth century, the transition from the view of the universe as animate, 
one that he shared, to the view that was coming to supplant it, that of the 
universe as a vast machine. Th ere was also a transition from the idea of 
objective ‘correspondences’ (between microcosm and macrocosm, for 
instance), to that of subjective analogies. As the American intellectual 
historian Marjorie Nicolson put it, ‘Our ancestors believed that what we 
call “analogy” was truth, inscribed by God in the nature of things.’8 
Kircher shared this belief, and he was left behind by the new trends.
PEDANTS AND POLYHISTORS
In the eighteenth century, the term ‘polyhistor’ shifted from compliment 
to criticism, at least in the German-speaking world. For Kant, polyhis-
tors were no more than ‘supermen of memory’ (Wundermannen des 
Gedächtnisses). Th eir achievement was simply to provide the ‘raw 


THE AGE OF THE ‘MAN OF LETTERS’
85
material’ for philosophers to work on.9 Criticisms of the polyhistor even 
spread to encyclopaedias. In Johann Heinrich Zedler’s Universal-Lexikon 
(1731–54) the article on ‘Polyhistorie’ declared that ‘the greatest poly-
maths did not do such a great service to the world, simply because they 
were polymaths and therefore occupied themselves with triﬂ es’. Th e 
famous Encyclopédie (1751–72) delivered a similar verdict: ‘Polymathy is 
often nothing but a confused mass of useless knowledge’ which is oﬀ ered 
‘to put on a show’.10 Th e polyhistor was becoming associated with the 
acquisition of trivial information for its own sake, contrasted with what 
came to be known as Politisch-galante Wissenschaft, the kind of knowl-
edge that was relevant to a man of the world and a gentleman.11
Th e jurist Ulrich Huber delivered an oration against pedantry in 
1678, printed ten years later by the philosopher Christian Th omasius, 
who was himself a ﬁ erce critic of what he called Scholastische Pedanterey. 
Two plays from the ﬁ rst half of the eighteenth century – both of them 
written, as it happens, by polymaths – vividly evoke the image of a 
pedant: Erasmus Montanus (1723) by Ludvig Holberg, and Der Junge 
Gelehrte (1748) by Gotthold Ephraim Lessing.
Lessing, who went on to become a famous playwright, declared that 
he was not a scholar (Ich bin nicht gelehrt) and that ‘to be a professor is not 
my thing’ (das Professoriren meine Sache nicht ist). In fact, he was a learned 
man who tried to wear his learning lightly. As a child, he wanted his 
portrait painted together with ‘a huge, huge heap of books (einem grosse, 
grosse Haufen Bücher). Lessing loved knowledge, planned to contribute to 
the fashionable genre of the history of learning, became the director of the 
famous library at Wolfenbüttel (like Leibniz before him), and wrote a 
daring study of the evangelists as ‘merely human historians’.12
Th e increasing suspicion of many-sidedness is also revealed by the rise 
of the term ‘charlatan’ and its synonyms. In ancient Greece, Plato’s 
Phaedrus had already condemned the sophists who only ‘appear to be 
wise’. In the seventeenth century, it became commonplace to compare 
scholars who promised what they could not perform to the notorious 
sellers of fake medicines in public places such as Piazza San Marco. Kircher 
was described by Descartes as a ‘charlatan’, by the scholar–archbishop 

THE POLYMATH

86
James Ussher as a ‘Mountebank’, and by Christopher Wren as a ‘juggler’ 
(probably in the sense of an impostor).13
In the eighteenth century, Descartes’s pejorative term was popularized 
by the Leipzig professor Johann Burckhardt Mencke. Mencke’s book 
‘On the Charlatanry of the Learned’ (De charlataneria eruditorum, 1715) 
is a hilarious description of the techniques used to promote themselves 
by the scholars of his time (though most if not all of these techniques 
may still be observed today).14 Th e idea of the pseudo-scholar or 
charlatan has been described as ‘central to the social workings of the 
eighteenth-century republic of letters’.15 Even the Comte de Buﬀ on, 
who dominated the extensive ﬁ eld of natural history, was called a char-
latan by a fellow polymath, the Marquis de Condorcet.16
Aspiring polymaths were increasingly considered to suﬀ er from 
hubris. Samuel Johnson, himself an individual of broad interests, told 
his readers that ‘Th e circle of knowledge is too wide for the most active 
and diligent intellect’ and that ‘Even those to whom Providence has 
allotted greater strength of understanding, can expect only to improve a 
single science. In every other part of learning, they must be content to 
follow opinions, which they are not able to examine.’17 In similar fashion, 
the biographer of James Tytler, editor of the supplement to the 
Encyclopaedia Britannica, remarked in 1805 that ‘No man, however 
astonishing his talents and intense his application, can ever reasonably 
expect to be a walking encyclopaedia.’18
A NEW IDEAL
Th e ideal of many-sidedness was not abandoned at this time but it was 
limited, lowering the bar over which candidates for the title had to jump. 
Since ‘universal knowledge is no longer within the reach of man’ (la science 
universelle n’est plus à la portée de l’homme), as the Encyclopédie put it, it was 
replaced by a new ideal, dominant in the eighteenth and early nineteenth 
centuries. Th is new ideal was put into practice by the gens de lettres, culti-
vated people (usually but not always male) who avoided pedantry and 
showed their knowledge in sparkling conversation in salons or in essays 
written in the vernacular and addressed to general educated readers.


THE AGE OF THE ‘MAN OF LETTERS’
87
Th e importance of the salons in eighteenth- and early nineteenth-
century culture, most famously in Paris but also in Milan, Berlin, London 
and elsewhere, has long been noted. Th is form of institutionalized socia-
bility for both sexes helped to shape the written style as well as the style 
of speaking of the participants. Some cultural journals reproduced this 
conversational tone. An early example is Bayle’s Nouvelles de la République 
des Lettres, aimed at an upper-class public that the author described as 
gens du monde. Th e Nouvelles were imitated by Lessing, an admirer of 
Bayle and his light touch, in a periodical with a similar name, Critischen 
Nachrichten aus dem Reiche der Gelehrsamkeit (Critical News from the 
Republic of Letters), 1751.
Cultural journals proliferated in the eighteenth century, among them 
the Spectator (founded in 1711), the Gentleman’s Magazine (1731) and 
the Allgemeine Deutsche Bibliothek (1765), which all tried to be accessible 
to what would later be called a ‘middlebrow’ readership. Joseph Addison 
declared in the ﬁ rst issue of the Spectator that ‘I shall be ambitious to 
have it said of me, that I have brought Philosophy out of Closets and 
Libraries, Schools and Colleges, to dwell in Clubs and Assemblies, at 
Tea-tables, and in Coﬀ ee houses.’ In similar fashion, the preface to 
another of these cultural journals observed that ‘Th e public demands to 
be taught in an agreeable manner and ﬁ nds a dry analysis boring.’19 
Voltaire was of course one of the masters of such an ‘agreeable manner’. 
Th ese periodicals helped to create the public that in turn made the careers 
of ‘men of letters’ possible.
MEN OF LETTERS
Th e term ‘man of letters’ was ambiguous at this time, since ‘letters’ 
often meant ‘learning’, as the phrase Respublica Literaria, ‘the Republic 
of Letters’, reminds us. However, its meaning was slowly shifting in 
this period towards belles-lettres, ‘literature’ in the modern sense, while 
scholars were increasingly expected to present their work in a clear and 
elegant form to the general educated public.
Th e phrase uomo di lettere had already been used in Italian in the 
title of a book by the Jesuit Daniele Bartoli as early as 1645. Two Italian 

THE POLYMATH

88
polymaths of the seventeenth century, Francesco Redi and Lorenzo 
Magalotti, already deserved to be described in this way. Redi’s fame 
depends partly on his research on parasites and partly on his poem in 
praise of the wines of Tuscany, Bacco in Toscana. Magalotti wrote poems 
and stories as well as publishing accounts of experiments and letters on 
‘scientiﬁ c and learned’ subjects.20
Despite such early examples, it was the period from the early eight-
eenth to the later nineteenth century that was the true age of the man of 
letters, in other words, an individual who (besides writing poems, plays 
or novels) made contributions to the humanities and showed an interest 
in the natural sciences.21
WOMEN OF LETTERS
As the gender-free phrase gens de lettres suggests, the new learning oﬀ ered 
women a more important role than before or, more exactly, two roles, 
one as an animator and the other as a scholar.
Mid-eighteenth-century Paris witnessed the great age of the salons, 
organized by cultivated ladies such as Madame Dupin, Madame Geoﬀ rin, 
the Marquise du Deﬀ and and her niece and former assistant Mademoiselle 
de Lespinasse, known as the ‘Muse of the Encyclopédie’. Th e polymaths 
Montesquieu, Voltaire, Buﬀ on, Diderot and d’Alembert could often be 
seen and heard on these occasions. Breadth of interests was essential for 
a hostess to be successful, while the salons widened the education of both 
the men and the women who frequented them.22
Salons of this kind were organized in other countries and continued 
to play an important role in intellectual life for several generations. In 
London in the 1760s, for instance, the term ‘bluestockings’ was applied 
to the people who frequented the salons, ﬁ rst to both sexes and then to 
intellectual women alone. Th e most famous salon was that of Elizabeth 
Montagu, ‘Queen of the Bluestockings’, whose regular guests included 
the polymath Samuel Johnson together with Joshua Reynolds, David 
Garrick, Edmund Burke and Horace Walpole.23 In Berlin in the 1780s, 
the brothers Humboldt, not yet polymaths, were introduced to the salon 
of Henriette Herz and Rahel Levin.


THE AGE OF THE ‘MAN OF LETTERS’
89
Some women of the time demonstrated a wide range of knowledge. 
Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, who established a salon in Venice in her 
old age in the 1750s, knew Latin as well as several modern languages, 
wrote poems, novels and literary criticism, introduced inoculation for 
smallpox to Western Europe, discussed education and the position of 
women, and planned to turn her letters describing the Ottoman Empire, 
where she lived from 1716 to 1718, into a book.24
Women were also active, and increasingly so in this period, as scholars 
in their own right. Among the best-known examples, discussed later in 
the chapter, are Émilie du Châtelet in France, Maria Gaetana Agnesi in 
Italy, the cosmopolitan Germaine de Staël (originally Swiss), the German 
Dorothea Schlözer, the Scot Mary Somerville and the Englishwomen 
Harriet Martineau and Mary Ann Evans, better known as George Eliot, 
a versatile essayist before she found a second vocation as a novelist.
THE FRENCH ENLIGHTENMENT
Th e obvious place to look for wide-ranging gens de lettres in the 
Enlightenment is France, since the French were trendsetters not only in 
the worlds of art and fashion but also in the intellectual world of Europe. 
Leading French polymaths in this period include Montesquieu, Voltaire, 
Châtelet, d’Alembert, Diderot and Condorcet.
A biographer of Montesquieu has noted the problem of writing about 
‘a man of many interests’ in that it requires ‘a multiplicity of compe-
tences, scientiﬁ c, philosophical, legal, historical and literary’ from anyone 
who writes about him.25 His most famous contribution to literature, the 
Persian Letters (1721), reveals his interest in the Orient as well as his 
ability to imagine how France might appear to a visitor from another 
culture. Besides his masterpiece of comparative social and historical ana -
lysis, L’esprit des lois (1748), Montesquieu wrote on political economy 
and ancient history.
Although he ‘disliked and knew nothing about mathematics and 
physics’, Montesquieu’s interest in the natural sciences is shown by 
his notebook on anatomy, his projected geological history of the earth 
and a paper, read to the Academy of Bordeaux in 1721, describing his 

THE POLYMATH

90
experiments on animals and plants. Th e full range of his interests is 
revealed by his library of nearly four thousand volumes, still to be seen in 
the municipal library of Bordeaux, including the many travel books from 
which, together with his own visits to Italy, England and Central Europe, 
he learned to appreciate the variety of human customs. Montesquieu 
took a particular interest in China, not only reading about it but also 
questioning a Chinese convert to Christianity, Arcadius Huang, and a 
Jesuit missionary, Jean-François Fouquet.26
A biographer of Voltaire has commented on ‘the universality of his 
interests’ and described him as an ‘omniscient polymath’.27 On purely 
academic criteria, Voltaire might not pass muster as a polymath, but it is 
impossible to deny such a many-sided man a place in this study. Voltaire 
thought of himself as a man of letters and also as a philosophe, more or 
less what we mean by the phrase ‘public intellectual’, active in the debates 
and conﬂ icts of his time, including the case of Jean Calas, a Protestant 
tortured and executed on a charge of murdering his son because he 
believed that son was about to turn Catholic. Many of Voltaire’s poems, 
plays and stories, notably his satire Candide (1759), were vehicles for his 
subversive ideas. His Letters on the English (1734) was more than a simple 
travelogue or a guide to English culture, since its praise of England 
implied a critique of France. Voltaire was particularly productive as a 
historian, with books on Charles XII of Sweden, Peter the Great of 
Russia and Louis XIV of France, as well as his famous Essay on Manners 
(1756), a pioneering work in what is now known as social and cultural 
history.28 Voltaire also wrote on philosophy, criticizing Descartes and 
Leibniz. He was a popularizer of science, especially Newtonian science, 
an activity that gained him a Fellowship of the Royal Society. He 
published an essay on geology and carried out experiments in physics 
and biology, cutting oﬀ  the heads of snails, for example, to see whether 
they regenerated.29
Voltaire wrote that Essay for his mistress, the Marquise Émilie du 
Châtelet, who was a woman of letters in her own right. She was particu-
larly well known as a mathematician and a natural philosopher, submit-
ting a dissertation on ﬁ re in a competition organized by the Académie 


THE AGE OF THE ‘MAN OF LETTERS’
91
des sciences and discussing topics such as kinetic energy and dynamics 
with leading natural philosophers such as Pierre Maupertuis. Her book 
Institutions de Physique oﬀ ered readers a synthesis of the ideas of Newton 
and Leibniz. Du Châtelet wrote a discourse on happiness and a treatise 
on biblical exegesis, and translated Newton’s Principia and selections 
from Bernard Mandeville’s Fable of the Bees. She contributed to the 
Journal des savants and was elected a member of the Academy of 
Bologna.30
Th e editors of the Encyclopédie, Jean d’Alembert and Denis Diderot, 
were themselves encyclopaedic in their interests. D’Alembert is most 
famous as a mathematician but he also made important contributions to 
physics (notably to the study of the movement of solids and ﬂ uids) and 
to the theory of music. He wrote a history of the suppression of the 
Jesuits and published ﬁ ve volumes of essays on literature and philosophy. 
D’Alembert’s articles for the Encyclopédie ranged from religion to math-
ematics. He also wrote the celebrated ‘preliminary discourse’ to the work, 
surveying all the arts and sciences.31
As for Diderot, his interests included philosophy, psychology, natural 
history, chemistry and music, discussed in his Letter on the Blind (1749) 
and in other works that were only published posthumously, such as 
Rameau’s Nephew. He made an important contribution to the anony-
mous collective work the Histoire des deux Indes (History of the Two Indies, 
1770) attributed to another philosophe, Guillaume-Th omas Raynal. Like 
Voltaire, Diderot sometimes expressed his ideas through ﬁ ction, notably 
in Jacques le fataliste, which discusses the problem of determinism.
In addition to his work as editor, Diderot wrote several hundred arti-
cles for the Encyclopédie on philosophy, literature, acoustics, biology, art, 
music and the crafts. Himself the son of an artisan, Diderot respected 
technical knowledge. Th anks to him, know-how has an important place 
in the Encyclopédie, not only in the text but in the many illustrations of 
technical processes.32 Among the 137 remaining contributors to the 
Encyclopédie, at least one, Louis de Jaucourt, was even more polymathic 
than the editors. Jaucourt, who had studied theology in Geneva, natural 
sciences at Cambridge and medicine at Leiden, contributed about 

THE POLYMATH

92
eighteen thousand articles on subjects that ranged from history to botany, 
chemistry, physiology and pathology.
Th e philosophes just mentioned belong to a larger group, some of 
whom regularly met one another for conversation in the salons. Two 
members of this group had particularly wide interests, Buﬀ on and 
Condorcet. Th e Comte de Buﬀ on is best known for his contribution to 
the sciences, but he prided himself on his literary style and wrote for the 
general educated public. His Histoire Naturelle, published in thirty-six 
volumes between 1749 and 1788, ranged over the ﬁ elds of geology, 
botany, zoology, palaeontology and ethnology (presented as the natural 
history of man). Th e book emphasized the action of climate – Buﬀ on 
was an admirer of Montesquieu – and what the author called the ‘epochs 
of nature’, estimating the age of the world at 100,000 years. Buﬀ on was 
also active as a mathematician (working on probability theory) and as a 
physiologist, as well as conducting experiments on trees in his private 
forest in response to the government’s concern with improvements in the 
wood used in shipbuilding.33
Th e Marquis de Condorcet has been described as ‘remarkable, even in 
an encyclopaedic age, in the range of his interests and activities’.34 
He studied mathematics with Jean d’Alembert, published an essay on 
calculus, and began to frequent the salon of Mademoiselle Lespinasse, 
who noted his interest in ‘philosophy, belles-lettres, science, the arts, 
government, jurisprudence’. Condorcet was a friend of the statesman 
and political economist Anne Robert Jacques Turgot, who placed him in 
charge of the French mint. He applied the mathematics of probability to 
the analysis of voting, an enterprise that he viewed as an element of a 
science of human behaviour that he described as ‘social mathematics’.
As Secretary of the Academy of Sciences, Condorcet wrote the obitu-
aries of its members, a task that required a broad knowledge of the topics 
that they had studied. Condorcet’s interest in history, including, as in 
Voltaire’s case, the history of civilization, is apparent in his most famous 
work, the posthumously published Esquisse d’un tableau historique des 
progrès de l’esprit humain (Sketch for a Historical Painting of the Progress of 
the Human Mind), 1795. Th is essay divided human history into nine 


THE AGE OF THE ‘MAN OF LETTERS’
93
epochs deﬁ ned not by politics or war but on technological criteria, the 
ages of agriculture, for instance, of writing and of printing.
Th e outstanding ﬁ gures discussed so far were part of a larger cluster of 
writers and thinkers active in this period, including René de Réaumur, 
best known for his thermometer; Antoine Lavoisier, famous for his 
contribution to chemistry; and Turgot, remembered for his political 
career and his writings on political economy. All three of them ranged 
much more widely. Indeed, a friend of the family described the young 
Lavoisier as someone whose ‘natural taste for the sciences leads him to 
want to know all of them before concentrating on one rather than 
another’.35
THE SCOTTISH ENLIGHTENMENT
As in France, a cluster of wide-ranging men of letters can be found in 
eighteenth-century Scotland. Where the French men of letters met one 
another in mixed company in the salons, the sociability of their Scottish 
equivalents centred on male clubs such as the Select Society of Edinburgh, 
founded in 1754. Its original ﬁ fteen members included David Hume, 
Adam Smith, Adam Ferguson, William Robertson, Lord Kames and 
Lord Monboddo. All six were individuals of wide interests and achieve-
ments, an example supporting the idea of the importance of small groups 
in the history of scholarship as in other kinds of innovation.36
David Hume spent some time in Paris, frequenting the salons of 
Madames Lespinasse, Geoﬀ rin and Deﬀ and and striking up a friendship 
with Turgot. He is usually remembered as one of the leading British 
philosophers, although the catalogue of the British Library used to 
describe him as ‘David Hume, historian’, a reminder that his achieve-
ments were not limited to philosophy and that his History of England 
(1754–61) made him famous as well as wealthy (he received £4,000 
from the publisher). Th e breadth of interests of a man who wrote in 
his autobiography of his passion for ‘general learning’ is even more visible 
in his Essays Moral, Political and Literary (1741–2) concerned with 
a variety of topics, some ‘light’ – impudence, love, avarice and so on – 
and others ‘serious’ – taste, for instance, superstition, demography, the 

THE POLYMATH

94
coalition of parties, a perfect commonwealth, the study of history and 
the rise of the arts and sciences. His notebooks also bear witness to 
Hume’s interest in natural philosophy. It is not diﬃ  cult to see why one 
of his biographers emphasizes his role ‘not as a specialist’ but as a ‘man of 
letters’, writing in an informal, accessible style for a general educated 
public that included women as well as men.37
Just as Hume is remembered as a philosopher, his friend Adam Smith 
is remembered as an economist, thanks to his masterpiece Th e Wealth of 
Nations (1776). However, this famous book is considerably more than a 
treatise on ‘economics’ in the specialized sense of the term current today. 
It demonstrated the relation of that subject to moral philosophy, law 
and politics. As Smith’s friend William Robertson wrote to the author, 
‘You have formed into a regular and consistent system one of the most 
important parts of political science’.38 Th e book also includes a good deal 
of history, notably the chapter ‘On the Rise and Progress of Cities and 
Towns after the Fall of the Roman Empire’.
In any case, Smith did not begin his academic career as a political 
economist. He was ﬁ rst a professor of logic and then a professor of moral 
philosophy at the University of Glasgow, publishing a Th eory of Moral 
Sentiments (1759). He also lectured on rhetoric, theology and jurispru-
dence. After he turned his attention to political economy, he did not 
abandon his wide interests. For example, he wrote an article on the origin 
of language, a topic that was attracting a good deal of interest in the later 
eighteenth century. While writing the Wealth of Nations, Smith confessed 
in a private letter that he had been ‘studying botany’ and ‘some other 
sciences to which I had never given much attention before’.39 Th e results 
of these studies can be seen in his posthumously published Essays on 
Philosophical Subjects (1795) concerned with the history of astronomy, 
ancient physics, logic and metaphysics, and the aﬃ  nities between music, 
dance and poetry and between English and Italian verse.
Other members of the Select Society were not exactly narrow in their 
interests either. Robertson was a minister of the Church of Scotland and 
Principal of Edinburgh University as well as a famous historian of both 
the ancient and the modern worlds. Th e rival law lords Kames and 


THE AGE OF THE ‘MAN OF LETTERS’
95
Monboddo did not conﬁ ne themselves to the study that launched their 
careers. Kames produced essays on education, history, farming, religion 
and morality, while Monboddo published multi-volume treatises on 
language and metaphysics.40 Adam Ferguson, professor of natural philos-
ophy and then of moral philosophy at the University of Edinburgh, 
published History of the Roman Republic but is most famous for his Essay 
on the History of Civil Society. Sociologists still treat him as a distinguished 
ancestor.41
Another constellation of versatile Scots centred on the Edinburgh 
Review, founded in 1802. Besides the editor, the polymath Francis 
Jeﬀ rey, who actually lived in Edinburgh, they included the expatriates 
Th omas Carlyle, who spanned philosophy, literature, history and math-
ematics; Th omas Macaulay, poet and politician, who wrote history and 
essays on a variety of subjects; and Henry Brougham, a lawyer who wrote 
on physics, fossils, biography and natural theology and supported general 
education.
THE ENGLISH ENLIGHTENMENT
In eighteenth-century England, Samuel Johnson oﬀ ers an example of a 
man of letters who was also a polymath, and Joseph Priestley that of 
a polymath who was also a man of letters.
Johnson, the son of a bookseller in Litchﬁ eld and so familiar with a 
wide range of books from an early age, was a poet (in English and Latin), 
the author of a play, Irene, and a romance, Rasselas. He was also a literary 
critic and an editor of Shakespeare. However, his interests were much 
wider. He is known as ‘Dr Johnson’ because he was awarded two doctor-
ates in law, one at Trinity College Dublin and the other at Oxford. He 
wrote a series of biographies of scholars for the Gentleman’s Magazine 
and planned to write a history of ‘the Revival of Learning in Europe’.42 
Johnson confessed to his biographer, James Boswell, that he was a great 
browser in an ‘irregular manner’ and had ‘looked into a great many 
books which were not commonly known at the Universities’. He took to 
heart the advice of his cousin: ‘learn the leading praecognita of all things 
– no need perhaps to turn over leaf by leaf, but grasp the trunk hard only 

THE POLYMATH

96
and you will shake all the branches’.43 He claimed that ‘All knowledge is 
of itself of some value. Th ere is nothing so minute or inconsiderable, that 
I would not rather know it than not.’44
A contemporary expressed his admiration for ‘the expanse of matter 
which Johnson had found room for in his intellectual storehouse’.45 Th is 
store of knowledge came in handy, to put it mildly, when Johnson 
embarked on his major project, the Dictionary of the English Language 
(1755). Although he described this project as ‘drudgery’ which did not 
require ‘the light of learning’, it was based not only on wide reading but 
also on knowledge of the various languages from which English borrowed. 
It also required an understanding of the technical terms used in the 
professions (the Church, medicine, the law, the army and navy) and 
(although the preface notes the omission of ‘many terms appropriated to 
particular occupations’) such practical arts as brewing, coining and 
tanning.46
Joseph Priestley was a scholar of a very diﬀ erent style, ‘a self-taught 
man hostile to the notion of increasing specialization’.47 He made orig-
inal contributions to both physics and chemistry. He discovered oxygen 
and six other gases and published the History and Present State of Electricity 
(1767) and Experiments and Observations on Diﬀ erent Kinds of Air 
(1774–86). In the humanities, he was a gifted and wide-ranging popu-
larizer. As a Dissenter from the Church of England he was excluded from 
Oxford and Cambridge, but he taught modern languages and rhetoric 
at Warrington Academy. His biographer refers to his publications on 
‘language study, English grammar, philosophy of education, rhetoric, 
politics, history, religion and biblical criticism, as well as the science for 
which he is best known’.48 For example, Priestley’s Lectures on History 
(1788) became a widely used textbook, thanks in particular to its use of 
memorable biographical and chronological charts.49
Like their French and Scottish counterparts, both these English poly-
maths participated in discussion groups. Together with his friend the 
painter Joshua Reynolds, Johnson founded Th e Club (1764), also known 
as Th e Literary Club, which met once a week in the London tavern the 
Turk’s Head to dine and converse on various subjects. As for Priestley, he 


THE AGE OF THE ‘MAN OF LETTERS’
97
was, like another polymath, Erasmus Darwin, a leading member of the 
Lunar Society of Birmingham, so-called because the members met once a 
month when the moon was full so that they could ride to and from meet-
ings without danger. Members discussed new discoveries in the natural 
sciences, the nature of electricity, for example, and also the application of 
science to medicine, manufactures and other practical activities.50
Th e achievements of these English polymaths, remarkable as they 
may seem, were eclipsed by those of a Welshman, Sir William Jones, 
known as ‘Oriental Jones’. He more or less conﬁ ned his interests to the 
humanities, but ranged over Asia as well as Europe. Jones was learned 
not only in the common law dominant in Britain but also in Roman law, 
ancient Greek law and, after his appointment to the Supreme Court in 
Bengal, in Hindu and Muslim law as well. Jones was also a polyglot who 
was said to know thirty languages. As well as writing poetry himself, he 
discussed and translated Arabic, Persian and Sanskrit literature, including 
a Sanskrit play, Shakuntala, which became famous in Europe in the age 
of Romanticism. Jones played an important role in the identiﬁ cation of 
the family of what are now known as the Indo-European languages, 
noting analogies between Greek, Persian and the Romance, Germanic 
and Celtic languages. He also studied Indian chronology and wrote a 
history of chess. No wonder then that he has been described, with only 
a little exaggeration, as ‘one of the greatest polymaths in history’.51
FROM SPAIN TO RUSSIA
Th e ideal of the many-sided man of letters was also personiﬁ ed by indi-
viduals in other countries at this time: in Spain, for instance, Italy, 
Sweden and Russia. In Spain, three rather diﬀ erent individuals come to 
mind: Lorenzo Hervás y Panduro, Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos and 
Benito Jerónimo Feijoo.
Hervás, described by one of his biographers as ‘the great forgotten ﬁ gure 
of the Spanish Enlightenment’, was a Jesuit. He studied philosophy, 
theology, mathematics and astronomy at the University of Madrid. After 
the expulsion of the Jesuits from Spain and its Empire in 1767, he moved 
to Italy, where he published his encyclopaedic Idea del Universo in 

THE POLYMATH

98
twenty-one volumes between 1778 and 1787. Hervás was and is best 
known as a linguist. His encyclopaedia included a catalogue of the languages 
of all known peoples, a task in which he was assisted by missionary colleagues 
who had learned Amerindian languages. Hervás also published a compara-
tive study of the origin, formation, working and harmony of languages. His 
interest in language led him to write about methods of teaching deaf mutes. 
Like an earlier Jesuit polymath, Kircher, Hervás made an early contribution 
to science ﬁ ction in his ‘Ecstatic Voyage to the World of the Planets’ (Viaggio 
estatico al mondo planetario). His unpublished manuscripts include studies 
of palaeography, chronology and the history of the ﬁ rst colonies in the 
New World.52
In his working hours, Jovellanos, a leading ﬁ gure in the Spanish 
Enlightenment, was active as a lawyer, a judge and minister of justice, 
while in his moments of leisure he was a poet, a playwright and a scholar. 
He oﬀ ers a ﬁ ne example of practical reason, interested in applied rather 
than pure knowledge and employing it in the reform of the law, education, 
commerce, industry and the constitution. Much of his thinking went into 
‘reports’ (informes), arguing against the use of torture, in favour of the 
liberty of industry, supporting technical education and discussing agricul-
ture and mining. He saw connections between disciplines and pleaded for 
a historical approach to the study of law and a geographical approach to 
the study of history. Jovellanos also wrote on language, theology, architec-
ture, geology, botany and medicine. He was a pioneer in the revaluation of 
the Gothic and Moorish styles in Spain, while his contribution to political 
economy would later be praised by Joseph Schumpeter.53
Feijoo was a Benedictine monk and a professor of theology at the 
University of Oviedo for nearly thirty years. In some ways he appears an 
old-fashioned scholar, and he was indeed praised by contemporaries in a 
manner appropriate to the previous century, as ‘the phoenix of the intel-
lects of his age’ and as ‘a monster of learning’ (monstruo de sabeduría).54 
Feijoo’s forte was high-level popularization, combined with criticism. 
His Teatro crítico universal (nine volumes, 1726–40) included essays, 
according to the title page, on ‘every kind of subject’ (todo genero de 
materia). In his prologue, the author explained that he had planned to 


THE AGE OF THE ‘MAN OF LETTERS’
99
arrange the essays by discipline (facultad) but desisted ‘either because 
they did not belong to any discipline, or because they participated equally 
in all of them’.
Feijoo might be described as a man of letters in monk’s clothing who 
wrote for the general public, criticizing ‘experts’ and adopting a conver-
sational style in the manner of Montaigne (whom he admired), enli-
vened by epigrams and vivid metaphors. He was an Anglophile, an 
empiricist and an admirer of Francis Bacon, praising this ‘great and 
sublime genius’ for removing the obstacles to the study of natural science 
(la ciencia de las cosas naturales). Feijoo neither made nor claimed to 
make an original contribution to knowledge. His aim was, in true 
Enlightenment fashion, to combat ignorance, prejudice and what he 
called ‘common errors’. To this end he wrote on theology, philosophy, 
philology, history, medicine, natural history, alchemy, astrology, mathe-
matics, geography, law, political economy, agriculture, literature and 
hydrology, ranging from earthquakes and fossils to the ideas of the medi-
eval polymath Ramón Lull.55
In Italy, wide-ranging scholars included Maria Gaetana Agnesi, 
mainly in the sciences, and Giambattista Vico, mainly in the humanities. 
Agnesi was a child prodigy. Educated at home in Milan (where her father 
was a professor), she defended 191 theses on logic, mechanics, chem-
istry, botany, mineralogy and other subjects at a meeting there and 
published them in 1738. A French scholar who visited her described 
Agnesi as ‘a walking polyglot’ (she knew Latin, Greek, Hebrew, French, 
Spanish and German), and compared her 191 theses with the ones that 
Pico had been expected to defend in 1486. Agnesi wrote but did not 
publish a critical comment on a treatise on conic sections by a French 
mathematician. She did publish a study of calculus, which modestly 
claimed to be ‘for the use of young Italians’ as if it was simply a popu-
larization, but also oﬀ ered new ideas. Agnesi was appointed professor of 
mathematics at Bologna but did not take up the appointment, turning 
instead to the study of theology and to charitable work.56
As we saw at the beginning of this chapter, Vico was a scholar of the 
old type. His great ambition, according to his autobiography, was to 

THE POLYMATH

100
unite all human and divine wisdom (tutto il sapere umano e divino). In 
practice, Vico, like Jones, more or less limited himself to the humanities. 
He was trained as a scholastic philosopher and then as a lawyer. He 
hoped to become a professor of jurisprudence but had to content himself 
with the chair of rhetoric at the University of Naples and the post of 
historian to King Charles III. He was more familiar with Latin than with 
French or English and habitually cited seventeenth-century scholars 
(including the polymaths Bacon, Grotius, Selden, Pufendorf and Huet) 
rather than later ones. His writings may seem old-fashioned and even 
provincial, at least on occasion, but they also reveal a vivid imagination 
and some extremely original ideas. Posthumously famous for his critique 
of Descartes, it might be suggested that it was easier for Vico than for 
some of his contemporaries to become a post-Cartesian because he had 
been trained as a pre-Cartesian.
Vico’s most important work, the Scienza Nuova (New Science; 1725, 
enlarged edition 1744) drew on the disciplines of philosophy, philology, 
literature and law as well as on the descriptions of exotic societies by 
European travellers to other continents. Like Montesquieu, Vico viewed 
law as part of what we call ‘culture’. It is a pity that the two scholars 
remained ignorant of each other’s work. (When Montesquieu visited 
Italy, someone recommended him to read the Scienza Nuova, but he 
seems not to have taken this advice.)
Vico viewed himself as the Galileo or the Newton of history, and 
described his book as an attempt to provide the principles of a new 
science. He argued the case for the existence of a recurrent sequence of 
changes in customs and mentalities that he described as the three ages of 
the gods, heroes and men, distinguished by diﬀ erent kinds of law, 
language and mentality. His most profound and original observations 
concerned the ﬁ rst age and its ‘poetic mode of thought’, concrete and 
metaphorical like the thought of children. In a section of his book enti-
tled ‘the discovery of the true Homer’, Vico presented the Iliad and the 
Odyssey as histories of ancient Greek customs, precious evidence of what 
would later be described as ‘primitive’ thought. He supported his views 
with a new interpretation of myths or ‘fables’ (favole), as he called them, 


THE AGE OF THE ‘MAN OF LETTERS’
101
treating them as evidence for the history ‘of the oldest customs, orders 
and laws’.57
Sweden was the home of two remarkable scholars who are remem-
bered today for only a small part of their many achievements. Carl 
Linnaeus, now classiﬁ ed as a botanist, was ‘a jack-of-all trades’ who 
‘worked in medicine and natural history’ and classiﬁ ed not only plants 
but also animals, minerals and diseases as well as writing on political 
economy and producing a description of Lapland that combined geog-
raphy with what we would call ethnography.58 Emanuel Swedenborg, 
now remembered for his second career as a visionary and mystic, 
following his midlife crisis in 1743, had a ﬁ rst career as a polymath 
and was active as a hydraulic engineer as well as investigating metallurgy, 
chemistry, astronomy, anatomy, physiology and physiognomy, designing 
machines and writing a report on trade and industry for his patron, King 
Charles XII.59
In Russia, Mikhail Lomonosov combined a career as a professor of 
chemistry at the Academy of Sciences with studies of mathematics and 
oceanography, while his manuscripts reveal his interest in mineralogy and 
in many aspects of physics. He was also a man of letters, a poet in the 
vernacular, and the author of a grammar of Russian and a history of 
Russia. Before Lomonosov, German expatriates had dominated the ﬁ eld 
of learning in Russia, having been invited by the tsars, from Peter the 
Great to Catherine the Great, in order to help Russians catch up with 
Western European scholarship. For example, the polymath Peter Simon 
Pallas was invited to Russia by Catherine, appointed professor of natural 
history at the Academy of St Petersburg, and spent forty-three years in 
Russia, contributing to the knowledge of Russian geography, geology, 
botany and zoology, as well as collecting information on world languages 
for the empress. Another polymath, August von Schlözer, who only spent 
six years in Russia, produced a report to the Academy of St Petersburg, 
two years after his arrival, about the way in which Russian history should 
be written. Th anks to Lomonosov, however, the St Petersburg Academy, 
once almost entirely composed of foreigners, was gradually Russianized 
and a native tradition of scholarship developed.60

THE POLYMATH

102
Another Slav polymath, born in the same year as Lomonosov, 1711, 
was Rudjer Bošković, a Jesuit from Dubrovnik. Like Lomonosov, 
Bošković was not only a natural philosopher who made original contri-
butions in a number of ﬁ elds, but also a poet (in Latin in his case). He 
was an archaeologist, excavating mosaics in Frascati, a diplomat, a cartog-
rapher, making a new map of the Papal States at the request of Pope 
Benedict XIV, and an inventor of scientiﬁ c instruments. Nonetheless, 
the fame of Bošković is mainly due to his studies of astronomy and 
optics, together with his masterpiece, Th eory of Natural Philosophy 
(1758), a kind of theory of everything in which he introduced the idea 
of atoms that are no larger than points and used it to reduce natural 
philosophy, so he claimed, to a single law.61
THE NEW WORLD
In Spanish America, Pedro de Peralta carried on the tradition of Sister 
Juana and Carlos Sigüenza y Góngora. Th is polymath was professor of 
mathematics at the university of Lima and later its rector, while his 
publications include an epic on the conquest of Peru as well as studies of 
music, metallurgy, astronomy, fortiﬁ cation and the history of Spain.62
In North America, two leading polymaths were active in politics, 
Benjamin Franklin and Th omas Jeﬀ erson. Th ey were both inspired by 
Joseph Priestley. Besides his political career as a member of Congress and 
as a diplomat in England, France and Sweden, Franklin, who had been 
trained as a printer, was an inventor of the lightning rod, bifocal lenses 
and a stove that was designed to produce more heat and less smoke than 
an ordinary open ﬁ replace. He also made contributions to the study of 
electricity, meteorology and oceanography.63
As for Jeﬀ erson, he was not only one of the founding fathers of the 
United States and its third President, from 1801 to 1809, but also a 
practising lawyer and a farmer who introduced innovations in agricul-
ture. Th is is to say nothing of his inventions (including an improved 
mould-board for ploughs, the ‘dumb waiter’ and a revolving bookcase), 
his excavation of an Indian burial mound near his house in Monticello, 
Charlottesville, Virginia, his architectural designs and his interests in 


THE AGE OF THE ‘MAN OF LETTERS’
103
natural history, linguistics and art. No wonder then that Jeﬀ erson has 
been called a ‘Renaissance Man’ (and even, like some later polymaths, 
‘the last Renaissance Man’).64
Th e late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries was the time of 
two remarkable clusters of polymaths, one in England and the other in 
Germany.
ENGLAND
Two men of letters of this period, Samuel Coleridge and his friend Th omas 
De Quincey, were particularly wide-ranging. Coleridge, remembered 
today mainly for his poems, has been described as ‘Romantic England’s 
quintessential polymath’.65 In a letter of 1796 he wrote that he had ‘read 
almost everything – a library cormorant – I am deep in all out of the 
way books’. He declared that he meant to be ‘a tolerable Mathematician’ 
and ‘would thoroughly know Mechanics, Hydrostatics, Optics, and 
Astronomy, Botany, Metallurgy, Fossilism, Chemistry, Geology, Anatomy, 
Medicine then the mind of Man – then the Minds of Men – in all Travels, 
Voyages and Histories’.66
As for De Quincey – who dropped out of Oxford, took drugs and is 
remembered today for his Confessions of an Opium Eater (1821) – he 
made a living as a popularizer of knowledge in Blackwood’s Magazine and 
other journals. His essays ‘covered an astonishing range of topics: German 
philosophy, political economy, literary history and biography, murder, 
the history and philosophy of ancient Greece and Rome, political 
commentary on current aﬀ airs, physiology’.67
Other polymaths made original contributions to a number of 
disciplines. Th omas Young, a Fellow of Emmanuel College, is the 
second individual to be described by a biographer as ‘the last man to 
know everything’. Somewhat less dramatically, Young’s tombstone in 
Westminster Abbey calls him ‘eminent in almost every department of 
human learning’. Early in his career, at the end of the eighteenth century, 
Young was attracted by oriental languages and learned Hebrew, Syriac, 
Samaritan, Arabic, Persian and Turkish. He was trained as a physician, 
practised this profession and pursued medical research. He also published 

THE POLYMATH

104
important papers calculating life insurance and describing his experi-
ments in acoustics and optics (he was a prominent early supporter of the 
wave theory of light).
Young also lectured on physiology, chemistry and the theory of 
the tides, acted as secretary to the Commission of Weights and Measures 
(taking a particular interest in the pendulum), and contributed articles to 
the Supplement to the fourth edition of the Encyclopedia Britannica on – 
among other topics – Annuities, Egypt, Hydraulics and Languages. Th e 
article on languages divided them into ﬁ ve main families, including the 
‘Indo-European’, which Young was the ﬁ rst to name, although, as we have 
seen, an earlier polymath, William Jones, had already discussed aﬃ  nities 
between Sanskrit, Greek and the Latin, Germanic and Romance languages.68 
Turning to the study of Egyptian hieroglyphics, which were attracting 
renewed attention at the time of Napoleon’s invasion of Egypt in 1798, 
Young was making good progress on their decoding, but was overtaken in 
this task by a more specialized French rival, Jean-François Champollion.69
In the next generation, John Herschel has been described as ‘one of 
the last of the great universalists’. He was not only an astronomer, ﬁ rst 
assisting and then carrying on the work of his father, William, but also a 
mathematician and a chemist. He made contributions to the study of 
magnetism, botany, geology, acoustics, optics and photography, putting 
him in a good position to produce what he called, following d’Alembert, 
a ‘Preliminary Discourse’ concerning ‘the study of natural philosophy’. 
In addition to all these interests, Herschel translated Schiller, Dante and 
Homer.70 As a student at Cambridge in the early 1810s, he made friends 
with two future polymaths, William Whewell and Charles Babbage, 
who founded what they called a ‘philosophical breakfast club’.71 Th e 
friendship of these three individuals at an impressionable age is another 
example supporting the idea of the creativity of small groups.
Herschel’s friend Whewell, who became Master of Trinity College, 
Cambridge, is another individual with a good claim to be regarded as a 
universal scholar.72 Herschel himself wrote of Whewell that no one 
else had gathered ‘a more wonderful variety and amount of knowledge 
in almost every department of human inquiry’.73 Whewell wrote on 


THE AGE OF THE ‘MAN OF LETTERS’
105
mathematics, mechanics, mineralogy, astronomy, philosophy, theology 
and architecture. He confessed to a ‘desire to read all manner of books at 
once’, and was said, like Aldous Huxley later, to have read his way through 
the Encyclopaedia Britannica ‘so as to have the whole of it at his ﬁ ngers’ 
ends’.74 He invented a machine to measure wind velocity, went on geolog-
ical expeditions, revised the classiﬁ cation of minerals, went further than 
Young in what he called ‘tidology’, and published a History of the Inductive 
Sciences (1837) and Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences (1840).
As for Babbage, he is best known for his construction of two ancestors 
of the computer, the ‘analytical engine’ (complete with punched cards) 
and the ‘diﬀ erence engine’, an enterprise in which he was assisted by 
Ada, Countess of Lovelace (daughter of Lord Byron). Besides his activi-
ties as a mathematician and a physicist, Babbage published papers on 
chess, statistics, geology, ciphers, eclipses and lighthouses. In addition, 
he wrote on natural theology and ‘the decline of science in England’ as 
well as helping to found the Astronomical Society.75
GERMANY
An even more remarkable cluster of polymaths active in the late eigh-
teenth and early nineteenth centuries was to be found in Germany, a 
cultural nation although not yet a political one. German-speaking poly-
maths could of course be found earlier in the eighteenth century. Lessing, 
for instance, has already been mentioned. Th e Swiss Albrecht von Haller, 
professor of medicine, anatomy and botany at Göttingen, was also active 
as a literary critic, poet and novelist. Immanuel Kant might be included 
here as well, since his interests were not conﬁ ned to philosophy. It is true 
that what we call psychology and anthropology, disciplines to which he 
contributed, still formed part of philosophy in his time, but Kant also 
wrote on cosmology and physical geography.
A group that ﬂ ourished around the year 1800 included Johann 
Gottfried Herder, his friend Johann Wolfgang von Goethe and Goethe’s 
friends the Humboldt brothers, Wilhelm and Alexander.
Herder, who died in 1803, made important contributions to the 
study of language, literature and culture. Early in his career, he won the 

THE POLYMATH

106
annual essay competition organized by the Berlin Academy of Sciences 
with a study of the origins of language. He also argued that each language 
had its own character. ‘In the language of a nation,’ he wrote, ‘dwell its 
entire world of tradition, history, religion, principles of existence: its 
whole heart and soul.’ Hence his publication of folk songs, which he 
viewed as the ‘voices of the people’ in the sense of the whole nation.76 
Herder’s concept of Volksgeist (‘the spirit of the people’) implied the exist-
ence of autonomous cultures in the plural, in contrast to earlier ideas of 
progress towards a single standard of ‘civilization’. Volksgeist would later 
play an important part in the development of new disciplines such as 
folklore and cultural anthropology, where it would be taken up by 
another German polymath, Franz Boas, discussed later.
Herder’s interests were still wider. One of his most famous works, 
Ideas on the Philosophy of the History of Humanity, contributed to what is 
now known as ‘Big History’, discussing the state of the earth before 
humans made their appearance. He also made a contribution to what is 
now known as the philosophy of science, emphasizing the role of analogy 
in scientiﬁ c discovery and the importance of the prototype (Hauptform), 
which is only visible in its variations.77
Herder’s younger friend Goethe, remembered today as the greatest 
German writer, saw himself as a scholar and a scientist as well. Th e choice 
of Dr Faustus as the protagonist of his most famous drama was no acci-
dent, for Goethe himself had a Faustian desire for knowledge of many 
kinds.78 He studied languages with enthusiasm – Latin, Greek, French, 
Italian, English and some Hebrew and Arabic as well. His literary inter-
ests extended to world literature, to Persian poetry, for instance, and to 
Chinese romances. He was interested in philosophy, studying Kant but 
disagreeing with him.79 ‘Development’ was one of Goethe’s central ideas, 
expressed in his use of the term Bildung (‘self-formation’) and in his 
novel Wilhelm Meister (later described as a Bildungsroman), which focuses 
on the development of Wilhelm’s personality.
In the natural sciences, Goethe made original discoveries and put 
forward original ideas. He made contributions to anatomy (the discovery 
of the intermaxillary bone in the human jaw), botany (criticizing the system 


THE AGE OF THE ‘MAN OF LETTERS’
107
of classiﬁ cation devised by Linnaeus) and mineralogy (he was at one time 
director of a silver mine). He criticized Newton’s optics and developed his 
own theory of colour (Farbenlehre, 1810). He was fascinated by what he 
called ‘morphology’, the study of the development and transformation of 
natural forms, a development from Herder’s idea of the Hauptform.80
Among Goethe’s friends from the 1790s were the brothers Wilhelm 
and Alexander von Humboldt, forming a creative small group that also 
included the poet, historian and philosopher Friedrich Schiller. Wilhelm 
spent more than a decade on his personal Bildung, studying and trans-
lating ancient Greek writers as a form of self-development as well as 
carrying out experiments either alone or with his brother Alexander. 
Wilhelm then followed an active career as a diplomat and an educational 
reformer, but retired in 1819, aged ﬁ fty-two, to devote his time to the 
study of language.
Humboldt was also a philosopher and a theorist of general education, 
which he deﬁ ned in Goethe’s terms as Bildung, emphasizing the cultiva-
tion of the self rather than the acquisition of knowledge and skills. He 
wrote on history (including another seminal essay on ‘Th e Task of the 
Historian’), politics (on the limits of state action) and literature 
(discussing the work of Goethe, for instance). He was interested in the 
natural sciences, especially anatomy, as well as taking enough interest in 
chemistry to write an introduction to his brother’s treatise on gases.81
As a linguist, or to use the term current in his day, a philologist, 
Wilhelm von Humboldt was interested, like Herder, in the distinctive 
character of diﬀ erent languages, as revealed in their structure as well as 
their vocabulary. He wrote two pioneering monographs, one on Basque 
and the other on Kavi (the ancient language of Java). Of all the polyglot 
polymaths mentioned in this book, Humboldt surely holds the record 
for the number of languages that he learned, from Hungarian to Japanese, 
allowing him to take a global view of his subject and write his famous 
essay on variation in linguistic structures. Humboldt’s achievement in 
this ﬁ eld has been described as a ‘Copernican revolution’.82
Th e supreme example of the nineteenth-century polymath, however, 
is surely Wilhelm’s younger brother Alexander von Humboldt, a monster 

THE POLYMATH

108
of erudition on a Leibnizian scale. His contemporaries were well aware 
of his range. In the United States, the President of Harvard, John 
Kirkland, described Humboldt as ‘at home on every subject’, while the 
philosopher–poet Ralph Waldo Emerson made a speech to commem-
orate his centenary in which he declared that ‘HUMBOLDT was one 
of those wonders of the world, like Aristotle, like Julius Cæsar, like 
the Admirable Crichton, who appear from time to time, as if to show 
us the possibilities of the human mind, the force and the range of the 
faculties – a universal man’.83
Humboldt began his career as an expert on mines and mining. A ﬁ ve-
year expedition to Spanish America (1799–1804) with his friend the 
botanist Aimé Bonpland allowed him to investigate the geology, botany, 
zoology and meteorology of the New World. It might be said that he 
arrived at the right moment, when there were many new plants and 
animals (new to Europeans, at least) waiting to be discovered in that part 
of the world. Humboldt was familiar with the latest scientiﬁ c methods, 
including the measurement of natural phenomena, and carried some forty 
diﬀ erent measuring instruments with him on the expedition. He was also 
known as the intrepid traveller who climbed Mount Chimborazo in what 
is now Ecuador and later, in 1829, when he was sixty, explored Siberia.
Humboldt’s fertile imagination suggested new ﬁ elds of study such as 
the geography of plants. He measured the temperature of the ocean and 
studied ocean currents, one of which was named after him. He launched 
the study of geomagnetism, in other words the investigation of the 
magnetic ﬁ eld of the earth, not only by his own papers on the subject but 
by organizing the work of others. Late in his long life, Humboldt 
published a general book on the cosmos, which originated as lectures 
delivered to the general public in Berlin. Cosmos extended his interest in 
physical geography to what he called the ‘perhaps too boldly imagined’ 
programme of ‘a physical description of the universe, embracing all 
created things in the regions of space and in the earth’.
Humboldt was also a man of letters in the nineteenth-century sense 
of the phrase. Like his brother Wilhelm, Alexander was a polyglot who 
shared Wilhelm’s interest in philology.84 His book Cosmos described not 


THE AGE OF THE ‘MAN OF LETTERS’
109
only the natural world but also the history of its study and the emotions 
felt when contemplating nature. It ranges from Arab poetry to Chinese 
chronology, from the archaeology of ancient Egypt to Titian’s landscapes, 
and from Columbus to Copernicus. In the introduction to the book, 
Humboldt suggested that scientiﬁ c description ‘is not wholly incompat-
ible with a picturesque animation of style’, an animation found in many 
of his writings.
Like Goethe, Alexander von Humboldt bridged the cultures of the 
humanities and natural sciences, as well as the worlds of action and 
contemplation.85 His Political Essay on the Kingdom of New Spain (soon 
to become independent under the name of Mexico) described the 
economy, the social structure and the political system. His concern with 
the geographical milieu included its inﬂ uence on diﬀ erent civilizations 
as well as on plants. His habit of measurement was extended to the 
pyramid of Cholula, while his interest in precise ﬁ gures included statis-
tics on the population of Spanish America, its density in diﬀ erent places 
and its division into whites, blacks and indigenous peoples. If his many 
interests make Humboldt seem like a fox, his concern for connection 
(Zusammenhang) reveal his hedgehog side. Th e point of all his measure-
ments was to help establish general laws of nature that would transcend 
its diﬀ erent domains.
Although he expressed anxiety about falling into what he called ‘the 
superﬁ ciality of the encyclopaedist’, Humboldt’s career shows that it was 
still possible for an individual to make original and important contribu-
tions to a wide range of disciplines, combining breadth with depth. He 
has been described – like the ‘last men who knew everything’ but with 
more reason – as ‘the last of the polymaths’.86
Th ere was only one Alexander von Humboldt, an individual who was 
still able in the 1850s to match both the range and the discoveries of the 
seventeenth-century monsters of erudition. In the next generation, 
though, a few individuals attempted to create intellectual systems that 
would contain all or at least most of human knowledge, defying the 
mountain of information that continued to accumulate. Th ese individ-
uals included Auguste Comte, Herbert Spencer and Karl Marx.

THE POLYMATH

110
SYSTEM BUILDERS
Comte’s career was spent on the margins of the academic world, as he 
complained, making his living as an examiner and a lecturer outside 
the university.87 He was a pioneer in the history of the sciences who asked 
the minister of education to create a chair for him in that subject at the 
Collège de France (the minister, François Guizot, refused). Comte was one 
of the most versatile scholars of his time. His public lectures ranged from 
astronomy to the history of humanity. He was particularly interested in clas-
sifying diﬀ erent kinds of knowledge, distinguishing between what he called 
the more ‘abstract’ sciences, such as mathematics, from the more ‘concrete’ 
ones. He also contrasted ‘simple’ sciences such as physics, producing general 
laws, with more complex sciences, such as biology and sociology, the laws of 
which were more speciﬁ c. In order to create his classiﬁ cation, Comte studied 
mathematics, mechanics, astronomy, acoustics, optics, ‘thermology’ (the 
physics of heat), chemistry, biology, political economy and a new discipline 
for which he chose a new name, ‘sociologie’, describing it as the study of ‘the 
fundamental laws pertaining to social phenomena’.88
For a British equivalent to Comte – who always denied his debt to 
Comte – one might nominate Herbert Spencer, who also made his name 
as a system builder.89 Spencer wrote on phrenology, biology, physiology, 
psychology and sociology as well as presenting what he called a ‘synthetic 
philosophy’. Spencer claimed that the social sciences should be modelled 
on the natural sciences and that society should be viewed as an organism 
that evolved from relatively simple forms to more complex ones. He 
combined wide reading – or rather, browsing, since he rarely read books 
from beginning to end – with a propensity to react against the ideas of 
the author. Spencer was an intellectual outsider, an autodidact who did 
not go to university. His training was that of a civil engineer, who worked 
for the railways before becoming a journalist (at Th e Economist) and then 
a freelance writer, living on the royalties from his books and the fees for 
articles in the reviews that formed such an important part of the intel-
lectual landscape in Victorian Britain.90 However, Spencer’s remarks 
about social ‘equilibrium’ in his Social Statics (1851) suggest that the 
habit of mind he formed as an engineer never left him.


THE AGE OF THE ‘MAN OF LETTERS’
111
Karl Marx’s system has lasted longer than those of Comte and Spencer, 
although his range was narrower than theirs.91 Th is system, expounded 
and illustrated most fully in Das Kapital (On Capital), 1867–93, oﬀ ered 
a synthesis of political economy, philosophy, history and the new disci-
pline of sociology. Marx’s interest in history would now be described as 
‘global’. He studied India and China in pursuit of a general theory of 
historical evolution that included the ‘Asiatic mode of production’. He 
also wrote over thirty articles on India for the New York Tribune around 
the time of what the British call the ‘Indian Mutiny’ of 1857 (Indians 
describe it as a war for independence). Late in life, the author discovered 
the new discipline of anthropology, notably the work of the American 
scholar Lewis Morgan on the Iroquois.92
Marx’s interests went well beyond the social sciences. At the University 
of Berlin, he wrote his doctoral thesis on the Greek philosopher Epicurus. 
Like other educated men of his time, Marx was familiar with the Greek 
and Latin classics, while his knowledge of the masterpieces of modern 
European literature was exceptional. He took part in the philosophical 
debates of his own day, for and against Hegel. During his long exile in 
England (1850–83), Marx spent much time studying in the famous 
circular Reading Room of the British Museum, plunging again and 
again, as his friend, colleague and later opponent Arnold Ruge put it, 
into ‘an inﬁ nite ocean of books’.93 When ‘utterly incapable of work’, as 
he said himself, Marx liked to read books on anatomy and physiology.94
THE SURVIVAL OF THE MAN OF LETTERS
Th e tradition of the wide-ranging man of letters remained a strong one 
in the nineteenth century. Whether they concentrated on ﬁ ction or fact, 
or published books or articles, it was becoming easier for writers to live 
by their pens. For polymaths, cultural journals such as the Edinburgh 
Review or the Revue des Deux Mondes oﬀ ered the opportunity to make a 
living by writing critical reviews of new books on a variety of subjects. 
Long reviews turned into independent essays that could be collected into 
volumes. A new role was emerging for men of letters at this time, that of 
a critic, not only in the sense of someone who evaluates works of art and 

THE POLYMATH

112
literature but an individual who points to what is wrong with contemp-
orary culture and society.
FRENCH CRITICS
Four leading men of letters of this type were active in France in the nine-
teenth century: Charles Sainte-Beuve, Alexis de Tocqueville, Ernest 
Renan and Hippolyte Taine.
Sainte-Beuve is remembered as a literary critic, but he had broader 
interests. He wrote poetry, a novel and a ﬁ ve-volume history of the 
monastery of Port-Royal, which was a centre of the Jansenist movement 
in the seventeenth century, sometimes described as a kind of Catholic 
Puritanism. In any case, his critical essays were not conﬁ ned to literature 
in a narrow sense but extended to a discussion of the ideas of Bayle and 
Rousseau, for instance. For Sainte-Beuve, the ﬁ rst stage in criticism was 
‘to understand everything that has lived’ (comprendre tout ce qui a vécu). 
He described his essays, many of which appeared in the journals Le 
Constitutionnel and Le Moniteur, as ‘Chats’ (Causeries) because they were 
written in an accessible style, close to spoken French. Th is style owed 
something to the author’s frequentation of the salons of Juliette Récamier 
and other leading hostesses of the time, who were continuing the great 
tradition of the eighteenth century.95
In his relatively short life, the French aristocrat Alexis de Tocqueville 
followed a political career, but in his memoirs he stationed himself 
between ‘men of letters who have written history without taking part 
in public aﬀ airs, and politicians who have concerned themselves with 
producing events without thinking about them’. He travelled widely and 
wrote two masterpieces of political and social analysis, De la démocratie 
en Amérique (Democracy in America), 1835–40, and L’Ancien Régime et la 
Révolution (Th e Old Regime and the Revolution), 1856. Tocqueville also 
wrote about poverty in England and Ireland, visiting poorhouses to see 
how the system worked, and about colonialism in Algeria, which he 
studied at ﬁ rst hand a century before the sociologist Pierre Bourdieu, 
although he reached opposite conclusions, supporting both conquest 
and colonization.96 Tocqueville studied religion, especially Islam and 


THE AGE OF THE ‘MAN OF LETTERS’
113
Hinduism, and planned a book about the British in India. His contribu-
tion to knowledge has been described as ‘polymorphic’.97 It went well 
beyond political science. His book on democracy in America has been 
described as containing ‘an important and original analysis of the United 
States economy’, thanks to its emphasis on the cultural dimension, that 
of social customs (moeurs).98
Ernest Renan followed a more turbulent career, or more exactly three 
careers, the ﬁ rst as a priest, the second as a scholar and the third as a 
critic and what might be described as a public intellectual. At the semi-
nary he studied philosophy, theology and Hebrew. Approaching the Old 
Testament as a philologist, he began to have doubts about his vocation 
to the priesthood and abandoned it. As a lay scholar, Renan published a 
book about Averroes, the medieval Arab philosopher discussed in chapter 
2, and a comparative study of the Semitic languages. He was invited to 
lead an archaeological mission to ‘Phoenicia’ (now the Lebanon) and 
elected to a prestigious chair at the Collège de France. Renan once 
described himself as ‘the least literary of men’.99 All the same, he became 
a man of letters. He wrote for both the Revue des Deux Mondes and the 
Journal des Débats. His controversial and best-selling Life of Jesus (1863) 
launched him as a public ﬁ gure who lectured on many subjects and a 
cultural critic who argued that France needed both intellectual and moral 
reform. It was said of him that ‘No brain has been more universal, more 
comprehensive.’100
Hippolyte Taine oﬀ ers a still more spectacular example of a mid-
nineteenth-century polymath.101 As a young man, Taine wished to become 
a philosopher but he was also attracted to both the social and the natural 
sciences, especially physiology, medicine and natural history. A fellow 
student described Taine’s mind as ‘a prodigious sponge’.102 He hoped for 
an academic career, but this hope was frustrated by his failure in a major 
examination, thanks to his heterodox philosophical ideas, and the rejec-
tion of his proposal for a doctoral thesis. He turned to a career as a critic, 
writing for the Revue des Deux Mondes and the Journal des Débats and then 
publishing his articles in book form in Essais de critique et d’histoire and 
Histoire de la littérature anglaise (1863), launching the idea that 

THE POLYMATH

114
literature, like culture in general, was shaped by three factors that he called 
race, milieu and moment.
Writing for journals and for the popular publisher Hachette and 
frequenting salons encouraged Taine to write, like Sainte-Beuve, in an 
accessible style (with more than a shade of malice, the Goncourt brothers 
noted Taine’s ‘great fear of being a pedant’).103 Taine also wrote on the 
philosophy of art and the psychology of intelligence. In reaction to the 
shock of French defeat by the Prussians in 1870, he turned to history. 
His Origines de la France contemporaine (1875–93) presented French 
history from 1789 onwards from a psychological point of view, inspired 
by the experience of the Paris Commune. In short, Taine spanned the 
humanities, the natural sciences and the social sciences that were 
emerging in the space between the two. No wonder then that the Danish 
critic Georg Brandes described him as a ‘Renaissance Man’.104
ENGLISH CRITICS
In England, leading cultural critics included John Stuart Mill, John 
Ruskin, William Morris and Matthew Arnold.
Mill’s main interests were philosophy, politics and economics. Th e 
son of another polymath, James Mill, he was educated at home and 
became an infant prodigy. When he was still a teenager, he studied math-
ematics and natural science in Montpellier and corresponded with 
Comte. Mill studied law but gave this up to spend thirty-ﬁ ve years as an 
administrator at the India Oﬃ  ce of the East India Company as well as 
acting as research assistant to the reformer Jeremy Bentham for his work 
on judicial evidence. Mill’s publications include books on logic, repre-
sentative government and (together with his wife Harriet Taylor) liberty, 
political economy and the subjection of women.105 He also published 
essays on subjects such as civilization, religion, the spirit of the age and 
fellow polymaths such as Coleridge and Taine.106
Ruskin began his career as a critic of art and architecture. An artist 
himself, he defended the work of Turner in the ﬁ rst volume of Modern 
Painters (1843) as he did the work of the Pre-Raphaelites later. He wrote 
about what he believed to be the decline and fall of Venetian architecture 


THE AGE OF THE ‘MAN OF LETTERS’
115
from the Middle Ages onwards and placed this decline in historical 
context in Th e Stones of Venice (1851–3). In later life, Ruskin turned 
from aesthetic to social criticism. He lectured on what he called ‘the 
political economy of art’ and, later, on political economy in general, 
criticizing the industrial society of his day. Although he was opposed to 
Darwinism, Ruskin was no enemy of natural science. He had a lifelong 
interest in geology, botany and zoology, even if he did not contribute to 
these disciplines.107
To the young William Morris, Ruskin’s writings were a ‘revelation’, 
and he followed a similar itinerary from art to politics. Strictly speaking, 
according to the deﬁ nition employed in this book, Morris was not a 
polymath because he took little interest in academic disciplines (though 
he knew the Middle Ages as well as any historian of his day). Yet he was 
so versatile – I would call him a ‘Renaissance Man’ if he had not hated 
the Renaissance – that it is impossible to exclude him. His disciple Walter 
Crane once described Morris as having six personalities, ﬁ ve of them 
public: author, artist, businessman, printer and socialist.108 He began by 
working as an architect, turned to sculpture and painting, found his 
vocation as a designer but also insisted on practising a number of crafts, 
including weaving, dyeing and calligraphy. He loved ‘hands-on’ activities 
in the most literal sense of the term, his hands turning indigo blue during 
his dyeing phase. He might be described as an experimental archaeolo-
gist, since he took medieval textiles to pieces to discover how they were 
made.
Morris was also active as a translator, from Homer and Virgil to 
Beowulf and Icelandic sagas, as a poet and as a writer of romances. When 
he entered politics, he expressed his socialist ideals in the form of ﬁ ction, 
notably in his utopian novel News from Nowhere (1890). Like Ruskin, he 
was a critic of his own society from both an aesthetic and a moral point 
of view, calling it ugly, ‘shoddy’ and unjust.109
Matthew Arnold combined the role of critic with those of a poet and 
an inspector of schools. He believed that assessing the inﬂ uence of books 
on what he called the ‘general culture’ was the most important function 
of literary criticism.110 ‘Criticism’ was a word that often ﬂ owed from his 

THE POLYMATH

116
pen, as it did from the pens of Renan and Taine in France. Arnold 
described Sainte-Beuve as ‘the ﬁ rst of living critics’. His Essays in Criticism 
(1865) was mainly concerned with literature but included an essay on 
Spinoza, while his most famous book, Culture and Anarchy (1869), was 
subtitled ‘An Essay in Political and Social Criticism’. It pointed to the 
cultural weaknesses of the British upper class (whom Arnold described as 
‘barbarians’), the middle class (the ‘philistines’) and the working class 
(the ‘populace’), and called for more ‘sweetness and light’, his version of 
the German term Bildung (elsewhere he wrote of the need to become 
‘more humane’). Literature was at the centre of Arnold’s interests, but he 
related it to religion (Literature and Dogma, 1873), to language (studying 
philology) and to culture more generally, taking an interest in the 
emerging discipline of ethnology as well as ranging beyond texts in 
English to discuss Homer, for instance, Dante, Goethe and even Celtic 
literature, ‘although he was not ﬂ uent in any Celtic language’. His wide 
reading included the Bhagavad Gita and Wilhelm von Humboldt’s essay 
on it, an inspiration for Arnold’s own poem Empedocles on Etna.111
THE NEW WOMEN OF LETTERS
In the early to mid-nineteenth century, the age of Jane Austen, the Brontë 
sisters and George Sand, some women were able to follow a literary 
career and a few deserve to be remembered as polymaths.
Germaine de Staël, for instance, who came from Switzerland, was a 
precocious child who made an appearance at the age of ﬁ ve in the salon 
hosted by her mother – Suzanne Courchod, the girl whom Edward 
Gibbon had once wished to marry. Germaine later frequented the salons 
of Madame Geoﬀ rin and Madame du Deﬀ and in Paris as well as founding 
her own. Besides her novels and plays, Madame de Staël wrote on philos-
ophy, the passions, suicide, translation and politics (on the trial of Marie 
Antoinette, on peace and on the French Revolution). Her best-known 
works are a study of what has come to be known as the sociology of 
literature, De la littérature considérée dans ses rapports avec les institutions 
sociales (1800), and De l’Allemagne (1813), which combined a descrip-
tion of German society, including religion and the position of women, 


THE AGE OF THE ‘MAN OF LETTERS’
117
with a presentation and assessment of the achievements of Germans in 
literature, philosophy and the natural sciences.112
Another precocious child was Dorothea Schlözer, the beneﬁ ciary – or 
the victim – of an educational experiment by her famous father, the 
historian August Schlözer. She was already learning the alphabet at 
eighteen months, moving on to modern languages and – at the age of 
ﬁ ve – mathematics. She was the ﬁ rst female to be awarded a Ph.D in a 
German university (at Göttingen in 1787). She knew ten languages and 
studied botany, zoology, mineralogy, optics, religion and art, distin-
guishing herself from her father by her concern with the natural sciences.113
In Britain, female polymaths included Harriet Martineau and Mary 
Ann Evans, better known under her pen-name of George Eliot. Martineau 
wrote of herself that ‘She could popularize while she could neither discover 
nor invent.’All the same, her range was impressive. She was said to be able 
to converse on almost any subject. Having decided to support herself by 
writing, she published books on religion (Devotional Exercises, 1823); polit-
ical economy (Illustrations of Political Economy, 1832); Society in America 
(1837), the fruit, like Tocqueville’s Democracy in America, of a visit to the 
United States; education (Household Education, 1848); Eastern Life, Present 
and Past (1848), following a tour of the Middle East; and Th e Th irty Years’ 
Peace (1849), a history of the period 1816–46. Martineau also wrote for 
newspapers and produced essays, novels and an abridged translation of 
Comte’s Positive Philosophy (1853).114
George Eliot once declared that ‘I enjoy all subjects’.115 Her descrip-
tion of Maggie Tulliver, the heroine of Th e Mill on the Floss, as ‘thirsty for 
all knowledge’ surely applies to her creator. Her non-ﬁ ction has long 
been overshadowed by her famous novels, but her career began as the 
unoﬃ  cial editor of what became a leading periodical of her time, the 
Westminster Review, and as a contributor of long articles on subjects such 
as ‘Woman in France’, ‘Church History of the Nineteenth Century’, 
‘Th e Future of German Philosophy’, translation and ethnography, as 
well as sketches of the lives of (among others) Mary Wollstonecraft, 
Goethe, Milton, Tennyson and Wagner. She knew seven foreign 
languages and translated Spinoza’s Ethics, Ludwig Feuerbach’s Essence of 

THE POLYMATH

118
Christianity and David Strauss’s controversial life of Jesus. In the 1850s, 
when she met George Henry Lewes, her main interests were in the 
humanities and in the social sciences (notably the ideas of Auguste 
Comte and Herbert Spencer). After going to live with Lewes, she accom-
panied him on scientiﬁ c expeditions and ‘read with him works on 
medical science, zoology, anatomy and marine biology’.116
Now best known as George Eliot’s partner, Lewes was a remarkable 
polymath himself. He edited the Fortnightly Review and published two 
novels as well as A Biographical History of Philosophy, a study of Spanish 
drama and an analysis of Comte’s philosophy of the sciences and biogra-
phies of Robespierre and Goethe. Lewes then turned to the natural 
sciences, producing a study of marine biology, a book on physiology and 
an unﬁ nished treatise on psychology, Problems of Life and Mind, which 
Eliot completed after his death.117 Incidentally, this highly educated man 
did not go to university.
Eliot’s interest in science is visible in her essays, letters and notebooks, 
which reveal a familiarity with geology, biology, physics, astronomy and 
anatomy. Indeed, her imagination has been described as ‘permeated by 
scientiﬁ c ideas and speculations’, so much so that she was sometimes 
criticized by reviewers for the number of learned allusions in her ﬁ ction.118 
Her notebooks bear witness to the careful research that she carried out in 
preparation for her novels. For Middlemarch, she studied the political 
history of England in the decades before the Reform Bill of 1832. For 
Romola, whose heroine was a woman of the Renaissance who wished to 
become as learned as Cassandra Fedele (discussed in chapter 2), Eliot 
carried out research in Florence, the British Museum and the London 
Library.119 For Daniel Deronda, focused on the Jewish community in 
London, she learned Hebrew and became, according to Lewes, ‘as 
profoundly versed in Jewish history and literature as any rabbi’. She is 
best remembered for her unﬂ attering portrait of the scholar Edward 
Casaubon in Middlemarch, but once admitted that ‘the Casaubon tints 
are not quite foreign to my own complexion’.
Th e Scotswoman Mary Somerville was a scientist who was compared 
by a leading English colleague to Maria Agnesi (discussed earlier).120 She 


THE AGE OF THE ‘MAN OF LETTERS’
119
grew up ‘a wild creature’, as she wrote much later, in a small town in 
Scotland and was mainly self-taught, since a woman of her generation 
was not allowed to attend a British university. She studied Latin, Greek, 
mathematics, astronomy, mineralogy and geology, carried out experi-
ments (on the eﬀ ects of solar radiation, for example) and published 
papers in the Transactions of the Royal Society. Moving to London, 
Somerville made the acquaintance of the polymaths Young, Herschel 
and Babbage (whom she praised for his ‘extensive knowledge on many 
subjects’).121
Unable, as a wife and mother, to ﬁ nd the time for systematic research, 
Somerville made a virtue, or at least an opportunity, of necessity, concen-
trating on the synthesis of information and ideas. Her life changed, she 
wrote later, when she was invited to translate a book on ‘the mechanism 
of the heavens’ by Jean-Pierre Laplace. Th e essay that she wrote as an 
introduction to this book led to her major work, On the Connection of the 
Physical Sciences (1834). Th is book was written in a clear and accessible 
style to appeal to general readers and oﬀ ers a ﬁ ne example of what poly-
maths do best, viewing the big picture and pointing out connections that 
specialists had missed. Somerville also published a successful textbook 
on physical geography. Her work was praised not only by Whewell but 
also by Alexander von Humboldt, who appreciated her ability to see 
connections.122
SCIENTISTS
By the time that George Eliot and Mary Somerville were studying the 
natural sciences, the term ‘scientist’ (coined by the polymath William 
Whewell in the 1830s) was coming into use, an early sign of the gradual 
split between what would be known, more than a century later, as ‘the two 
cultures’ of science and the humanities.123 At this time, however, individ-
uals who made a reputation as scientists, often in several ﬁ elds, also partic-
ipated in the culture of the humanities and sometimes contributed to it.
In France, for example, Antoine Cournot began his career in 
mechanics, moved on to mathematics, applied mathematics to the study 
of wealth in a pioneering study of political economy, and ended his 

THE POLYMATH

120
career as a philosopher, the author of an essay on the foundations of 
knowledge. He also took a lively interest in astronomy. Georges Cuvier 
dominated the related ﬁ elds of zoology, comparative anatomy, paleon-
tology and geology but he also wrote on the history of science. Cuvier’s 
friend, collaborator, rival and opponent Étienne Geoﬀ roy Saint-Hilaire 
worked in the ﬁ rst three of these ﬁ elds and was also active in experi-
mental embryology.124
GERMAN SCIENTISTS
German examples of the polymathic scientist from this period include 
Rudolf Virchow, Hermann Helmholtz and Ernst Haeckel. Virchow was 
active in politics as well as working not only as a physician, pathologist 
and biologist but also as an ethnologist and prehistorian. In fact, he 
claimed that ‘medicine is a social science and politics is nothing more 
than medicine on a grand scale’.125 He certainly took politics seriously, 
participating in the revolution of 1848 and later becoming a Liberal 
deputy and an opponent of Bismarck, who described him as an indi-
vidual who has ‘amateurishly stepped out of his ﬁ eld and into mine’.126 
Besides his contributions to the natural sciences, notably to the theory 
and the pathology of cells (explaining the origin of cancer and identi-
fying leukemia), Virchow studied physical anthropology and directed a 
survey of the hair, skin colour and eye colour of nearly seven million 
German schoolchildren, concluding that the idea of an Aryan race was a 
fantasy. He edited a journal of ethnology and wrote on Goethe as a 
student of nature. He also supported the businessman Heinrich 
Schliemann’s excavation of Troy and carried out his own archaeological 
investigations in Pomerania (in those relatively unspecialized times it 
was not necessary to be a card-carrying archaeologist in order to conduct 
excavations).127
Helmholtz has been described as a ‘universal genius’ and as ‘the last 
scholar whose work, in the tradition of Leibniz, embraced all the sciences, 
as well as philosophy and the ﬁ ne arts’.128 Th e normally laconic Dictionary 
of Scientiﬁ c Biography credits him with contributions to ‘energetics, 
acoustics, physiological acoustics, physiological optics, epistemology, 


THE AGE OF THE ‘MAN OF LETTERS’
121
hydrodynamics, electrodynamics’.129 As an adolescent, Helmholtz was 
fascinated by physics but followed his father’s advice to study medicine. 
At the University of Berlin, he took up chemistry, mathematics and 
philosophy. Helmholtz was appointed a professor of anatomy and phys-
iology, ﬁ rst at the University of Bonn and then at Heidelberg, working 
on the physiology of sight and hearing. Returning to his ﬁ rst enthu-
siasm, he moved back to Berlin as professor of physics. Helmholtz was 
particularly interested in the perception of art and in the theory of music. 
He lectured to art students and corresponded with the ancient and 
modern historians Th eodor Mommsen and Heinrich von Treitschke. 
Like Virchow, he wrote about Goethe and science.130
In the next generation, Virchow’s student Ernst Haeckel spanned the 
ﬁ elds of anatomy, zoology and ecology (a discipline that he was the ﬁ rst 
to name), as well as writing on the philosophy of science. He was 
concerned with the unity of science and founded the League of German 
Monists (Deutsche Monistenbund) to further the cause as well as to oﬀ er 
a secular religion for his age. Haeckel was also an artist who illustrated 
his own books and an athlete who won a prize for the long jump, making 
him the ﬁ rst polymath to distinguish himself in this ﬁ eld since the 
Renaissance, the age of Leonbattista Alberti, Rudolf Agricola and James 
Crichton. He loved travel and exploration, including mountaineering. 
His role model, appropriately enough, was Alexander von Humboldt.
Humboldt also inspired the American polymath George Marsh. 
Marsh was active as a lawyer, diplomat and social reformer, but in his 
spare time this ‘versatile Vermonter’ was an art collector, archaeologist, 
linguist, geographer and a pioneering environmentalist, described by his 
biographer David Lowenthal as ‘the broadest scholar of his day’.131
BRITISH SCIENTISTS
In Britain too, the Victorian age was a time of some many-sided scien-
tists, who contributed to several disciplines and combined a scientiﬁ c 
culture with a literary one.
Charles Darwin, for example, was, among other things, a Victorian 
man of letters. His father wished him to become a doctor and sent him 

THE POLYMATH

122
to Edinburgh, but Charles discovered that he hated anatomy. He was 
sent to Cambridge to train for a career in the Church, but discovered 
natural history. He was an admirer of Alexander von Humboldt, 
confessing that ‘my whole course of life is due to having read and reread 
as a youth his Personal Narrative’.132 Like Humboldt’s expedition to 
Spanish America, Darwin’s long voyage on Th e Beagle (1831–6) changed 
his life. On his travels, ‘Everything seemed to interest him, people, 
places, creatures, plants, climate, the structure of the rocks, the politics, 
the indigenous tribes.’133 Darwin eventually published six books on 
botany, three on geology and one on ‘the expression of the emotions in 
animals and man’.
His On the Origin of Species (1859), which made him famous, can be 
and has been analysed as a work of literature, presenting its argument in 
the form of a narrative and both supporting and enlivening it with exam-
ples that are precisely observed and vividly described.134 Th e book owes 
important ideas to the author’s wide reading, illustrating the way in 
which a polymath can make a contribution to one discipline by borrowing 
ideas from its neighbours and adapting them to the new situation. His 
friend Charles Lyell’s Principles of Geology led Darwin to think of the 
evolution of diﬀ erent species as a process extending over the very long 
term, while Th e Principle of Population by Th omas Malthus gave him the 
idea of the struggle for survival.135
Th omas Henry Huxley, best known for his public defence of Darwin, 
was another polymath who once thanked the gods for his ‘diversity of 
tastes’, declaring that ‘if I had as many lives as a cat, I should leave no 
corner unexplored’. Like Darwin, Huxley studied medicine, but did not 
take a degree. Like Darwin, his life was changed by an expedition, in his 
case to the Torres Straits and Australia between 1846 and 1850, as 
surgeon on HMS Rattlesnake. Huxley became interested in zoology, 
carrying out research on sea anemones, jellyﬁ sh and sea urchins. On his 
return to Britain, Huxley taught geology as a lecturer at the School of 
Mines in London. Geology and a concern with evolution led him to 
palaeontology, studying dinosaurs and the skull of a Neanderthal man. 
Following a meeting with Herbert Spencer, Huxley was introduced into 


THE AGE OF THE ‘MAN OF LETTERS’
123
the circle of the Westminster Review and came to write for it regularly, 
discovering a gift for lucid and vivid popularization. He also gave public 
lectures on a wide variety of topics, including the famous lecture, ‘On a 
Piece of Chalk’, delivered to the working men of Norwich in 1868. 
Huxley’s collected essays and lectures run to nine volumes and include a 
debate with Matthew Arnold over the relative place in education of liter-
ature and science.136
Another versatile scientist was Francis Galton, now famous – or 
notorious – for his advocacy of eugenics. He too began his career as an 
explorer, in his case in the Middle East and in parts of Southwest Africa 
previously unknown to Europeans, and he published a book on the art 
of travel. A cousin of Charles Darwin, Galton was particularly interested 
in heredity, studying both humans and sweet peas. He was also a math-
ematician, a statistician, a physical anthropologist who founded an 
anthropometric laboratory, an experimental psychologist interested in 
intelligence tests and visual memory, and a meteorologist who discovered 
and named the anti-cyclone. He also classiﬁ ed ﬁ ngerprints, building 
on the work of William James Herschel, son of the polymath John 
Herschel.137
William Henry Fox Talbot oﬀ ers a spectacular example of a many-
sided individual who is known today almost entirely for one form of 
knowledge and skill, in his case a contribution to the development of 
photography. Even if he had not invented a camera and written about 
photography in Th e Pencil of Nature (1844), Talbot would have a secure 
place in history as a Victorian polymath. He was a distinguished math-
ematician: ‘Talbot’s curve’ is named after him. After meeting John 
Herschel, he began working on optics and formulated ‘Talbot’s law’. 
Optics led him via the spectroscope to chemistry, demonstrating that the 
diﬀ erent elements could be identiﬁ ed from their spectra. His interests in 
optics and chemistry converged on photography, but Talbot’s range was 
wider still. In botany, he identiﬁ ed two new species. He published three 
papers on astronomy and several on the theory of numbers. He also 
wrote on etymology and he was one of the ﬁ rst individuals to decipher 
Assyrian cuneiform texts. Th inking like a natural scientist, he proposed 

THE POLYMATH

124
what he called an ‘experiment’ to test the reliability of translations from 
these texts, in which a few scholars translated a newly discovered inscrip-
tion without communicating with one another (happily, their versions 
did not diﬀ er very much). Talbot was also active as a Member of 
Parliament and his many books include Th oughts on Moderate Reform in 
the House of Commons.138
TOWARDS A NEW CRISIS
As the amount of information gradually increased throughout this 
period, both the idea and the practice of the division of intellectual 
labour began to gain ground. From the middle of the eighteenth century, 
specialization, including specialized knowledge, became the subject of 
public discussion. In 1748, Denis Diderot had already noted the devel-
opment of specialization in surgery and predicted – correctly – a similar 
tendency in the case of medicine.139
In his lectures on jurisprudence in 1763, Adam Smith preceded his 
famous discussion of the division of labour in the Wealth of Nations by 
remarks on intellectual work, remarking that ‘Philosophy’ (meaning 
what we call ‘science’) ‘becomes a separate trade and in time like all 
others, subdivided into various provinces’ or into ‘a great number of 
branches, each of which aﬀ ords occupation to a peculiar tribe or class of 
philosophers’. One might have thought that Smith was being sarcastic, 
but he continued by remarking that ‘Each individual becomes more 
expert in his own peculiar branch, more work is done upon the whole, 
and the quantity of science is considerably increased by it.’140
Immanuel Kant, writing in 1785, agreed with Smith about the divi-
sion of labour in general and also about philosophy, especially the divi-
sion between empirical and rational approaches. According to Kant, it 
was worth asking ‘whether pure philosophy in all its parts does not 
require each its particular man, and whether it would not stand better 
with the learned trade as a whole if those who, catering to the taste of the 
public, are accustomed to sell the empirical along with the rational, 
mixed in all sorts of proportions unknown even to themselves, if they 
were warned not to carry on simultaneously two enterprises that are very 


THE AGE OF THE ‘MAN OF LETTERS’
125
diﬀ erent in their mode of treatment, each of which perhaps requires a 
particular talent, and the combination of which in a single person 
produces only bunglers.’141
In England, Charles Babbage, despite his own wide range of interests, 
welcomed what he called the division of ‘mental labour’.142 Again, a 
major theme in Herbert Spencer’s theory of society was the tendency 
towards specialization, or ‘diﬀ erentiation’, which according to him 
contributed to progress or social ‘evolution’.143 Other English scholars 
were less happy with the tendency. Th e polymath William Whewell was 
particularly eloquent, noting ‘an increasing proclivity of separation and 
dismemberment’ among the sciences. ‘Th e mathematician turns away 
from the chemist; the chemist from the naturalist; the mathematician, 
left to himself, divides himself into a pure mathematician and a mixed 
mathematician, who soon part company,’ and so on.144 Adopting a polit-
ical metaphor that has often been employed since his time, Whewell 
expressed his fear that what he called the ‘commonwealth of science’ 
might disintegrate like ‘a great empire falling to pieces’.145
Specialization was encouraged by the foundation of new institutions. 
In France, for instance, the old regime of non-specialized regional acad-
emies gave way in the nineteenth century to local agricultural, archaeo-
logical, antiquarian and scientiﬁ c societies. In Paris, the Académie 
Celtique (founded in 1804) was followed by the Société Asiatique and 
the Société de Géographie (both founded in 1821), the Société 
Géologique (1830), the Société Anthropologique (1832), the Société 
Ethnologique (1839) and the Société d’Économie Politique (1842). In 
Berlin, new foundations included the Society for German Language and 
Antiquities (1815), the Geography Society (1828), the Physics Society 
(1845), the Geological Society (1848) and the Anthropology Society 
(1869).146
In London, the foundation of the Geological Society (1807) was 
followed by the Astronomical Society (1820) and the Royal Society of 
Literature (both 1820), the Political Economy Club (1821), the Royal 
Asiatic Society (1823), the Zoological Society (1826), the Entomological 
Society (1833), the Botanical Society (1833) and the Ethnological 

THE POLYMATH

126
Society (1843). Joseph Banks, President of the Royal Society of London, 
found a vivid metaphor for fragmentation in his comment on this trend, 
writing that ‘I see plainly that all these new-fangled Associations will 
ﬁ nally dismantle the Royal Society, and not leave the Old Lady a rag to 
cover her’.147
In France, Comte expressed ambivalence. He believed that the price 
of specialization was an inability to see what he called ‘the spirit of the 
whole’, but also that specialization was necessary to progress and that a 
group would emerge who would specialize in generalities. Th e story told 
in the following chapter suggests that Comte was right on all three 
counts.

127
 5 
 THE AGE OF TERRITORIALITY
18502000
By the late nineteenth century, the cultural climate was becoming less 
favourable to wide-ranging scholars. As we have seen, a few monsters of 
erudition, notably Athanasius Kircher and Olof Rudbeck, had been crit-
icized for excessive ambition in the seventeenth century, but such criti-
cisms became more and more frequent in the nineteenth.
POLYMATHS IN A COLD CLIMATE
Alexander von Humboldt, for instance, was criticized by his friend 
Friedrich Schiller because he ‘dabbled in too many subjects’, while 
Humboldt himself complained that ‘people often say that I’m curious 
about too many things at once’.1 It was said of William Whewell (by the 
wit Sidney Smith) that ‘omniscience is his foible’. Th e essayist William 
Hazlitt wrote of Coleridge that ‘Th ere is no subject on which he has not 
touched,’ but also ‘none on which he has rested’.2 Coleridge featured 
in the novelist Th omas Peacock’s satirical novel Headlong Hall (1816) as 
‘Mr Panscope’, who ‘had run through the whole circle of the sciences, 
and understood them all equally well’.
Th omas Young was another polymath who was criticized for 
attempting too much. An Italian scholar wrote to Young about the 
‘universal regret that your versatility is so widely engaged in the sciences 
. . . that you are unable to press on with your discoveries and bring them 
to that pitch of perfection which we have the right to expect from a man 
of your conspicuous talents’. On his death the President of the Royal 

THE POLYMATH

128
Society combined praise of Young’s achievements with the warning that 
the Society ‘rather recommends the concentration of research within the 
limits of some deﬁ ned portion of science, than the endeavour to embrace 
the whole’.3
Another sign of change in the intellectual climate was the shift in the 
meaning of the term dilettante. When it was coined (in Italian, spreading 
to English by the eighteenth century), the word was positive, meaning 
someone who ‘delighted’ in something, just as the French term amateur 
originally referred to anyone who ‘loved’ art or learning. In the course of 
the nineteenth century, these terms became pejorative, denoting not 
enthusiasm but the superﬁ cial understanding associated with non-
specialists. For example, Georg Waitz, a specialist on medieval Germany, 
criticized what he called Dilettantismus in the ﬁ rst number of the ﬁ rst 
journal for professional historians, the Historische Zeitschrift (1859). In 
similar fashion, Goethe’s studies of the natural science were dismissed by 
a leading German physiologist, Emil Dubois-Reymond, as the pastime 
(Spielerei) of ‘a self-taught dilettante’.4
OVERLOAD
Why was the climate changing? In a word, ‘overload’. As in the seven-
teenth century, there was an explosion of knowledge, in the double sense 
of expansion and fragmentation. Th e invention of the steam press, together 
with the use of cheaper paper made from wood pulp, reduced the price of 
books and journals and so encouraged them to proliferate, leading to what 
has been called the ‘second revolution of the book’ or ‘the ﬂ ood of cheap 
print’.5 Th e popularization of knowledge, especially scientiﬁ c knowledge, 
was increasingly important at this time.6 One of the British polymaths 
mentioned in the previous chapter, Th omas De Quincey, vividly expressed 
his anxiety in a vision or nightmare about ‘a procession of carts and wagons’ 
that kept unloading piles of books outside his house.7
Overload was not simply the result of cheap print. More knowledge 
was being produced, thanks to research that included experiments in 
physics and chemistry; the observation and description of an increasing 
variety of rocks, plants and animals; and historical research in the oﬃ  cial 


THE AGE OF TERRITORIALITY 
129
archives that were gradually opening to the public. New stars and new 
elements were among the many discoveries of this period, thanks to 
more powerful telescopes and microscopes. Scientiﬁ c expeditions, many 
of them funded by governments for strategic and economic purposes, 
brought back thousands of mineral, botanical and zoological specimens 
and vastly increased western knowledge of other parts of the world, 
notably Africa, Oceania and the Arctic – their natural resources, their 
peoples and their languages.8
Academic knowledge was not the only kind of knowledge to expand 
in this way. A ‘revolution in government’ was taking place in the nine-
teenth century, the rise of the ‘information state’ in which the systematic 
collection of data, often by means of surveys, preceded important deci-
sions.9 Much of the data collected took the form of statistics and a good 
deal of it was published. Th ere was an ‘avalanche of printed numbers’ in 
this period, much of it generated by bureaucracies.10
Th e rise of empires – the British in India, the French in North Africa, 
the Belgians in the Congo and so on – made it necessary for the rulers 
and their oﬃ  cials to learn something about the geography, the resources 
and the peoples under their rule. Territories were surveyed and mapped 
and reports were written about the propensity of their inhabitants to 
obey or rebel against the imperial regimes.11 At home, police forces were 
accumulating more and more information. In 1879 the British Criminal 
Investigation Department, the CID, dealt with more than 40,000 oﬃ  -
cial letters and special reports.12 Business gradually followed the model of 
government, with American railways in the lead, increasing the demand 
for information, ﬁ rst of all in order to avoid accidents and later, like 
other companies, to manage an expanding enterprise.13
All this information had to be organized. In the seventeenth century, 
as we have seen, one response to the ﬁ rst crisis of knowledge was to 
develop new methods of taking and ﬁ ling notes. In the eighteenth 
century, reference books on an increasing variety of subjects proliferated, 
books that were designed to be consulted or skimmed rather than read. 
Th ere were so many of them that a dictionary of these dictionaries was 
published in 1758.14

THE POLYMATH

130
Writing in 1819, the Scottish polymath Francis Jeﬀ rey, editor of the 
famous Edinburgh Review, expressed the fear that ‘if we continue to write 
and rhyme at the present rate for 200 years longer, there must be some 
new art of short-hand reading invented – or all reading will be given up 
in despair’.15
In the later nineteenth century the German polymath Hermann von 
Helmholtz noted improvements in what he called ‘appliances’, such as 
‘catalogues, lexicons, registers, indexes, digests’, that made knowledge 
‘immediately accessible’.16 He may have been thinking of the card indexes 
pioneered by the polymath–librarian Melvil Dewey, whose standardized 
cards appealed not only to other librarians but also to scholars and busi-
nesses (‘Card indexing has become nowadays an essential requirement of 
modern business’).17 Helmholtz may also have been thinking of the ﬁ ling 
cabinet, ﬁ rst produced in 1875, a piece of furniture that came to take up 
more and more space in oﬃ  ces and libraries.
SPECIALIZATION
Th e principal response to this explosion of knowledge was to spe -
cialize, thus reducing the amount of information that needed to be 
mastered. Specialization may be regarded as a kind of defence mecha-
nism, a dyke against the deluge of information. In 1979 a distinguished 
American historian noted the need for what he called ‘a still unwritten 
general history of specialization’.18 Th e gap has not yet been ﬁ lled, 
perhaps because writing such a general history would itself require 
a team of specialists. All that can be oﬀ ered here is a brief summary. 
Th e early stages of the process were noted in the previous chapter, but 
the trend became more and more powerful between the 1850s and the 
millennium.
New words once again reveal the consciousness of the problem. As we 
have seen, the term ‘scientist’ was coined in the 1830s, an early sign of 
a growing split between men of letters and investigators of nature. In 
France in the 1830s and 1840s the term spécialité came into use, followed 
by spécialiste, once again in a medical context, in 1848. It was, paradoxi-
cally, the polymath Auguste Comte who coined the abstract noun 


THE AGE OF TERRITORIALITY 
131
spécialisation.19 In English, the term ‘specialist’ is ﬁ rst recorded in 1856, 
‘specialism’ in the same year and ‘specialization’ in 1865. New words 
were necessary to describe new trends.
Th e debate initiated by Kant and Adam Smith continued to rever-
berate. On one side, the sociologist Émile Durkheim argued that the 
division of labour made society more cohesive because it made individ-
uals more dependent on one another. Despite the breadth of his own 
interests, Durkheim extended his praise of the division of labour to the 
academic world and held a ‘consistently positive view of disciplinary 
specialization’.20 He supported specialization in sociology itself, on the 
grounds that it allowed the study of society, all too often ‘a form of 
philosophical speculation’, to become more precise and more objective.21
On the other side, Karl Marx’s vision of a future communist society 
was one where it would be ‘possible for me to do one thing today and 
another tomorrow, to hunt in the morning, ﬁ sh in the afternoon, rear 
cattle in the evening, criticize after dinner, just as I have a mind’. William 
Morris was another critic of a society where the majority of workers were 
‘always doing one minute piece of work and never being allowed to think 
of any other’. In his ideal society, an artisan ‘shall put his own individual 
intelligence and enthusiasm into the goods he fashions. So far from his 
labour being “divided” . . . he must know all about the ware he is making 
and its relation to similar wares.’22
Th e polymathic social scientist Max Weber expressed his ambivalence 
in a famous lecture delivered in 1917, Wissenschaft als Beruf (a phrase 
translatable as either ‘Science as a Vocation’ or ‘Learning as a Profession’), 
in which the lecturer discussed the tension between many-sidedness and 
specialization.23 Weber felt this tension himself. It may even have contrib-
uted to his nervous breakdown in 1897.
THE DIVISION OF INSTITUTIONS
It is no accident that terms such as ‘specialist’ were ﬁ rst used in a medical 
context, since medicine, as Diderot noted in the mid-eighteenth century, 
was becoming divided into doctors focusing on particular diseases or 
parts of the body.24

THE POLYMATH

132
Universities, on the other hand, were concerned with knowledge in 
general. One reason for the survival of the polymath in the age of the 
man of letters was the relatively unspecialized nature of the western 
system of higher education at that time. German students, for example, 
regularly moved from one discipline to another just as they migrated 
from one university to another before taking their degree. In Scotland, 
where the ﬁ rst degree was the four-year MA (in contrast to the three-year 
BA elsewhere in Britain), the traditional curriculum was a general one 
that included compulsory philosophy.25 In Cambridge before the 1870s, 
undergraduates were examined either in classics or mathematics, but 
there were optional lectures in other disciplines that sometimes led on 
to informal tuition. Charles Darwin, for instance, who arrived as an 
eighteen-year-old student in 1828, plunged into the study of natural 
history with the help of two professors, John Henslow in botany and 
Adam Sedgwick in geology.
In the later nineteenth century, however, the example of the medics 
was followed by the new research universities in Germany, the United 
States and elsewhere. Th ese institutions were followed in their turn by 
universities in general, divided into more and more departments in order 
to accommodate new disciplines.26
As an American academic who had studied in Germany noted in the 
book about German universities that he published in 1874, the German 
professor ‘is not a teacher in the English sense of the term; he is a 
specialist’.27 In Germany and the United States in particular, new 
academic specialties proliferated, often claiming the title of disciplines 
and taking institutional form in separate departments. Th e increasing 
emphasis on research, in other words on original contributions to knowl-
edge, encouraged if it did not force individuals who hoped for an 
academic career to focus on limited ﬁ elds. An American classicist who 
studied in Germany in the 1850s later remembered many seminar topics 
as ‘hopelessly microscopic’.28
Declarations of independence became frequent, turning ﬁ elds into 
autonomous disciplines. Th e year 1872, for instance, marks the estab-
lishment of both the École Libre des Sciences Politiques in Paris and the 


THE AGE OF TERRITORIALITY 
133
chair of Political and Social Sciences at Yale. Émile Durkheim fought 
passionately, with eventual success, for the autonomy of sociology, with 
its own object and its own ‘right to exist’, separate not only from law but 
also from philosophy and psychology.29 Experimental psychology became 
independent from philosophy at the University of Leipzig in 1879, at 
Johns Hopkins in 1884 and at the University of Geneva in 1891.
Like philosophy, the old discipline of philology, which had been 
deﬁ ned in broad cultural and historical terms as late as the mid-
nineteenth century, lost territory to rising subjects such as the study of 
vernacular literatures (German, Romance, Slavic, English and so on). 
Even in the case of the ancient Greek and Roman world, the rise of clas-
sical archaeology and art history reduced the ﬁ eld of the philologists to 
the study of language.30
New disciplines, like some new nations, rapidly fragmented. History 
was divided into periods (ancient, medieval and modern). It was also 
divided into economic history, which acquired its own chairs (at Harvard 
in 1892, for instance) and the history of science (with a chair at the 
Collège de France, founded in the same year). Geography was divided 
into physical and human geography, while the latter soon split into 
economic geography and political geography (otherwise known as 
‘geopolitics’, named in 1899).
In England, the later nineteenth century marks a turning point. At 
Oxford, after the reform of the university in 1871, it became possible for 
students to take degrees in modern history, law, theology, mathematics 
and natural sciences (all from 1872), English literature (1894), modern 
languages (1903) and so on.31 Th e Scots resisted for a time: compromises 
were reached in 1858, when better students could follow general studies 
with a course in one discipline for ‘honours’, and in 1889, when the old 
general degree coexisted with the alternative of specialized courses.32
Th e frontiers between disciplines became more diﬃ  cult to cross, 
producing a landscape of ‘academic tribes and territories’.33 Among the 
signs of this territorialization of knowledge was the growing use of 
phrases such as ‘my ﬁ eld’ or (for historians) ‘my period’. Some academics 
became extremely conscious of the need to defend their ﬁ elds from 

THE POLYMATH

134
competitors. At a meeting of the American Economic Association in 
1894, one participant declared that the sociologists ‘had no right to stake 
oﬀ  for themselves a portion of the ﬁ eld of social science without 
consulting the economists’.34
Th e fragmentation of knowledge was also encouraged by the develop-
ment of technical terms, for example in physical anthropology, ‘dolico-
cephalic’ (long-headed); in social psychology, ‘de-individuation’ (loss of 
self-awareness); in zoology, ‘zoosemiotics’ (the study of forms of knowing 
in animals); in anthropology, ‘schismogenesis’, the process of cultural 
diﬀ erentiation. Th ey were useful shorthand for insiders, but incompre-
hensible jargon for everyone else – creating more deﬁ nite boundaries 
between disciplines and also between professionals and amateurs. Th ey 
were also encouraged by the employment of methods that were not 
immediately intelligible to the laity.
In the eighteenth century, scientiﬁ c experiments were still close to 
everyday observation and could be replicated by amateurs such as 
Voltaire, who would cut oﬀ  the heads of snails to see if they grew back 
like the tails of lizards. Even in the nineteenth century, hands-on science 
was still available to amateurs, looking through microscopes, hammering 
rocks, collecting dried plants or using a relatively simple piece of appa-
ratus such as a Bunsen burner. However, scientiﬁ c progress became 
increasingly dependent on large and expensive instruments. Amateurs 
are in no position to replicate the experiments that led to the discovery 
of the structure of DNA or Higgs’ boson in particle physics. As the 
philosopher Alfred Whitehead observed in the 1920s, ‘scientiﬁ c theory 
is outrunning common sense’.35
In short, the university campus became a kind of archipelago, 
containing many islands of knowledge, separated from one another by 
the walls of ‘departments’, as they were called in Britain, or ‘institutes’, as 
they were known in Germany and elsewhere.36
MUSEUMS, SOCIETIES, CONGRESSES
Outside the university, knowledge institutions also became increasingly 
specialized from the later nineteenth century onwards. New museums 


THE AGE OF TERRITORIALITY 
135
often conﬁ ned themselves to a particular ﬁ eld – natural history, for 
instance, archaeology, anthropology, Asia or even, in the case of a museum 
in Vienna, ‘war economy’. Like academic departments, older museums 
sometimes fragmented. In London, the Natural History Museum became 
independent from the British Museum in 1881. Four years later, the 
Science Museum became independent from the South Kensington 
Museum (now known as the Victoria and Albert Museum). Th e British 
Museum itself was gradually divided into departments such as Prints and 
Drawings, Coins and Medals, Oriental Antiquities and so on.
Th e rise of specialized societies at the expense of the Royal Society was 
noted in the previous chapter. Th e Royal Society itself was becoming more 
specialized. Until 1847 it had elected its Fellows in the ﬁ elds of ‘learning 
and science’, including ‘archaeologists, numismatists and antiquaries’, but 
after that date the candidates were expected to be natural scientists. In 
1887 specialization went further, and the society’s Philosophical Transactions 
were divided into two series, known as A (mathematical and physical 
sciences) and B (biological sciences).37 It is true that a few archaeologists 
and anthropologists were still able to join the Royal Society after 1847 
(John Lubbock in 1858, Edward Tylor in 1871, Augustus Pitt-Rivers in 
1876, Arthur Evans in 1901 and James Frazer in 1920).38 However, 
archaeology was regarded as a science at that time, while anthropology, 
despite the emphasis on culture in the work of Tylor and others, was widely 
viewed as concerned with the natural history of humans.
At the professional level, interaction with colleagues in other coun-
tries was increasing, thanks to the rise of the international congress in the 
later nineteenth century, made possible by the spread of the railway 
network in Europe. Th ese congresses were usually conﬁ ned to a partic-
ular discipline. For example, the ﬁ rst international congress of anthro-
pology and prehistoric archaeology was held in 1865, followed by the 
geographers in 1871, the orientalists in 1873 and the art historians in 
the same year. Some congresses were even devoted to sub-disciplines 
such as ‘criminal anthropology’ (ﬁ rst congress, 1885) or dermatology 
(1889). Th ese congresses surely helped forge specialist identities by 
making individuals more aware of colleagues with similar interests.39

THE POLYMATH

136
JOURNALS
If the early nineteenth century was the great age of journals concerned 
with general knowledge, such as the Edinburgh Review or the Revue des 
Deux Mondes, the late nineteenth century was the age of the specialized 
academic journal. It has been suggested that one reason why the Revue 
des Deux Mondes lost subscribers after the 1870s was that specialized 
journals began competing with it for readers.40 Famous examples in their 
various ﬁ elds include the German Historische Zeitschrift (1859), the 
Revue Historique and the Revue Philosophique in France (both 1876), the 
British philosophical journal Mind (1876), the American Journal of 
Philology (1880), the Political Science Quarterly (1886), the Quarterly 
Journal of Economics (1887), the Annales de Géographie (1891), the Année 
Psychologique (1894), the American Journal of Sociology (1895) and the 
Année Sociologique (1898).
In the natural sciences, the development of specialization went further 
and faster. Disciplinary periodicals such as the Journal de Physique (1872) 
or the American Journal of Mathematics (1878) were soon joined by sub-
disciplinary ones such as the Zeitschrift für physiologische Chemie (1877), 
Beiträge zur Geophysik (1887) and the Journal of Tropical Medicine (1898). 
Th e rapid diﬀ erentiation of scientiﬁ c journals in the 1880s and 1890s 
has been noted. It has been estimated that there were already 1,258 such 
journals in existence by the year 1900.41
In order to make an original ‘contribution to knowledge’, articles 
in these journals had to become increasingly specialized, while their 
language became more technical. A comparison between issues of the 
same journal, such as the American Journal of Sociology, when it was 
founded in 1895 and a hundred years later, reveals this process at work. 
Th e 1895 volume included articles such as ‘Th e Relation of Anthropology 
to the Study of History’, ‘Business Men and Social Th eorists’ and ‘Local 
Alliances’. In the 1995 volume we ﬁ nd ‘Statistical Methods for Comparing 
Regression Coeﬃ  cients between Models’, ‘Shifting Currents in Critical 
Sociology of Education’ and ‘Social Capital and the Control of Right-
Wing Extremism among East and West Berlin Youth’.


THE AGE OF TERRITORIALITY 
137
TWO CULTURES
In a famous – or notorious – lecture delivered in Cambridge in 1959, 
the physical chemist turned novelist C. P. Snow distinguished between 
what he called the ‘two cultures’ of the natural sciences and the 
hu manities. He lamented the fact that by the middle of the twentieth 
century, a formerly uniﬁ ed intellectual culture had split, that the two 
groups had ‘almost ceased to communicate’, and that educated individ-
uals on the humanities side lacked even a superﬁ cial knowledge of 
science.42
Th e debate that followed Snow’s lecture, and that was renewed much 
later, should not be understood in a parochial way as merely part of the 
history of the University of Cambridge, or even as part of the history of 
English culture in the middle of the twentieth century. As became 
obvious from later comments on Snow’s thesis in Germany, Th e 
Netherlands, Italy, Sweden and elsewhere, the Cambridge debate was 
simply a local example of a much more general phenomenon.43
Today, nearly seventy years after the original lecture, it may seem odd 
that the lecturer noted a division into no more than two cultures. A third 
culture, ‘social science’, has often been mentioned (originally by Snow 
himself), while the assumption that all scientists (or all scholars in the 
humanities) form a single culture now seems extremely questionable. 
Fragmentation was already visible in the nineteenth century, as the 
examples of societies, congresses and journals suggest, and it has gone 
much further since the 1950s.
In a famous study of nineteenth-century nationalism, Benedict 
Anderson launched the phrase ‘imagined community’, presenting the 
nation as one such community, held together by the national press, since 
individuals not only read the same news at the same time as their compa-
triots but were aware of doing so.44 If reading a particular journal regu-
larly and knowing that others do so too, like joining a society or attending 
an international congress, helps form an ‘imagined community’, such 
disciplinary communities have proliferated at the expense of the old 
Republic of Letters and the later Commonwealth of Science.

THE POLYMATH

138
TEAMWORK
In order to manage increasing amounts of information and turn them 
into knowledge, the labours of individual scholars were increasingly 
supplemented by those of teams, as in the case of scientiﬁ c expeditions, 
encyclopaedias, laboratories and observatories.
More and more scientiﬁ c expeditions were launched from the later 
eighteenth century onwards, and scholars who joined these expeditions 
were often chosen on the basis of specialist qualiﬁ cations. On his expedi-
tion to the Paciﬁ c in 1785, for instance, the Comte de La Pérouse took 
ten specialists, including an astronomer, a geologist, a botanist, a physi-
cist and three naturalists. When Nicolas Baudin was sent by the French 
government on an expedition to Australia in 1800, for research on geog-
raphy (especially hydrography) and natural history, he set out with ‘three 
botanists, ﬁ ve zoologists, two mineralogists . . . two astronomers and 
two geographers’, although he lost some of these researchers on the way.45 
Th e more specialized British expedition on Th e Challenger (1872–6), 
concerned with the depths of the ocean, included two marine biologists, 
two naturalists and a chemist.
As was noted earlier, the famous French Encyclopédie (1751–72), 
edited by Jean d’Alembert and Denis Diderot, drew on the knowledges 
of at least 139 individuals.46 Th e multiplication of contributors has 
continued ever since. Th e famous eleventh edition of the Encyclopedia 
Britannica, for instance, published in 1911, called on the expertise 
of 1,507 contributors, while by 1937 the Enciclopedia Italiana had 
3,272.47 In the age of Wikipedia, even these numbers have come to 
seem tiny.
Teamwork was not conﬁ ned to expeditions and encyclopaedias. By 
the beginning of the twentieth century, it was already a feature of ‘Big 
Science’ (Grosswissenschaft), especially in Germany. Th e chemist Emil 
Fischer complained in 1902 that the ‘mass production methods which 
dominate modern economic life have also penetrated experimental 
science’. In Russia at the same time, Ivan Pavlov’s physiology laboratory, 
in which about a hundred people worked, was compared to a factory.48 


THE AGE OF TERRITORIALITY 
139
Th e division of labour has gone much further since that time, as the 
increasing number of names attached to scientiﬁ c papers testify.
Th e social sciences were moving in a similar direction. In France 
around the year 1900, Durkheim advocated teamwork (travail en commun) 
and established the practice in the group of sociologists that he led.49 In 
the case of history, Lucien Febvre advocated teamwork in the 1930s, at 
least in the weak sense of individuals agreeing to study similar problems 
and ask similar questions, while carrying out research and writing up the 
results by themselves. Today, this form of teamwork has become common 
in the humanities, driven by the need to attract grants from bodies such 
as the European Science Foundation, with rules requiring a given project 
to include scholars from a number of diﬀ erent countries.
THE DEPARTMENTALIZATION OF THE UNIVERSITIES
Even more important, since it aﬀ ected many more people and at a 
younger, more impressionable age, was the trend towards the increasing 
specialization of university teaching. In early modern universities, as in 
medieval ones, a division of intellectual labour already existed, especially 
in the graduate faculties of theology, law and medicine. Within these 
faculties, new chairs were founded, mainly in the seventeenth and eigh-
teenth centuries. Professors of Hebrew joined faculties of theology, 
professors of natural law joined the lawyers, while the faculty of medi-
cine came to include professors of pharmacology and ‘iatrochemistry’ (in 
other words, chemistry for medical purposes).
Th e arts faculty traditionally oﬀ ered a more general education. It was 
this faculty, later known as the faculty of philosophy, which saw most 
changes. One specialist chair was ‘practical philosophy’, including ethics, 
politics and ‘economics’ in the sense of the management of a household. 
Ethics (or ‘moral philosophy’) had its own chair in some places, and so 
did politics (or ‘political philosophy’), and ﬁ nally, in the eighteenth 
century, ‘political economy’, known today as ‘economics’. Natural philos-
ophy, now known as the ‘natural sciences’, became independent from 
philosophy in general and then split into specialties such as chemistry 
and natural history. In its turn, natural history came to be subdivided 

THE POLYMATH

140
into geology, botany and ﬁ nally zoology. Th e trend continued in the early 
nineteenth century. For example, chairs of mineralogy were established 
in Moscow, Cambridge and Montpellier between 1804 and 1809. At the 
University of Berlin, chairs of Germanistik (German language and litera-
ture), geography, Sanskrit, medical history and art history were all 
founded before 1850.
EXPLAINING SPECIALIZATION
A specialist in the history of education has identiﬁ ed an ‘iron law’ of 
specialization.50 Why was there such a powerful – and some would say, 
irresistible – trend in this direction at this time? It is surely an oversimpli-
ﬁ cation to account for the process in terms of one element alone, the 
explosion of knowledge. Several diﬀ erent answers, or kinds of answer, can 
be given and indeed have been given to this question, each oﬀ ering its own 
insights.
Sociologists, for example, have argued that ‘internal diﬀ erentiation’ 
into diﬀ erent specialties led to the emergence of a system of disciplines.51 
Behind this approach to the history of knowledge stands the Victorian 
polymath Herbert Spencer, who famously argued that societies and their 
institutions evolved from homogeneity to heterogeneity by a process of 
diﬀ erentiation. Th e use of the term ‘evolved’ makes the process seem at 
once inevitable, irresistible and impersonal.
A second answer has been given by historians, noting that the trend was 
particularly strong in certain periods. It was the expansion of higher educa-
tion in Europe and the United States that made specialization possible. One 
study speaks of the emergence of a ‘mass market for education’ around the 
year 1800, while others date expansion to the second half of the nineteenth 
century.52 In France, the population of university students grew rapidly 
between 1876 and 1914, especially in faculties of letters.53 In Germany, it 
grew even more rapidly, from 20,000 in 1871 to 68,000 in 1910.54
Increasing the size of departments allowed a greater variety of special-
ized courses. At Harvard University in 1870, for instance, ‘32 professors 
taught 73 courses; by 1910, 169 professors taught 401 courses’.55 
Expansion was sometimes rapid: the Faculty of Letters at the Sorbonne 


THE AGE OF TERRITORIALITY 
141
had about 120 students in 1887, but by 1902 (following the opening of 
new buildings) the number of students had risen to 1,830.56 Looking 
back from the 1990s, it has been suggested that ‘Th e runaway expansion 
of the university system worldwide . . . created a structural pressure 
for increased specialization simply because scholars were in search of 
niches.’57
A third explanation of specialization brings people – individuals and 
groups – into the story. For students and scholars alike, specialization 
allowed them to keep their heads above water in the ﬂ ood of informa-
tion. For ambitious professors or would-be professors, working in a 
competitive environment, the creation of new specialties was a form of 
what Pierre Bourdieu famously called ‘distinction’.58 Market researchers 
speak of ‘product diﬀ erentiation’ as a means to success in the struggle for 
market share. Th e ideal was to ﬁ nd a new problem, turn it into a sub-
ﬁ eld and then into an autonomous discipline.
SPECIALIZATION BECOMES THE PROBLEM
Specialization was a response to the problem of overload, but it was 
sooner or later perceived as a problem in itself. Hence the rise of a move-
ment aimed at restoring the lost unity of knowledge. In 1864 the 
polymath scientist Lothar Meyer declared the need to reunite ‘the now 
severed sciences’. Th is ideal attracted a number of twentieth-century 
polymaths, examples of the hedgehog, among them the Scotsman Patrick 
Geddes, the Belgian Paul Otlet and the Austrian Otto Neurath. It is 
surely signiﬁ cant that all three turned to diagrams and other visual aids 
that allow the viewer to absorb in a moment information that might take 
several minutes to read when presented in words.
Geddes liked to use the word ‘synoptic’, and his ambition to see the 
whole was expressed by his reconstruction of the Outlook Tower in 
Edinburgh as a museum in which visitors could see the relation between 
Edinburgh, Scotland, Europe and the world. It oﬀ ered a general view of 
knowledge in visual form. Otlet’s desire to classify knowledge included a 
project for a storehouse of images. Neurath developed what he called an 
‘International System of Typographic Picture Education’ (ISOTYPE).

THE POLYMATH

142
Geddes described himself as ‘a comprehensive, synthesizing gener-
alist’ and was described by a contemporary as someone who ‘specialized 
in omniscience’.59 He began his career as a biologist but discovered soci-
ology by reading the work of an earlier polymath, Frédéric Le Play. 
Although he never took an academic degree, Geddes became a professor 
of botany at the University of Dundee. He was described by an acquaint-
ance as ‘a most unsettling person, talking, talking, talking – about 
anything and everything’.60 According to one of his disciples – he was a 
charismatic ﬁ gure who attracted disciples – he was ‘too integral for the 
specialists to understand . . . Th ey have to dub him a little mad – or else 
think that of themselves.’61 A fellow Scot, the poet ‘Hugh MacDiarmid’ 
(Christopher Murray Grieve), declared that Geddes ‘knew that water-
tight compartments are useful only to a sinking ship, and traversed all 
the boundaries of separate subjects’.62
Geddes began his career in botany, but his eye problems made the use 
of the microscope impossible and he turned to marine biology. He wrote 
two books on biology together with one of his students, but, while 
carrying out research in France, he was diverted into sociology and social 
reform. His concern with slum improvement in Edinburgh expanded 
into an interest in town planning, and he moved in 1919 from his 
chair in botany in Dundee to a chair of ‘Civics and Sociology’ at the 
University of Bombay. Geddes would not have seen this step as a big 
one, since he practised what he called ‘bio-sociology’, attempting to see 
the city as a whole, as an organism that was related to its region and 
gradually evolved.63
Like Francis Bacon, the Belgian Paul Otlet took the whole of knowl-
edge as his province. Trained as a lawyer, he is often described as a bibli-
ographer, and he did indeed plan a universal bibliography stored on 
index cards. He was also what he called a ‘documentalist’, using micro-
ﬁ ches (a technology that became available in the 1920s) for storing and 
retrieving documents and planning an encyclopaedia stored on micro-
ﬁ lm that would be accessible from anywhere. To hold this archive he 
founded what he called the Mundaneum, an institution in Brussels that 
still exists, though not on the original site.


THE AGE OF TERRITORIALITY 
143
Otlet has been described, like the eighteenth-century collector Hans 
Sloane, as a man who tried to classify and catalogue the world.64 His 
schemes for information retrieval were part of a wider vision that included 
world peace and world government. In this respect Otlet resembles 
Comenius and other adepts of pansophia. So does Geddes, who shared 
Otlet’s views on peace and corresponded with him. Even if Otlet’s polit-
ical dreams remain unrealized, his technological dream came true 
following the digital revolution. What he called his réseau mondial, and 
his contemporary H. G. Wells, the English pioneer of science ﬁ ction, 
called the ‘nervous network’ of a ‘world brain’, became reality in the 
World Wide Web. If Tim Berners-Lee is the father of the web, we might 
say that Paul Otlet was one of its grandfathers.
Otto Neurath’s life work was to restore the ‘unity of science’, as he 
called it, after taking refuge in Britain in 1940 (earlier, writing in German, 
he had referred to Einheitswissenschaft and included sociology and 
psychology as well as the natural sciences). People who met him remarked 
on Neurath’s ‘all-embracing knowledge’, and also on his bookshelves, 
‘ﬁ lled with works by scientists, philosophers, poets, fathers of the 
church’.65 He ‘estimated that on the average he read two books a day’.66
While writing a thesis on the economic history of the ancient world, 
Neurath was also editing the works of a German Romantic poet. He was 
active in politics (a member of the short-lived Bavarian Soviet in 1919), 
as a philosopher (a member of the famous Vienna Circle); as an econo-
mist, particularly interested in war economics; as an empirical sociolo-
gist, interested in housing; as a museum curator; and as a theorist of the 
social sciences. He was the inventor of a cable railway and ‘an aiming-
device for aircraft’ at the time of the First World War.
Neurath is best known as an organizer, founding an institute and a 
journal, arranging congresses and editing an encyclopaedia.67 He shared 
Otlet’s vision of international co-operation and indeed brieﬂ y co-
operated with him, opening a branch of the Mundaneum in Th e Hague.68 
He was conscious of the place of his movement in an intellectual tradi-
tion. His Encyclopedia, he once wrote, ‘continues the work of the famous 
French Encyclopédie’.69 Th e tradition included Comenius, who also 

THE POLYMATH

144
believed in the use of pictures in education. Indeed, Neurath’s crusade 
for the unity of science is rather like an adaptation of the vision of 
pansophia to the world of the twentieth century, placing more emphasis 
on organizations.
THE SURVIVAL OF THE POLYMATH
How did polymaths survive in the new world of specialists, departments 
and teams? One role that was open to them was to ﬁ ght for the unity 
of science, like Geddes, Otlet and Neurath. Another was to become a 
generalist, in other words, paradoxically enough, a specialist whose role 
was to correct the increasing narrowness or myopia of other specialists.
Take the case of the American Lewis Mumford. A follower – at least 
for a time – of Geddes (after whom he christened his son), Mumford also 
described himself as a ‘generalist’, whose ‘Master’ Geddes had ‘saved’ 
him ‘from becoming “just another specialist”’.70 His friend the writer 
Van Wyck Brooks regarded Mumford as a hedgehog, declaring that 
‘Lewis was one of the few men who have not ideas but an idea, and he 
was to spend his life working this out’.71
As a young man, Mumford studied geology, economics and anthro-
pology, besides the disciplines to which he later contributed, literature, 
architecture, history and sociology. Later in life, when students at 
Dartmouth College asked Mumford about his ﬁ eld, he replied that he was 
Professor der Allerlei Wissenschaften – ‘Professor of Th ings in General’. 
Appropriately, Mumford loved bridges. He wrote a play about Brooklyn 
Bridge, and another about Leonardo da Vinci. ‘Only by forfeiting the 
detail can the general pattern be seen,’ he explained, reassembling frag-
ments that had been separated ‘because specialists abide too rigorously by 
a gentleman’s agreement not to invade each other’s territory’.72 Again, ‘Th e 
generalist has a special oﬃ  ce, that of bringing together widely separated 
ﬁ elds, prudently fenced in by specialists, into a larger common area, visible 
only from the air’ (or, one might add, from Geddes’ Outlook Tower).73
Mumford, who has been described as ‘America’s last man of letters’, 
was a serial polymath who began his career as a literary critic.74 From 
literary criticism, including a book on Herman Melville, he turned to 


THE AGE OF TERRITORIALITY 
145
architectural criticism and so to the roles of cultural critic (like Ruskin, 
another of his heroes) and public intellectual.
Mumford had once hoped to become an engineer and continued to 
take an interest in technology, publishing Technics and Civilization 
(1934). His interest in architecture and his love of New York led Mumford 
to the study of cities and so to the social and technological changes that 
had transformed them over the centuries – in Mumford’s view, for the 
worse – at least since the Industrial Revolution. In this way he combined 
an interdisciplinary approach, architectural, historical and sociological, 
with a concentration on a single (large) object of study, producing Th e 
Culture of Cities (1938) and Th e City in History (1961), which is surely 
his masterpiece.
PASSIVE POLYMATHS
Distinctions were drawn earlier between three types of polymath, passive, 
clustered and serial. Th ese distinctions became clearer than before in the 
age of territoriality.
H. G. Wells, Aldous Huxley and Jorge Luis Borges are remembered as 
creative writers, but they were also passive polymaths. Wells used to read 
encyclopaedias in his youth while working in a draper’s shop, and in later 
life planned an encyclopaedia in which he would contribute ‘the plan 
and prefaces’.75 Huxley and Borges (curiously enough, both of them 
individuals with weak eyesight) read the Encyclopaedia Britannica (like 
William Whewell earlier) rather than merely consulting it.
Huxley carried volumes of the Britannica on journeys in a special case, 
while Bertrand Russell remarked that it was always easy to discover which 
volume Aldous was reading, because his conversation would revolve 
around topics beginning with a particular letter of the alphabet.76 Huxley 
used to write for periodicals such as Th e Athenaeum and Harper’s, the 
equivalents of the famous nineteenth-century reviews that were discussed 
earlier. His articles ranged over a wide variety of topics – art, literature, 
philosophy, politics, psychology, music, sociology, religion and so on. 
He described his essays as ‘moderately erudite, but not pedantic, as I 
don’t know enough to do the professor stunt with conﬁ dence’. He later 

THE POLYMATH

146
declared that ‘By profession I am an essayist who sometimes writes novels 
and biographies.’77 Huxley also appeared on ‘Th e Brains Trust’, a BBC 
programme of the 1940s and 1950s in which a group of intellectuals 
answered questions from the public. ‘Few ﬁ gures in the twentieth century 
have so insistently laid claim to the title of “polymath”.’78
Borges told an interviewer that ‘As a youngster, I used to come here to 
the library [the Biblioteca Nacional, Buenos Aires] quite frequently, and 
since I was very shy and didn’t dare ask the librarian for books, I would 
take a volume of the Britannica, any volume, from the shelf myself . . . 
and read it.’79 Borges had a love aﬀ air with encyclopaedias, not only 
reading them but also writing about them, as in the famous case of 
the imaginary Chinese encyclopaedia described in his essay on the 
seventeenth-century English polymath John Wilkins.
Borges might be considered an equivalent of Huxley in the Spanish-
speaking world, combining his ﬁ ction with essays and reviews on a great 
variety of topics.80 Indeed, if he had died in 1940, at the age of forty-one, 
Borges would be remembered today only as a poet and as an essayist 
(with ﬁ ve volumes of essays already published at that time). He described 
himself at the age of forty-seven, travelling ‘up and down Argentina and 
Uruguay, lecturing on Swedenborg, Blake, the Persian and Chinese 
mystics, Buddhism, gauchesco poetry, Martin Buber, the Kabbalah, the 
Arabian Nights, T. E. Lawrence, medieval Germanic poetry, the Icelandic 
sagas, Heine, Dante, expressionism and Cervantes’.81 Th e range of topics 
seems almost unbelievable.
Th e major interests of Borges – philosophy, language, mathematics, 
history, orientalism and the occult – surface in his ﬁ ction, which often 
deals with epistemological questions, notably the relation between repre-
sentation and reality, the problem of classifying knowledge (approached 
via the Chinese encyclopaedia), and the method of ‘abduction’ (a partic-
ular kind of inference associated with the polymath Charles Peirce) in 
‘Th e Garden of the Forking Paths’. Th e stories are especially concerned 
with the idea of total knowledge. Th e library of Babel is inﬁ nite, Funes 
remembers everything, and a map is described as the same size as the 
territory it represents.82


THE AGE OF TERRITORIALITY 
147
CRITICS
In the twentieth century, as in the nineteenth, a number of polymaths 
became cultural critics. Among the leading players of this role were Johan 
Huizinga, José Ortega y Gasset, Edmund Wilson, George Steiner, Susan 
Sontag and Umberto Eco. Let us focus for a moment on Steiner and 
Sontag (Eco will make his appearance later).
George Steiner has been described as ‘the best generalist reviewer of 
books since Edmund Wilson’.83 He has also been called ‘a late, late, late 
Renaissance man’ and ‘Th is monster who knows everything’ (Boerhaave’s 
metaphor remains current).84 Steiner spent some formative years at the 
University of Chicago, taking courses in physics, chemistry, biology, 
anthropology, literature and philosophy and discovering Heidegger by 
listening to a lecture by Leo Strauss. He has written about philosophy, 
theology, linguistics, history and chess as well as trying his hand at 
ﬁ ction. Much of his work consists of essays originally published in the 
New Yorker and other journals.
Steiner has played the role of a cultural critic with gusto, denouncing 
the ‘barbarism’ of our time and, more constructively, advocating the exten-
sion of the idea of cultural literacy to include the sciences as well as the 
arts.85 He has described himself as engaged in intellectual ‘border-crossing’ 
and oﬀ ers an especially vigorous critique of specialization, which according 
to him ‘has reached moronic vehemence’.86 Despite the variety of topics 
on which he has expressed opinions, at times with over-conﬁ dence, his 
reputation rests most ﬁ rmly on his studies in comparative literature, espe-
cially European literature of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
Th e hat of a cultural critic also ﬁ ts Susan Sontag, who built up a 
library of 10,000 books and was described by a friend as ‘an intellectual 
marathon runner, always trying to better her time’. She once declared 
that ‘I do not want to be a professor and I do not want to be a journalist. 
I want to be a writer who is also an intellectual.’87 As a child, Sontag ‘used 
to like to read encyclopaedias’.88 Like Steiner, she enrolled at the 
University of Chicago, attracted by the interdisciplinary ‘core curric-
ulum’ (discussed in chapter 8), and studying science as well as philos-
ophy and literature. When she married Philip Rieﬀ , she worked with 

THE POLYMATH

148
him on Freud: Th e Mind of the Moralist (1959). She registered as a grad-
uate student in English literature at Harvard but became a teaching 
assistant in philosophy. She went to Paris to study contemporary philos-
ophy but spent much of her time at the cinema.
Sontag wrote novels and plays and directed two ﬁ lms, but she 
confessed to an ‘addiction’ to essay writing as well as to smoking. In fact, 
she produced no fewer than nine collections of essays, including Against 
Interpretation (1966), On Photography (1977) and Illness as Metaphor 
(1978). Like Steiner, she became a cultural critic – unafraid, when still in 
her thirties, to oﬀ er conﬁ dent generalizations and to point out the weak 
points of celebrated ﬁ gures such as Ingmar Bergman (‘callow pseudo-
intellectuality’), Georg Lukács (‘crude’) and C. P. Snow (‘shallow knowl-
edge of the arts’).89 Her interests took a political turn from 1968 onwards 
with visits to North Vietnam and Cuba. She ﬁ rst supported the Left but 
later criticized it. Her comments on 9/11 took an unpopular line, 
refusing to call the terrorists ‘cowards’ and viewing them as responding 
to US foreign policy.
Sontag’s essays concentrated on the arts and humanities, ranging over 
painting (from Mannerism to modern art), literature, theatre, dance, 
philosophy, psychoanalysis, anthropology, history and especially photog-
raphy and ﬁ lm, an area in which she became an expert.90 Her greatest 
achievement was probably to construct bridges between two cultures, 
not the sciences and the humanities this time but between ‘high’ and 
‘low’ culture, confessing an interest in ‘David Bowie and Diderot’ and 
giving interviews to both Rolling Stone and Tel Quel.91
CLUSTERED POLYMATHS
Some polymaths may be described as ‘clustered’ in the sense that their 
achievements are concentrated in related ﬁ elds, following what the poly-
math Donald T. Campbell, a critic of ‘the ethnocentrism of disciplines’, 
called the ‘ﬁ sh-scale model’ of overlapping enterprises.92 Where general-
ists such as Patrick Geddes and Otto Neurath built bridges between 
distant disciplines, the clustered polymaths built bridges that were 
shorter but carried more traﬃ  c. Th e transfer and domestication of 


THE AGE OF TERRITORIALITY 
149
concepts between neighbouring disciplines is at once less diﬃ  cult and 
less spectacular than transfers between distant ones, but, because it is 
more frequent, it has probably played a more important role in the 
history of knowledge.
Max Weber, often described, like Durkheim, as one of the ‘founding 
fathers’ of sociology, once quipped that ‘I now happen to be a sociologist 
according to my appointment papers’.93 He began his career as a hist-
orian and his thesis on Roman agrarian history impressed the great 
ancient historian Th eodor Mommsen, so much so that he regarded the 
younger man as his destined successor. Weber also contributed to the 
disciplines of philosophy, law and economics. He eﬀ ectively gave up his 
chair of sociology in 1903 in favour of ‘a future career conducted along 
interdisciplinary lines’.94 Historians still argue about Weber’s explanation 
of the rise of capitalism; philosophers of social science still discuss his 
notion of the ‘ideal type’ or model; and sociologists and political scien-
tists still make use of his categories of traditional, bureaucratic and char-
ismatic rule (Weber borrowed the term ‘charisma’ from the theologian 
Rudolf Otto, adapting it to his purposes).
In economics, Kenneth Boulding described himself as ‘a fairly pure 
economist’ until 1949 and ‘a rather impure social philosopher’ after that, 
explaining that ‘Th e pursuit of any problem in economics always draws 
me into some other science before I can catch it.’ He also declared that 
there is ‘no such thing as economics, only social science applied to 
economic problems’, viewing the economy (like another polymath, Karl 
Polanyi) as embedded in a larger whole. An Englishman by birth, Boulding 
was attracted to the University of Michigan because ‘Ann Arbor looks like 
a good place to integrate the social sciences if they are integrable’. Besides 
economics, Boulding’s 40-odd books and 800 articles were concerned 
with society, knowledge, conﬂ ict, peace, the history of the nineteenth and 
twentieth centuries and what he called ‘eco-dynamics’.95
Th e American political scientist Harold Lasswell studied philosophy 
and economics at the University of Chicago but turned to political 
science, writing his doctoral dissertation on propaganda during the First 
World War. He discovered psychoanalysis, was himself analysed, and 

THE POLYMATH

150
became widely known for his book Psychopathology and Politics (1930). 
In the course of his career, Lasswell collaborated with a lawyer, a philoso-
pher and a sociologist.96 Th e American Council of Learned Societies 
declared him to be ‘master of all the social sciences and a pioneer in each: 
rambunctiously devoted to breaking down barriers between the social 
studies, and so acquainting each with the rest; ﬁ ller-in of interdiscipli-
nary spaces between political science, psychology, philosophy and soci-
ology’.97 Th e declaration not only honours Lasswell but also oﬀ ers a vivid 
summary of the social role of polymaths.
Still more diﬃ  cult to classify is Michel Foucault. Although his father, 
a surgeon, wanted his son to study medicine, Foucault began his career 
as a philosopher, but developed interests in diﬀ erent kinds of psychology, 
from experimental psychology to psychoanalysis. His doctoral disserta-
tion, on madness, arose from these interests but led him further aﬁ eld to 
the cultural and historical context of changing attitudes to patients. 
Published in 1961 as Histoire de la Folie (Th e History of Madness), it made 
the author famous.
While he was writing the dissertation, Foucault was teaching French 
language and literature in Sweden. On his return to France he began to 
publish studies of writers, including Gustave Flaubert, Alain Robbe-
Grillet and Raymond Roussel. In the same year – actually, on the same 
day – that he published the book on Roussel, in 1963, Foucault also 
published a better-known book, Th e Birth of the Clinic, ﬁ nally responding 
to his father’s wish that his son would study medicine, but in a typically 
unexpected way. Th e study focused on institutions and on spaces, thus 
making a contribution to sociology or social geography.
Th ree years later came Foucault’s Les Mots et les Choses (Th e Order of 
Th ings), a study in intellectual history focused on three disciplines, 
linguistics, economics and biology. Th e book began in dramatic fashion 
with a close analysis of a painting by Velázquez, a ﬁ rst foray into the 
history of art (Foucault later wrote, but did not publish, a book on 
Manet). In the 1970s his interests expanded to include law, crime and 
punishment. He published a dialogue on popular justice with a Marxist 
intellectual, a study of a nineteenth-century parricide (in collaboration 


THE AGE OF TERRITORIALITY 
151
with members of his seminar) and one of his most famous books, 
Surveiller et Punir (Discipline and Punish, 1975), which focused on the 
history of prisons. A year later Foucault published the ﬁ rst volume of 
an ambitious history of sexuality, La Volonté de Savoir (Th e History of 
Sexuality, 1976), continuing to work on it until his early death but also 
lecturing on other topics such as governmentality and biopolitics.
Foucault’s various interests were in fact connected, with the history of 
knowledge at their centre. Th e author described his history of madness 
as a study of knowledge ‘invested’ in institutions and his history of 
prisons as part of the background to the formation of knowledge in 
modern society. He defended his approach to intellectual history in a 
book entitled L’Archéologie du Savoir (Th e Archaeology of Knowledge, 
1969). He discussed the relation between knowledge and power (savoir 
and pouvoir) in a famous interview given in 1975 and began his history 
of sexuality with an essay on the ‘will to knowledge’.98
NEW DISCIPLINES
Paradoxically enough, the foundation of new disciplines in an age of 
specialization oﬀ ered a new role for polymaths, at least in the short term, 
since a new discipline is necessarily taught in the ﬁ rst generation by 
professors who have been trained in something else. Th e discipline needs 
serial polymaths, nomads in an age of territoriality. It also attracts them, 
oﬀ ering the freedom associated with a frontier of knowledge. Th is kind 
of opportunity for polymaths comes only once, since the second genera-
tion is trained in the new discipline and so reinforces specialization.
A few polymaths have christened new disciplines, successful or unsuc-
cessful. Auguste Comte christened ‘sociology’, Charles Peirce ‘semiotics’, 
Norbert Wiener ‘cybernetics’, Constantinos Doxiadis ‘ekistics’, Félix 
Guattari ‘ecosophy’, Ray Birdwhistell ‘kinesics’ and Hans Blumenberg, 
‘metaphorology’. At the beginning of the twentieth century the develop-
ment of biometrics, a form of mathematical biology, owed a good deal to 
a single polymath, Karl Pearson.
Pearson, a disciple of Galton who was appointed to a chair in applied 
mathematics at University College London in 1884, wrote some important 

THE POLYMATH

152
papers on ‘mathematical contributions to the theory of evolution’. However, 
Pearson’s interests were much wider. One of his ﬁ rst publications, at the age 
of twenty-six, was an article on Spinoza’s debt to Moses Maimonides, an 
article that revealed Pearson’s knowledge of Hebrew, Latin and Dutch. He 
was particularly interested in German culture and gave lectures in London 
on Martin Luther and also, as he remembered later, on Ferdinand Lassalle 
and Karl Marx ‘on Sundays at revolutionary clubs around Soho’. He later 
became a professor of eugenics.99
Polymaths also played an important role in the early development of 
biochemistry. Linus Pauling, for instance, carried out research in physics 
and chemistry (for which he won a Nobel Prize) before he turned to molec-
ular biology, a ﬁ eld that the ‘knowledge manager’ Warren Weaver was 
supporting in the 1930s. Weaver studied civil engineering and taught math-
ematics before becoming Director of the Division of Natural Sciences at the 
Rockefeller Foundation in 1932, where he was appointed in order to launch 
a new programme on biochemistry ‘described at the time as ‘vital processes’. 
Weaver adopted a hands-on approach, approving projects personally and 
staying at home on Wednesdays so that he could catch up with new publi-
cations in the ﬁ eld. Weaver’s wide interests inform his collaboration with 
Claude Shannon on the mathematical theory of communication, his 
involvement with the Green Revolution in the third world, his work on 
computer translation and his book, Lady Luck, on probability theory.100
THE SOCIAL SCIENCES
In the social sciences, which were emerging as autonomous disciplines 
from the later nineteenth century onwards, the role of polymaths is 
particularly visible. Some recruits to these new disciplines came from 
medicine, such as Paolo Mantegazza, who exchanged a chair in pathology 
at the University of Pavia for one in anthropology. He published articles 
on a wide range of topics as well as a novel set in the future.101 His 
compatriot Giuseppe Pitrè was trained in medicine before becoming a 
historian of popular traditions and ﬁ nally, at the age of seventy, professor 
of ‘popular psychology’ (demopsicologia) at the University of Palermo.102 
A third Italian, Cesare Lombroso, was originally a surgeon who moved 


THE AGE OF TERRITORIALITY 
153
into psychology (and parapsychology) before becoming famous as the 
founder of the anthropology of criminals.103
A fourth Italian, Vilfredo Pareto, began his career as a civil engineer, 
working on the railways. He moved into economics (becoming professor 
of political economy at Lausanne in 1893), and then into political 
and social sciences. When he moved disciplines, Pareto took the idea 
of equilibrium with him, illustrating once again the contribution that 
serial polymaths can make to innovation.104 So do the early histories of 
the disciplines of sociology, psychology and anthropology, and more 
recently the ﬁ elds of computer science, general systems and semiotics.
SOCIOLOGY
Sociology, a discipline named by Auguste Comte, owes its emergence to 
polymaths. In France, Frédéric Le Play, whose book inspired Geddes, was 
an engineer and a professor of metallurgy before turning to the sociology 
of the family, or, as he called it, économie sociale. In Belgium, Adolphe 
Quételet began his career as a mathematician but moved into astronomy 
and meteorology. His interest in the mathematics of probability led him 
into the study of statistics and so into what he called ‘social physics’, 
contributing to anthropometry and to what we call ‘criminology’.105 
Much later, the statistical turn in North American sociology was encour-
aged by the Austrian refugee Paul Lazarsfeld, who was originally an 
applied mathematician.
One of the most famous sociologists, Émile Durkheim, began his 
academic career teaching philosophy and education. His rival Gabriel 
Tarde was a magistrate who became a professor of philosophy at the 
Collège de France. Tarde was not only the author of a book on social 
‘laws’ such as imitation, but also a criminologist who adopted anthropo-
logical and psychological approaches to criminals. Like Mantegazza, 
Tarde wrote a novel set in the future.106 In Germany, Georg Simmel, who 
was, like Durkheim, concerned to establish sociology as an independent 
discipline, was also known as an individual of ‘extensive and many-sided 
knowledge’.107 He published essays on a wide variety of subjects that 
included Rembrandt and Goethe as well as psychology and philosophy.

THE POLYMATH

154
In the United States, the story is a similar one. Lester Ward, who was 
appointed professor of sociology at Brown University in 1906, at the age 
of sixty-ﬁ ve, had worked for the Bureau of Statistics as a librarian and for 
the US Geological Survey as a botanist, geologist and paleontologist. No 
wonder, then, that he had the conﬁ dence to entitle one of his courses ‘A 
Survey of All Knowledge’.108
In Britain, despite the foundation of a department of sociology at the 
London School of Economics in 1904, the discipline was slow to develop. 
Hence the German polymath Norbert Elias was able to make a major 
contribution to this development as late as the 1950s. Elias studied medi-
cine, philosophy, history and psychoanalysis as well as sociology, and all 
these disciplines shaped his social theory. He knew enough about embry-
ology to discuss the theoretical implications of research carried out by 
his friend Alfred Glucksmann.109 From medicine, Elias turned to philos-
ophy, writing a doctoral dissertation on the philosophy of history at 
the University of Breslau. Moving to Heidelberg, he discovered sociology. 
As an exile in Britain after Hitler’s rise to power, Elias discovered psycho-
analysis. His most famous book, Über den Prozess der Zivilisation (Th e 
Civilizing Process, 1939), combined history, psychology and social 
theory.
Appointed a lecturer in sociology at the University of Leicester in 
1954 – at the age of ﬁ fty-seven – Elias played a major role in building up 
the department. He disliked being classiﬁ ed as a historical sociologist, 
arguing that all sociology should have a historical dimension and criti-
cizing his colleagues for what he called their ‘retreat into the present’. 
Elias also studied society in his own time and he was, above all, an orig-
inal theorist. He never forgot his medical training, and the relation 
between the body and society remained an enduring theme in his work, 
from the early studies of good manners to the later ones on sport. 
Developing the sociology of knowledge associated with Karl Mannheim 
(whose assistant he had been at the University of Frankfurt in the early 
1930s), Elias analysed the process of specialization and the rise of what 
he called ‘scientiﬁ c establishments’, comparing their rivalry to the compe-
tition between ﬁ rms and nation states.110


THE AGE OF TERRITORIALITY 
155
PSYCHOLOGY
As psychology became independent from philosophy in the later nine-
teenth century, it attracted serial polymaths. Wilhelm Wundt, for instance, 
began his career in medicine and physiology, moving into experimental 
psychology, a ﬁ eld of which he was one of the founders, and on to philos-
ophy and the ‘psychology of peoples’ (Völkerpsychologie).111 William James, 
who accused Wundt of aiming to become ‘a sort of Napoleon of the intel-
lectual world’, followed a similar itinerary. James studied medicine at 
Harvard, becoming an instructor in anatomy and physiology and then 
founding what is said to be the ﬁ rst laboratory for experimental psychology 
in the world in 1875. He remains best known as a philosopher and as the 
author of Varieties of Religious Experience (1902).112
In France, Gustave Le Bon, who had also been trained in medicine, 
wrote travel books and popular science before making his reputation in 
psychology, especially the psychology of crowds, an interest triggered – 
as in the case of Taine, discussed earlier – by his observations during the 
Paris Commune of 1871.113
Th e founder of psychoanalysis was another polymath. Freud began 
his career in the Faculty of Medicine at the University of Vienna, followed 
by the study of marine biology in Trieste. He turned to physiology, 
study ing the nerve cells of ﬁ sh. Indeed, for twenty years, Freud ‘was 
primarily a neurologist and anatomist’. His ﬁ rst book, Aphasia (1891), 
has been described as ‘a solid contribution to conventional neuro-
pathology’.114 When he moved into psychology and developed the 
method of psychoanalysis, his genetic approach was inspired by biology. 
An admirer of Darwin, Freud has been called the ‘Darwin of the psyche’ 
and ‘the biologist of the mind’.
Freud’s interests were not limited to the natural sciences. His classical 
education left traces on his later work, most obviously in his concept of 
an ‘Oedipus Complex’. He was well read in modern literature and wrote 
on Shakespeare and other authors. He studied history, including the 
history of art, and wrote on Leonardo da Vinci and on a case of posses-
sion by the devil in the seventeenth century. He collected ancient 
Egyptian artefacts. He discovered anthropology and published Totem 

THE POLYMATH

156
and Taboo (1913), discussing what he called ‘resemblances between the 
psychic life of savages and neurotics’ (though leading anthropologists 
such as Franz Boas were not convinced).115
ANTHROPOLOGY
Th e ﬁ rst generation of teachers of anthropology (or ethnology) and 
writers on the subject came from a broad span of disciplines, including 
former medics, zoologists, classicists and theologians.
In France, Paul Broca, the founder of the Société d’Anthropologie de 
Paris, came from medicine and was particularly interested in physical 
anthropology. On the other hand, Durkheim’s nephew and intellectual 
heir Marcel Mauss was a pioneer of cultural anthropology whose Essay on 
the Gift (1925) remains a fundamental work in that ﬁ eld. Mauss had 
even wider interests than his uncle. He studied oriental philology and 
taught both ethnography and the history of religions. He also made 
studies of law, economics and history. No wonder, then, that his students 
used to say that Mauss knew everything. He wrote and published rela-
tively little, spending his time learning new things. His reputation rests 
on a few seminal essays that would have been impossible to write had the 
author not read so widely.116 In the United States, Franz Boas, an emigrant 
from Germany and another pioneer of cultural anthropology, had been 
active as a geographer and a museum curator before becoming professor 
of anthropology at Columbia in 1899. His pupils and disciples would 
become major ﬁ gures in the new discipline.117
Th e Englishman Alfred Haddon was a zoologist who became inter-
ested in the culture of rural western Ireland in the course of his research 
on sea anemones there. He was invited to join an expedition to the 
islands of the Torres Straits (now part of Queensland) in 1898 as a 
zoologist, but there too he studied the local culture. He was appointed a 
lecturer in ethnology at Cambridge in 1900.118 Another member of the 
expedition to the Torres Straits was William Rivers who, encouraged by 
Haddon, added anthropology to a portfolio of intellectual interests that 
already included medicine, neurology and psychology. His study Th e 
Todas (1906) made a major contribution to the ethnography of India.119


THE AGE OF TERRITORIALITY 
157
Another route to anthropology was through classics, as in the case of 
James Frazer, who became interested in comparative mythology and reli-
gion and wrote Th e Golden Bough (1890), thanks to which he is regarded 
as an ancestor, if not exactly a founder, of social anthropology.120 Some 
of the many publications of another classicist (and another Scot), Andrew 
Lang, were concerned with anthropology and folklore, disciplines that 
were not yet clearly diﬀ erentiated at the beginning of the twentieth 
century. Lang has been described as ‘a raider, a free-lance, crossing all 
men’s frontiers’.121 He wrote on mythology, psychical research and 
Scottish history.122 Bronisław Malinowski studied mathematics and 
physics at Cracow before Frazer’s Golden Bough inspired him to make his 
famous anthropological turn. Th e same book inspired Jack Goody, who 
began by reading English at Cambridge, to move into anthropology (he 
later wrote on history and sociology as well).
Like Lang, the most remarkable of the British polymaths involved 
with anthropology in its early years never held a post in that discipline. 
William Robertson Smith, another Scot, was for a time the editor-in-
chief of the Encyclopedia Britannica in the 1880s. A fellow scholar 
remarked on the ‘rare versatility’ of his knowledge, while an obituary 
declared that ‘Professor Smith, in the depth and range of his knowledge, 
had no equal among living men.’123 Smith’s intellectual trajectory went 
from mathematics to theology and a chair in biblical exegesis in Aberdeen, 
from which he was removed for ‘heresy’. He became Professor of Arabic 
at Cambridge and published a study on Kinship and Marriage in Early 
Arabia (1885). It was Smith’s friendship with Frazer that encouraged the 
latter’s anthropological turn.124
COMPUTER SCIENCE
In the middle of the twentieth century a number of polymaths came 
together in the new and fast-developing ﬁ eld of computers and artiﬁ cial 
intelligence. Th ey included, in order of seniority, Norbert Wiener (born 
in 1894), John von Neumann (1903), Alan Turing (1912) and Claude 
Shannon (1916). Other polymaths attracted to this ﬁ eld were Herbert 
Simon, Allen Newell and Marvin Minsky.

THE POLYMATH

158
Wiener gained a degree in mathematics at the age of fourteen, wrote 
his Ph.D dissertation on logic and tried out a number of occupations, 
from engineer to journalist, before settling down as a professor of math-
ematics at MIT. His research on the automatic aiming of anti-aircraft 
guns during the Second World War led him into the ﬁ eld that he chris-
tened ‘cybernetics’, participating in the annual conferences on the subject 
organized by the Macy Foundation from 1946 onwards and exchanging 
ideas with John von Neumann.125
Neumann, another child prodigy in mathematics, went on to study 
chemistry and to carry out research on hydrodynamics and meteorology. 
An acquaintance testiﬁ ed that ‘von Neumann’s mind was all-encompassing. 
He could solve problems in any domain.’126 At the Institute of Advanced 
Study in Princeton, he worked on mathematical economics, including a 
famous application of game theory to economic behaviour. Making use of 
computers to assist his calculations, Neumann became interested in 
improving them, developing what he described as ‘an obscene interest’ in 
these machines, including their viruses.127 From 1946 onwards, he too 
attended the Macy conferences on the subject.128
Claude Shannon graduated from the University of Michigan with 
two degrees, one in mathematics and the other in electrical engineering, 
and wrote his Ph.D dissertation on the uses of mathematics in the study 
of genetics. His article ‘A Mathematical Th eory of Communication’ 
(1948), which drew in part on the work of Wiener, laid the foundations 
of information theory. It developed into a book he wrote with Warren 
Weaver, the ‘knowledge manager’ discussed earlier, Th e Mathematical 
Th eory of Communication, 1949. Shannon was also an inventor of (among 
other things) a machine that explained how computers worked.129
During the Second World War, Shannon worked on code-breaking. 
It was in this capacity that he met the only Englishman in this group, 
Alan Turing, a serial polymath who was in turn a mathematician, philos-
opher, cryptanalyst, engineer and theoretical biologist. In 1936 Turing 
invented what he called a ‘universal machine’, now known as the ‘Turing 
machine’, which was able to do the work of all other machines. Th e most 
famous episode of Turing’s career was during the Second World War, 


THE AGE OF TERRITORIALITY 
159
when he was sent to Bletchley Park to assist with breaking the German 
‘Enigma’ code, designing a machine to do so. After the war, before his 
career came to a tragic end (probably suicide) following his arrest for 
homosexuality, Turing worked on what he called the ‘imitation game’, in 
other words the construction of a computer that would be able to respond 
to questions in a manner indistinguishable from humans.130
Th e careers of this quartet of extraordinary men illustrate two recur-
rent themes of this study. One is the attraction of an emerging ﬁ eld of 
study to individuals with wide interests. Th e other is the role of the 
outsider as innovator, examining problems in one discipline with the 
habit of thought of an individual trained in another.
GENERAL SYSTEMS
Towards the end of his short life, Turing moved into mathematical 
biology, viewing the analogies between living creatures and machines 
from the opposite perspective. In similar fashion, working with computers 
led Neumann to think of the nervous system as digital and so to 
contribute to the rise of neuroscience. His book Th e Computer and the 
Brain was published posthumously in 1958.
Among biologists, systems were already a central interest of polymaths 
such as Lawrence Henderson, Ludwig von Bertalanﬀ y and Anatol 
Rapoport. Henderson was active as a chemist but is better known for his 
work in physiology. While working in the chemistry laboratory at Harvard, 
he attended the seminars in philosophy led by Josiah Royce. Henderson 
later organized a seminar of his own on the sociology of Vilfredo Pareto 
and published a book on Pareto written from a physiologist’s point of view 
and discussing the idea of systems across the disciplines.131
Biologists, like engineers, form a group that think with, as well as 
about, systems. Th e Austrian Ludwig von Bertalanﬀ y, for instance, was 
both a biologist and a founder of general systems theory. He began his 
academic career by studying philosophy and art history and wrote his 
Ph.D dissertation on the work of another polymath, the philosopher–
psychologist–physicist Gustav Fechner. Turning to theoretical biology, he 
adopted a mathematical approach (the ‘Bertalanﬀ y equation’ describes the 

THE POLYMATH

160
growth of an organism in mathematical terms). He went on to contrast the 
‘closed systems’ of physics, subject to the laws of thermodynamics, with the 
‘open systems’ of living things, moving outwards still further to include 
psychology and the social sciences in his General Systems Th eory (1969) 
or GST.132
Th e Russian-American Rapoport was a third scientist of wide inter-
ests that included music and psychology but centred, like Bertalanﬀ y’s, 
on mathematical biology, the behavioural sciences and general systems 
theory (he helped to found the Society for General Systems Research in 
1954). He declared himself to be fascinated by what he called ‘the funda-
mental interconnectedness of everything with everything else’.133
Th e polymathic economist Kenneth Boulding dated the birth of GST 
to Palo Alto in California in 1954, when Bertalanﬀ y, Rapoport, Ralph 
Gerard and Boulding himself met and realized that they were ‘converging 
on something like General Systems from diﬀ erent directions’.134
SEMIOTICS
Semiotics is a crossroads rather than a ﬁ eld or a discipline, so it is partic-
ularly appropriate that polymaths have played a large part in the devel-
opment of this ‘science of signs’. Th ey include Charles Peirce, Roman 
Jakobson, Juri Lotman, Roland Barthes, Charles Morris, Jacob von 
Uexküll, Th omas Sebeok, Giorgio Prodi and Umberto Eco, an interna-
tional group who arrived at this destination from some very diﬀ erent 
points of departure.
Peirce, now best known as a philosopher, studied chemistry and 
zoology and carried out his own research on gravity and the mathematics 
of probability. Working on logic, he distinguished a kind of inference 
that was neither deduction nor induction, and coined the term ‘abduc-
tion’ to describe it. He also studied psychology and economics. Like 
other polymaths, from Bacon to Comte, Peirce was interested in the clas-
siﬁ cation of the sciences. He studied what he called ‘semiotics’ from the 
point of view of a logician, distinguishing between three kinds of sign 
that he called an ‘icon’, which resembles its object; an ‘index’, which is 
connected to its object; and a symbol.135


THE AGE OF TERRITORIALITY 
161
Roman Jakobson liked to describe himself as ‘a Russian philologist’, 
words that are inscribed (in Russian) on his tombstone, but the interests of 
this polyglot scholar were much wider. Colleagues called him a ‘polyhistor’ 
and ‘one of the most far-ranging scholars of the 20th century’.136 If language 
was at the centre of his interests, there was also plenty of periphery.
Jakobson was a friend of the Russian folklorist Petr Bogatyrev, ‘who’, 
so he wrote later, ‘initiated me into the delights and arduous tasks of 
ethnographic ﬁ eld work’.137 Together they published a seminal article 
about folklore, comparing and contrasting it with literature. Th e authors 
argued that folklore corresponds to what linguists call langue, in the 
sense of a system of resources for speech, whereas literature corresponds 
to parole, a particular selection from those resources.138 Th e article oﬀ ers 
a typical example of the recurrent use of binary oppositions in Jakobson’s 
work, a legacy of his early study of Hegel’s dialectic.139
His interest in language also led Jakobson towards psychology, including 
neuropsychology.140 He studied the acquisition of language by children 
and in 1956 published a famous article on aphasia. Jakobson noticed that 
two types of this impairment of language ran parallel to two well-known 
ﬁ gures of speech, metaphor (based on similarity), and metonymy (based 
on contiguity).141 Th is article illustrates once again how serial polymaths 
can make original contributions to their second or third disciplines by 
approaching them with the mental habits acquired in their ﬁ rst one.
Jakobson’s ideas have made an impact on even more disciplines than 
the ones to which he contributed in person. Th e psychoanalyst Jacques 
Lacan’s approach to the unconscious in terms of language was indebted 
to his work.142 Claude Lévi-Strauss, who ﬁ rst met Jakobson in New York 
in 1941 and later collaborated with him, acknowledged a debt to his 
ideas about the importance of binary oppositions in language. In this 
way, Jakobson contributed to structuralist anthropology and so to the 
more general rise of structuralism (a term that he had already used as 
early as 1929 to refer to an emphasis on the relations between things 
rather than on things themselves).143
Another Russian, Juri Lotman, an admirer of Jakobson who founded 
the Tartu school of semiotics, coined the term ‘semiosphere’ to describe a 

THE POLYMATH

162
ﬁ eld in which diﬀ erent systems of signs meet. Roland Barthes preferred the 
term ‘semiology’ and focused on literature, but also applied this ‘structur-
alist’ approach to language, advertising, wrestling, food and especially 
fashion. Even his account of a visit to Japan presented the author as an 
observer engaged in reading signs.144
Th e American Charles Morris studied engineering and psychology 
and took a Ph.D in philosophy before moving into semiotics. He also 
belonged to the movement for the unity of science. His former student 
Th omas Sebeok was active as a linguist and an anthropologist before 
helping to found biosemiotics, a ﬁ eld that owes much to the Estonian 
aristocrat Jakob von Uexküll. Uexküll was a physiologist, biologist and 
ecologist who became interested in the way in which diﬀ erent animals 
perceive their environment (their Umwelt, a concept that was taken up 
by Lotman). He studied living organisms as examples of information 
processing, since they respond to signs. Th e Italian Giorgio Prodi, whose 
principal ﬁ eld was medicine, was another leader in the ﬁ eld of biosemi-
otics. He was also a friend of Umberto Eco, one of the leading polymaths 
of recent years, described by Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti as ‘a poly-
hedric personality’.145
Eco was a philosopher, a literary critic, a semiotician and an essayist 
on an extraordinary variety of subjects – serial music, candomblé, the Red 
Brigades, the Middle Ages and so on. Th e essays, often articles in news-
papers such as L’Espresso, oﬀ ered lucid and accessible summaries of diﬃ  -
cult subjects for a wide range of readers, and also arguments that often 
contradicted the conventional wisdom about the individuals and the 
topics discussed. Like Susan Sontag, Eco bridged the divide between 
high culture and popular culture, using semiotic theory to write about 
Superman and James Bond, juxtaposing Heidegger to the sports press 
and discussing the Middle Ages as evoked both by the French historian 
Georges Duby and by what Eco called the ‘pseudo-medieval pulp’ of 
Conan the Barbarian.
Eco followed a mainly academic career, writing a dissertation on the 
aesthetics of Th omas Aquinas (1954). His friendship with the composer 
Luciano Berio led him to produce a general study of the avant-garde in 


THE AGE OF TERRITORIALITY 
163
the arts and sciences, drawing analogies between diﬀ erent ‘disciplinary 
universes’, as he called them. Eco moved from a chair of visual commu-
nication at the University of Florence to a chair of semiotics at the 
University of Bologna. He combined his academic career with work in 
television, publishing, journalism and ﬁ nally ﬁ ction, beginning with his 
best-selling novel Th e Name of the Rose (1980), which linked several of 
the author’s interests. It is a murder story in which the detective follows 
Peirce’s method of abduction, it is set in the Middle Ages, and the solu-
tion of the mystery depends on the correct reading of a sign.146
SIX SERIAL POLYMATHS
More polymaths were active in the twentieth century than can possibly 
be ﬁ tted into this chapter, but it is equally impossible to leave out six 
individuals whose range is reminiscent of the seventeenth-century 
‘monsters’ who were discussed earlier. In chronological order of birth, 
they are Pavel Florensky (1882), Michael Polanyi (1891), Joseph 
Needham (1900), Gregory Bateson (1904), Herbert Simon (1916) and 
Michel de Certeau (1925).
Pavel Florensky has been described as ‘Russia’s unknown da Vinci’. 
After studying mathematics and philosophy at university, he went on to 
become an Orthodox priest, to lecture on theology and to publish studies 
in that discipline as well as in philosophy and the history and theory of art. 
Studying icons, he focused on the representation of space (revealing the 
habitus of a geometrician). Less predictably, Florensky collected popular 
songs and carried out research in electrodynamics, describing this as 
compensation for ‘the cultural barrenness’ of self-suﬃ  cient mathematics. 
At this time, the 1920s, electriﬁ cation was a major project of the new Soviet 
Union and Florensky participated in electriﬁ cation commissions (addressing 
one conference on the topic while wearing his cassock, to the surprise of 
another participant, Leon Trotsky). Even after he had been arrested, in the 
course of Stalin’s purges, Florensky continued to study topics as various as 
the Orochen language and the production of iodine from seaweed.147
Michael Polanyi came from Hungary and was originally trained in 
medicine. He turned to chemistry, carrying on research in Germany before 

THE POLYMATH

164
ﬂ eeing to England in 1933 after the Nazis’ rise to power and becoming 
Professor of Physical Chemistry (C. P. Snow’s discipline) at the University 
of Manchester. Already in his German days, Polanyi was extremely inter-
ested in economic and social studies, stimulated by debates with his elder 
brother (Karl defended socialism, whereas Michael opposed it). He later 
left the Department of Chemistry to become a philosopher. Polanyi began 
his new career at the age of ﬁ fty-seven, enquiring into ‘the nature and 
justiﬁ cation of scientiﬁ c knowledge’, as the preface to Personal Knowledge 
(1958) described his book, and going on to analyse what he called ‘implicit 
knowledge’, in other words the practical knowledge that individuals do 
not know that they know. Polanyi’s remark to a friend that ‘I have been a 
vagabond all my life’ applies to his intellectual itinerary as well as his 
successive displacements from Hungary to Germany and from Germany 
to Britain.148
Joseph Needham, who has been described, like Lasswell, as a 
‘20th-century Renaissance Man’, began his career as a biochemist. He 
became interested not only in embryology but also in its history.149 His 
passion for China was awakened in the late 1930s and reinforced by 
his years in that country during the Second World War. Needham found 
his vocation as a historian of Chinese science, producing, together with 
a number of collaborators, a book that is still in progress (despite the 
main author’s death in 1995) and now runs to twenty-seven large 
volumes published over more than sixty years. Like James Frazer before 
him, Needham was elected a Fellow of both the Royal Society (in 1941) 
and the British Academy (thirty years later). For a short period, on his 
return to Cambridge after the war, he was working on Science and 
Civilisation while ‘at the same time he was still holding his Readership in 
biochemistry and teaching three special courses’. Needham was able to 
devote the rest of his life to his enthusiasm, the history of Chinese science 
(as a student at Oxford, I once heard him lecture on water-clocks and 
can testify that his enthusiasm was infectious).150
Needham believed that the ‘rising tide of specialization’ had encour-
aged people to forget that many problems ‘cannot be understood in 
terms of one subject’. He liked to ask big questions, most famously the 


THE AGE OF TERRITORIALITY 
165
‘Needham Question’: why did the Scientiﬁ c Revolution happen in 
Europe and not in China? He was aware of the dangers of rashness and 
superﬁ ciality and described his essays as ‘exciting reconnaissances, never 
saying the last word on anything, but opening up mines of treasures 
which other scholars can develop later’.151 His remark oﬀ ers a good 
description of one of the distinctive contributions of polymaths to the 
common store of knowledge.
Th e biologist William Bateson christened his son ‘Gregory’ in homage 
to Gregor Mendel, whose work he had helped to rediscover. Gregory 
Bateson began his career by studying zoology at Cambridge, but switched 
to anthropology in order, as he confessed, to make ‘a break with ordi-
nary, impersonal science’ and also to escape the role of ‘the son of William 
Bateson’.152 He carried out ﬁ eldwork among the Iatmul in New Guinea 
and later in Bali, working with and subsequently marrying the anthro-
pologist Margaret Mead. Following his divorce from Mead in 1950, 
Bateson underwent psychotherapy and then began to study it, intro-
ducing the idea of the ‘double bind’ to describe the irreconcilable 
demands on individuals that lead to what used to be called a ‘nervous 
breakdown’. When Harvard did not renew his appointment in anthro-
pology, Bateson began working with the psychiatrist Jürgen Ruesch at 
the University of California’s Medical School in San Francisco.
Bateson’s active interests also included ecology and ethology (stud-
ying the behaviour of otters and dolphins). He has been described as ‘an 
intellectual nomad’.153 However, he did not simply move from one disci-
pline to another, while keeping his various interests in diﬀ erent compart-
ments. On the contrary, he engaged in the typically polymathic enterprise 
of using concepts from one discipline to study others. He called his 
interest in ideas an ‘ecology of mind’ and borrowed the concept of self-
regulation from computer science, employing it to analyse the emotions 
and the behaviour of individuals and groups.
Bateson’s interests may seem dispersed, but a concern with communi-
cation was at the heart of most if not all of them.154 In Bali in the 1930s 
he photographed gestures. In the 1940s he was one of the pioneers of 
cybernetics, and spoke at the famous Macy conferences on the subject 

THE POLYMATH

166
along with Norbert Wiener and John von Neumann, commenting later 
that ‘membership in those conferences . . . was one of the great events of 
my life’.155 His interest in psychology focused on schizophrenic commu-
nication, and together with his colleague Ruesch he published a book 
entitled Communication: Th e Social Matrix of Psychiatry (1951). When 
he studied dolphins, it was to ﬁ nd out how they communicate with one 
another. As Bateson wrote of himself, he wanted to ﬁ nd a ‘bridge between 
all branches of the world of experience – intellectual, emotional, obser-
vational, theoretical, verbal and wordless’.156
Herbert Simon studied at the University of Chicago at a time (the age of 
Robert Hutchins, discussed below) when it was necessary to pass exams in 
humanities, social sciences and natural sciences. He began his career as a 
political scientist, particularly interested in the process of making decisions. 
He turned to public administration, business administration and so to 
economics, winning a Nobel Prize in the subject without ever having 
worked in a department of economics. His own comment on the situation 
was that ‘Psychologists think that I am an economist, but economists think 
I am a psychologist. In fact, I feel allegiance to none of these academic 
tribes, but regard myself as a citizen of the world – a behavioral scientist.’157 
Simon’s particular interest was behavioural economics, linking up with 
his earlier work on decisions.158 Th is serial polymath saw 1955–6 as 
a turning point in his intellectual life, ‘when the maze branched in a most 
unexpected way’, transforming him into ‘a cognitive psychologist and 
computer scientist’. Together with a younger colleague, Allen Newell, 
another polymath who began his career as a mathematician, he set up a 
laboratory to study artiﬁ cial intelligence at Carnegie-Melon University, 
making use of computers to simulate human problem-solving.159
Simon might also be described as a philosopher, given his study of 
what he called ‘bounded rationality’, midway between the poles of 
conventional rationality and irrationality. He claimed to read more than 
twenty languages and used them to read ﬁ ction as well as behavioural 
science. After reading a story by Borges, ‘Th e Garden of Forking Paths’, 
he visited the author in Buenos Aires in order to discuss it, seeing links 
with his own habits of thought.


THE AGE OF TERRITORIALITY 
167
Th e last of the six modern monsters, the French scholar Michel de 
Certeau, liked to describe himself as a historian, but he moved in and 
out of nine diﬀ erent disciplines (history, theology, philosophy, sociology, 
anthropology, linguistics, literature, geography and psychoanalysis). 
Certeau was trained by the Jesuits in philosophy and theology. While 
working on a doctorate in the ﬁ eld of religious studies, he attended the 
seminars directed by a historian of religion (Jean Orcibal) and a political 
and social historian (Roland Mousnier). Certeau was fascinated by the 
history of mysticism, an interest that links his early work to the book Th e 
Mystic Fable (1982), which he published towards the end of his career.
So far his intellectual trajectory seems a normal one, but Certeau 
went on to participate in the seminars of the dissident psychoanalyst 
Jacques Lacan. His book La Possession de Loudun (1970) studied the 
nuns in that convent, who were supposed to have been possessed by 
devils, from a psychoanalytical as well as a historical and a theological 
point of view (Aldous Huxley had written a book about the same episode, 
but in a more conventional manner).
Th e French student revolt of 1968, which Certeau interpreted as a 
prise de parole (a phrase with the double meaning of ‘speaking out’ and ‘a 
capture of speech’), stimulated his interest in politics, culture and society. 
He published an essay on the signiﬁ cance of the ‘events’ of ’68, as well 
as a study of the politics of language in the French Revolution.160 Th anks 
to the former essay, the Ministry of Culture invited Certeau to organize 
a seminar on the prospects for culture in France. Th is request led in turn 
to a collective survey of the culture of the working class and so to Certeau’s 
best-known work, L’Invention du Quotidien (1980), an essay in which 
he argued, against the Marxists, that ordinary individuals still retain a 
certain degree of freedom in contemporary society and that consump-
tion should be regarded as a form of production.
GIANTS OR CHARLATANS?
Despite the achievements described above, criticisms of polymaths 
continued. Even a sympathetic account of Otto Neurath remarked that 
his many projects gave him ‘no time for him to work them out’.161 A 

THE POLYMATH

168
sharper criticism of polymaths, only to be expected in an age of special-
ization, has been to describe them as dilettantes, amateurs or even, 
reviving the seventeenth-century term, as charlatans.
Émile Durkheim, for instance, expressed anxiety ‘that sociology 
might be invaded by charlatans’ and criticized his rival the polymath 
Gabriel Tarde as an ‘amateur’.162 Kenneth Boulding was once described 
as ‘much admired as an economist – by non-economists’.163 Isaiah Berlin 
described Michael Polanyi as a ‘great scientist’ who gave up science to 
write ‘mediocre works of philosophy’.164 Alan Turing described his fellow 
polymath Warren McCulloch as a ‘charlatan’.165 Lewis Mumford 
dismissed his fellow polymaths Buckminster Fuller and Marshall 
McLuhan as ‘charlatans’.166 Sitting in a café in Paris, the British historian 
Edward Th ompson once remarked to Carlo Ginzburg that ‘Foucault is a 
charlatan’.167 Noam Chomsky called the French psychoanalyst Jacques 
Lacan ‘a total charlatan’.168 Isaiah Berlin, asked about Jacques Derrida 
and unable to resist an oxymoron, replied that ‘I think he may be a 
genuine charlatan, though a clever man’.169 Similar criticisms have 
been made (sometimes by journalists) about George Steiner and Slavoj 
Žižek.170 Th e term has the advantage of concentrating in a single word a 
wide range of criticisms – arrogance, superﬁ ciality, unfulﬁ lled promises 
and ‘playing to the gallery’.
What Chomsky disliked most about Lacan was his ‘posturing before 
the television cameras’ in an age when a few intellectuals, including 
Steiner, Sloterdijk and Žižek, stand in this new kind of limelight.
Peter Sloterdijk, who wrote his doctoral dissertation in German liter-
ature, has extended his interests to philosophy, geography, ecology and 
media theory, and writes for the newspapers on contemporary issues 
such as the welfare state, terrorism and globalization. He courts contro-
versy, notably in his attacks on living members of the Frankfurt School, 
dismissing them as mere academics. As for his learning, even a friendly 
critic has called Sloterdijk ‘an intellectual magpie’. Like Susan Sontag, he 
has discussed social and political problems in a literary way and from a 
literary point of view, focusing on narrative and metaphor and illus-
trating his arguments by quoting novels.171


THE AGE OF TERRITORIALITY 
169
Žižek, who began his career with two doctoral dissertations, one on 
structuralism and the other on psychoanalysis, also writes on sociology, 
politics and ﬁ lm. Like Eco and Sontag, he delights in juxtaposing high 
culture and popular culture.172 In his case, as in that of Jacques Derrida, 
a playful style of writing has encouraged critics to call him a charlatan, a 
‘comedian’ or a ‘Marx Brother’.173
Some of these criticisms may be fair but others are not. It is scarcely 
possible to be a public intellectual these days without appearing on tele-
vision. Behind the criticisms lurks the assumption that any claim to 
wide-ranging knowledge must be fraudulent, an assumption that seems 
increasingly obvious as the process of specialization accelerates.
What may have been new in the twentieth century is the occasional 
expression of regret for their wide range on the part of polymaths them-
selves. Andrew Lang was often described as ‘versatile’, but ‘there was 
nothing he less liked to hear’. He said once that ‘if I had stuck to one 
thing . . . I should have been a really big swell at anthropology’.174 Among 
the various tensions in Max Weber’s life and work was the one between 
the generalist and the specialist. He pursued his wide-ranging projects, 
but told the audience of one of his most famous lectures that ‘Limitation 
to specialized work, with a renunciation of the Faustian universality of 
man which it involves, is a condition of any valuable work in the modern 
world.’175
Despite possible ﬂ aws, the achievement of all or at least most of these 
polymaths commands admiration. Th ey prompt the question: how were 
they able to do it? Th is problem will be explored in the following chapter.

170
Is the polymath a particular kind of individual? What encourages or 
drives them to follow this career? It is time to attempt to identify some 
general characteristics of the species, summarizing the analysis in earlier 
chapters and attempting a synthesis. Such a synthesis will necessarily be 
tentative, since polymathy, unlike creativity, does not seem to have been 
the subject of systematic investigation by cognitive psychologists. In any 
case, information about the early years of polymaths is all too often 
lacking.
Nevertheless, the recurrent references to a series of qualities in their 
autobiographies and in the reminiscences of their friends and relatives is 
suggestive, to say no more. Many of these qualities are shared in some 
degree with other scholars, but some are particularly important for poly-
maths, who might be described as scholars who possess these traits to a 
superlative degree. A number of these qualities will be discussed in what 
follows, oﬀ ering a group portrait in a pointilliste style, a collective image 
created by juxtaposing many small items of information. Some of these 
qualities, such as curiosity, a good memory or exceptional creativity, may 
be genetic, one of the genes being what is known as the ‘brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor’ (BNDF).
Th e interests, abilities and achievements of polymaths are also shaped 
by their upbringing and by the milieu and the epoch in which they live, 
discussed in the next chapter on ‘Habitats’. It is virtually needless to say 
that the line between the psychological and the social is diﬃ  cult to draw, 
 6 
 A GROUP PORTR AIT


A GROUP PORTRAIT
171
being not so much a line as a border zone with features of its own. In any 
case, my central argument is that polymaths do not succeed by virtue of 
their individual gifts alone. Th ey also require an appropriate niche.
CURIOSITY
Th ere may be a gene for curiosity – in the case of a bird, the great tit, a 
team of researchers at the Max Planck Institute have indeed discovered 
what they termed a ‘curiosity gene’, Drd4.1 In the case of humans, the 
question cannot yet be answered. Besides, an overdose of curiosity, long 
known as the libido sciendi and described by the polymath Francis Bacon 
as ‘inquisitive appetite’, is surely the most general as well as the most 
obvious characteristic of the species.
Modern studies of Leonardo da Vinci, based on his voluminous 
notebooks, often refer to his curiosity, describing it as ‘omnivorous’, 
‘passionate’, ‘obsessive’ and even ‘relentless’. Polymaths have often 
described themselves in this way. In the seventeenth century, Sister Juana 
de la Cruz, for instance, explained to the bishop of Puebla her need to 
acquire knowledge. Peiresc noted ‘the excess of my curiosity’.2 Pierre 
Bayle described himself as ‘hungry to know everything’ (aﬀ amé de savoir 
tout). Pierre-Daniel Huet recalled his ‘inﬁ nite desire to learn’ (inﬁ nitum 
discendi desiderium) and remembered the time when ‘I believed that I 
had learned nothing, when I saw there was something left to learn’.3 In 
his puritanical youth, Isaac Newton apologized to God for ‘setting my 
heart’ on learning more than on Him.4 Benjamin Franklin described his 
‘thirst for knowledge’ when he was a child.5 Alexander von Humboldt 
confessed his ‘irrestistible impulse toward knowledge of various kinds’.
Despite the rise of intellectual specialization in the nineteenth and 
twentieth centuries, some individuals were still driven by wide-ranging 
curiosity. Alexis de Tocqueville described himself when young as ‘given 
up to insatiable curiosity’ (livré à une curiosité insatiable).6 At the age of 
twenty-one, Hippolyte Taine wrote to a friend that he studied not for 
practical reasons but driven by ‘the need for knowledge’ (besoin de 
savoir).7 Sigmund Freud studied medicine at the University of Vienna, 
‘moved,’ so he confessed, ‘by a sort of greed for knowledge’.8 Bertrand 

THE POLYMATH

172
Russell listed ‘the search for knowledge’ as one of his three main passions.9 
Th e Cuban sociologist Fernando Ortiz confessed to ‘restless curiosity’ 
(inquietas curiosidades).10
Some friends and acquaintances of polymaths tell a similar story. One 
of the patrons of Leibniz referred to his ‘insatiable curiosity’.11 A friend 
of the young Samuel Johnson described him as ‘uncommonly inquisi-
tive’.12 Lewis Mumford, who observed his hero Patrick Geddes with care, 
described his ‘all-devouring curiosity’ that ‘matched Leonardo’s’.13 Klári, 
the second wife of John von Neumann, remembered that ‘Johnny’s most 
characteristic trait was his boundless curiosity about everything and 
anything’.14 An acquaintance of Karl Polanyi remarked on his ‘endless 
curiosity’.15 Th e biographer of Edmund Wilson, who knew his subject 
personally, described him as ‘intensely curious’.16 One of the teachers at 
Michel Foucault’s school later testiﬁ ed that ‘you could feel a formidable 
intellectual curiosity in him’.17 A colleague of the Jesuit Michel de 
Certeau noted ‘the passionate interest’ that he took ‘in everything’.18 
His ‘immense, omnivorous curiosity’ is also noted in a study of David 
Riesman, who became a famous sociologist without undergoing any 
formal training in sociology.19
CONCENTRATION
Another important quality of at least some polymaths is the power of 
concentration, at an unconscious as well as a conscious level. Giambattista 
Vico described himself as ‘reading, writing and thinking while conversing 
with friends and during the shouts of his children’.20 John von Neumann 
was said to wake up in the morning with the solution to a problem he 
had been thinking about the night before. When he was awake, he was 
able to work ‘in crowded railway stations and airports, trains, planes, 
ships, hotel lobbies, lively cocktail parties’. Indeed, he preferred a back-
ground of noise.21
Such a resistance to distraction was and is particularly necessary in the 
case of female polymaths who are also mothers. Mary Somerville’s 
daughter inserted a note in her mother’s autobiography about what she 
called Mary’s ‘singular power of abstraction’, allowing her to be ‘so 


A GROUP PORTRAIT
173
completely absorbed’ in her work as not to hear either conversation or 
music – a gift all the more valuable because this scholar did not have a 
‘room of her own’, but read and wrote in the drawing room.22
As in the case of more specialized scholars, the ability of a polymath 
to concentrate was often perceived as ‘absent-mindedness’, although that 
mind was present elsewhere, detached from everyday life while focusing 
on a particular problem. Celebrated cases, which include John Selden, 
Isaac Barrow, Isaac Newton, Montesquieu, Immanuel Kant, Samuel 
Johnson, Adam Smith, Henri Poincaré and Norbert Wiener, have gener-
ated a number of anecdotes, not always reliable.
According to Anthony Wood, the Oxford scholar and gossip, when 
Selden left his books to the Bodleian Library, ‘in opening some of the 
books they found several pair of spectacles that Mr Selden had put in, 
and forgotten to take out’.23 According to the equally gossipy John 
Aubrey, Barrow was ‘so intent’ on his studies that he did not notice when 
his bed was made (presumably with him in it), ‘and would sometimes be 
going out without his hat on’, and at least once with his cloak ‘half on 
and half oﬀ ’.24 Newton would forget to eat and when he was living in 
Trinity College, Cambridge, he would sometimes go to dinner in hall 
wearing his surplice, as if he was going to chapel.25 Adam Smith is 
supposed to have walked for ﬁ fteen miles on one occasion without real-
izing that he was still wearing his dressing gown.26
According to his nephew, Poincaré ‘thought at the table, at family 
reunions, even in the salons’, while a friend described him as ‘almost 
permanently distracted’. Th ere is a story that Poincaré once went for a 
walk and found he was carrying a birdcage that he must have picked up 
without noticing it.27 As for Norbert Wiener, a well-known anecdote 
presents him on one occasion as failing to recognize his own daughter. 
Compared to examples such as these, Karl Polanyi’s propensity to forget 
his gloves, a scarf or even his passport becomes a minor eccentricity.28
MEMORY
Curiosity and concentration are not suﬃ  cient to make polymaths. A 
good memory is another great advantage. Kant was surely right to discuss 

THE POLYMATH

174
polymaths as examples of what he called ‘marvels of memory’ even if it 
was rather unkind of him to emphasize that particular quality at the 
expense of others. At all events, people who knew polymaths personally 
often remembered this quality. Blaise Pascal’s niece, Marguerite Périer, 
for instance, remarked on his extraordinary memory. A friend of Th omas 
Browne remarked that ‘His memory was capacious and tenacious’, while 
two contemporaries of Gilbert Burnet referred to his ‘prodigious 
memory’. A friend of Dr Johnson remembered that his memory was ‘so 
tenacious, that whatever he read or heard, he never forgot’.29 A friend of 
Condorcet declared that ‘his memory is so prodigious, that he has never 
forgotten anything’.30 Georges Cuvier was ‘blessed with a memory that 
retained everything he saw and read, and which never failed him in any 
part of his career . . . long lists of sovereigns, princes, and the driest 
chronological facts, once arranged in his memory, were never forgotten’.31 
Macaulay too was famous for his memory, which allowed him to recite 
whole texts by heart, among them Paradise Lost, Th e Pilgrim’s Progress, 
and Th e Lay of the Last Minstrel.32 According to a friend, Sainte-Beuve 
had ‘a prodigious memory of everything’.33
More recently, Wiener boasted about his memory. A friend of John 
von Neumann marvelled at his ability, ‘on once reading a book or 
article, to quote it back verbatim’. Another eyewitness remembered that 
Neumann’s memory ‘was just beyond conception, a photograph for 
everything he ever learned or saw’ (Neumann will recur in this chapter 
because he seems to have ticked almost all the boxes of its imagined ques-
tionnaire).34 Joseph Needham’s wife Dorothy and some of his collabora-
tors commented on his ‘photo-memory’ or ‘fantastic memory’.35 Fernand 
Braudel was known for what he called his ‘elephantine’ memory, allowing 
him to write most of his major work on the Mediterranean world far 
away from his books and ﬁ les, in prisoner-of-war camps.
SPEED
Th e ability to assimilate new kinds of information, preferably at high 
speed, is something that all polymaths need and some are said to have 
possessed. A contemporary of Gilbert Burnet remarked on his ‘quick 


A GROUP PORTRAIT
175
apprehension’, while Burnet himself remarked that his memory ‘took 
things soon’.36 A fellow student of Louis Agassiz at the University of 
Zurich wrote that ‘Agassiz knew everything. He was always ready to 
demonstrate and speak on any subject. If it was a subject he was not 
familiar with, he would study and rapidly master it.’37 In similar fashion, 
Macaulay’s biographer noted his ‘capacity for taking in at a glance the 
contents of a printed page’. ‘He read books more quickly than other 
people skimmed them, and skimmed them as fast as anyone else could 
turn the leaves.’38 A friend of Robertson Smith remarked on ‘the extreme 
quickness of his mind, which rapidly acquired knowledge on almost any 
kind of subject’.
Th e polymath Kenneth Boulding said of another polymath, Anatol 
Rapoport, that he was ‘a man of unusually quick learning ability’.39 
Walter Pitts was ‘known to master the contents of a textbook in a ﬁ eld 
new to him in a few days’.40 Joseph Needham had ‘a special gift of 
learning a new subject’ rapidly.41 A former classmate of Linus Pauling 
said of him that ‘it just seemed like all he had to do was sit down at a 
table, look at a book, and he’d absorb the knowledge without reading 
it’.42 Th e ability to learn new things is associated with the desire to do so. 
It was said of George Evelyn Hutchinson, whose interests ranged from 
zoology and ecology to art history and archaeology, that he liked to learn 
something new every year.43 One of the pioneers of artiﬁ cial intelligence, 
Marvin Minsky, declared in an interview that he liked ‘learning new 
things’, whereas ‘most people don’t like learning something new’.44
IMAGINATION
A vivid imagination forms an important part of a polymath’s psycho-
logical equipment. Charles Darwin noted in himself a tendency to 
daydream, while Herbert Simon described himself as ‘a terrible 
daydreamer’, who ‘seldom can keep a coherent line of thought’. It may 
be argued that it is through daydreaming (viewed by others as ‘absent-
mindedness’) and the unconscious association of ideas that these indi-
viduals reach at least some of their insights. One of their leading qualities 
is the capacity to make what Darwin called ‘linkings of facts’, in his case 

THE POLYMATH

176
facts about diﬀ erent species and their diﬀ erent environments.45 Th ey 
perceive connections that others miss. For example, the ‘breakthroughs’ 
of Shen Gua, who was discussed earlier, ‘frequently came from juxta-
posing insights that did not conventionally ﬁ t together’.46 In the language 
of Pierre Bourdieu, polymaths bring the ‘habitus’ acquired in one disci-
pline to bear on the problems of another. In the language of Michel de 
Certeau, they have a special gift for the ‘re-employment’ of ideas in new 
contexts.
Like poets and other creative writers who think with metaphors, 
polymaths constantly draw analogies, engaging in what Aristotle 
famously called the ‘perception of the similarity in dissimilars’. As we 
have seen, the notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci oﬀ er many examples of 
this practice, comparing birds and bats to ﬂ ying machines, for instance. 
Herder once described Newton, Leibniz and Buﬀ on as poets because 
they reached their discoveries via analogy, while later philosophers of 
science have pointed out that scientiﬁ c theories or models have some-
thing important in common with metaphors.47 A number of Th omas 
Young’s contributions to knowledge depended on his perception of anal-
ogies: between waves of light and sound, for instance, and between 
diﬀ erent Indo-European languages.
A similar point might be made about the social sciences. Vilfredo 
Pareto’s transfer of the idea of equilibrium from engineering to economics 
has already been noted. Max Weber borrowed the idea of charisma from 
theology and used it to discuss politics. Pierre Bourdieu employed a 
number of analogies in his social theory, taking the idea of ‘ﬁ eld’ from 
social psychology, ‘habitus’ from art history, ‘capital’ from economics 
and ‘consecration’ from theology.
It is not surprising, then, to ﬁ nd that polymaths have played leading 
roles in the development of the comparative method, deﬁ ned as a search 
for both similarities and diﬀ erences. Contributions to comparative 
mythology were made by (among others) Samuel Bochart, Pierre-Daniel 
Huet, Giambattista Vico, James Frazer and more recently by Georges 
Dumézil, who studied myth in a long tradition from India via Greece 
and Rome to Northern Europe.48 A number of polymaths, among them 


A GROUP PORTRAIT
177
Conrad Gessner, Leibniz, Hiob Ludolf, Wilhelm von Humboldt and 
Roman Jakobson concentrated on comparative linguistics, and yet others 
on comparative studies of law (Montesquieu, for instance) or religions 
(Selden and Robertson Smith). Cuvier’s fame rests on his comparative 
anatomy, which underlay his famous reconstructions of extinct animals 
(his genius for analogy was noted by Balzac). Darwin’s theory of the 
evolution of species drew on analogies with the work of Charles Lyell on 
rocks and Malthus on human populations. Alan Turing’s work on artiﬁ -
cial intelligence depended on analogies between people and machines.
For these reasons it seems illuminating to speak of a scientiﬁ c imagi-
nation, or more generally still of a scholarly imagination, particularly 
strong in innovators in their ﬁ elds. In drawing analogies, polymaths have 
the advantage of personal acquaintance with diﬀ erent disciplines. If 
innovation consists, as has been argued, in the displacement of concepts, 
polymaths are among the leading displacers.49
Th e idea that polymaths in particular are endowed with fertile and 
creative imaginations is supported by the fact that a number of them 
have, among other achievements, published poems. In the early modern 
period, the twenty-one examples are not so surprising, since writing 
poetry was a common pastime, at least among the social elite.50 However, 
at least fourteen polymaths from the nineteenth and twentieth centuries 
did the same: not only Goethe, Coleridge, Matthew Arnold and Th omas 
Macaulay but at least ten others as well.51
Besides three novelists who were also polymaths (George Eliot, Aldous 
Huxley, Vladimir Nabokov), over forty of the polymaths listed in the 
appendix published romances or novels. ‘Science ﬁ ction’, in a broad sense 
of the term, is represented by the Discovery of a World in the Moon by John 
Wilkins, the Blazing World by Margaret Cavendish, the Heavenly Journey 
of Athanasius Kircher and the Ecstatic Voyage of Lorenzo Hervás, as well 
as by the images of the future oﬀ ered in works by Tommaso Campanella, 
Paolo Mantegazza, Gabriel Tarde, William Morris, Alexander Bogdanov, 
H. G. Wells, Aldous Huxley and the Austrian biologist Karl Camillo 
Schneider. Umberto Eco’s Th e Name of the Rose became a global 
bestseller.52

THE POLYMATH

178
ENERGY
A good memory and a lively imagination would be of little use to a 
polymath if he or she did not work hard to employ these qualities. 
Also necessary is the physical energy to do this work, a quality that 
is often noted by observers. A former collaborator described John 
Wilkins as ‘indefatigable’.53 Pierre Bayle’s friend Jacques Basnage 
described him as ‘a tireless worker’ (infatigable au travail) and noted 
that on the eve of his death, despite his poor health, Bayle worked 
until eleven at night.54 Burnet remarked on his own ‘very happy consti-
tution’, making him ‘capable of much labour and hard study’.55 Buﬀ on 
was known for his ability to rise at dawn and work ‘with prodigious 
energy’ for fourteen hours a day.56 So was Émilie du Châtelet.Th e ‘inde-
fatigable energy’ of Alexander von Humboldt was noted by his brother.57 
Th e biographer of Louis Agassiz notes his ‘amazing store of physical 
energy’.58
One observer noted William Morris’s ‘immense energy’. To another, 
he seemed ‘overcharged with energy’.59 When Max Weber lectured, 
listeners were impressed by his explosive energy, sometimes compared to 
a volcano. In similar fashion, an acquaintance of Herbert Simon described 
him lecturing: ‘Th e intellectual energy pours out of him, as if it could 
light the city tonight.’60 A friend of the many-sided political scientist 
Harold Lasswell noted his ‘high level of physical energy’.61 Visitors to 
Henri Berr, a veteran campaigner for historical synthesis, were impressed 
by his élan.62 A number of acquaintances remarked on the ‘vitality’ of 
Otto Neurath. Mumford bore witness to the ‘intellectual energy’ and 
‘immense vitality’ of Patrick Geddes.63 One colleague of Joseph Needham 
called him ‘a fountain of physical and intellectual energy’, while another 
remarked on ‘his titanic energy and enthusiasm’.64 Susan Sontag’s son 
David called his mother ‘a person with truly boundless energy’.65
Multitasking was a quality of at least a few polymaths. Buﬀ on was 
said to work ‘in several directions at the same time’.66 William Morris 
was observed translating Homer in his head while standing at an easel 
painting, and he once said that ‘if a chap can’t compose an epic poem 
while he’s weaving tapestry he had better shut up’.67 Joseph Needham 


A GROUP PORTRAIT
179
was supposedly able to lecture and read proofs at the same time. Otto 
Neurath ‘liked to do three things at the same time’, according to his wife 
Marie.68 Linus Pauling was another polymath who ‘ranged over several 
problems at once’.69
RESTLESSNESS
A surplus of energy often leads to restlessness, which may be viewed 
either as a positive trait that encourages serial polymathy or as the down-
side of curiosity. Leibniz criticized Becher as ‘restless’.70 Alexander 
von Humboldt was also criticized for being ‘restless’ (rastlos, unruhig). 
Henry James described the ‘nervous restless manner’ of William Morris.71 
August Strindberg was notoriously restless. Umberto Eco described his 
friend the polymath Giorgio Prodi as always ‘in a hurry’.72
Other polymaths gloried in the nomadic condition. Robert 
Burton told his readers about his ‘roving humour’. Georg Simmel was 
described by a former student (Siegfried Kracauer, another polymath) as 
‘a wanderer’. Gilbert Chinard, an expatriate professor of literature who 
wrote biographies and historical studies, sent a book to a former student 
with the inscription remembering half a century of ‘vagabondage 
littéraire’. Michael Polanyi remarked to a friend that ‘I have been a vaga-
bond all my life’, moving from chemistry to philosophy as well as from 
Hungary via Germany to England.73 Julian Huxley was described by his 
wife as ‘escaping from one activity by diving into yet another’.74
Gregory Bateson has been described as an ‘intellectual nomad’, 
‘traveling from place to place, and from one ﬁ eld to another, without 
ever settling into the safety of a secure niche’.75 George Steiner described 
himself as ‘a grateful wanderer’, experiencing the sorrows (and beneﬁ ts) 
of what he called ‘unrootedness’ (since he lacked a place to be uprooted 
from).76 Edward Said saw himelf as a nomad, ‘out of place’ everywhere.77 
Bruce Chatwin, a travel writer and novelist who has a good claim to be 
considered a polymath, given his interest in art, archaeology and 
anthropology, was restless himself. No wonder that he was attracted 
to the life of nomads or that one of his last books was Anatomy of 
Restlessness.

THE POLYMATH

180
Serial polymaths move from one discipline to another and another. 
Herbert Simon described himself as having ‘wandered . . . from political 
science and public administration, through economics and cognitive 
psychology, to artiﬁ cial intelligence and computer science’.78 Th e anthro-
pologist Gregory Bateson and the physiologist Henry Murray were both 
drawn to the study of psychology as a result of their own psychological 
problems. A few polymaths were forced to wander. Gustav Fechner, 
Patrick Geddes, Aldous Huxley and Herbert Fleure all suﬀ ered from eye 
problems that drove them out of their original ﬁ eld, physics in the case of 
Fechner, botany for Geddes, medicine for Huxley and zoology for Fleure.
A few polymaths tried various occupations before embarking on an 
academic career. Th e geographer Friedrich Ratzel and the sociologist 
Robert Park were professional reporters, the anthropologist Adolf Bastian 
was a ship’s doctor, while Elton Mayo worked as a journalist and as a 
clerk in an African gold mine before ﬁ nding his vocation as an industrial 
psychologist and settling down at Harvard.79
Th e link between crossing two kinds of frontier, national and discipli-
nary, provokes further thought. In the twentieth century, at least seven 
leading polymaths were active in the international peace movement: 
Wilhelm Ostwald, Paul Otlet, Patrick Geddes, Bertrand Russell (who 
established the Peace Foundation), Kenneth Boulding, Linus Pauling 
(recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize for 1962) and Noam Chomsky (who 
received the Sean McBride Peace Prize in 2017). It may not be a coinci-
dence that these scholars supported both internationalism and interdis-
ciplinarity. Some earlier polymaths, notably Comenius and Leibniz, had 
also worked for peace between nations.
WORK
If any readers of these lines harbour the ambition to become a polymath, 
they should be warned that for success, long hours of work are needed. 
Th eir energy allows some polymaths to sleep less than ordinary mortals 
and to devote the time saved to study. Th e philologist Franciscus Junius 
worked a sixteen-hour day, normally from 4 a.m. to 8 p.m.80 Pierre-
Daniel Huet claimed in his autobiography that he allowed himself to 


A GROUP PORTRAIT
181
sleep for only three hours a night in order to have more time for study. 
Alexander von Humboldt was said, like Napoleon, to need only four 
hours sleep a night, and John von Neumann, three or four.81 Émilie 
du Châtelet ‘could function with four or ﬁ ve hours’ sleep a night’ and 
was capable of getting up at four in the morning and working a fourteen-
hour day.82 A life of Th omas Jeﬀ erson describes his ‘amazing readiness’ to 
work long hours, sometimes from ﬁ ve in the morning until midnight, 
and his advice to a student to work for eleven hours a day. John Th eodore 
Merz, who earned his living as a manager and director of industrial enter-
prises, wrote his four-volume history of nineteenth-century European 
thought from ﬁ ve till eight in the morning, before beginning his normal 
work. Lester Ward was educated in evening classes and went on to write 
a book on sociology at night, at a time when his day job was working for 
the United States Geological Survey.83
Th e biographer of Joseph Leidy, asking how he found the time for his 
multifarious activities, noted that he was ‘working until 2 a.m. every 
night and most Sundays, leaving only one evening a week free’, and on 
occasion working from 8 a.m. until 8 p.m. without even a drink.84 Karl 
Pearson attributed his success to ‘a capacity for hard work’.85 John 
Maynard Keynes ‘was always inclined to overwork’ according to Bertrand 
Russell.86 Herbert Simon presented himself, apparently with pride, as a 
‘workaholic’, at his desk ‘for sixty to eighty hours a week, sometimes 
more’.87 Linus Pauling explained that he developed ‘the habit of working’ 
when he was young.88 Klara, the wife of John von Neumann, remem-
bered that ‘His capacity for work was practically unlimited.’89 A collabo-
rator of Joseph Needham described him as ‘working non-stop’, even at 
breakfast, and as liking boiled eggs because he could work while they 
were boiling.90 Michel Foucault worked hard and took few breaks, from 
his years in school until shortly before his death. Th e very day in 1974 
that he ﬁ nished one book, Discipline and Punish, he began writing 
another, Th e Will to Knowledge.91
Without such habits of work, it is diﬃ  cult to imagine how some 
polymaths could have been as proliﬁ c as they were. Henri Poincaré, 
for instance, produced over 30 books and some 500 articles, but was 

1. Some scholars think that this drawing in red chalk of a handsome old man represents Leonardo, as 
the inscription claims. It certainly matches other possible portraits of the artist, as well as descriptions 
of him by contemporaries.

2. Here is one of Leonardo da 
Vinci’s illustrations to a book by 
his friend the friar Luca Pacioli, 
On Divine Proportion, published 
in 1509. It testifies to Leonardo’s 
fascination with mathematics, 
an important discipline for 
Renaissance artists, whether they 
were concerned with the laws or 
perspective or the vital statistics 
of an ideal human figure. In his 
notebooks, Leonardo wrote, ‘Let 
no one read me who is not a 
mathematician’.
3. Today, Nicolaus Copernicus 
is generally remembered for one 
achievement: his argument that 
the sun and not the earth was the 
centre of the universe. However, 
he was also active as a physician, 
studied law and put forward 
pioneering theories in what is 
now known as economics.
This sixteenth-century diagram 
shows the sun, not the earth, 
in the centre of the universe. 
Copernicus wrote that ‘In the 
middle of all sits the sun on 
his throne, as upon a royal dais 
ruling his children the planets 
which circle about him’.

4. Private museums of ‘wonders’ (remarkable works of both art or nature) were fashionable in the 
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. The museum illustrated here belonged to the Danish physician 
Ole Worm, a polymath who was particularly interested in ‘curiosities’ from Scandinavia, from weapons 
to stuffed animals, birds and fish. 
5. Juan Caramuel y Lobkowitz, a 
Spanish monk who lived in Vienna and 
Prague before becoming a bishop in 
Vigevano, is said to have known twenty-
four languages. He published more than 
sixty books on a variety of subjects, from 
theology to music, besides his activities 
as a diplomat and an architect. 

6. Known as the ‘Swedish Minerva’, Queen Christina of Sweden was said to ‘know everything’. Her 
interests included languages, philosophy, astronomy and alchemy. She invited a number of scholars to 
her court to give her tutorials, look after her library or dispute in public with one another.

7. The most famous of the scholars at Christina’s court, the philosopher René Descartes, is shown here 
standing at the table of the queen, who seems to be presenting her arguments while the courtiers listen. 
Unfortunately, Descartes did not survive a Swedish winter, dying in Stockholm in February 1650.
8. Of all the so-called ‘monsters 
of erudition’ who flourished in 
the seventeenth century, Gottfried 
Wilhelm Leibniz was surely the 
greatest. He is remembered today 
mainly as a philosopher and a 
mathematician who competed with 
Newton in the discovery of calculus, 
but he also made important 
contributions to the study of history, 
languages and law, took an interest 
in all the natural sciences and was 
known in his own day as an expert 
on China.

9. This portrait gives viewers some sense of 
the flamboyant style of Madame de Staël, a 
Swiss intellectual who wrote on philosophy, 
the passions, suicide, translation, politics 
and society (including the position of 
women), not to mention her novels and 
plays.
10. This painting portrays a meeting of the salon of Madame Geoffrin, which met on Mondays and 
Wednesdays in mid-eighteenth-century Paris. Montesquieu and Rousseau are represented here, while 
a bust of Voltaire observes the proceedings. Salons of this kind, in which men and women of letters 
displayed their knowledge with elegance and wit, had a particularly important role in intellectual life 
in France in this period.

11. Voltaire was, among many other things, 
a popularizer of science and together with 
his mistress Émilie du Châtelet, he wrote 
an introduction to the theories of Isaac 
Newton. In this engraving, Voltaire is shown 
as a poet, wearing a crown of laurel, while 
Émilie is not shown at all. 
12. Today, the Swede Emanuel Swedenborg 
is remembered almost exclusively for the 
religious writings he produced in later 
life, including the book in the portrait, 
Apocalypse Revealed. It comes as something 
of a surprise to learn that the younger 
Swedenborg was celebrated as an engineer as 
well as for his contributions to metallurgy, 
chemistry, astronomy, anatomy, physiology 
and physiognomy. 

13. Thomas Young, a Cambridge 
don, was known as ‘Phenomenon 
Young’ thanks to his many interests. 
Trained in medicine, he made 
experiments in optics and acoustics, 
lectured on physiology, learned six 
oriental languages and was working 
on the decoding of Egyptian 
hieroglyphs when he was overtaken 
by his French rival, Champollion.
14. Described as ‘one of the last 
of the great universalists’, John 
Herschel, best known as an 
astronomer, also made important 
contributions to mathematics, 
chemistry, magnetism, botany, 
geology, acoustics, optics and 
photography. In his spare time, 
Herschel translated Homer, Dante 
and Schiller.

15. Not content with ranging 
widely over the natural sciences, 
the independent scholar Alexander 
von Humboldt took an informed 
interest in literature and art. He 
looked at landscape with the eyes 
of an artist, as well as practising 
drawing himself.
16. The Scottish scientist Mary 
Somerville was mainly self-taught, 
since a woman of her generation 
was not allowed to attend a 
British university. Unable, as 
a wife and mother, to find the 
time for systematic research, 
she concentrated on synthesis, 
publishing her major work, On the 
Connection of the Physical Sciences, in 
1834. Somerville College Oxford is 
named in her honour.

17. Pavel Florensky, shown here in his white cassock, was an Orthodox priest who 
wrote on philosophy, theology and religious art, and was also, less orthodox in this 
respect, an electrical engineer. Accused in Stalin’s time of attempts to overthrow the 
Soviet system, he was successively exiled, sent to a labour camp and shot. Florensky 
has been described as ‘Russia’s unknown da Vinci’.
18. Herbert Simon’s academic career ranged 
from political science to computer science via 
cognitive psychology. He was awarded a Nobel 
Prize for Economics without having officially 
worked in that discipline. It is no surprise to 
learn that Simon did not take the differences 
between what he called ‘academic tribes’ very 
seriously.

19. The Belgian scholar Paul Otlet has been described as ‘the man who tried to classify the world’. His 
schemes for information retrieval, inspired by Dewey’s decimal system for the classification of books, 
formed part of a wider vision that included world peace and world government. The Mundaneum, an 
institution that Otlet founded to bring together the whole of knowledge, still exists, although it has 
been moved from Brussels to Mons.
20. Susan Sontag is probably best described as a cultural critic, who once declared that ‘I do not want 
to be a professor and I do not want to be a journalist. I want to be a writer who is also an intellectual.’ 
A regular writer for the New Yorker and the New York Review of Books, Sontag collected her work into 
nine volumes of essays, concerned with painting, literature, theatre, dance, philosophy, psychoanalysis, 
anthropology, history and especially photography and film.

21. The Princeton Institute for Advanced Study was founded in 1930 to offer selected scholars 
the leisure necessary for research, thought and writing. Its first director, Abraham Flexner, was an 
educationalist, famous for an essay on ‘The Usefulness of Useless Knowledge’. Early members of the 
Institute included Albert Einstein and the polymath John von Neumann.
22. The programme of the University of Sussex, the first of seven new universities founded in Britain 
in the 1960s and photographed here in 1964, was ‘to redraw the map of learning’ by emphasizing 
interdisciplinary research and teaching. Particularly successful in this respect were the seminars led by 
teachers in neighbouring disciplines, among them history and literature.

THE POLYMATH

182
overtaken by Kenneth Boulding’s 40 books and about 800 articles. 
Niklas Luhmann published some 70 books, Benedetto Croce over 80, 
while Salomon Reinach published 90.
Long hours at the desk sometimes exacted a price. Th e autobiography 
of Leonbattista Alberti describes him as suﬀ ering what a much later 
generation would call a ‘nervous breakdown’, in which the words he was 
reading would turn into scorpions. Darwin worked so hard as to damage 
his health. William Robertson Smith is said to have given up lunch in 
order to have more time for research and his early death may have been 
the result, at least in part, of overwork.92 Th e same was probably true of 
Karl Lamprecht, who believed that ‘he could drain inexhaustible amounts 
of energy from his body by sheer will power’. His friend Wilhelm 
Ostwald remembered warning Lamprecht, who died at the age of ﬁ fty-
nine, that he was working too hard.93
Herbert Spencer’s habitual overwork led to a nervous breakdown in 
1855. T. H. Huxley’s breakdowns in 1871 and 1884 seem to have had a 
similar cause. Leslie Stephen compared himself to a hoop – ‘When I’m 
not going at full speed, I drop.’94 According to Bertrand Russell, it was 
overwork that led to the death of John Maynard Keynes. Max Weber’s 
breakdown followed the death of his father, but overwork may have 
made him more vulnerable.
MEASURING TIME
Th e sense of a duty not to waste time but to put it to good use was incul-
cated in a number of polymaths at an early age. It is a form of what 
Weber called ‘worldly asceticism’ (innerweltliche Askese). Th e polymath 
Mark Pattison, an Anglican clergyman, preached sermons suggesting 
that education is, or should be, a form of asceticism.95 In his autobiog-
raphy, John Stuart Mill described his father as someone who ‘vigorously 
acted up to the principle of losing no time’ and so ‘was likely to adhere 
to the same rule in the instruction of his pupil’.
Th e diary of the Calvinist scholar Isaac Casaubon vividly reveals his 
‘preoccupation with time and the lack of it’.96 Th e motto of his fellow 
Calvinist Hugo Grotius was ‘Time is running out’ (Ruit Hora). Th omas 


 
183
Browne was described in his own day as ‘so impatient of Sloth and 
Idleness, that he would say he could not do nothing’.97 Newton’s amanu-
ensis described him as ‘Th inking all hours lost, that was not spent in his 
studies . . . I believe he grudged that short time he spent in eating and 
sleeping’.98 Montesquieu associated idleness not with the joys of heaven 
but with the torments of hell. Benjamin Franklin declared that ‘leisure 
is time for doing something useful’. In his retirement, Wilhelm von 
Humboldt told a friend that ‘I never go to bed before one o’clock’ and 
‘most of my life is spent in my study’.99 Th omas Young declared with 
pride at the end of his life that he had never spent an idle day. Th e young 
John Herschel wished he had ‘that enviable capacity of husbanding every 
atom of time’.100 Darwin’s opinion was that ‘A man who dares to waste 
one hour of time has not discovered the value of life.’101
A few polymaths were driven by the need to make up for lost time. 
Although Darwin was able to study on board the Beagle, as well as to make 
many precious observations whenever he landed, by the end of his ﬁ ve-
year expedition he was looking forward ‘with a comical mixture of dread 
and satisfaction to the amount of work that remains for me in England’.102 
Th e philosopher Hans Blumenberg, who lived in Nazi Germany during 
the war, was not allowed to attend university at that time because he was 
half-Jewish. After the war, he gave up sleep for one night a week in order 
to study longer.103
Weber’s ‘work mania’ is discussed by a recent biographer, together with 
his sharp sense of the passing of time. His ‘compulsive haste’ was ‘apparent 
in his impossible handwriting’.104 H. G. Wells worried about wasting 
time, writing to his mother that, at seventeen, he had spent ‘more than a 
quarter of my life already’. He later suﬀ ered from overwork.105 An even 
more extreme case of preoccupation with time is that of Melvil Dewey, a 
fanatic for eﬃ  ciency who required his staﬀ  to be well prepared when 
speaking to him, ‘so that without loss of a moment, you can present the 
case in [the] fewest possible words’.106 He is said to have scolded a library 
receptionist for greeting him with ‘Good Morning, Dr Dewey!’ because 
this was a waste of valuable time. Th ere would seem to be a pathology as 
well as a psychology of the polymath.

THE POLYMATH

184
COMPETITION
Th e passion for work is often driven by competition. It has been noted 
that John Selden wrote two of his treatises in emulation of scholars that 
he admired, Joseph Scaliger in the case of Syrian Gods and Hugo Grotius 
in that of Natural Law.107 A school friend of Samuel Johnson remem-
bered ‘his ambition to excel’.108 Herbert Simon confessed that ‘I have 
been, and am, a competitive person’, while George Homans remem-
bered his schoolboy self as ‘always the great little competitor’.109 Th is 
quality is obvious enough in other polymaths, from Isaac Newton to 
Karl Mannheim, who wrote a famous article on ‘competition as a cultural 
phenomenon’ and was himself described as extremely competitive by his 
former assistant, Norbert Elias.110 Th omas Young believed that ‘scientiﬁ c 
investigations are a kind of warfare . . . against all one’s contemporaries 
and predecessors’, a statement borne out by his relations with Jean-
François Champollion, his rival in the decipherment of hieroglyphics.111 
Competition encourages the desire to succeed and what Needham called 
‘a certain ruthlessness in pursuing objectives’.112 Sibling rivalry helps 
explain the achievements of the Humboldt brothers, the Polanyi brothers 
and the Huxley brothers. Each pair developed a division of labour but 
did not always respect it. Michael Polanyi moved from chemistry to 
economics, while Julian Huxley wrote science ﬁ ction.
THE PLAY ELEMENT
It would surely be a mistake, though, to see the achievements of poly-
maths as purely Apollonian, all work and no play. Th ere is also a Dionysian 
aspect to their achievements, the pleasure taken both in acquiring knowl-
edge and in solving problems. In an interview, Carlo Ginzburg, a his -
torian of unusually wide interests, has compared the pleasure of learning 
about a new topic to that of skiing on fresh snow.113 Some polymaths love 
wordplay, among them Jacques Derrida, who coined the term diﬀ érance 
to include both ‘diﬀ erence’ and ‘deferral’, Slavoj Žižek, who has published 
a collection of jokes, and Gilberto Freyre, who shocked some readers with 
a pun (in Portuguese) on civilization and syphilis. Kenneth Boulding had 
the habit of writing humorous verse about his many interests. Umberto 


 
185
Eco, who imagined a treatise on laughter by Aristotle and wrote a percep-
tive essay about Johan Huizinga’s Homo Ludens, a study of the play 
element in culture, was himself a playful scholar. Well known for his 
battute (‘witticisms’), the man who entitled a serious study of philosophy 
Kant and the Platypus was certainly able to wear his learning lightly. So 
was the sociologist David Riesman, who wrote playfully as well as writing 
about play.
In the sixteenth century, Girolamo Cardano was known for his prac-
tical as well as his theoretical interest in games of chance, while diﬀ erent 
forms of play seem to have been an important element in the culture of 
the ﬁ rst computer scientists. Constructing machines that played chess 
was itself a game, though one with serious consequences.
Claude Shannon has been called ‘the playful inventor’. One of his 
devices was a juggling machine. Alan Turing enjoyed a variety of games. 
Warren McCulloch valued what he called ‘fun’, while his collaborator 
Walter Pitts enjoyed ‘inventing all kinds of word games’.114 John von 
Neumann, who made use of the theory of games in his work, was himself 
described as ‘a playful man’. Th e computer scientist and cognitive 
psychologist Allen Newell, who published a book on Th e Chess Machine, 
was remembered by an interviewer as ‘playful’ and as calling science a 
‘game’.115 Newell’s colleague Herbert Simon seems to have written his 
articles on physics as a form of relaxation (along with playing the piano 
and reading Proust in French). Solving scientiﬁ c problems was the equiv-
alent for him of solving crosswords for ordinary mortals.
HEDGEHOGS AND FOXES
As we have seen, polymaths have sometimes been divided into two oppo-
site groups, foxes versus hedgehogs.116 I began research for this book 
expecting to ﬁ nd that most polymaths would belong to the group of 
foxes, drawn in centrifugal fashion towards many diﬀ erent kinds of 
knowledge. Some polymaths have indeed viewed themselves as foxes. 
Gilbert Chinard confessed to his vagabondage, as we have seen, and so 
did Michael Polanyi, while Gregory Bateson admitted his fondness for 
what he called ‘detours’.117

THE POLYMATH

186
On the other side, what to outsiders looks like a dispersal of interests 
may be viewed very diﬀ erently by polymaths themselves. Of Herman 
Conring it has been suggested that ‘His writings have seemed bewilder-
ingly disparate, but in his mind they were united.’118 Th e father of Pavel 
Florensky (the ‘Russian Leonardo’) worried about young Pavel’s regular 
changes of direction, but Pavel himself wrote to his mother that 
‘Mathematics is the key to a world view’, in which there would be 
‘nothing so unimportant as not to be worth studying and nothing that 
was not linked to something else’. He wrote of himself, as we have seen, 
that his ‘life’s task’ was to continue along ‘the path toward a future inte-
gral world view’.119 In similar fashion, the father of Joseph Needham, 
noting the variety of his son’s reading, used to warn him, ‘Don’t dissipate 
your energies, my boy.’ Needham himself, however, looking back on his 
life, saw himself as a bridge-builder or a syncretist.120
With interests that included all the social sciences, as well as mathe-
matics and computer science, Herbert Simon looks like an extreme case 
of a fox, but, according to him, ‘what appeared to be scatteration was 
really closer to monomania’, focused on the logic of decision-making.121 
Jacob Bronowski wrote about himself that ‘All that I have written, though 
it has seemed to me so diﬀ erent from year to year, turns to the same 
centre: the uniqueness of man that grows out of his struggle (and his gift) 
to understand both nature and himself.’122 Th e number of polymaths 
involved in projects for the uniﬁ cation of knowledge also testiﬁ es to the 
importance of the hedgehog ideal.
Some polymaths see themselves or are seen by others in a way that 
confuses or transcends the original distinction. In the essay that launched 
the dichotomy, Isaiah Berlin described Tolstoy as a fox who thought that 
he ought to be a hedgehog. Paul Lazarsfeld (according to Marie Jahoda, 
his former wife), was a fox ‘by talents and interest’, attracted to mathe-
matics, psychology, sociology and the study of the media, although 
‘historical accidents forced him to masquerade as a hedgehog’.123 George 
Steiner has been described as ‘two Steiners’, both fox and hedgehog.124 
Th e historian Carlo Ginzburg has described himself as ‘becoming more 
and more a fox, but ultimately I regard myself as a hedgehog’.125


 
187
Th e cases of Leonardo, Alexander von Humboldt and Michel de 
Certeau also highlight diﬃ  culties with this dichotomy. Leonardo has 
often been described as an individual of centrifugal interests, but it has 
been noted that what appears to be undirected curiosity is usually linked 
to his main preoccupations: ‘Th ese invisible threads connect the frag-
ments.’ Leonardo worked on the assumption that ‘all the apparent diver-
sities of nature are symptoms of an inner unity’.126 Alexander von 
Humboldt also appears to be a spectacular example of a fox, but he 
believed that ‘all forces of nature are interlaced and interwoven’. His 
scientiﬁ c achievement was, above all, to show connections ‘between 
climate and vegetation, between altitude and fertility, between human 
productivity and property relationships, and between the animal and 
plant kingdoms’.127 In his Cosmos (1845–62), originally lectures deliv-
ered to a lay public, Humboldt presented an account of connections on 
a literally global scale.
To pursue the question in more detail, it may be illuminating to 
return to Michel de Certeau.128 Certeau’s intellectual itinerary from a 
historian of mysticism to a sociologist of consumption was certainly an 
unusual one. He practised as well as preaching what he called interdisci-
plinary ‘poaching’ (braçonnage).129 However, in his forays into diﬀ erent 
disciplines, Certeau worked with the same fundamental concepts. Some 
central themes link his explorations, among them the idea of alterity – 
the ‘otherness’ of other cultures, other periods, of mystics and of indi-
viduals possessed by the devil. Certeau’s language of analysis also 
remained constant when its objects changed. He had a remarkable gift 
for perceiving analogies and some of his sociological concepts turn out to 
be transformations of theological ones. To use his own favourite term, he 
‘re-employed’ them. Belief, la croyance, and the production of belief, faire 
croire, are major themes in Certeau’s work, ﬁ rst in a religious context and 
later in a political one, noting for instance that the capacity to believe 
was in retreat in the political domain. His later discussion of social prac-
tices, from shopping to reading, echoes his earlier articles on religious 
topics, using phrases such as pratique sacramentelle, pratique chrétienne, 
pratique de l’amour and so on.

THE POLYMATH

188
Again, absence and related themes such as invisibility and silence play 
an important role in Certeau’s political and social analyses: the signiﬁ -
cance of absence, the need to listen to silence, and so on. Th ese themes 
had emerged earlier in his studies of mysticism. ‘Otherness’ or altérité is 
another major theme in Certeau’s work. Th is key term is an adaptation 
to secular contexts, such as the colonial encounter, of a concept that 
Certeau had begun to use when studying religious experience in general 
and mysticism in particular. Finally, the very idea of re-employment has 
religious origins. It is explicit in some of the Fathers of the Church, espe-
cially Augustine, discussing whether Christians can make use of classical 
culture and comparing this practice to the ‘spoils of Egypt’ taken by the 
Israelites at the Exodus. In short, Certeau may be described as a hedgehog 
in fox’s clothing.130
Th is point about the centripetal drive of apparently centrifugal 
scholars such as Humboldt and Certeau may be generalized. Rather than 
make a sharp distinction between two groups of polymaths, it may be 
more useful to place them along a continuum between these poles. It 
may be even more illuminating to think of many polymaths as tugged 
back and forth between centrifugal interests and the desire to make 
connections.
True foxes seem to be rare, and hedgehogs much more numerous, 
although it is surely necessary to distinguish between individuals who 
want to see connections, those who claim to have seen them, and those 
who actually demonstrate links between diﬀ erent domains of knowl-
edge. In any case, the fox element has not infrequently led to what I 
have called ‘Leonardo syndrome’.
LEONARDO SYNDROME
A recurrent theme in the life of polymaths is a dispersal of interests that 
has sometimes prevented them from producing books, completing inves-
tigations or making the discoveries to which they were close.
Leonardo is surely the most famous example of this dispersal, but he 
has rivals in this respect. Lucas Holstenius, a German scholar best known 
for his editions of classical and medieval texts, embarked on a number of 


 
189
ambitious projects such as collecting inscriptions and writing a history of 
the popes, but left them unﬁ nished. Peiresc, as we have seen, did not 
publish, although he contributed more to the circulation of knowledge 
through his letters than many other scholars did through their books. 
Leibniz never ﬁ nished his pioneering investigation of medieval German 
history. A modern admirer of Robert Hooke also notes his ‘failure to 
carry things through’, a weakness that contributed to the failure of 
posterity to recognize his importance.131
Examples of the syndrome can also be found in the nineteenth and 
twentieth centuries. Th omas Young admitted, as we have seen, that his 
forte was ‘acute suggestion’ rather than taking an enquiry to its conclu-
sion. Although he worked for a long time, on and oﬀ , at deciphering 
Egyptian hieroglyphics, it was his French rival Champollion who was 
ﬁ nally successful.132 In similar fashion to Young, Th omas Huxley wrote 
of himself that his intellect was ‘acute and quick’ rather than ‘grasping or 
deep’. Th e German philosopher Arnold Ruge remarked that, because of 
his many interests, Karl Marx ‘never ﬁ nishes anything’ (in fact, Marx 
almost ﬁ nished Das Kapital before his death, leaving his friend Friedrich 
Engels the task of making it ready for the press).133
As for Alexander von Humboldt, he intended to publish his account 
of his expedition to the Americas soon after he returned in 1804, but its 
ﬁ nal section was only published thirty-ﬁ ve years later, while the intro-
duction to the book was never ﬁ nished. If he had died at seventy, instead 
of eighty-nine, Humboldt’s most famous book, Cosmos, presented in the 
form of lectures between 1825 and 1827, would never have appeared in 
print at all (its ﬁ ve volumes were published between 1845 and 1862). 
Th is book, too, remained incomplete.
Freud, according to his friend and biographer Ernest Jones, ‘narrowly 
missed world fame in early life through not daring to pursue his thoughts 
to their logical – and not far-oﬀ  – conclusion’, notably in the case of the 
medical uses of cocaine.134 It has been said of Patrick Geddes that he 
‘rapidly became bored and was always more interested in the next idea 
than in following the last one to the point where he could write a mono-
graph about it’.135 A study of Otto Neurath notes ‘the enormous fertility 

THE POLYMATH

190
and suggestiveness of his ideas’, but also that there was ‘no time for him 
to work them out’.136 According to sympathetic biographers, Michael 
Polanyi’s record, even in his main discipline, chemistry, was ‘dotted with 
near misses’.137 Linus Pauling, who combined careers as a physicist, 
chemist and biologist, was on the track of the structure of DNA but 
failed to reach his goal, perhaps because he was distracted by his other 
interests.
On other occasions, though, fear of Leonardo syndrome turned out 
to be unjustiﬁ ed. One of Certeau’s Jesuit colleagues worried about ‘his 
perpetual attraction to new topics of research, the passionate interest that 
he shows in everything (in the manner of an extremely gifted adolescent) 
and the virtual impossibility for him to make a choice and to settle 
down’.138 In fact, as we have seen, Certeau went on to produce an impor-
tant and coherent body of work.

191
 7 
 HABITATS
A good memory and abundant energy belong to the realm of nature 
rather than nurture. So, perhaps, does curiosity, although in order to be 
eﬀ ective it needs to be awakened and allowed to ﬂ ourish, conditions that 
only some societies oﬀ er. Other characteristics of polymaths also require 
a cultural or social explanation. Where the previous chapter concen-
trated on the psychology of polymaths, this one is concerned with their 
habitat, from their early environment, geographical and social, to the 
niches that they later found for themselves.
In his autobiography, Vico declared that he became a scholar because 
he was born in Italy ‘and not in Morocco’. If he had known of the exist-
ence of Ibn Khaldun, who lived in Fez for a time, Vico might not have 
chosen this example, but his general point about the geography of schol-
arship is surely valid.1 Western polymaths were not distributed equally 
either in Europe or the Americas.
Of the 500 polymaths listed in the appendix to this book, 84 were 
German and 81 British (including a Welshman, William Jones, and a 
Channel Islander, Herbert John Fleure), 76 were French, 62 North 
American, 43 Italian. From other parts of the West the numbers are 
much lower: 21 Scots, 18 Austrians, 17 Spaniards, 15 Netherlanders 
(including Belgians), 14 Swiss, 11 Russians, 10 Hungarians, 6 Swedes, 5 
Danes, 5 Czechs, 4 Poles, 4 Mexicans, 3 Argentinians, 3 Brazilians, 3 
Irish, 2 Canadians, 2 Romanians, and one each from Algeria (Jacques 
Derrida), Australia (George Elton Mayo), Bulgaria (Tristan Todorov), 

THE POLYMATH

192
Croatia (Rudjer Bošković), Cuba (Fernando Ortiz), Estonia (Jacob 
von Uexküll), Greece (Constantinos Doxiadis), Malta (Th emistocles 
Zammit), Peru (Pedro de Peralta), Venezuela (Andrés Bello) and Portugal 
(Fernão de Oliveira).
Th e place of some small nations is particularly impressive. Th e Swedes 
include two individuals who remain famous for only one of their many 
achievements: Emanuel Swedenborg, discussed earlier, as a visionary, 
and August Strindberg as a dramatist – he also wrote on (among other 
things) history, photography, alchemy, linguistics, China and Japan.2 
Th e relatively high score of a small population in the Swedish case may 
be linked to the country’s literacy rate, already approaching 90 per cent 
of adults by the end of the seventeenth century.3 In the eighteenth 
century, Scotland produced a remarkable cluster of polymaths, notably 
David Hume, Adam Smith, Adam Ferguson, Lord Kames, Lord 
Monboddo and the brothers John and William Playfair. Th e Swiss score 
high from the sixteenth century (Conrad Gessner and Th eodor Zwinger) 
to the twentieth (Carl Gustav Jung and Jean Piaget), with Leonhard 
Euler, Albrecht von Haller, Germaine de Staël, Louis Agassiz and Jacob 
Burckhardt in between.
Th e Dutch contribution, concentrated in the seventeenth century 
with nine polymaths, looks particularly spectacular and this success story 
may help in the search for general explanations. Th e Dutch Republic in 
the seventeenth century was a densely populated country with good 
internal communications by canal, and good connections with much of 
the world thanks to its many ships. It was an urban culture with one of 
the biggest cities in Europe (Amsterdam), a high literacy rate and four 
universities (Leiden, Utrecht, Harderwijk and Franeker), the ﬁ rst of 
these being a major centre of learning with a good library, some famous 
professors and many foreign students. In addition, an important educa-
tional institution, the Athenaeum, was located in Amsterdam, together 
with a Stock Exchange, the headquarters of the East and West India 
Companies, and other ‘centres of calculation’ or ‘sites of knowledge’.4
Access to knowledge via schools, universities, libraries and so on is 
obviously important for would-be polymaths, so it was a great advantage 


HABITATS
193
to be born in a major city such as Amsterdam or Hamburg, a commer-
cial city that either produced or oﬀ ered niches to six early modern 
German polymaths, thanks in part to a famous school, the Johanneum, 
founded in 1529. A history of the scholars of Hamburg was published as 
early as 1783.5 In the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, Paris, London 
and Berlin were major centres of polymathy.
Twelve of the polymaths listed came from Latin America.6 Th e 
number is not high relative to the total population of the region, or 
indeed to the United States, where opportunities were greater, but none-
theless it is striking. A possible explanation may be late specialization 
and the survival of the idea of the ‘man of letters’. It has often been noted 
that social theory has been produced mainly in Western Europe and 
North America and that theorists have tended to generalize on the basis 
of those parts of the world. Two major exceptions to this rule, examples 
of what is known as ‘Southern Th eory’, are the Cuban Fernando Ortiz 
and the Brazilian Gilberto Freyre.
Both men taught in universities on occasion but they were primarily 
men of letters who wrote poems and stories as well as reading widely in 
sociology, anthropology, geography, history and psychology, and devel-
oping their theories from their investigation of their own societies. Both 
of them emphasized the importance of cultural mixing (rejecting the 
idea of ‘race’). Ortiz compared Cuban culture to the local stew (ajiaco) 
and wrote about what he called ‘transculturation’, while Freyre wrote in 
similar terms about the ‘interpenetration’ of cultures, especially in Brazil.7
THE WORK ETHIC
Th e geography of religion is also relevant to the distribution of poly-
maths. In the long debate about the causes of the Scientiﬁ c Revolution 
of the seventeenth century, it has sometimes been argued that what Max 
Weber called ‘Th e Protestant Ethic’ was important for the rise of science 
as well as the rise of capitalism.8 Th is argument certainly needs to be 
qualiﬁ ed. Rather than referring to all Protestants, it should concentrate, 
as Weber did, on the ‘Puritan’ variety, with its ethic of frugality and hard 
work. Conversely, what is often called the ‘Protestant’ work ethic is 

THE POLYMATH

194
found among other groups as well, including Confucians and Jews 
(discussed below) as well as some Catholics, including Umberto Eco, 
whose ‘work ethic’ (etica lavorativa) has been emphasized by one of his 
former students.9 Th e presence of ten Jesuit polymaths in the group 
undermines any simple appeal to a Protestant ethic.
Despite these necessary qualiﬁ cations to his thesis, there remains a 
kernel of truth in Weber’s argument and it is tempting to extend it to 
scholars in general and polymaths in particular, encouraged by the fact 
that one of Weber’s favourite examples of the Protestant ethic was the 
polymath Benjamin Franklin, whose ‘Plan for Future Conduct’ (1726) 
shows his concern at the age of twenty with frugality and industry.
Th e argument is supported by the number of polymaths who were 
Protestant ministers, nineteen altogether, whether Lutheran, Calvinist or 
Anglican. In Central Europe, they included Philipp Melanchthon, 
Johann Heinrich Alsted, Johannes Comenius and Johann Gottfried 
Herder. In Scotland, they included Gilbert Burnet, John Playfair (a 
mathematician, geologist and astronomer) and William Robertson 
Smith. In mainly Catholic France, ministers included Samuel Bochart, 
Pierre Bayle and Comte’s mentor Daniel Encontre (who was successively 
a professor of literature, mathematics and theology). Other polymaths 
expected, or were expected by their parents, to follow this career, 
including the biologist–psychologist James Miller; Warren McCulloch, 
a pioneer in the ﬁ eld of artiﬁ cial intelligence; the economist–historian 
Harold Innis, whose family were Baptists; and Melvil Dewey, another 
Baptist, who thought of becoming a missionary.
Twenty-nine polymaths, including Olof Rudbeck, Pierre Bayle, Carl 
Linnaeus, Emanuel Swedenborg, Adam Ferguson, Jacob Burckhardt, 
John Stuart Mill, Louis Agassiz, Carl Gustav Jung, Harold Lasswell and 
Robert Hutchins, were the sons of Protestant ministers and so particu-
larly likely to have the ‘Protestant ethic’ inculcated in them at an early 
age.10 Friedrich Nietzsche, himself the son of a Lutheran clergyman, 
once wrote that ‘Th e Protestant pastor is the grandfather of German 
philosophy’, a remark that might be extended to scholarship in general.11 
Grandchildren of pastors include Johann Albert Fabricius, Madame de 


HABITATS
195
Staël and Jürgen Habermas. Habermas, who spends long hours at his 
desk, is the grandson of a pastor ‘who upheld the Prussian virtue of a 
strict work ethic’.12
An outstanding example of such an ethic is Max Weber himself, 
whose mother, like the mothers of Benjamin Franklin and Warren 
McCulloch, was a devout Protestant. Max once said to his wife, Marianne, 
that for him, uninterrupted work was a ‘natural need’. John Maynard 
Keynes (another workaholic, as we have seen) was the son of ‘an earnest 
Nonconformist’ and, according to Bertrand Russell, ‘Something of the 
Nonconformist spirit remained in his son’.13
THE VEBLEN QUESTION
To place the Weber thesis in perspective, it may be juxtaposed to an 
argument by another polymathic sociologist, Th orstein Veblen. In a 
famous essay published in 1919, Veblen discussed what he called ‘Th e 
Intellectual Pre-Eminence of Jews in Modern Europe’, attempting to 
explain why the Jews have contributed ‘a disproportionate number of the 
men to whom modern science and scholarship look for guidance and 
leadership’, ‘the pioneers, the uneasy gild of pathﬁ nders and iconoclasts’. 
Rejecting a racial explanation of the phenomenon on the grounds that 
‘the Jewish people are a nation of hybrids’, Veblen adopted a social one, 
claiming that it is only when Jews join ‘the gentile republic of learning’ 
that they become creative, poised between two worlds and therefore 
regarding both with a certain degree of detachment or scepticism.14
Th e prosopography of polymaths on which this book is based also 
suggests that individuals of Jewish origin (whether they were practising 
Jews, Catholics, Protestants or atheists) have punched well above their 
weight, at least from the mid-nineteenth century onwards, beginning 
with Marx. Among the individuals listed in the appendix who were born 
in 1817 or later, 55 out of 250 were Jewish. Th is ﬁ gure conﬁ rms Veblen’s 
idea in one way yet it undermines it in another. Th e problem is that, if 
Veblen was right, as Jews left the ghettoes and became assimilated into 
European and American culture, what he called ‘the supply of Jewish 
renegades’ should have dried up early in the twentieth century. It has 

THE POLYMATH

196
conspicuously failed to do so in the case of polymaths. Alternative expla-
nations for Jewish ‘intellectual pre-eminence’ are therefore necessary in 
order to supplement if not to replace Veblen’s insight.
As in the case of other minorities such as the Quakers, exclusion from 
politics will have encouraged intelligent young men to move into another 
domain, such as trade or scholarship. Jewish parents traditionally 
respected learning and becoming a scientist or a scholar was a kind of 
secularization of the tradition of studying the Tanakh and the Torah. It 
is not surprising to ﬁ nd some parents who pushed their children hard in 
this direction, as in the case of Norbert Wiener, who later joked that he 
had been ‘brought up in a doubly Puritan environment’, in a Jewish 
family in Protestant New England.15 Th e importance of exile is also 
worth noting, as Veblen surely would have done if he had been writing 
in the 1930s rather than in 1919. Th e polymaths of Jewish origin 
discussed in this book were usually either exiles themselves or the chil-
dren of exiles, living between the culture of their homeland and that of 
their ‘hostland’ and so viewing both with a certain degree of detachment, 
allowing these refugees to escape the provinciality of scientists and 
scholars who are rooted in one particular environment and the ways of 
thinking that accompany it.16
EDUCATION
Did a particular kind of upbringing encourage polymathy? It is plausible 
to suggest, though diﬃ  cult to prove, that education at home rather than 
school encourages a lack of respect for formal academic boundaries or 
even a lack of awareness of their existence. At any rate, some leading poly-
maths were educated at home. For a long time this was necessarily the case 
for women, for Anna Maria Schurman, for instance, for Sister Juana de la 
Cruz, for Mary Somerville and for Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, who 
studied Latin by herself when ‘everyone thought I was reading but 
romances’. Among the males, polymaths who were educated at home, at 
least in their early years, include Christiaan Huygens, Nicolaes Witsen, 
Christopher Wren, Gilbert Burnet, the Humboldt brothers, Th omas 
Young, John Stuart Mill, Mark Pattison, William Robertson Smith, Karl 


HABITATS
197
Pearson, Karl and Michael Polanyi, John von Neumann, Bertrand Russell, 
Jorge Luis Borges and Ludwig von Bertalanﬀ y.
A number of polymaths were child prodigies: Blaise Pascal, for 
instance, Juan Caramuel, Maria Agnesi, the Swiss physiologist Albrecht 
von Haller, Th omas Macaulay, John Stuart Mill, Dorothea Schlözer, 
Manuel Menéndez y Pelayo, Jean Piaget (who published several scientiﬁ c 
articles while he was a teenager), John von Neumann, Norbert Wiener 
(whose autobiography was entitled Ex-Prodigy), his friend William Sidis 
(who went to Harvard at the age of eleven) and Walter Pitts.
Some of these, notably Mill, Schlözer, Wiener and Sidis, all three of 
whom were the children of intellectuals, felt the pressure of the ‘great 
expectations’ of their fathers. Mill began Greek at the age of three, 
Dorothea Schlözer began geometry, French and Latin at the age of ﬁ ve, 
while Wiener studied physics and chemistry aged seven, went to univer-
sity aged twelve and took his BA aged fourteen. He remembered his 
father’s ‘hard and unceasing work’ and the fact that ‘what Father expected 
of himself, he expected of me as well’. Ralph Gerard, whose background 
was similar to Wiener’s, was ﬁ fteen when he went to university and 
described his father as ‘a master teacher, a demanding prod, and a 
tyrant’.17 Kenneth Boulding did not view his parents as tyrants, but 
remembered that they too had ‘extremely high expectations’ of their 
precocious son.18
Other polymaths attended conventional schools but went their 
own way. Vico called himself an autodidact. Alan Turing, who went to 
Sherborne, a public school in Dorset, ‘always preferred his own methods 
to those supplied by the text-book’, while Herbert Simon claimed that 
when he was a schoolboy in Milwaukee, he ‘kept his education entirely 
in his own hands, seldom asking for advice’. Simon followed the same 
‘strategy of self-instruction’, as he called it, when learning mathematics 
and languages in later life.19 He was not the only polymath to praise this 
method. Daniel Morhof defended the autodidact.20 David Hume 
declared that ‘there is nothing to be learnt from a professor, which is not 
to be met with in books’. Th omas Young agreed that there was ‘very little’ 
that ‘a person who is seriously and industriously disposed to improve 

THE POLYMATH

198
may not obtain from books with more advantage than from a living 
instructor’.21
Access to a well-stocked library at home or nearby encouraged self-
education in parallel with school. Christiaan Huygens, for instance, had 
access to the extensive collection of books accumulated by his father. 
Giambattista Vico and Samuel Johnson had the advantage of being the 
sons of booksellers. Th omas Young discovered the natural sciences by 
browsing in the library of a neighbour.22 H. G. Wells was allowed to 
borrow books from the library of the country house of Uppark when his 
mother was a servant there, and in middle age he remarked on ‘the 
wonders of self-education’.23 George Homans believed that ‘much of 
what I learned from books I learned not at school but at home, from our 
excellent library’.24 Jorge Luis Borges also lived in a house with many 
books in it, and later said that ‘if I were asked to name the chief event in 
my life, I would say my father’s library’.25 Walter Bagehot, Norbert 
Wiener, John von Neumann and Joseph Needham all developed their 
wide interests by browsing in their father’s libraries, while Otto Neurath, 
the son of a professor who owned about 13,000 books, confessed that ‘I 
made my ﬁ rst mathematical estimates counting the number of books in 
the library’.26
Some polymaths dropped out of university, among them Robert 
Hooke, Denis Diderot, David Hume, Th omas De Quincey, T. H. 
Huxley, August Strindberg, Patrick Geddes, Elton Mayo, Kenneth 
Burke, H. G. Wells (who began studying at the Normal School of Science 
in London) and Lewis Mumford. Mumford later taught at colleges on 
occasion, but avoided permanent attachments and once described being 
read by academics as ‘a second burial’. A few never studied at university 
at all, among them Leonardo, Joseph Priestley (unable to enter Oxford 
or Cambridge because he was not an Anglican), Herbert Spencer and 
Jorge Luis Borges.
In more than the ﬁ rst two-thirds of the period examined in this book, 
more or less 1400–1800, formidable obstacles were placed in the way 
of female scholars. Th ey were not forbidden to go to university but it 
was generally assumed that higher learning was not for them. If they 


HABITATS
199
developed intellectual interests, these were expected to be in belles-lettres 
rather than learning, just as their publications, if any, were expected to be 
translations rather than original work. In these circumstances it is little 
short of miraculous that a few female polymaths emerged in the early 
modern period, twelve of them between 1450 and 1800.27
Th e removal of some of these obstacles in the way of intellectual 
women led to a slight rise of female polymaths, six of them in the nine-
teenth century: Germaine de Staël, Dorothea Schlözer, George Eliot, 
Mary Somerville, Harriet Martineau and Harriet Taylor. Th ey have been 
succeeded in the twentieth and the twenty-ﬁ rst centuries by a larger 
cluster of versatile scholars who were able to take advantage of the expan-
sion of female education and of occupations for educated women, espe-
cially for the generation born in the 1930s, such as Susan Sontag and 
Clara Gallini, who was active as a classicist, historian of religion and 
cultural anthropologist, and their successors.
Living women with a good claim to be considered as polymaths include 
Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, active in philosophy, literary theory and 
postcolonial studies; Luce Iragiray (philosophy, psychoanalysis and 
linguistics); Hélène Cixous (philosophy, psychoanalysis, literature); Juliet 
Mitchell (literature, psychoanalysis and gender studies); Julia Kristeva 
(literature, philosophy, psychoanalysis, semiotics); Griselda Pollock (art 
history, cultural theory, psychoanalysis); Aleida Assmann (literature, 
cultural history, anthropology); Judith Butler (philosophy, linguistics, 
politics); Margaret Boden (philosophy, psychology and cognitive studies); 
Mieke Bal, a theorist of literature, art and the media who also practises as 
a video artist, and Jacqueline Rose, who writes on literature, psychoana-
lysis, gender studies, politics and history (not to mention a novel).28
INDEPENDENCE
Curiosity, energy and the drive to make a productive use of time are still 
not enough. Polymaths also need the leisure to do their own work. Th is 
was sometimes provided by life in community in Oxford and Cambridge 
colleges or as members of religious orders – Benedictines (Johannes 
Trithemius and Benito Feijóo), Carmelites (Bodin for a time, and Sister 

THE POLYMATH

200
Juana), Cistercians (Caramuel), canons regular (Erasmus, for a time, and 
Copernicus), Franciscans (Rabelais and Sebastian Münster, both for a 
time), Dominicans (Fernão de Oliveira, Giordano Bruno, for a time, 
and Tommaso Campanella), Servites (Paolo Sarpi) and especially Jesuits 
(the ten mentioned earlier). Princess Elisabeth became a Protestant 
abbess. Celibacy and the freedom from concern with food and lodging 
allowed these scholars to concentrate on acquiring and transmitting 
knowledge, while Athanasius Kircher in particular made good use of his 
order’s global network. His book on China drew on the ﬁ rst-hand knowl-
edge of colleagues who were missionaries. Kircher was even able to 
assemble a team of Jesuits to observe magnetic variation in diﬀ erent parts 
of the globe.29
A few lay polymaths never married. In some cases, from Leonardo to 
Alan Turing, this was probably because they were homosexual, but in 
other cases the likely reason was to avoid distraction from their studies. 
Th e group includes Filippo Brunelleschi, Joseph Scaliger, Franciscus 
Junius, Nicolas-Claude Peiresc, Leibniz, Pierre Bayle, René de Réaumur, 
Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos, Alexander von Humboldt, Th omas 
Macaulay, Herbert Spencer, Charles Sainte-Beuve, William Robertson 
Smith and Charles Ogden. When Charles Darwin made his famous list 
of the case for and against marriage, one of the arguments for remaining 
single was ‘Loss of time – cannot read in the Evenings’ (nevertheless, he 
married Emma Wedgwood).30
A substantial number of polymaths were members of a ‘leisure class’ 
with an income that did not depend on employment: Pico della 
Mirandola, for instance, John Dee, Tycho Brahe, Christiaan Huygens, 
Scipione Maﬀ ei, Montesquieu and Buﬀ on. Alexander von Humboldt 
had enough not only to live on but also to ﬁ nance his famous expedition 
to Latin America. In Britain, Charles Babbage, Charles Darwin, Francis 
Galton, John Lubbock and William Henry Fox Talbot were all gentleman 
scholars with private incomes. Aby Warburg, the son and brother of a 
banker, was able to live comfortably and buy all the books he needed for 
his studies.31 Walter Benjamin was supported, not always willingly, by 
his wealthy parents. Henry Murray was ‘independently wealthy’.32


HABITATS
201
Inheriting a fortune allowed a number of polymaths to indulge their 
wider interests in later life –Th omas Young, for instance, Charles Peirce, 
Herbert Spencer, Georg Simmel and Vilfredo Pareto, who gave up 
teaching at the age of sixty-one in order to devote more time to his 
books. Bertrand Russell inherited £20,000 from his father, although he 
still needed to write books and make lecture tours in the United States in 
order to support his various wives and children.
ENFORCED LEISURE
A few polymaths made good use of enforced leisure, among them Walter 
Raleigh, who, according to Aubrey, ‘studied most in his Sea-Voyages, 
where he carried always a trunk of books along with him’.33 Darwin, who 
spent ﬁ ve years at sea on the Beagle, reading and writing in his hammock, 
wrote to his father that ‘a ship is singularly comfortable for all sorts of 
work. Everything is so close at hand, and being cramped makes one so 
methodical, that in the end I have been the gainer.’ One of the books he 
read in this way was Charles Lyell’s Principles of Geology (1830–3), which 
helped shape his theory of evolution.34
Raleigh’s second bout of enforced leisure was as a prisoner in the Tower 
of London, where he wrote his History of the World. John Selden wrote a 
study of Jewish legal history in the Marshalsea prison, where he was 
conﬁ ned for political reasons in 1629. He later remarked wryly on ‘the 
abundant leisure of prison’.35 Th omas Campanella spent twenty-seven 
years in Neapolitan prisons and indeed wrote some of his most important 
books in these circumstances. Samuel Pufendorf, who was employed as a 
tutor in the family of a Swedish diplomat, was imprisoned in Copenhagen 
when war broke out between Denmark and Sweden. According to his 
own testimony, Pufendorf employed his time in prison to write his 
Elements of Jurisprudence – from memory, since he had no access to 
books.36 Th e Spanish statesman Jovellanos, in prison in the castle of 
Bellver in Mallorca, used his leisure to study the geology of the region, to 
produce a historical description of the castle, and to write up his notes on 
the buildings of Palma. Bertrand Russell, who was imprisoned for ﬁ ve 
months for supporting the refusal of ‘conscientious objectors’ to ﬁ ght in 

THE POLYMATH

202
the First World War, ‘read enormously’ in gaol and, like Pufendorf, he 
was able to write a book before he was released.37
FAMILIES
Families linked a number of the individuals discussed in this study, whether 
(as one of them, Francis Galton, claimed) because ‘genius’ is hereditary, 
or whether it is the early environment that encourages the development 
of many-sidedness. Famous examples of polymathic families include the 
brothers Wilhelm and Alexander von Humboldt; John and William 
Playfair, the elder focusing on mathematics and natural philosophy and 
the younger on engineering and political economy; Julian and Aldous 
Huxley, dividing the natural sciences and the humanities between them; 
and the French scholars Joseph, Salomon and Th éodore Reinach (it was 
remarked that the initials of the three, J, S and T, stood for ‘je sais tout’).
As for the brothers Karl and Michael Polanyi, they were only the best-
known members of what a friend called ‘the most gifted family I have 
ever known or heard of’, including their sister Laura. Th ey seem to have 
taken after their mother, Cécile, who ‘penned unpublished texts on a 
miscellany of cultural and political topics, from graphology to jewellery, 
pedagogy to pyjamas, romance to the Russian revolution’.38 Another 
remarkable example of a gifted family is that of the six Prodi brothers, all 
of whom followed academic careers, including at least two polymaths, 
Giorgio (in medicine, biology and semiotics) and Paolo (in church 
history and political thought). Of the remaining four, Giovanni was a 
mathematician, Franco and Vittorio were physicists, while Romano, an 
economist, later became Prime Minister of Italy.
Fathers and sons include three examples from the seventeenth century, 
one Swedish and two Dutch. Olof Rudbeck the Younger did not match 
his father’s range, but his work in medicine, botany, ornithology and 
what we call ‘linguistics’ surely merits the title of polymath. Th e leading 
mathematician and natural philosopher Christiaan Huygens was the son 
of Constantijn, whose wide interests were mainly in the humanities. 
Another Dutchman, Isaac Vossius, was the son of an equally well-known 
scholar, Gerard Vossius.


HABITATS
203
Th e polymaths studied here also include a pair of fathers and daugh-
ters. August von Schlözer was not only one of the leading historians of 
his time but also wrote on what he was one of the ﬁ rst to call Völkerkunde 
(the comparative study of diﬀ erent peoples) and on Statistik, which 
included the description of political systems as well as tables of ﬁ gures. 
His daughter Dorothea, the ﬁ rst German woman to take a Ph.D, knew 
nine languages and studied mathematics, botany, zoology, optics, reli-
gion, mining, mineralogy and art. Jacob Bronowski and his daughter 
Lisa oﬀ er another example. Jacob’s straddling of the two cultures was 
discussed earlier, while his daughter, better known as Lisa Jardine, was a 
mathematician turned literary critic and cultural historian as well as a 
public intellectual.
NETWORKS
Polymaths include groups of friends as well as relatives. Despite rivalries, 
members of the species are often drawn to one another. After his migra-
tion to America, Joseph Priestley became a friend of his fellow polymath 
Th omas Jeﬀ erson. Th e young Goethe was a friend of Herder and the 
middle-aged Goethe was a friend of the Humboldt brothers.
John Herschel, William Whewell and Charles Babbage became 
friends when they were students at Cambridge. James Frazer’s friendship 
with William Robertson Smith began when Smith arrived at the same 
university. Yet another Cambridge friendship, between Charles Ogden 
and Ivor Richards, began when the two men were students at Magdalene 
College. Ogden, who studied classics, turned to psychology and later 
invented and advocated Basic English. Richards studied ‘moral sciences’, 
taught philosophy and English literature, and became a professor of 
education.39
In Germany, the so-called ‘Frankfurt School’, discussed in the 
following chapter, included friends who knew one another from their 
schooldays: Th eodor Adorno, Max Horkheimer and Siegfried Kracauer. 
In France, Georges Bataille and Roger Caillois were friends who founded 
the so-called ‘College of Sociology’ together. Th ey shared interests in 
literature (Bataille wrote poetry and Caillois a novel), but both are best 

THE POLYMATH

204
known for ambitious studies that drew on anthropology while oﬀ ering 
broader conclusions. Bataille’s La part maudite (1949) oﬀ ered a theory 
of consumption, while Caillois presented a theory of play, Les jeux et les 
hommes (1958).40 Another productive friendship was that between Gilles 
Deleuze, a philosopher and critic who wrote on literature, art and the 
cinema, and the psychologist, philosopher and semiologist Félix Guattari.
Th e relation between William Robertson Smith and James Frazer 
might also be described as that of master and disciple, another recurring 
theme in the history of polymaths.41 Karl Pearson was a disciple of 
Francis Galton. Lewis Mumford described himself as a rebellious disciple 
of Patrick Geddes, recognizing that Geddes ‘changed my whole life’ and 
‘gave me a new view of the world’ but also that, as he grew older, ‘my 
own way of thinking had departed from his’.42 Henry Murray was one of 
Lawrence Henderson’s students, and Ernst Haeckel a pupil of Rudolf 
Virchow. In his turn, Haeckel became a master for whom Friedrich 
Ratzel expressed ‘unqualiﬁ ed admiration’.43
Wider networks of correspondents have often been mentioned in 
earlier chapters. Some of these networks are well known. Th ey run from 
Erasmus to Charles Darwin via Peiresc, Kircher, Leibniz, Bayle and 
Alexander von Humboldt. Face-to-face contacts are not always docu-
mented but they are probably even more important. For example, 
Gregory Bateson saw himself as part of a common enterprise involving 
at least four other polymaths whom he knew personally: Bertalanﬀ y, 
Wiener, von Neumann and Shannon.44
Family and friends form what might be called a lateral network of 
individuals living at the same time or at least overlapping for several 
decades. Also important for polymaths is what might be called their 
vertical network or their intellectual genealogy, which often includes 
earlier polymaths such as Ramón Lull, Pico della Mirandola, Johannes 
Comenius and Francis Bacon. Pico, Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa, 
Kircher, Caramuel, Leibniz and Benito Feijoo were all fascinated by 
Lull’s art of combination. Johannes Bureus admired Pico, while Queen 
Christina owned a portrait of him. Leibniz and Kircher were both inter-
ested in Comenius. Bacon was a hero for d’Alembert, Feijoo and 


HABITATS
205
Jovellanos, and later for Comte, Spencer and Melvil Dewey. Even some 
relatively recent polymaths had this sense of genealogy. Both Geddes and 
Neurath found Comenius inspiring. Borges expressed interest in Lull 
(writing an essay on his ‘thought machine’), Pico (reviewing a book 
about him), Kircher, Leibniz, Coleridge, De Quincey (‘essential for me’), 
and ‘Th e Huxley dynasty’ (including Aldous’s brother Julian and their 
grandfather T. H. Huxley).
To ﬂ ourish, polymaths need a niche that will allow them to make a 
living. Among the most common of these niches have been courts, 
schools, universities, libraries and journals.
COURTS AND PATRONAGE
In early modern times an important niche for polymaths, as for other 
scholars (not to mention artists, poets and musicians), was the court, 
royal or aristocratic. Leonardo left Florence for the court of Lodovico 
Sforza in Milan, and ended his life in France supported by King Francis I. 
Charles IX of Sweden and his successor Gustav Adolf were patrons of 
Johannes Bureus, who has been described as ‘the great polyhistor of the 
age of greatness’ and is best known for his studies of the occult sciences 
and of Swedish antiquities.45 Particularly important for scholars, as we 
have seen, was the court of Gustav’s daughter Christina of Sweden.
Leibniz lived at the courts of Hanover and Wolfenbüttel. Lorenzo 
Magalotti and Francesco Redi lived at the Medici court in Florence. 
Samuel Pufendorf was employed as a historian at the court of Charles XI 
of Sweden and then at the court of the Elector of Brandenburg in Berlin. 
Peter Simon Pallas and August Schlözer were supported by Catherine the 
Great and Denis Diderot spent a few months at her court in St Petersburg, 
like Voltaire at the court of Frederick the Great in Potsdam. As late as the 
nineteenth century, Alexander von Humboldt served as chamberlain at 
the Prussian court.
Th e attitude of polymaths to courts was often ambivalent. For scholars 
who lacked a private income, the salaries paid by monarchs and aristocrats 
were often tempting. One reason for the nomadic life of Agrippa, in 
Cologne, Turin, Metz, Geneva, Fribourg, Lyon and Antwerp, was the 

THE POLYMATH

206
search for patrons, among them the emperor Maximilian, Louise of Savoy 
and Margaret of Austria. Patrons might pay for books to be printed. 
Without the ﬁ nancial aid of the Emperor Ferdinand III, the massive illus-
trated folios of Kircher’s Oedipus Aegyptiacus might never have been 
published. Again, powerful patrons oﬀ ered protection. In his conﬂ icts with 
academic colleagues, Swedenborg was supported by King Charles XII.
On the other hand, scholars often resented the distraction from their 
studies entailed by the need to play the courtier. In Rome, Kircher 
complained about spending his time answering questions from Pope 
Alexander VII.46 When Leibniz was serving as historian to Ernst August, 
the Elector of Hanover, his patron regularly asked him to attend to other 
matters. As for Humboldt, he was required to read to King Friedrich 
Wilhelm III at meals and deal with his correspondence, and later to 
answer Friedrich Wilhelm IV’s many questions on a variety of subjects, 
using him like an encyclopaedia.47
Today, the patronage of monarchs and aristocrats has been taken over 
by foundations. Th eir role in some enterprises involving polymaths will 
be discussed below.
SCHOOLS AND UNIVERSITIES
In early modern Germany, a number of polymaths taught in schools, 
especially in the academically oriented gymnasia in Hamburg and else-
where. A few individuals preferred this niche to a place in a university, as 
if they were uncomfortable with the need to restrict their teaching to a 
single discipline.48
All the same, many polymaths did gravitate to universities, which 
have often oﬀ ered more freedom for scholars than is customary today. 
Before the second half of the twentieth century, the administration of 
academic departments was not yet too demanding, while teaching loads 
might be light. At Johns Hopkins, where he was a professor from 1910 to 
1938, Arthur Lovejoy ‘refused to teach undergraduates’ and ‘never taught 
more than four hours per week’ and only small groups of graduate 
students.49 In addition, many professors were able to leave domestic 
aﬀ airs to their wives and servants. Of Friedrich Ratzel it has been 


HABITATS
207
remarked that ‘It was still possible in the last quarter of the nineteenth 
century for a professor, especially a German professor, untrammelled by 
administration, welfare work and domestic chores, to acquire an extraor-
dinary sweep of knowledge’.50
Academic freedom included opportunities for switching disciplines, a 
form of freedom particularly important for polymaths. At the University 
of Helmstedt, Hermann Conring moved between law, history and medi-
cine.51 At Uppsala, Olof Rudbeck, originally appointed to teach medi-
cine, lectured on a wide range of natural sciences. At the University of 
Leiden, Herman Boerhaave, professor of botany and medicine, was 
allowed to hold the chair of chemistry as well. In the nineteenth century, 
Hermann Helmholtz moved from a chair in physiology to one in physics.
Even in the twentieth century, some universities showed themselves to 
be ﬂ exible in this respect. At the University of Graz, in 1924, a special 
chair in meteorology and geophysics was created for Alfred Wegener, 
whose interests also included astronomy. At Oxford, R. G. Collingwood 
was given the made-to-measure post of University Lecturer in Philosophy 
and Roman History. In Cambridge, after the Second World War, Joseph 
Needham, Reader in Embryology, retained his post at the university after 
he had given up biology in order to write the history of Chinese science.
Th ree serial polymaths were able to remain professors in their respec-
tive universities despite their dramatic shifts between academic ﬁ elds, 
simply moving across the campus from one department to another. At 
the University College of Aberystwyth, Herbert Fleure, formerly head of 
the department of zoology, became the ﬁ rst (indeed the only) professor 
of anthropology and geography. At the University of Manchester, as we 
have seen, Michael Polanyi exchanged a chair in chemistry for one in 
‘social studies’. At the University of California at Los Angeles, Jared 
Diamond, a former professor of physiology, moved to the Department 
of Geography.
DISCIPLINES
A few disciplines in particular appear to have provided trampolines for 
polymaths. Philosophy is an obvious example, via its tradition of concern 

THE POLYMATH

208
with the foundations of knowledge. Durkheim, Foucault and Bourdieu, for 
instance, were all trained as philosophers. Medicine was another spring-
board, oﬀ ering training in precise observation that proved to be of use in 
other disciplines as well. In the early modern period physicians often studied 
botany and chemistry in the search for cures, while Miguel Servet was also 
interested in astronomy and geography. Among the early modern virtuosi 
who were famous for their cabinets of curiosities were the Danish physician 
Ole Worm and the Irishman Hans Sloane. Later, a few physicians were 
drawn to physical and also to social anthropology. Th e Frenchman Paul 
Broca migrated from medicine to anthropology, like his compatriots 
Gustave Le Bon and Paul Rivet and the Italian Paolo Mantegazza.52
In the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, engineering was yet 
another route to polymathy. Léon Walras and Vilfredo Pareto moved 
into economics, for instance, Frédéric Le Play and Herbert Spencer into 
sociology, Warren Weaver into the study of agriculture and the theory of 
communication, Vannevar Bush into computer science, John Maynard 
Smith and Robert May into biology, Benjamin Whorf into linguistics 
and anthropology, and Buckminster Fuller into architecture and what he 
called ‘the principles governing the universe’. It seems that the sense of 
system necessary to be a good engineer is capable of adaptation to other 
disciplines, just as John Playfair’s training as an engineer’s draughtsman 
helped him to invent graphs and charts.
New disciplines emerge as part of the process of specialization. 
Paradoxically, they also oﬀ er particular opportunities for polymaths, at 
least in the short term, since the ﬁ rst generation of teachers of new disci-
plines is necessarily trained in something else. Freud’s move from medi-
cine and zoology to psychoanalysis oﬀ ers a famous example of what 
might be described as the creative ‘renegade’.53
In the case of anthropology, migrants came from geography (Franz 
Boas), zoology (Alfred Haddon) and psychology (William Rivers) as well 
as from medicine. In sociology, Frédéric Le Play came from engineering, 
Émile Durkheim from philosophy and pedagogy, Max Weber from law, 
Robert Park from philosophy and journalism, and Lester Ward from 
geology and palaeontology.


HABITATS
209
LIBRARIES AND MUSEUMS
Th e post of librarian is an obvious niche for polymaths, beginning in the 
third century bc with Eratosthenes in Alexandria. Pierre Bayle thought 
at one time of becoming a librarian because that would provide him with 
‘suﬃ  cient books’, together (so he thought) with ‘the time to study’.54 In 
our period, at least twenty polymaths occupied this position at some 
time in their careers. Th ey include Benito Arias Montano at the Escorial, 
Hugo Blotius in Vienna, Gabriel Naudé in Paris, Stockholm and Rome, 
Leibniz and Lessing in Wolfenbüttel, Antonio Magliabecchi in Florence, 
David Hume and Adam Ferguson in Edinburgh, William Robertson 
Smith in Cambridge, Marcelino Menéndez Pelayo in Madrid and Jorge 
Luis Borges in Buenos Aires.55 Classifying books is obviously linked to 
classifying knowledge, as in the cases of Leibniz, Melvil Dewey and Paul 
Otlet.56
Museums too used to oﬀ er the curators the time and the opportunity 
to study. Th e Muséum d’histoire naturelle in Paris, which was in the 
early nineteenth century ‘the world’s largest establishment dedicated to 
scientiﬁ c research’, was the base for the many activities of Georges 
Cuvier.57 Adolf Bastian founded the Museum für Völkerkunde in Berlin. 
Franz Boas worked there, and it was in the course of cataloguing exhibits 
that he became interested in artefacts produced in the North West Coast 
of the United States, a region that he continued to study throughout his 
career. After his arrival in the United States, Boas was active in the Field 
Museum at Chicago and the American Museum of Natural History in 
New York before moving to Columbia University.
Other polymaths studied and wrote in the intervals aﬀ orded by their 
employment, intervals that were often more generous in the eighteenth 
and nineteenth centuries than they became later. John Stuart Mill had 
the good fortune to work in an oﬃ  ce in the East India Company, where 
his duties were light enough to allow him to write his books. John 
Lubbock was able to write his books on prehistory while active as head 
of the family bank and a Member of Parliament. When Borges was cata-
loguing books in a public library in Buenos Aires, his occupation for 

THE POLYMATH

210
nine years, what he described as a light workload gave him the opportu-
nity to continue his wide reading.
ENCYCLOPAEDIAS AND JOURNALS
On the edge of the academic world, a number of polymaths have written, 
edited or contributed to encyclopaedias – appropriately enough, given 
their encyclopaedic interests. As we have seen, Johann Heinrich Alsted 
compiled a massive encyclopaedia single-handed, while Diderot and 
d’Alembert managed a team of contributors. Th omas Young contributed 
over sixty articles to the ﬁ fth edition of the Encyclopedia Britannica. 
Robertson Smith was chief editor of the ninth edition of the Britannica, 
while Andrew Lang contributed nineteen articles to that edition. For a 
time, the young Norbert Wiener made a living by writing articles for the 
Encyclopedia Americana.
Another niche for polymaths, from the age of Bayle until today, has 
been the cultural journal or the newspaper, especially for those who 
prefer the freedom of a freelance worker to the relative security of an 
institution such as the university. Samuel Johnson, for instance, founded 
Th e Rambler, which, like his Dictionary, allowed him to support himself 
outside what he called ‘the shelter of academic bowers’.58 Macaulay 
earned £200 a year (a reasonable income at that time) from his famous 
essays for Th e Edinburgh Review.59 George Eliot wrote for the Westminster 
Review, Ernest Renan and Hippolyte Taine for the Revue des Deux 
Mondes, Siegfried Kracauer for the Frankfurter Zeitung, Lewis Mumford, 
George Steiner and Susan Sontag for the New Yorker, Sontag, Steiner and 
Oliver Sacks for the New York Review of Books, Michel Foucault for Le 
Nouvel Observateur and Umberto Eco for L’Espresso.
A few polymaths edited or founded journals as well as writing for 
them. Francis Jeﬀ rey edited the Edinburgh Review, Lewis Mumford and 
Kenneth Burke edited Th e Dial, Benedetto Croce founded La Critica. 
Editing a series, as a kind of midwife of books, has been another role for 
polymaths, among them Gustave Le Bon, who edited the Bibliothèque de 
Philosophie Scientiﬁ que for the publisher Flammarion; Henri Berr, who 


HABITATS
211
edited the historical series L’Évolution de L’Humanité for Albin Michel; 
and Charles Ogden, who edited the International Library of Psychology, 
Philosophy and Scientiﬁ c Method for Routledge, a series that eventually 
reached 201 volumes.
COLLABORATION
Even in the ‘golden age’ of polymaths, they did not work alone but 
depended on a network of friends and informants. As the diﬃ  culty of 
mastering diﬀ erent disciplines has grown, later polymaths have collabo-
rated at least some of the time. Alexander von Humboldt, who employed 
assistants for his observations, was also devoted to international scientiﬁ c 
collaboration, especially in geophysical research, encouraging the setting 
up of a network of observation posts in diﬀ erent countries to measure 
the magnetism of the earth.60 H. G. Wells collaborated with Julian 
Huxley on Th e Science of Life (1929). Karl Polanyi had a number of assis-
tants in his studies of anthropology and ancient history.
Th roughout his long career, Paul Lazarsfeld carried out research in 
collaboration with colleagues. Joseph Needham’s assistants and collab-
orators enabled the many volumes of Science and Civilization in China to 
continue to appear long after the death of the senior author.61 Ernst 
Gombrich worked with the neuropsychologist Richard Gregory (on eye 
and brain) and the biologist Robert Hinde (on non-verbal communica-
tion). Herbert Simon participated, by his own count, in ‘more than 80 
research partnerships’.62
Famous collaborations include Charles Ogden with Ivor Richards on 
Th e Meaning of Meaning (1923), a book about philosophy and language; 
John von Neumann with Norbert Wiener on cybernetics and with Oskar 
Morgenstern on Th e Th eory of Games and Economic Behaviour (1944); 
Claude Shannon with Warren Weaver on Th e Mathematical Th eory of 
Communication (1949). Yuri Lotman and Boris Uspensky were partners 
for decades in their studies of the semiotics of culture.
Michel de Certeau wrote his study of the politics of language together 
with two young historians, Jacques Revel and Dominique Julia. Michel 
Foucault carried out one study, on the history of the family, together 

THE POLYMATH

212
with the historian Arlette Farge, and another, on the parricide Pierre 
Rivière, with the members of his seminar at the Collège de France, 
including the anthropologist Jeanne Favret and the historian of medicine 
Jean-Pierre Peter.63
It would be easy to add to these examples. Projects for multidiscipli-
nary or interdisciplinary collaboration, whether formal or informal, are 
the subject of the following chapter.

213
 8 
 THE AGE OF 
INTERDISCIPLINARITY
As the position of ‘lone ranger’ among the ﬁ elds of knowledge is becoming 
increasingly untenable, it is necessary to shift attention to attempts to 
achieve collectively what some polymaths have achieved individually, 
an overview of a territory that extends well beyond the boundaries of a 
single discipline.1 Attempts of this kind have been made by small, 
informal, face-to-face groups and also by formal institutions founded for 
the purpose.
Th e story begins well before the adjective ‘interdisciplinary’ came 
into common use in the 1950s, in French and German as well as in 
the Anglophone world. Before that time, attempts at interdisciplinary 
work, whether by individuals or by teams, were described as intel -
lectual ‘co-operation’ or ‘cross-fertilization’.2 Since then, a confusing 
variety of terms has come into occasional use, among them ‘adiscipli-
nary’, ‘anti-disciplinary’, ‘cross-disciplinary’, ‘multi-disciplinary’, ‘non- 
disciplinary’. ‘omni-disciplinary’, ‘pluri-disciplinary’, ‘post-disciplinary’, 
‘pre-disciplinary’ and ‘trans-disciplinary’. What follows will avoid most of 
these terms, retaining the word ‘interdisciplinary’ to describe studies on 
the borders – or in the gaps – between disciplines, and ‘multidisciplinary’ 
to refer to teams that draw their members from diﬀ erent disciplines in 
order to work on a common project.
As we have seen, the encyclopaedias and the scientiﬁ c expeditions of 
the eighteenth century already depended on such teams. So did indus-
trial research laboratories in the late nineteenth century, ﬁ nanced by 

THE POLYMATH

214
ﬁ rms such as General Electric, Standard Oil, Eastman Kodak and Bell 
Telephone.3 So did projects funded by governments in the First and 
Second World Wars and beyond.
Th e polymath Herbert Simon criticized teamwork in the social 
sciences, describing it as ‘bringing unlike social scientists together’. What 
was needed, according to him, was a polymath, ‘bringing unlike social 
sciences together in one man’.4 If everyone was like Simon himself, he 
would surely have been right. However, the central theme of this chapter 
is that the explosion of knowledge has made it impossible for all but 
a few energetic and dedicated individuals to keep up with what is 
happening in even a few disciplines. Hence the many collective attempts 
to solve the problem, at the level of general education as well as that of 
problem-oriented research.
A number of the polymaths who starred in earlier chapters will appear 
once again, viewed this time as participants in collective attempts to 
combat specialization. Th omas De Quincey discussed ‘superﬁ cial knowl-
edge’; José Ortega y Gasset denounced the ‘learned ignoramus’ and 
claimed that specialization led to barbarism; Lewis Mumford was proud 
to call himself a ‘generalist’; George Steiner has called specialization 
‘moronic’; and Robert Heinlein, a former engineer best known as a writer 
of science ﬁ ction, asserted that ‘specialization is for insects’.
A more balanced view was expressed by the British journalist and soci-
ologist L. T. Hobhouse, who wrote in 1901 that ‘To specialization . . . we 
owe the eﬃ  ciency and accuracy of modern science. To it we also owe a 
loss of freshness and interest, a weakening of the scientiﬁ c imagination, 
and a great impairment of science as an instrument of education.’5
A notable feature of the debate over specialization is the recurrence of 
a few metaphors. Th e metaphor of territory is rather worn by now but it 
remains irresistible, not least because the idea of ‘ﬁ elds’ of knowledge has 
passed into common academic use. It is associated with fences and fron-
tiers. A writer in the New Yorker once commented on the polymath 
Beardsley Ruml’s ‘creative ignorance’, ‘which prevents him from seeing 
the No Th oroughfare, Keep Oﬀ  the Grass, Don’t Trespass and Dead End 
Street signs in the world of ideas’.6


THE AGE OF INTERDISCIPLINARITY
215
Conversely, interdisciplinary enterprises are presented as opening 
doors or windows, building bridges and knocking down walls. At Yale, 
President Angell described his interdisciplinary project, whether gran-
diloquently or wryly, as dismantling the ‘Great Wall of China’.7
Alternatively, the critics of specialization make use of political meta-
phors. In the early nineteenth century, William Whewell was already 
referring to the danger that the ‘commonwealth of science’ would disin-
tegrate ‘like a great empire falling to pieces’. Specialization has been 
described as ‘balkanization’ or ‘disciplinary chauvinism’. Norbert Elias 
remarked that ‘Th e departments of scientiﬁ c knowledge, as constituted 
today, have some of the characteristics of sovereign states.’ According to 
Herbert Simon, ‘disciplines play the same role in academe as nations in 
the international system’.8
Th e aims of the critics of specialization have varied from the modest 
to the ambitious. Some, like Otto Neurath, have been visionaries (the 
vision was that of the unity of science, or of knowledge more generally). 
Others were pragmatists. Ortega y Gasset did not reject specialization 
entirely but favoured an equilibrium between specialist knowledge and 
‘culture’, which ‘is necessarily general’ (no puede ser sino general).9 Th e 
polymath social scientist Donald T. Campbell oﬀ ered what he called a 
‘ﬁ sh-scale model’ of overlaps between disciplines, implying that scholars 
should pay particular attention to what is happening in ﬁ elds neigh-
bouring their own.10
Th e methods of the supporters of interdisciplinarity also varied. Some 
favoured the foundation of new institutions, whereas others preferred 
informal arrangements. It may be useful to distinguish six overlapping 
phases, with older forms of co-operation coexisting with new ones.
Th e ﬁ rst phase, from the middle of the nineteenth century onwards, 
was one of informal or semi-formal discussion groups in salons, clubs 
and cafés. It was followed in turn by the international movement for 
uniﬁ ed science; by the foundation of interdisciplinary centres for 
research, especially in the social sciences, in the United States, together 
with a revival of the idea of general education; by government support 
for research in the natural sciences and ‘area studies’, again in the USA; 

THE POLYMATH

216
by the rise of new universities committed to interdisciplinary teaching in 
Europe and elsewhere; and by the rise of interdisciplinary journals and 
the proliferation of institutes for advanced study.
In other words, we have moved from an age of institutionalized 
specialization in the second half of the nineteenth century to an age of 
institutionalized anti-specialization in the second half of the twentieth 
century and beyond.
SEMIFORMAL ARRANGEMENTS
Informal discussion groups were and are one way to encourage interdis-
ciplinarity. Th e term ‘informal’ is not easy to deﬁ ne, and it may be more 
illuminating to think in terms of ‘semi-formal’ groups that met outside 
academic departments and often outside the university altogether. Some 
met in a ﬁ xed place and at a regular time and had a ﬁ xed membership, 
sometimes by election. Others met in cafés, including peripheral 
members around a central core. Th ey all focused on common themes 
and problems viewed from the standpoints of diﬀ erent disciplines, fuel-
ling discussions and encouraging freedom of speech by means of coﬀ ee, 
wine and beer.
Th ese forms of intellectual sociability were situated between the tradi-
tions of the traditional Spanish tertúlia (more sociable than intellectual, 
combining conversation with cards and music) and the academic seminar 
(more intellectual than sociable, although discussion might continue in 
the café or the pub).11
Clubs, Societies and Circles: Select Chronology, 1855–c.1950
1855 Saturday Club, Boston
1869 Edinburgh Evening Club
1872 Metaphysical Club, Cambridge, MA
c.1887 Lamprecht group, Leipzig
1905 Eranos Circle, Heidelberg


THE AGE OF INTERDISCIPLINARITY
217
1908 Galileo Circle, Budapest
c.1915 Sunday Circle, Budapest
c.1922 Vienna Circle
1923 History of Ideas Club, Baltimore
1928 Prague Circle
1932 Pareto Circle, Cambridge, MA
1949 Ratio Club, London
c.1949 Innominate Club, Chicago
c.1954 Glasgow group
Long before the term ‘interdisciplinarity’ was coined, the desire for 
general knowledge and wide-ranging discussion led to the foundation of 
societies such as ‘Th e Club’ (1764), established by Samuel Johnson and 
Joshua Reynolds and meeting in a London tavern. Th e historian of music 
Charles Burney remembered that ‘It was Johnson’s wish that our club 
should be composed of the heads of every liberal and literary profession, 
that we might not talk nonsense on any subject that might be started, 
but have somebody to refer to in our doubts and discussions, by whose 
science we might be enlightened.’12
In the nineteenth century, clubs of this kind proliferated. Th e 
Edinburgh Evening Club, which met twice a week from November to 
July, was described by a member, William Robertson Smith, as a ‘talking 
club’, including ‘a whole circle of literary and scientiﬁ c men in or near 
Edinburgh, the object being to have one man at least well up in every 
conceivable subject’.13 It both presupposed specialization and oﬀ ered a 
sociable response to it.
At the University of Leipzig, a group known as ‘the Leipzig Circle’ 
met for after-dinner coﬀ ee and conversation on Friday evenings at the 
Café Hannes in the years around 1900. It included Wilhelm Wundt, 
Wilhelm Ostwald, Karl Lamprecht and Friedrich Ratzel, all four of 

THE POLYMATH

218
them polymaths in their diﬀ erent ways. Wundt was a psychologist best 
known for his experimental method, but he was also a physician, physi-
ologist and philosopher, interested in ‘the psychology of peoples’ 
(Völkerpsychologie) and in a synthesis between the humanities and the 
social sciences.14 Ostwald, a professor of chemistry, was also interested in 
philosophy and published a biography of Auguste Comte. Lamprecht, 
like Wundt, was interested in collective psychology and drew on it in his 
historical works, shocking his more conservative colleagues but inspiring 
French historians of ‘mentalities’ in the early twentieth century.15 As for 
Ratzel, he is usually classiﬁ ed as a geographer, but his interests were much 
wider. It was his experience as a journalist, travelling widely, that awak-
ened his interest in geography. As a professor of the subject, he took an 
active interest in neighbouring ﬁ elds such as ethnology and politics.16
In his autobiography, Ostwald refers to meeting Wundt ‘from time to 
time in a small informal circle that for a number of years met for an hour 
or so once a week after dinner in the theatre café’. It would be fascinating 
to know what the group talked about, to discover how much history 
Ratzel learned from Lamprecht, for instance, or how much psychology 
Lamprecht learned from Wundt. Ostwald’s Energetische Grundlagen der 
Kulturwissenschaft (Energy and the Foundations of the Science of Culture, 
1909) certainly bears the marks of his intellectual debt to Lamprecht.17
In Heidelberg, the Eranos Circle, composed in the main of Protestant 
scholars, discussed papers that focused on religion, viewing it from the 
perspective of various disciplines, from economics to law. Members of 
the Circle included the theologian Ernst Troeltsch, the art historian 
Henry Th ode, the philosopher Wilhelm Windelband and the polymath 
Max Weber. It was to this Circle that Weber ﬁ rst presented his famous 
ideas on what he called ‘the Protestant Ethic’.18
In Budapest, the ‘Sunday Circle’ did not last long (from 1915 to 
1919), but it was vigorous while it lasted. Members included the 
critic Georg Lukács, who soon became the leader of the group; the art 
historian Frederick Antal; the sociologist Karl Mannheim; and the 
chemist Michael Polanyi (who was already interested in philosophy and 
economics). Th e Circle included ‘a remarkably large number of talented 


THE AGE OF INTERDISCIPLINARITY
219
women’ (including the psychologist Júlia Lang, who later married 
Mannheim), who were able to participate ‘without feeling the conde-
scension of the male intellectual toward the woman’. According to one 
participant, ‘it was always impossible to terminate the discussions’, and 
one lasted until the next morning.19
Still better known are two groups that were formed in the 1920s. Th e 
Prague Circle, composed both of Czech and of exiled Russian scholars 
(including Roman Jakobson), meeting in the Café Derby, discussed 
problems of language, literature, folklore and semiotics. Th e Vienna 
Circle, meeting in the Café Central on Th ursday evenings, was mainly 
composed of philosophers, inclding Rudolf Carnap and Moritz Schlick, 
but as one of its leading ﬁ gures, Otto Neurath, explained, ‘not one of the 
members is a so-called “pure” philosopher; all of them have done work 
in a special ﬁ eld of science’ such as mathematics or physics.20 Th e Vienna 
Circle was not the only group of its kind to be established in Vienna at 
this time. Viennese coﬀ ee-house culture may have encouraged this form 
of intellectual sociability.21
Interdisciplinary clubs emerged a little later in the English-speaking 
world and included the History of Ideas Club at Johns Hopkins 
University, the Pareto Circle at Harvard, the Ratio Club in London and 
a nameless but important group at the University of Glasgow.
Th e History of Ideas Club was founded in 1923, following a conver-
sation at lunch between the philosophers Arthur Lovejoy and George 
Boas and Gilbert Chinard, who taught French literature but had many 
other interests. Six meetings a year were held on Th ursdays in a seminar 
room at Johns Hopkins, with papers lasting from thirty-ﬁ ve to ﬁ fty 
minutes, followed by discussion. Th e constitution of the Club noted the 
choice of ‘topics of common interest to representatives of diverse speci-
alities’ and the hope for ‘a useful cross-fertilization’. Speakers came from 
a variety of disciplines but the Club’s core membership was drawn from 
philosophy, history and literature.22
Th e Pareto Circle (founded in 1932) was the idea of the polymath 
Lawrence J. Henderson, who was interested in biological and social 
systems and attracted to Vilfredo Pareto as an alternative to Marx. He 

THE POLYMATH

220
organized a seminar at Harvard that ‘met for a couple of hours late in the 
afternoon’, mainly to listen to Henderson interpreting Pareto’s General 
Treatise on Sociology and to discuss it. Th e Circle included an anthro-
pologist, an economist, a sociologist, a historian and a psychologist 
(another polymath, James G. Miller). Of all the interdisciplinary groups 
discussed here, it was the most sharply focused.23
Th e Ratio Club, founded in London in 1949, has been described as ‘a 
hub of British cybernetics’. It met every couple of months in the National 
Hospital for Nervous Diseases to drink beer, listen to papers and discuss 
what was becoming known as ‘cybernetics’. Th e group included psychol-
ogists, physiologists, mathematicians, physicists and engineers, among 
them the polymaths Alan Turing and W. Ross Ashby, a psychiatrist who 
moved into neuroscience, biophysics and general systems theory. In 
order to keep the proceedings informal, the club adopted a ‘No Professors’ 
rule, which inevitably led to its extinction in 1958 after its members had 
been promoted.24
As for the Glasgow group, ‘about a dozen’ academics met every few 
weeks in member’s homes from about 1954 onwards to listen to and 
discuss a paper presented by one of them. Th e group’s interests centred 
on theology, philosophy, literature and psychology. R. D. Laing is prob-
ably the best known of its members.25 Another member, the Romanian 
sociologist Zevedei Barbu, migrated to the University of Sussex, where 
he joined a similar group, founded in the 1960s and calling itself the 
‘Humans’ (in homage to David Hume).26
Groups of this semi-formal kind encourage the free expression of 
diﬀ erent points of view and educate their members by oﬀ ering ideas that 
are new to some of them. Th eir success illustrates the argument that 
when problems need to be solved, even more important than ability is 
‘cognitive diversity’. In other words, two or three points of view are better 
than one. Th ese interdisciplinary groups also illustrate the sociological 
theory of ‘collaborative circles’.27 Th ey are small and mainly composed of 
young adults in their twenties and thirties who gradually formalize their 
meetings by ﬁ xing times and places. Th e groups tend to last about ten 
years from formation to dissolution. Th eir short life may not be a bad 


THE AGE OF INTERDISCIPLINARITY
221
thing, since spontaneity and even semi-formality are diﬃ  cult to main-
tain after a decade has passed.
UNIFYING KNOWLEDGE IN THEORY AND PRACTICE
Groups such as the ones discussed above might be described as a form of 
guerrilla warfare against the advance of specialization and the fragmenta-
tion of knowledge. Th ey illustrate the modest approach to the problem, 
discussing speciﬁ c themes and involving only a handful of people, even 
if there is a kind of ‘multiplier eﬀ ect’ when each of these individuals talk 
to others. A more ambitious general approach is oﬀ ered by the move-
ment or movements for uniﬁ ed science.
Th e idea of uniﬁ cation goes back a long way for, as we have seen, the 
synthesis of fragmented knowledges was already part of the pansophic 
ideal of Comenius and his followers.28 In the nineteenth century, 
Alexander von Humboldt viewed knowledge of the cosmos, like the 
cosmos itself, as an organic whole. Auguste Comte was concerned with 
the common principles of the sciences, while Herbert Spencer believed 
in a uniﬁ ed system of knowledge based on the laws of evolution.
An organized movement to unify the disciplines, on the other hand, 
emerged in the 1930s. As we have seen, the Austrian polymath Otto 
Neurath was a leader and an organizer of this movement, extending 
his concern with central planning and co-ordinated action from the 
economic to the intellectual sphere.29 Th e philosopher Rudolf Carnap 
testiﬁ ed that ‘In our discussion in the Vienna Circle, chieﬂ y under the 
inﬂ uence of Neurath, the principle of the unity of science became one of 
the main tenets of our general philosophical conceptions.’30 All the same, 
‘it is curiously hard to say precisely what Neurath thought that the unity 
of science was’. He described one of the main aims of the movement as 
‘to further all kinds of scientiﬁ c synthesis’ but he was sceptical of system-
atization, preferring ‘the stressed incompleteness of an encyclopaedia’ 
with ‘the anticipated completeness of the system’.31 He was more inter-
ested in bridge-building than in a unifying ‘theory of everything’.
Other attempts to unify knowledge depend on the concept of system. 
In biology, the polymaths Ludwig von Bertalanﬀ y and Anatol Rapoport 

THE POLYMATH

222
founded the Society for the Advancement of General Systems Th eory 
(1954), now the International Society for the Systems Sciences. As we 
have seen, Bertalanﬀ y developed the idea of an ‘open system’, while 
Rapoport was concerned with what he called ‘the fundamental intercon-
nectedness of everything with everything else’.32 Another biologist 
concerned with the unity of knowledge is Edward O. Wilson, who was 
‘captured by the dream of uniﬁ ed learning’ when he was eighteen. Wilson 
adopted the term ‘consilience’, in the sense of ‘connection’, from the 
Victorian polymath William Whewell. He argues that ‘a united system 
of knowledge . . . frames the most productive questions for future 
inquiry’.33
INTERDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH IN THE UNIVERSITIES
Less ambitious than attempts to unify science, a number of collective 
projects for research in ﬁ elds that cut across disciplines were formally 
established in universities in the ﬁ rst half of the twentieth century. An 
early example, and one of the most famous, is the Institute for Social 
Research (Institut für Sozialforschung) established at Frankfurt in 1923 
and the cradle of the so-called ‘Frankfurt School’ of Marxist scholars.34 
Th e Institute was directed from 1930 onwards by Max Horkheimer, 
whose programme was to replace what he called ‘chaotic specialization’ 
by the union of philosophy, economics, sociology, history and psycho-
analysis in a common enterprise.35 Horkheimer was joined by the poly-
maths Leo Löwenthal (later Lowenthal), best known for his studies of 
the sociology of literature, and Th eodor Adorno, with whom he wrote 
Dialektik der Aufklärung (Dialectic of the Enlightenment, 1944), which 
included a famous account of popular culture as an ‘industry’.36 Two 
more polymaths, Walter Benjamin and Siegfried Kracauer (best known 
for his contribution to ﬁ lm studies, but a man of many talents), were 
active on the margins of the Frankfurt School.
After Hitler came to power the Institute was evacuated to Switzerland 
in 1933 and the United States in 1934, and it was there that Adorno and 
a number of collaborators began work on a major interdisciplinary study, 
Th e Authoritarian Personality (1949), examining the formation of that 


THE AGE OF INTERDISCIPLINARITY
223
type of personality from diﬀ erent points of view: sociological, political 
and psychological. Th e Institute returned to Frankfurt after 1945. In its 
second generation it was directed by Jürgen Habermas, another poly-
math who may be equally well described as a philosopher or a sociolo-
gist, and it has also contributed to the disciplines of law and history.37
Collective projects were especially important in the United States, 
where philanthropic foundations, universities themselves and ﬁ nally the 
government all encouraged interdisciplinary approaches to both the 
natural and the social sciences. Beardsley Ruml, for instance, a former 
psychologist who directed the Rockefeller Foundation programme for 
the social sciences from 1922 to 1929, described the current disciplinary 
divisions between ‘history, economics, sociology, psychology and so 
forth’ as ‘sterile’, so many obstacles to ‘the development of social science 
as a whole’.38 Warren Weaver, who was Director of the Division of 
Natural Sciences at the Rockefeller Foundation from 1932 to 1955, 
supported research on the frontiers of the disciplines of biology and 
chemistry. At the Ford Foundation in the 1950s, Bernard Berelson 
supported ‘problem areas’ that were common to diﬀ erent social sciences, 
‘Values and Beliefs’, for example, or ‘Social and Cultural Change’.
Some leading American universities attempted to unite the social 
sciences in super-departments. At Yale, for instance, James Angell, a 
psychologist who became president of the university in 1921 (and had 
formerly supervised Ruml’s dissertation at the University of Chicago), 
founded an Institute for Social Relations in 1929. Th e Institute brought 
together in one building individuals working in the ﬁ elds of psychology, 
medicine, neurology, economics, law, sociology and political science in 
order to launch a ‘co-operative scientiﬁ c attack’ on ‘the urgent problems 
of personal and social adjustment’. Seminars at the Institute on Monday 
nights were expected to produce integration.39
At the University of Chicago, it was the arrival of Robert Hutchins as a 
dynamic new president, aged only thirty at the time of his appointment, 
that led to the formation of an interdisciplinary research group in the 
social sciences. Th e group was housed in the Social Science Research 
Building, inaugurated in 1929 with an interdisciplinary conference that 

THE POLYMATH

224
included representatives of medicine and neurology as well as law, 
economics, sociology and anthropology. In his ‘Address of Dedication’, 
prefaced to the volume, Hutchins emphasized what he called ‘co-operative 
research’ (the word ‘interdisciplinary’ had not yet come into general use).40 
Hutchins appointed Ruml dean of the social sciences in 1931 in order to 
assist the work of integration.41
A number of multidisciplinary committees were established for the 
same purpose. Th e Committee on Human Development (1940) was 
concerned to link the natural with the social sciences. Th e Committee 
on Social Th ought (1942) encouraged the integration of the humanities 
as well. Th e Committee on the Behavioral Sciences (1949) was the brain-
child of the physicist Enrico Fermi and the psychologist James G. Miller.
After helping to design the atomic bomb during the Second World 
War, Fermi was concerned to understand ‘why men ﬁ ght and kill’. He 
suggested to Miller that he work with colleagues in other disciplines to 
integrate the biological and the social sciences. Miller agreed, and became 
the chair of a group planning the institutionalization of what he claimed 
to have been the ﬁ rst to call ‘behavioral science’ (which, unlike ‘social 
science’, included psychology). Th e group was encouraged by President 
Hutchins and ﬁ tted into the Chicago tradition, but six years of discus-
sion between 1949 and 1955 failed to establish an Institute of Behavioral 
Sciences at Chicago.
At Harvard, a Department of Social Relations was established in 1946, 
on the initiative of a group of psychologists and others who wished to 
reach out to other disciplines. Th e new department was dominated by the 
sociologist Talcott Parsons (a former member of the Pareto Circle), who 
established a division of labour between economists, psychologists, soci-
ologists and anthropologists (who were awarded ‘culture’, leaving ‘society’ 
to their colleagues in sociology). Th e department, which included the 
polymaths Henry Murray and Barrington Moore, made an important 
contribution to the interdisciplinary theory of modernization, dominant 
in the 1950s and 1960s.42
Some of these attempts at co-operation between disciplines did not 
last. Th e Great Crash of 1929 reduced the funds for new developments. 


THE AGE OF INTERDISCIPLINARITY
225
Th ere was also opposition to the new projects. In the case of Miller’s 
‘behavioral science’, opposition from colleagues who defended their 
territories or opposed the high-handed methods employed by President 
Hutchins made it impossible to ‘walk the tightrope’ between the bio -
logical and the social sciences.43
GENERAL EDUCATION
Some heads of American universities had been complaining about 
over-specialized curricula from the 1890s onwards. A response to this 
complaint was the movement for ‘general education’, the equivalent of 
Bildung in nineteenth-century Germany.44 At Columbia University, for 
instance, President Nicholas Butler supported the idea of education for 
citizenship and so a course on ‘Contemporary Civilization’ was set up in 
1919, the joint creation of professors from the departments of history, 
economics, philosophy and government.45
In Britain, a course in Philosophy, Politics and Economics (PPE) was 
established at Oxford in 1920. Besides attracting future polymaths such 
as Kenneth Boulding, PPE has played an important role in the forma-
tion of Britain’s political elite.46 In Scotland too there was a reaction 
against over-specialization at this time, taking the form of encouraging 
the study of philosophy by students in diﬀ erent disciplines. As late as the 
1960s, ‘a substantial number of students were annually exposed to 
philosophy’.47
Th e best-known attempt to address the need for general education 
took place at the University of Chicago when Robert Hutchins was pres-
ident, from 1929 to 1945. Hutchins had been a professor of law but he 
was an individual of wider interests that led him later to become the 
chair of the board of editors of the Encyclopedia Britannica. Although he 
was the president of a major research university, and attempted, as we 
have seen, to establish a uniﬁ ed social science, Hutchins believed that 
too much attention was being paid to research and too little to teaching.
According to Hutchins, what was needed was a general education, 
emphasizing what he called ‘a common stock of fundamental ideas’, 
acquired from the study of the classics of literature and thought from the 

THE POLYMATH

226
ancient Greeks onwards, a common course based on ‘Great Books’. 
Hutchins was impressed if not inspired by the polymath Ortega y Gasset’s 
denunciation of over-specialization. He reviewed Ortega’s essay on the 
mission of the university, expressing his agreement with the author’s 
critique of specialization.48
Th e Great Books course did not last for many years, but the idea of a 
general education survived. To this day, undergraduates at the University 
of Chicago follow a common ‘Core Curriculum’ that takes up about a 
third of their time and includes topics in the humanities, natural sciences 
and social sciences.49 Two polymaths who studied at the University of 
Chicago, Herbert Simon and George Steiner, have testiﬁ ed to the impor-
tance for them of this broad learning experience. Other polymaths who 
studied there include Susan Sontag, Ralph Gerard, Anatol Rapoport and 
Th omas Sebeok.
An alternative attempt to promote integration, at least in the human-
ities, was the creation of a course in the history of Western Civilization, 
a historicization of an earlier course on Contemporary Civilization at 
Columbia. For a time courses in ‘Western Civ’ ﬂ ourished in leading 
American universities, emphasizing the development of Western democ-
racy and so contributing to what might be described as the Cold War of 
ideas.
THE ROLE OF GOVERNMENT
From the Second World War onwards, the US government supported 
interdisciplinary research, especially in the natural sciences. During the 
war, this was done via the Oﬃ  ce of Scientiﬁ c Research and Development 
(1941), headed by the polymath engineer Vannevar Bush. Th e most 
famous project was the construction of an atomic bomb at Los Alamos, 
involving collaboration between physicists, chemists and engineers. Its 
success illustrated the advantages of a problem-oriented approach as 
opposed to a discipline-oriented one.
After 1945, thanks to the Cold War, new institutions for research were 
established with money from the US government. Th ey included the 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), founded in 


THE AGE OF INTERDISCIPLINARITY
227
1958 as a response to the Soviet launch of Sputnik a year earlier, and the 
Advanced Research Project Agency (ARPA), which was dependent on the 
Department of Defense. Its private communication system, ARPANET, 
inspired the public Internet, a striking example of the importance of 
unintended consequences in the history of technology.50
In the social sciences, the Center for International Studies was estab-
lished at MIT in 1952 with funds from the CIA. It housed economists, 
political scientists and sociologists who were committed to moderniza-
tion theory and also intellectual warriors against Communism.51
AREA STUDIES
A joint enterprise of foundations and government was the interdisci-
plinary programme for ‘Area Studies’ launched in the United States soon 
after the Second World War.
Wars have often encouraged the participants to take an interest in 
other parts of the world. In London, the School of Slavonic Studies was 
founded in 1915, while the School of Oriental Studies (later the School 
of Oriental and African Studies, SOAS) followed a year later. In the 
United States, the rise of Japanese Studies was ‘fuelled by confrontation 
with an enemy in war’. Th e anthropologist Ruth Benedict wrote her 
famous book Th e Chrysanthemum and the Sword (published in 1946) on 
commission from the Foreign Morale Analysis Division of the Oﬃ  ce of 
War Information.52
During the Cold War, William Langer, assistant director of the 
CIA, argued that the government should support Area Studies, while 
McGeorge Bundy, a National Security Advisor to two presidents and 
himself president of the Ford Foundation, expressed the hope that there 
would be ‘a high measure of interpenetration between universities with 
area programs and the information-gathering agencies of the govern-
ment of the United States’.53 On the principle of ‘know your enemy’, 
US foundations and the US government poured money into Russian 
studies. Th e best known of the fruits of this policy is probably the Russian 
Research Center (RRC) at Harvard, established in 1948, funded by the 
Carnegie Corporation and maintaining ‘close but informal ties with the 

THE POLYMATH

228
CIA’.54 Its ﬁ rst director, the anthropologist Clyde Kluckhohn, described 
the research as ‘interdisciplinary in character’, emphasizing ‘anthro-
pology, psychology and sociology’, though scholars working on 
economics, economic history and politics were also active in the Center’s 
projects.55
On the model of the RRC, Middle East Institutes were founded in 
Washington in 1946 and at Columbia and Harvard in 1954, while a 
Harvard professor received 100,000 dollars for secret research on Saudi 
Arabia.56 Centres of South-East Asian studies were established at Yale, 
Cornell and elsewhere during the Vietnam War.57 After Fidel Castro 
took power in Cuba, more money was forthcoming for the study of 
Latin America. As Eric Hobsbawm once remarked, ‘We owe it to Castro.’ 
Th e Institute for Latin American Studies at Columbia, for instance, was 
founded in 1962.
Some money from US foundations also went to academic institutions 
elswhere, to St Antony’s College, Oxford, for instance, to the Osteuropa 
Institut (‘Institute for East European Studies’) in Berlin, and to the École 
des Hautes Études in Paris, where Area Studies was grafted on to the 
local tradition of aires culturelles. Th e expectations of the funders may be 
illustrated from the relation between the oﬃ  cials of the Rockefeller 
Foundation and the historian Fernand Braudel, director of the Centre 
for Historical Research at the École. Th e Foundation was happy to give 
money to support the study of Chinese history but objected to Braudel’s 
choice of two scholars, one because he was a member of the French 
Communist Party and the other because he worked on the twelfth 
century (research viewed as too remote to be useful). Braudel refused to 
back down, and the two scholars were appointed.58
In the case of the humanities and social sciences, unlike that of the 
natural sciences, the results of these initiatives were disappointing, at least 
insofar as interdisciplinarity was concerned. Th e centres for Area Studies 
provided information and published monographs but they were weaker 
in synthesis. Th e Russian Research Center at Harvard, for instance, soon 
‘dissolved into disciplines’. More generally, Herbert Simon criticized Area 
Studies programmes because they ‘seemed to aim at training disciplinary 


THE AGE OF INTERDISCIPLINARITY
229
specialization within area specialization: experts on the Russian economy, 
the Chinese government, the Indonesian family’.59 It seems that a general 
concern with a particular region or ‘area’ does not displace disciplinary 
identities as eﬀ ectively as a focus on a practical problem.
NEW UNIVERSITIES
Th e controversies surrounding both ‘Great Books’ and ‘Western Civ’, as 
well as opposition to attempts to unite the social sciences in Chicago, 
Harvard and Yale, suggest, among other things, that it is often easier 
to found a new institution than to reform an old one.60 On the positive 
side, two new universities of the early twentieth century encouraged 
interdisciplinary co-operation, Strasbourg (discussed later in the chapter) 
and Hamburg.
In its early days, the University of Hamburg, founded in 1919, already 
harboured an interdisciplinary Institute for the Study of the Environment 
(Institut für Umweltsforschung) and the Institute for Foreign Policy 
(Institut für auswärtige Politik). Th e university also collaborated with 
the Library for Cultural Studies (Kulturwissenschaftlicher Bibliothek) 
founded by the polymath Aby Warburg. One polymath active in the 
university in the 1920s, the biologist Jakob von Uexküll, inspired the 
work of another, the philosopher Ernst Cassirer. Cassirer was also close 
to Warburg and his Library.61
In the second half of the twentieth century, the spread of interdiscipli-
nary approaches owed a great deal to the foundation of new universities.
New Universities, 1950–75
1950 University of North Staﬀ ordshire (Keele)
1961 University of Sussex
1962 University of Bochum
1966 University of Konstanz
1967 La Trobe University

THE POLYMATH

230
1969 University of Bielefeld
1970 University of Linköping
1971 Griﬃ  th University
1972 University of Roskilde
1974 Deakin University
1975 Murdoch University
As the table shows, the 1960s and early 1970s witnessed the foundation 
of a number of new universities in Britain, Germany, Scandinavia and 
Australia, oﬀ ering some form of general education alongside training in 
particular disciplines. A pioneer in this respect was the University of 
North Staﬀ ordshire, now known as Keele University, founded in 1950, 
where the undergraduate course lasted for four years (instead of the three 
that are customary in England), beginning with a ‘General Foundation 
Year’ that attempted to bridge the gap between the ‘two cultures’, nine 
years before C. P. Snow formulated the concept. In the second year, Arts 
students were obliged to take a ‘subsidiary’ paper in the natural sciences, 
and vice versa.62
Again, the University of Sussex was founded in 1961 in order to 
‘redraw the map of learning’, as the historian Asa Briggs, who helped 
plan the university, famously put it.63 Originally there were no depart-
ments, only larger ‘schools of studies’. ‘English and American Studies’ 
made a reference to the interdisciplinary courses in ‘American Studies’ in 
universities in the United States. ‘European Studies’ and ‘African and 
Asian Studies’ followed the model of ‘Area Studies’ – without either Cold 
War militancy or US money.
At Sussex, undergraduates chose a ‘core’ discipline on which to 
specialize but spent much of their time (half in arts, a third in the sciences) 
on other subjects, known as ‘contextuals’, which varied according to their 
School. In Social Studies, all the students took a contextual paper on 
‘Contemporary Britain’, for instance, while in European Studies they 


THE AGE OF INTERDISCIPLINARITY
231
took ‘Th e Modern European Mind’, approached via a reading list that 
included Marx, Dostoyevsky, Nietzsche and Freud. On the Arts side, 
introductory courses on philosophy and history were compulsory, while 
seminars led by two teachers (for instance one in history and one in liter-
ature) were common in the early years, focusing on interdisciplinary 
topics such as ‘Science, Poetry and Religion in Seventeenth-Century 
England’, or ‘Literature and Society in the Age of Louis XIV’.64 I can 
testify to the value of these seminars, not least as a way of educating the 
teachers.65
Interdisciplinary education became an international trend in 
the 1960s and 1970s and remains very much alive in some places. Th e 
University of Konstanz advertises interdisciplinary research projects. Th e 
University of Bielefeld has an interdisciplinary mission statement 
published on its website.66 Th e University of Roskilde states that ‘We 
employ an interdisciplinary approach because no major problems are 
ever resolved on the basis of any single academic discipline alone.’67 
Th ree Australian universities, Griﬃ  th, Deakin and Murdoch, still adver-
tise interdisciplinary programmes. ‘Integrative Studies’ or ‘Integrated 
Studies’ is another name for a few centres, courses and degrees in the 
United States and elsewhere.
Th e story of these ventures includes failures as well as successes, 
and on occasion the disillusionment of former supporters of an interdis-
ciplinary approach. At La Trobe University in Australia, founded in 
the 1960s, interdisciplinary schools were replaced by departments 
before the end of the decade. In 2003, after more than forty years of 
interdisciplinarity, the University of Sussex abandoned this form of 
organization and at least some of the aims associated with it. In Germany, 
the philosopher Hans Blumenberg and the historian Reinhart Koselleck 
began by supporting interdisciplinarity but Blumenberg came to 
regret that he had ever believed in it, while Koselleck became disillu-
sioned with the practice as he had experienced it at the University of 
Bielefeld.68
On the other hand, an increasing number of interdisciplinary courses 
were established in more traditional universities. From the 1960s, courses 

THE POLYMATH

232
on Western Civilization were increasingly criticized for their emphasis 
on white male Europeans, and they were gradually abandoned.69 Th eir 
place was taken by programmes for the study of groups that had formerly 
been neglected by the academic world: Blacks, women and Latinos.
Programmes in African-American Studies or Black Studies were 
established at major US universities, sometimes, as at Cornell, as the 
result of direct action by students.70 Women’s Studies developed in the 
wake of the Feminist movement of the 1970s, followed by Gender 
Studies. Th e rise of Chicano Studies, later Latino or Latina/o Studies, 
was more gradual, sometimes building on or combining with Latin 
American Studies. As in the case of Area Studies, interdisciplinarity was 
encouraged by politics, but this time it was politics from below.
Other interdisciplinary programmes focused on a period, including 
Medieval, Renaissance, Eighteenth-Century and Victorian Studies (Classical 
Studies, formerly known in Germany as Altertumswissenschaft, goes back to 
the early nineteenth century). Th e menu has expanded to include Business 
Studies, Cognitive Studies, Cultural Studies, Development Studies, Media 
Studies, Memory Studies, Postcolonial Studies, Religious Studies, Science 
Studies, Urban Studies and Visual Studies.
Many of these programmes focus on topics that do not ﬁ t easily into 
a single discipline. Some illustrate a widening vision of a discipline, such 
as the shift from theology to religious studies or from the history of ‘art’ 
to the study of visual culture. Others represent combinations: Cognitive 
Studies joins psychology to linguistics and computer science, for instance, 
while Renaissance Studies brings together art, history and literature. 
Memory Studies bridges the two cultures, bringing together experi-
mental psychologists, cognitive scientists and historians.
Cultural Studies, at least in Britain, has combined literature and 
socology with history (especially British history from the nineteenth 
century onwards), notably at the Centre for Contemporary Cultural 
Studies at the University of Birmingham (1964), directed from 1972 to 
1979 by the cultural theorist Stuart Hall.71 As in the case of American 
Studies in the United States, the movement for Cultural Studies emerged 
from a certain dissatisfaction with the way in which literature was taught, 


THE AGE OF INTERDISCIPLINARITY
233
placing the emphasis on ‘Great Books’, often described as ‘the canon’, 
but failing to pay much attention to the social context of literature, to 
popular culture, to women writers or to authors from minorities.72
It is probably Urban Studies that holds the record for the number 
of disciplines involved in its programmes in diﬀ erent universities – 
anthropology, archaeology, architecture, economics, geography, history, 
literature, politics and sociology – held together by a concern with major 
urban problems such as poverty and violence. Th is is a ﬁ eld that has 
long attracted polymaths, from Georg Simmel and his former student 
Robert Park to Patrick Geddes, his former disciple Lewis Mumford 
and Richard Sennett, a polymath whose books might equally well be clas-
siﬁ ed as contributions to the study of architecture, sociology, history and 
philosophy.
JOURNALS AND INSTITUTES
As we have seen, the emergence of particular academic disciplines in the 
nineteenth and twentieth centuries was encouraged by the foundation of 
specialist journals. In similar fashion, so is the movement for interdiscipli-
narity. Two well-known examples of such journals were founded in the 
middle of the twentieth century, Diogenes (founded in 1953 by the French 
polymath Roger Caillois) and Daedalus (1955). Other journals with a 
similar range include two that began publication in 1974, the Internationales 
Jahrbuch für interdisziplinäre Forschung and Critical Inquiry. A more recent 
example is Common Knowledge (1992).
Th e various forms of ‘studies’ have generated their own journals in 
parallel with disciplinary ones, among them Urban Studies (1964); Signs: 
Journal of Women in Culture and Society (1975); Cultural Studies (1984); 
and Memory Studies (2008). Unlike the nineteenth-century journals such 
as the Edinburgh Review which appealed, as we saw in chapter 5, to the 
general educated reader, the journals just mentioned target the academic 
community.
Conversation or collaboration between diﬀ erent disciplines was 
and still is a hallmark of research institutes, which often employ the 
phrase ‘Advanced Studies’ in their title, on the model of the Institute of 

THE POLYMATH

234
Advanced Studies at Princeton (1931). Early members of the Institute 
included Albert Einstein, the polymath John von Neumann and the 
art historian Erwin Panofsky. Another model for later institutes is the 
Center for Advanced Studies in the Behavioral Sciences at Palo Alto in 
California, founded in 1954 and funded by the Ford Foundation. On 
the advice of the polymath Herbert Simon, it was planned as a site 
remote from academic hierarchies and focused on research and writing. 
As we have seen, the Center brought together a diverse group of gifted 
individuals who discovered their common interest in the general theory 
of systems.
Th ese research institutes proliferated, like the new universities, from 
the 1960s onwards.
Select Institutes for Advanced Studies, 1923–2008
1923 Institut für Sozialforschung, Frankfurt
1931 Institute for Advanced Studies, Princeton
1954 Centre for Advanced Studies in the Behavioral Sciences, Palo Alto
1962 Maison des Sciences de l’Homme, Paris
1963 Institut für Höhere Studien, Vienna
1968 Zentrum für interdisziplinäre Forschung, Bielefeld
1969 Institute for Advanced Studies in the Humanities, Edinburgh
1970 Netherlands Institute for Advanced Studies, Wassenaar
1970–81 Max Planck Institut, Starnberg
1972 Humanities Research Centre, Canberra
1980 Wissenschaftskolleg, Berlin
1985 Swedish Collegium for Advanced Studies, Uppsala
1986 Instituto de Estudos Avançados, São Paulo


THE AGE OF INTERDISCIPLINARITY
235
1987 Rice University Humanities Research Centre, Houston
1992–2011 Collegium Budapest
1992 Centre for Advanced Studies, Oslo
1994 School of Advanced Study, London
1998 Max-Weber-Kolleg, Erfurt
2006 Institute for Advanced Studies, Durham
2007 Institute for Advanced Studies, Konstanz
2007 Institute for Advanced Studies, Paris
2008 Institute for Advanced Studies, Freiburg
Some of these institutes, such as the one in Vienna, founded as early as 
1963, are conﬁ ned to the social sciences, on the model of Palo Alto. 
Others are conﬁ ned to the humanities, as at Edinburgh or Canberra, 
while still others are open to scholars working in any discipline. Some 
place particular emphasis on interdisciplinarity, for instance the Maison 
des Sciences de l’Homme in Paris or the Centre for Interdisciplinary 
Research at Bielefeld (the ZiF).73
Some of these institutes, such as Princeton, welcome individual 
scholars who come with their own projects. Others encourage collective 
projects, which are sometimes focused on a particular range of problems. 
Th e ZiF, for instance, focuses on a diﬀ erent theme every year. Th e Max 
Planck Institute at Starnberg in Bavaria, directed by the polymaths Carl 
von Weizsäcker and Jürgen Habermas, studies ‘living conditions in the 
scientiﬁ c and technical world’, while another Max Planck Institute, at 
Göttingen, focuses on multicultural societies.
Whether or not these institutes were or are explicitly committed to 
interdisciplinarity, they have facilitated dialogues between scholars from 
diﬀ erent disciplines, sometimes formally, in seminars where papers are 
presented for general discussion, and more often informally, over cups of 
coﬀ ee in the intervals between bouts of reading or writing.

THE POLYMATH

236
INTERDISCIPLINARY HISTORY
As a case study of attempts by scholars in one discipline to learn from their 
neighbours, this section focuses on history. An early example is that of Karl 
Lamprecht, mentioned earlier, whose cultural history was inspired by the 
collective psychology of his friend Wilhelm Wundt. Lamprecht’s work was 
widely read by the general public, but rejected by most of his colleagues, 
with important exceptions such as the Dutch historian Johan Huizinga.
Huizinga surely qualiﬁ es as a polymath. He began his academic career 
as a philologist, writing a dissertation on the ways in which perceptions 
of light and sound were expressed in the Indo-Germanic languages. For 
his doctoral thesis, he turned to literature and studied the ﬁ gure of 
the jester in ancient Sanskrit drama. When he did become a historian, 
Huizinga ‘never specialized in a particular ﬁ eld, period, country or 
subject’.74 His masterpiece, Th e Autumn of the Middle Ages (1919), owes 
not a little to his wide reading, from social anthropology to the study of 
Buddhism. Huizinga was also active as a literary critic, a cultural critic 
and a theorist, most famous for his analysis of the play element in culture, 
Homo Ludens (1938).
In the 1930s it was already possible for economic historians to draw 
on economic theory without losing professional respectability. Th ey 
included Earl Hamilton, who studied the ‘price revolution’ in sixteenth-
century Spain, and Eli Heckscher, who investigated the theory and 
practice of mercantilism. Th e new discipline of sociology also attracted 
some historians at this time, among them Marc Bloch, who learned from 
the work of Durkheim, Otto Hintze, who drew on the theories of Max 
Weber, and Lewis Namier, who made use of ideas from Vilfredo Pareto.
Namier also took an interest in Freud. It was not until the second half 
of the twentieth century, however, that leading professional historians 
began to make explicit use of ideas from psychoanalysis, as in the case of 
Peter Gay’s Freud for Historians (1985). Gay’s sustained engagement with 
Freud included professional training at the Western New England 
Institute of Psychoanalysis.
From the 1960s onwards, a number of cultural and social historians 
became fascinated by social and cultural anthropology, among them 


THE AGE OF INTERDISCIPLINARITY
237
Jacques Le Goﬀ  in France, Keith Th omas in Britain and Carlo Ginzburg 
in Italy. Like Huizinga, Ginzburg may be described as a polymath. He 
made his reputation in the 1970s for his studies of sixteenth-century 
religion and popular culture, but since then he has published books on 
art history and literature as well as collections of wide-ranging essays.
Engagement with other disciplines has sometimes been supported by 
institutions. Th e Journal of Interdisciplinary History was founded in 1970 
by two American historians interested in what historians could learn 
from a whole range of other disciplines. In Britain, Asa Briggs, whose 
books drew on economics and sociology, was one of the founders of the 
University of Sussex.
In France, the so-called ‘Annales School’ was and remains a group of 
historians committed to learning from their neighbours. Th e school, or 
better, the movement, began when Lucien Febvre met Marc Bloch at the 
University of Strasbourg after the First World War. Strasbourg was eﬀ ec-
tively a new university, since the city had become part of France in 1919. 
In the early years, a Saturday seminar attracted a number of professors in 
the humanities and social sciences.
Febvre himself may be described as a polymath who edited an ency-
lopaedia, wrote on geography and linguistics, and was inspired by 
psychologists and anthropologists in his investigation of sixteenth-
century mentalities. Febvre’s editorial launching of the journal Annales 
(1929) amounted to a declaration of war on the division between history 
and the social sciences, declaring that ‘Th e walls are so high that they 
often impede the view.’ Th e editorial committee included a geographer, 
an economist, a sociologist and a political scientist.75
Th e second generation of the group was led by Fernand Braudel, who 
was at home in geography, economics and sociology and sometimes drew 
on other disciplines as well, in pursuit of what he called ‘total history’, 
including every type of human activity. As he once wrote, ‘To try to 
marry history with geography or history with economics . . . is a waste of 
time. It is necessary to do everything at once. It is necessary to redeﬁ ne 
problems in a total manner [recréer des problématiques totalisantes].’76

THE POLYMATH

238
In the second decade of the twenty-ﬁ rst century, new partners for 
historians are emerging. Environmental history, for instance, a new sub-
discipline attracting more and more interest in an age of environmental 
crisis, requires some knowledge of geology, botany, climatology and 
other disciplines in the natural sciences. Historians of the ‘co-evolution’ 
of humans with other animals study biology, while some historians of 
the emotions have discovered neuroscience.77
Few historians are able to emulate Braudel and ‘do everything at 
once’. Th e main result of all the eﬀ orts described above has been the 
establishment of what are eﬀ ectively hybrid disciplines such as historical 
anthropology, historical sociology or bio-history.
AMBITION VERSUS MODESTY
Earlier in this chapter I distinguished between modest and ambitious 
approaches to interdisciplinarity. Th e ambitious ones, from the move-
ment for uniﬁ ed science to more recent discussions of post-disciplinarity, 
have not produced lasting results, while some experiments in education 
have been abandoned, at the University of La Trobe, for instance, and 
the University of Sussex. On the other hand, more modest approaches 
have had a certain degree of success, as in the case of the Annales group 
discussed in the previous section, or of teams focused on particular prob-
lems or topics such as fear and trust rather than on interdisciplinarity in 
general.78
Today, at both institutional and individual levels, the situation is so 
varied as to be confusing. We might be said to live in an age of coexist-
ence between disciplines and interdisciplinarity, or more exactly in what 
Spaniards call convivencia, emphasizing interaction rather than simple 
existence. Academic departments, better described as compartments, 
have not withered away, but many interdisciplinary centres have been 
erected side by side with them on campuses in the United States and 
elsewhere.79
At an individual level, it no longer raises eyebrows when historians, 
for instance, make use of Weber, Freud or Foucault in writing about the 


THE AGE OF INTERDISCIPLINARITY
239
ancient world or medieval or early modern Europe. Th ere are current 
prospects for more exchanges between the notorious ‘two cultures’ in 
ﬁ elds such as bio-history, bio-politics and bio-sociology. Th e interdisci-
plinary enterprise continues. Indeed, it is more necessary than ever before 
in our digital age, the moment of a third crisis, discussed in the coda that 
follows.

240
We have arrived at last in the digital age, often deﬁ ned as beginning in 
1990 with the World Wide Web. Some writers refer to the ‘digital revolu-
tion’, others to the ‘search engine society’ (Internet Explorer was launched 
in 1995, Firefox and Yahoo in 2004, Google Chrome in 2008 and Bing 
in 2009).1 Th e history of encyclopaedias tells us something about recent 
changes in the history of knowledge. Th e 1,507 individuals who contrib-
uted articles to the 1911 edition of the Encyclopedia Britannica or even 
the 4,000 who contributed to the ﬁ fteenth edition have become very 
few by comparison with the number of contributors to Wikipedia (nearly 
34 million in 2018).2 Th e tradition of ‘citizen science’, drawing on 
contributions by amateurs, has widened into what might be called ‘citizen 
knowledge’.
Much knowledge has become more accessible, but recent changes are 
not all for the better. We may be experiencing a third crisis of knowledge. 
We are certainly living through a period of rapid change, turbulence and 
anxiety. For an older generation, at least, one reason for anxiety is the 
gradual decline and on occasion the rapid destruction of printed books, 
replaced by e-books. In the Netherlands, for instance, a number of 
university libraries have pulped most of their books or thrown them 
away. ‘Th e idea is that one paper copy of each book is suﬃ  cient for the 
whole of the Netherlands.’ Th e debate over this policy is of course part 
of a wider discussion about the future of the book.3
 CODA
TOWARDS A THIRD CRISIS


CODA
241
Underlying the competition between two kinds of book is the compe-
tition between two styles of reading, perceptively discussed in two rela-
tively recent studies. Maryanne Wolf’s Proust and the Squid (2007) draws 
on neuroscience to tell ‘the story of the reading brain’. Th e author encour-
ages us to marvel at the plasticity of the brain, the way it has recycled 
circuits of neurons in order to make use of the diﬀ erent writing systems 
invented in the last few thousand years. Wolf also expresses alarm at the 
rise of a new form of recycling neurons, encouraging the rapid scanning 
of information at the expense of slower reading. She alerts her readers – 
while there are still readers – to the danger of becoming ‘a society of 
decoders of information’ without the time for the thought necessary to 
transform information into knowledge.4
Nicolas Carr’s Th e Shallows (2011) also draws on neuroscience, 
focusing on changes in ‘the way we think, read and remember’ in the age 
of the Internet. Th e book is all the more persuasive because the author is 
no enemy of the Internet but an enthusiast, or at least an ex-enthusiast 
who describes his ‘uncomfortable sense that someone, or something, has 
been tinkering with my brain’, impeding concentration on the narrative 
or the argument of a book or a long article.5 Th e plasticity of the brain 
that made reading possible in the ﬁ rst place is now making it increasingly 
diﬃ  cult.
In short, both these authors view the Internet as a problem. It is one 
of many examples in history of the way in which a solution to a problem 
sooner or later generates problems of its own. In this case the problem 
that the Internet seemed to solve is that of overload or ‘overﬂ ow’, a 
problem that has become a serious one for the third time, at both the 
individual level and that of society at large. For individuals, the new 
media of communication have produced an over-abundance of messages. 
For society, the amount of new information and the speed at which it 
arrives does not allow its ‘cooking’, in other words its transformation 
into knowledge.
No wonder then that the phrase ‘information anxiety’ is often heard.6 
Th ere is even a glut of books on the glut of information, otherwise known 
as a ‘ﬂ ood’, ‘deluge’ or ‘tsunami’.7

THE POLYMATH

242
As so often happens, revolution was preceded by more gradual change, 
a run up to the high jump. Once again, new words oﬀ er clues to percep-
tions of change. It was in 1964 that the phrase ‘information explosion’ 
was ﬁ rst used in English, according to the Oxford English Dictionary, 
while it was in 1970 that the American journalist Alvin Toﬄ  er coined 
the now ubiquitous phrase ‘information overload’.8
Some statistics support this sense of change. Th ere was a sharp rise in 
the number of books published in the second half of the twentieth 
century: from 332,000 titles published in 1960 to 842,000 in 1990.9 
Th e twenty-ﬁ rst century has witnessed a much more rapid rise in digital 
data. It has been estimated that 150 exabytes of digital data were produced 
in 2005 but around 1,200 exabytes were expected to be generated in 
2010.10 Th is amount has since come to seem small and calculations are 
now expressed in zettabytes (1,000 exabytes = 1 zettabyte). ‘Th e total 
amount of data in the world was 4.4 zettabytes in 2013. Th at is set to rise 
steeply to 44 zettabytes by 2020.’11
Th ere have of course been advances in the handling of ‘Big Data’. At 
an everyday level, ﬁ nding information on a variety of topics has become 
easier and faster than ever before, thanks to a variety of search engines. 
Companies, governments and scholars have all beneﬁ ted from this digital 
revolution.12 Th ere is also a downside, however. For example, the reason 
that the attack on 9/11 was not detected in advance, despite warnings 
from the security services, was that the warnings were lost in the ‘ﬂ ood’ of 
data. As Condoleeza Rice put it, there was ‘a lot of chatter in the system’.13
Th e problem of bias in search engines, whether to increase the sale of 
certain products or to support political (including racist) agendas, has 
been the subject of much recent discussion. We have long been familiar 
with the ‘surveillance state’, but we now have to accustom ourselves 
to ‘surveillance capitalism’, the idea that when we search Google, for 
instance, Google is searching us.14 Th e challenges presented by what are 
known as ‘Big Data’ include storage, analysis, veriﬁ cation and invasions 
of privacy.15
Th e turbulence we are experiencing makes it diﬃ  cult to descry the 
long-term consequences of the shift from printed books and newspapers 


CODA
243
to online information. Wolf and Carr are not the only individuals to fear 
that the skill of ‘slow reading’ or ‘close reading’ in a continuous, linear, 
attentive manner will be lost, replaced by rapid scanning. Th ere was a 
time when courses in rapid reading were oﬀ ered to students who were 
used to going through a text from beginning to end. Today, courses on 
slow reading are becoming necessary. Optimists take comfort from the 
fact that skimming books is a skill that has co-existed for a long time 
with the ability to read with care.
Turbulence also obscures our vision of changes in the structure 
of knowledge. It has been suggested that we are entering a ‘post-
disciplinary’ era.16 What would such an era be like? Divisions between 
forms of knowledge would surely persist, because it is impossible to learn 
everything at once and because diﬀ erent methods are needed to attack 
diﬀ erent problems. In any case, specialization continues its relentless 
progress. Th e diﬀ erent branches of the tree of knowledge are constantly 
producing new twigs.
What is all too visible today is the threat to traditional niches for 
polymaths. Th ere was a time, as we have seen, when wide-ranging 
scholars such as Leibniz were appointed librarians. Today, librarians are 
expected to be managers. Museums have moved in the same direction as 
libraries, from the age of the scholar–keeper to the age of the manager. 
Universities too are less welcoming to polymaths than they used to be. 
Heavier teaching loads and the proliferation of meetings are reducing 
the time available for both thinking and research. I wonder how a vice-
chancellor would respond today to a professor of chemistry who 
announced (as Michael Polanyi did at the University of Manchester in 
1948) that he wanted to teach philosophy.
Again, the cultural journals that have oﬀ ered opportunities to 
members of the species from the later seventeenth century onwards are 
now facing diminishing sales. Th ey may survive in online versions, but 
this solution is less satisfactory for these journals than for newspapers, 
because their articles are longer. It is no surprise to ﬁ nd that for some 
decades a number of distinguished freelance journalists have been coming 
in from the cold and joining universities. Th e polymath Perry Anderson, 

THE POLYMATH

244
editor of the New Left Review, became a professor at the New School for 
Social Research in the 1980s. Timothy Garton Ash, a former foreign 
editor of Th e Spectator, joined St Antony’s College, Oxford, in 1989. Th e 
former freelance writer Ian Buruma joined Bard College in 2003.
Despite these problems, a few many-sided scholars survive. Living 
polymaths include three controversial individuals who were mentioned 
earlier: George Steiner, Peter Sloterdijk and Slavoj Žižek. Somewhat less 
controversial, the Frenchman Bruno Latour has been described as ‘a 
proliﬁ c writer on an amazing variety of topics’, without respect for disci-
plinary boundaries. He might equally well be described as a philosopher, 
a sociologist, an anthropologist or a worker in the interdisciplinary ﬁ eld 
of the ‘social studies of science’. In fact, his range is wider still. When 
Latour received the Holberg Prize in 2013, the committee described his 
work as making a contribution to ‘the history of science, art history, 
history, philosophy, anthropology, geography, theology, literature and 
law’.17 He has argued against the idea of modernity, emphasized the 
importance of ‘centres of calculation’ in the history of science, carried 
out ‘ﬁ eldwork’ in a laboratory and also in a court (the Conseil d’État in 
Paris), and developed what he calls ‘actor-network theory’, which resem-
bles the ﬁ gurational sociology of Norbert Elias but includes ideas and 
material objects in the network alongside people.
As I write, in January 2019, living examples of the species ‘polymath’ 
include Jürgen Habermas, who has been described as ‘arguably our era’s 
version’ of Aristotle; the essayist Perry Anderson, whose interests span 
history, philosophy, politics, economics and sociology; the judge, econo-
mist and philosopher Richard Posner, whose publications have been 
described as ‘almost absurdly wide ranging in subject matter’; the Italian 
Giorgio Agamben, who has written on philosophy, literature, law and 
history; and the Brazilian Roberto Mangabeira Unger, who helped to 
found the movement known as Critical Legal Studies as well as criti-
cizing classical economics and writing about politics, religion and, most 
recently, on cosmology.18 Th e number of living female polymaths, as we 
have seen, is higher than ever before, consisting mainly of clustered poly-
maths who concentrate on philosophy, literature, psychoanalysis, history 


CODA
245
and the interdisciplinary ﬁ eld of gender studies (Aleida Assmann, Mieke 
Bal, Margaret Boden, Judith Butler, Hélène Cixous, Luce Iragiray, Julia 
Kristeva, Juliet Mitchell, Griselda Pollock and Gayatri Chakravorty 
Spivak).
On the side of the natural sciences, the American scientist Edward O. 
Wilson oﬀ ers an obvious example of a living polymath. Like Geddes and 
Herbert Fleure, Wilson suﬀ ers from eye problems, which in his case led 
to his turning his attention away from mammals and towards close 
studies of insects (especially ants and ‘ant societies’). Again, Wilson’s 
interest in what he calls ‘socio-biology’, studying humans and their soci-
eties as the products of evolution, is reminiscent of the ‘bio-sociology’ of 
Geddes. As we have seen, his theory of ‘consilience’ emphasizes the unity 
of knowledge.19
Another example is the Australian Robert May. May studied engi-
neering, took his Ph.D in theoretical physics, taught mathematics, 
carried out research on biology and ecology, and has combined his inter-
ests by employing mathematical techniques to study animal populations.
A few polymaths bridge the famous ‘two cultures’. In Britain, Nikolas 
Rose, who was trained in biology, has moved into sociology, psychology, 
philosophy and neuroscience. In the United States, Jared Diamond, who 
began his career as a physiologist, moved into ornithology and ecology 
and is perhaps most widely known today for his essays on world history, 
notably Guns, Germs and Steel (1997) and Collapse (2005), to say nothing 
of his lifelong interest in languages. His work has often been criticized 
by specialists but it has also been taken seriously. Th e American 
Anthropological Association responded to Collapse by holding a sympo-
sium in 2006, which led to a book with contributions not only by 
anthropologists but by historians and archaeologists as well.20 One might 
say of Diamond – as one might say of other serial polymaths – that 
whether or not one agrees with his answers, the questions that this 
outsider has asked in the disciplines to which he has migrated have been 
original and fruitful ones.
Will polymaths survive, or is the species about to become extinct? Th e 
examples cited so far, and others that come to mind – to my mind, at 

THE POLYMATH

246
least – are all limited to scholars who were already middle-aged before 
the digital revolution occurred. Noam Chomsky was born in 1928; 
Jürgen Habermas, George Steiner and Edward O. Wilson were all born 
in 1929; Luce Iragiray in 1930; Margaret Boden and Robert May in 
1936; Hélène Cixous and Jared Diamond in 1937; Perry Anderson 
in 1938; Charles Jencks and Richard Posner in 1939; Juliet Mitchell in 
1940; Julia Kristeva in 1941; Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak and Giorgio 
Agamben in 1942; Richard Sennett and Vaclav Smil in 1943; Raymond 
Tallis in 1946; Aleida Assmann, Bruno Latour, Nikolas Rose, Peter 
Sloterdijk and Roberto Mangabeira Unger in 1947; Jacqueline Rose and 
Slavoj Žižek in 1949; Judith Butler in 1956; Daniel Levitin and Robert 
Sapolsky in 1957. Th e drop around 1950 may be an alarm signal.
New challenges require new responses, so we should place our hopes 
– if we are optimists – in the digital generation.21 In any case, an elegy for 
the species is still premature. Th is is just as well, since within the current 
division of intellectual labour we still need generalists in the sense of 
individuals who are able to perceive what Isaac Barrow back in the seven-
teenth century called the ‘connection of things, and dependence of 
notions’. As Leibniz once declared, ‘what we need are universal men. For 
one who can connect all things can do more than ten people.’22 In an age 
of hyper-specialization, we need such individuals more than ever before.

247
Th is list of western polymaths active from the early ﬁ fteenth century 
onwards is not intended to form a canon: I am sure that I have missed 
some important ﬁ gures, especially when they come from countries whose 
languages I cannot read. A round number has been chosen in order to 
make obvious the necessarily arbitrary nature of this kind of choice, 
dependent on the knowledge of a single individual. It is not assumed 
that the contributions of all these 500 individuals were equally impor-
tant: Leibniz, for instance, contributed more to knowledge than Kircher. 
Living polymaths are absent from this list, though some have been 
mentioned from time to time in the text.
Th e 500 individuals selected for inclusion here have been chosen 
according to several diﬀ erent criteria. Th e majority have made original 
contributions to several (if not ‘many’) disciplines, but passive polymaths 
such as Aldous Huxley and Jorge Luis Borges have also been included, 
familiar with a range of disciplines without contributing to any; encyclo-
paedists such as Alsted, Diderot and Lucien Febvre; classiﬁ ers of knowl-
edge such as Bacon, Comte and Melvil Dewey; managers of knowledge 
such as Warren Weaver; and polyglot scholars such as Lorenzo Hervás.
 1. Filippo Brunelleschi, 1377–1446, Italian. Architect, engineer, 
mathematician, inventor, artist.
 2. Mariano da Jacopo ‘Taccola’, 1382–c.1453, Italian. Notary, 
sculptor, engineer, inventor.
 APPENDIX
500 WESTERN POLYMATHS


248
APPENDIX: 500 WESTERN POLYMATHS
 3. Paolo Toscanelli, 1397–1482, Italian. Mathematics, astronomy, 
geography.
 4. Nicholas of Cusa, 1401–64, German. Bishop and cardinal. 
Philosophy, theology, law, astronomy, mathematics.
 5. Leonbattista Alberti, 1404–72, Italian. Priest. Humanist, architect, 
mathematician.
 6. Niccolò Leoniceno, 1428–1524, Italian. Philosophy, medicine, 
botany.
 7. Francesco di Giorgio Martini, 1439–1501, Italian. Architect, 
engineer.
 8. Rodolphus Agricola, 1443–85, Dutch. Humanist, philosopher, 
artist, musician.
 9. Donato Bramante, 1444–1514, Italian. Architect, painter, poet, 
musician.
10. Leonardo da Vinci, 1452–1519, Italian. Artist, engineer, inventor, 
student of mathematics, natural history, etc.
11. Johannes Trithemius, 1462–1516, German, Benedictine abbot. 
History, philosophy, cryptography.
12. Giovanni Pico della Mirandola, 1463–94, Italian. Aristocrat. 
Attempted to master every discipline.
13. Cassandra Fedele, c.1465–1558, Italian. Philosophy, mathematics, 
astronomy, education.
14. Desiderius Erasmus, 1466–1536, Netherlander. Canon regular, 
then secular priest. Philology, philosophy, theology.
15. Laura Cereta, 1469–99, Italian. Rhetoric, philosophy, mathematics, 
astronomy.
16. Nicolaus Copernicus, 1473–1543, German/Polish. Canon, 
physician. Astronomy, medicine, law, humanities.
17. Celio Calcagnini, 1479–1541, Italian. Th eology, law, medicine, 
rhetoric, astronomy.
18. Gasparo Contarini, 1483–1542, Italian. Cardinal, bishop. 
Th eology, philosophy, astronomy.
19. Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa, 1486–1535, German. Philosophy, 
medicine, law, alchemy, occult sciences.


APPENDIX: 500 WESTERN POLYMATHS
249
20. Sebastian Münster, 1488–1552, German. Franciscan turned 
Lutheran. Cartography, cosmography, biblical studies, oriental 
languages, mathematics.
21. Juan Luis Vives, 1493–1540, Spanish. Philosophy, medicine, 
education,.
22. Georg Agricola (Bauer), 1494–1555, German. Physician. 
Medicine, history, geology, mineralogy.
23. François Rabelais, c.1494–1553, French. Franciscan, then physician. 
Medicine, law, theology.
24. Philip Melanchthon, 1497–1560, German. Lutheran minister. 
Philosophy, theology, astronomy, astrology, anatomy, botany, 
mathematics.
25. Gerolamo Cardano, 1501–76, Italian. Physician. Medicine, 
mathematics, astrology, music, geology.
26. Cosimo Bartoli, 1503–72, Italian. Mathematics, art, architecture, 
literature, history.
27. Fernão de Oliveira, 1507–81, Portuguese, Dominican. Grammar, 
history, navigation.
28. Guillaume Postel, 1510–81, French. Languages, history, theology, 
geography, politics, astrology.
29. Miguel Servet, c.1511–53, Spanish. Physician. Protestant. 
Medicine, anatomy, astrology, astronomy, geography, theology.
30. Wolfgang Lazius, 1514–65, Austrian. Physician. Philosophy, 
medicine, history, geography.
31. Petrus Ramus, 1515–72, French. Calvinist. Philosophy, rhetoric, 
mathematics.
32. Conrad Gessner, 1516–65, Swiss. Physician. Medicine, natural 
history, languages, bibliography.
33. Ulisse Aldrovandi, 1522–1605, Italian. Medicine, natural history, 
antiquities.
34. Benito Arias Montano, 1527–98, Spanish. Rhetoric, theology, 
antiquities, oriental studies.
35. John Dee, 1527–1608, English. Mathematics, geography, 
astrology, alchemy, geography, antiquities, magic.


250
APPENDIX: 500 WESTERN POLYMATHS
36. Jean Bodin, 1530–96, French. Carmelite, then layman. Natural 
philosophy, history, politics, political economy.
37. Hugo Blotius, 1533–1608, Netherlander. Librarian. Rhetoric, law, 
bibliography.
38. Th eodor Zwinger the Elder, 1533–88, Swiss. Physician. Medicine, 
oriental languages, philosophy.
39. Giambattista Della Porta, 1535–1615, Italian. Gentleman, founder 
of the Otiosi. Cryptography, optics, mnemonics, meteorology, 
physics, astrology, physiognomy, mathematics, etc.
40. Joseph Scaliger, 1540–1609, French. Philology, chronology, 
oriental studies, astronomy.
41. Johann Th omas Freigius, 1543–83, Swiss. Calvinist. Philosophy, 
law, history, mathematics, political economy.
42. Tycho Brahe, 1546–1601, Danish. Aristocrat. Astronomy, 
astrology, alchemy, medicine.
43. Justus Lipsius, 1547–1606, Netherlander. Catholic and Protestant 
at diﬀ erent times. Philology, philosophy, chronology, etc.
44. Giordano Bruno, 1548–1600, Italian. Dominican. Philosophy, 
theology, cosmology, art of memory, mathematics.
45. Francisco Suárez, 1548–1617, Spanish. Jesuit. Philosophy, 
theology, law.
46. Paolo Sarpi, 1552–1623, Italian. Servite friar. History, law, 
philosophy, theology, mathematics, anatomy.
47. Walter Raleigh, 1554–1618, English. Courtier. History, chemistry.
48. Isaac Casaubon, 1559–1614, French. Calvinist. Philology, 
literature, history, theology, geography.
49. James Crichton, 1560–c.1585, Scottish. Gentleman. Attempted to 
master every discipline.
50. Francis Bacon, 1561–1626, English. Law, history, philosophy, 
natural philosophy.
51. Marie de Gournay, 1565–1645, French. Humanities, alchemy and 
a treatise on the equality of men and women.
52. Johannes Bureus, 1568–1652, Swedish. Antiquities, alchemy, 
occult studies.


APPENDIX: 500 WESTERN POLYMATHS
251
53. Tommaso Campanella, 1568–1639, Italian. Dominican. 
Philosophy, theology, astrology, astronomy, physiology, politics.
54. Bartholomäus Keckermann, c.1572–1608, German. Calvinist. 
Philosophy, theology, politics, law, rhetoric, astronomy, geography, 
physics.
55. Christoph Besold, 1577–1638, German. Jurist. Convert to 
Catholicism. Law, history, theology, politics.
56. Robert Burton, 1577–1640, English. Anglican clergyman. 
Librarian. Medicine, philosophy, theology, astrology.
57. Gerard Johannes Vossius, 1577–1649, Dutch. Th eology, philology, 
literature, history.
58. Nicolas-Claude Peiresc, 1580–1637, French. Nobleman. 
Antiquities, natural history, anatomy, astronomy, etc.
59. Hugo Grotius, 1583–1645, Dutch. Calvinist. Law, history, theology.
60. John Selden, 1584–1654, English. Law, history, antiquities, 
philology, oriental studies.
61. Peter Lauremberg, 1585–1639, German. Protestant. Anatomy, 
mathematics, botany, philology.
62. Joseph Mede, 1586–1638, English. Anglican clergyman. Th eology, 
philosophy, chronology, mathematics, natural history, anatomy, 
Egyptology.
63. Johann Heinrich Alsted, 1588–1638, German. Calvinist minister. 
Encyclopaedist.
64. Ole Worm, 1588–1654, Danish. Physician. Medicine, antiquities, 
natural history.
65. Claude Saumaise (Salmasius), 1588–1653, French. Protestant. 
Classics, philology, antiquities, oriental studies.
66. Franciscus Junius (de Jon), 1591–1677, Netherlander. Philology, 
antiquities, literature.
67. Jan Amos Comenius (Komenský), 1592–1670, Czech. Cleric. 
Philosophy, languages, education.
68. Pierre Gassendi, 1592–1655, French. Priest. Philosophy, 
astronomy, physics.


252
APPENDIX: 500 WESTERN POLYMATHS
69. Emmanuele Tesauro, 1592–1675, Italian. Jesuit. Rhetoric, 
philosophy, history.
70. Johannes Marcus Marci, 1595–1667, Czech. Catholic. Medicine, 
optics, mechanics, mathematics, astronomy.
71. Juan Eusebio Nieremberg, 1595–1658, Spanish. Jesuit. Th eology, 
philosophy, natural history, astronomy.
72. René Descartes, 1596–1650, French. Philosophy, geometry, optics, 
astronomy, music, medicine.
73. Lucas Holstenius, 1596–1661, German. Librarian. Convert to 
Catholicism. History, antiquities, theology.
74. Constantijn Huygens, 1596–1687, Dutch. Protestant. Natural 
philosophy, anatomy, medicine, languages.
75. Giambattista Riccioli, 1598–1671, Italian. Jesuit. Astronomy, 
geography, chronology, theology, mechanics, prosody.
76. Samuel Bochart, 1599–1667, French. Calvinist minister. Th eology, 
geography, philology, oriental studies.
77. Samuel Hartlib, c.1600–62, Polish. Information go-between.
78. Bathsua Makin (née Reynolds), c.1600–c.1681, English. 
Education, medicine, languages.
79. Gabriel Naudé, 1600–53, French. Librarian. History, politics, 
bibliography.
80. Athanasius Kircher, 1602–80, German. Jesuit. Egyptology, 
sinology, magnetism, mathematics, mining, music. Inventor.
81. Kenelm Digby, 1603–65, English. Catholic gentleman. Attempted 
to master every discipline.
82. John Jonston, 1603–75, Scottish. Physician. Medicine, natural 
history, theology, antiquities.
83. Johann Heinrich Bisterfeld, 1605–55, German. Calvinist. 
Philosophy, theology, mathematics, physics.
84. Th omas Browne, 1605–82, English. Physician. Medicine, 
antiquities, philosophy, natural history.
85. Hermann Conring, 1606–81, German. Lutheran. Physician. 
Medicine, law, history, politics.


APPENDIX: 500 WESTERN POLYMATHS
253
 86. Juan Caramuel y Lobkowitz, 1606–82, Spanish. Cistercian. 
Th eology, philosophy, mathematics, history, etc.
 87. Anna Maria van Schurman, 1607–78, Dutch. Languages, 
philosophy, theology, education.
 88. John Wilkins, 1614–72, English. Bishop. Philosophy, theology, 
astronomy, mathematics, languages, cryptography.
 89. Th omas Bartholin the Elder, 1616–80, Danish. Physician. 
Medicine, mathematics, theology, antiquities.
 90. Nicolás Antonio, 1617–84, Spanish. Law, bibliography.
 91. Elias Ashmole, 1617–92, English. Law, astrology, alchemy, magic, 
heraldry, antiquities.
 92. Elisabeth, Princess Palatine, 1618–80, English. Protestant abbess. 
Mathematics, philosophy, astronomy, history.
 93. Isaac Vossius, 1618–89, Dutch. Philology, chronology, geography, 
physics, antiquities, mathematics.
 94. Henry Oldenburg, c.1619–77, German. Th eology, natural 
philosophy, information go-between.
 95. François Bernier, 1620–88, French. Medicine, oriental studies, 
philosophy.
 96. John Evelyn, 1620–1706, English. Gentleman. Anatomy, 
chemistry, natural history, mathematics, mechanics.
 97. Johann Heinrich Hottinger, 1620–67, Swiss. Oriental studies, 
theology, history.
 98. Marcus Meibom, 1621–1710, Danish. Antiquities, philology, 
mathematics.
 99. Blaise Pascal, 1623–62, French. Mathematics, physics, philos-
ophy, theology. Inventor.
100. William Petty, 1623–87, English. Inventor. Medicine, 
anatomy, natural philosophy, mathematics, political economy, 
demography. 
101. Margaret Cavendish (née Lucas), c.1624–74, English. Natural 
philosophy, alchemy.
102. Hiob Ludolf, 1624–1704, German. Languages.


254
APPENDIX: 500 WESTERN POLYMATHS
103. János Apáczai Csere, 1625–59, Hungarian. Calvinist. 
Mathematician and encyclopaedist.
104. Erhard Weigel, 1625–99, German. Mathematics, astronomy, 
theology. Also architect, inventor.
105. Queen Christina of Sweden, 1626–89. Philosophy, theology, 
mathematics, alchemy, astronomy, astrology.
106. Francesco Redi, 1626–97, Italian. Medicine, natural philosophy, 
literature.
107. Robert Boyle, 1627–91, English. Aristocrat. Philosophy, theology, 
physics, physiology, medicine, chemistry.
108. Peter Lambeck, 1628–80, German. Protestant, then Catholic. 
Librarian, historian of literature.
109. Christiaan Huygens, 1629–95, Dutch. Gentleman. Mathematics, 
astronomy, physics, mechanics.
110. Pierre-Daniel Huet, 1630–1721, French. Bishop. Mathematics, 
astronomy, anatomy, natural history, chemistry, oriental studies, 
history, theology, philosophy.
111. Isaac Barrow, 1630–77, English. Anglican clergyman. 
Mathematics, optics, theology, antiquities.
112. Olof Rudbeck the Elder, 1630–1702, Swedish. Anatomy, 
languages, music, botany, ornithology, antiquities.
113. Johann Georg Graevius, 1632–1703, German. Calvinist. 
Philology, rhetoric, history, classics, antiquities.
114. Samuel Pufendorf, 1632–94, German. Law, politics, history, 
philosophy, theology, political economy.
115. Christopher Wren, 1632–1723, English. Architecture, math-
ematics, astronomy, optics, mechanics, medicine, meteorology.
116. Antonio Magliabechi, 1633–1714, Italian. Librarian. Information 
go-between.
117. Johann Joachim Becher, 1635–82, German. Mineralogy, alchemy, 
natural history, education, philosophy, politics, political economy.
118. Robert Hooke, 1635–1703, English. Mathematics, physics, 
astronomy, chemistry, medicine, biology, geology. Inventor.


APPENDIX: 500 WESTERN POLYMATHS
255
119. Lorenzo Magalotti, 1637–1712, Italian. Natural philosophy, 
geography.
120. Nicholas Steno, 1638–86, Danish. Convert to Catholicism. 
Bishop. Medicine, anatomy, natural history, philosophy.
121. Daniel Georg Morhof, 1639–91, German. Librarian. History, 
alchemy.
122. Olof Rudbeck the Younger, 1660–1740, Swedish. Anatomy, 
botany, ornithology, philology.
123. Nicolaes Witsen, 1641–1717, Dutch. Patrician. Geography, 
ethnography, antiquities, natural history.
124. Conrad Samuel Schurzﬂ eisch, 1641–1708, German. Protestant. 
Librarian. Rhetoric, history, philosophy, law, geography.
125. Vincent Placcius, 1642–99, German. Law, philosophy, theology, 
medicine, bibliography, history.
126. Gilbert Burnet, 1643–1715, Scottish. Bishop. History, theology, 
philosophy.
127. Isaac Newton, 1643–1727, English. Mathematics, physics, 
alchemy, chronology, theology.
128. Otto Mencke, 1644–1707, German. Th eology, philosophy, 
information go-between.
129. Eusebio Kino (Kühn), 1645–1711, Italian/Austrian. Jesuit. 
Languages, geography, astronomy, philosophy.
130. Carlos Sigüenza y Góngora, 1645–1700, Mexican. Mathematics, 
astronomy, astrology, geography, antiquities.
131. Elena Cornaro Piscopia, 1646–84, Italian. Languages, theology, 
philosophy, mathematics, music.
132. Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, 1646–1716, German. Philosophy, 
mathematics, history, languages, law, physics, chemistry, natural 
history, medicine.
133. Pierre Bayle, 1647–1706, French. Protestant minister. History, 
philosophy, natural philosophy, theology.
134. Sister Juana Inés de la Cruz, 1651–95, Mexican. Th eology, 
philosophy, natural philosophy, law, theory of music.


256
APPENDIX: 500 WESTERN POLYMATHS
135. Henri Basnage, 1656–1710, French. Protestant. History, 
lexicography, theology, mechanics.
136. Bernard de Fontenelle, 1657–1757 (sic), French. Philosophy, 
history, natural sciences.
137. Jean Leclerc, 1657–1736, Swiss. Protestant minister. Philosophy, 
philology, theology, history, literature.
138. Luigi Marsili, 1658–1730, Italian. Engineering, geography, 
hydrography, astronomy, natural history, history.
139. Jacob von Melle, 1659–1743, German. History, antiquities, 
palaeontology, lexicography.
140. Hans Sloane, 1660–1745, Irish. Medicine, anatomy, chemistry, 
botany, antiquities.
141. Giuseppe Averani, 1662–1739, Italian. Law, physics, theology, 
astronomy, mathematics.
142. Pedro de Peralta y Barnuevo, 1664–1743, Peruvian. Mathematics, 
astronomy, natural philosophy, metallurgy, law, history, etc.
143. John Woodward, c.1665–1728, English. Natural history, 
antiquities.
144. Herman Boerhaave, 1668–1738, Dutch. Philosophy, medicine, 
botany, chemistry.
145. Johann Albert Fabricius, 1668–1736, German. Rhetoric, 
philosophy, theology, bibliography, historia literaria.
146. Johann Peter von Ludewig, 1668–1743, German. History, law, 
antiquities.
147. Giambattista Vico, 1668–1744, Italian. Law, rhetoric, history, 
philosophy, philology.
148. Burkhard Gotthelf Struve, 1671–1738, German. Philosophy, 
politics, history, law, alchemy.
149. Johann Jacob Scheuchzer, 1672–1733, Swiss. Geology, 
palaeontology, meteorology, geography, antiquities.
150. Johannes Alexander Döderlein, 1675–1745, German. History, 
antiquities, philology, theology, oriental languages.
151. Scipione Maﬀ ei, 1675–1755, Italian. Politics, history, antiquities.


APPENDIX: 500 WESTERN POLYMATHS
257
152. Benito Jerónimo Feijoó, 1676–1764, Spanish. Benedictine. 
Th eology, philosophy, philology, history, medicine, natural 
history.
153. Ephraim Chambers, c.1680–1740, English. Encyclopaedist and 
lexicographer.
154. René de Réaumur, 1683–1757, French. Mathematics, metallurgy, 
meteorology, natural history.
155. Matthias Bél, 1684–1749, Hungarian/Slovak. History, geography, 
grammar, rhetoric, languages.
156. Daniel Gottlieb Messerschmidt, 1684–1735, German. Natural 
history, antiquities.
157. Nicholas Fréret, 1688–1749, French. History, chronology, 
geography, religion.
158. Emanuel Swedenborg, 1688–1772, Swedish. Th eology, 
philosophy, metallurgy, chemistry, astronomy, anatomy, 
physiology.
159. Montesquieu (Charles de Secondat), 1689–1755, French. Law, 
history, geography, geology.
160. Carlo Lodoli, 1690–1761, Italian. Franciscan. Mathematics, 
architecture, physics, philosophy, theology.
161. Voltaire (François-Marie Arouet), 1694–1778, French. History, 
philosophy, natural history.
162. François Quesnay, 1694–1774, French. Political economy, medi-
cine, politics, geometry.
163. Hermann Samuel Reimarus, 1694–1768, German. Th eology, 
philosophy, oriental languages, mathematics, history, political 
economy, natural history.
164. Johann Andreas Fabricius, 1696–1769, German. Rhetoric, 
philosophy, philology, history.
165. Henry Home, Lord Kames, 1696–1782, Scottish. Law, 
philosophy, history, literary criticism, political economy.
166. Louis de Jaucourt, 1704–79, French. Anatomy, botany, chemistry, 
physiology, pathology, history.


258
APPENDIX: 500 WESTERN POLYMATHS
167. Émilie du Châtelet, 1706–49, French. Physics, mathematics, 
philosophy.
168. Benjamin Franklin, 1706–90, English/American. Physics, meteor-
ology, politics. Inventor.
169. Comte de Buﬀ on (Georges-Louis Leclerc), 1707–88, French. 
Mathematics, geology, biology, palaeontology, physiology.
170. Leonhard Euler, 1707–83, Swiss. Mathematics, optics, ballistics, 
music.
171. Carl Linnaeus, 1707–78, Swedish. Natural history, medicine, 
political economy, ethnography.
172. Albrecht von Haller, 1708–77, Swiss. Anatomy, physiology, 
botany, bibliography, theology.
173. Johann Georg Gmelin, 1709–55, German. Natural history, chem-
istry, medicine.
174. Samuel Johnson, 1709–84, English. Lexicography, literary criti-
cism, history.
175. Rudjer Bošković, 1711–87, Croat. Jesuit. Mathematics, 
astronomy, physics, cartography, philosophy, archaeology.
176. David Hume, 1711–76, Scottish. Philosophy, history, political 
economy.
177. Mikhail Lomonosov, 1711–65, Russian. Chemistry, mathematics, 
physics, metallurgy, history, philology.
178. Denis Diderot, 1713–84, French. Edited the Encyclopédie.
179. James Burnett, Lord Monboddo, 1714–99. Scottish. Law, 
language, philosophy.
180. Jean d’Alembert, 1717–83, French. Mathematics, physics, philos-
ophy, music theory, history.
181. Johann David Michaelis, 1717–91, German. Th eology, oriental 
studies, geography, law.
182. Maria Gaetana Agnesi, 1718–99, Italian. Mathematics, philos-
ophy, theology.
183. Adam Ferguson, 1723–1816, Scottish. Protestant minister. 
Philosophy, history, politics.


APPENDIX: 500 WESTERN POLYMATHS
259
184. Adam Smith, 1723–90, Scottish. Political economy, philosophy, 
rhetoric, theology, law.
185. Anne Robert Turgot, 1727–81, French. Political economy, 
philosophy, physics, philology.
186. Christian Gottlob Heyne, 1729–1812, German. Philology, 
rhetoric, antiquities.
187. Erasmus Darwin, 1731–1802, English. Medicine, physiology, 
natural history, philosophy.
188. Joseph Priestley, 1733–1804, English. Philology, education, 
rhetoric, history, theology, physics, chemistry.
189. Lorenzo Hervás y Panduro, 1735–1809, Spanish. Languages, 
palaeography, archives, education.
190. John Millar of Glasgow, 1735–1801, Scottish. Law, history, 
philosophy.
191. August von Schlözer, 1735–1809, German. History, languages, 
Völkerkunde, Statistik.
192. José Antonio de Alzate, 1737–99, Mexican. Natural history, 
astronomy.
193. Nicolas Masson de Morvilliers, 1740–89, French. Geography, 
encyclopaedist.
194. Peter Simon Pallas, 1741–1811, German. Natural history, 
geography, languages.
195. José Mariano da Conceição Veloso, 1742–1811, Brazilian. 
Natural history, chemistry, mathematics, linguistics, political 
economy.
196. Joseph Banks, 1743–1820, English. Natural history, languages, 
ethnography.
197. Th omas Jeﬀ erson, 1743–1826, American. Languages, natural 
history. Inventor.
198. Antoine Lavoisier, 1743–94, French. Chemistry, geology, 
physiology, agriculture.
199. Nicholas, Marquis de Condorcet, 1743–94, French. Philosophy, 
mathematics, political economy, politics, history.


260
APPENDIX: 500 WESTERN POLYMATHS
200. Johann Gottfried Herder, 1744–1803, German. Protestant 
minister. Philosophy, theology, history, linguistics, literary and art 
criticism, music.
201. Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos, 1746–1811, Spanish. Medicine, 
language, political economy, education, law, historical geography, 
theology, botany, mining.
202. William Jones, 1746–94, Welsh. Law, oriental studies, botany.
203. John Playfair, 1748–1819, Scottish. Protestant minister. 
Mathematics, geology, astronomy.
204. Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, 1749–1832, German. Anatomy, 
physics, chemistry, botany, geology.
205. Johann Gottfried Eichhorn, 1752–1827, German. Th eology, 
oriental studies, history, numismatics.
206. Stanisław Staszic, 1755–1826, Polish. Priest. History, education, 
geology.
207. William Playfair, 1759–1823, Scottish. Engineering, political 
economy, statistics. Inventor.
208. Jan Potocki, 1761–1815, Polish. Engineering, Egyptology, 
languages, history.
209. Daniel Encontre, 1762–1818, French. Protestant minister. 
Literature, mathematics, theology, philosophy.
210. Germaine de Staël, 1766–1817, Swiss. Politics, literature, 
geography.
211. William Wollaston, 1766–1828, English. Physiology, optics, 
chemistry, geology.
212. Wilhelm von Humboldt, 1767–1835, German. Philosophy, 
languages, history, politics, literature, medicine.
213. Georges Cuvier, 1769–1832, French. Protestant. Palaeontology, 
natural history, comparative anatomy, history of science.
214. Alexander von Humboldt, 1769–1859, German. Geography, 
natural history, anatomy, politics, archaeology, demography.
215. Dorothea Schlözer, 1770–1825, German. Studied mathematics, 
botany, zoology, optics, religion, mineralogy, art history.


APPENDIX: 500 WESTERN POLYMATHS
261
216. Samuel Taylor Coleridge, 1772–1834, English. Literary critic, 
philosopher. Interest in astronomy, botany, chemistry, geology, 
medicine, history, languages.
217. Francis Jeﬀ rey, 1773–1850, Scottish. Literary criticism, history, 
philosophy, law, political science, religion, geography.
218. Th omas Young, 1773–1829, English. Medicine, physiology, 
physics, languages, Egyptology.
219. Henry Peter Brougham, 1778–1868, Scottish. Journalist. Law, 
physics, education. 
220. Mary Somerville, 1780–1872, Scottish. Mathematics, astronomy, 
geography.
221. Andrés Bello, 1781–1865, Venezuelan. Law, philosophy, 
philology.
222. Th omas De Quincey, 1785–1859, English. Philosophy, political 
economy, history, physiology.
223. Carl Gustav Carus, 1789–1869, German. Medicine, physiology, 
zoology, psychology, philosophy, literature.
224. Jules Dumont d’Urville, 1790–1842, French. Cartography, 
languages, botany, entomology.
225. Charles Babbage, 1791–1871, English. Mathematics, physics, 
theology. Inventor.
226. John Herschel, 1792–1871, English. Astronomy, mathematics, 
physics, chemistry, botany, geology.
227. William Whewell, 1794–1866, English. Anglican clergyman. 
Mathematics, mechanics, mineralogy, astronomy, philosophy and 
history of science, theology.
228. Th omas Carlyle, 1795–1881, Scottish. Philosophy, literature, 
history, mathematics.
229. Auguste Comte, 1798–1857, French. Philosophy, sociology, 
history of science.
230. Th omas B. Macaulay, 1800–59, Scottish. History, essays.
231. William Henry Fox Talbot, 1800–77, English. Mathematics, 
physics, botany, astronomy, chemistry, photography, Assyriology. 
Inventor.


262
APPENDIX: 500 WESTERN POLYMATHS
232. Carlo Cattaneo, 1801–69, Italian. Political economy, history, 
mathematics.
233. Antoine Cournot, 1801–77, French. Mechanics, mathematics, 
political economy.
234. Gustav Fechner, 1801–87, German. Philosophy, physics, 
experimental psychology.
235. George P. Marsh, 1801–82, American. Philology, archaeology, 
geography, ecology.
236. Gustav Klemm, 1802–67, German. Archaeology, ethnology, 
history.
237. Harriet Martineau, 1802–76, English. Th eology, political 
economy, education, history.
238. Charles Sainte-Beuve, 1804–69, French. Literary criticism, 
philosophy, history.
239. Alexis de Tocqueville, 1805–59, French. Political science, history, 
sociology, ethnography.
240. Frédéric Le Play, 1806–82, French. Engineering, metallurgy, 
economics, sociology.
241. John Stuart Mill, 1806–73, English. Philosophy, economics, 
politics, history.
242. Louis Agassiz, 1807–73, Swiss. Botany, geology, zoology, 
anatomy.
243. Harriet Taylor (née Hardy), 1807–58, English. Co-author with 
John Stuart Mill.
244. Charles Darwin, 1809–82, English. Zoology, botany, geology, 
palaeontology, philosophy.
245. Domingo Sarmiento, 1811–88, Argentinian. Education, 
philosophy, society, law, politics.
246. Mark Pattison, 1813–84, English. Anglican clergyman. History, 
theology, philosophy, literature.
247. George Boole, 1815–64, English. Mathematics, logic, education, 
history, psychology, ethnography.
248. Benjamin Jowett, 1817–93, English. Anglican clergyman. 
Classics, philosophy, theology.


APPENDIX: 500 WESTERN POLYMATHS
263
249. George Henry Lewes, 1817–78, English. Literary criticism, 
history, philosophy, biology, physiology, psychology.
250. Alfred Maury, 1817–92, French. Medicine, psychology, folklore, 
archaeology, geography, geology.
251. Jacob Burckhardt, 1818–97, Swiss. History, philosophy of history, 
art history, art criticism.
252. Karl Marx, 1818–83, German. Philosophy, history, economics, 
sociology, politics.
253. Marian Evans (‘George Eliot’), 1819–80, English. History, 
philosophy, geology, biology, physics, astronomy, anatomy.
254. John Ruskin, 1819–1900, English. Art criticism, geology, history, 
economics, philosophy.
255. Herbert Spencer, 1820–1903, English. Engineering, philosophy, 
sociology, phrenology, biology, psychology.
256. Hermann von Helmholtz, 1821–94, German. Medicine, 
anatomy, physics, the perception of art, theory of music.
257. Rudolf Virchow, 1821–1902, German. Medicine, anatomy, 
physical anthropology, ethnology, prehistory, biology.
258. Matthew Arnold, 1822–88, English. Education, cultural criticism.
259. Francis Galton, 1822–1911, English. Biology, psychology, math-
ematics, statistics, physical anthropology, meteorology.
260. Joseph Leidy, 1823–91, American. Anatomy, natural history, 
forensic medicine, palaeontology.
261. Ernest Renan, 1823–92, French. Priest, then layman. Philosophy, 
philology, oriental languages, history of religion, archaeology.
262. Paul Broca, 1824–80, French. Medicine, anatomy, physical 
anthropology.
263. Th omas Henry Huxley, 1825–95, English. Medicine, physiology, 
anatomy, zoology, geology, palaeontology.
264. Ferdinand Lassalle, 1825–64, German. Philosophy, law, economics.
265. Adolf Bastian, 1826–1905, German. Psychology, ethnography, 
geography, history.
266. Hippolyte Taine, 1828–93, French. Philosophy, literature, history, 
psychology.


264
APPENDIX: 500 WESTERN POLYMATHS
267. Lothar Meyer, 1830–95, German. Medicine, physiology, chem-
istry, physics.
268. Paolo Mantegazza, 1831–1910, Italian. Medicine, natural history, 
ethnography.
269. Wilhelm Wundt, 1832–1920, German. Physiology, psychology, 
philosophy.
270. Ernst Haeckel, 1834–1919, German. Anatomy, zoology, physical 
anthropology, ecology, philosophy of science.
271. John Lubbock, 1834–1913, English. Private means. Archaeology, 
anthropology, natural history, prehistory.
272. Léon Walras, 1834–1910, French. Mathematics, mechanics, 
economics.
273. Cesare Lombroso, 1835–1909, Italian. Forensic medicine, psych-
iatry, parapsychology, criminology, physical anthropology.
274. James Bryce, 1838–1922, Irish. Law, history, politics, botany, 
‘mental and moral science’.
275. Ernst Mach, 1838–1916, Austrian. Physics, psychology, philos-
ophy, history of science.
276. Friedrich Althoﬀ , 1839–1908, German. Administrator of educa-
tion and science.
277. Charles Sanders Peirce, 1839–1914, American. Philosophy, 
mathematics, chemistry, linguistics, semiotics, psychology, 
economics.
278. John Th eodore Merz, 1840–1922, English/German. Astronomy, 
engineering, philosophy, history.
279. Gustave Le Bon, 1841–1931, French. Medicine, anthropology, 
psychology, geography, sociology.
280. Giuseppe Pitrè, 1841–1916, Italian. Medicine, psychology, 
folklore.
281. Rudolf Sohm, 1841–1917, German. Law, theology, history, religion.
282. Lester Frank Ward, 1841–1913, American. Botany, geology, 
palaeontology, sociology.
283. William James, 1842–1910, American. Philosophy, psychology, 
religion, education.


APPENDIX: 500 WESTERN POLYMATHS
265
284. Manuel Sales y Ferré, 1843–1910, Spanish. Philosophy, law, 
sociology, history, geography, archaeology.
285. Gabriel Tarde, 1843–1904, French. Law, anthropology, 
psychology, philosophy, sociology.
286. Alfred Espinas, 1844–1922, French. Philosophy, education, 
zoology, psychology, sociology.
287. Andrew Lang, 1844–1912, Scottish. History, literary criticism, 
folklore, anthropology.
288. Friedrich Ratzel, 1844–1904, German. Geography, anthropology, 
politics.
289. William Robertson Smith, 1846–94, Scottish. Protestant 
minister, but expelled. Mathematics, physics, theology, oriental 
studies, anthropology, comparative religion.
290. Karl Bücher, 1847–1930, German. Economics, history, geog-
raphy, journalism studies.
291. Vilfredo Pareto, 1848–1923, Italian. Engineering, economics, 
sociology, political science.
292. Frederic William Maitland, 1850–1906, Scottish. Law, history, 
philosophy.
293. Th omas Masaryk, 1850–1937, Czech. Sociology, philosophy, 
philology, international relations.
294. Melvil Dewey, 1851–1931, American. Bibliography, classiﬁ cation 
of knowledge.
295. Wilhelm Ostwald, 1853–1932, German. Chemistry, philosophy, 
history, ‘energetics’.
296. Patrick Geddes, 1854–1932, Scottish. Botany, biology, sociology, 
urban studies.
297. James Frazer, 1854–1941, Scottish. Classics, comparative religion, 
anthropology.
298. Henri Poincaré, 1854–1912, French. Mathematics, physics, 
astronomy, philosophy of science.
299. Franklin H. Giddings, 1855–1931, American. Sociology, 
economics, politics, cultural history.


266
APPENDIX: 500 WESTERN POLYMATHS
300. Alfred Haddon, 1855–1940, English. Zoology, anthropology, 
sociology.
301. Rafael Salillas, 1855–1923, Spanish. Medicine, law, psychology, 
anthropology, philology, history.
302. Karl Lamprecht, 1856–1915, German. History, psychology.
303. Benedetto Croce, 1856–1952, Italian. Philosophy, history, literary 
and art criticism.
304. Marcelino Menéndez Pelayo, 1856–1912, Spanish. Philology, 
literary criticism, history.
305. Sigmund Freud, 1856–1939, Austrian. Medicine, physiology, 
psychology.
306. Karl Pearson, 1857–1936, English. Mathematics, history, philos-
ophy, statistics, eugenics.
307. Th orstein Veblen, 1857–1929, American. Economics, philosophy, 
sociology.
308. Franz Boas, 1858–1942, German-American. Physics, geography, 
anthropology.
309. Émile Durkheim, 1858–1917, French. Philosophy, psychology, 
political economy, sociology, anthropology.
310. Salomon Reinach, 1858–1932, French. Classics, art history, 
archaeology, anthropology, religious studies.
311. Georg Simmel, 1858–1918, German. Philosophy, psychology, 
sociology.
312. John Dewey, 1859–1952, American. Philosophy, psychology, 
education, religious studies.
313. Ludwik Krzywicki, 1859–1941, Polish. Economics, sociology, 
politics, history, ethnography.
314. Th éodore Reinach, 1860–1928, French. Law, classics, math-
ematics, musicology, history.
315. Henri Berr, 1863–1954, French. Philosophy, history, 
psychology.
316. Henri-Alexandre Junod, 1863–1934, Swiss. Protestant minister. 
Medicine, ethnography, botany, entomology.


APPENDIX: 500 WESTERN POLYMATHS
267
317. Robert E. Park, 1864–1944, American. Philosophy, sociology, 
urban studies.
318. William H. Rivers, 1864–1922, English. Medicine, neurology, 
psychology, anthropology.
319. Max Weber, 1864–1920, German. History, philosophy, law, 
economics, sociology.
320. Jacob von Uexküll, 1864–1944, Estonian. Physiology, biology, 
ecology, biosemiotics.
321. Th emistocles Zammit, 1864–1935, Maltese. History, archaeology, 
chemistry, medicine.
322. Ernst Troeltsch, 1865–1923, German. Protestant minister. 
Th eology, philosophy, history, sociology, religious studies.
323. Aby Warburg, 1866–1929, German. History of images, cultural 
studies.
324. Herbert George Wells, 1866–1946, English. Biology, history, 
futurology.
325. Karl Camillo Schneider, 1867–1943, Austrian. Zoology, anatomy, 
animal psychology, parapsychology, futurology.
326. Vladimir Vernadsky, 1867–1945, Russian. Mineralogy, 
geochemistry, radiogeology, biochemistry, philosophy.
327. Paul Otlet, 1868–1944, Belgian. Classiﬁ ed the world.
328. James R. Angell, 1869–1949, American. Philosophy, psychology, 
education.
329. Nicolae Iorga, 1871–1940, Romanian. History, philosophy, 
criticism. Also politician, poet and playwright.
330. Johan Huizinga, 1872–1945, Dutch. Oriental studies, history, 
cultural criticism.
331. Marcel Mauss, 1872–1950, French. Sociology, anthropology, 
philology, religious studies.
332. Alexander Bogdanov, 1873–1928, Russian. Medicine, psychology, 
philosophy, economics. Also science ﬁ ction.
333. Arthur Lovejoy, 1873–1962, American. Philosophy, philology, 
history of ideas.


268
APPENDIX: 500 WESTERN POLYMATHS
334. Abel Rey, 1873–1940, French. Philosophy, history of science, 
sociology.
335. Carl Gustav Jung, 1875–1961, Swiss. Medicine, psychiatry, 
psychoanalysis, religious studies.
336. Herbert John Fleure, 1877–1969, from Guernsey. Zoology, 
geology, anthropology, prehistory, folklore, geography.
337. Lawrence J. Henderson, 1878–1942, American. Physiology, 
chemistry, biology, philosophy, sociology.
338. Lucien Febvre, 1878–1956, French. History, geography. 
Encyclopaedist.
339. Othmar Spann, 1878–1950, Austrian. Philosophy, sociology, 
economics.
340. Alfred Zimmern, 1879–1957, English. Classics, history, interna-
tional relations.
341. George Elton Mayo, 1880–1949, Australian. Psychology, soci-
ology, management theory.
342. Alfred Wegener, 1880–1930, German. Astronomy, meteorology, 
geophysics.
343. Gilbert Chinard, 1881–1972, French. Literature, history.
344. Fernando Ortiz, 1881–1969, Cuban. Law, ethnography, folklore, 
history, philology, geography, economics, musicology.
345. Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, 1881–1955, French. Jesuit. Geology, 
palaeontology, philosophy, theology.
346. Eugenio d’Ors, 1881–1954, Spanish. Essayist on art, literature, etc.
347. Pavel Florensky, 1882–1937, Russian. Priest. Mathematics, 
philosophy, theology, art history, electrical engineering.
348. Otto Neurath, 1882–1945, Austrian. Economics, politics, soci-
ology, history, literature. Encyclopaedist.
349. John Maynard Keynes, 1883–1946, English. Economics, history.
350. José Ortega y Gasset, 1883–1955, Spanish. Philosopher, sociolo-
gist, historian.
351. Philipp Frank, 1884–1966, Austrian. Physics, mathematics, 
philosophy.


APPENDIX: 500 WESTERN POLYMATHS
269
352. Edward Sapir, 1884–1939, American. Linguistics, anthropology, 
psychology, philosophy.
353. György Lukács, 1885–1971, Hungarian. Philosophy, literary 
criticism, history, sociology.
354. Karl Polanyi, 1886–1964, Hungarian. Economics, history, 
anthropology, sociology, philosophy.
355. Julien Cain, 1887–1974, French. History, art history. 
Encyclopaedist.
356. Julian Huxley, 1887–1975, English. Zoology, physiology.
357. Gregorio Marañón, 1887–1960, Spanish. Medicine, psychology, 
history, philosophy.
358. Erwin Schrödinger, 1887–1961, Austrian. Physics, experimental 
psychology, biology, philosophy.
359. Erich Rothacker, 1888–1965, German. Philosophy, sociology, 
psychology, history.
360. Robin George Collingwood, 1889–1943, English. Philosophy, 
archaeology, history.
361. Gerald Heard, 1889–1971, English. Science, religion, para-
psychology.
362. Siegfried Kracauer, 1889–1966, German. Art history, philosophy, 
sociology, ﬁ lm studies.
363. Charles Ogden, 1889–1957, English. Psychology, language, 
education.
364. Alfonso Reyes, 1889–1959, Mexican. Philosophy, literature.
365. Arnold Toynbee, 1889–1975, English. Classics, history, 
international relations.
366. Vannevar Bush, 1890–1974, American. Engineering, computer 
science. Inventor.
367. Victoria Ocampo, 1890–1979, Argentinian. Criticism, 
biography.
368. Michael Polanyi, 1891–1976, Hungarian. Chemistry, economics, 
philosophy.
369. Walter Benjamin, 1892–1940, German. Philosophy, literature, 
history.


270
APPENDIX: 500 WESTERN POLYMATHS
370. John B. S. Haldane, 1892–1964, English. Genetics, physiology, 
biochemistry, biometry.
371. Karl Mannheim, 1893–1947, Hungarian. Sociology, history, 
philosophy.
372. Henry A. Murray, 1893–1988, American. Physiology, biochem-
istry, psychology, literature.
373. Ivor Richards, 1893–1979, English. Philosophy, literature, 
language, psychology, education.
374. Aldous Huxley, 1894–1963, English. Essayist and passive 
polymath.
375. Harold Innis, 1894–1952, Canadian. History, economics, 
communications.
376. Friedrich Pollock, 1894–1970, German. Economics, sociology.
377. Beardsley Ruml, 1894–1960, American. Statistics, economics, 
social sciences.
378. Warren Weaver, 1894–1978, American. Engineering, math-
ematics, agriculture, computer science.
379. Norbert Wiener, 1894–1964, American. Mathematics, 
philosophy engineering, cybernetics.
380. Joseph Henry Woodger, 1894–1981, English. Zoology, 
philosophy, mathematics.
381. Mikhail Bakhtin, 1895–1975, Russian. Philosophy, literary 
criticism, language, theology.
382. Richard Buckminster (‘Bucky’) Fuller, 1895–1983, American. 
Engineer, inventor, futurologist.
383. Max Horkheimer, 1895–1973, German. Philosophy, sociology, 
history, psychology.
384. Ernst Jünger, 1895–1998, German. Entomology, philosophy.
385. Lewis Mumford, 1895–1990, American. Criticism, sociology, 
history, interest in geography, geology, economics, biology, ecology.
386. Edmund Wilson, 1895–1972, American. Criticism, history, 
sociology.
387. Roman Jakobson, 1896–1982, Russian. Philology, literature, 
psychology, folklore.


APPENDIX: 500 WESTERN POLYMATHS
271
388. Georges Bataille, 1897–1962, French. Librarian. Philosophy, 
economics, sociology, anthropology.
389. Kenneth Burke, 1897–1993, American. Criticism, rhetoric, 
philosophy, sociology.
390. Norbert Elias, 1897–1990, German. Philosophy, sociology, 
psychology, history.
391. Karóly Kérenyi, 1897–1973, Hungarian. Classics, philosophy, 
psychology.
392. Benjamin Lee Whorf, 1897–1941, American. Engineering, 
linguistics, anthropology.
393. Roger Bastide, 1898–1974, French. Philosophy, sociology, 
anthropology, psychoanalysis.
394. Georges Dumézil, 1898–1986, French. Philology, comparative 
religion.
395. Warren McCulloch, 1898–1969, American. Mathematics, 
philosophy, psychology, neuroscience, cybernetics.
396. Jean Piaget, 1896–1980, Swiss. Psychology, philosophy, botany, 
biology.
397. Leo Szilard, 1898–1964, Hungarian. Engineering, physics, 
biology. Inventor.
398. Jorge Luis Borges, 1899–1986, Argentinian. Philosophy, 
languages, mathematics, history.
399. Friedrich (von) Hayek, 1899–1992, Austrian. Economics, 
political science, psychology, philosophy of science.
400. Robert M. Hutchins, 1899–1977, American. Law, education.
401. Vladimir Nabokov, 1899–1977, Russian. Comparative literature, 
entomology.
402. Nicolas Rashevsky, 1899–1972, Russian. Physics, mathematical 
biology.
403. Alfred Schütz, 1899–1959, Austrian. Philosophy, sociology.
404. Gilberto Freyre, 1900–87, Brazilian. History, sociology, 
anthropology.
405. Erich Fromm, 1900–80, German. Psychology, history, 
philosophy, sociology.


272
APPENDIX: 500 WESTERN POLYMATHS
406. Ralph W. Gerard, 1900–74, American. Medicine, biophysics, 
biochemistry, neuroscience and GST.
407. Leo Lowenthal, 1900–93, German. Sociology, literature, 
philosophy, history.
408. Joseph Needham, 1900–95, English. Biology (embryology), 
sinology, history of science.
409. Franz Leopold Neumann, 1900–54, German. Law, political 
science.
410. John D. Bernal, 1901–71, Irish. Crystallography, biology, physics, 
history and sociology of science.
411. Ludwig von Bertalanﬀ y, 1901–72, Austrian. Philosophy, biology, 
psychology, GST.
412. Paul Lazarsfeld, 1901–76, Austrian. Mathematics, psychology, 
sociology.
413. Charles W. Morris, 1901–79, American. Engineering, psychology, 
philosophy, semiotics.
414. Linus Pauling, 1901–94, American. Physical chemistry, 
mathematical physics, biology, medicine.
415. Mortimer J. Adler, 1902–2001, American. Philosophy, law, 
education, psychology, economics.
416. Fernand Braudel, 1902–85, French. History, geography, 
economics, sociology.
417. Harold Lasswell, 1902–78, American. Political science, 
psychology, law, sociology.
418. Oskar Morgenstern, 1902–77, German. Economics, math-
ematics.
419. Th eodor W. Adorno, 1903–69, German. Philosophy, sociology, 
psychology, musicology.
420. William Ross Ashby, 1903–72, English. Medicine, psychiatry, 
neurology, cybernetics.
421. Peter A. Boodberg (Piotr Alekseevich Budberg), 1903–72, 
Russian. Linguist, sinologist.
422. Henry Corbin, 1903–78, French. Philosophy, theology, history, 
Islamic studies.


APPENDIX: 500 WESTERN POLYMATHS
273
423. George Evelyn Hutchinson, 1903–91, English. Zoology, ecology, 
art history, archaeology, psychoanalysis.
424. Konrad Lorenz, 1903–89, Austrian. Zoology, psychology, 
ethology, ecology.
425. John von Neumann, 1903–57, Hungarian-American. 
Mathematics, computer science, biology, history.
426. Gregory Bateson, 1904–80, English. Anthropology, psychology, 
biology.
427. Raymond Aron, 1905–83, French. Philosophy, politics, sociology, 
history.
428. Jean-Paul Sartre, 1905–80, French. Philosophy, criticism, politics.
429. Charles P. Snow, 1905–80, English. Physical chemistry, education.
430. Edward Haskell, 1906–86, American. Sociology, anthropology, 
philosophy, uniﬁ ed science.
431. Samuel Hayakawa, 1906–92, American. Linguistics, psychology, 
philosophy, musicology.
432. Marie Jahoda, 1907–2001, Austrian. Psychology, sociology, 
science studies.
433. Jacob Bronowski, 1908–74, English. Mathematics, biology, 
history of science, ideas.
434. Ernesto de Martino, 1908–65, Italian. Ethnology, philosophy, 
history, interest in archaeology, psychoanalysis.
435. Pedro Laín Entralgo, 1908–2001, Spanish. Medicine, history, 
philosophy.
436. Isaiah Berlin, 1909–97, English. Philosophy, history, Russian 
studies.
437. Norberto Bobbio, 1909–2004, Italian. Philosophy, law, political 
science.
438. Peter Drucker, 1909–2005, Austrian-American. Economics, 
sociology, psychology, management theory.
439. Ernst Hans Gombrich, 1909–2001, Austrian-English. History, 
art history, drew on experimental psychology, biology.
440. David Riesman, 1909–2002, American. Sociology, psychology, 
education, law, politics.


274
APPENDIX: 500 WESTERN POLYMATHS
441. Joseph Jackson Schwab, 1909–88, American. Biology, education.
442. Kenneth Boulding, 1910–93, English. Economics, but also wrote 
on society, knowledge, conﬂ ict, peace, ecology and history.
443. Marjorie Grene (née Glickman), 1910–2009, American. 
Philosophy, biology, history and philosophy of science.
444. George C. Homans, 1910–89, American. Sociology, history, 
anthropology.
445. Paul Goodman, 1911–72, American. Literary critic, psychotherapist, 
philosopher, sociologist.
446. Louis Henry, 1911–91, French. Demography, history.
447. Marshall McLuhan, 1911–80, Canadian. Literature, media 
studies.
448. Anatol Rapoport, 1911–2007, Russian. Mathematics, biology, 
psychology, GST.
449. Bernard Berelson, 1912–79, American. Literature, sociology, 
knowledge management.
450. Karl Deutsch, 1912–92, Czech. Law, international relations, 
political science, cybernetics.
451. Alan Turing, 1912–54, English. Mathematician, philosopher, 
cryptanalyst, engineer, biologist.
452. Carl Friedrich von Weizsäcker, 1912–2007, German. Astronomy, 
physics, philosophy, sociology.
453. Roger Caillois, 1913–78, French. Literature, sociology.
454. Barrington Moore, 1913–2005, American. Sociology, politics, 
history.
455. Paul Ricoeur, 1913–2005, French. Philosophy, psychoanalysis, 
history, literature.
456. Zevedei Barbu, 1914–93, Romanian. Philosophy, psychology, 
sociology, history.
457. Daniel Boorstin, 1914–2004, American. History, law, sociology.
458. Julio Caro Baroja, 1914–95, Spanish. History, anthropology, 
linguistics.
459. Constantinos Doxiadis, 1914–75, Greek. History, geography, 
anthropology, ‘ekistics’.


APPENDIX: 500 WESTERN POLYMATHS
275
460. Roland Barthes, 1915–80, French. Criticism, linguistics, 
sociology, semiotics.
461. Albert Hirschman, 1915–2012, German-American. Economics, 
politics, history, anthropology.
462. Donald T. Campbell, 1916–96, American. Psychology, sociology, 
anthropology, biology and philosophy.
463. James G. Miller, 1916–2002, American. Psychology, pharma-
cology, biology, GST.
464. Claude Shannon, 1916–2001, American. Mathematics, engineering, 
genetics, computer science. Inventor.
465. Herbert Simon, 1916–2001, American. Political science, 
economics, psychology, artiﬁ cial intelligence.
466. Edward N. Lorenz, 1917–2008, American. Mathematics, 
meteorology.
467. Ray Birdwhistell, 1918–94, American. Anthropology, linguistics, 
comunication, ‘kinesics’.
468. Richard Feynman, 1918–88, American. Physics, biology, 
astronomy.
469. Jack Goody, 1919–2015, English. Anthropology, history, 
sociology.
470. Hans Blumenberg, 1920–96, German. Philosophy, intellectual 
history, theology, literature (‘metaphorology’).
471. John Maynard Smith, 1920–2004, English. Engineering, biology, 
mathematics.
472. George A. Miller, 1920–2012, American. Linguistics, psychology, 
cognitive science.
473. Th omas Sebeok, 1920–2001, Hungarian-American. Linguistics, 
anthropology, folklore, semiotics, ‘zoosemiotics’.
474. Edmund S. Carpenter, 1922–2011, American. Anthropology, 
archaeology, communication studies.
475. Yuri Lotman, 1922–93, Russian. Philology, literature, history, 
semiotics.
476. Darcy Ribeiro, 1922–97, Brazilian. Anthropology, sociology, 
history, education.


276
APPENDIX: 500 WESTERN POLYMATHS
477. René Girard, 1923–2015, French. History, philosophy, literature, 
theory of violence.
478. David Lowenthal, 1923–2018, American. Geography, history, 
heritage studies.
479. Walter Pitts, 1923–69, American. Mathematics, philosophy, 
biology, neuroscience.
480. Jacob Taubes, 1923–87, Austrian. Th eology, philosophy, 
sociology.
481. Benoit Mandelbrot, 1924–2010, French. Mathematician. 
Geometry, physics, geology, economics.
482. Michel de Certeau, 1925–86, French. Jesuit. Philosophy, 
theology, psychoanalysis, history, sociology, anthropology.
483. Gilles Deleuze, 1925–95, French. Philosopher, critic of literature, 
art, ﬁ lm.
484. Ernest Gellner, 1925–95, Czech/English. Philosophy, anthro-
pology, history, sociology.
485. Michel Foucault, 1926–84, French. Philosophy, history, 
geography, sociology, politics.
486. Niklas Luhmann, 1927–98, German. Sociology, law, economics, 
politics, art, religion, ecology, psychology.
487. Marvin Minsky, 1927–2016, American. Mathematics, 
psychology, engineering, computer science.
488. Allen Newell, 1927–92, American. Maths, psychology, computer 
science.
489. Giorgio Prodi, 1928–87, Italian. Medicine, biology, philosophy, 
biosemiotics.
490. André Gunder Frank, 1929–2005, German-American. 
Economics, sociology, history, anthropology.
491. Pierre Bourdieu, 1930–2002, French. Philosophy, anthropology, 
sociology.
492. Jacques Derrida, 1930–2004, Algerian-French. Philosophy, 
linguistics, literary criticism.
493. Pierre-Félix Guattari, 1930–92, French. Psychoanalysis, 
philosophy, semiology, ‘ecosophy’.


APPENDIX: 500 WESTERN POLYMATHS
277
494. Ronald Dworkin, 1931–2013, American. Law, philosophy, 
politics.
495. Umberto Eco, 1932–2016, Italian. Philosophy, literature, semi-
otics.
496. Oliver Sacks, 1933–2015, English. Neurology, psychiatry, botany, 
biology, history of science.
497. Susan Sontag (née Rosenblatt), 1933–2004, American. 
Philosophy, criticism, photography, etc.
498. Edward Said, 1935–2003, American. Criticism, philosophy, 
history, postcolonial theory, music.
499. Tristan Todorov, 1939–2017, Bulgarian. Philosophy, literary 
criticism, history, sociology, politics.
500. Stephen J. Gould, 1941–2002, American. Geology, palaeon-
tology, biology.

278
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
ANB 
American National Biography, 24 vols. (New York, 1999)
DBI 
Dizionario Biograﬁ co degli Italiani (Rome, 1960–)
DSB 
Charles C. Gillespie (ed.), Dictionary of Scientiﬁ c Biography, 16 vols. (New York, 1970)
GDLI 
Grande Dizionario della Lingua Italiano, 21 vols. (Turin, 1961–2002)
IESBS  International Encyclopedia of Social and Behavioral Sciences, 2nd edn, ed. James Wright, 
26 vols. (Amsterdam, 2015)
JHI  
 Journal of the History of Ideas (University of Pennsylvania Press, 1940–)
ODNB  Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, eds. Henry Matthew and Brian Harrison, 60 
vols. (Oxford, 2004)
PREFACE
1. See in particular Peter Burke, ‘Th e Polymath: A Cultural and Social History of an Intellectual 
Species’, in D. F. Smith and H. Philsooph (eds.), Explorations in Cultural History: Essays for 
Peter McCaﬀ ery (Aberdeen, 2010), 67–79.
INTRODUCTION
 1. Alexander Murray (ed.), Sir William Jones, 1746–1794 (Oxford, 1998), v.
 2. Edward Dyker, Dumont Durville: Explorer and Polymath (Dunedin, 2014); D. Ben Rees, Th e 
Polymath: Reverend William Rees (Liverpool, 2002).
 3. Edward Carr, ‘Th e Last Days of the Polymath’, Intelligent Life, Autumn 2009; Burke, ‘Th e 
Polymath’, in Smith and Philsooph (eds.), Explorations in Cultural History, 67–79; Eric 
Monkman and Bobby Seagull, ‘Polymathic Adventure’, BBC Radio 4, 21 August 2017. For 
a recent general view, working with a wider deﬁ nition of ‘polymath’ than mine, see Waqas 
Akbar Ahmed, Th e Polymath: Unlocking the Power of Human Versatility (Chichester, 2019).
 4. Quoted by Woodruﬀ  D. Smith, Politics and the Sciences of Culture in Germany, 1840–1920 
(New York, 1991), 138.
 5. www.dubage.com/API/Th ePolymath.html, accessed 15 July 2016.
 6. Th e friend was Leonard Woolf, quoted in Richard Davenport-Hines, Universal Man: Th e 
Seven Lives of John Maynard Keynes (London, 2015), 7; Keynes quoted in ibid., 137.
 7. For a comparative analysis of the early stages of ‘disciplining’, see Geoﬀ rey Lloyd, Disciplines 
in the Making (Oxford, 2009).
 8. Carr, ‘Th e Last Days of the Polymath’, on Judge Richard Posner. A similar example is that of 
Amartya Sen in the ﬁ elds of economics and philosophy.
 NOTES


279
NOTES to pp. 4–11
 9. ‘la prosopographie des savants . . . a toujours été une de mes passions’ (Pierre Bayle to his 
brother Jacob, 1675, quoted in Hubert Bost, Pierre Bayle [Paris, 2006], 387). Such a 
prosopography was provided by Christian Gottlieb Jöcher in his Allgemeines Gelehrten-
Lexicon (Leipzig, 1750).
10. Augustine, De vera religione, section 49.
11. Peter Burke, Exiles and Expatriates in the History of Knowledge, 1500–2000 (Waltham, MA, 
2017).
12. Leo Rosten, ‘Harold Lasswell: A Memoir’, in Arnold A. Rogow (ed.), Politics, Personality and 
Social Science in the 20th Century (Chicago, 1969), 1–13, at 5.
13. ‘Henry Holorenshaw’, ‘Th e Making of an Honorary Taoist’, in Mikuláš Teich and Robert 
Young (eds.), Changing Perspectives in the History of Science (London, 1973), 1–20, at 1.
14. Johann Heinrich Alsted, Encyclopaedia (1630), preface.
15. Isaiah Berlin, Th e Hedgehog and the Fox: An Essay on Tolstoy’s View of History (London, 1953). 
Cf. Stephen J. Gould, Th e Hedgehog, the Fox and the Magister’s Pox (London, 2003), a plea 
for ‘a fruitful union of these seemingly polar opposites’ (5).
16. Pamela H. Smith, Th e Business of Alchemy: Science and Culture in the Holy Roman Empire 
(Princeton, NJ, 1994), 14; Mikuláš Teich, ‘Interdisciplinarity in J. J. Becher’s Th ought’, in 
Gotthardt Frühsorge and Gerhard F. Strasser (eds.), Johann Joachim Becher (Wiesbaden, 
1993), 23–40.
17. Paula Findlen (ed.), Th e Last Man Who Knew Everything (London, 2004).
18. Andrew Robinson, Th omas Young: Th e Last Man Who Knew Everything (London, 2006); 
Leonard Warren, Joseph Leidy: Th e Last Man Who Knew Everything (New Haven, 1998); 
David Schwartz, Th e Last Man Who Knew Everything: Th e Life and Times of Enrico Fermi 
(New York, 2017), 365. No fewer than eighteen individuals are listed in Hmolpedia, ‘Last 
person to know everything’, http://www.eoht.info/page/Last+person+to+know+everything.
19. Sandro Montalto (ed.), Umberto Eco: l’uomo che sapeva troppo (Pisa, 2007). Cf. Stephen 
Inwood, Th e Man Who Knew Too Much: Th e Strange and Inventive Life of Robert Hooke 
(London, 2002), and David Leavitt, Th e Man Who Knew Too Much: Alan Turing and the 
Invention of the Computer (London, 2006).
20. Croce was so described by Antonio Gramsci, Simon by Ha-Joon Chang, 23 Th ings Th ey 
Don’t Tell You about Capitalism (London, 2011), 173; Maurice Goldsmith, Joseph Needham: 
Twentieth-Century Renaissance Man (Paris, 1995); Steiner, described by Antonia Byatt; 
Florensky, by Avril Pyman, Pavel Florensky, a Quiet Genius: Th e Tragic and Extraordinary Life 
of Russia’s Unknown Da Vinci (New York, 2010); Lasswell, by Steven A. Peterson, ‘Lasswell, 
Harold Dwight’, in Glenn H. Utter and Charles Lockhart (eds.), American Political Scientists: 
A Dictionary (2nd edn, Westport, CT, 2002), 228–30, at 229, and by Bruce L. Smith, ‘Th e 
Mystifying Intellectual History of Harold D. Lasswell’, in Arnold A. Rogow (ed.), Politics, 
Personality and Social Science in the 20th Century (Chicago, 1969), 41.
21. N. J. Pearce, ‘Janet Beat: A Renaissance Woman’, Contemporary Music Review 11 (1994), 27; 
Melanie Davis, ‘Sandra Risa Leiblum, Ph.D: Sexology’s Renaissance Woman’, American 
Journal of Sexuality Education 5 (2010), 97–101.
22. Cf. Robert K. Merton, ‘Th e Matthew Eﬀ ect in Science’, Science 159 (1968), Issue 3810, 
56–63, which discusses the later attribution to major scientists of the discoveries made by 
minor ones, illustrating the idea expressed in the Gospel of St Matthew that ‘To him who 
hath shall be given’.
23. Burnet to Leibniz, 27 February 1699, quoted in Maria Rosa Antognazza, Leibniz: An 
Intellectual Biography (Cambridge, 2009), 559.
CHAPTER 1
 1. However, this fragment has survived only because it was recorded by a later philosopher, 
Diogenes Laertius, who had his own agenda. In any case, it may be better to translate noos not 
as ‘understanding’ but as the faculty of sense. My thanks to Geoﬀ rey Lloyd for pointing this out.
 2. Isaiah Berlin, Th e Hedgehog and the Fox (London, 1953).


280
NOTES to pp. 12–19
 3. W. K. C. Guthrie, Th e Sophists (Cambridge, 1971), 280–5; Patricia O’Grady, ‘Hippias’ in 
O’Grady (ed.), Th e Sophists (London, 2008), 56–70.
 4. Th ere is a huge secondary literature on Aristotle, including Maurice Manquat, Aristote natu-
raliste (Paris, 1932), and Geoﬀ rey Lloyd, Aristotle: Th e Growth and Structure of his Th ought 
(Cambridge, 1968). See also G. E. L. Owens, D. M. Balme and Leonard G. Wilson, 
‘Aristotle’, DSB 1, 250–81 (taking three specialists to assess his contributions to the natural 
sciences).
 5. Christian Jacob, ‘Un athlète du savoir’, in C. Jacob and F. de Polignac (eds.), Alexandrie 
(Paris, 1992), 113–27; Klaus Geus, Eratosthenes von Kyrene (Oberhaid, 2011, 32–4).
 6. Th is argument repeats much from Plato’s Gorgias. Th anks again to Geoﬀ rey Lloyd for 
pointing this out.
 7. Quintilian, Institutio Oratoria, 12.xi.21–4.
 8. Vitruvius, De Architectura, 1.i.1, 1.i.3.
 9. Cicero, De Oratore, 3.xxxiii.135.
10. Quintilian, Institutio, 12.xi.24. Cf. D. J. Butterﬁ eld (ed.), Varro Varius: Th e Polymath of the 
Roman World (Cambridge, 2015).
11. Trevor Murphy, Pliny the Elder’s Natural History: Th e Empire in the Encyclopaedia (Oxford, 
2004), 13.
12. Howard L. Goodman, ‘Chinese Polymaths 100–300 AD’, Asia Major 18 (2005), 101–74, at 
110.
13. John Chaﬀ ee, Th e Th orny Gates of Learning in Sung China: A Social History of Examinations 
(Cambridge, 1985); Benjamin A. Elman, A Cultural History of Civil Examinations in Late 
Imperial China (Berkeley, CA, 2000).
14. Quoted in John Meskill (ed.), Wang An-shih: Practical Reformer? (Boston, MA, 1963), 8.
15. Wang Yangming, Instructions for Practical Living (English translation, New York, 1963), 13, 
62. Cf. Benjamin A. Elman, On Th eir Own Terms (Cambridge, MA, 2005), 4–7.
16. Hellmut Wilhelm, ‘Th e Po-Hsüeh Hung-ju Examination of 1679’, Journal of the American 
Oriental Society 71 (1951), 60–6.
17. Geoﬀ rey Lloyd, Disciplines in the Making (Oxford, 2009), 10, 45.
18. Zhuangxi, chapter 33, in Complete Works of Chuang Tzu (New York, 1968), 374, 377. Cf. 
Angus G. Graham, Disputers of the Tao (Chicago, 1989), 76–81, 174–83.
19. Joseph Needham and Wang Ling, Science and Civilization in China (Cambridge, 1965), vol. 
4, part 1, 446–65.
20. Needham and Wang Ling, Science and Civilization (Cambridge, 1954), vol. 1, 135. Th anks 
yet again to Geoﬀ rey Lloyd for making me aware of Shen’s importance.
21. Joël Brenier et al., ‘Shen Gua (1031–1095) et les sciences’, Revue d’histoire des sciences 42, 
333–50. On his ‘vast’ knowledge, 335. Nathan Sivin, ‘Shen Gua’, Science in Ancient China: 
Researches and Reﬂ ections (Aldershot, 1995, vol. III, 1–53), notes his ‘unlimited curiosity’ and 
the comparisons to Leibniz and Lomonosov, the latter made ‘in an era of happy relations 
between China and the Soviet Union’ (11).
22. Daiwie Fu, ‘A Contextual and Taxonomic Study of the “Divine Marvels” and “Strange 
Occurrences” in the Mengxi bitan’, Chinese Science 11 (1993–4), 3–35.
23. Geoﬀ rey Lloyd, Th e Ambitions of Curiosity: Understanding the World in Ancient Greece and 
China (Cambridge, 2002).
24. Sivin, ‘Shen Gua’, 53.
25. Tertullian, De praescriptione haereticorum, Book 7, ch. 14; Augustine, Confessiones, Book 12, 
ch. 14.
26. Richard Southern, Th e Making of the Middle Ages (London, 1953), 210.
27. Other major ﬁ gures include Cassiodorus, Bede and Alcuin of York.
28. Cassiodorus, Variarum Libri XII, ed. Å. J. Fridh (Turnhout, 1973), Book I, no. 44.
29. Henry Chadwick, Boethius (Oxford, 1981); Lorenzo Minio-Paluello, ‘Boethius’, DSB 2 
(New York, 1981), 228–36.
30. Isidore of Seville, Etymologies (English translation, Cambridge, 2006). On him, John 
Henderson, Th e Medieval World of Isidore of Seville (Cambridge, 2007).


281
NOTES to pp. 19–25
31. Pierre Riché, Gerbert d’Aurillac, le pape de l’an mil (Paris, 1987).
32. William of Malmesbury, Gesta Regum Anglorum, ed. and trans. R. A. B. Mynors (Oxford, 
1998), Book II, sections 167–9, 172.
33. Tarif Khalidi, Images of Muhammad (New York, 2009), 104–5. My thanks to Professor 
Khalidi for help with this section.
34. Quoted in Robert Irwin, Ibn Khaldun: An Intellectual Biography (Princeton, NJ, 2018), 24.
35. Geert Jan Van Gelder, ‘Compleat Men, Women and Books’, in Peter Binkley (ed.), 
Pre-Modern Encyclopaedic Texts (Leiden, 1997), 241–59, at 247; George Makdisi, Th e Rise of 
Humanism in Classical Islam and the Christian West (Edinburgh, 1990), 110.
36. Michael Chamberlain, Knowledge and Social Practice in Medieval Damascus (Cambridge, 
1994), 86.
37. Other leading scholars were Jabir ibn Hayyan (c.721–c.815), known in the West as ‘Geber’; 
Ibn Bajja (c.1085–1138: ‘Avempace’); Al-Farabi (872–950: ‘Alpharabius’); Al-Biruni (973–
c.1050); and Ibn Hazm (994–1064).
38. Quoted in George N. Atiyeh, Al-Kindi: Philosopher of the Arabs (Rawalpindi, 1966), 9.
39. Peter Adamson, Al-Kindī (Oxford, 2007), 7. Cf. Fritz W. Zimmerman, ‘Al-Kindi’, in M. J. 
L. Young, J. D. Latham and R. B. Serjeant (eds.), Religion, Learning and Science in the 
Abbasid Period (Cambridge, 2014), 364–9.
40. G. C. Anawati and Albert Z. Iskander, ‘Ibn Sina’, DSB Supplement 1, 495–501; Lenn E. 
Goodman, Avicenna (revised edn, Ithaca, NY, 2006); Robert Wisnovsky, ‘Avicenna and the 
Avicennian Tradition’, in Peter Adamson and Richard C. Taylor (eds.), Th e Cambridge 
Companion to Arabic Philosophy (Cambridge, 2006), 92–136.
41. Dominque Urvoy, Ibn Rushd (Averroes) (London, 1991).
42. Warren E. Gates, ‘Th e Spread of Ibn Khaldun’s Ideas on Climate and Culture’, Journal of the 
History of Ideas 28 (1967), 415–22; Aziz al-Azmeh, Ibn Khaldun in Modern Scholarship: A 
Study in Orientalism (London, 1981); Robert Irwin, Ibn Khaldun: An Intellectual Biography 
(Princeton, NJ, 2018).
43. Th omas Aquinas is omitted because this great scholar concentrated on theology and philos-
ophy.
44. Studies of Hugh focus on either his theology, his history or his ‘psychology’, so many signs 
of the fragmentation of knowledge in our own time.
45. Serge Lusignan and Monique Paulmier-Foucart (eds.), Lector et compilator: Vincent de 
Beauvais (Grâne, 1997).
46. Tom McLeish, ‘In Conversation with a Medieval Natural Philosopher’, Emmanuel College 
Magazine 100 (Cambridge, 2018), 147–62, at 147.
47. Alistair C. Crombie, Robert Grosseteste and the Origins of Experimental Science (Oxford, 
1953); Richard W. Southern, Robert Grosseteste (Oxford, 1986); idem., ‘Grosseteste, Robert’, 
ODNB 24, 79–86.
48. Alistair C. Crombie and John North, ‘Bacon, Roger’, DSB 1 (New York, 1981), 377–85; 
G. Mollant, ‘Bacon, Roger’, ODNB 3, 176–81.
49. Giovanni da Pian del Carpine, Benedict of Poland and William of Rubruck. See Bert Roest, 
Reading the Book of History: Intellectual Contexts and Educational Functions of Franciscan 
Historiography, 1226–c.1350 (Groningen, 1996), 114, 120.
50. Ulrich of Strasbourg, quoted in Irven M. Resnick (ed.), A Companion to Albert the Great 
(Leiden, 2013), 1. Cf. James A. Weisheipl (ed.), Albertus Magnus and the Sciences (Toronto, 
1980); Gerbert Meyer and Albert Zimmermann (eds.), Albertus Magnus, Doctor Universalis 
1280/1980 (Mainz, 1980), which includes chapters on his contribution to medicine, zoology 
and botany.
51. Paolo Rossi, Clavis Universalis: arti mnemoniche e logica combinatorial da Lullo a Leibniz 
(Milan and Naples, 1960), esp. 61–74; Dominique Urvoy, Penser l’Islam. Les présupposés 
Islamiques de l’“art” de Lull (Paris, 1980); Umberto Eco, Th e Search for the Perfect Language 
(Oxford, 1995), 53–72, at 53; John N. Crossley, Raymond Llull’s Contributions to Computer 
Science (Melbourne, 2005); Anthony Bonner, Th e Art and Logic of Ramon Llull: A User’s 
Guide (Leiden, 2007).


282
NOTES to pp. 26–32
CHAPTER 2
 1. Agnes Heller, Renaissance Man (1982: English translation, London 1984); Dorothy 
Koenigsberger, Renaissance Man and Creative Th inking (Atlantic Highlands, NJ, 1979).
 2. Jacob Burckhardt, Th e Civilisation of the Renaissance in Italy (1860: English translation, 
London 1878), ch. 2, section 2.
 3. Edgar Quinet, Révolutions d’Italie (Paris, 1849), quoted and translated in J. B. Bullen, Th e 
Myth of the Renaissance in Nineteenth-Century Writing (Oxford, 1994), 175.
 4. George Eliot, Romola (1863), quoted in Bullen, Myth, 218.
 5. William H. Woodward, Vittorino da Feltre and Other Humanist Educators (Cambridge, 
1897), 1–92, drawing on Bartolomeo Platina’s life of Vittorino.
 6. Matteo Palmieri, Vita Civile, ed. Gino Belloni (Florence, 1982), 43.
 7. Eliza M. Butler, Th e Fortunes of Faust (Cambridge, 1952), ch. 1.
 8. James J. Supple, Arms versus Letters: Th e Military and Literary Ideals in the Essais of Montaigne 
(Oxford, 1984).
 9. Baldassare Castiglione, Il Cortegiano (1528: ed. Bruno Maier, Turin 1964), Book 1, sections 
44–9.
10. Maximilian, Weisskunig, ed. H. T. Musper (Stuttgart, 1956), part 2. However, Jan-Dirk 
Müller, Gedachtnus: Literatur und Hofgesellschaft um Maximilian I (Munich, 1982), 242, 
rejects the interpretation of this text in terms of the Renaissance man.
11. François Rabelais, Pantagruel (c.1532), ch. 8; Gargantua (1534), chs. 23–4. Th e phrase ‘abysme 
de science’ was later used to describe the learning of the French polymath Guillaume Postel.
12. William Caxton, Chronicle (1520), quoted in Oxford English Dictionary under ‘universal’.
13. Th omas Elyot, Th e Book Named the Governor (1531: facsimile edn, Menston, 1980), ch. 8.
14. Castiglione, Il Cortegiano, Book 2, section 39.
15. Werner Kaegi, Jacob Burckhardt: eine Biographie (6 vols., Basel, 1947–77); Hugh R. Trevor-
Roper, ‘Jacob Burckhardt’, Proceedings of the British Academy 70 (1984), 359–78. Cf. J. B. 
Bullen, Th e Myth of the Renaissance in Nineteenth-Century Writing (Oxford, 1994).
16. Riccardo Fubini and Anna Nenci Gallorini, ‘L’autobiograﬁ a di Leon Battista Alberti’, 
Rinascimento 12 (1972), 21–78, at 68; English translation in James B. Ross and Mary M. 
McLaughlin (eds.), Th e Portable Renaissance Reader (revised edn, Harmondsworth 1978), 
480. Cf. Anthony Grafton, Leon Battista Alberti: Master Builder of the Italian Renaissance 
(London, 2001), 17–29.
17. Cristoforo Landino, Apologia di Dante, quoted in Joan Gadol, Leon Battista Alberti: Universal 
Man of the Early Renaissance (Chicago, 1969), 3.
18. Werner Straube, ‘Die Agricola-Biographie des Johannes von Plieningen’, in Wilhelm 
Kühlmann, Rudolf Agricola 1444–1485 (Bern, 1994), 11–48.
19. Stephen Greenblatt, Sir Walter Ralegh: Th e Renaissance Man and his Roles (New Haven, 
1973); Mark Nicholls and Penry Williams, ‘Raleigh, Walter’, ODNB 45, 842–59; Nicholls 
and Williams, Sir Walter Raleigh in Life and Legend (London, 2011).
20. Aldo Manutio, Relatione de Iacomo di Crettone (Venice, 1581); James H. Burns, ‘Crichton, 
James’, ODNB 14, 183–6, at 184.
21. Paolo Rossi, Francis Bacon, from Magic to Science (1957: English translation, London 1968); 
J. Martin, Francis Bacon, the State, and the Reform of Natural Philosophy (Cambridge, 1992).
22. André Godin, ‘Erasme: Pia/Impia curiositas’, in Jean Céard (ed.), La curiosité à la Renaissance 
(Paris, 1986), 25–36; Brian Cummings, ‘Encyclopaedic Erasmus’, Renaissance Studies 28 
(2014), 183–204, at 183.
23. Dino Bellucci, ‘Mélanchthon et la défense de l’astrologie’, Bibliothèque d’Humanisme et 
Renaissance 50 (1988), 587–622; Sachiko Kusukawa, Th e Transformation of Natural 
Philosophy: Th e Case of Philip Melanchthon (Cambridge, 1995).
24. Chaim Wirszubski, Pico della Mirandola’s Encounter with Jewish Mysticism (Cambridge, MA, 
1989), 121, 259.
25. Eugenio Garin, Giovanni Pico della Mirandola: vita e dottrina (Florence, 1937); Frances 
Yates, ‘Pico della Mirandola and Cabalist Magic’, in Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic 


283
NOTES to pp. 32–8
Tradition (London, 1964), 84–116; William G. Craven, Giovanni Pico della Mirandola, 
Symbol of his Age (Geneva, 1981); Steve A. Farmer, Syncretism in the West: Pico’s 900 Th eses 
(Tempe, AZ, 1998).
26. W. Craven, Giovanni Pico della Mirandola (Geneva, 1981), stresses Pico’s medieval heritage 
and denies that Pico’s theses dealt with all subjects.
27. Yates, ‘Cornelius Agrippa’s Survey of Renaissance Magic’, in Giordano Bruno,130–43; 
Charles G. Nauert Jr., Agrippa and the Crisis of Renaissance Th ought (Urbana, IL, 1965); 
Rudolf Schmitz, ‘Agrippa, Heinrich Cornelius’, DSB 1, 79–81; Christoph I. Lehrich, Th e 
Language of Demons and Angels: Cornelius Agrippa’s Occult Philosophy (Leiden, 2003).
28. Hugh R. Trevor-Roper, Th e European Witch-Craze of the 16th and 17th centuries (1969: 
Harmondsworth, 1978 edn), 47.
29. Beatrice Reynolds (ed. and trans.), Method for the Easy Comprehension of History (New York, 
1945), 2 (the dedication), 79, 81. On Bodin’s studies of law, history and politics, Julian H. 
Franklin, Jean Bodin and the Sixteenth-Century Revolution in the Methodology of Law and 
History (New York, 1963); Donald R. Kelley, ‘Th e Development and Context of Bodin’s 
Method’ (1973: rpr. Julian H. Franklin [ed.], Jean Bodin [Aldershot, 2006], 123–50).
30. Denis P. O’Brien, ‘Bodin’s Analysis of Inﬂ ation’ (2000: rpr. in Franklin [ed.], Jean Bodin, 
209–92).
31. Marion Kuntz, ‘Harmony and the Heptaplomeres of Jean Bodin’, Journal of the History of 
Philosophy 12 (1974), 31–41; Noel Malcolm, ‘Jean Bodin and the Authorship of the 
“Colloquium Heptaplomeres’, Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes 69 (2006), 
95–150.
32. On Scaliger as one of the ‘Wündermännern des Gedächtnisses’, Immanuel Kant, Gesammelte 
Schriften 7 (Berlin, 1907), 184; as a ‘titan’, Anthony Grafton, Joseph Scaliger: A Study in the 
History of Classical Scholarship, 2 vols. (Oxford, 1983–93), vol. 2, 22.
33. Jakob Bernays, Joseph Justus Scaliger (Berlin, 1855); Grafton, Joseph Scaliger, vol. 2.
34. Peter J. French, John Dee: Th e World of an Elizabethan Magus (London, 1972), 209; Nicholas 
H. Clulee, John Dee’s Natural Philosophy (London, 1988); J. Roberts and A. Watson, John 
Dee’s Library Catalogue (London, 1990); William H. Sherman, John Dee: Th e Politics of 
Reading and Writing in the English Renaissance (Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts 
Press, 1995); R. Julian Roberts, ‘Dee, John’, ODNB 15, 667–75; Stephen Clucas (ed.), John 
Dee: Interdisciplinary Studies in English Renaissance Th ought (Dordrecht, 2006).
35. Helmut Zedelmaier, Bibliotheca universalis und Bibliotheca selecta: das Problem der Ordnung 
des gelehrten Wissens in der frühen Neuzeit (Cologne, 1992), 101, 297n.
36. Ann Blair, ‘Humanism and Printing in the Work of Conrad Gessner’, Renaissance Quarterly 
70 (2017), 1–43, at 9.
37. Ibid., 14; cf. Alfredo Serrai, Conrad Gesner (Rome, 1990); Massimo Danzi, ‘Conrad Gessner 
(1516–1565: Universalgelehrter und Naturforscher der Renaissance’, Bibliothèque 
d’Humanisme et Renaissance 78 (2016), 696–701; Urs B. Leu and Mylène Ruoss (eds.), 
Facetten eines Universums: Conrad Gessner, 1516–2016 (Zurich, 2016).
38. Christopher, Bellitto, Th omas M. Izbicki and Gerald Christianson (eds.), Introducing 
Nicholas of Cusa: A Guide to a Renaissance Man (New York, 2004).
39. Garin, Pico, 120n.
40. William J. Bouwsma, Th e Career and Th ought of Guillaume Postel (Cambridge, MA, 1957); 
Marion Kuntz, Guillaume Postel: Prophet of the Restitution of all Th ings (Th e Hague, 1981).
41. Franklin, Sixteenth-Century Revolution, 59; Kelley, ‘Development’, 145; Marion D. Kuntz, 
‘Harmony and the Heptaplomeres of Jean Bodin’, Journal of the History of Philosophy 12 
(1974), 31–41; Ann Blair, Th e Th eater of Nature: Jean Bodin and Renaissance Science 
(Princeton, NJ, 1997), 7.
42. Th e word calculation comes from Ann Blair, ‘Revisiting Renaissance Encyclopaedism’, in 
Jason König and Greg Woolf (eds.), Encyclopaedism from Antiquity to the Renaissance 
(Cambridge, 2013), 379–97, at 385.
43. Erwin Panofsky, ‘Artist, Scientist, Genius’, in Wallace K. Ferguson (ed.), Th e Renaissance: Six 
Essays (New York, 1962), 121–82.


284
NOTES to pp. 38–45
44. Helmut M. Wilsdorf, ‘Agricola, Georgius’, DSB 1, 77–9.
45. Eugenio Battisti, Filippo Brunelleschi (Florence, 1976); Bertrand Gille, ‘Brunelleschi, 
Filippo’, DSB 2, 534–5.
46. Bertrand Gille, Th e Renaissance Engineers (1964: English translation, Cambridge, MA, 
1966), 81–7; Paul L. Rose, ‘Taccola’, DSB 13, 233–4.
47. Gille, Th e Renaissance Engineers, 101–15; Ladislao Reti, ‘Martini, Francesco di Giorgio’, DSB 
9, 146–7.
48. Quoted in Martin Warnke, Th e Court Artist (1985: English translation, Cambridge 1993), 
177.
49. General studies of Leonardo include Vasilii Zubov, Leonardo da Vinci (1961: English transla-
tion, Cambridge, MA 1968); Martin Kemp, Leonardo da Vinci: Th e Marvellous Works of 
Nature and Man (London, 1981); Walter Isaacson, Leonardo: Th e Life (New York, 2017).
50. Emmanuel Winternitz, Leonardo da Vinci as a Musician (New Haven, 1982).
51. Raﬀ aele Giacomelli, ‘Leonardo da Vinci aerodinamico’ and Luigi Tursini, ‘La navigazione 
subacquea in Leonardo’, in Atti del Convegno di Studi Vinciani (Florence, 1953), 353–73 and 
344–52; Mario Taddei and Edoardo Zanon, Le macchine di Leonardo (Milan, 2005).
52. Quoted in Martin Kemp, Leonardo (Oxford, 2011), 45.
53. Leonardo, ‘Codice Atlantico’, 119, a passage discussed in Kemp, Marvellous Works, 102–3.
54. Giorgio di Santillana, ‘Léonard et ceux qu’il n’a pas lus’, in Léonard de Vinci et l’expérience 
scientiﬁ que (Paris, 1953), 43–9.
55. Martin Clayton and Ron Philo, Leonardo Anatomist (London, 2012), 7.
56. Francesca Fiorani and Alessandro Nova (eds.), Leonardo da Vinci and Optics (Venice, 2013).
57. Zubov, Leonardo, 188–9, 109; Mario Taddei and Edoardo Zanon (eds.), Leonardo, l’acqua e 
il Rinascimento (Milan, 2004).
58. F. Sherwood Taylor, ‘Léonard de Vinci et la chimie de son temps’, in Léonard de Vinci et 
l’expérience scientiﬁ que (Paris, 1953), 151–62.
59. Ann Pizzorusso, ‘Leonardo’s Geology’, Leonardo 29 (1996), 197–200.
60. Annalisa Perissa Torrini, ‘Leonardo e la botanica’, in Perissa Torrini (ed.), Leonardo da Vinci 
uomo universale (Florence, 2013), 99–107.
61. F. S. Bodenheimer, ‘Léonard de Vinci, biologiste’, in Léonard de Vinci et l’expérience, 171–88.
62. Roberto Almagià, ‘Leonardo da Vinci geografo e cartografo’, in Atti del Convegno di Studi 
Vinciani (Florence, 1953), 451–66.
63. Fra Pietro da Novellara, quoted in Kenneth Clark, Leonardo da Vinci (1936: new edn, 
Harmondsworth, 1958), 63.
64. Kemp, Leonardo, 4.
65. Zubov, Leonardo, 65.
66. Edna E. Kramer, ‘Hypatia’, DSB 6, 615–6; Charlotte Booth, Hypatia: Mathematician, 
Philosopher, Myth (London, 2017).
67. Sabina Flanagan, Hildegard of Bingen, 1098–1179, a Visionary Life (London, 1989); Charles 
Burnett and Peter Dronke (eds.) Hildegard of Bingen: Th e Context of her Th ought and Art 
(London, 1998), especially the essays by Burnett, Jacquart and Moulinier; Heinrich 
Schipperges, Th e World of Hildegard of Bingen (Collegeville, MN, 1999).
68. Margaret Brabant (ed.), Politics, Gender, and Genre: Th e Political Th ought of Christine de 
Pizan (Boulder, CO, 1992); Kate Forhan, Th e Political Th eory of Christine de Pizan (Aldershot, 
2002).
69. Castiglione, Il Cortegiano, Book 3, section 9.
70. Margaret L. King, ‘Book-Lined Cells: Women and Humanism in the Early Italian 
Renaissance’, in Patricia H. Labalme (ed.), Beyond Th eir Sex: Learned Women of the European 
Past (New York, 1980), 66–90, at 81n. Cf. Paul O. Kristeller, ‘Learned Women of Early 
Modern Italy’, in Labalme, Beyond Th eir Sex, 91–116; Lisa Jardine, ‘Th e Myth of the Learned 
Lady’, Historical Journal 28 (1985), 799–819.
71. Lisa Jardine, ‘Isotta Nogarola’, History of Education 12 (1983), 231–44; Margaret King, 
‘Isotta Nogarola’, in Ottavia Niccoli (ed.), Rinascimento al femminile (Rome and Bari, 1991), 
3–34.


285
NOTES to pp. 45–50
72. Albert Rabil Jr, Laura Cereta: Quattrocento Humanist (Binghamton, NY, 1981); M. Palma, 
‘Cereta, Laura’, DBI 23, 729–30.
73. C. Cavazzana, ‘Cassandra Fedele erudita veneziana del Rinascimento’, Ateneo veneto, XXIX 
(1906), 74–91, 249–75, 361–97; Franco Pignatti, ‘Fedele, Cassandra’, DBI 45, 566–8.
74. Rabil, Laura Cereta, 25.
75. King, ‘Book-Lined Cells’, 69.
76. Georg Deichstetter (ed.), Caritas Pirckheimer, Ordensfrau und Humanistin (Cologne, 1982).
77. Almudena de Arteaga, Beatriz Galindo, La Latina, maestra de reinas (Madrid, 2007).
78. Retha M. Warnicke, ‘Women and Humanism in the English Renaissance’, in Albert Rabil Jr 
(ed.), Renaissance Humanism (Philadelphia, 1988), vol. 2, 39–54.
79. Marjorie H. Ilsley, A Daughter of the Renaissance: Marie Le Jars de Gournay (Th e Hague, 
1963); Eva Sartori, ‘Marie de Gournay’, Allegorica 9 (1987), 135–42; Michèle Fogel, Marie 
de Gournay: itinéraires d’une femme savante (Paris, 2004).
CHAPTER 3
 1. Hermann Boerhaave, Methodus studii medici (Amsterdam, 1751), 73. In Middlemarch, 
George Eliot preferred ‘hero of erudition’, but Richard Feynman’s autobiography mentions 
‘monster minds’ such as John von Neumann’s.
 2. Hans Blumenberg, Die Legitimität der Neuzeit (1966: English translation, Th e Legitimacy of 
the Modern Age, Cambridge, MA, 1983), 191–200. Neil Kenny warns against viewing 
Bacon as ‘baldly’ in favour of curiosity in his Uses of Curiosity, 167.
 3. Nicholas Jardine, Th e Birth of History and Philosophy of Science: Kepler’s A Defence of Tycho 
against Ursus (Cambridge, 1984).
 4. Erwin Panofsky, Galileo as a Critic of the Arts (Th e Hague, 1954).
 5. Stephen Gaukroger, Descartes: An Intellectual Biography (Oxford, 1995).
 6. Meric Casaubon, Generall Learning: A Seventeenth-Century Treatise on the Formation of the 
General Scholar, ed. Richard Serjeantson (Cambridge, 1999), 149.
 7. Parentalia, or memoirs of the family of the Wrens (London, 1750), 343: https://books.google.
co.uk/books?id=Tm1MAAAAcAAJ
 8. Adrian Tinniswood, His Invention So Fertile: A life of Christopher Wren (London, 2001); Lisa 
Jardine, On a Grander Scale: Th e Outstanding Career of Sir Christopher Wren (London, 2002); 
Kerry Downes, ‘Wren, Christopher’, ODNB 60, 406–19.
 9. Betty J. T. Dobbs, Th e Foundations of Newton’s Alchemy (Cambridge, 1975); Karin Figala, 
‘Newton’s Alchemy’, in I. Bernard Cohen and George E. Smith (eds.), Cambridge Companion 
to Newton (Cambridge, 2002), 370–86. Frank E. Manuel, Isaac Newton, Historian 
(Cambridge, 1963); idem., Th e Religion of Isaac Newton (Oxford, 1974); Rob Iliﬀ e, Priest of 
Nature: Th e Religious Worlds of Isaac Newton (Oxford, 2017).
10. Yaël Nazé, ‘Astronomie et chronologie chez Newton’, Archives Internationales d’Histoire des 
Sciences 62 (2012), 717–65; Jed. Z. Buchwald and Mordechai Feingold, Newton and the 
Origin of Civilization (Princeton, NJ, 2013), 244.
11. Jean R. Brink, ‘Bathsua Makin: Educator and Linguist’, in Brink (ed.), Female Scholars 
(Montreal, 1980), 86–100; Frances Teague, Bathsua Makin, Woman of Learning (Lewisburg, 
PA, 1998); Carol Pal, ‘Bathsua Makin’, in Republic of Women (Cambridge, 2012), 177–205.
12. Una Birch, Anna van Schurman (London, 1909); Mirjam de Baar et al. (eds.), Choosing the 
Better Part: Anna Maria van Schurman (Dordrecht, 1996); Joyce L. Irwin, ‘Anna Maria van 
Schurman and her Intellectual Circle’, in Anna Maria van Schurman, Whether a Christian 
Woman should be Educated (Chicago, 1998), 1–21; Pieta van Beek, Th e First Female University 
Student: A. M. van Schurman (Utrecht, 2010).
13. Pal, Republic of Women, 22–51.
14. Eileen O’Neill, Margaret Cavendish, Duchess of Newcastle, Observations upon Experimental 
Philosophy (Cambridge, 2001); Lisa Walters, Margaret Cavendish: Gender, Science and Politics 
(Cambridge, 2014); Richard Holmes, ‘Margaret Cavendish’, Th is Long Pursuit (London, 
2016), 111–32.


286
NOTES to pp. 51–5
15. Evelyn is quoted in Holmes, Long Pursuit, 126.
16. Sten Stolpe, Queen Christina (2 vols., 1960–1: abbreviated English translation, London, 
1966); Sten G. Lindberg, ‘Christina and the Scholars’, in Christina, Queen of Sweden 
(Stockholm, 1966), 44–53; Susanna Åkerman, Queen Christina of Sweden and her Circle 
(Leiden, 1991).
17. Åkerman, Queen Christina, 49.
18. R. Derosas, ‘Corner, Elena Lucrezia’, DBI 29, 174–9.
19. Ludwig Pfandl, Die Zehnte Muse von Mexico (1946); Octavio Paz, Sor Juana: Her Life and her 
World (1982: English translation, London 1988); Gerard Flynn, ‘Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz’, 
in Brink, Female Scholars, 119–36.
20. Helmut Zedelmaier, ‘“Polyhistor” und “Polyhistorie”’ (2002: rpr. in Werkstätten des Wissens 
zwischen Renaissance und Aufklärung [Tübingen, 2015], 112).
21. By Michael Neander, Orbis terra, 1583, quoted in Zedelmaier, Bibliotheca Universalis und 
Bibliotheca Selecta (Cologne, 1992), 297n. Cf. Anthony Grafton, ‘Th e World of the 
Polyhistors’, Central European History 18 (1985), 31–47, rpr. in his Bring Out Your Dead 
(Cambridge, MA, 2001), 166–80.
22. For English, here and subsequently, I follow the Oxford English Dictionary (1888: revised 
edn, online, 2000); for French, Emile Littré, Dictionnaire de la langue française (1863: revised 
edn, 7 vols., Paris 1956–8).
23. Claudia Bareggi, Il mestiere di scrivere (Rome, 1988).
24. Oliver Impey and Arthur MacGregor (eds.), Th e Origins of Museums: Th e Cabinet of Curiosities 
in 16th- and 17th-Century Europe (Oxford, 1985); Krysztof Pomian, Collectors and Curiosities 
(1987: English translation, Cambridge 1990); Jaś Elsner and Roger Cardinal (eds.), Th e 
Cultures of Collecting (London, 1994); Arthur MacGregor, Curiosity and Enlightenment: 
Collectors and Collections from the Sixteenth to the Nineteenth Century (New Haven, CT, 2007).
25. Neil Kenny, Th e Uses of Curiosity in Early Modern France and Germany (Oxford, 2004), 52, 
64, 69–70; Jean-Marc Chatelain, ‘Philologie, pansophie, polymathie, encyclopédie’, in 
Waquet, Morhof, 15–30.
26. Serjeantson (ed.), Generall Learning.
27. Johannes Wower, De polymathia (1603: Leipzig 1665 edn), 19. Cf. Luc Deitz, ‘Johannes 
Wower of Hamburg, Philologist and Polymath’, Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld 
Institutes 58 (1995), 132–51.
28. Marcus Boxhorn, De polymathia (Leiden, 1632); Jack Fellman, ‘Th e First Historical Linguist’, 
Linguistics 41 (1974), 31–4.
29. Pietro Rossi, Clavis Universalis: arti mnemoniche e logica combinatorial da Lullo a Leibniz 
(Milan-Naples, 1960), ix–xv, 178–200; Frances Yates, Th e Rosicrucian Enlightenment 
(London, 1972), a speculative reconstruction; Frank E. Manuel and Fritzie P. Manuel, 
‘Pansophia: A Dream of Science’ in their Utopian Th ought in the Western World (Oxford, 
1979), 205–21; Chatelain, ‘Philologie, pansophie’; Howard Hotson, ‘Outsiders, Dissenters, 
and Competing Visions of Reform’, in Ulinka Rublack (ed.), Oxford Handbook of the 
Protestant Reformations (Oxford, 2017), 301–28.
30. Howard Hotson, Johann Henrich Alsted, 1588–1638: Between Renaissance, Reformation 
and Universal Reform (Oxford, 2000); idem., ‘Th e Ramist Roots of Comenian Pansophia’, 
in Ramus, Pedagogy and the Liberal Arts: Ramism in Britain and the Wider World, eds. 
Steven John Reid and Emma Annette Wilson (Farnham, 2011), 227–52; idem., ‘Outsiders’, 
306–9.
31. Imre Bán, Apáczai Csere János (Budapest, 1958), 563–85.
32. Johann Heinrich Alsted, Encyclopaedia septem tomis distincta (Herborn, 1630); Hotson, 
Alsted, 144–81, 163–72; idem., ‘Ramist Roots’, 233n.
33. Jan Amos Comenius, Via Lucis (1668). Cf. Umberto Eco, Th e Search for the Perfect Language 
(Oxford, 1995), 214–16, at 215.
34. Jan Amos Comenius, Pansophiae Praeludium (1637), rpr. in Works 15/2 (Prague, 1989), 
13–53, at 32, 41. On his career, Milada Blekastad, Comenius. Versuch eines Umrisses von 
Leben, Werk und Schicksal des Jan Amos Komenský (Oslo, 1969).


287
NOTES to pp. 56–61
35. Robert F. Young, Comenius in England (Oxford, 1932), 32–3.
36. Jan Amos Comenius, Prodromus, ed. and trans. Herbert Hornstein (Dusseldorf, 1963), 12; 
Samuel Hartlib (trans.), A Reformation of Schools (London, 1642); Comenius, Pansophiae 
Diatyposis (1643; English translation, London, 1651).
37. Jan Amos Comenius, Conatum Pansophicorum Dilucidatio (1638), rpr. in Works 15/2, 
59–79, at 63.
38. Jan Amos Comenius, De rerum humanarum emendatio, rpr. in Works 19/1 (Prague, 2014), 
58–9; cf. Blekastad, Comenius, 688–700.
39. H. D. Schepelern, Museum Wormianum (Aarhus, 1971); idem., ‘Worm, Ole’, Dansk 
Biograﬁ sk Leksikon 16 (1984), 45–51; Glyn Daniel, ‘Worm, Ole’, DSB 14, 505.
40. James Delbourgo, Collecting the World: Th e Life and Curiosity of Hans Sloane (London, 2017).
41. Rubens to Pierre Dupuy, 1628, quoted and translated in Peter N. Miller, Peiresc’s 
Mediterranean World (Cambridge, MA, 2015), 1, 449. Peiresc, long neglected, has been put 
back on the intellectual map by Miller.
42. Many of Peiresc’s letters have been published: see emloportal.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/collections/?cat
alogue=nicolas...peiresc. On him, Peter N. Miller, Peiresc’s Europe: Learning and Virtue in the 
Seventeenth Century (New Haven, CT, 2000); idem., Peiresc’s History of Provence: 
Antiquarianism and the Discovery of a Medieval Mediterranean (Philadelphia, 2011); idem., 
Peiresc’s Orient (Farnham, 2012). On his Egyptian studies, Sydney Aufrère, La momie et la 
tempête (Avignon, 1990).
43. Arnaldo Momigliano, Th e Classical Foundations of Modern Historiography (Berkeley, 1990), 
54.
44. Miller, Peiresc’s Mediterranean World, 334–7; idem., ‘Peiresc in Africa’, in Marc Fumaroli 
(ed.), Les premiers siècles de la république européenne des lettres (Paris, 2005), 493–525.
45. Miller, Peiresc’s Mediterranean World, 108–11.
46. On his concern with the natural sciences, Harcourt Brown, ‘Peiresc’, DSB X, 488–92. On 
astronomy, Miller, Peiresc’s Mediterranean World, 241–6.
47. Miller, Peiresc’s Mediterranean World, 18, 65, 266–8, 347.
48. Jacopo Antonio Tadisi, Memorie della Vita di Monsignore Giovanni Caramuel di Lobkowitz 
(Venice, 1760), v; Alfredo Serra, Phoenix Europae: Juan Caramuel y Lobkowicz in prospettiva 
bibliograﬁ ca (Milan, 2005).
49. Th e term was also applied to the philologist Joseph Scaliger, the Mexican nun Sor Juana and 
the Jesuit Athanasius Kircher.
50. Bianca Garavelli (ed.), Caramuel: vescovo eclettico (Bergamo, 2016), 38–9, 105–7.
51. Dino Pastine, Juan Caramuel: probabilismo ed enciclopedia (Florence, 1975); Augusto De 
Ferrari and Werner Oechslin, ‘Caramuel Lobkowicz, Juan’, DBI 19, 621–6; Paolo Pissavino 
(ed.), Le meraviglie del probabile: Juan Caramuel (Vigevano, 1990); Julia Fleming, Defending 
Probabilism: Th e Moral Th eology of Juan Caramuel (Washington DC, 2006); Petr Dvořák and 
Jacob Schmutz (eds.), Juan Caramuel Lobkowitz, the Last Scholastic Polymath (Prague, 2008); 
Bianca Garavelli, Caramuel, Vescovo Eclettico (Bergamo, 2016).
52. Cesare Vasoli, ‘Introduzione’ to Pissavino, Le meraviglie del probabile, 13–17; María Elisa 
Navarro, ‘Th e Narrative of the Architectural Orders’, in Dvořák and Schmutz, Caramuel, 
257–72, at 257.
53. Rudbecksstudier (Uppsala, 1930); Sten Lindroth, Svensk Lärdomshistoria, vol. 4, Stormaktstiden 
(Stockholm, 1975), 414–32, translated in Lindroth, Les chemins du savoir en Suède 
(Dordrecht, 1888), 57–70; idem., ‘Rudbeck, Olaus’, DSB XI, 586–8.
54. Lindroth, Stormaktstiden, 284–96, translated in Les Chemins, 71–82; Gunnar Eriksson, Th e 
Atlantic Vision: Olaus Rudbeck and Baroque Science (Canton, MA, 1994), 45, 50, 54–5, 
100–12.
55. Kurt Johannesson, Th e Renaissance of the Goths in Sixteenth-Century Sweden (Berkeley, CA, 
1991).
56. Håkan Håkansson, ‘Alchemy of the Ancient Goths: Johannes Bureus’s Search for the Lost 
Wisdom of Scandinavia’, Early Science and Medicine 17 (2012), 500–22.


288
NOTES to pp. 62–7
57. Ole Klindt-Jensen, A History of Scandinavian Archaeology (English translation, London, 
1975), 30.
58. Paula Findlen (ed.), Athanasius Kircher: Th e Last Man Who Knew Everything (London, 2003); 
Joscelyn Godwin, Athanasius Kircher: A Renaissance Man and the Quest for Lost Knowledge 
(London, 1979), 5.
59. Daniel Stolzenberg, Egyptian Oedipus: Athanasius Kircher and the Secrets of Antiquity 
(Chicago, 2013).
60. Malcolm, ‘Private and Public Knowledge’, 297.
61. John T. Waterman (ed. and trans.), Leibniz and Ludolf on Th ings Linguistic (Berkeley, CA, 
1977), 51, 53.
62. On the tradition, Erik Iversen, Th e Myth of Egypt and its Hieroglyphs in European Tradition 
(1961: 2nd edn, Princeton, NJ, 1993).
63. Peiresc described Kircher as ‘a little too credulous’, while an Englishman who visited Rome 
at this time (Robert Southwell, later President of the Royal Society) reported that Kircher ‘is 
reputed very credulous’: Findlen, Last Man, 141, 384.
64. Th omas Leinkauf, Mundus Combinatus: Studien zur Struktur der barocken Universalwissenschaft 
am Beispiel Athanasius Kirchers SJ (1602–1680) (Berlin, 1993), 75 and passim.
65. Pierre Bayle, Oeuvres Diverses (Th e Hague, 1737), vol. 1, 75.
66. Elisabeth Labrousse, Pierre Bayle (Th e Hague, 1963–4); eadem, Bayle (Oxford, 1983); 
Helena H. M. van Lieshout, Th e Making of Pierre Bayle’s Dictionnaire historique et critique 
(Amsterdam, 2001); Wiep van Bunge, ‘Pierre Bayle et l’animal-machine’, in Hans Bots (ed.), 
Critique, savoir et erudition au siècle des lumières (Amsterdam-Maarssen, 1998), 375–88, at 
386.
67. bayle-correspondance.univ-st-etienne.fr/. Cf Miranda Lewis, ‘At the centre of the networked 
early modern world: Pierre Bayle’, www.culturesofknowledge.org/?p=7326.
68. Marc Fumaroli, ‘Nicolas Claude Fabri de Peiresc, prince de la république des lettres’ (1996: 
rpr. Fumaroli, La République des Lettres [Paris, 2015], 56–90).
69. Nicholas Jolley (ed.), Th e Cambridge Companion to Leibniz (Cambridge, 1995), which is the 
work of twelve professors of philosophy. For a corrective to this emphasis, see Maria Rosa 
Antognazza, Leibniz: An Intellectual Biography (Cambridge, 2007).
70. Sigrid von der Schulenberg, Leibniz als Sprachforscher (Frankfurt, 1973), 68–114; Daniel 
Droixhe, ‘Leibniz et le ﬁ nno-ougrien’, in Tullio De Mauro and Lia Formigari (eds.), Leibniz, 
Humboldt and the Origins of Comparativism (Amsterdam and Philadelphia, 1990), 3–29; 
Shane Hawkins, ‘“Selig wer auch Zeichen gibt”: Leibniz as historical linguist’, Th e European 
Legacy 23 (2018), 510–21.
71. Louis Davillé, Leibniz historien (Paris, 1909); Carl J. Friedrich, ‘Philosophical Reﬂ ections of 
Leibniz on Law, Politics and the State’, Natural Law Forum 11 (1966), 79–91; Patrick Riley 
(ed.), Th e Political Writings of Leibniz (Cambridge, 1972); Franklin Perkins, Leibniz and 
China (Cambridge, 2004).
72. Miller, Peiresc’s Mediterranean World, 394.
73. Maria Rosa Antognazza, Leibniz: An Intellectual Biography (Cambridge, 2009), 2, 206.
74. Delia K. Bowden, Leibniz as Librarian (1969); Hans G. Schulte-Albert, ‘Gottfried Wilhelm 
Leibniz and Library Classiﬁ cation’, Journal of Library History 6 (1971), 133–52; Margherita 
Palumbo, Leibniz e la res bibliothecaria (Rome, 1993); Antognazza, Leibniz: An Intellectual 
Biography, 195–280.
75. Anna Rosa Antognazza, Leibniz: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford, 2016), 6.
76. Antognazza, Leibniz: An Intellectual Biography, 559.
77. Ibid, 1.
78. Christian Gottlieb Jöcher, 1733, quoted in Wellmon, Organizing Enlightenment, 49; Emil 
Du Bois-Reymond, Reden, quoted in Lorraine Daston, ‘Th e Academies and the Unity of 
Knowledge: Th e Disciplining of the Disciplines’, Diﬀ erences 10 (1998), 67–86, at 76.
79. Schulte-Albert, ‘Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz’; Palumbo, Leibniz.
80. Antognazza, Leibniz: An Intellectual Biography, 236, 244.


289
NOTES to pp. 67–75
 81. István Hont, ‘Samuel Pufendorf and the Th eoretical Foundations of the Four-Stage Th eory’ 
(1986: rpr. in his Jealousy of Trade, Cambridge, MA, 2005, 159–84); Detlef Döring, 
‘Biographisches zu Samuel von Pufendorf’, in Bodo Geyer and Helmut Goerlich (eds.), 
Samuel Pufendorf und seine Wirkungen bis auf die heutige Zeit, Baden-Baden 1996, 23–38; 
Mordechai Feingold (ed.), Before Newton: Th e Life and Times of Isaac Barrow (Cambridge, 
1990); idem., ‘Barrow, Isaac’, ODNB 4, 98–102, at 102; Françoise Waquet (ed.), Mapping 
the World of Learning: Th e Polyhistor of Daniel Georg Morhof (Wiesbaden, 2000).
 82. Pierre-Daniel Huet, Commentarius (Th e Hague, 1718); Charles Sainte-Beuve, Causeries de 
Lundi, 15 vols. (Paris, 1851–62).
 83. Christopher Ligota, ‘Der apologetischen Rahmen der Mythendeutung im Frankreich des 
17. Jahrhunderts (P. D. Huet)’, in Walter Killy (ed.), Mythographie der frühen Neuzeit 
(Wiesbaden, 1984), 149–62, at 151.
 84. Alphonse Dupront, Pierre-Daniel Huet et l’exégèse comparatiste au XVII siècle (Paris, 1930); 
Alain Niderst, ‘Comparatisme et syncrétisme religieux de Huet’, in Suzanne Guellouz (ed.), 
Pierre-Daniel Huet (Tübingen, 1994), 75–82; Elena Rapetti, Pierre-Daniel Huet: erudizione, 
ﬁ losoﬁ a, apologetica (Milan, 1999); April G. Shelford, Transforming the Republic of Letters: 
Pierre-Daniel Huet and European Intellectual Life, 1650–1720 (Rochester, NY, 2007).
 85. Fabienne Gégou (ed.), Traité sur l’origine des romans (Paris, 1971), introduction.
 86. Léon Tolmer, Pierre-Daniel Huet: humaniste, physicien (Bayeux, 1949), 189–90, 215–18; 
M. de Pontville, ‘Pierre-Daniel Huet, homme des sciences’, in Guellouz, Huet, 29–42.
 87. Quoted in David S. Berkowitz, John Selden’s Formative Years (Washington DC, 1988), 296.
 88. Harold D. Hazeltine, ‘Selden as Legal Historian’, Festschrift H. Brunner (Weimar, 1910), 
579–630; Paul Christianson, ‘Selden, John’, ODNB 49, 694–705; Gerald J. Toomer, John 
Selden: A Life in Scholarship, 2 vols. (Oxford 2009); Timothy Brook, Mr Selden’s Map of 
China (London, 2015).
 89. John Stoye, Marsigli’s Europe (New Haven, CT, 1994); Giuseppe Gullino and Cesare Preti, 
‘Marsili, Luigi Fernando’, DBI 70, 771–81.
 90. Igor Wladimiroﬀ , De kaart van een verzwegen vriendschap. Nicolaes Witsen en Andrej Winius 
en de Nederlandse cartograﬁ e van Rusland (Groningen, 2008), 148–9.
 91. Brun Naarden, ‘Witsen’s Studies of Inner Eurasia’, in Siegfried Huigen, Jan L. de Jong and 
Elmer Kotﬁ n (eds.), Th e Dutch Trading Companies as Knowledge Networks (Leiden 2010), 
211–39.
 92. Marion Peters, De wijze koopman. Het wereldwijde onderzoek van Nicolaes Witsen (1641–
1717), burgemeester en VOC-bewindhebber van Amsterdam (Amsterdam, 2010).
 93. Prager and Scaglia, Brunelleschi, 111, 129, 144.
 94. Richard S. Westfall, Never at Rest: A Biography of Isaac Newton (Cambridge, 1980), 714–15, 
727; Th omas Sonar, Die Geschichte des Prioritätsstreits zwischen Leibniz und Newton 
(Heidelberg, 2016).
 95. ‘Altissimum planetam tergeminum observavi’.
 96. ‘anulo cingitur, tenui, plano, nusquam cohaerente, ad eclipticam inclinato’.
 97. ‘ut tensio, sic vis’.
 98. Jacob Th omasius, De plagio literario (1673); Th eodor Jansson van Almeloveen, ‘Plagiorum 
syllabus’, in his Opuscula (1686); Johannes Fabri, Decas decadum, sive plagiariorum centuria 
(1689); Jacques Salier, Cacocephalus, sive de plagiis (1693).
 99. Wolfgang Behringer, ‘Communications Revolutions’, German History 24 (2006), 333–74.
100. Philippe Tamizey de Larroque (ed.), Lettres de Peiresc, 7 vols. (Paris 1888–98).
101. Elisabeth Labrousse et al. (eds.), Correspondance de Pierre Bayle, 14 vols. (Oxford, 1999–
2017). Cf. emlo-portal.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/collections/?catalogue=pierre-bayle
102. Kircher’s correspondence is available online at http://web.stanford.edu/group/kircher/
cgi-bin/site/?page_id=303. On magnetic variation, Michael John Gorman, ‘Th e Angel and 
the Compass: Athanasius Kircher’s Magnetic Geography’, in Paula Findlen (ed.), Th e Last 
Man Who Knew Everything (New York, 2003), 229–51, at 245.
103. Marie Boas Hall, Henry Oldenburg (Oxford, 2002).
104. M. Albanese, ‘Magliabechi, Antonio’, DBI 67, 422–7.


290
NOTES to pp. 76–81
105. Mordechai Feingold, ‘Th e Humanities’, in Nicholas Tyacke (ed.), History of the University 
of Oxford, vol. 4 (Oxford, 1997), 211–357, at 218.
106. Paul Hazard, Th e Crisis of the European Mind, 1680–1715 (1934: English translation, New 
York 2013), Hugh R. Trevor-Roper, ‘Th e General Crisis of the Seventeenth Century’, Past 
& Present 16 (1959), 31–64.
107. Malcolm Gladwell, Th e Tipping Point: How Little Th ings Can Make a Big Diﬀ erence 
(London, 2000).
108. Eduard J. Dijksterhuis, Th e Mechanization of the World Picture (English translation, Oxford, 
1961).
109. Richard H. Popkin, Th e History of Scepticism from Erasmus to Spinoza (1960: revised edn, 
Berkeley, CA, 1979).
110. Elisabeth Labrousse, Bayle (Oxford, 1983), 12, 22, 51.
111. Ann M. Blair, Too Much to Know: Managing Scholarly Information before the Modern Age 
(New Haven, CT, 2010).
112. Andrew Pettegree, ‘Th e Renaissance Library and the Challenge of Print’, in Alice Crawford 
(ed.), Th e Meaning of the Library: A Cultural History (Princeton, NJ, 2015), 72–90, at 75, 84.
113. Peter Burke, ‘Gutenberg Bewältigen. Die Informationsexplosion im frühneuzeitlichen 
Europa’, Jahrbuch für Europäische Geschichte 2 (2001), 237–48. Cf. the special issue of the 
Journal of the History of Ideas 64 (2003), no. 1; Blair, Too Much to Know.
114. Robert Burton, Anatomy of Melancholy (1621), Book 1, section 10; Adrien Baillet, Jugemens 
des sçavans (Paris, 1685), translated and quoted in Blair, Too Much to Know, 59.
115. Adrien Baillet, Jugements des Savants sur les principaux ouvrages des anciens, 4 vols (Paris, 
1685–6), preface; Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, Philosophische Schriften, 7 vols. (Berlin 
1875–90), vol. 7, 160.
116. Blair, Too Much to Know, 93–6.
117. David Gledhill, Th e Names of Plants (4th edn, Cambridge 2008), 7.
118. Richard S. Wurman, Information Anxiety (New York, 1989).
119. Johannes Wower, De polymathia (1603); Daniel Georg Morhof, Polyhistor (Lübeck, 1688). 
Cf. Luc Deitz, ‘Joannes Wower’, Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes 58 (1995), 
132–51; Françoise Waquet (ed.), Mapping the World of Learning: Th e Polyhistor of Daniel 
Georg Morhof (Wiesbaden, 2000).
120. Morhof, Polyhistor, 2.
121. Jan Amos Comenius, Pansophia Praeludium (1637), rpr. in Works 15/2 (Prague, 1989), 22.
122. Quoted and translated in Daniel Murphy, Comenius: A Critical Introduction to his Life and 
Work (Dublin, 1995), 20.
123. John Donne, An Anatomy of the World (written in 1611). Th e poem argues in conventional 
fashion for ‘the decay of the world’, but this particular argument is a fresh one.
124. John Selden, Titles of Honour (London, 1614), dedication.
125. Richard Baxter, Holy Commonwealth (London, 1659), 493; he seems to be quoting 
Comenius, ‘uno intuitu OMNIA . . . exhibens’ (Consultatio Catholica, Prague 1966, 28).
126. Th omas Fuller, Th e Holy State (London, 1642), Book 2, ch. 7.
127. Isaac Barrow, Sermons and Expository Treatises (Edinburgh, 1839), 492.
128. Morhof, Polyhistor (1688: expanded edn, Lübeck, 1747), 4.
129. Casaubon, Generall Learning, 88, 146.
130. Burnet is quoted in Antognazza, Leibniz: An Intellectual Biography, 559; John Cockburn, A 
Specimen of Some Free and Impartial Remarks occasion’d by Dr Burnet’s History of His Own 
Times (London, 1724), 27–8, quoted in Helen C. Foxcroft (ed.), Supplement to Burnet’s 
History of His Own Time (Oxford, 1902), 456n.
131. Quoted in Lisa Jardine, Th e Curious Life of Robert Hooke (London, 2003), 6.
132. Walter E. Houghton, ‘Th e English Virtuoso in the Seventeenth Century’, Journal of the 
History of Ideas 3 (1942), 51–73; on fashions, Krzysztof Pomian, ‘Médailles/
coquilles=érudition/philosophie’, Transactions of the IVth International Congress on the 
Enlightenment 4 (1976), 1677–1705; Delbourgo, Collecting the World, 164. Th e phrase 
‘master of only scraps’ was used by a contemporary critic of Sloane, the lawyer William King.


291
NOTES to pp. 81–6
133. Pamela H. Smith, Th e Business of Alchemy: Science and Culture in the Holy Roman Empire 
(Princeton, NJ, 1994), 14.
134. John Fletcher (ed.), Athanasius Kircher und seine Beziehungen zum gelehrten Europa seiner 
Zeit (Wiesbaden, 1988), 111.
135. Antognazza, Leibniz: An Intellectual Biography, 232 (cf. 325).
136. Ibid., 171, 321.
137. Jardine, Curious Life, 3, 22.
138. Tinniswood, His Invention So Fertile, 246; Derek T. Whiteside, ‘Wren the Mathematician’, 
Notes and Records of the Royal Society of London 15 (1960), 107–11, at 107.
139. David Brading, Th e First America (Cambridge, 1991), 393; John Stoye, Marsigli’s Europe 
(New Haven, CT, 1994), viii, 25.
CHAPTER 4
  1. Pierre-Daniel Huet, Huetiana (Paris, 1722), 1–2.
  2. Giambattista Vico, letter to the French Jesuit Édouard de Vitry, in Opere, ed. Roberto 
Parenti, 2 vols. (Naples, 1972), vol. 1, 452, 454.
  3. Louis Davillé, Leibniz historien (Paris, 1909), 407, 522–3.
  4. Contemporary critics include Johan Hadorph, Claudius Örnhielm and Johann Scheﬀ er.
  5. Peter Miller, ‘Copts and Scholars’, in Findlen, Last Man, 135, 141.
  6. Findlen, Last Man, 5–6.
  7. Quoted in Eric Jorink and Dirk van Miert (eds.), Isaac Vossius (Leiden, 2012), 211.
  8. Dijksterhuis, De Mechanisering; Marjorie H. Nicolson, Th e Breaking of the Circle: Studies in 
the Eﬀ ect of the ‘New Science’ upon Seventeenth-Century Poetry (Evanston, IL, 1950), 108.
  9. Conrad Wiedemann, ‘Polyhistors Glück und Ende: Von D. G. Morhof zum jungen 
Lessing’, Festschrift Gottfried Weber (Bad Homburg, 1967), 215–35; Helmut Zedelmaier, 
‘“Polyhistor” und “Polyhistorie”’ (2002: rpr. in Werkstätten des Wissens zwischen Renaissance 
und Aufklärung [Tübingen, 2015], 109, 115).
 10. Quoted and translated in Jan. C. Westerhoﬀ , ‘A World of Signs: Baroque Pansemioticism, 
the Polyhistor and the Early Modern Wunderkammer’, Journal of the History of Ideas 62 
(2001), 633–50, at 641.
 11. Gunter E. Grimm, Literatur und Gelehrtentum in Deutschland (Tübingen, 1983), 346. Cf. 
Wilhelm Kühlmann, Gelehrtenrepublik und Fürstenstaat (Tübingen, 1982), 286–454, 
though he laments the lack of a history of pedantry (287, note 2).
 12. Paul Raabe, ‘Lessing und die Gelehrsamkeit’, in Edward P. Harris and Richard E. Schade 
(eds.), Lessing in heutiger Sicht (Bremen, 1977), 65–88; Wilfred Barner, ‘Lessing zwischen 
Bürgerlichkeit und Gelehrtheit’, in Rudolf Vierhaus (ed.), Bürger und Bürgerlichkeit 
(Heidelberg, 1981), 165–204.
 13. Ussher’s remark was recorded by John Evelyn, Diary, ed. E. S. de Beer, 6 vols. (Oxford 
1955), vol. 3, 156. Wren is quoted in Steven Shapin and Simon Schaﬀ er, Leviathan and the 
Air-Pump: Hobbes, Boyle and the Experimental Life (Princeton, NJ, 1985), 31. Like 
Descartes, the English gentleman Robert Payne compared Kircher to fellow Jesuits: ‘enough 
of these Mountebankes’ (quoted by Noel Malcolm, ‘Private and Public Knowledge: Kircher, 
Esotericism and the Republic of Letters’, in Findlen, Last Man, 300).
 14. ‘Le Jesuite a quantité de farfanteries: il est plus charlatan que sçavant’: René Descartes to 
Constantijn Huygens, 14 January 1643, in Marin Mersenne, Correspondence (Paris, 1972), 
vol. 12, no. 1160. Johann Burckhardt Mencke, De Charlataneria Eruditorum (1715), 
English translation Th e Charlatanry of the Learned (New York, 1937), 85–6, also discusses 
Kircher, not as an impostor but as an easily deceived worshipper of antiquity.
 15. Marian Füssel, ‘“Th e Charlatanry of the Learned”: On the Moral Economy of the 
Republic of Letters in Eighteenth-Century Germany’, Cultural and Social History 3 (2006), 
287–300.
 16. Jacques Roger, Buﬀ on: A Life in Natural History (1989: English translation, Ithaca, NY 
1997), 434.


292
NOTES to pp. 86–96
17. Samuel Johnson, Th e Rambler (1750–2: ed. W. J. Bate and Albrecht B. Strauss, New Haven, 
CT, 1969), nos. 180, 121.
18. Quoted in Richard Yeo, Encyclopaedic Visions: Scientiﬁ c Dictionaries and Enlightenment 
Culture (Cambridge, 2001), xi.
19. Preface to vol. 6 of the Bibliothèque Françoise, quoted in Jean Sgard (ed.), Dictionnaire des 
Journaux, 1600–1789, 2 vols. (Paris 1991), vol. 1, 162. My translation.
20. Maria Luisa Altieri Biagi, Lingua e cultura di Francesco Redi, medico (Florence, 1968); Gabriele 
Bucchi and Lorella Mangani, ‘Redi, Francesco’, DBI 86, 708–12; Georges Güntert, Un poeta 
scienziato del Seicento (Florence, 1966); L. Matt, ‘Magalotti, Lorenzo’, DBI 67, 300–5.
21. Steven Shapin, ‘Th e Man of Science’, in Lorraine Daston and Katharine Park (eds.), Early 
Modern Science (Cambridge History of Science, vol. 3, Cambridge, 2006), 179–91; Londa 
Schiebinger, ‘Women of Natural Knowledge’, ibid., 192–205.
22. Dena Goodman, ‘Enlightenment Salons: Th e Convergence of Female and Philosophic 
Ambitions’, Eighteenth-Century Studies 22 (1989), 329–50. Cf. Antoine Lilti, Le monde des 
salons: sociabilité et mondanité à Paris au XVIIIe siècle (Paris, 2005).
23. Sylvia H. Myers, Th e Bluestocking Circle (Oxford, 1990).
24. Isobel Grundy, ‘Montagu, Lady Mary Wortley’, ODNB 38, 754–9.
25. Robert Shackleton, Montesquieu, an Intellectual and Critical Biography (Oxford, 1961), vii.
26. Judith N. Shklar, Montesquieu (Oxford, 1987), 10; Muriel Dodds, Les récits de voyages: sources 
de L’Esprit des lois de Montesquieu (Paris, 1929).
27. Th eodore Besterman, Voltaire (London, 1969).
28. John Henry Brumﬁ tt, Voltaire historian (Oxford, 1958).
29. Besterman, Voltaire, 124, 525.
30. Esther Ehman, Madame du Châtelet (Leamington, 1986); Judith P. Zinsser and Julie C. 
Hayes (eds.), Émilie du Châtelet: Rewriting Enlightenment Philosophy and Science (Oxford, 
2006); Judith P. Zinsser, Émilie du Châtelet: Daring Genius of the Enlightenment (New York, 
2007).
31. Th omas Hankins, Jean d’Alembert, Scientist and Philosopher (Ithaca, NY, 1964); J. Morton 
Briggs, ‘Alembert, Jean Le Rond d’, DSB 1, 110–17.
32. René Pomeau, Diderot (Paris, 1967); Charles C. Gillespie, ‘Diderot, Denis’, DSB 4, 84–90.
33. Jacques Roger, Buﬀ on: A Life in Natural History (1989: English translation, Ithaca, NY, 
1997).
34. Keith M. Baker, Condorcet: From Natural Philosophy to Social Mathematics (Chicago, IL, 
1975), ix. Cf. Gilles Granger, ‘Condorcet, Marie-Jean-Antoine-Nicolas Caritat, Marquis de’, 
DSB 3, 383–8.
35. J. B. Gough, ‘Réaumur, René-Antoine Ferchault de’, DSB 11, 327–35; Jean Torlais, Un esprit 
encyclopédique en dehors de l’Encyclopédie: Réaumur (Paris, 1961); Henry Guerlac, ‘Lavoisier, 
Antoine-Laurent’, DSB 8, 66–91; Arthur Donovan, Antoine Lavoisier (Cambridge, 1993); 
Rhoda Rappoport, ‘Turgot, Anne-Robert-Jacques’, DSB 13, 494–7; Anthony Brewer, 
‘Turgot: Founder of Classical Economics’, Economica 54 (1987), 417–28.
36. Peter Loewenberg, ‘Th e Creation of a Scientiﬁ c Community’, in Fantasy and Reality in 
History (New York, 1995), 46–89; Martin Mulsow and Marcelo Stamm (eds.), 
Konstellationsforschung (Frankfurt, 2005).
37. Ernest C. Mossner, Th e Life of David Hume, 2nd edn (Oxford, 1980), 3. Cf. James A. Harris, 
Hume: An Intellectual Biography (Cambridge, 2015), 14–24.
38. Quoted in Nicholas Philippson, Adam Smith: An Enlightened Life (London, 2010), 214.
39. Ian S. Ross, Th e Life of Adam Smith, 2nd edn (Oxford, 2010), 241.
40. Alastair J. Durie and Stuart Handley, ‘Home, Henry, Lord Kames’, ODNB 27, 879–81; Iain 
Maxwell Hammett, ‘Burnett, James, Lord Monboddo’, ODNB 8, 941–3.
41. Fania Oz-Salzberger, ‘Ferguson, Adam’, ODNB 19, 341–7.
42. Robert DeMaria, Jr., Th e Life of Samuel Johnson (Oxford, 1993), 45, 97.
43. Quoted in J. P. Hardy, Samuel Johnson: A Critical Study (London, 1979), 28.
44. James Boswell, Life of Samuel Johnson (1791: ed. A. Napier, 2 vols., London 1884), vol. 2, 
365. Th e cousin’s name was Cornelius Ford.


293
NOTES to pp. 96–104
45. Richard Cumberland, Memoirs (London, 1807), 77.
46. DeMaria, Johnson’s Dictionary and the Language of Learning (Oxford, 1986).
47. Vincenzo Ferrone, ‘Th e Man of Science’, in Michel Vovelle (ed.), Enlightenment Portraits 
(1995: English translation, Chicago, IL, 1997), 190–225, at 211.
48. Robert E. Schoﬁ eld, Th e Enlightenment of Joseph Priestley (University Park, PA, 1997), ix.
49. Robert E. Schoﬁ eld, Th e Enlightened Joseph Priestley (University Park PA, 2004); idem., 
‘Priestley, Joseph’, ODNB 45, 351–9.
50. Jenny Uglow, Th e Lunar Men (London, 2003).
51. Richard Gombrich in Alexander Murray (ed.), Sir William Jones, 1746–94: A Commemoration 
(Oxford, 1998), 3. Cf. Michael J. Franklin, Oriental Jones: Sir William Jones, Poet, Lawyer 
and Linguist, 1746–1794 (Oxford, 2011).
52. Marisa González Montero de Espinosa, Lorenzo Hervás y Panduro, el gran olvidado de la 
ilustración española (Madrid, 1994); Antonio Astorgano Abajo, Lorenzo Hervás y Panduro 
(1735–1809) (Toledo, 2010).
53. Javier Varela, Jovellanos (Madrid, 1988); AA.VV., Jovellanos: el hombre que soñó España 
(Madrid, 2012).
54. Quoted from the ecclesiastical approbation of the seventh volume of Feijoo’s Teatro Crítico by 
Gregorio Marañón, Las ideas biológicas del Padre Feijoo (1933: 2nd edn, Madrid, 1941), 15.
55. Ivy L. McClelland, Benito Jerónimo Feijoo (New York, 1969); Inmaculada Urzainqui and 
Rodrigo Olay Valdés (eds.), Con la razón y la experiencia: Feijoo 250 años después (Oviedo, 
2016).
56. Edna E. Kramer, ‘Agnesi, Maria Gaetana’, DSB 1, 75–7; M. Gliozzi and G. F. Orlandelli, 
‘Agnesi, Maria Gaetana’, DBI 1, 441–3.
57. Peter Burke, Vico (Oxford, 1985); Joseph Mali, Th e Rehabilitation of Myth: Vico’s New Science 
(Cambridge, 1992); Mark Lilla, G. B. Vico: Th e Making of an Anti-Modern (Cambridge, MA, 
1993); H. S. Stone, Vico’s Cultural History (Leiden, 1997).
58. Lisbet Koerner, Linnaeus: Nature and Nation (Cambridge, MA, 1999).
59. Ernst Benz, Emanuel Swedenborg: Visionary Savant in the Age of Reason (1948: English trans-
lation, West Chester, PA, 2002).
60. B. M. Kedrov, ‘Lomonosov, Mikhail Vasilievich’, DSB 8, 467–72; Galina Pavlova and 
Alexander Fyodorov, Mikhail Lomonosov, Life and Work (Moscow, 1984); Ludmilla Schulze, 
‘Th e Russiﬁ cation of the St Petersburg Academy of Sciences’, British Journal for the History of 
Science 18 (1985), 305–35.
61. Elizabeth Hill, ‘Roger Boscovich’, in Lancelot L. Whyte (ed.), Roger Joseph Boscovich 
(London, 1961), 17–201; Piers Bursill-Hall (ed.), R. J. Boscovich (Rome, 1993).
62. Irving A. Leonard, ‘Pedro de Peralta: Peruvian Polygraph’, Revista Hispánica Moderna 34 
(1968), 690–9, at 698. Cf. David Brading, Th e First America (Cambridge, 1991), 391–9; 
Mark Th urner, History’s Peru: Th e Poetics of Colonial and Post-Colonial Historiography 
(Gainesville, FL, 2011), 58–81).
63. P. Ford, Th e Many-Sided Franklin (1899); Carl Van Doren, Benjamin Franklin (New York, 
1938); Alfred O. Aldridge, Benjamin Franklin, Philosopher and Man (Philadelphia, PA, 
1965); I. Bernard Cohen, ‘Franklin, Benjamin’, DSB 5, 129–39.
64. Karl Lehmann, Th omas Jeﬀ erson, American Humanist (1947: Charlottesville, VA, 1985).
65. Catherine E. Ross, ‘“Trying all things”: Romantic Polymaths, Social Factors and the Legacies 
of a Rhetorical Education’, Texas Studies in Literature and Language 53 (2011), 401–30, at 
406.
66. Richard Holmes, Coleridge: Early Visions (1989: new edn, London 1998), 130. Cf. Trevor H. 
Levere, ‘Coleridge and the Sciences’, in Andrew Cunningham and Nicholas Jardine (eds.), 
Romanticism and the Sciences (Cambridge, 1990), 295–306.
67. Josephine McDonagh, De Quincey’s Disciplines (Oxford, 1994). Cf. Grevel Lindof, ‘Quincey, 
Th omas Penson de’, ODNB 45, 700–6.
68. Alexander Wood, Th omas Young, Natural Philosopher (Cambridge, 1954), 256–71, 286.
69. Wood, Th omas Young, 227–55; Edgar W. Morse, ‘Young, Th omas’, DSB 14, 562–72; Andrew 
Robinson, Th e Last Man Who Knew Everything: Th omas Young, the anonymous polymath who 


294
NOTES to pp. 104–9
proved Newton wrong, explained how we see, cured the sick and deciphered the Rosetta Stone, 
among other feats of genius (New York, 2005).
70. David S. Evans, ‘Herschel, John’, DSB 6, 323–8, at 327. Cf. Günter Buttmann, Th e Shadow 
of the Telescope: A Biography of John Herschel (1965: English translation, New York, 1970); 
Michael J. Crowe, ‘Herschel, John Frederick William’, ODNB 26, 825–31; Richard Holmes, 
Th e Age of Wonder: How the Romantic Generation Discovered the Beauty and Terror of Science 
(2008: new edn, London, 2009), 387–411; James A. Secord, ‘Th e Conduct of Everyday Life: 
John Herschel’s Preliminary Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy’, in his Visions of 
Science (Oxford, 2014), 80–106.
71. Laura J. Snyder, Th e Philosophical Breakfast Club: Four Remarkable Friends who Transformed 
Knowledge and Changed the World (New York, 2011).
72. Robert E. Butts, ‘Whewell, William’, DSB 14, 292–5; Richard Yeo, Deﬁ ning Science: William 
Whewell, Natural Knowledge, and Public Debate in Early Victorian Britain (Cambridge, 
1993); idem., ‘Whewell, William’, ODNB 58, 463–70.
73. John Herschel, Proceedings of the Royal Society 16 (1867–8), liii.
74. Yeo, Deﬁ ning Science, 57; J. M. F. Wright, Alma Mater (London, 1827).
75. R. A. Hyman, Charles Babbage (London, 1982); Doron Swade, Th e Cogwheel Brain: Charles 
Babbage and the Quest to Build the First Computer (London, 2000); idem., ‘Babbage, Charles’, 
ODNB 3, 68–74; James A. Secord, ‘Th e Economy of Intelligence: Charles Babbage’s 
Reﬂ ections on the Decline of Science in England’, in his Visions of Science (Oxford, 2014), 
52–79.
76. Isaiah Berlin, ‘Herder and the Enlightenment’, in Vico and Herder (London, 1976), 145–216; 
Jürgen Trabant, ‘Herder and Language’, in Hans Adler and Wolf Koepke (eds.), Companion 
to the Works of Johann Gottfried Herder (Rochester, NY, 2009), 117–39.
77. Walter H. Bruford, Culture and Society in Classical Weimar, 1775–1806 (Cambridge, 1962), 
174–235; Peter H. Reill, ‘Herder’s Historical Practice and the Discourse of Late 
Enlightenment Science’, in Wulf Koepke (ed.), Johann Gottfried Herder, Academic Disciplines 
and the Pursuit of Knowledge (Columbia, SC, 1996), 13–21; Elías Palti, ‘Th e “Metaphor of 
Life”: Herder’s Philosophy of History and Uneven Developments in Late Eighteenth-
Century Natural Sciences’, History and Th eory 38 (1999), 322–47; Dalia Nassar, 
‘Understanding as Explanation: Th e Signiﬁ cance of Herder’s and Goethe’s Science of 
Describing’, in Anik Waldow and Nigel DeSouza (eds.), Herder: Philosophy and Anthropology 
(Oxford, 2017), 106–25.
78. Nicholas Boyle, Goethe: Th e Poet and the Age, 2 vols. (Oxford 1991–2000).
79. Katharina Mommsen, Goethe and the Poets of Arabia (1988: English translation, Rochester, 
NY, 2014).
80. Hugh A. Nisbet, Goethe and the Scientiﬁ c Tradition (1972); George A. Wells, Goethe and the 
Development of Science (Alphen, 1978); F. Amrine et al., Goethe and the Sciences (Dordrecht, 
1987).
81. Paul R. Sweet, Wilhelm von Humboldt: A Biography, 2 vols. (Columbus, OH, 1978–80); 
Tilman Borsche, Wilhelm von Humboldt (Munich, 1990); Peter H. Reill, ‘Science and the 
Construction of the Cultural Sciences in Late Enlightenment Germany: Th e Case of 
Wilhelm von Humboldt’, History and Th eory 33 (1994), 345–66; K. Muller-Vollmer, 
‘Wilhelm von Humboldt’, Stanford Encyclopaedia of Philosophy, https://plato.stanford.edu/
entries/wilhelm-humboldt.
82. Ole Hansen-Love, La révolution copernicienne du langage dans l’oevre de Wilhelm von 
Humboldt (Paris, 1972).
83. Ralph W. Emerson, Works, 17 vols. (London 1904–5), vol. XI, 458.
84. Kurt-R. Biermann and Ingo Schwarz (1997) ‘Der polyglotte Alexander von Humboldt’, 
Mitteilungen der Alexander von Humboldt-Stiftung H69, 39–44.
85. Bettina Hey’l, Das Ganze der Natur und die Diﬀ erenzierung des Wissens: Alexander von 
Humboldt als Schriftsteller (Berlin, 2007), 7–10, 386–94 and passim.
86. Die letzte Universalgelehrte: Claudia Schülke, https://www.welt.de › Wissenschaft, 4 May 
2009.


295
NOTES to pp. 110–17
 87. Auguste Comte, ‘Préface personnelle’, Cours de Philosophie Positive, 6 vols. (1830–42, rpr. 
Brussels, 1969), vol. 6, v–xxxviii. Cf. Mary Pickering, Auguste Comte: An Intellectual 
Biography, 3 vols. (Cambridge, 1993–2009).
 88. Comte, Cours, vol. 1, 1–115. Cf. Johan Heilbron, ‘Auguste Comte and Modern 
Epistemology’, Sociological Th eory 8 (1990), 153–62; Pickering, Auguste Comte, vol. 1, 445, 
561–604.
 89. Sydney Elsen, ‘Herbert Spencer and the Spectre of Comte’, Journal of British Studies 7 
(1967), 48–67.
 90. John D. Y. Peel, Herbert Spencer: Th e Evolution of a Sociologist (London, 1971); Greta Jones 
and Robert Peel, Herbert Spencer: Th e Intellectual Legacy (London, 2004); José Harris, 
‘Spencer, Herbert’, ODNB 51, 851–61.
 91. General studies of the man and his work range from Isaiah Berlin, Karl Marx (London, 
1939), to Gareth Stedman Jones, Karl Marx: Greatness and Illusion (London, 2016).
 92. Lawrence Krader (ed.), Th e Ethnological Notebooks of Karl Marx (Assen, 1972).
 93. Quoted in Eric Hobsbawm, ‘Marx, Karl’, ODNB 37, 57–66, at 60.
 94. Jones, Karl Marx, 434, 593.
 95. René Wellek, A History of Modern Criticism 1750–1950, 4 vols. (Cambridge 1955–65), vol. 
3, 34–72; Wolf Lepenies, Sainte-Beuve: Auf der Schwelle zur Moderne (Munich, 1997).
 96. François Furet and Françoise Mélonio, ‘introduction’ to Tocqueville, Oeuvres, vol. 1 (Paris, 
2004); Raymond Aron, Main Currents in Sociological Th ought, 2 vols. (Harmondsworth, 
1968–70), vol. 1, 183–232; Melvin Richter, ‘Tocqueville on Algeria’, Th e Review of Politics 
25 (1963), 362–98.
 97. Jean-Louis Benoît, Tocqueville (Paris, 2005), xii.
 98. Richard Swedberg, Tocqueville’s Political Economy (Princeton, NJ, 2009), 73.
 99. H. W. Wardman, Ernest Renan: A Critical Biography (London, 1964), 211. Cf. Jean-Pierre 
Van Deth, Renan (Paris, 2012); Henry Laurens (ed.), Ernest Renan (Paris, 2013).
100. Th e historian Gabriel Monod, quoted in Laurens, Renan, 10.
101. Leo Weinstein, Hippolyte Taine (New York, 1972); Regina Pozzi, Hippolyte Taine: scienze 
umane e politica nel ‘Ottocento (Venice, 1993); Nathalie Richard, Hippolyte Taine: histoire, 
psychologie, littérature (Paris, 2013).
102. Pozzi, Hippolyte Taine, 24.
103. Richard, Hippolyte Taine, 81.
104. Quoted in Weinstein, Hippolyte Taine, 26.
105. Ann P. Robson, ‘Mill, Harriet’, ODNB 38, 143–6; Dale E. Miller, ‘Harriet Taylor Mill’, in 
Edward N. Zalta (ed.), Th e Stanford Encyclopaedia of Philosophy (Stanford, CA, 2015): 
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2015/entries/harriet-mill
106. Nicholas Capaldi, John Stuart Mill: A Biography (Cambridge, 2004); Jose Harris, ‘Mill, 
John Stuart’, ODNB 38, 155–75.
107. Timothy Hilton, John Ruskin, 2 vols. (New Haven CT, 1985–2000); Robert Hewison, 
‘Ruskin, John’, ODNB 48, 173–92.
108. Quoted in Peter Stansky, William Morris (Oxford, 1983), 1.
109. E. P. Th ompson, William Morris, Romantic to Revolutionary (London, 1955); Fiona 
McCarthy, William Morris (London, 1994).
110. Stefan Collini, Matthew Arnold: A Critical Portrait (Oxford, 1994), 54; idem., ‘Arnold, 
Matthew’, ODNB 2, 487–94. Cf. Wellek, Modern Criticism, vol. 4, 155–80.
111. William E. Buckler, ‘“On the Study of Celtic Literature”: A Critical Reconsideration’, 
Victorian Poetry 27 (1989), 61–76, at 62; S. Nagarajan, ‘Arnold and the Bhagavad Gita’, 
Comparative Literature 12 (1960), 335–47.
112. Maria Fairweather, Madame de Staël (London, 2004); Michel Winock, Madame de Staël 
(Paris, 2010); Richard Holmes, Th is Long Pursuit (London, 2016), 153–68.
113. Bärbel Kern and Horst Kern, Madame Doctorin Schlözer: ein Frauenleben in den 
Widersprüchen der Aufklärung (Munich, 1988), 52ﬀ .
114. Robert K. Webb, ‘Martineau, Harriet’, ODNB 37, 13–19.


296
NOTES to pp. 117–24
115. Gordon S. Haight, George Eliot: A Biography (1968); Sally Shuttleworth, George Eliot and 
19th-Century Science (Cambridge, 1984); Beryl Gray, ‘George Eliot and the “Westminster 
Review”’, Victorian Periodicals Review 33 (2000) 212–24; Diana Postlethwaite, ‘George 
Eliot and Science’, in George Levine (ed.), Th e Cambridge Companion to George Eliot 
(Cambridge, 2001), 98–118; Rosemary Ashton, ‘Evans, Marian’, ODNB 18, 730–43.
116. Valerie A. Dodd, George Eliot: An Intellectual Life (1990), 284.
117. Rosemary Ashton, George Henry Lewes (London, 1991); eadem., ‘Lewes, George Henry’, 
ODNB 33, 563–8.
118. Gillian Beer, Darwin’s Plots (London, 1983), 149, 154.
119. Haight, George Eliot, 344–50.
120. Kathryn A. Neeley, Mary Somerville: Science, Illumination and the Female Mind (Cambridge, 
2001), 2.
121. Mary Somerville, Personal Recollections (London, 1873), 140.
122. Elizabeth C. Patterson, ‘Somerville, Mary’, DSB 12, 521–5; idem., Mary Patterson and the 
Cultivation of Science, 1815–1840 (Th e Hague, 1984); Mary R. S. Creese, ‘Somerville, 
Mary’, ODNB 51, 617–9; James A. Secord, ‘General Introduction’ to Mary Somerville, 
Scientiﬁ c Papers and Reviews (London, 2004), xv–xxxix; idem., ‘Mathematics for the 
Million? Mary Somerville’s On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences, in Visions of Science 
(Oxford, 2014), 107–37; Richard Holmes, Th is Long Pursuit: Reﬂ ections of a Romantic 
Biographer (London, 2016), 197–216.
123. Sydney Ross, ‘“Scientist”: Th e Story of a Word’, Annals of Science 18 (1962), 65–85.
124. G. Granger, ‘Cournot, Antoine-Augustin’, DSB 3, 450–4; Franck Bourdier, ‘Cuvier, 
Georges’, DSB 3, 521–8; idem., ‘Geoﬀ roy Saint-Hilaire, Étienne’, DSB 5, 355–8.
125. Quoted in Ian F. McNeely, ‘Medicine on a Grand Scale’: Rudolf Virchow, Liberalism and the 
Public Health (London, 2002), 5.
126. McNeely, ‘Medicine on a Grand Scale’, 7.
127. Guenther B. Risse, ‘Virchow, Rudolf’, DSB 14, 39–45; T. James, ‘Rudolf Virchow and 
Heinrich Schliemann’, South African Medical Journal 56 (1979), 111–14.
128. Lorenz Krüger (ed.), Universalgenie Helmholtz (Berlin, 1994).
129. R. Steven Turner, ‘Helmholtz, Hermann von’, DSB 6, 241–53, at 253.
130. Michel Meulden, Helmholtz: From Enlightenment to Neuroscience (2001: English transla-
tion, Cambridge, MA, 2010).
131. Wilhelm Bölsche, Haeckel: His Life and Work (English translation, London, 1906, 173); 
Georg Uschmann, ‘Haeckel, E. H. P.’, DSB 6, 6–11; Andrea Wulf, Th e Invention of Nature: 
Th e Adventures of Alexander von Humboldt, the Lost Hero of Science (London, 2016), 
298–314; David Lowenthal, G. P. Marsh: Prophet of Conservation (Seattle, WA, 2000).
132. Letter to his friend the botanist Joseph Hooker, quoted in Peter Brent, Charles Darwin: A 
‘man of enlarged curiosity’ (London, 1981), 98.
133. Ibid., 174.
134. Gillian Beer, Darwin’s Plots (London, 1983).
135. Gavin de Beer, ‘Darwin, Charles Robert’, DSB 3, 565–77; Janet Browne, Charles Darwin, 
2 vols. (London, 1995–2002); Adrian Desmond, Janet Browne and James Moore, ‘Darwin, 
Charles Robert’, ODNB 15, 177–202; Oliver Sacks, ‘Darwin and the Meaning of Flowers’, 
in Th e River of Consciousness (2017), 3–26.
136. Wesley C. Williams, ‘Huxley, Th omas Henry’, DSB 6, 589–97; Adrian Desmond, T. H. 
Huxley, 2 vols. (1994–7); idem., ‘Huxley, Th omas Henry’ ODNB 29, 99–111.
137. Norman T. Gridgeman, ‘Galton, Francis’, DSB 5, 265–7; Ruth S. Cowan, ‘Galton, 
Francis’, ODNB 21, 346–9; Nicholas W. Gillham, A Life of Sir Francis Galton (Oxford, 
2001); Michael Bulmer, Francis Galton (Baltimore, MD, 2003).
138. H. J. P. Arnold, William Henry Fox Talbot: Pioneer of Photography and Man of Science 
(London, 1977); Larry J. Schaﬀ , ‘Talbot, William Henry Fox’, ODNB 53, 730–3. An 
exhibition in Cambridge in 2012, ‘Talbot Beyond Photography’, celebrated his many 
achievements.


297
NOTES to pp. 124–9
139. Diderot, letter, 16 December 1748.
140. Adam Smith, Lectures on Jurisprudence (1763); idem., Wealth of Nations (1776), 18. Cf. 
Jerry A. Jacobs, In Defense of Disciplines: Interdisciplinarity and Specialization in the Research 
University (Chicago, IL, 2013), 55–60.
141. Immanuel Kant, Groundwork for the Metaphysics of Morals (1785: English translation, ed. 
Alan Wood, New Haven, CT, 2002), preface.
142. Charles Babbage, On the Economy of Machinery and Manufactures (2nd edn, London 
1832), 131–63.
143. Herbert Spencer, ‘Progress: Its Law and Cause’ (1857), in Essays, media.bloomsbury.
com/.../primary-source-131-herbert-spencer-progress-its-law-and-cause.pdf, 2.
144. Quoted in Ross, ‘Scientist’, 71.
145. Quoted in Crosbie Smith and William Agar (eds.), Making Space for Science (Basingstoke 
1998), 184.
146. Jean-Pierre Chaline, Sociabilité et erudition: les sociétés savantes en France, XIXe–XXe siècles 
(Paris, 1995). Chaline quotes one exception, the ‘Société polymathique de Morbihan’ 
(1826).
147. Holmes, Th e Age of Wonder, 393.
CHAPTER 5
  1. Schiller quoted in Andrea Wulf, Th e Invention of Nature (London, 2016), 33.
  2. Smith is quoted in Richard Yeo, Encyclopaedic Visions (Cambridge, 2001), 249; William 
Hazlitt, ‘Samuel Taylor Coleridge’, Th e Spirit of the Age (London, 1825), 61–79, at 61.
  3. Alexander Wood, Th omas Young (Cambridge, 1954), 230, 237.
  4. Dubois-Reymond quoted in Paul Bishop (ed.), Companion to Goethe’s Faust (Woodbridge, 
2006), 195. Cf. Richard Hibbitt, Dilettantism and its Values (London, 2006), especially the 
introduction.
  5. Frédéric Barbier (ed.), Les trois révolutions du livre (Geneva, 2001); Simon Eliot, ‘From Few 
and Expensive to Many and Cheap: Th e British Book Market, 1800–1890’, in Eliot and 
Jonathan Rose (eds.), A Companion to the History of the Book (Oxford, 2007), 291–302; 
Aileen Fyfe, Steam-Powered Knowledge: William Chambers and the Business of Publishing, 
1820–1860 (Chicago, IL, 2012), 1–11.
  6. Bernard Lightman, Victorian Popularizers of Science: Designing Nature for New Audiences 
(Chicago, IL, 2007), 66. On Germany, see Andreas W. Daum, Wissenschaftspopularisierung 
in 19 Jht: bürgerliche Kultur, naturwissenschaftliche Bildung und die deutsche Öﬀ entlichkeit, 
1848–1914 (Munich, 1998).
  7. Th omas De Quincey, Suspiria de profundis (London, 1845), ch. 1.
  8. Emma C. Spary, ‘L’invention de “l’expédition scientiﬁ que”’, in Marie-Noëlle Bourguet et 
al. (eds.), L’invention scientiﬁ que de la Méditerranée (Paris, 1998), 119–38.
  9. Oliver MacDonagh, ‘Th e Nineteenth-Century Revolution in Government: A Reappraisal’, 
Historical Journal 1 (1958), 52–67; Martin Bulmer (ed.), Th e Social Survey in Historical 
Perspective (Cambridge, 1991); Edward Higgs, Th e Information State in England 
(Basingstoke, 2004).
 10. Ian Hacking, Th e Taming of Chance (Cambridge, 1990), 3. Cf. Alain Desrosières, Th e 
Politics of Large Numbers (1993: English translation, Cambridge, MA, 1998).
 11. Studies of this topic abound. Important examples include Chris A. Bayly, Empire and 
Information: Intelligence Gathering and Social Communication in India, 1780–1870 
(Cambridge, 1996); Bernard S. Cohn, Colonialism and its Forms of Knowledge (Princeton, 
NJ, 1996); Emmanuelle Sibeud, Une science impériale pour l’Afrique? La construction des 
savoirs africanistes en France, 1878–1930 (Paris, 2002).
 12. Haia Shpayer-Makov, Th e Ascent of the Detective (Oxford, 2011), 125.
 13. JoAnne Yates, ‘Business Use of Information and Technology during the Industrial Age’, in 
Alfred D. Chandler Jr. and James W. Cortada (eds.), A Nation Transformed by Information 
(New York, 2003), 107–36.


298
NOTES to pp. 129–35
14. Jacques-Bernard Durey de Noinville, Table alphabétique des dictionnaires (Paris, 1758). Cf. 
Peter Burke with Joseph McDermott, ‘Th e Proliferation of Reference Books, 1450–1850’, in 
McDermott and Burke (eds.), Th e Book Worlds of East Asia and Europe, 1450–1850: 
Connections and Comparisons (Hong Kong, 2015), 283–320.
15. Quoted in Mark S. Phillips, Society and Sentiment: Genres of Historical Writing in Britain, 
1740–1820 (Princeton, NJ, 2000), 294.
16. Quoted by Nick Jardine in Marina Frasca-Spada and Nick Jardine (eds.), Books and the 
Sciences in History (Cambridge, 2000), 402.
17. Th e journal Modern Business in 1908, quoted in the OED.
18. John Higham, ‘Th e Matrix of Specialization’, in Alexandra Oleson and John Voss, Th e 
Organization of Knowledge in Modern America, 1860–1920 (Baltimore, MD, 1979), 3–18, 
at 9.
19. Comte also wrote of ‘l’esprit de spécialité, l’âge de spécialité, le régime de spécialité’: Cours 
de Philosophie Positive (6 vols., 1830–42: rpr. Brussels, 1969), vol. 1, 31: vol. 6, 15, 293, 
304, 341.
20. Fritz Ringer, Fields of Knowledge: French Academic Culture in Comparative Perspective, 1890–
1920 (Cambridge, 1992), 303.
21. Émile Durkheim, La division du travail social (1893); cf. Marcel Fournier, Émile Durkheim 
(2007: English translation, Cambridge 2013), 427–9, 432.
22. Quoted in Ruth Kinna, ‘William Morris: Art, Work and Leisure’, JHI 61 (2000), 493–512, 
at 499, 503–4.
23. Max Weber, ‘Science as a Vocation’, in Hans H. Gerth and C. Wright Mills (eds.), From Max 
Weber (New York, 1946), 129–56.
24. George Rosen, Th e Specialization of Medicine with Particular Reference to Ophthalmology 
(New York, 1944).
25. George E. Davie, Th e Democratic Intellect: Scotland and her Universities in the Nineteenth 
Century (1961: 3rd edn, Edinburgh, 2013).
26. Chad Wellmon, Organizing Enlightenment: Information Overload and the Invention of the 
Modern Research University (Baltimore, MD, 2015) 4–5, 10–11, 40, 122 and passim.
27. James Hart, German Universities (1874), 264.
28. Basil Gildersleeve, quoted in James Axtell, Wisdom’s Workshop: Th e Rise of the Modern 
University (Princeton, NJ, 2016), 248.
29. Durkheim quoted in Fournier, Émile Durkheim, 67.
30. Sheldon Pollock, ‘Introduction’ to World Philology, ed. Pollock et al. (Cambridge, MA, 
2015), 1–24.
31. Michael G. Brock and M. C. Curthoys (eds.), History of the University of Oxford (Oxford, 
2000), vol. 7, part 2, 361–84, 397–428.
32. Davie, Th e Democratic Intellect, 6–7, 65–6, 79; idem., Th e Crisis of the Democratic Intellect: 
Th e Problem of Generalism and Specialization in Twentieth-Century Scotland (New York, 
1987).
33. Tony Becher and Paul R. Trowler, Academic Tribes and Territories: Intellectual Inquiry and the 
Cultures of Disciplines (1989: second edn, Buckingham, 2001): an investigation of the late 
twentieth century. Robert Ardrey’s Th e Territorial Imperative: A Personal Enquiry into the 
Animal Origins of Property and Nations (London, 1972) was followed by many extensions of 
the idea from zoology to sociology. For a geographer’s view, see Robert David Sack, Human 
Territoriality: Its Th eory and History (Cambridge, 1986).
34. Quoted in Mary O. Furner and Barry Supple (eds.), Th e State and Economic Knowledge 
(Cambridge, 1990), 303.
35. Alfred N. Whitehead, Science and the Modern World (Cambridge, 1926).
36. Charles E. McClelland, State, Society and University in Germany, 1700–1914 (Cambridge, 
1980), 281, 285.
37. Marie B. Hall, All Scientists Now: Th e Royal Society in the Nineteenth Century (Cambridge, 
1984), 216–17.
38. My thanks to Michael Hunter for help on this question.


299
NOTES to pp. 135–42
39. Eckhardt Fuchs, ‘Th e Politics of the Republic of Learning: International Scientiﬁ c Congresses 
in Europe, the Paciﬁ c Rim and Latin America’, in Fuchs and Benedikt Stuchtey (eds.), Across 
Cultural Borders (Lanham, MD, 2002), 205–44; Wolf Feuerhahn (ed.), La fabrique interna-
tionale de la science: les congrès internationales de 1865 à 1945 (Paris, 2010).
40. Denis Pernot, ‘Brunetière’, in Dominique Kalifa et al. (eds.), La civilisation du journal: 
histoire culturelle et littéraire de la presse française au XIXe siècle (Paris, 2011), 1,261–5.
41. Lorraine Daston, ‘Th e Academies and the Unity of Knowledge’, Diﬀ erences 10 (1998), 
67–86, at 73.
42. C. P. Snow, Th e Two Cultures (1959: ed. Stefan Collini, Cambridge, 2001), 2, 14–15.
43. Helmut Kreuzer (ed.), Die zwei Kulturen (Munich, 1987); W. W. Mijnhardt and B. 
Th eunissen (eds.) De Twee Culturen (Amsterdam, 1988); Giorgio Olcese (ed.), Cultura scien-
tiﬁ ca e cultura umanistica: contrasto o integrazione? (Genoa, 2004); Emma Eldelin, “De två 
kulturerna” ﬂ yttar hemifrån: C. P. Snows begrepp i svensk idédebatt, 1959–2005 (Stockholm, 
2006); Jost Halfmann and Johannes Rohbeck (eds.), Zwei Kulturen Der Wissenschaft, Revisited 
(Göttingen, 2007).
44. Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities: Reﬂ ections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism 
(1983: revised edn, London, 1991).
45. Frank Horner, Th e French Reconnaissance: Baudin in Australia, 1801–1803 (Melbourne, 
1987), 72.
46. Peter E. Carels and Dan Flory, ‘J. H. Zedler’s Universal Lexicon’, in Frank A. Kafker (ed.), 
Notable Encyclopaedias of the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries (Oxford, 1981), 165–95; 
Frank A. Kafker, Th e Encyclopaedists as Individuals (Oxford, 2006).
47. Herman Kogan, Th e Great EB: Th e Story of the Encyclopaedia Britannica (Chicago, IL, 
1958), 168; Gabriele Turi, Il mecenate, il ﬁ losofo e il gesuita: l’ Enciclopedia Italiana, specchio 
della nazione (Bologna, 2002), 50, 57.
48. Steven Shapin, Th e Scientiﬁ c Life: A Moral History of a Late Modern Vocation (Chicago, IL, 
2008), 169–78; Jeﬀ rey A. Johnson, Th e Kaiser’s Chemists: Science and Modernization in 
Imperial Germany (Chapel Hill, NC, 1990), 34; Daniel P. Todes, Pavlov’s Physiological Factory 
(Baltimore, MD, 2002), 88.
49. Laurent Mucchielli, La découverte du social: naissance de la sociologie en France, 1870–1914 
(Paris, 1998), 213; Marcel Fournier, Émile Durkheim (2007: English translation, Cambridge 
2013), 66.
50. John Ruscio, quoted in Becher and Trowler, Academic Tribes and Territories, 66.
51. Rudolf Stichweh, ‘Diﬀ erenzierung der Wissenschaft’, in Wissenschaft, Universität, Professionen 
(Frankfurt, 1994).
52. Ian McNeely with Lisa Wolverton, Reinventing Knowledge from Alexandria to the Internet 
(New York, 2008), xix, 163. Cf. Immanuel Wallerstein et al., Open the Social Sciences 
(Stanford, CA, 1996).
53. George Weisz, Th e Emergence of Modern Universities in France, 1863–1914 (Princeton, NJ, 
1983), 225–69).
54. Bernhard vom Brocke, ‘Friedrich Althoﬀ : A Great Figure in Higher Education Policy in 
Germany’, Minerva 29 (1991), 269–93, at 272.
55. Axtell, Wisdom’s Workshop, 263.
56. Fournier, Émile Durkheim, 91, 411.
57. Wallerstein, Open the Social Sciences, 34.
58. Pierre Bourdieu, Distinction (1979: English translation, London 1984); idem., Homo 
Academicus (1984: English translation, Cambridge 1988).
59. P. Boardman, Th e Worlds of Patrick Geddes: Biologist, Town Planner, Re-Educator, Peace-
Warrior (London, 1978), 1; Israel Zangwill, ‘Introduction’ to Amelia Defries, Th e Interpreter: 
Geddes, the Man and his Gospel (London, 1927), 10.
60. Th e acquaintance was the planner Patrick Abercrombie. Paddy Kitchen, A Most Unsettling 
Person: An Introduction to the Ideas and Life of Patrick Geddes (London, 1975), 237.
61. Lewis Mumford, Sketches from Life: Th e Autobiography of Lewis Mumford (New York, 1982), 
153.


300
NOTES to pp. 142–7
62. Quoted in Davie, Th e Democratic Intellect, ix.
63. Helen Meller, Patrick Geddes: Social Evolutionist and City Planner (London, 1990); idem., 
‘Geddes, Patrick’, ODNB 21, 701–6.
64. Françoise Levie, L’homme qui veut classer le monde (Brussels, 2006); Alex Wright, Cataloguing 
the World: Paul Otlet and the Birth of the Information Age (Oxford, 2014).
65. Marie Neurath and Robert S. Cohen (eds.), Otto Neurath: Empiricism and Sociology 
(Dordrecht, 1973), 14, 46.
66. Otto quoted in Neurath and Cohen, Otto Neurath, 4. His estimate was 13,000 books. His 
wife Marie is quoted ibid., 59.
67. Jordi Cat, Nancy Cartwright and Hasok Chang, ‘Otto Neurath: Politics and the Unity of 
Science’, in Peter Galison and David J. Stump (eds.), Th e Disunity of Science (Stanford, CA, 
1996), 347–69. It seems paradoxical that it takes three authors to discuss one man’s view of 
the unity of knowledge, but the article does illustrate the international co-operation dear to 
its protagonist.
68. Nader Vossoughian, ‘Th e Language of the World Museum: Otto Neurath, Paul Otlet, Le 
Corbusier’, Associations Transnationales (2003), 82–93.
69. Otto Neurath, ‘Uniﬁ ed Science as Encyclopaedic Integration’, in Otto Neurath, Rudolf 
Carnap and Charles Morris (eds.), International Encyclopaedia of Uniﬁ ed Science, vol. 1 
(Chicago, IL, 1955), 1–27.
70. Guy V. Beckwith, ‘Th e Generalist and the Disciplines: Th e Case of Lewis Mumford’, Issues 
in Integrative Studies 14 (1996), 7–28. Mumford became increasingly critical of Geddes, as is 
clear from his article ‘Th e Disciple’s Rebellion’, Encounter (September, 1966), 11–20.
71. Quoted in Donald L. Miller, Lewis Mumford: A Life (New York, 1989), 163.
72. Ibid., 427, quoting from the Mumford papers; Lewis Mumford, Th e Myth of the Machine 
(1966), 16–17.
73. Ibid., 16.
74. Allen Davis, ‘Lewis Mumford: Man of Letters and Urban Historian’, Journal of Urban History 
19 (1993), 123–31, at 123. Cf. Th omas P. Hughes and Agatha Hughes (eds.), Lewis Mumford: 
Public Intellectual (New York, 1990).
75. Norman and Jean Mackenzie, Th e Time Traveller: Th e Life of H. G. Wells (London, 1973), 41, 
402–3.
76. Nicholas Murray, Aldous Huxley: A Biography (London, 2003), 171.
77. Ibid., 127, 161.
78. Stefan Collini, Absent Minds: Intellectuals in Britain (Oxford, 2008), 458.
79. Interview with Borges, cited in Jaime Alazraki, Borges and the Kabbalah (Cambridge, 1988), 5.
80. My thanks to my friend Steven Boldy for comments on the draft of this section. Cf. his 
Companion to Jorge Luis Borges (Woodbridge, 2009).
81. Borges, ‘An Autobiographical Essay’, in Th e Aleph and Other Stories (London, 1971), 203–60, 
at 245.
82. Iván Almeida, ‘Borges and Peirce, on Abduction and Maps’, Semiotica 140 (2002), 113–31, 
22, and, more generally, Alfonso de Toro (ed.), Jorge Luis Borges: Ciencia y Filosofía 
(Hildesheim, 2007), and Guillermo Martínez, Borges and Mathematics (West Lafayette, IN, 
2012).
83. Mark Krupnick, ‘George Steiner’s Literary Journalism’, New England Review 15 (1993), 
157–67, at 157.
84. It was the novelist and critic Antonia Byatt who called Steiner a ‘Renaissance man’. On 
Steiner as a ‘monster’ of learning, see Guido Almansi, ‘Th e Triumph of the Hedgehog’, in 
Nathan A. Scott Jr. and Ronald A. Sharp (eds.), Reading George Steiner (Baltimore, MD, 
1994), 58–73, at 60.
85. Robert Boyers, ‘Steiner as Cultural Critic’, in Scott and Sharp, Reading George Steiner, 
14–42.
86. George Steiner, Errata: An Examined Life (New Haven, CT, 1997), 278.
87. Quoted in Daniel Schreiber, Susan Sontag: A Biography (2007: English translation, Evanston, 
IL, 2014), 196, 153.


301
NOTES to pp. 147–54
 88. Ibid., 15.
 89. Susan Sontag, Against Interpretation (New York, 1966), 11, 88, 93ﬀ , 299.
 90. All the same, Sontag often approached photography through literature. Her essay ‘America, 
Seen Th rough Photographs, Darkly’, begins with Walt Whitman and later refers to 
Stéphane Mallarmé, Paul Valéry, Hart Crane, Herman Melville, Marcel Proust, Th omas 
Mann, J. G. Ballard, Th omas Hardy, William Carlos Williams and D. H. Lawrence.
 91. Schreiber, Susan Sontag, 111–12.
 92. Donald T. Campbell, ‘Ethnocentrism of Disciplines and the Fish-Scale Model of 
Omniscience’, in Muzafa Sherif and Carolyn W. Sherif (eds.), Interdisciplinary Relationships 
in the Social Sciences (Boston, MA, 1969), 328–48.
 93. Max Weber to Robert Liefmann (1920), quoted in Guenther Roth and Wolfgang 
Schluchter, Max Weber’s Vision of History (Berkeley, CA, 1984), 120.
 94. Peter Ghosh, Max Weber and the Protestant Ethic: Twin Histories (Oxford, 2014), 35.
 95. Cynthia Kerman, Creative Tension: Th e Life and Th ought of Kenneth Boulding (Ann Arbor, 
MI, 1974), quotations at 6, 8, 43; Deborah Hammond, Th e Science of Synthesis (Boulder, 
CO, 2003), 197–241.
 96. Leo Rosten, ‘Harold Lasswell: A Memoir’, in Arnold A. Rogow (ed.), Politics, Personality 
and Social Science in the 20th Century (Chicago, IL, 1969), 1–13.
 97. Quoted in Steven A. Peterson, ‘Lasswell, Harold Dwight’, in Glenn H. Utter and Charles 
Lockhart (eds.), American Political Scientists: A Dictionary (2nd edn, Westport, CT, 2002), 
228–30.
 98. From the huge secondary literature on Foucault, see Didier Eribon, Michel Foucault (1989: 
English translation, Cambridge, MA, 1991); Alan Megill, ‘Th e Reception of Foucault by 
Historians’, Journal of the History of Ideas 48 (1987), 117–41; Moya Lloyd and Andrew 
Tucker (eds.), Th e Impact of Michel Foucault on the Social Sciences and Humanities 
(Basingstoke, 1997); Jeremy W. Crampton and Stuart Elden (eds.), Space, Knowledge and 
Power: Foucault and Geography (Basingstoke, 2007); Ben Golder and Peter Fitzpatrick 
(eds.), Foucault and Law (Farnham, 2010).
 99. Egon S. Pearson, Karl Pearson: An Appreciation of Some Aspects of his Life and Work 
(Cambridge, 1938); Churchill Eisenhart, ‘Pearson, Karl’, DSB 10, 447–73; Joanne Woiak, 
‘Pearson, Karl’, ODNB 43, 331–5.
100. Nathan Reingold, ‘Weaver, Warren’, ANB 22, 838–41; Robert E. Kohler, Partners in 
Science: Foundations and Natural Scientists, 1900–1945 (Chicago, IL, 1991), 265–302.
101. Giuseppe Armocida and Gaetana S. Rigo, ‘Mantegazza, Paolo’, DBI 69, 172–5.
102. Fabio Dei, ‘Pitré, Giuseppe’, DBI 84, 293–7.
103. Giuseppe Armocida, ‘Lombroso, Cesare’, DBI 65, 548–53; Mary Gibson, Born to Crime 
(Westport, CT, 2002).
104. Fiorenzo Monati, ‘Pareto, Vilfredo’, DBI 81, 341–7. G. Eisermann, Vilfredo Pareto 
(Tübingen, 1987); Bernard Valade, Pareto: la naissance d’une autre sociologie (Paris, 1990).
105. Paul Lazarsfeld, ‘Notes on the History of Quantiﬁ cation in Sociology’, Isis 52 (1961), 
277–333; Kevin Donnelly, Adolphe Quételet, Social Physics and the Average Men of Science 
(Pittsburgh, PA, 2015).
106. Tarde’s reputation, long eclipsed by Durkheim’s, is currently undergoing a revival. See 
Elihu Katz, ‘Rediscovering Gabriel Tarde’, Political Communication 23 (2006), 263–70.
107. A comment made when Simmel was considered for a chair in philosophy in Heidelberg. 
He was not appointed. David Frisby, Georg Simmel (1984: revised edn, London, 2002), 31.
108. Cliﬀ ord H. Scott, Lester Frank Ward (Boston, MA, 1976); Laurel N. Tanner, ‘Ward, Lester 
Frank’, ANB 22, 641–3.
109. Alfred Glucksmann, ‘Norbert Elias on his Eightieth Birthday’, prefaced to Peter 
Gleichmann, Johan Goudsblom and Hermann Korte (eds.), Human Figurations: Essays 
for/Aufsätze für Norbert Elias (Amsterdam, 1977). My thanks to Stephen Mennell for this 
reference.
110. Norbert Elias, ‘Scientiﬁ c Establishments’(1982, rpr. in his Collected Works, vol. 14, Dublin, 
2009), 107–60). Cf. Stephen Mennell, Norbert Elias (Oxford, 1989); Dennis Smith, 


302
NOTES to pp. 154–60
Norbert Elias and Modern Social Th eory (Cambridge, 2001); Florence Delmotte, Norbert 
Elias, la civilisation et l’Etat: enjeux épistémologiques et politiques d’une sociologie historique 
(Brussels, 2007); Marc Joly, Devenir Norbert Elias (Paris, 2012).
111. Woodruﬀ  Smith, ‘Wilhelm Wundt: Völkerpsychologie and Experimental Pyschology’, in 
Politics and the Sciences of Culture (New York, 1991), 120–8.
112. James quoted in Horst Gundlach, ‘William James and the Heidelberg Fiasco’, Journal of 
Psychology and Cognition (2017), 58. Cf. Gerald E. Myers, William James (New Haven, CT, 
1986).
113. Robert A. Nye, Th e Origins of Crowd Psychology: Gustave Le Bon and the Crisis of Mass 
Democracy in the Th ird Republic (Beverly Hills, CA, 1975); Benoît Marpeau, Gustave Le 
Bon: parcours d’un intellectuel, 1841–1931 (Paris, 2000).
114. Peter Amacher, ‘Freud, Sigmund’, DSB 5, 171–83, at 173; Oliver Sachs, ‘Th e Other Road: 
Freud as Neurologist’, Th e River of Consciousness (London, 2017), 79–100, at 79.
115. Frank J. Sulloway, Freud, Biologist of the Mind (1979, 2nd edn, Cambridge, MA 1992); Joel 
Whitebook, Freud: An Intellectual Biography (Cambridge, 2017).
116. Marcel Fournier, Marcel Mauss (1994: English translation, Princeton, NJ, 2006), 92.
117. Douglas Cole, Franz Boas: Th e Early Years, 1858–1906 (Seattle, WA, 1999); Ned Blackhawk 
and Isaiah L. Wilner (eds.), Indigenous Visions: Rediscovering the World of Franz Boas (New 
Haven, CT, 2018).
118. Herbert J. Fleure, ‘Haddon, Alfred’, ODNB 24, 411–12.
119. Michael Bevan and Jeremy MacClancy, ‘Rivers, William Halse Rivers’, ODNB 47, 48–9.
120. Robert Ackerman, J. G. Frazer: His Life and Work (Cambridge, 1987); idem., ‘Frazer, Sir 
James George’, ODNB 20, 892–3.
121. George Gordon, Andrew Lang (Oxford, 1928), 11.
122. George Gordon, ‘Lang, Andrew’, DNB 1912–21, 319–23; A. De Cocq, Andrew Lang 
(Tilburg, 1968); William Donaldson, ‘Lang, Andrew’, ODNB 32, 453–6.
123. Bernhard Maier, William Robertson Smith (Tübingen, 2009), 5, 243.
124. Th omas O. Beidelman, W. Robertson Smith and the Sociological Study of Religion (Chicago, 
IL, 1974); Henry R. Sefton, ‘Smith, William Robertson’, ODNB 51, 385–6.
125. Norbert Wiener, Ex-Prodigy (1953: new edn, Cambridge, MA 1964), and I Am a 
Mathematician (1956: new edn, Cambridge, MA, 1964); Leone Montagnini, Le armonie 
del disordine: Norbert Wiener matematico-ﬁ losofo del ‘900 (Venice, 2005).
126. Leon Harmon, quoted in Pamela McCorduck, Machines Who Th ink: A Personal Enquiry 
into the History and Prospects of Artiﬁ cial Intelligence (Natick, MA, 2004), 67.
127. William Aspray, John von Neumann and the Origins of Modern Computing (Cambridge, 
MA, 1990), 1.
128. Norman Macrae, John von Neumann: Th e Scientiﬁ c Genius who Pioneered the Modern 
Computer, Game Th eory, Nuclear Deterrence and Much More (New York, 1992); Giorgio 
Israel and Ana Millán Gasca, Th e World as a Mathematical Game: John von Neumann and 
20th-Century Science (Basel, 2000).
129. Jimmy Soni and Rob Goodman, A Mind at Play: How Claude Shannon Invented the 
Information Age (New York, 2017).
130. Andrew Hodges, Alan Turing: Th e Enigma (London, 1983); David Leavitt, Th e Man Who 
Knew Too Much: Alan Turing and the Invention of the Computer (London, 2006); George 
Dyson, Turing’s Cathedral: Th e Origins of the Digital Universe (London, 2012).
131. Th is remarkable man does not appear to have been the subject of a full biography. For a 
short account, see John Parascandola, ‘Henderson, Lawrence Joseph’, DSB 6, 260–2.
132. Mark Davidson, Uncommon Sense: Th e Life and Th ought of Ludwig Von Bertalanﬀ y (Los 
Angeles, CA, 1983); cf. Hammond, Th e Science of Synthesis.
133. Quoted in Hammond, Th e Science of Synthesis, 157.
134. Quoted in Davidson, Uncommon Sense, 18.
135. Beverley Kent, Charles S. Peirce: Logic and the Classiﬁ cation of the Sciences (Montreal, 1987); 
Paul J. Croce, ‘Peirce, Charles Sanders’, ANB 17, 252–4; Christopher Hookway, ‘Peirce, 
Charles Sanders’, in Edward Craig (ed.), Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 7, 269–84.


303
NOTES to pp. 161–7
136. Daniel Armstrong and C. H. van Schooneveld (eds.), Roman Jakobson: Echoes of his 
Scholarship (Lisse, 1977), v, 1.
137. Roman Jakobson, ‘Preface’ to Selected Writings, vol. 4 (Th e Hague, 1966).
138. Roman Jakobson and Petr Bogatyrev, ‘Folklore as a Special Form of Creation’ (1929: repr. 
in Selected Writings, vol. 4, 1–15).
139. Elmar Holenstein, ‘Jakobson’s Philosophical Background’, in Krystina Pomorska et al. 
(eds.), Language, Poetry and Politics (Amsterdam, 1987), 15–31.
140. José Marcos-Ortega, ‘Roman Jakobson precursor de la neuropsicología cognitiva’, in 
Mónica Mansour and Julieta Haidar (eds.), La imaginación y la inteligencia en el lenguaje: 
Homenaje a Roman Jakobson (Mexico City, 1996), 161–76.
141. Roman Jakobson, ‘Two Aspects of Language and Two Aspects of Aphasic Disturbances’ 
(1956: repr. in Roman Jakobson, Selected Writings, vol. 2 (Th e Hague, 1971), 239–59.
142. Richard Bradford, Roman Jakobson: Life, Language, Art (London, 1994), 129–42.
143. Edmund Leach, ‘Roman Jakobson and Social Anthropology’, in the collective volume A 
Tribute to Roman Jakobson (Berlin, 1983), 10–16; Holenstein, ‘Philosophical Background’, 
17.
144. Roland Barthes, Système de la Mode (Paris, 1967); idem., L’empire des signes (Paris, 1970). 
On him, Louis-Jean Calvet, Roland Barthes: A Biography (1990: English translation, 
Bloomington, IN, 1994).
145. Quoted in Sandro Montalto (ed.), Umberto Eco: l’uomo che sapeva troppo (Pisa, 2005), 215. 
In fact, Eco did not approve of acquiring information for its own sake, although he doubt-
less relished the allusion in the title of this collection to Alfred Hitchcock’s Th e Man Who 
Knew Too Much.
146. Peter Bondanella, Umberto Eco and the Open Text (Cambridge, 1997); Michael Caesar, 
Umberto Eco: Philosophy, Semiotics and the Work of Fiction (Cambridge, 1999).
147. Avril Pyman, Pavel Florensky, a Quiet Genius: Th e Tragic and Extraordinary Life of Russia’s 
Leonardo da Vinci (New York, 2010). I should like to thank Robin Milner-Gulland for 
telling me, years ago, about Florensky’s work.
148. William T. Scott and Martin X. Moleski, Michael Polanyi: Scientist and Philosopher (Oxford, 
2005): Mary Jo Nye, Michael Polanyi and his Generation (Chicago, IL, 2011).
149. Maurice Goldsmith, Joseph Needham: 20th-Century Renaissance Man (Paris, 1995).
150. Needham’s collaborator Wang Ling, quoted in Goldsmith, Joseph Needham, 136. Cf. Simon 
Winchester, Bomb, Book and Compass: Joseph Needham and the Great Secrets of China 
(London, 2008).
151. Goldsmith’s interviews with Needham, quoted in Joseph Needham, 55, 45. On the 
‘Needham Question’, Nathan Sivin, ‘Why the Scientiﬁ c Revolution Did Not Take Place in 
China – or Didn’t It?’, Chinese Science 5 (1982), 45–66.
152. David Lipset, Gregory Bateson: Legacy of a Scientist (Boston, MA, 1980), 115. Cf. Peter 
Harries-Jones, A Recursive Vision: Ecological Understanding and Gregory Bateson (Toronto, 
1995).
153. Robert W. Rieber (ed.), Th e Individual, Communication and Society: Essays in Memory of 
Gregory Bateson (Cambridge, 1989), 2.
154. Lipset, Gregory Bateson, 184–238.
155. Ibid., 180. On the Macy conferences, see chapter 8 below.
156. Harries-Jones, Recursive Vision, 9.
157. Letter to Sigmund Koch, quoted in Hunter Crowther-Heyck, Herbert A. Simon: Th e 
Bounds of Reason in Modern America (Baltimore, MD, 2006), 312.
158. Ha-Joon Chang, 23 Th ings Th ey Don’t Tell You about Capitalism (London, 2011), 173.
159. Herbert Simon, Models of My Life (New York, 1991), 189.
160. Michel de Certeau: La prise de parole: pour une nouvelle culture (Paris, 1968); idem., with 
Jacques Revel and Dominique Julia, Une politique de la langue: la Révolution Française et les 
patois (Paris, 1975).
161. Richard Creath, ‘Th e Unity of Science: Carnap, Neurath and Beyond’, in Peter Galison 
and David J. Stump, Th e Disunity of Science (Stanford, CA, 1996), 158–69, at 161.


304
NOTES to pp. 168–72
162. Fournier, Émile Durkheim, 188, 206, 208.
163. Cynthia Kernan, Creative Tension: Th e Life and Th ought of Kenneth Boulding (Ann Arbor, 
MI, 1974), 22.
164. Berlin quoted in Mary Jo Nye, Michael Polanyi and His Generation (Chicago, IL, 2011), 
304.
165. Andrew Hodges, Alan Turing, the Enigma (1983: new edn, London, 2012), 411.
166. Miller, Lewis Mumford, 532.
167. Reported by Carlo Ginzburg in Maria Lúcia G. Pallares-Burke, Th e New History: Confessions 
and Comparisons (Cambridge, 2002), 209.
168. www.critical-theory.com/noam-chomsky-calls-jacques-lacan-a-charlatan, accessed 3 Aug ust 
2017.
169. Quoted in Michael Moran, Th e Metaphyiscal Imagination (Peterborough, 2018), 660–1.
170. Blake Morrison, ‘Too Clever by Half: George Steiner’, Independent, 15 October 1994; Jeet 
Heer, ‘George Steiner’s Phony Learning’, sans everything, 16 May 2009; https://www.wsws.
org/en/articles/2010/11/zize-n12.html, accessed 3 August 2017.
171. Stuart Elden, Sloterdijk Now (Cambridge, 2012), 3.
172. Stuart Elden (ed.), Sloterdijk Now (Cambridge, 2011); Jamil Khader and Molly Anne 
Rothenberg (eds.), Žižek Now (Cambridge, 2013).
173. Rebecca Mead, ‘Th e Marx Brother: How a Philosopher from Slovenia Became an 
International Star’, New Yorker, 5 May 2005.
174. George S. Gordon, ‘Lang, Andrew’, DNB 1912–21, 319–23, at 322; idem., Andrew Lang 
(Oxford, 1928), 10. Robert R. Marett, who worked in this ﬁ eld himself, called Lang ‘a 
great anthropologist’ (Th e Raw Material of Religion, Oxford, 1929, 3).
175. Max Weber, Th e Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (1904: English translation, 
London, 1930), 32.
CHAPTER 6
 1. Josh Clark, ‘How Curiosity Works’, https://science.howstuﬀ works.com › Science › Life 
Science › Evolution
 2. Peter Miller, ‘Peiresc in Africa’, in Marc Fumaroli (ed.), Les premiers siècles de la république 
européenne des lettres (Paris, 2005), 493–525, at 501.
 3. Pierre-Daniel Huet, Commentarius (Th e Hague, 1718), 15; Huetiana (Paris, 1722), quoted 
in Elena Rapetti, Pierre-Daniel Huet: erudizione, ﬁ losoﬁ a, apologetica (Milan, 1999), 5n.
 4. Richard S. Westfall, Never at Rest: A Biography of Isaac Newton (Cambridge, 1980), 103.
 5. Benjamin Franklin, Autobiography, ed. J. A. Leo Lemay and P. M. Zall (New York, 1986), 9.
 6. Alexander von Humboldt, Cosmos (English translation, New York, 1858), preface; Jean-
Louis Benoît, Tocqueville (Paris, 2005), vol. 1, p. 818.
 7. Hippolyte Taine, Correspondance, 4 vols. (Paris, 1902–6), vol. 1, 56.
 8. Peter Gay, Freud: A Life for Our Time (London, 1988), 13–14, 25.
 9. Bertrand Russell, Autobiography, 3 vols. (London, 1967–9), vol. 1, 13.
10. Fernando Ortiz, La africanía de la música folklorica de Cuba (Havana, 1950), xiii.
11. Anna Rosa Antognazza, Leibniz: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford, 2016), 6.
12. Edmund Hector, quoted in Robert DeMaria Jr., Th e Life of Samuel Johnson (Oxford, 1993), 8.
13. Lewis Mumford, Th e Condition of Man (1944), 383.
14. George Dyson, Turing’s Cathedral (London, 2012), 44.
15. Quoted in Gareth Dale, Karl Polanyi: A Life on the Left (New York, 2016), 8.
16. Lewis M. Dabney, Edmund Wilson: A Life (New York, 2005), xii.
17. Quoted in Didier Eribon, Michel Foucault (1989: English translation, Cambridge, MA 
1991), 9.
18. ‘l’intérêt passioné . . . qu’il porte à toutes choses’: quoted in François Dosse, Michel de 
Certeau: Le marcheur blessé (Paris, 2002), 176.
19. Daniel Horowitz, ‘David Riesman: From Law to Social Criticism’, Buﬀ alo Law Review 58 
(2010), 1,005–29, at 1,012.


305
NOTES to pp. 172–7
20. ‘ragionando con amici e tra lo strepito de’suoi ﬁ gliuoli, come ha uso di sempre o leggere o 
scrivere o meditare’: Giambattista Vico, Opere, ed. Roberto Parenti (Naples, 1972), 384.
21. Klári von Neumann, quoted in Dyson, Turing’s Cathedral, 54.
22. Mary Somerville, Personal Recollections (London, 1873), 164.
23. Andrew Clark, Th e Life and Times of Anthony Wood, 3 vols. (Oxford, 1891–4), vol. 1, 282.
24. John Aubrey, Brief Lives, ed. Oliver L. Dick (London, 1960), 20.
25. Westfall, Never at Rest, 103, 191.
26. Robert Shackleton, Montesquieu: A Critical Biography (Oxford, 1961), 77–8.
27. Pierre Boutroux and Etienne Toulouse, quoted in Jeremy Gray, Henri Poincaré: A Scientiﬁ c 
Biography (Princeton, NJ, 2013), 25.
28. Dale, Karl Polanyi, 216–17.
29. Hector, quoted in DeMaria, Th e Life of Samuel Johnson, 8.
30. Julie de Lespinasse, quoted in Keith M. Baker, Condorcet: From Natural Philosophy to Social 
Mathematics (Chicago, IL, 1975), 25.
31. Sarah Lee, Memoirs of Baron Cuvier (London, 1833), 9, 11.
32. George O. Trevelyan, Life and Letters of Lord Macaulay (1876: rpr. Oxford, 1978), vol. 1, 48, 
and vol. 2, 142–3, citing Macaulay’s friend and editor, the polymath Francis Jeﬀ rey.
33. Ferdinand Denis, quoted in A. G. Lehmann, Sainte-Beuve (Oxford, 1962), 233.
34. Quotations from Dyson, Turing’s Cathedral, 41, and Pamela McCorduck (the interviewer), 
in Machines Who Th ink (San Francisco, CA 1979), 67.
35. Maurice Goldsmith, Joseph Needham: Twentieth-Century Renaissance Man (Paris, 1995), 3, 
137.
36. Foxcroft, Supplement, 456.
37. Th e French geologist Jules Marcou, quoted in Edward Lurie, Louis Agassiz: A Life in Science 
(Chicago, IL, 1960), 18.
38. Trevelyan, Life and Letters, vol. 1, 48, 50.
39. James Bryce, quoted in Bernhard Maier, William Robertson Smith (Tübingen, 2009), 202; 
Boulding quoted in Deborah Hammond, Th e Science of Synthesis (Boulder, CO, 2003), 154.
40. Steve J. Heims, Th e Cybernetic Group (Cambridge, MA, 1991), 44.
41. Wang Ling in Goldsmith, Joseph Needham, 141.
42. Quoted in Th omas Hager, Force of Nature: A Life of Linus Pauling (New York, 1995), 53.
43. Nancy G. Slack, G. Evelyn Hutchinson and the Invention of Modern Ecology (New Haven, CT, 
2010), 320–33.
44. McCorduck, Machines Who Th ink, 86.
45. Quoted in Peter Brent, Charles Darwin (1981: new edn, London, 1983), 300; McCorduck, 
Machines Who Th ink, 154.
46. Nathan Sivin, ‘Shen Gua’, Science in Ancient China: Researches and Reﬂ ections (Aldershot, 
1995), vol. III, 53.
47. Johann Gottfried Herder, ‘Vom Erkennen und Empﬁ nden der menschlichen Seele’, in 
Werke, eds. Jürgen Brummack and Martin Bollacher (Frankfurt, 1985–2000), vol. 4, 330; 
Max Black, Models and Metaphors (Ithaca, NY, 1962); Mary B. Hesse, Models and Analogies 
in Science (London, 1963).
48. C. Scott Littleton, Th e Comparative Indo-European Mythology of Georges Dumézil 
(Bloomington, IN, 1964).
49. Donald A. Schön, Displacement of Concepts (London, 1963).
50. Cosimo Bartoli, Giordano Bruno, Celio Calcagnini, Erasmus Darwin, Kenelm Digby, 
Tommaso Campanella, Hugo Grotius, Albert von Haller, Constantijn Huygens, Samuel 
Johnson, William Jones, Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos, Mikhail Lomonosov, Lorenzo 
Magalotti, Pedro Peralta, Francesco Redi, Carlos de Sigüenza y Góngora, Rudjer Bošković.
51. Andrés Bello, Jorge Luis Borges, Aldous and Julian Huxley, Kenneth Boulding, Jacob 
Bronowski, Kenneth Burke, Roman Jakobson, Andrew Lang and Georges Bataille.
52. Novels were also published by Albrecht von Haller, Germaine de Staël, George Henry Lewes, 
Karl Pearson, Siegfried Kracauer, Kenneth Burke, Ludwig von Bertalanﬀ y, Gilberto Freyre, 
Roger Caillois, Darcy Ribeiro and Susan Sontag.


306
NOTES to pp. 178–81
53. William Lloyd, sermon at the funeral of John Wilkins, quoted in Barbara J. Shapiro, John 
Wilkins (Berkeley, CA, 1969), 214, 312.
54. Basnage quoted in Hubert Bost, Pierre Bayle (Paris, 2006), 518.
55. Foxcroft, Supplement, 455.
56. Jacques Roger, Buﬀ on: A Life in Natural History (1989: English translation, Ithaca, NY, 
1997), 24, 28.
57. Paul R. Sweet, Wilhelm von Humboldt: A Biography, 2 vols. (Columbus, OH, 1978–80), vol. 
1, 160.
58. Karl Lehmann, Th omas Jeﬀ erson, American Humanist (Chicago, IL, 1947), 13; Lurie, Louis 
Agassiz, 24.
59. Quoted in Fiona MacCarthy, William Morris (London, 1994), 499, 523.
60. McCorduck, Machines Who Th ink, 131.
61. Bruce L. Smith, ‘Th e Mystifying Intellectual History of Harold D. Lasswell’, in Arnold A. 
Rogow (ed.), Politics, Personality and Social Science in the 20th Century (Chicago, IL, 1969), 
41–105, at 44.
62. Berr’s friend Lucien Febvre, quoted in Agnès Biard, Dominique Bourel and Eric Brian (eds.), 
Henri Berr et la culture du XXe siècle (Paris, 1997), 11.
63. Mumford, Condition of Man, 383.
64. Mark Elvin, ‘Introduction’ to a symposium on the work of Joseph Needham, Past and Present 
87 (1980), 17–20, at 18; Christopher Cullen, in Needham, Science and Civilization in 
China, vol. 7, part 2, xvi.
65. David Rieﬀ , quoted in Daniel Schreiber, Susan Sontag (2007: English translation, Evanston, 
IL, 2014), 55.
66. Roger, Buﬀ on, 28.
67. MacCarthy, William Morris, 262, 562.
68. Wang Ling in Goldsmith, Joseph Needham, 135; Marie Neurath and Robert S. Cohen (eds.), 
Otto Neurath, Empiricism and Sociology (Dordrecht, 1973), 13, 28, 52, 59, 64.
69. Hager, Force of Nature, 139.
70. Pamela H. Smith, Th e Business of Alchemy: Science and Culture in the Holy Roman Empire 
(Princeton, NJ, 1994), 14.
71. Quoted in MacCarthy, William Morris, 230.
72. Umberto Eco, ‘In Memory of Giorgio Prodi’, in Leda G. Jaworksi (ed.), Lo studio Bolognese 
(Stony Brook, NY, 1994), 77. As for Eco himself, I can oﬀ er personal testimony about the 
speed with which he moved. I was once on the same panel as Eco at a conference in Italy. He 
arrived just in time for his paper, shook hands with each member of the panel, delivered his 
paper, shook hands again and left – presumably for another conference!
73. To Hugh O’Neill, quoted in Scott and Moleski, Polanyi, 193.
74. Quoted in Robert Olby, ‘Huxley, Julian S.’, ODNB 29, 92–5, at 93.
75. Robert W. Rieber, ‘In Search of the Impertinent Question: An Overview of Bateson’s Th eory 
of Communication’, in Rieber (ed.), Th e Individual, Communication and Society: Essays in 
Memory of Gregory Bateson (Cambridge, 1989), 1–28, at 2.
76. George Steiner, Errata: An Examined Life (New Haven, CT, 1997), 276.
77. Edward Said, Out of Place: A Memoir (London, 1999).
78. Herbert Simon, Models of My Life (1991: 2nd edn, Cambridge, MA, 1996), ix.
79. George C. Homans, Coming to My Senses: Th e Autobiography of a Sociologist (New Brunswick, 
1984), 164.
80. Johann Georg Graevius, preface to Junius, De pictura (Rotterdam, 1694).
81. Neumann’s daughter Marina, quoted in Dyson, Turing’s Cathedral, 55.
82. Linda Gardiner, ‘Women in Science’, in Samia I. Spencer (ed.), French Women and the Age of 
Enlightenment (Bloomington, IN, 184), 181–93, at 189; Judith P. Zinsser, Émilie du Châtelet: 
Daring Genius of the Enlightenment (New York, 2007).
83. Laurel N. Tanner, ‘Ward, Lester Frank’, ANB 22, 641–3.
84. Leonard Warren, Joseph Leidy: Th e Last Man Who Knew Everything (New Haven, CT, 1998), 5.
85. Karl Pearson’s autobiography, quoted in E. S. Pearson, Karl Pearson (London, 1938), 2.


307
NOTES to pp. 181–6
 86. Russell, Autobiography, vol. 1, 71.
 87. Simon, Models, 112, 200, 238.
 88. Quoted in Hager, Force of Nature, 55.
 89. Klára von Neumann, preface to John von Neumann, Th e Computer and the Brain (New 
Haven, CT, 1958).
 90. Wang Ling in Goldsmith, Joseph Needham, 134, 137, 143.
 91. Eribon, Foucault, 13, 325; Stuart Elden, Foucault’s Last Decade (Cambridge, 2016), 1.
 92. Th omas O. Beidelman, W. Robertson Smith and the Sociological Study of Religion (Chicago, 
IL, 1974), 11.
 93. Wilhelm Ostwald, Th e Autobiography (1926: English translation, n.p., 2017), 202.
 94. Frederick W. Maitland, Life and Letters of Leslie Stephen (London, 1906), 374, quoted in 
Alan Bell, ‘Stephen, Leslie’, ODNB 52, 447–57, at 454.
 95. H. S. Jones, Intellect and Character in Victorian England: Mark Pattison and the Invention of 
the Don (Cambridge, 2007), 150.
 96. Anthony D. Nuttall, Dead from the Waist Down: Scholars and Scholarship in Literature and 
the Popular Imagination (New Haven, CT, 2003), 142.
 97. R. H. Robbins, ‘Browne, Th omas’, ODNB 8, 215.
 98. Westfall, Never at Rest, 192.
 99. Quoted in Sweet, Wilhelm von Humboldt, vol. 2, 372.
100. Quoted in Günter Buttmann, Th e Shadow of the Telescope: A Biography of John Herschel 
(1965: English translation, New York, 1970), 14.
101. Charles Darwin, letter to his sister Susan, 1836, in Life and Letters of Charles Darwin, 2 
vols. (London, 1887), 266.
102. Quoted in Brent, Charles Darwin, 209.
103. Annette Vowinckel, ‘“Ich fürchte mich vor den Organisationslustigen”: Ein Dialog 
zwischen Hans Blumenberg und Reinhart Koselleck’, Merkur 68 no.6, 546–50, at 548.
104. Joachim Radkau, Max Weber (2005: English translation, Cambridge 2009), 122–4, 145.
105. Mackenzie, Time Traveller, 46, 329, 338.
106. Montesquieu quoted in Shackleton, Montesquieu, 234; Young quoted in Gurney, 42; 
Dewey quoted in Wayne Wiegand, Irrepressible Reformer, 192.
107. Gerald Toomer, John Selden (2 vols., Oxford 2009), 490.
108. Edmund Hector, quoted in John Hawkins, Life of Samuel Johnson, 7.
109. Simon, Models, 110; Homans, Coming to My Senses, 57.
110. Norbert Elias, Über Sich Selbst (Frankfurt, 1990), 138.
111. Young, letter to Gurney, quoted in Robinson, 183.
112. ‘Henry Holorenshaw’, ‘Th e Making of an Honorary Taoist’, in Mikuláš Teich and Robert 
Young (eds.) Changing Perspectives in the History of Science (London, 1973), 1–20, at 12.
113. Maria Lúcia G. Pallares-Burke, Th e New History: Confessions and Comparisons (Cambridge, 
2002), 186.
114. Heims, Th e Cybernetic, 37, 45.
115. McCorduck, Machines Who Th ink, 121.
116. Isaiah Berlin, Th e Hedgehog and the Fox: An Essay on Tolstoy’s View of History (London, 
1953). Cf. Stephen J. Gould, Th e Hedgehog, the Fox and the Magister’s Pox (London, 2003).
117. Rieber, ‘In Search of the Impertinent Question’, 3.
118. Constantin Fasolt, ‘Hermann Conring and the Republic of Letters’, in Herbert Jaumann 
(ed.), Die Europäische Gelehrtenrepublik im Zeitalter des Konfessionalismus (Wiesbaden, 
2001), 141–53, at 150; cf. Michael Stolleis, Die Einheit der Wissenschaften – zum 300. 
Todestag von Hermann Conring (Helmstedt, 1982).
119. Pyman, Pavel Florensky, 40, 27; Steven Cassedy, ‘P. A. Florensky and the Celebration of 
Matter’, in Judith D. Kornblatt and Richard F. Gustafson (eds.), Russian Religious Th ought 
(Madison, WI, 1996), 95–111, at 97.
120. Teich and Young, ‘Holorenshaw’, ‘Honorary Taoist’, 2, 19–20.
121. Simon quoted in Hunter Crowther-Heyck, Herbert A. Simon: Th e Bounds of Reason in 
Modern America (Baltimore, MD, 2005), 316.


308
NOTES to pp. 186–94
122. Bronowski’s unpublished autobiographical sketch, quoted by Sheets-Pyenson, ‘Bronowski’, 
834.
123. Marie Jahoda, ‘PFL: Hedgehog or Fox?’, in Robert Merton, James Coleman and Peter 
Rossi (eds.), Qualitative and Quantitative Social Research (Glencoe, IL, 1979), 3–9, at 3.
124. Guido Almansi, ‘Th e Triumph of the Hedgehog’, in Nathan A. Scott Jr. and Ronald A. 
Sharp (eds.), Reading George Steiner (Baltimore, MD, 1994), 58–73.
125. Ginzburg quoted in Pallares-Burke, Th e New History, 194.
126. Vasilii Zubov, Leonardo da Vinci (1961: English translation, Cambridge, MA, 1968), 65; 
Martin Kemp, Leonardo (Oxford, 2011), 4.
127. Kurt-R. Biermann, ‘Humboldt, F. W. H. A. von’, DSB 6, 551.
128. François Dosse, Michel de Certeau: le marcheur blessé (Paris, 2002).
129. Michelle Perrot, ‘Mille manières de braconner’, Le Débat 49 (1988), 117–21.
130. Peter Burke, ‘Th e Art of Re-Interpretation: Michel de Certeau’, Th eoria 100 (2002), 27–37.
131. Michael Hunter, ‘Hooke the Natural Philosopher’, in Jim Bennet et al., London’s Leonardo 
(Oxford, 2003), 105–62, at 151.
132. George Peacock, Life of Th omas Young (London, 1855), 397.
133. Quoted in Eric Hobsbawm, ‘Marx, Karl’, ODNB 37, 57–66, at 60.
134. Quoted by Gay, Freud, from Ernest Jones, Sigmund Freud: Life and Work, vol. 1 (London 
1954), 50.
135. Helen Meller, ‘Geddes, Patrick’, ODNB 21, 706.
136. Richard Creath, ‘Th e Unity of Science: Carnap, Neurath and Beyond’, in Peter Galison 
and David J. Stump (eds.), Th e Disunity of Science: Boundaries, Contexts and Power 
(Stanford, CA, 1996), 158–69, at 161.
137. Scott and Moleski, Polanyi, 208.
138. Dosse, Michel de Certeau, 176.
CHAPTER 7
  1. For speculation about Vico’s knowledge of the ideas of Ibn Khaldun, see Warren E. Gates, 
‘Th e Spread of Ibn Khaldun’s Ideas on Climate and Culture’, Journal of the History of Ideas 
28 (1967), 415–22.
  2. Sue Prideaux, Strindberg: A Life (New Haven, CT, 2012).
  3. Egil Johansson, ‘Literacy Studies in Sweden’, in Johansson (ed.), Literacy and Society in a 
Historical Perspective (Umeå, 1973), 41–65.
  4. Bruno Latour, ‘Centres of Calculation’, Science in Action (Cambridge, MA, 1987) 215–57; 
Christian Jacob (ed.), Lieux de Savoir, 2 vols. (Paris 2007–11); on the Dutch, see Graham 
Gibbs, ‘Th e Role of the Dutch Republic as the Intellectual Entrepôt of Europe in the 17th 
and 18th Centuries’, Bijdragen en Mededelingen betreﬀ ende de geschiedenis der Nederlanden 
86 (1971), 323–49; Karel Davids, ‘Amsterdam as a Centre of Learning in the Dutch 
Golden Age’, in Patrick O’Brien et al. (eds.), Urban Achievement in Early Modern Europe 
(Cambridge, 2001), 305–25.
  5. Th e six are Wower, Holstenius, Lambeck, Placcius, Fabricius and Reimarus. Cf. Johann 
Otto Th iess, Versuch einer Gelehrtengeschichte von Hamburg (Hamburg, 1783).
  6. In chronological order: Sigüenza y Góngora, Sor Juana, Peralta, Alzate, Conceição Veloso, 
Bello, Sarmiento, Ortiz, Reyes, Borges, Freyre, Ribeiro.
  7. Enrico Mario Santi, Fernando Ortiz: contrapunteo y transculturación (Madrid, 2012); Peter 
Burke and Maria Lúcia G. Pallares-Burke, Gilberto Freyre: Social Th eory in the Tropics 
(Oxford, 2008).
  8. Robert K. Merton, ‘Science, Technology and Society in Seventeenth-Century England’, 
Osiris 4 (1938), 360–620; Reijer Hooykaas, ‘Science and Reformation’, Cahiers d’Histoire 
Moderne 3 (1956), 109–38.
  9. Th e nine Jesuit polymaths in the appendix are Suárez, Tesauro, Nieremberg, Riccioli, 
Kircher, Kino, Bošković, Teilhard and Certeau. On Eco, Claudio Paolucci, Umberto Eco 
(Milan, 2016), 40–1.


309
NOTES to pp. 194–203
10. Th e others are Isaac Casaubon, Johann Heinrich Bisterfeld, Herman Conring, Gerard Voss, 
Samuel Pufendorf, Conrad Schurzﬂ eisch, Johann Joachim Becher, John Millar of Glasgow, 
John and William Playfair, Daniel Encontre, Gustav Fechner, Mark Pattison, William 
Robertson Smith, Frank Giddings, Wilhelm Wundt, James G. Miller and Edward Haskell.
11. Friedrich Nietzsche, Der Antichrist (1895), chapter 10.
12. Stefan Müller-Doohm, Habermas: A Biography (2014: English translation, Cambridge, 
2016), 13.
13. Bertrand Russell, Autobiography, 3 vols. (London, 1967–9), vol. 1, 71.
14. Th orstein Veblen, ‘Th e Intellectual Pre-Eminence of Jews in Modern Europe’, Political 
Science Quarterly 34 (1919), 33–42.
15. Norbert Wiener, Ex-Prodigy (New York, 1953), 120.
16. Peter Burke, Exiles and Expatriates in the History of Knowledge (Waltham, MA, 2017).
17. Wiener, Ex-Prodigy, 63; idem., I am a Mathematician (London, 1956), 20; Gerard quoted in 
Deborah Hammond, Th e Science of Synthesis (Boulder, CO, 2003), 147.
18. Cynthia E. Kerman, Creative Tension: Th e Life and Th ought of Kenneth Boulding (Ann Arbor, 
MI, 1974).
19. Andrew Hodges, Andrew Turing: Th e Enigma (1983: 2nd edn, London, 2014), 43; Herbert 
Simon, Models of My Life (New York, 1991), 9, 40.
20. Hans Rudoolf Velten, ‘Die Autodidakten’, in Jutta Held (ed.), Intellektuelle in der Frühe 
Neuzeit (Munich, 2002), 55–81, at 66.
21. Alexander Wood, Th omas Young, Natural Philosopher (Cambridge, 1954), 11.
22. Ibid., 5.
23. Norman and Jeanne Mackenzie, Th e Life of H. G. Wells: Th e Time Traveller (London, 
1987), 47.
24. George C. Homans, Coming to My Senses: Th e Autobiography of a Sociologist (New Brunswick, 
NJ, 1984), 46.
25. Jorge Luis Borges, ‘Autobiographical Essay’, in Th e Aleph (London, 1971), 203–60, 
at 209.
26. Wiener, Ex-Prodigy, 62–3; Otto Neurath, Empiricism and Sociology, eds. Marie Neurath and 
Robert S. Cohen (Dordrecht, 1973), 4, 14, 46.
27. Cassandra Fedele, Laura Cereta, Marie de Gournay, Bathsua Makin, Anna Maria van 
Schurman, Elisabeth Princess Palatine, Margaret Cavendish, Queen Christina, Elena 
Cornaro, Sor Juana, Émilie du Châtelet, Maria Agnesi.
28. Most of this group are happily still alive and so excluded from the list in the appendix.
29. Michael John Gorman, ‘Th e Angel and the Compass: Athanasius Kircher’s Magnetic 
Geography’, in Paula Findlen (ed.), Th e Last Man Who Knew Everything (New York, 2003), 
229–51, at 245.
30. Charles Darwin, notebook, July 1838, ms in Cambridge University Library, https://www.
darwinproject.ac.uk/tags/about-darwin/family-life/darwin-marriage.
31. Ernst Gombrich, Aby Warburg: An Intellectual Biography (Oxford, 1986), 22.
32. Homans, Coming to My Senses, 295.
33. John Aubrey, Brief Lives, ed. Oliver L. Dick (London, 1960), 254.
34. Quoted in Peter Brent, Charles Darwin: A Man of Enlarged Curiosity (London, 1981), 
137.
35. Gerald Toomer, John Selden: A Life in Scholarship, 2 vols. (Oxford, 2009), 332, 447.
36. Detlef Döring, ‘Biographisches zu Samuel von Pufendorf’, in Bodo Geyer and Helmut 
Goerlich (eds.), Samuel Pufendorf und seine Wirkungen bis auf die heutige Zeit (Baden-Baden, 
1996), 23–38, at 27.
37. Russell, Autobiography, vol. 2, 34.
38. Peter F. Drucker, Adventures of a Bystander (London, 1978), 126; on Cécile, see Gareth Dale, 
Karl Polanyi: Th e Limits of the Market (Cambridge, 2010), 15.
39. J. W. Scott, ‘Ogden, Charles Kay’, ODNB 41, 558–9; Richard Storer, ‘Richards, Ivor 
Armstrong’, ODNB 46, 778–81.


310
NOTES to pp. 204–11
40. Michel Surya, Georges Bataille: An Intellectual Biography (1992: English translation, London, 
2002); Alain Bosquet, Roger Caillois (Paris, 1971).
41. On masters and disciples, George Steiner, Lessons of the Masters (Cambridge, 2003), and 
Françoise Waquet, Les enfants de Socrate: ﬁ liation intellectuelle et transmission du savoir, 
XVIIe–XXie siècle (Paris, 2008).
42. Interview with Lewis Mumford, www.patrickgeddestrust.co.uk/LM%20on%20PG%20
BBC%201969.htm, accessed 6 February 2017. Cf. Mumford, ‘Th e Disciple’s Rebellion’, 
cited in Frank G. Novak Jr. (ed.), Lewis Mumford and Patrick Geddes: Th e Correspondence 
(London, 1995).
43. Harriet Wanklyn, Friedrich Ratzel: A Biographical Memoir and Bibliography (Cambridge, 
1961), 7.
44. Mark Davidson, Uncommon Sense: Th e Life and Work of Ludwig von Bertalanﬀ y (Los Angeles, 
CA, 1983), 191.
45. Sten Lindroth, Svensk lärdomshistoria, vol. 1 (Stockholm, 1975), 152–61, 237–49; Håkan 
Håkansson, ‘Alchemy of the Ancient Goths: Johannes Bureus’s Search for the Lost Wisdom 
of Scandinavia’, Early Science and Medicine 17 (2012), 500–22.
46. John Fletcher (ed.), Athanasius Kircher und seine Beziehungen zum gelehrten Europa seiner Zeit 
(Wiesbaden, 1988), 3, 111.
47. Maria Rosa Antognazza, Leibniz: An Intellectual Biography (Cambridge, 2009), 324; Andrea 
Wulf, Th e Invention of Nature: Th e Adventures of Alexander von Humboldt, the Lost Hero of 
Science (London, 2015), 240.
48. Wilhelm Adolf Scribonius moved from the University of Marburg to the gymnasium at 
Korbach. Conrad Samuel Schurzﬂ eisch also taught at Korbach. Teachers at the gymnasium 
at Hamburg, the Johanneum, included Peter Lambeck, Vincent Placcius, Johann Albert 
Fabricius and Hermann Samuel Reimarus.
49. Daniel J. Wilson, Arthur O. Lovejoy and the Quest for Intelligibility (Chapel Hill, NC, 1980), 
186–7.
50. Wanklyn, Friedrich Ratzel, 3.
51. Michael Stolleis, ‘Die Einheit der Wissenschaften: Hermann Conring’, in Stolleis, ed., 
Conring (Berlin, 1983), 11–34. Cf. Alberto Jori, Hermann Conring (1606–1681): Der 
Begründer der deutschen Rechtsgeschichte (Tübingen, 2006).
52. Benoît Marpeau, Gustave Le Bon: parcours d’un intellectuel, 1841–1931 (Paris, 2000); G. 
Armocida and G. S. Rigo, ‘Mantegazza, Paolo’, DBI 69, 172–5.
53. On one kind of renegade, see Peter Burke, ‘Turn or Return? Th e Cultural History of Cultural 
Studies, 1500–2000’, in Mihaela Irimia and Dragoş Ivana (eds.), Literary into Cultural 
History (Bucharest, 2009), 11–29.
54. Bayle, writing in 1681, quoted in Helena H. M. van Lieshout, ‘Th e Library of Pierre Bayle’, 
in Eugenio Canone (ed.), Bibliothecae Selectae da Cusano a Leopardi (Florence, 1993), 
281–97, at 281.
55. Other listed polymaths who were active as librarians were Johannes Bureus and Isaac Voss in 
Stockholm, Marcus Meibom in Stockholm and Copenhagen, Robert Burton at Christ 
Church, Oxford, Daniel Morhof in Kiel, Lucas Holste in France and Rome, Peter Lambeck 
in Vienna, Vincentius Placcius in Padua, Conrad Schurzﬂ eisch in Weimar, Georges Bataille 
in Paris and Daniel Boorstin in Washington.
56. Gordon Stevenson and Judith Kramer-Greene (eds.), Melvil Dewey: Th e Man and the 
Classiﬁ cation (Albany, NY, 1983); Françoise Levie, L’Homme qui voulait classer le monde: Paul 
Otlet et le mundaneum (Brussels, 2006); Alex Wright, Cataloging the World: Paul Otlet and the 
Birth of the Information Age (New York, 2014).
57. Franck Bourdier, ‘Cuvier, Georges’, DSB 3, 521–8, at 524.
58. Samuel Johnson, Dictionary of the English Language (London, 1755), preface.
59. John Clive, Macaulay: Th e Shaping of the Historian (London, 1973), 100.
60. L. Kellner, Alexander von Humboldt and the Organization of International Collaboration 
in Geophysical Research’, Contemporary Physics 1 (1959), 35–48; Kurt-R. Biermann, ‘Alexander 


311
NOTES to pp. 211–18
von Humboldt als Initiator und Organisator internationaler Zusammenarbeit auf 
geophysikalischen Gebiet’, in E. G. Forbes (ed.), Human Implications of Scientiﬁ c Advance 
(Edinburgh, 1978), 126–38; Frank Holl (ed.), Alexander von Humboldt: Netzwerke des Wissens 
(Ostﬁ ldern, 2009); Otmar Ette, Alexander von Humboldt und die Globalisierung (Frankfurt, 
2009), 20.
61. Lazarsfeld’s collaborators included Marie Jahoda (his ﬁ rst wife), Elihu Katz and Robert 
Merton. Needham’s assistants, some of whom pursued academic careers of their own, 
included Lu Gwei-Jen (his second wife), Wang Ling, Gregory Blue, Francesca Bray and 
Toshio Kusamitsu.
62. Simon, Models, 64.
63. Stuart Elden, Foucault’s Last Decade (Cambridge, 2016), 8.
CHAPTER 8
 1. For a general guide, see Robert Frodeman (ed.), Th e Oxford Handbook of Interdisciplinarity 
(Oxford, 2010); for a history, see Harvey J. Graﬀ , Undisciplining Knowledge: Interdisciplinarity 
in the Twentieth Century (Baltimore, MD, 2015).
 2. Roberta Frank, ‘Interdisciplinary: Th e First Half-Century’, in E. G. Stanley and T. F. Hoad 
(eds.), Words (Cambridge, 1988), 91–101.
 3. Leonard S. Reich, Th e Making of American Industrial Research (Cambridge, 1985).
 4. Herbert Simon, Models of My Life (Cambridge, MA, 1991), 170.
 5. Manchester Guardian, 1 January 1901.
 6. Beardley Ruml, ‘Recent Trends in Social Science’, in Leonard D. White (ed.), Th e New Social 
Science (Chicago, IL, 1930); Martin Bulmer and Joan Bulmer, ‘Philanthropy and Social 
Science in the 1920s’, Minerva 19 (1981), 347–407, at 358.
 7. James R. Angell, ‘Yale’s Institute of Human Relations’, Religious Education 24 (1929), 583–8, 
at 585; cf. J. G. Morawski, ‘Organizing Knowledge and Behavior at Yale’s Institute of Human 
Relations’, Isis 77 (1986), 219–42, at 219.
 8. Guy V. Beckwith, ‘Th e Generalist and the Disciplines: Th e Case of Lewis Mumford’, Issues 
in Integrative Studies 14 (1996), 7–28, at 15; Norbert Elias, ‘Scientiﬁ c Establishments’, in 
Elias, Herminio Martins and Richard Whitely (eds.), Scientiﬁ c Establishments and Hierarchies 
(Dordrecht, 1982), 3–69; Simon, Models of My Life, 173.
 9. José Ortega y Gasset, Misión de la universidad (1930, rpr, in his Obras, vol. 4, 4th edn, 
Madrid, 1957), 313–53); Antón Donoso, ‘Th e University Graduate as Learned Ignoramus 
according to Ortega’, in Ortega y Gasset Centennial (Madrid, 1985), 7–18.
10. Donald T. Campbell, ‘Ethnocentrism of Disciplines and the Fish-Scale Model of 
Omniscience’, in Muztafa Sherif and Carolyn W. Sherif (eds.), Interdisciplinary Relationships 
in the Social Sciences (Boston, MA, 1969), 328–48.
11. Andreas Gelz, Tertulia: Literatur und Soziabilität im Spanien des 18. Und 19. Jahrhunderts 
(Frankfurt, 2006); William Clark, ‘Th e Research Seminar’, in Academic Charisma and the 
Origins of the Research University (Chicago, IL, 2006), 141–82.
12. Marshall Waingrow (ed.), Th e Correspondence and other Papers of James Boswell (2nd edn, 
New Haven, CT, 2000), 331.
13. Bernhard Maier, William Robertson Smith (Tübingen, 2009).
14. Solomon Diamond, ‘Wundt, Wilhelm’, DSB 14, 526–9, considers him only as an experi-
mental psychologist; contrast Woodruﬀ  Smith, ‘Wilhelm Wundt: Völkerpsychologie and 
Experimental Psychology’, in Politics and the Sciences of Culture (New York, 1991), 120–8.
15. Roger Chickering, Karl Lamprecht: A German Academic Life (1856–1915) (Atlantic 
Highlands, NJ, 1993).
16. Johannes Steinmetzler, Die Anthropogeographie Friedrich Ratzels und lhre Ideengeschichtlich 
Würzeln (Bonn, 1956); Wanklyn, Friedrich Ratzel.
17. Wilhelm Ostwald, Th e Autobiography (1926: English translation, n.p., 2017, 191–206; 
Woodruﬀ  D. Smith, ‘Th e Leipzig Circle’, in Politics and the Sciences of Culture in Germany, 
1840–1920 (New York, 1991), 204–9.


312
NOTES to pp. 218–23
18. Hubert Treiber, ‘Der Eranos: Das Glanzstück im Heidelberger Mythenkranz’, in W. 
Schluchter and F. W. Graf (eds.), Asketischer Protestantismus und der ,,Geist” des modernen 
Kapitalismus (Tübingen, 2005), 75–153.
19. Mary Gluck, ‘Th e Sunday Circle’, in Georg Lukács and his Generation, 1900–1918 
(Cambridge, MA, 1985), 13–42; Eva Káradi and Erzsebet Vezér (eds.), Georg Lukács, Karl 
Mannheim und der Sonntagskreis (Frankfurt, 1985); Lee Congdon, Exile and Social Th ought: 
Hungarian Intellectuals in Germany and Austria, 1919–33 (Princeton, NJ, 1991), 10–11, 
52ﬀ .
20. Otto Neurath, Empiricism and Sociology, eds. Marie Neurath and Robert S. Cohen 
(Dordrecht, 1973), 304.
21. Charlotte Ashby, Tag Gronberg and Simon Shaw-Miller (eds.), Th e Viennese Café and Fin-de-
Siècle Culture (New York, 2013).
22. Dorothy Stimson, ‘Th e History of Ideas Club’, in George Boas et al., Studies in Intellectual 
History (Baltimore, MD, 1953), 174–96; Irmeline Veit-Brause, ‘Th e Interdisciplinarity of 
History of Concepts: A Bridge Between Disciplines’, History of Concepts Newsletter 6 (2003), 
8–13.
23. Barbara Heyl, ‘Th e Harvard “Pareto Circle”’, Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences 
4 (1968), 316–34; George Homans, Coming to My Senses: Th e Autobiography of a Sociologist 
(New Brunswick, NJ, 1984), 105.
24. Philip Husbands and Owen Holland, ‘Th e Ratio Club’ in Husbands, Holland and Michael 
Wheeler (eds.), Th e Mechanical Mind in History (Cambridge, MA, 2008), 91–148.
25. Kenneth Collins, ‘Joseph Schorstein: R. D. Laing’s “rabbi”’, History of Psychiatry 19 (2008), 
185–201, at 195–7.
26. Besides Barbu, the Sussex group included literary scholars (John Cruickshank, Cecil Jenkins, 
Gabriel Josipovici, Tony Nuttall), philosophers (Bernard Harrison, István Mészaros) and 
historians (Peter Hennock, John Rosselli and myself). Among the texts discussed were 
Hume’s Dialogues on the Natural History of Religion, Martin Buber’s I and Th ou, some short 
stories by Kafka, Claude Lévi-Strauss’s Anthropologie structurale, and the Mahabharata. My 
thanks to Gabriel Josipovici for sharing his memories of the meetings.
27. Scott Page, Th e Diﬀ erence (Princeton, NJ, 2007); Michael P. Farrell, Collaborative Circles 
(Chicago, IL, 2001).
28. Jordi Cat, ‘Th e Unity of Science’, in Edward N. Zalta (ed.), Th e Stanford Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy (Spring 2017 Edition), URL = https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2017/
entries/scientiﬁ c-unity; David Lowenthal, Quest for the Unity of Knowledge (London, 2019).
29. Georg A. Reisch, ‘Planning Science: Otto Neurath and the “International Encyclopedia of 
Uniﬁ ed Science”’, British Journal for the History of Science 27 (1994), 153–75; Jordi Cat, 
Nancy Cartwright and Hasok Chang, ‘Otto Neurath: Politics and the Unity of Science’, in 
Peter Galison and David J. Stump (eds.), Th e Disunity of Science (Stanford, CA, 1996), 
347–69.
30. Carnap quoted in Neurath, Empiricism and Sociology, 43; Otto Neurath, ‘Zur Th eorie der 
Sozialwissenschaften’, rpr. in his Schriften (1981). Cf. John Symons, Olga Pombo and Juan 
Manuel Torres (eds.), Otto Neurath and the Unity of Science (Dordrecht, 2004).
31. Neurath, ‘Politics and the Unity of Science’; Richard Creath, ‘Th e Unity of Science: Carnap, 
Neurath and Beyond’, in Galison and Stump, Th e Disunity of Science, 158–69, at 161.
32. Quoted in Deborah Hammond, Th e Science of Synthesis (Boulder, CO, 2003), 157.
33. Edward O. Wilson, Consilience: Th e Unity of Knowledge (New York, 1999), 3, 8, 298.
34. Martin Jay, Th e Dialectical Imagination: A History of the Frankfurt School and the Institute for 
Social Research 1923–1950 (Boston, MA, 1973); Stuart Jeﬀ ries, Grand Hotel Abyss: Th e Lives 
of the Frankfurt School (London, 2016).
35. Max Horkheimer, ‘Th e Present State of Social Philosophy and the Tasks of an Institute for 
Social Research’ (1931: English translation in Horkheimer, Between Philosophy and Social 
Science, Cambridge, MA, 1993, 1–14), at 9.
36. Stefan Müller-Doohm, Adorno: A Biography (Cambridge, 2005).
37. Stefan Müller-Doohm, Habermas: A Biography (Cambridge, 2016).


313
NOTES to pp. 223–9
38. Ruml, ‘Recent Trends in Social Science’, 99–111, at 104.
39. Howard Spiro and Priscilla W. Norton, ‘Dean Milton C. Winternitz at Yale’, Perspectives in 
Biology and Medicine 46 (2003), 403–12; Mary Ann Dzuback, Robert M. Hutchins: Portrait 
of an Educator (Chicago, IL, 1991), 43–66.
40. Th e proceedings of the conference were published in Leonard D. White (ed.), Th e New Social 
Science (Chicago, IL, 1930).
41. Dzuback, Hutchins, 111.
42. Nils Gilman, Mandarins of the Future: Modernization Th eory in Cold War America (Baltimore, 
MD, 2003), 72–112; Joel Isaac, Working Knowledge: Making the Human Sciences from Parsons 
to Kuhn (Cambridge, MA, 2012), 174–9.
43. Dzuback, Hutchins, 214–5; Hammond, Th e Science of Synthesis, 143–96; Philippe Fontaine, 
‘Walking the Tightrope: Th e Committee on the Behavioral Sciences and Academic Cultures 
at the University of Chicago, 1949–1955’, Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences 52 
(2016), 349–70.
44. Roy Pascal, ‘Bildung and the Division of Labour’, German Studies presented to W. H. Bruford 
(Cambridge, 1962), 14–28
45. Gilbert Allardyce, ‘Th e Rise and Fall of the Western Civilization Course’, American Historical 
Review 87 (1982), 695–725, at 703, 707.
46. Andy Beckett, ‘PPE: Th e Oxford Degree that Runs Britain’, Guardian, 23 February 2017, 
https://www.theguardian.com/.../2017/.../ppe-oxford-university-degree-that-rules-brita, 
accessed 4 April 2018.
47. George E. Davie, Th e Crisis of the Democratic Intellect: Th e Problem of Generalism and 
Specialisation in Twentieth-century Scotland (Edinburgh, 1986), 11–26, 46–7, 158.
48. Robert M. Hutchins, Th e Higher Learning in America (New Haven, CT, 1936), 60, 78, 81; 
idem., review of Ortega, Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 239 
(1945), 217–20. Cf. Dzuback, Hutchins, 88–108, 101–24; Donoso, ‘Th e University 
Graduate’, 12.
49. https://college.uchicago.edu/academics/college-core-curriculum
50. Stuart W. Leslie, Th e Cold War and American Science (New York, 1993); Erin C. Moore, 
‘Transdisciplinary Eﬀ orts at Public Science Agencies’, in Frodeman, Oxford Handbook, 337–8.
51. Gilman, Mandarins, 155–202.
52. Richard D. Lambert, ‘Blurring the Disciplinary Boundaries: Area Studies in the United 
States’, in David Easton and Corinne S. Schelling (eds.), Divided Knowledge (Th ousand 
Oaks, CA, 1991), 171–94; Alan Tansman, ‘Japanese Studies: Th e Intangible Act of 
Translation’, in David L. Szanton (ed.), Th e Politics of Knowledge: Area Studies and the 
Disciplines (Berkeley, CA, 2002), 184–216, at 186.
53. Robin W. Winks, Cloak and Gown: Scholars in America’s Secret War (London, 1987), 81; 
Bundy quoted in Sigmund Diamond, Compromised Campus: Th e Collaboration of Universities 
with the Intelligence Community, 1945–55 (New York, 1992), 10.
54. David C. Engerman, Know Your Enemy: Th e Rise and Fall of America’s Soviet Experts (Oxford, 
2009), 48.
55. Clyde Kluckhohn, ‘Russian Research at Harvard’, World Politics 1 (1949), 266–71.
56. Timothy Mitchell (2004) ‘Th e Middle East in the Past and Future of Social Science’, in 
Szanton, Politics of Knowledge, 74–118.
57. Benedict Anderson, Th e Spectre of Comparisons: Nationalism, Southeast Asia and the World 
(London, 1998), 8–12.
58. Brigitte Mazon, Aux origines de l’EHESS. Le role du mécenat américain (1920–60) (Paris, 
1988).
59. Engerman, Know Your Enemy, 70, 75, 255, 259; Simon, Models, 173.
60. Peter Burke, A Social History of Knowledge, vol. 2, From the Encyclopédie to Wikipedia 
(Cambridge, 2012), 239–43.
61. Barend van Heusden, ‘Jakob von Uexküll and Ernst Cassirer’, Semiotica 134 (2001), 275–92; 
Frederik Stjernfelt, ‘Simple Animals and Complex Biology: Th e Double von Uexküll 
Inspiration in Cassirer’s Philosophy’, Synthese 179 (2009), 169–86.


314
NOTES to pp. 230–42
62. W. B. Gallie, A New University: A. D. Lindsay and the Keele Experiment (London, 1960).
63. David Daiches (ed.), Th e Idea of a New University: An Experiment at Sussex (London, 1964), 
67.
64. For a vivid account of these joint seminars by a leading participant, see Laurence Lerner, 
Wandering Professor (London, 1999), 146–57.
65. Daiches, Th e Idea of a New University; personal knowledge (I taught in the School of 
European Studies, 1962–78).
66. https://www.uni-bielefeld.de/(en)/Universitaet/Serviceangebot/.../leitbild.html
67. https://ruc.dk/en
68. Annette Vowinckel, ‘“Ich fürchte mich vor den Organisationslustigen”: Ein Dialog zwischen 
Hans Blumenberg und Reinhart Koselleck’, Merkur 68, no. 6 (2014), 546–50.
69. Frederic Cheyette, ‘Beyond Western Civilization’, Th e History Teacher 10 (1977), 533–8; 
Allardyce, ‘Rise and Fall’, 720–4.
70. Lewis R. Gordon and Jane A. Gordon (eds.), A Companion to African-American Studies 
(Oxford, 2006).
71. Th e Centre became the nucleus of a Department of Cultural Studies, abruptly closed in 
2002.
72. Toby Miller (ed.), A Companion to Cultural Studies (Oxford, 2006). Rather diﬀ erent 
approaches are employed in German Kulturwissenschaft. See Heide Appelsmeyer and Elfriede 
Billmann-Mahecha (eds.), Kulturwissenschaft (Göttingen, 2001).
73. Jürgen Kocka, ‘Realität und Ideologie der Interdisciplinarität: Erfahrung am ZiF Bielefeld’, 
in Einheit der Wissenschaften (Berlin, 1991), 127–44; Wolf Lepenies, ‘Interdisciplinarität und 
Institutes for Advanced Study’, in ibid., 145–61.
74. Johan Huizinga, ‘My Path to History’ (1943: English translation in Huizinga, Dutch 
Civilization in the 17th Century and Other Essays, London, 1968, 244–75), at 273–4.
75. Peter Schöttler, ‘Die frühen Annales als interdisziplinäre Projekt’, in Matthias Middell (ed.), 
Frankreich und Deutschland im Vergleich (Leipzig, 1992), 112–86; Peter Burke, Th e French 
Historical Revolution: Th e Annales School, 1929–2014 (2nd edn, Cambridge, 2015).
76. Quoted in Pierre Daix, Braudel (Paris, 1995). My translation.
77. Edmund Russell, ‘Coevolutionary History’, American Historical Review 119 (2014) 1,514–28.
78. Jan Plamper and Benjamin Lazier (eds.), Fear Across the Disciplines (Pittsburgh, PA, 2012); 
Diego Gambetta (ed.), Trust: Making and Breaking Cooperative Relations (Oxford, 1988).
79. For a guide to the situation today, see Frodeman, Oxford Handbook, and Graﬀ , Undisciplining 
Knowledge.
CODA
 1. Alexander Halavais, Search Engine Society (Cambridge, 2009).
 2. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Wikipedians.
 3. Rudolf Dekker, Th e Road to Ruin: Dutch Universities, Past, Present and Future (Amsterdam, 
2015), 144; Angus Phillips, ‘Does the Book Have a Future?’, in Simon Eliot and Jonathan 
Rose (eds.), A Companion to the History of the Book (Oxford, 2007), 547–59.
 4. Maryanne Wolf, Proust and the Squid: Th e Story and Science of the Reading Brain (London, 
2008), 226.
 5. Nicholas Carr, Th e Shallows: How the Internet is Changing the Way we Th ink, Read and 
Remember (New York, 2011).
 6. Richard S. Wurman, Information Anxiety (2nd edn, New York, 2000).
 7. Alex Wright, Glut: Mastering Information through the Ages (Washington DC, 2007). Cf. 
David W. Shenk, Data Smog: Surviving the Information Glut (London, 1997).
 8. Alvin Toﬄ  er, Future Shock (1970, rpr. London, 1971), 11–12, 317–23. Cf. William van 
Winkle, ‘Information Overload’, www.gdrc.org/icts/i-overload/infoload.html, accessed 19 
July 2012.
 9. UNESCO statistical yearbook, quoted in Michael Gibbons et al., Th e New Production of 
Knowledge (London, 1994), 94.


315
NOTES to pp. 242–6
10. ‘Data Deluge’, Th e Economist, 25 February 2010. An exabyte is equivalent to a billion giga-
bytes or a quintillion bytes.
11. Mikal Khoso, ‘How Much Data is Produced Every Day?’, 13 May 2016, www.northeastern.
edu › Home › Authors › Posts by Mikal Khoso.
12. Jo Guldi and David Armitage, Th e History Manifesto (Cambridge, 2014).
13. Quoted in Jeﬀ reys Jones, Th e FBI: A History (New Haven, CT, 2007), 232.
14. ‘How Google’s Search Algorithm Spreads False Information with a Rightwing Bias’, 
Guardian, 12 December 2016, https://www.theguardian.com, accessed 18 July 2017. On 
bias on the web in general, see Halavais, Search Engine Society, 55–60, 64–5. Cf. Shoshana 
Zubov, Th e Age of Surveillance Capitalism (London, 2019).
15. Wikipedia, ‘Big Data’, accessed 18 July 2017.
16. ‘Tourism in a Post-Disciplinary Era’ was the subject of a conference at the University of 
Neuchâtel in 2013.
17. Gerard De Vries, Bruno Latour (Cambridge, 2016), 3 and passim.
18. Stefan Müller-Doohm, Habermas: A Biography (Cambridge, 2016): the comparison with 
Aristotle, by Martin Jay, appears on the back cover. On Anderson, see Stefan Collini, Absent 
Minds (Oxford, 2006), 469; on Posner, see James Ryerson, ‘Th e Outrageous Pragmatism of 
Judge Richard Posner’, Lingua Franca 10 (2000), 26–34; Roberto M. Unger and Lee Smolin, 
Th e Singular Universe and the Reality of Time (Cambridge, 2014).
19. Edward O. Wilson, Sociobiology: Th e New Synthesis (1975); idem., Consilience: Th e Unity of 
Knowledge (New York, 1998).
20. Patricia A. McAnany and Norman Yoﬀ ee (eds.), Questioning Collapse (Cambridge, 2010).
21. John Palfrey and Urs Gasser, Born Digital: Understanding the First Generation of Digital 
Natives (New York, 2008).
22. Quoted in Maria Rosa Antognazza, Leibniz: An Intellectual Biography (Cambridge, 2009), 
210. I have modiﬁ ed the translation.

316
General studies of polymaths are rare. A recent one is Waqas Ahmed’s Th e Polymath (Chichester, 
2018), based mainly on interviews with living members of the species. On the trend towards 
increasing specialization that polymaths resist, see Peter Burke, ‘Dividing Knowledges’, in A 
Social History of Knowledge, vol. 2 (Cambridge, 2012), 160–83. On interdisciplinarity, Robert 
Frodeman, Julie T. Klein and Carl Mitcham (eds.), Th e Oxford Handbook of Interdisciplinarity 
(Oxford, 2010).
Some polymaths have written their autobiographies, including the following:
Charles Darwin, Autobiography (c.1876–82: reprinted London, 1958)
Benjamin Franklin, Autobiography (1793: reprinted, London 1936)
Wilhelm Ostwald, Autobiography (1926: English translation, Cham, 2017)
Bertrand Russell Autobiography (1931: 3 vols., London, 1967–9)
Giambattista Vico, Autobiography (1728: English translation, Ithaca, NY, 1975)
Norbert Wiener, Ex-Prodigy (New York, 1953)
Biographies of individual polymaths are listed below, in order of the subject, not the author:
David Lipset, Gregory Bateson (Boston, MA, 1982)
Howard Eiland and Michael W. Jennings, Walter Benjamin: A Critical Life (Cambridge, MA, 
2014)
Jacques Roger, Buﬀ on: A Life in Natural History (1989: English translation, Ithaca, NY, 1997)
Lisa Walters, Margaret Cavendish: Gender, Science and Politics (Cambridge, 2014)
François Dosse, Le marcheur blessé: Michel de Certeau (Paris, 2002)
Judith P. Zinsser, Emilie du Châtelet, Daring Genius of the Enlightenment (New York, 2007)
Susanna Åkerman, Queen Christina of Sweden (Leiden, 1991)
Richard Holmes, Coleridge (2 vols., London, 1989–99)
Adrian Desmond and James Moore, Darwin (New York, 1991)
Claudio Paolucci, Umberto Eco tra Ordine e Avventura (Milan, 2016)
Rosemary Ashton, George Eliot (Oxford, 1983)
Avril Pyman, Pavel Florensky, a Quiet Genius (London, 2010)
Didier Eribon, Michel Foucault (1989: English translation, Cambridge, MA, 1991)
Paddy Kitchen, A Most Unsettling Person: An Introduction to the Ideas and Life of Patrick Geddes 
(London, 1975)
Nicholas Boyle, Goethe (2 vols., Oxford, 1991–9)
Andrea Wulf, Th e Invention of Nature: Th e Adventures of Alexander von Humboldt (London, 2015)
James A. Harris, Hume: An Intellectual Biography (Cambridge, 2015)
 FURTHER READING


317
FURTHER READING
Nicholas Murray, Aldous Huxley (London, 2003)
Octavio Paz, Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz (1983: English translation, Cambridge, MA, 1988)
Michael J. Franklin, Orientalist Jones: Sir William Jones, Poet, Lawyer and Linguist, 1746–1794 
(Oxford, 2011)
Paula Findlen (ed.), Athanasius Kircher: Th e Last Man Who Knew Everything (London, 2004)
Maria Rosa Antognazza, Leibniz (Cambridge, 2008)
Leonard Warren, Joseph Leidy: Th e Last Man Who Knew Everything (New Haven, CT, 1998)
Martin Kemp, Leonardo (1981: revised edition, Oxford, 2006)
Robert Shackleton, Montesquieu: A Critical Biography (Oxford, 1961)
Fiona McCarthy, William Morris (London, 1994)
Donald L. Miller, Lewis Mumford (New York, 1989)
Maurice Goldsmith, Joseph Needham: A 20th-Century Renaissance Man (London, 1995)
Norman Macrae, John von Neumann (New York, 1992)
Alex Wright, Cataloging the World: Paul Otlet and the Birth of the Information Age (New York, 
2014)
Peter N. Miller, Peiresc’s Mediterranean World (Cambridge, MA, 2015)
Gareth Dale, Karl Polanyi: A Life on the Left (New York, 2016)
Mary Jo Nye, Michael Polanyi and his Generation (Chicago, IL, 2010)
Gunnar Eriksson, Th e Atlantic Vision: Olof Rudbeck and Baroque Science (Canton, MA, 1994)
Hunter Crowther-Heyck, Herbert A. Simon: Th e Bounds of Reason in Modern America (Baltimore, 
MD, 2005)
Ian S. Ross, Th e Life of Adam Smith (2nd edn, Oxford, 2010)
Kathryn A. Neeley, Mary Somerville (Cambridge, 2001)
Daniel Schreiber, Susan Sontag: A Biography (2007: English translation, Evanston, IL, 2014)
Michel Winock, Madame de Staël (Paris, 2010)
Andrew Robinson, Th e Last Man Who Knew Everything: Th omas Young (London, 2006)

318
abduction, 146, 160, 163
absent-mindedness, 173
academies, 66, 89, 91, 92, 101, 106, 125, 164
Adab, 20
Addison, Joseph, 87
Adorno, Th eodor, 203, 222–3
Agamben, Giorgio, 244, 246
Agassiz, Louis, 175, 178, 192, 194
Agnesi, Maria Gaetana, 89, 99, 118, 197
Agricola, Georg, 38
Agricola, Rudolf, 30, 121
Agrippa, Heinrich Cornelius, 33–5, 204
Albert of Saxony, 24
Albert the Great, 24, 31, 35
Alberti, Leonbattista, 27, 29–30, 38, 121, 
182
Alexander VII, Pope, 206
Alexander of Miletus, 13
Al-Farabi, 31
Al-Kindi, 21, 41
Alsted, Johann Heinrich, 6, 54–5, 56, 79, 194
amateur, 11, 28, 50, 53, 59, 74, 120, 168, 
240
analogies, 38–9, 43, 62, 64, 97, 106, 122, 
176–7, 187, see also metaphors
Anderson, Benedict, 137
Anderson, Perry, 243–4, 246
Angell, James R., 215, 223
Antal, Frederick, 218
Apáczai Csere, János, 55
Aquinas, Th omas, 60, 162
Archilochus, 6
Area Studies, 227–9
Arias Montano, Benito, 4, 209
Aristotle, 12, 18, 21–4, 45, 56, 108, 
176, 185
Arnold, Matthew, 115–16, 123, 177
ARPA, 227
asceticism, 3, 182
Ash, Timothy Garton, 244
Ashby, W. Ross, 220
assistants, 16, 59, 98, 105, 108, 183, 211, 
see also collaboration; informants
Assmann, Aleida, 199, 245–6
Athenaeum (Amsterdam), 193
athletics, 12, 30, 121
Aubrey, John, 173, 201
Augustine, 4–5, 17, 188
Averroes (Ibn Rushd) 21–2, 113
Avicenna (Ibn Sina), 21
Babbage, Charles, 104, 119, 125, 200, 203
Bacon, Francis, 6, 31, 47, 99–100, 171, 204
Bacon, Roger, 23–4, 35, 41
Bagehot, Walter, 198
Baillet, Adrien, 77
Bal, Mieke, 199, 245
Balzac, Honoré de, 177
Banks, Joseph, 126
Barbu, Zevedei, 220
Barrow, Isaac, 67, 79–80, 173, 246
Barthes, Roland, 160, 162
Bartholin, Th omas, the Elder, 61, 72
Bartoli, Daniele, 87
Basnage, Henri, 64
Basnage, Jacques, 178
Bastian, Adolf, 180, 209
Bataille, Georges, 203–4
Bateson, Gregory, 163, 165, 179–80, 185, 
204
Baudin, Nicolas, 138
Bauhin, Caspar, 74, 78
INDEX


INDEX
319
Baxter, Richard, 79
Bayle, Pierre, 4, 64–5, 75, 77, 87, 112, 171, 
178, 194, 200, 209
Becher, Johann Joachim, 7, 81, 179
Bello, Andrés, 192
Benedict, Ruth, 227
Benjamin, Walter, 200, 222
Bentham, Jeremey, 114
Berelson, Bernard, 223
Bergman, Ingmar, 148
Berio, Luciano, 162
Berlin, Isaiah, 6, 168, 186
Bernard of Chartres, 22
Berners-Lee, Tim, 143
Berr, Henri, 178, 210–11
Bertalanﬀ y, Ludwig von, 159–60, 197, 204, 
221–2
Bildung, 106–7, 116, 225
Birdwhistell, Ray, 151
Bloch, Marc, 236–7
Blotius, Hugo, 209
bluestockings, 88
Blumenberg, Hans, 151, 183, 231
Boas, Franz, 106, 156, 208–9
Boas, George, 219
Bochart, Samuel, 51, 68, 176, 194
Boden, Margaret, 199, 245–6
Bodin, Jean, 4, 33–4, 37, 199
Boerhaave, Herman, 4, 47, 56, 147, 207
Boethius,18
Bogatyrev, Petr, 161
Bogdanov, Alexander, 177
Boineburg, baron von, 66
Bonpland, Aimé, 108
Borges, Jorge Luis, 2, 145–6, 166, 197–8, 
205, 209–10
Borgia, Cesare, 40
Bošković, Rudjer, 102, 192
Boswell, James, 95
Boulding, Kenneth, 149, 160, 168, 175, 180, 
182, 184, 197, 225
Bourdieu, Pierre, 112, 141, 176, 207
bowu, 14
Boxhorn, Marcus, 54
boxue, 14
Brahe, Tycho, 48, 72, 200
Brandes, Georg, 114
Braudel, Fernand, 174, 228, 237
Bridges, 40, 109, 144, 148, 162, 166, 186, 
215, 221, 230, 232, 245
Briggs, Asa, 230, 237
Brin, Sergei, 2
Broca, Paul, 156, 208
Bronowski, Jacob, 186, 203
Brooks, Van Wyck, 144
Brougham, Henry, 95
Browne, Th omas, 174, 183
Browning, Robert, v
Brunelleschi, Filippo, 38–9, 72, 200
Bruno, Giordano, 4, 200
Brunswick, Duke of, 66
Buﬀ on, Comte de, 86, 88, 92, 176, 178, 200
Buissière, Paul, 65
Bundy, McGeorge, 227
Burckhardt, Jacob, 26–7, 29, 44, 192, 194
Bureus, Johannes, 61, 204–5
Burke, Edmund, 88
Burke, Kenneth, 198, 210
Burnet, Gilbert, 8, 81, 174–5, 178, 194, 196
Burney, Charles, 217
Burton, Robert, 53, 77–8, 179
Buruma, Ian, 244
Bush, Vannevar, 208, 226
Butler, Judith, 199, 245–6
Butler, Nicholas, 225
Cabala, 31–3
cafés, 216–18
Caillois, Roger, 203–4, 233
Calvin, Jean, Calvinism, 34, 47, 55, 182
Campanella, Tommaso, 177, 200–1
Campbell, Donald T., 148, 215
Capella, Martianus, 3
Caramuel y Lobkowitz, Juan, 59–60, 71, 75, 
197, 200, 204
card indexes, 130
Cardano, Girolamo, 37, 185
Carlyle, Th omas, 95
Carnap, Rudolf, 219, 221
Carr, Nicolas, 241
Casaubon, Edward, 118
Casaubon, Isaac, 80, 182
Casaubon, Meric, 54, 80
Cassirer, Ernst, 229
Castiglione, Baldassare, 27–9, 44
Catherine II of Russia (‘the Great’), 101, 205
Cato, Marcus Portius, 13
Cavendish, Margaret, 50–1, 177
Caxton, William, 28
Cellini, Benvenuto, 41
centres, 228: for Advanced Studies in the 
Behavioral Sciences, Palo Alto, 160, 234; 
for Contemporary Cultural Studies, 
Birmingham, 232; for Interdisciplinary 
Research, Bielefeld, 235; for International 
Studies, MIT, 227; Russian Research 
Centre, Harvard, 227
centrifugal, centripetal polymaths, 6, 43, 188

INDEX

320
Cereta, Laura, 45
Certeau, Michel de, 163, 167, 172, 176, 
187–8, 190, 211
Champollion, Jean-François, 104, 184, 189
Charlatans, 8, 85–6, 168–9
Charles III of Spain, 100
Charles IX of Sweden, 205
Charles XI of Sweden, 205
Charles XII of Sweden, 90, 101
Châtelet, Émilie Marquise du, 89–91, 178, 
181
Chatwin, Bruce, 179
Chinard, Gilbert, 179, 185, 219
Chomsky, Noam, 168, 180, 246
Christina of Sweden, 4, 51, 205
CIA, 227–8
Cicero, 13–14, 18
circles, 143, 216–21, 224, see also clubs
Cixous, Hélène, 199, 245–6
Clarendon, Edward Hyde, Lord, 17, 69
clubs, 87, 93, 96, 104, 125, 152, 215–17, 
219–20, see also societies
clustered polymaths, 6, 148–51
Coleridge, Samuel T., 103, 114, 127, 177, 
205
collaboration, 58, 67, 75, 108, 144, 150–1, 
164, 189, 211–12, see also assistants
collections, collectors, 53, 57, 59, 70–1, 81, 
see also museums
Collège de France, 110, 133
Collingwood, Robin G., 207
Comenius, Jan Amos, 55–6, 67, 71, 79–80, 
143, 180, 194, 204–5, 221
committees: on the Behavioral Sciences, 224; 
on Human Development 224; on Social 
Th ought, 224
Commonwealth: of Learning (Respublica 
litterarum), 74, 87; of Science, 125
comparative method, 33, 36, 54, 63, 68–9, 
97–8, 113, 120, 147, 154, 157, 176–7, 
203, see also analogy
competition, 14, 39, 90, 106, 134, 141, 154, 
184
Comte, Auguste, 6, 110, 114, 117–18, 126, 
130, 151, 194, 205, 218, 221
concentration, 172–3
concord, idea of, 37, 54–5, 71–2
Condorcet, Marquis de, 86, 92–3, 174
congresses, 135
connections, 5–6, 78–81, 98, 109, 119, 151, 
160, 166, 175–6, 187–8, 222, 246
Conring, Hermann, 51, 186, 207
Cooke, Anne and Elizabeth, 45
Copernicus, Nicolaus, 200
Corner, Elena, 51–2
Courchod, Suzanne, 116
Cournot, Antoine, 119–20
courts, 205–6
Crane, Walter, 115
Crichton, James, 31, 108, 121
crises of knowledge, 9, 76–7, 124–6,
critic, criticism, 2, 8, 15–16, 64, 70, 87, 89, 
95–6, 98, 105, 111–16, 144–5, 147–8, 
162, 203–4, 210, 218, 233, 236, 244
Croce, Benedetto, 8, 182, 210
Cujas, Jacques, 34
curiosity, 4–6, 10, 14, 17, 29, 41, 43, 47, 55, 
58, 63, 66, 69–70, 73, 74, 170–3, 179, 
187
Cuvier, Georges, 120, 174, 177, 209
d’Alembert, Jean, 88, 91–2, 204
da Vinci, Leonardo, 8, 21, 27, 29, 40–3, 81, 
144, 171–2, 176, 187, 198, 200, 205
Darwin, Charles, 121–3, 132, 175–7, 182–3, 
200–1
Darwin, Erasmus, 97
day-dreaming, 175
De Quincey, Th omas, 103, 128, 198, 205, 214
de-compartmentalization, 38
Dee, John, 35, 72, 200
Deﬀ and, Marie-Anne Marquise du, 88, 93, 
116
Deleuze, Gilles, 204
Department of Social Relations, Harvard, 
224
Derrida, Jacques, 168–9, 184, 191
Descartes, René, 48, 50–1, 59–60, 68, 85, 
90, 100
Dewey, Melvil, 130, 183, 194, 205, 209
diagrams, 141, 208
Diamond, Jared, 207, 245–6
Diderot, Denis, 91, 124, 148, 198, 205
dilettante, 128
Dioscorides, 74
disciplines, 2–3, 14, 18, 20, 23, 26, 31, 35, 
55, 207–8, 213–39, 243
division of labour, see specialization
Donne, John, 59, 70, 79
Doxiadis, Constantinos, 151, 192
Drayton, Michael, 70
Dubois-Reymond, Emil, 66, 128
Duby, Georges, 162
Dumézil, Georges, 176
Dupin, Louise, Madame, 88
Durkheim, Émile, 131, 133, 139, 149, 153, 
155, 168, 208, 236
Dury, John, 75


INDEX
321
Eco, Umberto, 2, 7, 25, 160, 162–3, 177, 
179, 184–5, 194, 210
écoles: École libre des sciences politiques, 
132; École des hautes études, 228
Edinburgh Review, 95, 111, 130, 136, 210
Einstein, Albert, 234
Elias, Norbert, 154, 184, 215, 244
Eliot, George (Mary Ann Evans), 2, 27, 89, 
117–18, 177, 210
Elisabeth, Princess Palatine, 50, 200
Elyot, Th omas, 28
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 108
Empedocles, 10–11
Encontre, Daniel, 194
encyclopaedias, 14, 16, 18, 21, 23, 27, 34, 
37–8, 55, 64–5, 85–6, 91–2, 97, 104–5, 
138, 143, 147, 210, 237, 240; 
Encyclopaedia Britannica, 104–5, 138, 
145–6, 157, 210, 225, 240; L’Encyclopédie, 
85–6, 138, 143; Wikipedia, 240
energy, 178–9
Engels, Friedrich, 189
engineers, 39–40, 101, 110, 145, 152–3, 
158, 162, 176, 202, 208, 214, 220, 226, 
245
Erasmus, 31–2, 45, 200
Eratosthenes of Cyrene, 12, 209
Ercilla, Alonso, 30
Ernst August of Hanover, 206
essays, 16, 26, 31, 46, 50, 68, 80, 86, 89, 
90–5, 98–9, 103, 106–7, 109, 111–14, 
116–20, 123, 127, 145–8, 151, 153, 156, 
162, 165, 167, 185–6, 195, 210, 226, 
237, 244
Euler, Leonhard, 192
Evans, Arthur, 135
Evelyn, John, 48–51, 82
exiles, 5, 50, 55, 64–5, 111, 154, 196, 219
explosion of knowledge, 9, 77, 128, 242
Fabricius, Johann Albert, 194
Farge, Arlette, 212
Faust, 27, 29, 33, 35, 106, 169
Favret, Jeanne, 212
Febvre, Lucien, 139, 237
Fechner, Gustav, 159, 180
Fedele, Cassandra, 45
Feijoo, Benito Jerónimo, 98–9, 199, 204
Feltre, Vittorino da, 27
female polymaths, 8, 88–9, 116–19, 172, 
196, 198–9, 244–5
Ferdinand III, emperor, 60, 206
Ferguson, Adam, 93, 95, 192, 194, 209
Fermi, Enrico, 7, 224
Feuerbach, Ludwig,
Fischer, Emil, 138
Fleure, Herbert, 180, 191, 207
Florensky, Pavel, 8, 163, 186
Fontenelle, Bernard de, 66
Foucault, Michel, 150–1, 168, 172, 181, 
207, 210–12
foundations, 206, 227–8; Carnegie, 227; 
European Science, 139; Ford, 223, 227, 
234; Macy, 158; Peace, 158; Rockefeller, 
152, 223, 228
Fouquet, Jean-François, 90
foxes, 6, 11, 36, 43, 55, 58, 68, 81, 109, 
185–8
fragmentation, 9, 77–80, 125, 128, 134, 137
Francis I of France, 41, 205
Franklin, Benjamin, 102, 171, 183, 194–5
Frazer, James, 135, 157, 164, 176, 203–4
Frederick II of Prussia (‘the Great’), 205
Freud, Sigmund, 155–6, 171, 189, 208, 236
Freyre, Gilberto, 184, 193
Friedrich Wilhelm III of Prussia, 206
Friedrich Wilhelm IV of Prussia, 206
Fuller, Buckminster, 168, 208
Fuller, Th omas, 79
Galileo, 48, 65, 73, 100
Galindo, Beatriz, 45
Gallini, Clara, 199
Galton, Francis, 123, 151, 200, 202, 204
Garrick, David, 88
Gassendi, Pierre, 48, 58–9, 75, 81–2
Gay, Peter, 236
Geddes, Patrick, 141–2, 148, 172, 178, 180, 
189, 198, 204–5, 233
generalists, 5, 142, 144
Geoﬀ rin, Marie Th érèse, Madame, 88, 93, 
116
Gerard, Ralph, 160, 197, 226
Gerbert of Aurillac, 19
Gessner, Conrad, 35–7, 53, 177, 192
Ghiberti, Lorenzo, 39
Ginzburg, Carlo, 168, 184, 186, 237
Glucksmann, Alfred, 154
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 2, 105–7, 
116–18, 120–1, 128, 153, 177, 203
Gombrich, Ernst, 211
Goody, Jack, 157
Google, 2, 240, 241
Gournay, Marie de, 46
Gower, John, 7
Gregory, Richard, 211
Grosseteste, Robert, 23–4
Grotius, Hugo, 48, 69, 75, 100, 182, 184

INDEX

322
Guarino of Verona, 45
Guattari, Félix, 151, 204
Guizot, François, 110
Gustav Adolf of Sweden, 61, 205
Habermas, Jürgen, 195, 223, 235, 244, 246
habits, habitus, 110, 159, 161, 163, 166, 
176
Haddon, Alfred, 156, 208
Haeckel, Ernst, 121, 204
Hall, Stuart, 232
Haller, Albrecht von, 105, 192, 197
Hamilton, Earl, 236
Harmony, 54–5, 71–2
Hartlib, Samuel, 49, 56, 75
Harvey, Gabriel, 53
Harvey, William, 58
Hazlitt, William, 127
Heckscher, Eli, 236
hedgehogs, 6, 11, 36, 55, 81, 109, 144, 
185–8
Heidegger, Martin, 147, 162
Heinlein, Robert, v, 214
Helmholtz, Hermann, 120–1, 130, 207
Henderson, Lawrence, 159, 204, 219–20
Henslow, John, 132
Heraclitus, 10–11
Herder, Johann Gottfried, 105–7, 176, 
194, 203
Herschel, John, 104, 119, 123, 183, 203
Herschel, William, 104
Herschel, William James, 123
Hervás, Lorenzo, 97–8, 177
Herz, Henriette, 88
Heyerdahl, Th or, 62
Hildegard of Bingen, 43–4
Hinde, Robert, 211
Hintze, Otto, 236
Hippias of Elis, 11–13
Hitchcock, Alfred, 7
Hobhouse, Leonard T., 214
Hobsbawm, Eric, 228
Holberg, Ludvig, 85
Holstenius, Lucas, 4, 188–9
Homans, George, 184, 189, 198
Hooke, Robert, 7–8, 49, 72–4, 81–2, 198
Horkheimer, Max, 203, 222
Huang, Arcadius, 90
Huber, Ulrich, 85
Huet, Pierre-Daniel, 51, 68–9, 71, 83, 100, 
171, 176, 180–1
Hugh of St Victor, 23
Hui Shi, 15
Huizinga, Johan, 185, 236
Humboldt, Alexander von, 88, 105, 107–8, 
119, 121–2, 127, 171, 178, 181, 184, 187, 
189, 196, 200, 202–3, 205, 211, 221
Humboldt, Wilhelm von, 88, 105, 107, 116, 
177–9, 183–4, 196, 202–3
Hume, David, 93–4, 192, 197–8, 209, 220
Hutchins, Robert, 194, 223–6
Hutchinson, George Evelyn, 175
Huxley, Aldous, 2, 105, 145–6, 167, 177, 
180, 184, 202, 205
Huxley, Julian, 179, 184, 202, 211
Huxley, Th omas Henry, 122–3, 189, 198, 205
Huygens, Christiaan, 65, 73, 196, 198, 200, 
202
Huygens, Constantijn, 198, 202
Hypatia of Alexandria, 43
Ibn Khaldun, 20, 22, 191
Ibn Rushd (‘Averroes’), 22, 31, 113
Ibn Sina (‘Avicenna’), 21, 31, 41
imagination, 175–9
informants, 90, 200, 211
information anxiety, 241
information explosion, 9, 77, 128, 242
information state, 129
Innis, Harold, 194
innovation, 34, 40, 93, 102, 153, 159, 177, 
see also inventors; originality
institutes, 228; for Social Research, Frankfurt, 
222–3; for Social Relations, Yale, 223; for 
the Study of the Environment, Hamburg, 
229; for Advanced Study, Princeton etc, 
158, 233–5; Warburg, 229
intellectuals, public, 90, 113, 169, 203
interdisciplinarity, 213–39 passim
inventors, 39–41, 63, 66, 69, 102, 105, 123, 
143, 158
Iragiray, Luce, 199, 245–6
Isabella of Castile, 45
Isidore of Seville, 18–19
Jahoda, Marie, 186
Jakobson, Roman, 160–1, 177, 219
James, Henry, 179
James, William, 155
Jardine, Lisa, 203
Jaucourt, Louis de, 91–2
Jeﬀ erson, Th omas, 102–3, 181, 203
Jeﬀ rey, Francis, 95, 210
Jencks, Charles, 246
Jews, 195–6
Johanneum (Hamburg), 193
Johnson, Samuel, 86, 88, 95–6, 172–4, 184, 
198, 210, 217


INDEX
323
Jones, Ernest, 189
Jones, William, 97, 191
Jonson, Ben, 70
journals, 64, 75–6, 87, 95, 103, 110–12, 
117, 123, 136, 145, 147, 162, 180, 210, 
233, 237, 243
Jovellanos, Gaspar Melchor de, 98, 200–1, 
205
Juana Inés de la Cruz (Sister Juana), 52, 171, 
196, 200
Julia, Dominique, 211
Jung, Carl Gustav, 192, 194
Junius, Franciscus, 180, 200
Justel, Henri, 65,
Kabbalah, 31–3
Kames, Henry, Lord, 93–5, 192
Kant, Immanuel, 34, 84–5, 105–6, 124, 
173–4
Kepler, Johannes, 37, 48, 64, 72
Keynes, John Maynard, 2, 181–2, 195
Kircher, Athanasius, 7, 52, 59, 62–5, 71, 
75, 81, 84–6, 177, 200, 204–6
Kirkland, John, 108
Kluckhohn, Clyde, 228
Koselleck, Reinhart, 231
Kracauer, Siegfried, 179, 203, 210, 222
Kristeva, Julia, 199, 245–6
La Pérouse, Comte de, 138
Lacan, Jacques, 161, 167–8
Laing, Ronald D., 220
Lambeck, Peter, 4
Lamprecht, Karl, 182, 217–18, 236
Landino, Cristoforo, 30
Lang, Andrew, 157, 169, 210
Lang, Júlia, 219
Langer, William, 227
Laplace, Jean-Pierre, 119
Larroque, Daniel de, 65
Lasswell, Harold, 5, 8, 149–50, 164, 178, 
194
Latour, Bruno, 244, 246
Lauremberg, Peter, 55
Lavoisier, Antoine, 93
Lazarsfeld, Paul, 153, 186, 211
Le Bon, Gustave, 155, 208, 210
Le Goﬀ , Jacques, 237
Le Play, Frédéric, 142, 153, 208
Leeuwenhoek, Antonie, 65, 74
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 16, 25, 60, 
65–7, 71–2, 77, 81–4, 90, 172, 176–7, 
179–80, 189, 200, 204–6, 209, 246
Leidy, Joseph, 7, 181
Lenfant, Jacques, 65
Leonardo syndrome, 8, 42–3, 81–2, 188–90
Leopold I, 7
Lespinasse, Julie, Mademoiselle, 88, 92–3
Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim, 85, 87, 209
Levin, Rahel, 88
Lévi-Strauss, Claude, 161
Levitin, Daniel, 246
Lewes, George Henry, 118
libraries, librarians, 12, 17, 35, 52, 57, 66–9, 
75, 77, 85, 90, 103, 111, 118, 130, 146–7, 
154, 173, 192, 198, 209, 229, 240, 243
Linnaeus, Carl, 61, 101, 107, 194
Lipsius, Justus, 4
Lombroso, Carlo, 152–3
Lomonosov, Mikhail, 101
Lotman, Juri, 160–2, 211
Louise of Savoy, 206
Lovejoy, Arthur O., 206, 219
Lovelace, Ada, Countess of, 104
Lowenthal, David, 121
Lowenthal, Leo, 222
Lubbock, John, 135, 200, 209
Ludolf, Hiob, 51, 63, 71, 177
Luhmann, Niklas, 182
Lukács, Georg, 148, 218
Lull, Ramón, 24–5, 31, 33, 35, 55, 60, 64, 
99, 204–5
Lunar Society, 97
Lyell, Charles, 122, 177, 201
Macaulay, Th omas, 95, 174–5, 177, 197, 
200, 210
MacDiarmid, Hugh, 142
Maﬀ ei, Scipione, 200
Magalotti, Lorenz, 88, 205
Magliabecchi, Antonio, 75, 209
Magni, Valerio, 59
Maison des Sciences de l’Homme, Paris, 235
Makin, Bathsua, 49–50
Malinowski, Bronisław, 157
Malthus, Th omas, 122, 177
Mandeville, Bernard, 91
Manilius, Marcus, 35
Mannheim, Karl, 154, 184, 218–19
Mantegazza, Paolo, 152, 177, 208
Marci, Jan Marcus, 59
Margaret of Austria, 206
Marlowe, Christopher, 33, 35
Marsh, George P., 121
Marsili, Luigi, 70, 82
Martianus Capella, 3
Martineau, Harriet, 89, 117, 199
Martini, Francesco di Giorgio, 39–40

INDEX

324
Marx, Karl, Marxism, 111, 131, 150, 152, 
167, 189, 219, 222
Maupertuis, Pierre, 91
Mauss, Marcel, 156
Maximilian I, emperor, 28, 206
May, Robert, 208, 245–6
Mayo, Elton, 180, 191, 198
McCulloch, Warren, 168, 185, 194–5
McLuhan, Marshall, 168
Mead, Margaret, 165
Meibom, Marcus, 51, 63
Melanchthon, Philip, 4, 32, 194
Mencke, Johann Burckhardt, 86
Mendel, Gregor, 165
Menéndez y Pelayo, Manuel, 197, 209
Mercator, Gerard, 35
Mersenne, Marin, 63
Merz, John Th edre, 181
metaphors, 151, 161, 176, 214–15, see also 
analogies
Meyer, Lothar, 141
Mill, James, 114, 182
Mill, John Stuart, 114, 182, 194, 196–7, 209
Miller, James G., 194, 220, 224–5
Minsky, Marvin, 157, 175
Mitchell, Juliet, 199, 245–6
Momigliano, Arnoldo, 58
Mommsen, Th eodor, 121, 149
Monboddo, James, Lord, 93–5, 192
monsters of erudition, 4, 35, 47, 56, 98, 167
Montagu, Elizabeth, 88
Montaigne, Michel de, 46, 99
Montesquieu, Charles-Louis, marquis de, 
88–90, 92, 100, 173, 177, 183, 200
Moore, Barrington, 224
More, Th omas, 31, 177
Moreri, Louis, 64
Morgan, Lewis, 111
Morgenstern, Oskar, 211
Morhof, Daniel, 53, 67, 78–80, 197
Morris, Charles, 160, 162
Morris, William, 115, 131, 177–9
Mousnier, Roland, 167
multitasking, 178–9
Mumford, Lewis, 144, 168, 172, 178, 198, 
204, 210, 214, 233
Münster, Sebastian, 4, 200
Murray, Henry, 180, 200, 204, 224
museums, 57, 134–5, 141, 143, 156, 209, 243
Musk, Elon, 2
Nabokov, Vladimir, 2, 177
Namier, Lewis, 236
NASA, 226–7
Naudé, Gabriel, 51, 209
Needham, Dorothy, 174
Needham, Joseph, 6, 8, 163–5, 174–5, 
178–9, 181, 184, 186, 198, 207, 211
networks, 59, 65, 71, 74–5, 135, 143, 200, 
203, 205, 211, 244
Neumann, John von, 157–9, 166, 172, 174, 
181, 185, 197–8, 204, 211, 234
Neumann, Klára von (Klári), 172, 181
Neurath, Otto, 141, 143–4, 148, 167, 
178–9, 189–90, 198, 205, 215, 219, 221
Newell, Alan, 157, 166, 185
Newton, Isaac, 4, 35, 49, 65, 72, 81, 91, 100, 
107, 171, 173, 176, 183–4
niches, 5, 141, 179, 191, 193, 205, 243, see 
also courts; journals; libraries; museums; 
schools; universities
Nicholas of Cusa, 37
Nicolson, Marjorie, 84
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 194
Nogarola, Isotta, 44–5
nomads, intellectual, 164–5, 179, 205, 
see also serial polymaths
notes, 36, 77–8, 130
Ogden, Charles, 200, 203, 211
Oldenburg, Henry, 75
Oliveira, Fernão de, 192, 200
Orcibal, Jean, 167
originality, 72–3, 99, 103, 106, 109
Ortega y Gasset, José, 214–15, 226
Ortiz, Fernando, 172, 192–3
Ostwald, Wilhelm, 180, 182, 217–18
Otlet, Paul, 141–3, 180, 209
Otto, Rudolf, 149
overload, 77–8, 124–6, 128–30, 241–2
Pallas, Peter Simon, 101, 205
Palmieri, Matteo, 27
Panofsky, Erwin, 234
pansophia, 54, 56, 62–4, 79–80
Pareto, Vilfredo, 153, 159, 176, 201, 208, 
219, 236
Park, Robert E., 180, 208, 233
Parsons, Talcott, 224
Pascal, Blaise, 8, 48, 174, 197
passive polymaths, 6, 145–8
Pattison, Mark, 182, 196
Pauling, Linus, 152, 175, 179–81, 190
Pavlov, Ivan, 138
peace movement, 116, 143, 149, 180
Peacock, Th omas, 127
Pearson, Karl, 151–2, 181, 197, 204
pedantry, 84, 114, 145


INDEX
325
Peirce, Charles, 146, 151, 160, 201
Peiresc, Claude-Fabri de, 56–9, 65–6, 75, 81, 
84, 171, 189, 200
Peralta, Pedro de, 102, 192
Périer, Marguerte, 174
Peter I of Russia (‘the Great’), 101
Peter, Jean-Pierre, 212
Petrarca, Francesco (‘Petrarch’), 27
Pezron, Paul-Yves, 84–5
Philip IV of Spain, 60
Piaget, Jean, 192, 197
Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni, 27, 32, 
35–7, 51, 64, 99, 200, 204–5
Pirckheimer, Caritas, 45
Pitrè, Giuseppe, 152
Pitt-Rivers, Augustus, 135
Pitts, Walter, 175, 185, 197
Pizan, Christine de, 44
Placcius, Vincent, 78, 82
plagiarism, 14, 72–3
Plato, v, 11, 85
Playfair, John, 192, 194, 202, 208
Playfair, William, 192, 202
playfulness, 184–5
Pliny the Elder, 13–14, 33, 35, 41, 52–3
Poincaré, Henri, 173, 181–2
Polanyi, Cécile, 202
Polanyi, Karl, 149, 164, 172–3, 184, 197, 
202, 211
Polanyi, Laura, 202
Polanyi, Michael, 163–4, 168, 179, 184–5, 
190, 197, 202, 207, 218, 243
Pollock, Griselda, 199, 245
polyhistor, 13, 53, 84–5, 161
polymatheia, polymathia, 10, 53–4, 78
popularization, 90, 96, 98–9, 103, 117, 
123, 128
Posidonius of Rhodes, 12
Posner, Richard, 244, 246
postal system, 74–5
Postel, Guillaume, 37
Priestley, Joseph, 95–6, 102, 198, 203
Prodi, Giorgio, 160, 162, 179, 202
Prodi brothers, 202
prosopography, 4,
Protestant ethic, 193–5
Ptolemy of Alexadria, 18–19, 41
Pufendorf, Samuel, 48, 67, 100, 201, 205
Pyrrho of Elis, pyrrhonism, 76–7
Pythagoras, 8, 11, 18
Quételet, Adolphe, 153
Quinet, Edgar, 27
Quintilian, 13–14,
Rabelais, François, 28–9, 200
Radolf of Liège, 17
Raginbold of Cologne, 17
Raleigh, Walter, 30, 201
Ramus, Petrus, 55
Rapoport, Anatol, 159–60, 175, 221–2, 
226
Ratzel, Friedrich, 1, 180, 204, 206–7, 
217–18
Ray, John, 78
Raynal, Guillaume-Th omas, 91
Réaumur, René de, 93, 200
Récamier, Juliette, Madame, 112
Reconciliation, 37, 54–5, 71–2
Redi, Francesco, 88, 205
Reinach, Joseph, 202
Reinach, Salomon, 182, 202
Reinach, Th éodore, 202
Renan, Ernest, 113, 210
renegades, 208
Republic of Letters (Respublica litterarum), 
74, 87, 195
restlessness, 179–80
Revel, Jacques, 211
Revue des Deux Mondes, 111, 113, 136, 210
Reynolds, Joshua, 88, 96, 217
Rice, Condoleeza, 242
Richards, Ivor, 203, 211
Rieﬀ , David, 178
Rieﬀ , Philip, 147–8
Riesman, David, 172, 185
Rivers, William, 156, 208
Rivet, Paul, 208
Robertson, William, 93–4
Robertson Smith, William, 157, 175, 177, 
182, 194, 196, 200, 203–4, 209–10, 217
Roper, Margaret, 45
Rose, Jacqueline, 199, 246
Rose, Nikolas, 245–6
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 112
Roussel, Raymond, 150
Royce, Josiah, 159
Rudbeck, Olof, the Elder, 60–2, 72, 83–4, 
194, 202, 207
Rudbeck, Olof, the Younger, 61, 202
Ruesch, Jürgen, 165–6
Ruge, Arnold, 111, 189
Ruml, Beardsley, 214, 223–4
Ruskin, John, 114–15
Russell, Bertrand, 145, 171–2, 180–2, 195, 
197, 201
Sacks, Oliver, 210
Said, Edward, 179

INDEX

326
Sainte-Beuve, Charles, 68, 112, 116, 174, 200
Saint-Hilaire, Étienne Geoﬀ roy, 120
salons, 86–9, 92–3, 112, 114, 116, 173
Sapolsky, Robert, 246
Sarpi, Paolo, 200
Saumaise, Claude, 51
Scaliger, Joseph, 34–5, 49, 69, 184, 200
Schiller, Friedrich, 107, 127
Schlick, Moritz, 219
Schliemann, Heinrich, 120
Schlözer, August, 101, 117, 203, 205
Schlözer, Dorothea, 89, 117, 197, 199, 203
Schneider, Karl Camillo, 177
schools, 206
Schumpeter, Joseph, 98
Schurman, Anna Maria van, 50, 196
Sebeok, Th omas, 160, 162, 226
Sedgwick, Adam, 132
Selden, John, 34, 69–70, 79, 100, 173, 177, 
184, 201
Sennett, Richard, 233, 246
serial polymaths, 6, 144, 151, 153, 155, 158, 
161, 163–7, 179–80, 245
Servet, Miguel, 208
Sforza, Ludovico, 40, 205
Shannon, Claude, 152, 157–8, 185, 204, 211
Shen Gua, 15–16, 176
Sidis, William, 197
Sidney, Philip, 30
Sigüenza y Góngora, Carlos de, 82
Simmel, Georg, 153, 179, 201, 233
Simon, Herbert, 8, 157, 163, 166, 175, 178, 
180–1, 184–6, 197, 211, 214–15, 226, 
228–9, 234
Skalić, Paul, 37
Sloane, Hans, 57, 81, 143, 208
Sloterdijk, Peter, 168, 244, 246
Smil, Vaclav, 246
Smith, Adam, 93–4, 124, 173, 192
Smith, John Maynard, 208
Smith, Sidney, 127
Snow, Charles P., 137, 148, 164, 230
societies, 65, 75, 90, 93–4, 97, 105, 119, 
125–8, 135, 160, 164, 222, see also clubs
Socrates, 11, 31
Somerville, Mary, 89, 118–19, 172–3, 
196, 199
Sontag, Susan, 147–8, 162, 178, 199, 
210, 226
Sophists, 11
specialization, 5, 124–6, 130–4, 138–41, 
147, 154, 164, 222, 225, 243, 246
Spencer, Herbert, 110, 118, 122, 125, 140, 
182, 198, 200–1, 205, 208, 221
Spinoza, Baruch, 117, 152
Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty, 199, 245–6
Staël, Germaine de, 89, 116–17, 192, 195, 
199
Steiner, George, 8, 147, 168, 179, 186, 210, 
214, 226, 244, 246
Steno, Nicholas, 4, 71
Stephen, Leslie, 182
Strauss, Leo, 147
Strindberg, August, 2, 179, 192, 198
‘Studies’, 232–3
Su Song, 15–17
Swedenborg, Emanuel, 101, 192, 194
system-builders, 6, 78, 94, 106, 109–11, 
159–62, 219–20, 222
Taccola, Mariano, 39
tafannun ﬁ  al-’ulum, 20
Taine, Hippolyte, 113–14, 171, 210
Talbot, William Henry Fox, 123–4, 200
Tallis, Raymond, 246
Tarde, Gabriel, 153, 168, 177
Taylor, Harriet, 114, 199
teamwork, 138–9, 200
territory, intellectual, 127, 134, 144
Tertullian, 17
Th ode, Henry, 218
Th omas, Keith, 237
Th omasius, Christian, 85
Th ompson, Edward, 168
time, sense of, 182–4
Tocqueville, Alexis de, 112–13, 171
Todorov, Tristan, 191
Toﬄ  er, Alvin, 242
Tolstoy, Lev, 6
Torre, Marcantonio della, 41
Treitschke, Heinrich von, 121
Trevor-Roper, Hugh, 33
Trithemius, Johannes, 199
Troeltsch, Ernst, 218
Turgot, Anne Robert Jacques, 92–3
Turing, Alan, 7, 157–9, 168, 177, 185, 197, 
200, 220
two cultures, 137, 148, 230, 239, 245
Tylor, Edward, 135
Tytler, James, 86
Uexküll, Jakob von, 160, 162, 192, 229
Unger, Roberto Mangabeira, 244
unity of knowledge, science, 36, 60, 121, 
143, 162, 221–2
universities, 5, 23, 132, 139–40, 192, 206–7, 
227–33, 243; Aberdeen, 157; Aberystwyth, 
207; Berlin, 111, 121, 140, 228; Bielefeld, 


INDEX
327
230–1; Birmingham, 232; Bochum, 229; 
Bologna, 23, 70, 99, 163; Bombay, 142; 
Breslau, 154; Brown, 154; California, 165, 
207; Cambridge, 91, 104, 122, 132, 137, 
156–7, 164–5, 203, 207; Carnegie-Melon, 
166; Chicago, 223–6; Columbia, 156, 
225; Cornell, 232; Cracow, 157; Deakin, 
230–1; Dundee, 142; Edinburgh, 94, 234; 
Florence, 163; Franeker, 192; Frankfurt, 
154, 168, 203, 222–3; Geneva, 133; Graz, 
207; Griﬃ  th, 230–1; Hamburg, 229; 
Harderwijk, 192; Harvard, 108, 133, 140, 
155, 159, 165, 180, 197, 220, 224, 227–8; 
Heidelberg, 154; Helmstedt, 207; Johns 
Hopkins, 133, 206; Keele, 230; Kiel, 67; 
Konstanz, 229, 231; La Trobe, 229, 231; 
Lausanne, 153; Leicester, 154; Leiden, 
53–4, 71, 91, 192, 207; Leipzig, 53, 86, 
133, 217–18; Linköping, 230; London, 
151, 154, 227; Manchester, 207; 
Michigan, 149, 158; MIT, 227; Murdoch, 
230–1; Oxford, viii, 23–4, 133, 207, 225, 
228, 244; Paris, 23, 140–1, see also Collège 
de France, écoles; Palermo, 152; Pavia, 
152; Roskilde, 230–1; Strasbourg, 237; 
Sussex, viii–ix, 220, 229–31, 237; Uppsala, 
60, 207; Utrecht, 50, 192; Vienna, 155, 
171; Yale, 133, 215, 223, 228
uomo universale, 27
Uspensky, Boris, 211
Ussher, James, 86
vagabonds, 164–5, 179, see also exiles
Varro, Marcus Terentius, 13–14, 17, 19, 
34
Vasari, Giorgio, 39, 42
Veblen, Th orstein, 195–6
Vega, Garcilaso de la, 30
Verelius, Olaus, 61
Verrocchio, Andrea, 40
Vico, Giambattista, 8, 83, 99–101, 172, 176, 
191, 197–8
Vincent of Beauvais, 23
Virchow, Rudolf, 120, 204
virtuoso, 53, 56
Vitruvius, 13, 38
Vives, Juan Luis, 31, 37
Voltaire, 87, 90, 205
Voss, Gerard, 54, 202
Voss, Isaac, 51, 71, 84, 202
Waitz, Georg, 128
Walpole, Horace, 88
Walras, Léon, 208
Wang Anshi, 15
Wang Yangming, 15
Warburg, Aby, 200
Ward, Lester, 154, 181, 208
Weaver, Warren, 152, 158, 208, 211, 223
Weber, Max, 149, 169, 176, 178, 182–3, 
193–4, 208, 218, 236
Wegener, Alfred, 207
Weizsäcker, Carl von, 235
Wells, Herbert G., 143, 177, 183, 198, 211
Whewell, William, 104–5, 119, 125, 127, 
203, 215, 222
Whitehead, Alfred N., 134
Whorf, Benjamin, 208
Wiener, Norbert, 151, 157–8, 166, 173–4, 
196–8, 204, 210–11
Wilkins, John, 71, 146, 177–8
William of Malmesbury, 19
Wilson, Edmund, 147, 172
Wilson, Edward O., 222, 245–6
Windelband, Wilhelm, 218
Witsen, Nicolaes, 68, 70–1, 196
Wolf, Maryanne, 241
women, 8, 43–6, 49–52, 88–9, 116–19, 172, 
196, 198–9, 219, 232, 244–5
Wood, Anthony, 173
work, 180–2
Worm, Ole, 57, 208
Wortley Montagu, Lady Mary, 89, 196
Wower, Johannes, 54, 78–9
Wren, Christopher, 48–9, 82, 86, 196
Wundt, Wilhelm, 155, 217–18, 236
Young, Th omas, 7, 103–4, 119, 127–8, 176, 
183–4, 189, 196–8, 201
Zammit, Th emistocles, 192
Zedler, Johann Heinrich, 85
Zesen, Philipp von, 62
Žižek, Slavoj, 168–9, 184, 244, 246
Zusammenhang, 109
Zwinger, Th eodore, 37–8, 53, 192

328

